The University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center College of Medicine is a private medical college within the UERM Memorial Medical Center in the Philippines. Recognized as a Center of Excellence in Research by the Department of Science and Technology and has Level IV Accreditation by PAASCU. It is the first and only private medical school with a Level IV PAASCU Accredited Program. The College of Medicine is in the list of top performing medical schools for having an overall passing percentage of 97.8% as of the August 2015 Physician Licensure examination.

Overview

In 1946, Dr. Francisco T. Dalupan, Sr. in response to the Filipino Youth’s clamor for college education after the end of World War II established the first piece of his grand vision of a university - the Philippine College of Commerce and Business Administration. This was followed by four colleges in 1948: Liberal Arts, Education, Dentistry and Graduate School. With the addition of the College of Law in 1950, the group of colleges became a university - the University of the East (UE), Manila. The UE campus in Caloocan opened in 1954. The university would not be complete without a college of medicine. This was facilitated by the purchase of the Instituto de Mujeres along Aurora Boulevard, Quezon City. It consisted of 10,000 square meters of ground and a four-storey concrete building which was remodelled to expand and meet the requirements of a medical college.

Thus, the college of medicine was established in 1956 and it became the nucleus of the University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center, Inc.(UERMMMCI)

University Vision Statement

To preserve academic integrity, safeguard the security of students records as well as other vital documents of the University in strict confidentiality.

To enforce the academic policy of the University, policies and guidelines of the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) and other government agencies on matters related to the functions of the University.

To uphold the University’s core values to provide professional, exemplary quality support services, efficient and courteous responsive to the needs of the academic community.

University Mission Statement

Develop outstanding health professionals committed to lifelong learning.

Provide equitable, holistic, and quality health care

Advance quality research relevant to education and practice of health professionals.

Advocate causes and promote love of country, welfare of the people, and preservation of the environment

Provide services relevant and responsive to the needs of the community.

The College of Medicine established its first Community Health Project in Limay, Bataan; introduced the Correlated Lecture Series, the teaching of problem-oriented medical records started the teaching of Family Planning, instituted a clinical clerkship program in the USA; established a grant-in-aid scholarship program; integrated the teaching of primary health care in the curriculum; created a course on the human life cycle; introduced the 'Problem Bases' learning strategy; developed and exported the teaching of research methods to other medical schools.

The College of Medicine periodically reviews and upgrades its curriculum by instituting general changes such as the implementation of the core curriculum, granting of the M.D. degree after the Fourth year; upgrading of selected subjects; teaching by objectives; role-based curriculum and competencies; and integration of Primary health Care in the curriculum.

Specific changes have also been installed in its search for relevance to the national and local health needs, as well as in keeping with international trends. It put more emphasis on science and art in the teaching of all courses, in order to produce graduates who shall internalize science and art and use them as the bases of medical practice. The curricular structure was made more flexible, allowing the student to participate in directing his learning and providing him adequate time for self-study and greater exposure to non-hospital settings of training. It shifted emphasis of the curricular content to topics, which were directly related to the national and local health and medical problem and issues. A uniform teaching method was utilized for all courses, which fostered the development of problem-solving skills in health and medicine. Through its continued excellence in the field of medical education, the College of Medicine was granted level II accreditation by the PAASCU for a three-year period.

Top class university

Just like in India, universities/institutes abroad provide students with state-of-the-art universities complete with modern amenities for a wholesome education experience. The universities not only boast world-class faculty but also provide internationally recognized degrees to students to be able to create a mark in the medical field globally. Universities and colleges abroad also provide paramount safety and security to students so they are able to feel at home in a foreign land.

Use of English language

To attract international students, a lot of colleges and universities abroad use English as their primary language of instructions and communication in medical universities. This again works as an advantage in attracting international and Indian students. However, applicants should note that it is always an added bonus to be versed in the local language.

​

Better ROI

The cost of pursuing MBBS abroad is at par or lower as compared to private universities in India. On successful completion of their course students are allowed to practice in the host country. This provides them an opportunity to earn big money thus yielding a better return on investments in the long run. Tuition Fees in abroad medical colleges are affordable

​

More number of seats

Due to the limited number of government medical seats in India, and exorbitant tuition fees at private universities, a lot of aspirants are unable to pursue their dream of studying MBBS in India. However, international universities have been able to tap into this student group simply by keeping their tuition fees low, education standards high, and above all providing a larger number of seats as compared to their government counterparts in India.

​

Scholarships and Financial Aid

To promote a healthy flow of students coming into foreign countries to pursue medical studies, universities and institutions have announced several scholarships and financial grants to students to encourage studying MBBS abroad. Students can check out a list of scholarships available to them to pursue MBBS study abroad.

​

Global Job Opportunity

The students who are studying MBBS from Abroad gets ample opportunity to apply for jobs in any part of the world. Once they obtain the certificate to practice anywhere in the world, they can get the country-wise certificate as well to be able to practice medicine after their graduation.

The Philippines, officially the Republic of the Philippines, is an archipelagic country in Southeast Asia. It is situated in the western Pacific Ocean, and consists of about 7,640 islands, that are broadly categorized under three main geographical divisions from north to south: Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao.

The Philippines (Filipino: Pilipinas) is an archipelago in South-East Asia of more than seven thousand islands located between the Philippine Sea and the South China Sea at the southeastern edge of Asia.

Many wonderful beaches are just part of one of the world's longest coastlines and it would take about 20 years to spend a day on every island. Since Spanish colonial times, the country has been Asia's largest Catholic country. Over a hundred ethnic groups, a mixture of foreign influences and a fusion of culture and arts have enhanced the uniqueness of the Filipino identity and the wonder that is the Philippines.

Climate

The climate is tropical, with March to May (summer) being the hottest months. The rainy season starts in June and extends through October with strong typhoons possible. The coolest months are from November to February, with mid-January to end of February considered the best for cooler and drier weather. Locations exposed directly to the Pacific Ocean have frequent rainfall all year. This includes the popular Pagsanjan Falls southeast of Manila (though the falls will get you wet regardless). The average temperatures range from 78°F / 25°C to 90°F / 32°C, and humidity is around 77 percent. Baguio, which is branded as the summer capital of the Philippines, tends to be cooler due to its being located in mountainous regions with temperatures at night going below 20°C (68°F). During summer, the country experience droughts, sometimes at extreme conditions.