University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center, Inc. is a non-stock, non-profit corporation that aspires to become a bastion of quality education, service and research in the health sciences advancing health empowerment towards nation building.

Core values underlie our work, how we interact with each other and which strategies we employ to fulfill our mission. The core values are the basic elements of how we go about our work. These are the practices we use (or should be using) every day in everything we do.

The University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center (UERMMMC) is both a world-renowned training ground for the medical, nursing and physical therapy professions and one of the leading health care facilities in the country today. It is a witness to the remarkable vision and foresight of its founders.

The UERM Memorial Medical Center believes in the development of the healers of tomorrow who are capable of being relevant, compassionate, and ethical in the practice of his/her profession. Thus, its graduates are imbued not only with technology but with the power to continue growing with a commitment to life-long learning. Campus activities help to mold him to be relevant and serve as a catalyzer, an organizer and an advocate. He thus learns to practice his profession not only as a skilled technician but one who puts art in the science of healing. He cares not only for his individual patient but the whole community that he serves as well.

UERMMH is a tertiary hospital founded on an academic institution. Our mission is to provide personalized quality care, based on rational medical economics, to patients from all walks of life. Through the excellent practice of this unique competence, we aim to affirm our distinction as a top hospital in the Philippines. The mission of the UERM Memorial Medical Center (UERMMMC) education system is to serve society by educating and training a diverse medical and paramedical workforce capable of meeting the country's need for health workers engaged in the practice of medicine, nursing, physical therapy, public health, biomedical and health services research, as well as developing administrators and educators through its graduate school.

The learning objectives focus on what a student should know what the student is capable of doing and what the student can actually demonstrate. Specific competencies for graduates are described in the individual college brochures.

Research is one of the three general functions of an academic institution. The Research Institute is the unit of the Medical Center that is responsible for carrying out this function. It promotes, manages and supports research and development in the fields of health sciences, service and education. The Research Institute is directly under the president of the Medical Center. It has an office headed by a research director. All research activities in the Medical Center, except those of the students of the different colleges, are under the supervision of the Research Institute.The Research Institute is linked with units with research functions through the research coordinators of the units. The coordinators are administratively under the unit heads and functionally under the director of research.

The UERMMMC alumni, who are the major products or fruits of the school, manifests and gauges the worth and essence of the academic institution. As such, they are the living testament of the school's excellence and perpetual existence.The UERMMMC alumni recognize the importance of giving back to the school, where they have been born to their profession. The commitment and support of alumni contribute greatly to the success of UERMMMC especially in maintaining high quality faculty. It also plays vital roles in promoting the school and attracting new students, enhancing educational programs, sourcing modern equipment and generating finances for scholarships and research endeavors. These are the alumni associations that continue the legacy of the UERM Memorial Medical Center. The UERM alumni continuously inspire the students to make good, to do better and to give their best, for God and country.

In 1946, Dr. Francisco T. Dalupan, Sr. in response to the Filipino Youth’s clamor for college education after the end of World War II established the first piece of his grand vision of a university - the Philippine College of Commerce and Business Administration. This was followed by four colleges in 1948: Liberal Arts, Education, Dentistry and Graduate School. With the addition of the College of Law in 1950, the group of colleges became a university - the University of the East (UE), Manila. The UE campus in Caloocan opened in 1954.The university would not be complete without a college of medicine. This was facilitated by the purchase of the Instituto de Mujeres along Aurora Boulevard, Quezon City. It consisted of 10,000 square meters of ground and a four-storey concrete building which was remodelled to expand and meet the requirements of a medical college. Thus, the college of medicine was established in 1956 and it became the nucleus of the University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center, Inc.(UERMMMCI).