Since its founding in 2008, Roc Nation has grown into the world’s preeminent entertainment company. We work in every aspect of modern entertainment—with recording artists and producers, songwriters and more. Our client list includes some of the world’s most recognizable names: from Rihanna and Rapsody to Buju Banton and Snoh Aalegra. We are a full-service organization, supporting our diverse roster of talent via artist management, music publishing, touring, production, strategic brand development and beyond.

Since its founding in 2008, Roc Nation has grown into the world’s preeminent entertainment company. We are a full-service organization, supporting our diverse roster of talent via artist management including some of the world’s most recognizable names: from Rihanna and Megan Thee Stallion to Lil Uzi Vert and Big Sean. Roc Nation has partnerships with the world’s leading experts in artist management, technology, fashion, and philanthropy, redefining the business of entertainment.

Roc Nation Sports, a sub-division of Roc Nation, launched in spring 2013. Founder Shawn "JAY-Z" Carter's love of sports led to the natural formation of Roc Nation Sports, supporting athletes in the same way Roc Nation has been working alongside and advocating for artists in the music industry for years. Roc Nation Sports focuses on elevating athletes' careers on a global scale both on and off the field. Roc Nation Sports conceptualizes and executes marketing and endorsement deals, community outreach, charitable tie-ins, media relations, and brand strategy. Roc Nation Sports' roster includes premiere athletes such as LaMelo Ball, Robinson Cano, Skylar Diggins-Smith, Kevin De Bruyne, Vini Jr., Rashod Bateman, Dez Bryant, Danny Green, Rudy Gay, Todd Gurley, Jaire Alexander and Ronnie Stanley.

Since its founding in 2008, Roc Nation has grown into the world’s preeminent entertainment company. We are a full-service organization, supporting talent via music publishing for a diverse roster of artists.

Equity Distribution

Your Music. Your Money.

Equity Distribution is a best-in-class music distribution platform that helps artists, labels, and right holders distribute their music world-wide. By allowing artists to retain ownership of their masters and distribute music globally, EQ Equity Distribution is cutting out the middlemen and helping artists to retain ownership of their content.