Steve Harvey may have addressed Katt Williams recently calling him out by not addressing him at all.

In a Jan. 7 Twitter/X post featuring the host on-set of Family Feud, Harvey tells the audience that one never needs to explain themselves to haters.

“No, you ain’t gotta tell nobody nothing. All you got to do is be it. You don’t have to open your mouth,” he began before quoting Psalms 23:5. “‘He prepares a table in the presence of mine enemies’, he do it all the time. All my haters? I ain’t gotta say nothing to them. They got TV. They can cut they TV on seven days a week. All that hate? ‘Man, he on there.'”

The former talk show host went on to assert people only acquire haters because they’re effective at what they do, stirring jealousy in others. He also believes that haters can be sent from the devil to provide opposition to God guiding you towards greatness.

“God is about to do something, and the devil is throwing in opposition,” he stated before addressing someone who is “really attacking me right now,” though he doesn’t drop a name.

“I got somebody really attacking me right now, I mean, really going after me, man. I’m just waiting to see what God going to do because they’re gonna have to get on…can’t nobody stop what God got for you.”

Harvey captioned the clip, “You don’t have to address your haters.” Check it out below.

During Williams’ visit to the Club Shay Shay podcast last week, the comic took aim at several of his peers, accusing Harvey of stealing the concept of his 1990s sitcom The Steve Harvey Show from Mark Curry’s Hangin’ With Mr. Cooper.

“The same Steve that went to go watch Mark Curry do his whole sitcom and then stole everything Mark Curry had…Now Steve got a sitcom where he’s the principal and he wears a suit,” Williams told host Shannon Sharpe before insulting Harvey’s skills as an actor and claims he never wanted to be a movie star.

“You couldn’t be a movie star…There are 30,000 new scripts in Hollywood every year. Not one of them asked for a country bumpkin Black dude that can’t talk good … and look like Mr. Potato Head. There ain’t none. You have to have range.”