Read one or both of the following passages:

Psalm 23 or Psalm 121, then continue

PSALM 23

The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.

He maketh me to lie down in green pastures;

He leadeth me beside the still waters.

He restoreth my soul;

He guideth me in straight paths for His name’s sake.

Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,

I will fear no evil,

For thou art with me;

Thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me.

Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies,

Thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.

Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life;

And I shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever.

PSALM 121

I will lift up mine eyes unto the mountains; From whence shall my help come?

My help cometh from the Lord, Who made heaven and earth.

He will not suffer thy foot to be moved; He that keepeth thee will not slumber.

Behold, He that keepeth Israel Doth neither slumber nor sleep.

The Lord is thy keeper; The Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.

The sun shall not smite thee by day, Nor the moon by night.

The Lord shall keep thee from all evil; He shall keep thy soul.

The Lord shall guard thy going out and thy coming in, From this time forth and forever.

After the psalm(s) have been read, recite the following:

The body has died; the spirit it housed will never die.

On earth our dear ones do live on through those of us to whom they were so very precious.

(THE COVERING IS REMOVED)

We now fondly dedicate this monument (plaque) to the blessed memory of (name) realizing that his (her) remains lie not only in this plot of ground but in every heart his (her) life did touch.

O God, we are grateful for the years we were privileged to share with him (her) – years when he (she) brought us so many pleasures and taught us so very much by example.

And even though he (she) has left our midst, we know he (she) will never leave our hearts where his (her) memory will endure as a blessing forever. – See more at: https://www.heidis106.sg-host.com/jewish-unveiling-prayers.html#sthash.7ndXTPh9.dpuf