WAKEFIELD, Mass. and NUREMBERG, Germany, Aug. 31, 2017 /PRNewswire/ --Paessler AG, the innovative network monitoring specialist, today announced its membership in the NetApp Alliance Partner Program as an Advantage Alliance Partner. Paessler is collaborating with NetApp to further integrate PRTG Network Monitor, Paessler's comprehensive IT and network monitoring solution, with NetApp's full range of solutions and services.

Customers can now utilize PRTG to maintain a real-time view of the networks, systems, applications and devices involved in the digital transformation NetApp empowers enterprises to achieve with its hybrid cloud data services. PRTG simplifies network administrators' lives by providing them with a comprehensive, real-time view of networks, systems and applications regardless of whether they are on premises, in the cloud, or in hybrid environments.

"Across industries, progressive IT teams are rapidly working to transform their IT infrastructure and address the demand for better ways to store, access, protect and use data regardless of where it resides," said Dirk Paessler, founder and CEO of Paessler. "Many rely on NetApp's solutions and services to address this reality. The sensors we've created for NetApp enable these innovative teams to maintain a real-time view of how everything in their network is working, including applications, hardware and devices."

Paessler offers more than 200 pre-configured sensors, or monitoring elements, that feed real-time data into PRTG's highly intuitive and customizable dashboards - enabling IT teams to see precisely what information matters to them and to be alerted when any thresholds of their choosing, such as pre-determined performance levels, are met. PRTG offers sensors to monitor virtually everything in today's increasingly complex networks - from overall network health and performance - to granular details like the temperature of individual servers and the speed of fans within them. Custom sensors are also easily created and integrated into PRTG.

PRTG can be found on the Partner Directory. Additional NetApp sensors will also be added over time.

The NetApp Alliance Partner Program

NetApp Alliance Partner Program provides qualified infrastructure and application providers with access to NetApp solutions, software development kits, technical support, training, certification, product information, and marketing and sales assistance. Customers benefit by having access to best-of-breed partner solutions that has been tested to work with NetApp storage. Additional information on the NetApp Alliance Partner Program is available at http://www.netapp.com/alliances

For more information on Paessler AG and PRTG Network Monitor, please visit www.paessler.com.

About Paessler AG

Paessler AG's award winning PRTG Network Monitor is a powerful, affordable and easy-to-use Unified Monitoring solution. It is a highly flexible and generic software for monitoring IT infrastructure, already in use at enterprises and organizations of all sizes and industries. Over 150,000 IT administrators in more than 170 countries rely on PRTG and gain peace of mind, confidence and convenience. Founded in 1997 and based in Nuremberg, Germany, Paessler AG remains a privately held company that is recognized as a member of the Cisco Solution Partner Program, the NetApp Alliance Partner Program, and a VMware Technology Alliance Partner. Learn more about Paessler and PRTG at www.paessler.com.

Media Contact:

Ken Phillips

LEWIS Global Communications

T: +1 781-418-2437

paessler@teamlewis.com

View original content with multimedia:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/paessler-joins-the-netapp-alliance-partner-program-300512075.html

SOURCE Paessler AG