Nuremberg, Germany – September 28, 2023 – Paessler AG, a leading provider of IT, OT, and IoT monitoring solutions based in Nuremberg, Germany, announces the successful acquisition of ITPS Group, with subsidiaries in Switzerland, the Czech Republic, and Romania as well as business activities in India. This strategic development comes in the run-up to IT-SA 2023 and marks another step in Paessler's ambition to offer its customers a diversified range of individual features for any infrastructure and monitoring objective.

ITPS, known for its software products under the name CORP-IT, has established itself in the IT industry through innovative solutions. Based in Frauenfeld, Switzerland, the company was founded by Thomas Wächter, an entrepreneur from Baden, Germany. Prior to this strategic development, ITPS was a valued Paessler Alliance Partner & Paessler Gold Partner for many years.

Three of the central solutions of ITPS, which are now being further developed and marketed under the Paessler umbrella brand under new product names, are:

“Our collaboration with Paessler has always been characterized by mutual trust and innovation,” said Thomas Wächter, founder of ITPS AG. “With this acquisition, we are looking confidently to a future in which we can jointly offer our customers even greater added value. It is a significant step that combines the strengths of both companies and concretizes our vision for the future of monitoring.”

Starting in the fourth quarter of 2023, ITPS products will be sold under the Paessler brand, further diversifying Paessler's product portfolio of IT, OT, and IoT monitoring solutions.

“By integrating ITPS' advanced product enhancements and innovative technologies into our direct product portfolio, we can offer our customers an even more comprehensive network monitoring solution," announced Helmut Binder, CEO of Paessler AG. “This step illustrates our commitment to being at the forefront of technological developments and to continuously increase the added value for our customers.”