Tony Long and Tony Benneworth were both life-long members of the Trevallyn Bowls and Community Club. Pictures: Supplied

Two men who died on Saturday in a boating incident off the Tasmania’s North-East coast were “great friends with a love of bowls and fishing”.

Subscribe now for unlimited access .

or signup to continue reading

All articles from our website & app

The digital version of Today's Paper

Breaking news alerts direct to your inbox

Interactive Crosswords, Sudoku and Trivia

All articles from the other in your area

Anthony Benneworth, 67, of Norwood and Anthony Long, 73, of Youngtown, were on a fishing trip at Ansons Bay.

Investigations into the incident are continuing, but is understood the men ended up in the water about 500 metres offshore.

A third man, from Youngtown, who was also on the boat, was able to swim to shore to raise the alarm.

The news sent a shockwave through the community.

Both Mr Benneworth and Mr Long were long-time members of the Trevallyn Bowls and Community Club.

Mr Benneworth, or ‘Benny’, as he was known by friends, was the club’s president, a former Australian cricketer and part of Tasmania’s inaugural Sheffield Shield team.

He was also a Liberal candidate for Bass in 2001 and previously served in the Tasmanian House of Assembly.

Tony 'Benny' Benneworth.

Trevallyn Bowls vice president Andrew Baird said their deaths were “completely devastating”.

“It is just a complete shock and very sobering,” he said.

“News like this really brings a sense of reality back into the world.

“I am at a loss.”

Mr Baird said both men had been friends for more than 20 years and regularly went on fishing trips together.

“Benny was just a natural leader,” he said.

“We always refereed to him as the director of the orchestra.”

Tony Long, a past president at the club, was remembered as a “class clown”.

“Tony was just a really funny bloke and a real joker,” Mr Baird said.

“He played a lot of tricks over the years, he was all about having a good time.

“I think they were both having fun and really enjoying their life, right up until the last minute.”

The Advocate

DAILY

Your morning news

Today's top stories curated by our news team.

WEEKLY

Sport

The latest news, results & expert analysis.

WEEKLY

Note from the Editor

Get the editor's insights: what's happening & why it matters.

WEEKLY

FootyHQ

Love footy? We've got all the action covered.

WEEKLY

Explore Travel

Every Sunday explore destinations, deals, tips & travel writing to transport you around Australia and the globe.

WEEKLY

What's On

Going out or staying in? Find out what's on.

WEEKDAYS

The Echidna

Sharp. Close to the ground. Digging deep. Your weekday morning newsletter on national affairs, politics and more.

TWICE WEEKLY

The Informer

Your essential national news digest: all the big issues on Wednesday and great reading every Saturday.

WEEKLY

Motoring

Get news, reviews and expert insights every Thursday from CarExpert, ACM's exclusive motoring partner.

TWICE WEEKLY

Voice of Real Australia

Get real, Australia! Let the ACM network's editors and journalists bring you news and views from all over.

AS IT HAPPENS

Breaking news alert

Be the first to know when news breaks.

DAILY

Today's Paper Alert

Your digital replica of Today's Paper. Ready to read from 5am!

DAILY

Your favourite puzzles

Test your skills with interactive crosswords, sudoku & trivia. Fresh daily!

Advertisement

Ad

Advertisement

Ad