The 1942 film Casablanca, directed by Michael Curtiz, is a prime example of a civic artifact in modern society. The film takes place in Casablanca, Africa, a refugee town caught in the crossfire of World War II. Rick, played brilliantly by Humphrey Bogart, is shocked when his old flame Ilsa (Ingrid Bergman) and her husband Victor Laszlo (Paul Henreid) pay a visit to his infamous cafe. Laszlo is on the run from German authority after escaping from a concentration camp and leading an underground revolution, and is attempting to flee to America to escape persecution. The film explores Rick and Ilsa’s lost love, as well as the consequences of war and how it affects every citizen of the world.

Casablanca was produced by the Warner Bros. Studio in January 1943. During the Second World War, the Office of War Information (the OWI, for short) became extremely interested in the production of war films and various other forms of media to spread awareness about the war front overseas. The studio actually rushed Casablanca’s release to coincide with America’s invasion of North Africa, showing the relevancy and sheer necessity for movies like these to boost general morale and patriotism in America.

Alongside Shine On, Harvest Moon (1944), This Is The Army (1943), and countless others, Casablanca was part of a series of war propaganda films produced by the studio from 1940-1945. The OWI believed that the hearts of the American people could be persuaded to take action and feel pride for their country through radio, commercials, and, of course, film and television. As explained by The Conversation’s article in 2017, entitled “You Must Remember This: Casablanca at 75–Still a Classic of WWII Propaganda”, “Casablanca is a dramatic, heartbreaking movie, an unsurpassed classic from Hollywood’s golden era. But it is also an extremely effective piece of propaganda cinema, persuading an American audience reluctant to commit to another European conflict to set aside its isolationism simply by dramatising the heroism of the European resistance to Nazi Germany” (McVeigh). Despite the lingering isolationist sentiment in the hearts of many American citizens and studio executives, the Warner brothers showed no fear in supporting the war effort through their art.

While the film has taken the world by storm and is often hailed as one of the greatest love stories ever told, the underlying messages of the effect of WWII is often lost on newer generations. Although the film is no longer needed as a rallying war cry in modern society, its key themes and overarching ideals still ring true. At its most basic level, Casablanca is an epic love story spanning two countries and three years. It is the story of Ilsa and Rick, lovers torn apart by war, secrets, and complicated situations. It is important to note that Casablanca was quite groundbreaking in its explicit portrayal of an affair on-screen, and it shocked the world with its forbidden yet compelling love story. Audiences are on the edge of their seats for every captivating moment, rooting for true love despite its moral implications and near-scandalous undertones. Much of the film actually had to be rewritten due to restrictions on Hollywood movies during this era, specifically involving the connotations of sex and infidelity in certain scenes. Despite this relatively tame version of the movie, audiences across the globe were both appalled and thrilled to see such a love story rife with drama portrayed on the big screen. For this reason and countless others, the film is hailed as a timeless American love story.

At a deeper level, though, the film actually represents something more. In addition to its captivating plot and devastating love triangle, Casablanca holds a more symbolic meaning for many, especially those who belong to immigrant families or have been affected by the war. Many members of the cast for this movie were actually refugees and immigrants themselves–Paul Heinreid (Victor Laszlo), Conrad Veidt (Major Heinrich Strasser), and Madeleine Lebeau (Yvonne), to name a few–, fighting for the war in their own way by portraying it on the big screen. In the midst of the war, this film dared the people to take arms, and stand up against the evil powers of the world in the name of freedom and love, no matter their background. Casablanca–both the city and the film–is a melting pot of cultures, races, and ideas, and consequently served as inspiration for many marginalized groups across the globe.

The most prominent commonplace embedded in the film is the concept of isolationism versus activism. While on the surface level Rick seems like the brooding, cynical yet secretly romantic love interest found in many movies from the “film noir” era, his character is actually used allegorically to represent America during the beginning of the war. In the first half of the film, cafe owner Rick Blaine is portrayed as completely neutral. He shows no direct resentment of German officers, remains completely oblivious and indifferent to black market trading in his cafe, does not interfere with law enforcement when they arrest Ugarte for murdering the German couriers, and frequently repeats one of his iconic phrases, “I stick my neck out for nobody”. When asked about his involvement in the war–Captain Renault notes his running of guns to Ethopia and participation in the war on the Spanish Loyalist side–Rick claims that he had economic motivations and nothing more. This introduction of Rick’s character is a direct parallel–and criticism, for that matter–of the American isolationist policy during the first few years of the war. Despite the blatant cries for help around him and the dire need for action, both Rick and America during this time remain silent and act exclusively in self-interest.

This attitude changes completely once Ilsa and Victor arrive to Casablanca. Instead of “sticking his neck out for nobody” and maintaining his apathetic air, Rick begins to get more involved in the war effort and the events that happen in his cafe. In the second half of the film, Rick is shown helping a married couple win money to move to America–at direct opposition to Renault’s sinister plans with the young bride–, permitting the band to drown out the German officers’ singing with “La Marseillaise”, a French ballad, and most notably, sacrificing his happiness and potential future with Ilsa by allowing her to leave Casablanca with Victor Laszlo instead of him (and shooting Major Strasser in the process). At the end of the film, Rick is completely reimagined as a patriot and an active participant in the war. He realized, as told to him by rival cafe owner Signor Ferrari, that “isolationism is no longer a practical policy”, and one must stand up and fight for the good in the world. This is a clear comparison to America’s role in the war, and represents the importance of activism as a commonplace both in the film and in society.

Because of these daring commonplaces, Casablanca is classified as a civic artifact. The film is a sort of window into the tumultuous time period of the early 1940s, and showcases the common ideologies and perspectives of global citizens during this time. When the world was in disarray and the malevolent powers that be seemed to destroy everything in their path, it was the people’s moral responsibility to take action and fight bravely and tenaciously despite the impossible odds. This film, along with countless other movies, books, radio shows, campaigns, and artworks created during this era, served the people as a way to educate, motivate, and inspire. For these reasons, Casablanca is not only considered a civic artifact, but also one of the greatest love stories of old Hollywood, even as time goes by.

Sources:

Casablanca. Directed by Michael Curtiz, performances by Humphrey Bogart, Ingrid Bergman, Paul Heinreid, and Claude Rains. Warner Bros. Studio, 1943.

McVeigh, Stephen. “You Must Remember This: Casablanca at 75–Still a Classic of WWII Propaganda”. The Conversation. 24 November 2017. https://theconversation.com/you-must-remember-this-casablanca-at-75-still-a-classic-of-wwii-propaganda-87113.