Casablanca (1942) was directed by Michael Curtiz and based on Murray Burnett and Joan Alison's unproduced stage play Everybody Comes to Rick's. The film stars Humphrey Bogart, Ingrid Bergman, Paul Henreid, Claude Rains, Conrad Veidt, Sydney Greenstreet, Peter Lorre, and Dooley Wilson. Running time: 102 minutes.

The death of Madeleine Lebeau, the last surviving star from Casablanca, was announced on May 15. She was 92.

The review below is by Sheila Johnston.

In a dangerous Islamic city, on the fringes of a major war-zone, an American is staring down an axis of evil. Surrounded by sinister foreign plotters and malfeasants, should he stand by idly or intervene, committing murder to protect his beliefs?

There, in a nutshell, is the plot of any number of self-important movies about the fight against terror (films such as Rendition, The Kingdom, Lions for Lambs). But this is also the story of one of the best-loved films in all of cinema.

Casablanca is set in December 1941, the month Pearl Harbour pitched the United States into the Second World War. It's also the moment Humphrey Bogart's cynical bar owner rediscovers his lost political ideals when Ingrid Bergman, the woman he loved, and loves, walks into his gin-joint with a legendary resistance hero.

Casablanca's backdrop is equally dark and momentous. But it contains no suicide bombings, no scenes of explicit torture and no sententious liberal agonising. Its touch is featherlight and peerlessly entertaining. Any political message is delivered with a witty twist, like the bottle of Vichy water – an emblem of Marshal Pétain's collaborationist regime – that's scornfully tossed in the wastebin.

Casablanca is the quintessential studio-era production, where stock elements and unpromising source material (an unproduced stage play) mysteriously coalesced into a classic. It has haunting songs, bittersweet emotion and excellent hats; indeed, film romance has never been quite the same since people stopped wearing them.

There are some of the very finest character actors that Warner Brothers could muster and a rich, detailed screenplay studded with an indecent number of sparklingly quotable lines. It is a movie to play again, and again.

Casablanca is available on Amazon Prime UK from May 26