This page refers to THE DOG Island Game, for the location, see THE DOG Island (Location)

THE DOG Island is a 2007 open world action adventure video game for the Wii and Playstation 2 consoles. It is based upon THE DOG Artlist Collection (now The DOG and Friends franchise) and tasks the player with guiding their character on a journey to an island of the same name.

Story

The player is a dog who lives with their mother, Mar, and younger sibling, Emilio/Maria (depending on the gender chosen) in Puroro Town. Emilio/Maria is sick with a disease that makes them unable to have much time to play outside; their father, Doluk, had travelled in search of a cure, but he never returned. Nevertheless, Emilio/Maria is rebellious and secretly participates in the town's festival that night, only to collapse from exhaustion. The player decides to take matters into their own hands by sailing with a crew to The Dog Island to meet with Dr. Potan, a famed doctor. However, on the way there, the ship is a caught in a storm and the player is separated from the others.

The player is rescued and wakes up in the company of Amalia, a resident of Pupsville, The Dog Island's main village. They also befriend an anc, creatures normally invisible to dogs, called Petasi, who was exiled by his queen for his mischief; to return to the Anc Land, he will have to raise a tree by doing good deeds. They proceed to meet with Dr. Potan, who agrees to go to Puroro Town with a cure. However, even Dr. Potan's cure is not potent enough to cure Emilio/Maria. Instead, Dr. Potan suggests a search for the Legendary Flower, allegedly capable of healing everything, back in The Dog Island.

The player learns from Obaba, a traditional healer, that the Legendary Flower is well-hidden and can only be found by dogs who are in touch with nature. The player begins learning sniffing from several masters, including Yi Lu, Rode, and finally, the Grand Master Tao, all of whom tell the player that to become a Master, they need to raise the Anc Tree by helping dogs in need. Once the player raises the tree to enough height, Tao tells the player to find a medal in Kunka Ruins, with which they can access Ancient Grove, a sanctuary of flowers that houses the Legendary Flower. Unfortunately, the flower is found wilted.

Thanks to the growth of the Anc Tree, Petasi is allowed to return to the Anc Land, where he goes to with the player. They learn from the Anc Queen that the flower is wilted because the residents of The Dog Island have forgotten to get in touch with nature, which is simultaneously causing the crust that protects their world to break. To strengthen it back, they will have to hold the Star Festival. She sends the player and Petasi to a deeper portion of Kunka Ruins, where the Stone of the Heavens, a regalia of the festival, is stored. After retrieving the stone and battling a skeleton guardian, the player narrowly manages to hold the festival with the island residents using the stone. This act rejuvenates both the crust and the Legendary Flower. Going back home, the player bids Petasi goodbye.

The end credits show the player giving the flower to Dr. Potan, who uses it to cure Emilio/Maria. In a post-credits scene, Doluk returns home and, to the player's surprise, has brought Petasi in tow.

Gameplay

On the Nintendo Wii, players guide their character by use of the Wii Remote moving an on-screen cursor around. On the Sony Playstation 2, movement is achieved through free movement via the controller analogue sticks. The goal is to find a magical cure-all for the protagonist's sick sibling, which is achieved through learning scents and ascending Sniff Master levels. This is done via quests and exploration.

Controls

General

Wii PS2 Point + B Left Stick + Circle Movement A Square Sniff Shake Triangle Dig / Scratch / Clean Plus Start Menu, Skip Cutscenes Minus Cross Bark, (Hold to Howl) Directional Pad Right Stick Camera 1 R1 Reset Camera 2 R2 Cycle through Mini-Map, Sort Items

Menu

Wii PS2 Directional Pad Left Stick + Directional Pad Cycle Options A Cross Select B Triangle Back

Map

Wii PS2 A Square Sniff (Island Map) B Triangle Back Plus + Minus R2 Toggle Island Map/Local map

Gallery

Official Website (JAPANESE - Archived)

Wikipedia

Trivia