See other formats

laaos-dlisi- a6pa pappi aqj sons e , MJ ^ v Pl«y am 0} fjqiurod mouv 3 a6ed inoppj am 6umonoj apis )uoj j l 1|}1M )33C|S S|I4) JJ8SU| Z sBed )nop|oj am uado I taaijs-djis inopio j GbsSlipSheet-001 Foldout slip-sheet 1 . Open the foldout page 2. Insert this sheet with 1 . Front side touching the foldout page 2. Arrow pointing to the fold Free end 3. Slice the folded edge m*»» S nv 4. Close the page ^ — Copyright 2008 Google, Inc. t — ,-- All Rights Reserved. ^^ 3 ^SiP r '-'mi 1 -"' mr^f ^ THE INTERNATIONAL NEWSWEEK LY OF MUSIC, VIDEO, AND HOME ENTERTAINMENT DECEMBER 25. 1 999 Warner Launches 'Virtual Jukebox' BY ED CHRISTM AN NEW YORK— The Warner Music Group has launched a virtual jukebox that will stream videos and music to promote its recording artists to the consumer. Us- ing Micro- soft's Win- dows Media format, Pre- viewTunes. com, launched Dec. 16, will allow visitors to the site to view music videos and/br listen to music from featured artists. The site (previewtunes.com), which can he accessed directly is also part of Time Warner's Entertaindom (entertaindom. com), a home entertainment page launched Nov. 29 that (Continued on page x'.l) U.K. Awards Show Packs Retail Punch BY PAUL SEXTON LONDON— Britain's "Record Of The Year" show may be aimed at the small screen, but it has its sights on a big goal: to become the U.K.'s second major annual televised awards event. According to the domestic indus- try, the 1999 program, which aired live Dec. 11 across Britain on the ITV network and whose prize went to "Flying Without Wings" from RCA's Irish teen group Westlife, has gone a good distance toward (Continued on i>uge81) UNIVERSAL: ONE YEAR LATER Merger Behind It, BMB looks Ahead A Billboard staff report. NEW YORK— For Doug Morris, the Universal Music Group (UMG) was really horn at a restaurant last Jan. 11 in Los Angeles. Morris, chairman/CEO of the world's largest record company, says executives of Universal and Poly Gram, which it had acquired the month before, had come together for the first time. He describes the excitement in the room and the camara- derie and mutual respect among once-competing executives. "It set the tone for the year," he says, adding that the meeting helped usher in a powerful record company that has exceeded its targets and goals for the first year of it 'lirlllti'K'ti nu /Jffi/r :S) P'Gram Bred Ms Propel lot'l Growth A Billboard international staff report. LONDON — In the world outside North America, it was the power of PolyGram that pulsed through Universal Music during 1999. Indeed, as the year's most important sales season reach- es its climax, it is mostly Poly- Gram-bred acts who are pop- ulating the charts for Universal around the world. These range from such bor- der-breakers as Shania Twain, Andrea Bocelli, Metal- lica, Boyzone, and Bryan Adams to regional or national hitonakers like Holland's Andre Rieu, Germany's Die Aerzte, France's Florent Pagny, Scotland's Texas, Australia's Powderfinger, and Hong Kong's Jacky Cheung. (Continued on /xiffc 7'J) After The Sale: Label Founders Reflect A Billboard sUiff report. NEW YORK— The recent turmoil in the U.S. music industry over the possibility of an Arista Records without Clive Davis at its helm underscores not only the personal feelings clearly evident for this one executive — who at press time remained embroiled in contract talks with parent company BMG about his future role at the label he founded and later sold — but likely also points up a deeper sentiment about changing times in an altered industry. With the final hours of the 20th century ticking down, it is easy to be nostalgic. And it is hard to overlook that few of this century's seminal labels will move into the 21st in the same form their founders shaped them into over years of hard-sought signings and hands-on oversight. Fewer still are the number of larger labels now inextricably bound to any ISLAND MOTOWK* one person — the types of operations, much more common in the indie realm, that would be hard to imag- ine without one particular person driving them. Many of these labels have been profitably sold by their founders over the years to the big label groups, which have sometimes used their global might to extend the brands and build them to great new levels of success. Others have not been so lucky; victims of consolidation or bad timing, these labels exist in name only, their glory days — for the mo- ment at least — consigned to the his- tory books. Most, however, simply grew and changed with the times, evolving naturally under new owners and label executives and in step with new generations of music fans with their own distinct tastes demanding to be met. "Things have changed radically since we left the label," says Larry (Continued on page 77) Billboard Critics Name Top Choices ■1999 was once year of the NEW YORK again the woman" for Billboard and Airplay Monitor editors and writers, whose votes landed "Black Diamond" from R&B newcomer Angie Stone atop the pile of noteworthy albums in this year's edition of Billboard's Critics' Poll. Lucinda Wil- liams and Lau- ryn Hill tied for top-album honors in 1998. Close behind Stone was Mary J. Blige, who scored five votes for her album "Mary" and one for her single "All That I Can Say." Also nabbing five album votes were sets from Moby, Flaming Lips, Macy Gray, Richard Thomp- son, and Tom Waits. Beyond that, consensus was ' hard to come by jijflfBF| among the 43 i^^ fer tastes run the ^HL gamut from hip-hop to old- mqby school R&B, commercial pop to cutting-edge rock. A complete listing of their choices begins on page YE-6. Justice Dept. Probing MTV's Practices, Acquisitions See Page 10 IN THE NEWS FTC's Look At Majors Seen Slowing CDnow Merger Deal See Page B1 Every name you need, virtually. BILLBOARD'S INTERNATIONAL BUYER'S GUIDE IS NOW AVAILABLE ONLINE! Fully searchable and updated weekly • Customized reports for download BillboQrd For free demo, visit www.billboard.com/directories VW&ctorLes ADVERTISE MINT iqhted material We Are Proud To End The Century The Way We Have Ended Each Of The Past 25 Years: £1 Pop Imprint #1 Pop Label HOT 100 SINGLES #1 Hot 100 Imprint #1 Hot 100 Label #1 Longest-Running Single of 1999 Santana, "Smooth" Featuring Rob Thomas R&B #1 R&B/Hip-Hop Imprint #1 R&B/Hip-Hop Label #1 Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Imprint #1 Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Label #1 Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Sales Deborah Cox "Nobody's Supposed To Be Here' #1 Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Artist Faith Evans (Bad Boy) JAZZ #1 Contemporary Jazz Imprint #1 Contemporary Jazz Label #1 Combined Jazz Imprint #1 Contemporary Jazz Artist Kenny G #1 Contemporary Jazz Album Kenny G, Classics In The Key Of G ADULT CONTEMPORARY #1 Hot Adult Contemporary Singles & Tracks Sarah McLachlan, "Angel" In addition, Arista was named Pop and R&B Label Of The Year at The Billboard Monitor Convention for the second year in a row. ARISTA www.arista.com Leadership Is Everything. I!*99 Arista Records, Inc.. a unit of BMG Elite i-tninment Billboard Editor in Chief: TIMOTHY WHITE ■ EDITORIAL Managing Editor: SUSAN NUNZ1ATA Deputy Editor: Irv Licfitman Newt Editor: Marilyn A. Gillen Director of Special Issues: Gene Sculatti; Dale! Brady. Associate Director; Porter Hali. Assistant Editor; Katy Kroll. Special Issues Coord nator Bureau Chiets: Oet Flippo (Nashville), B.ll Holland (Washington), John Lannert (Caribbean and Latin America], Meltnda Newman (L.A ) Art Director: JeW Ntsbet: Assistant: Raymond Carlson Copy Chief: Bruce Janicke Copy Editors: Andrew Boorstyn. Martaina Gray, Car! Rosen Senior Editor: Ed Chnstman, Retail IKY) Senior Writer*: Cnns Morns (L A ), Bradley Bambarger (N.V.) Talent Editor: Larry Flick (N.Y) R&B Musk: Gail Mitchell. Editor (L.A.) Country Music/Nashville: Deborah Evans Price. Associate Editor Dance Music; Michael Paoletla, Editor (N.Y.I Pro Audio/Technology: Paul Verna. Editor (N.Y.) Merchants & Marketing: Don Jeffrey, Editor (N.Y.) Digital Entertainment Editor: Eileen Rtzpatrick (L.A.) Radio: Chuck Taylor. Editor (N.Y.) Healseekers Features Editor Music Video: Carla Hay, Editor (N.Y.) Financial Reporter: Brian Garrity (N.Y.) Editorial Assistant): Rashaun Hall (N.Y.) Special Correspondent: Jim Bessman Contributors: Catherine Applefeld Olson. Fred Bronson. Usa Collins. Larry LeBlanc. Moira McCormick, David Nathan. Dylan Siegler, Phyllis Stark, Steve Traiman International Editor In Chief: ADAM WHITE International Deputy Editor: The - C.rfy International Music Editor: Dominic Pride International Business Editor: Mark Solomons International Editor: Tom Ferguson German Bureau Chief: Wolleang Spahr Japan Bureau Chief: Steve McClure Contributing Editor: Paul Sexton ■ CHARTS & RESEARCH Director of Charts: GEOFF MAYFIELD Chart Managers: Anthony Colombo (Mainstream Rock/New Age) Ricardo Com pan irjon Dance. Latin), Datu Faison (Hot R48 SmgleVToo R&B Album&'RarVGospeVReCEae), Steven Graybow (Adult Contemporary/ Adult Top 40/Jazz/Blues). Wade Jesseri (Country/Contemporary Christian), Mark Marone (Modern Rock'Studio Action), Geoff Mayfield (Billboard 200,' Heatseekersy'Catalog), SJvio Pietrotuongo (Hot lOO/Top 40 Tracks), Marc Zubatkm (Video/Classical 1 Kid Audio. World Music) Chart Production Manager: Michael Cusson Manager: Archive Research and Retail Charts: Alex Vitouhs Assistant Chart Production Manager: Gordon Murray Administrative Assistants: Keith Caulfield (L A ), Mary DeCroce (Nashville). Gisle Slow 3 (N.Y ■ SALES Associate Publisher/Worldwide : IRWIN KORNFELD Advertising Directors: Pat Jennings (East), Jodie Francisco (West) New York: Evan Braunstein, Michael Lewis, Virginia Lujano LA.: Andy Anderson, Diana Blackwelf, Michelle Wright Nashville: Phil Hart Advertising Coordinators: Hollie Adams, Evelyn Aszodi Advertising Assistant; Lorraine Stewart, Eric Vitoulis Classified: Tracy Walker Directories: JefrSerrette Associate Publisher/International: GENE SMITH U.KjEorope: Christine Chmetb, Ian Remrner 44-207-822-8300 Asia-Pacrfic'Australia: Linda Matrch 612-9440-7777. Fax: 612-9440-7788 Japan: Aki Kaneko. 323-525-2299 Italy: Ud>a Bonguardo. 031 570056 Fax; 031-570485 France: Francois Millet. 33-1-4549-2933 Latin American a mi: Mair.ia Clival 3^-664-7578. Fax; 305-864-3227 Mexico/West Coast Latin: Daisy Ducret 323-782-6250 Jamaica/Caribbean: Betty Ward Reld. Phone/Fax 954-929-5120 ■ MARKETING S. LICENSING Associate Publisher: HOWARD APPELBAUM Promotion Director: Peggy Altenpohl Promotion Cooidinator; Amy Helier Senior Designer: Melissa Subalch Assistant Marketing Manager: Corey Kronengold Special Events Director: MicheJe Jacangelo Quigley Special Events Coordinator: Phyllis Demo Circulation Director: JEANNE JAMIN Group Sales Manager: Katia Ducheine Circulation Promotion Manager: Lori Donohue Circulation Assistant: Mike Fouratt International Circulation Marketing Director: Ben Eva ■ PRODUCTION Director of Production & Manufacturing: MARIE R, GOMBERT Advertising Production Manager: Johny Wallace Advertising Manufacturing Manager: Lydia Mi-J-n Advertising Production Coordinator: C"ir.s!ine Paz Editorial Production Director: Terrence C Sanders Editorial Production Supervisor: Anthony T. Stalling* Specials Production Editor: Marcia Repmski Associate Specials Production Editor: Marc Giaqumto Systems/Technology Supervisor: Barry Bishm Senior Composition Technician: Susan Chicola Composition Technicians; Rodger Leonard, Maria ManltcUc Directories Production Manager: Len Durham Classified Production Assistant: Gene Williams ■ NEW MEDIA Editorial Director: KEN SCH LAGER Billboard Online: Julie Taraska (News Editor). Jonathan Cohen (Assistant Editor!. David Wertheimer (Web Site Designer). Sam D. Bell (Sales Manager), Rachel Vilson (Product Manager) ■ ADMINISTRATION Distribution Director: Edward Skiba Billing: iingette Wallace Credit: Shawn Norton Assistant to the Publisher: Sylvia Sinn PRESIDENT I PUBLISHER: HOWARD LANDER Washington. D.C. 733 15th St N.W. Wash.. D C. 20005 202-783-3282 tax 202-737-3833 London 50-51 Bedford Row London WC1R 4LR 44-207 822-8300 (ax: 44-20-7242-9136 ■ BILLBOARD OFFICES: New York 1515 Broadway N Y. NY 10036 212-764-7300 edit tax 212-536- 53 58 sales tax 212-536-5055 Los Angeles Nashville 5055 Wilshire Blvd. 49 Music Square W. Los Angeles, CA 90036 Neshvine. TN 37203 323-525-2300 61 5-32 1 -4290 lax 323 525 2394/2395 Fax 615-320-0454 To Subscribe call USA; 800-745-8922. Europe: +44 (0) 185B435326 International: 740-382-3322 ■ BILLBOARD ONLINE: http://www.billtoard.corn 212-536-1402. sbetl@fjillooard.corn PRESIDENT: Howard Lander Bifcoord Music Group Vice Presidents: Howard Appelbaum, Marie Gombert. Irwin Kornfetd. Karen Oertley, Ken Schlager. Joellen Sommer, Adam White The Enduring Dreams Of Secular Kmas Snngs The religious devotion behind Christmas music is an ancient facet of Western culture, but the song-minded impulse to celebrate the holiday's secular virtue is a modern development, proving our endur- ing ability to remake our culture to fit our contemporary dreams. Even a time-tested hymn like "Good King Wenceslas," whose music was first published in Germany in 1582, was originally an ode to the vernal equinox, boasting such passages as "Spring has unwrapped her flowers." Its current lyrics (extolling a pious and beneficent legendary king from 10th-century Bohemia) were pro- vided in 1853 by an English cleric who debuted them in a book called "Carols For Christmas-Tide." As we experience the final holiday season of the second millen- nium and the wide range of seasonal songs that enhance it, many listeners might not be aware that the 20th-century panorama of nonreligious Christmas music — from Bessie Smith to Bing Cros- by to Jimmy Buffett — has historical roots existing outside the bounds of mere errant ecclesiasticism. In Smith's case, her 1925 recording "At The Christmas Ball," with its initial braying horns and "Hooray for Christmas!" out- burst, echoed the Africa-rooted Junkanoo (aka John Canoe) festivals of the American South (and the Caribbean), which began after midnight on Christ- mas morning and were traditional from the 1700s until as late (in some regions) as the 1940s. The post-harvest carnival atmosphere of Christ- mastime in the Southern states before the Civil War (1861-65) was observed by both plantation overseers and the slave population (which was customarily given anywhere between a day and a few weeks of respite from their usual regimen) as they engaged in various public revels. The paternalistic calcula- tion by slave owners in such brief spells of liberty — often fueled by copious free alcohol and the gaudy trappings of materialism — was to superficially sate greater thirst for self-empowerment. In "The Battle For Christmas" (Vintage Books. 1996), historian Stephen Nissenbaum quotes African- American abolitionist/statesman Frederick Douglass' own writings as a former slave, in which Douglass surmised that such hard-partying holiday indulgence in the South played into racist boss- es' commercial designs. "Their object seems to be, to disgust their slaves with freedom, by plunging them into the lowest depths of dis- sipation ... So, when the holidays ended, we staggered up from the filth of our wallowing, took a long breath, and marched to the field — feeling, upon the whole, rather glad to go, from what our master had deceived us into belief was freedom, back into the arms of slavery." The manipulative sins, personal sorrows, and wrenching self-decep- tions of these pleasure-exploiting ploys laid the basis for some of the 20th century's most bittersweet Christmas songs, including 1924's "Santa Claus Blues" from Louis Armstrong with the Red Onion Jazz Babies, "Blind" Lemon Jefferson's 1928 "Christmas Eve Blues," Bo Chatrnon and Walter Jacobs Vinson's (as the Mississippi Sheiks) 1930 "Sitting On Top Of The World" (in which the torment of being trapped in work "overalls" on Christmas Day is recounted), Robert Johnson's ia37 "Hellhound On My Trail" (with its futile fugitive fantasy: "If today was Christmas Eve/And tomorrow was Christmas Day/Aow, wouldn't we have a time, baby?"), and Sonny Boy (aka John Lee) Williamson's abject 1938 recording, "Christmas Morning Blues." The seasonal lessons of these and comparable songs are just as instructive as those informing the saga of a savior's humble birth, as each in its own fashion counsels the unwary nut to be hood- winked during the year by what's currently hustled as dap style, "vivrant things," or the shortest route to a wad of dead presidents. Yet even those who understandably decry the well-moneyed modern merchandising of Christmas should also recognize that even in antebellum America, efforts at preserving the pure and humble joys of the holiday often came from unexpected precincts. The rustic, temporal, wintertime anthem of "Jingle Bells" (whose first word, by the way, was intended as a verb) was actually penned as a Sunday school amusement and copyrighted in 1857 under its seminal title, "One Horse Open Sleigh" — yet its author was nei- ther a country preacher nor a rural poet but rather wealthy Bostonian James Pierpont, great-grandfather of curmudgeonly John Pierpont Morgan, financier/founder of U.S. Steel, Interna- tional Harvester, and the Pierpont Morgan Library. Most people are aware that the nondenomina- tional "White Christmas," which songwriter Irv- ing Berlin (a secular Jew) published on May 6, 1942, is one of the most successful songs of all time. But at the point that same month when Bing Crosby cut the definitive version in Decca's Los Angeles stu- dios for the soundtrack to the Paramount film "Hol- iday Inn," such "Christmas music was still largely the province of classical artists and church choirs," according to Crosby authority F.B. Wiggins' liner notes for "Bing Crosby: The Voice Of Christmas — The Complete Decca Christmas Songbook" (MCA/ Decca, 1998). Nonetheless, the song copped the Academy Award for best film song of 1942. Crosby's 1945 "Merry Christmas" ER on which "White Christmas" was included, became the biggest album seller in history prior to the arrival of the CD. Among the earlier Christmas recordings by Crosby on that five-track collection were his 1935 renditions of the church hymns "Adeste Fideles" (1760) and "Silent Night" (1818), which Crosby had first balked at cutting because he felt such a move was borderline profane for a popular entertainer. In the decades since, "White Christmas" has been covered by acts as varied as Frank Sinatra, Otis Redding, the Ravens, the Drifters, the ska-era (Bob Marley & the) Waiters, Ernest Tubbs, Garth Brooks, and Anne Sofie von Otter. What rarely gets mentioned as the years accumulate is the potent message implicit in Berlin's classic, which emerged at a time when the gravest conflict in history, World War II, was raging, with Hitler unbeaten in Europe and the U.S. formally involved for only five-odd months following the Dec. 7, 1941, surprise bombing of Pearl Harbor by the Japanese. "White Christmas" evoked a less-fearsome period, when the future seemed brighter and humanity's outlook was more merry. The best edition of Crosby's timeless interpretation may be his inaugural studio take of "White Christmas" on May 29, 1942 — which remained unreleased until the '98 "Voice Of Christmas" anthology — on which Crosby haltingly dropped the third word in the conducting phrase, "May all your Christmases be white." Within its poignant imperfection is one of the must enduring lessons of Christmas: We're only human, and our aims are imperfect, thus the greatest gift we offer one another is our effort to refine the dreams we dream. Rick Danko, Bassist/Vocalist Far The Band, Bias BY CHRIS MORRIS LOS ANGELES— "I don't think I play basslines," Rick Danko once told an inter- viewer. "I just try to play where there's no one else hitting it" Danko's sensitively wrought yet pungent bass work and quavering vocals were critical components of the Band, the Canada-bred quintet that became the exponent of a sound that ran deep in the American grain. Danko, 56, was found dead Dec. 10 at his home in Woodstock, N.Y. The cause of death was unknown at press time. Danko was born Dec. 29, 1942, in Simcoe, Ontario. He was raised on the hardcore coun- try music he heard on WWVA, a clear-chan- nel station that broadcast out of Wheeling, WVa. The songs of Hank Williams and Cana- da's own Hank Snow were early influences. Danko later began picking up R&B station WLAC Nashville and fell under the spell of Sam Cooke. He performed in bands with his brothers until 1961, when expatriate rockabilly singer Ronnie Hawkins recruited him — first as rhythm guitarist, and later as bassist — for his group the Hawks, which at that point included Arkansas-born drummer Levon Helm and Canadian-born guitarist Robbie Robertson. Soon joined by Canadi- an keyboardists Richard Manuel and Garth Hud- son, the Hawks backed Hawkins for two years, playing Canadian and American clubs that the danko bandleader later described as "so tough, you had to puke twice and show your razor just to get in." The group also supported Hawkins on his Roulette Records recordings, which included a crackling 1963 cover of Bo Did- dley's "Who Do You Love." In '63, the group left Hawkins to fend for itself and recorded some unsuccessful singles as the Canadian Squires and Levon & the Hawks. Their fortunes lifted forever in 1965, when Mary Martin, a Toronto native and assistant to Bob Dylan's manager Albert Grossman brought the Hawks to the attention of the cel- ebrated folk singer. Dylan was electrifying his sound and looking for musicians to back him in concert, and Helm and Robertson became part of the group that backed Dylan at his tumultuous Aug. 28, 1965, electric bow at Forest Hills Stadium in New York. Dylan then enlisted the Hawks to support him on his 1965-66 world tour. (Helm abruptly left the group on tour and was replaced for the duration by Bobby Gregg and Mickey Jones.) Critic Greil Marcus wrote of Danko's forceful presence at a Dylan/Hawks show in Berkeley, Calif., "I couldn't take my eyes off him . . . Rick's body translated his musical lines into physical motion." During that epochal tour, playing a bruis- ingly loud combination of folk, blues, R&B, and rock'n'roll, Dylan and his road-seasoned band got a harsh reception from fans who be- (Coutinued on page Hi) BILLBOARD DECEMBER 25. 1999 www.billboard.com 7 No. 1 IN BILLBOARD ; VOLUME 111- NO. 52 w THIS WEEK THIS WEEK THIS WEEK Billboard THIS WEEK THIS WEEK THIS WEEK • THE BILLBOARD 200 " * BOKN AGAIN ■ THE NOTORIOUS B.I.G. • BWBOT CLASSICAL * SACRED ARIAS ■ ANDREA BOCEUJ • PUR CLASSICAL CROSSOVER * CHARLOTTE CHURCH • CHARLOTTE CHURCH • WW ClAS«C*l COUNTRY * COME ON OVER • SHANIA TWAIN * mercury HEATSEEKERS * THE IRISH TENORS HOME FOR CHRISTMAS MCDrTKMOrT KEARMS 1 TYNAN * ^mh-. r.< INTERNET * ALL THE WAY. . A DECADE OF SONG CELINE DION ■ r-50 ml^sic JAZZ * WHEN I LOOK IN YOUR EYES • DIANA KKAU • VERVl JAZZ I CONTEMPORARY * FATTH: A HOLIDAY ALBUM • KENNY G • nam NEW AGE * WINTER SOLSTICE ON ICE • VARIOUS ARTISTS ■ WlNDfVW H POP CATALOG * THESE ARE SPECIAL TIMES • CELINE DION • sso MUX R&B/HIP HOP * BORN AGAIN • THE NOTORIOUS B.I.G. « BAD BOY CHRISTMAS * FATTH. A HOUDAY ALBUM • KENNY G • «KW • THE HOT 100 • * SMOOTH SANTANA FEATURING ROB THOMAS ■ ADULT CONTEMPORARY r I KNEW I LOVED YOU * SAVAGE GARDEN * COLUMBIA ADULT TOP 40 * SMOOTH SANTANA FEATURING ROB THOMAS * WW COUNTRY * BREATHE * FATTH HILL • WARNER BROS DANCE / CLUB PLAY * I 7 AGAIN • EURYTHMICS • .wsi DANCE / MAXI SINGLES SALES * SEXUAL |U DA DIJ • AMBER ■ TOMMY BOY HOT LATIN TRACKS * RITMO TOTAL • ENRIQUE IGLESIAS • WITBCOre R&B/HIPHOP * U KNOW WHAT'S UP DON NELL JONES ' UNTOUOtABtfS ,■ LWSCE RAP * HOT BOYZ MISSY "MISDEMEANOR" ELLIOTT * > ROCK / MAINSTREAM ROCK TRACKS * HIGHER ■ CREED ■ <MM>4* ROCK / MODERN ROCK TRACKS * ALL THE SMALL THINGS • BUNK- 1 82 * MCA TOP 40 TRACKS * SMOOTH SANTANA FEATURING ROB THOMAS • •>: J- • TOP VIDEO SALES - * AUSTIN POWERS: THE SPY WHO SHAGGED F> NEW UNf HOMF WEO DVD SALES * THE MATRIX • u/arwr homf vsifo KID VIDEO * MARY-KATE & ASHLEY: PASSPORT TO PARES • GUAUUWv RENTALS * AUSTIN POWERS: THE SPY WHO SHAGGED ME NEWUNE HOME VtXO 86 No. 1 ON THIS WEEK'S UNPUBLISHED CHARTS BLUES * UVE ON • KENNY WAYNE SHEPHERD BAND * GIANT / ROftlSL CONTEMPORARY CHRISTIAN * A CHRISTMAS TO REMEMBER » AMY GRANT • myrkh GOSPEL * ALABASTER BOX • CECE WTNANS • vmiifTOG GOVti KID AUDIO * TOY STORY 2 • READ-ALONG * W*J ixnti THE BILLBOARD LATIN 50 * DESDE UN PWNC1PIO - FROM THE BEGINNING MARC ANTHONY ■ SONYPSCOS MUSIC VIDEO * TIME OUT WITH BRITNEY SPEARS ■ BRITNEY SPEARS* JTVE / zomba vwo REGGAE * CHANT DOWN BABYLON • BOB MARLEY • tlfff GONG / BLAND WORLD MUSIC * THE IRISH TENORS HOME FOR CHRISTMAS MCDERMOT7 , KEAfiNS / TYNAN « W.iL i m Top Or THt Him 1 0 MTV Networks under inves- tigation for alleged antitrust viola- tions Artist* i Mine 1 4 Executive Turntable: Inigo Zabala is promoted to president ol Mexico and U.S. Latin opera- tions lor Worner Music Interna- tional. 18 Their impoct on youngsters is the common ground that links today's stor pop performers with the legends ol yesteryear. 1 8 The Beat: Teen dreams, pop rockers, the returns ol living legends, and industry executive moves highlight 1 999. 28 Popular Uprisings: Break through acts win with persis- tence. 29 MB: Women dominate the R&B scene with female empow- erment themes from Destiny's Child. Mary J. Blige. and 702. CHRISTINA AGUIIEHA: P. 18 31 The Rhythm Section: TLC. Maxwell, and Whitney Houston reign on the R&B charts this year. 3 1 Words ft Deeds: Rap cele- brates its 20th anniversary with a banner year. SEITINT'I ClllO: P. 29 34 Dance: The dance genre can soar with the support of labels in 2000 36 Country: Country/pop fusion rules the charts. 41 Classical/Keeping Score: Classical chart-toppers of the past year Include Andrea Bocelli, Charlotte Church, and Cecilia Bartoll 42 Jazz/Blue Notes: A look at the top 1 0 jazz albums ot 1 999. 44 Pro Audio: Digital advance- ments earmark the year in studio production. 46 Songwriters & Publishers: Century begins with ragtime ond ends with rap. 47 Latin Notos: Latin music celebrates most successful decdde lo date 49 Europe wraps up the year with local octs dominating lop singles. 52 Hits ot the World: Celine Dion's "All The Way ... A Decade Of Song' remains atop live intemolional charts. 53 Global Music Purse: A month by-month look back a1 this year's music news from around the globe. Merchants 8 Mahmtinb 55 Retail and distribution com- panies deal with Internet ond security concerns. 55 Buying Trends: Internet research otters Insight Into the future ol selling music online. 57 Child's Play/Audio: Koch dominates kids' audio chart with Pokemon title. 58 Retail Track: E-commerce loomed large for brick-and-mor- tar retailers in 1999. 59 Declarations of Indepen- dents: Indies experience a year of highs and lows. 62 Sites + Sounds: The merg- ing of the music industry and the Internet results In groundbreaking partnerships this year. 63 Home Video: Europe's home video industry gears up to tackle revenue and import issues in 2000. 65 Child's Play/Video: Buena Vista Home Entertainment earns top video honors, with 22 titles charting. 70 Internet radio creates seri- A BILLBOARD SPECIAL SECTION ous threat to traditional stations 72 Airwaves: The best ot Air- Waves '99. 73 The Modem Age: Korn, Limp Bizkit. Rob Zombie make rodlo rock harder 74 Music Video: Music video network mergers consolidate the industry. FLATlHH 14 Between the Bullets: Tis the season for slew of hip-hop sets. 66 Classifieds 69 Update/Good Works: Com- pilation to benefit the National Foundation for Children with AIDS. 83 Hot 100 Spotlight: tv Billboard Hot 100 to add audi- ence dola Irom Latin stations 91 This Week's Billboard Online 92 Market Watch 92 Chart Beat: Country singer Eddy Arnold may be the first artist to have charted in seven straight decades 92 Homefront: Billboard and BET on Jazz announce dates tor the first Billboard Jazz Conference and Awards Mexican Collection Body Fights Royalty Ruling BY JOHN LANNERT A Mexican collection agency, Sociedad de Autores y Compositores de Musica (SACM), has appealed a decision by a Mexico City judge that denied the orga- nization sole authority to collect song- writer royalties. The appeal was filed Dec. 13 in response to the judge's Nov. 29 decision that cited SACM's lack of "competency in the cause to sue" several music pub- lishers. The decision also said SACM "did not prove any legal entail" to obligate the defendants to comply with conditions SACM said were necessary to collect royalties. The ruling came almost five years after SACM, which historically has oper- ated as Mexico's exclusive performance right society, initially sued several put>- lishers, alleging that they did not meet requirements that SACM asserted were necessary to collect an author's share of mechanicals (Billboard, Sept. 30, 1995). In filing the appeal on behalf of SACM, Gabriel Larrea, SACM's coordinator of international affairs, deemed the judge's verdict as "weak and contradictory." "On one side he recognizes that the society has the rights of collection, but he does not recognize the powers of its members," says Larrea. According to Larrea, Mexican law states that collection duties for com- posers can be performed only by a gov- ernment-approved entity, which would disqualify privately owned publishing companies. Larrea adds that Mexico's 1997 Federal Law of Authors' Rights "does not distinguish whether the collec- tion is for performance or mechanicals." Predictably, the publishers were elated with the judge's opinion. "It's a great decision for us," says Nestor E. Casonu, Latin American regional managing director of EMI Music Publishing Latin America, "because the judge recognized that we the publishers have the freedom to man- age our decisions." Edmundo Monroy, president of Edi- tores Mexicanos de Musica S.A. (EMMAC), declares that the ruling "is going to change the panorama" of the music publishing business in Mexico. "It means that the publishers' rights remain within the realm of the publish- ers without being assaulted by a society that pretended to be the monopoly of mechanical and performance [collec- tions]," says Monroy. Many non-Latino publishing execu- tives based in the U.S. are reserving their opinions about the decision until it is translated into English. However, Ralph Peer II. president of stateside music publisher peermusic, says that "from conversations from my colleagues in Mexico, I do get the impression that it is a fundamentally important decision and that the decision goes to the heart of the matter: that the composer has freedom to contractually assign his rights as he wishes to do. That (Continued mi page 75) 8 www.billboard.com BILLBOARD DECEMBER 25. 1999 Your Music. Your Business. CD *F* interTrust The MetaTrust Utility" Leading Digital Rights Management www.intertrust.com/partners 1-800-393-2272 ■ Data Center/Hosting Services bj ^<s imm inn fii romoutacenter igroup ANatWMt -j Mitsubishi Corporation Codec and Players D I C I T A t SURROUND Fraunhofar Inst: tut In teq/ierte Sch*ltung.n MEDIA MUSJC»MATCH" Devices and Portals Music 112. UNIVERSAL MUSIC CROUP "This On« JXU9-JRU-W75Y Dutch Indies Merge Road runner Buys Arcade, Goes Large BY ROBBERT TILLI AMSTERDAM — The acquisition of Netherlands-based Arcade Music Group by fellow Dutch indie Roadrunner, expected to be con- cluded Jan. 3, will create one of the world's biggest independent record companies, with combined annual revenue in excess of 300 million Dutch guilders ($150 million). Roadrunner parent WBG Be- heer BV is to buy Arcade Music Group from its owner, Dutch media group Wegener Arcade. The Arcade name will be adopted for all of Roadrunner's European activities outside the Netherlands. The Roadrunner label will main- tain a separate identity and its own offices in Hilversum near Amsterdam. According to a statement issued by Wegener Dec. 14, "The acquisi- tion would allow Roadrunner the opportunity to expand its strategic position in Europe, along with the broadening of its repertoire in var- ious territories." The statement says that "talks have reached the stage where agreement is expect- ed." According to Arcade Music Group managing director Nico Geusebroek, the deal is contingent only on "a few formalities." Based in the Netherlands, where it is the biggest local indie. Arcade also has offices in Belgium, Spain, Norway, Sweden, and Den- mark. Arcade Music Group's labels include CNR (MOR, pop, national repertoire), Bit (dance), and Arcade (TV merchandising, com- pilations). Wegener decided to sell its music operations in August to return to its core publishing activ- ities. Last month it sold its pub- lishing catalog to a joint venture formed by former executive Andre de Raaff and local publisher Strengholt (Billboard, Nov. 6). Geusebroek was meanwhile look- ing for a new business partner for the rest of the music group. "Roadrunner and Arcade are the perfect fit for each other," Geusebroek tells Billboard. "We have affiliates in the Benelux and Scandinavian territories and (Continued on pugeSQ) MTV Faces DOJ Investigation BY CAR LA HAY NEW YORK— The stakes have been raised in the music video arena with the launch of a U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) investigation into MTV Networks' practices and the compa- ny's recent acquisition activities. The investigation follows on the heels of last month's deal by online site Launch to begin streaming music vid- eos from Sony Music Entertainment and EMI Group on its Web site. Although MTV Networks' dominance of the music televi- sion arena has thus far not extended to the Internet, where it faces competition for its recently formed MTV Interactive (MTVi) division, the division is said to be planning an initial public offering next year that could accelerate its Web activities. MTVi president Nicholas Butter- worth lias told Billboard that the com- pany is "going to be offering more videos" on its site ( Billboard, Sept 11). At present, the MTVi sites — includ- ing mtv.com and vhl.com — offer par- 'I don't think it's fair at all for MTV to get videos exclusively' - NICK SCHITTONE - B'board Awards Boost Spears, Own BY GEOFF MAYFIELD LOS ANGELES— Celine Dion and Britney Spears, who each performed at the Billboard Music Awards Dec. 8 on Fox, were among the show's biggest sales beneficiaries, with their top 10 albums posting gains of more than 70,000 units over prior- week sales. In all, 20 acts who played the show, won awards, or served as presenters on the Fox special saw albums enjoy larger increases than the 20% gain that overall album sales saw during the week. With an 8.1 rating and a 13 share, the show ranked 25th among the week's shows. It drew 12.1 million viewers and had the night's highest ratings for adults in the 18-49 demo- graphic (5.3/15) and teens (9.6/31). At No. 2 on The Billboard 200, Dion's "All The Way ... A Decade Of Song" rose by 87,000 units, for a total of 414,500, in a week that also saw her visit "The Tonight Show With Jay Leno." At No. 4, Spears' ". . . Baby One More Time," which had a 3% gain on last issue's chart, rode the Fox show to a 32% increase of 77,000 units, for a total of 318,000. "The only artist to see a signifi- cant sales increase [from the awards show] was Celine Dion," says James Brown, manager of Tower Records in San Francisco. "And Metallica, but that's also because they are from the Bay Area." Like Dion's, albums by perform- ers Metallica (up 32.000 units, at No. 13), Red Hot Chili Peppers (up 14,000 units, a 37% increase, at No. 63), Juvenile (up 18,500 units, at Music Network Acquires Troubled Willie's Chain BY ED CHRISTMAN NEW YORK— With its acquisition of the Willie's chain, the Music Network is now firmly established as a region- al urban music-oriented powerhouse. The deal, completed Dec. 10, gives the Music Network a total of 42 stores, with a combined sales volume of about $45 million annually (Billboard/M- letin, Dec. 15). The Music Network, which is based in Norcross, Ga., operates the 24-unit Starship and Peppermints chains as well as a one-stop. Willie's, an 18-unit chain based in Richmond, Va., has been experiencing financial trouble for the last year. Michael Goldwasser, co-owner of the Music Network, says the compa- ny acquired certain assets and lia- bilities of Willie's but declines to pro- vide details of the deal. Sources suggest that his company made a token cash payment for Willie's and assumed the chain's $5 million in lia- bilities. Going forward, the company will continue to use the Willie's logo, which Goldwasser terms a "hell of a brand." In fact, some of the Pepper- mints stores operating in the Willie's markets will assume the Willie's name, he reports. The 42 stores are (Continued on puw S9) No. 36), and Snoop Dogg (up by 4%, at No. 167) all saw increases after posting declines in the week before the show. Similarly, the latest set by artist- of-the-decade winner Mariah Carey (up 36,000 units, at No. 12) had a gain following a week when "Rainbow" saw an 11% drop. "Mariah Carey's sales went up as a result of her win- ning artist of the decade," says Daniel Augustine, assistant manag- er of Sam Goody in San Diego. Other show participants who moved from a loss to a gain include Blink-182 (up 32,000 units, a 38% gain, at No. 27), Lou Bega (up 30,000 units, at No. 18), and Mary J. Blige (up 7,000 units, at No. 87). Two albums by Emmylou Harris saw large spikes, with "Western Wall — The Tucson Sessions," Harris' pairing with Linda Ronstadt, bullet- ing 60-52 on Top Country Albums with a 54% gain (5,000 units), while "Trio II" with Ronstadt and Dolly Parton posted a 48% gain. Two cata- log albums by Artist Achievement winner Aerosmith, "Nine Lives" and "Big Ones," each had gains exceed- ing 60% of previous-week sales. Two Billboard show performers who had other TV exposure during the week, Jennifer Lopez and LeAnn Rimes, built on established momen- tum. Lopez, who also appeared on the VH1/ Vogue Fashion Awards, moved from an 8% gain on the pre- vious chart to a 36% boost (No. 51 ). Rimes, who also sang on the "Today" show, rolled from a 2% gain to a 40.5% rise (No. 39). Assistance in preparing this story was provided by Keith Caidfield in Los Angeles and Rashmtn Hall in New York. tial videoclips but do not offer full- length videos on demand. Among the issues involved in the DOJ investigation is the network's practice of getting videos exclusively for a limited period of time under its blanket licensing agreements with labels, which some industry observers say is likely to extend to its Web site. Launch president David Goldberg says he doesn't rule out the "probability that MTV [Networks] might want to use that kind of leverage if they started offer- ing videos on their Web sites. 1 suppose that's what the [DOJ I investigation is prob- ably about: making sure there's a level playing field for everybody." MTV Networks owns MTV VH1, MTV2, and the Box. MTV Networks parent Viacom Inc. also plans to buy CBS, which includes CMT and TNN. The sale is pending Federal Trade Commission approval and is expect- ed to be finalized next year. A DOJ spokesman confirms that the department is investigating the possibility of anti-competitive be- havior among music video networks. An MTV Networks spokeswoman says of the company's exclusive agree- ments with labels, "We have some deals with some companies where we pay money to air their videos exclu- sively. We don't exercise this agree- ment that often." The videos that MTV obtained exclusive rights to in 1999 were Korn's "Freak On A Leash," Spice Girls' "Goodbye," the Offspring's "Why Don't You Get A Job'.'," and Limp Bizkit's "Nookie." When MTV receives exclusive rights to air a vid- eo, the exclusivity period typically lasts for about a month. The spokeswoman says that the company has not been attempting to obtain exclusive video rights for its online operations. Until recently, it has been difficult for Web-based video sites to obtain videoclips from the major record companies due to concerns over li- censing fees and other policy issues. However, Launch has pacted with Sony Music and EMI Group in sep- arate deals to offer the labels' full- length videoclips on its Web site. As part of the deals, Sony and EMI were given an undisclosed minority stake in Launch (The Eye, Billboard, Dee. 18). "The Internet will be a bigger business for music videos over the next 10 years than cable TV because, on the Internet, there's more poten- tial for people to view music videos on demand," says Goldberg. Other Web channels that offer music video on demand include En- tertainment Boulevard (formerly VidNet), InterneTV, and Tunes.com. The biggest cable TV competitors to MTV Networks are Black Enter- tainment Television (BET); Much- MusicUSA; and Great American Country. Executives at these net- works were unavailable for comment at press time. MTV Networks issued a statement Dec. 15 saying it is cooperating with the DOJ investigation. According to Nielsen Media Research, MTV reaches more than 72 million U.S. households and VH1 reaches more than 68 million, com- pared with BET (56 million), the Box (24 million), MuchMusicUSA (12 mil- lion), and MTV2 (10 million). Says one record company execu- tive, "Yes, there's an unbalanced amount of power that MTV Net- works has, but I don't see anyone else coming to the table to give them serious competition. MTV doesn't (Continued on ]mqe HP) GOOD WORKS from Taylor's 'Syae' Front Door artist Kate Taylor is starting the millennium in a charitable way by donating pro- ceeds from a special issue of her folk-infused "Auld Lang Syne" to the Elizabeth Glaser Pedi- atric AIDS Foundation. The classic song, refashioned here with acoustic guitars, vio- lin, upright bass, and Taylor's gentle Americana vocal stylings, was arranged by bro- ther James, who also plays gui- tar and sings background (Music to My Ears, Billboard, Nov. 13). "Auld Lang Syne" was produced by her manager/ husband, Charles Witham, and Tony Garnier. It came together a year after Taylor decided to perform the song at her 1998 winter concert on Martha's Vineyard. Earlier this year she and Witham found the original 18th-century Robert Burns lyric — its popu- larized version includes only the first verse. "When we realized the mean- ing of the lyrics — about recon- ciliation, forgiveness, and recog- nizing what's important — it just felt so good, and then James added his magical touch," Taylor says. Front Door will auction a signed edition of the CD over eBay, with America Online (AOL) providing promotion and trafficking. AOL's Spinner.com will past "Auld Lang Syne" on one of its radio channels. The track is also available on Taylor's Web site (www.kateta.vior.com). CHUCK TAYLOR 10 www.billboard.com BILLBOARD DECEMBER 25, 1999 UNIVERSAL MUSIC & VIDEO DISTRIBUTION STILL STRIVING TO BE THE BEST. THANKS TO OUR RETAIL PARTNERS, FAMILY OF LABELS AND STUDIOS FOR MAKING 1999 A HISTORIC YEAR. warn — .-v mc:* susss UM1 ^ 8Al n mca Qdju, © q h ■ MUSICI latino •;-.•„,„ ^jjp^ croup ^ H NASHV.U.E -■r^-r- U lal Over 25 million worldwide s Over 16 million albums sold in the U.S. alone All we could have asked for and more... Congratulations and Thank You! Mercury Nashville and the Universal Music Group Produced by Robert John Mutt Lange Jon Landau Management: Jon Landau, Barbara Carr Visit www.shania-twain.com Copyrighted male Grainge Named To Uni Exec Post BY DOMINIC PRIDE and ADAM WHITE LONDON— Universal Music U.K. is the latest of the majors' internation- al affiliates to place a "music man" in charge of all of its pop label opera- tions, with the appointment of Poly- dor Records U.K. managing director Lucian Grainge to the role of deputy chairman of the company (Bill- boardHuiletin, Dec. 10). Beginning Jan. 1 Mercury, Polydor, and Universal/Island will report to Grainge, who in turn reports to Uni- versal U.K. chairman/CEO John Kennedy. The move partly emulates Univer- sal^ German strategy, where five repertoire units report to music group president Tim Renner, who in turn reports to Universal Germany chairman/CEO Wolf Gramatke. It also underlines the competition for executive talent in the U.K.: Epic U.K. managing director Rob Strin- ger had a similar promotion when elevated to senior VP of Sony Music U.K. in August. Kennedy says of Grainge, "He is that elusive person: the music man as opposed to the music executive. When he hears a record, he either knows it's a hit or if he thinks it's not a hit but a potential hit, he knows what to do to put it right. Not many people are born with those skills, and there are even fewer around in the U.K. music indus- try." Among the records that Grainge has had a hand in are Irish pop gb sensation Boyzone; S Club 7, a pop group brought in by Simon Fuller at 19 Management and created with a view to exploiting the act's BBC TV show; and the Light- house Family, whose smooth pop/R&B sound has carved out a huge international career. Grainge and his team arc credited with rebuilding Polydor in the U.K., restoring its status as a pop label, and in doing so contributing to the revival of Britain's now dominant pop busi- at to do to ket in the I Foster Signs Plus One Producer Moves Into Christian Music BY DEBORAH EVANS PRICE NASHVILLE — Grammy-winning producer David Foster is making his first foray into the contempo- rary Christian music market with . Plus One, a new male pop group signed to his 143 Records. The group's debut album will be a joint venture between 143 and Atlantic Records' fosteh Christian division, which is headed by VP/GM Barry Landis. "David is a VP in the Warner Music Group, and David had, through his manager, Brian Avnet, expressed an interest in getting into Christian music," says Landis. "I started hav- ing some meetings and said, 'Wow, if David's interested in getting into Christian music, we really need to find him something speciaL' " Landis surfaced with Plus One, the five-member ensemble of Nathan Walters, Jason Perry, Gabe Combs, Jeremy Mhire, and Nate Cole, who range in age from 17 to 21. The group Is the brainchild of manager Mitchell Solarek of Mitchell Jannsen Man- agement, who auditioned prospective members, put the act together, and took it to Landis. A 14-time Grammy winner w-ho has produced Toni Braxton's "Un- Break My Heart," Whitney Hous- ton's "I Will Always I-ove You," and Celine Dion's "Because You Loved Me," Foster has dabbled in Christian music before. (CoJitin iicd fin /xif/f ness, which is powering the market as a whole. "I like to sell records. I am proud of it," Grainge says. In the albums market, Polydor ranked third with 7.7% of the mar- ket in the third quarter, according to research by ERA from chart data sup- plier Millward Brown. Polydor had 10.7% of the singles market in the same three months, also third. Universal was the nge market leader for the same period, with an albums share of 25.7% and 22.2% of the singles market Grainge says the simple approach that has given Polydor a boost in recent years is one that applies across all labels. "People talk about how complicated the record business is," says Grainge. "Ultimately it's about having the best songs and the best artists." As for his future plans for the labels, he says the philosophy is equal- ly simple. "I want the best songs, the best artists, and the best marketing. We need to prioritize the artists that we can be successful with, then mar- ket and promote and sell them." Grainge will continue to helm Polydor until a successor is appoint- ed. He does not put a time frame on when that will take place. "I have a strong management team in Polydor," he says. "They are more than ready and more than ca- pable of running the label. If I didn't have the right management, I would be more nervous." Observers have attributed the move to Universale recognition that Grainge's skills were in demand and that offers were made by at least one other major. There was speculation that he would join Roger Ames at the Warner Music Group. While declining to discuss other offers, he says, "I hare been with the company for 13 years. They did not want to lose that. This is about Uni- versal deciding that running Polydor for the rest of my life might not have kept me stimulated; it's (Cviitiutii d mt /ni/jr S!l! by Geoff Mayfield Rapf ping PAPER: Ah, December, the month of Santa and reindeer, the menorah and dreidels . . . and rappers, of course. The week after Christ- mas has been a big one for rap album sales through the '90s. Now, earli- er weeks of the month are being targeted for hip-hop releases. Last year, when DMX delivered his sophomore album later than Def Jam expected, the label rolled the dice and released it a few days before Christmas. Although widely considered a gamble to arrive that late in the holiday selling season, "Flesh Of My Flesh Blood Of My Blood" moved 670,000 copies, one of the year's largest totals. As folks in the rap sector keep a close eye on one another — remember the flood of two-disc sets that hit the market a couple of years ago? — it was not surprising to see key rap albums slated for release this Decem- ber. One of them, the second posthumous album from the Notorious B.I.G., is the big kingpin on this issue's Billboard 200, leading the chart with 485,000 units. The sum exceeds Celine Dion, at No. 2, by 17% (414,500 units) and is 7.5% more than the 451,000 copies that placed Garth Brooks' "Double Live" on top of the list this chart week a year ago. The genre is also represented this month by the new Juvenile album and the soundtrack from "Next Friday," which came out Dec. 14; anoth- er DMX and a new Goodie Mob, due Tuesday (21 ); and the next Jay-Z — for which Island/Def Jam Music Group has staked the ambitious goal of 1.25 million units in the first week. It arrives Dec. 28. 1999* IN* REVIEW H OME STRETCH: Business looks healthy as we approach Christmas week. On the current charts, which reflect sales for the period of Dec. 6- 12, each of the top 32 albums on The Billboard 200 surpasses 100,000 units, with the top 13 titles residing in the 200,000-plus club. This chart week a year ago, 26 albums sold 100,000 pieces or more, with just eight tipping the scales at 200,000 or more. Further, each of the week's top 10 albums is bulleted. Bullet criteria for this up-and-at-'em period: a 35% sales jump over the previous week, or any album that gains 30,000 units or more, regardless of percentage change. Prominent on the big chart are sales increases by acts that played the Billboard Music Awards (see story, page 10). Sad FOOTNOTE: As I prepared a retrospective on music of the '90s for this issue's Year in Music spotlight (see page YE-14), it occurred to me that the Grim Reaper had more representation on the charts in the last 10 years than in any other decade. With this issue's chart-topper, seven different posthumous albums by four different '90s artists reached No. 1 on The Billboard 200. The common denominator of the deaths: guns. Nirvana front man Kurt Cobain committed suicide in April 1994, after which the band's "MTV Unplugged In New York" (in the Nov. 19, 1994, Billboard) and "From The Muddy Banks Of The Wishkah" (Oct 19, 1996) each bowed at No. 1. Selena, who was preparing to cross to pop formats from the fan base she had built with her success in the Latin genres, was murdered by her former fan club president, Yolanda Saldivar, in March 1995. "Dreaming (Continued on page 90) EXECUTIVE TURNTABLE RECORD COMPANIES. Warner Music International promotes Inigo Za- bala to president of Mexico and U.S. Latin operations, Mariano Perez to managing director of WEA Mexico in Mexico, and George Zamora to president of WEA Latina in Miami. They were, respectively, managing director of Warner Music Mexico, managing director of DRO EastWest Spain, and VP/GM of WEA Latina. Arista names Tom Corson senior VP of worldwide marketing and sales in New York. Arista also pro- motes Danny "C" Coniglio to senior director of club and crossover promotion and Jeffrey Schulz to senior art director in New York. They were, respectively, senior VP of marketing for Columbia Records, director of club and mix show pro- motion, and a freelancer. Ken Robold is promoted to CFO AX ZABALA ZAMORA for MCA and Mercury Nashville in Nashville. He was senior VP of fin- ance and administration. BMG Entertainment names Keith Eastbrook VP of corporate communications in New York. BMG Entertainment also promotes San- dra Medina to director of event planning in New York. They were, respectively, VP of corporate com- munications and special projects at Hachette Filipacchi Magazines, and manager of event planning. Christine Prudham is named CORSON CONIGLIO VP of legal and business affairs for BMG Music Canada in Toronto. She was a partner with Davies, Ward and Beck. Audrey Strahl is named VP of national publicity and artist devel- opment for the Rounder Records Group in New York. She was VP of publicity and media relations at Capitol Records. Ben Kline is promoted to VP of sales for Mercury Nashville in Nashville. He was senior director of national sales. ROBOLD KLINE Keith Rosenberg is named director of production for BMG Classics in New York. He was director of production for Astral- werks. Renee White is promoted to sen- ior manager of A&R for MCA Nashville in Nashville. She was manager of A&R. Crissy Zagami is named nation- al promotion manager of jazz for the Verve Music Group in New York. She was national promotion manager at Coast to Coast Pro- WHITE ZAGAMI motion. PUBLISHERS. Monti Olson is named creative manager at peer- music in New York. He was cre- ative manager at Windswept Pacif- ic music publishing. RELATED FIELDS. Bill Manning is named executive VP/COO of Artist Group International in New York. He w r as executive VP of Metromedia International Com- munications Inc. 14 www.billboard.com BILLBOARD DECEMBER 25. 1999 GREYBULL, WYOMING. ONE TRAFFIC LIGHT. 100 RADIO STATIONS. 5IRIU5 SFITELLITE RRDIO IS RLtlOST HERE. FWD HO TOUtt IS IMlUliE. There's no escaping it. Sirius Satellite Radio's 100 channels will reach nearly every driver on every highway, ^^^^^^ byway, main street and back road in the lower 48 states. We're revolutionizing in-vehicle entertainment oMKtoMNM "seon "i/fi's 'coverage. witn commercial-free music, digital-quality sound, seamless nationwide coverage and a breadth of programming that traditional radio has never delivered. Starting in late 2000, our satellites will beam 50 channels of digital-quality music to cars and trucks with absolutely no commercial interruptions. Our subscribers will enjoy programming of every music style imaginable - from Rock, Country and Classical to Salsa, Hip Hop, Reggae and Swing. And in addition to our diverse selection of originally programmed ^ ^^^^^ music, they'll get up to 50 channels of unique and compelling news, sports, talk and BKwtWJI BSwJ entertainment programming. 1— wiiw—^ [ Receivers will display artist, song title ond channel information Sirius Satellite Radio also features seamless nationwide coverage. So, whether our subscribers are in the wilds of Wyoming or the middle of New York City, they'll never drive out of range of our crystal-clear signal. (One more thing in the interest of clarity - we recently changed our name from CD Radio.) And at just $9.95 a month, our service will be music to the ears of everyone who owns one of the 200 million vehicles on the road. To find out more about Sirius Satellite Radio, call us at 212-584-5100 or visit us at www.siriusradio.com. « SIRIUS Satellite Radio FORMERLY CD RADIO Copyrighted materia r CLOSING DECEMBER 23 • MIDEM • Rock Records 20th Anniversary CALL NOW! ADVERTISING OPPORTUNITI RED DISTRIBUTION 20™ ANNIVERSARY Billboard spotlights the incredible rise and success of RED Distribution, the largest independent distributor in the music business today. We explore the worlds of Ken Antonelli and company and the supportive style they've provided to so many companies and individuals. Help us tell RED's story by including your advertisement in this salute. Contact: Evan Braunstein 212.536.5172 ISSUE DATE: JAN 29 AD CLOSE: JAN 4 Billboard turns its spotlight on the 25 shining years of Nile Rodgers. Coverage includes a full report on Rodgers' prolific career as a hit-mak- ing artist, a successful producer and his present-day activities. Editorial features an exclusive Q&A with Rodgers and a recap of his success on the Billboard charts. Place your tribute in this significant salute to one of Rock n' Roll's greats. ISSUE DATE: FEB 5 AD CLOSE: JAN 11 Pat Rod Jennings 212.536.5136 SPRING BUYER' nil Billboard's semi-annual Buyer's Guide includes a report of the most anticipated music releases for the January-to-June period, covering all genres and styles. Plus: a look at key releases in selected international markets, reissue/ catalog schedules and DVDs. Get your ad in this comprehensive guide of the must-have products ofthe spring season. ISSUE DATE: FEB 12 AD CLOSE: JAN 18 Evan Braunstein 212.536.5172 LATIN MUSIC 6 PACK I The first edition of the Latin Music Six Pack features a look at Jaci Velasquez's transformation from contemporary Christian idol to Latin star. Plus a profile of Puerto Rico's newest pop star Noelia and an update on Spanish artists visiting Latin markets. Bonus Distribution to 500 leading Latin radio program directors in the U.S., Latin America, Spain and Latin consumer media. ISSUE DATE: FEB 19 AD CLOSE: JAN 25 Gene Smith 212.536.5001 UPCOMING SPECIALS CHILDREN'S ENTERTAINMENT - Issue Date: Feb 19 • Ad Close: Jan 25 MADACY • Issue Date: Feb 26 • Ad Close: Feb 1 ASIA PACIFIC QUARTERLY I - Issue Date: Feb 26 • Ad Close: Feb 1 NARM - Issue Date: Mar 4 • Ad Close: Feb 7 BRIT AWARDS - Issue Date: Mar 4 • Ad Close: Feb 7 CANADA - Issue Date: Mar 1 1 • Ad Close: Feb 14 New York 212.536.5004 Los Angeles 323.525.2307 Nashville 615.321.4287 London 44.207.822.8300 ArtistsS Music POP'ROCK'R&B«RAP«DANCE«COUNTRY«LATIN'CLASSICAL«JAZZ«PRO AUDIO Live Byrds Set To Take Off On Columbia Legacy BY CARRIE BELL LOS ANGELES — Feb. 7 and 8, 1969, at the Fillmore West was no ordinary Byrds show. Four-fifths of the origi- nal members had split and Gram Par- sons, who sparked the band's interest in coun- try/rock, was gone. They weren't even headlining. Instead, the band served as the opening act to "The ,Jam,'' an ad hoc collec- tion of Butterf ield Blues the Rmd refugees like Mike Bloomfield and Nick Gravenites. "This show in particular was wry cool and important. It was recorded when the band's j^i-sonnel and mind- set was in a state of flux, and they weren't the road warriors thev would liecome in 1970 yet," says Bob Irwin, owner of the reissue label Sundazed and co-producer of "The Byrds At The Fillmore— February' 1969," which will be issued Feb. 22 by Columbia Legacy. "The song list rep- resents all stages of their career, from the early rock days to the folk- and country- infused stuff and their last eclectic and tour- hos heavy years," says Irwin. "It is quite a piece of history." It is one that Byrds guitarist/vocal- ist and "Fillmore" co-producer Roger McGuinn doesn't really remember but was thrilled to hear. "We were TV Boosts Cathedrals Set Homeland's 'Farewell' Jumps Up Charts BY DEBORAH EVANS PRICE NASHVILLE— A TV special that aired on nine cable networks helped propel "The Cathedrals A Farewell Celebration" onto the top half of The Bill- board 200. earning the veteran Southern gospel group Heat- seekers Impact status. The live album and accompanying long- form video were released Nov. 16 by Homeland Entertainment in conjunction with Bill Gaither's Spring House label, which is marketing ' the project. Gaither, whose organization is well known for more than 6 mil hEAt SSKERS IMPACT lion units in sales from the popular "Homecoming" video series, hosted "A Farewell Celebration." The perfor- mance features the Cathedrals with the Oak Ridge Boys, Sandi Patty, the Gaither Vocal Band, and the Statler Brothers during a concert at Nashville's Ryman Auditorium. Barry Jennings, president of Spring House Music Group, says television has played a key role in mar- keting the album and video. "We took it to nine different networks," says Jennings. "It aired on TNN Thanksgiving weekend, and (('iiiittiwrd (ill /KU/f '.Hi Siberry Concerts Yield 'Trilogy' 4 Discs Of NYC Shows Contained In Sheeba Boxed Set BY MICHAEL PAOLETTA NEW YORK — Since amicably parting ways with Reprise Records in 1996, Canadian singer/song- writer Jane Siberry has released five albums on her Toronto-based independent label, Sheeba Records: "Teenager," "A Day In The Life," "Tree: Music For Films And Forests," "Lips: Music For Saying It," and the two-disc set "Child: Music For The Christmas Season." 'With live shows, everything is kept super-electric' - JANE SIBERRY - Earlier this month, Sheeba Records issued "New York Trilo- gy" — a four-disc boxed set consist- ing of "Tree," "Lips," and "Child" that illuminates the diversity, and quirkiness, inherent in Siberry's musical output since the early '80s. "New York Trilogy" is the direct result of a series of theme concerts that Siberry did in the fall of '96 at New York's Bottom Line nightclub. Available solely from Sheeba Records' Internet site (www.shee- ba.ca), the set sells for $45. "Tree" features songs that are either in films or about forests, and includes "Slow Tango" from Wim Wenders' film "Faraway, So Close." "Lips," explains Siberry, includes songs that "are both nasty and deli- cious. Speeches as facLs and speech- es as wishes. About closing up the gap between what we say and what we mean. And the power that can come from the human being when what we say n what we mean." A centerpiece of "Lips" is "Mimi Speaks," a sequel to Siberry's '84 hit "Mimi On The Beach." Also noteworthy is the festive cover of Gloria Gaynor's timeless disco anthem "I Will Survive." Originally, "Child" was to include only familiar favorites. "But that is not what it was to be," explains Siberry. "The songs started becom- ing more about darkness, about the context for needing hearth and fam- ilv and familiaritv. Much time in the show is spent painting the landscape that the child is set within." Siberry's songs are published bv Wing-It Music (SOCAN). For Siberry, it was important to capture these performances on disc. "What you hear is fresh and real, with some mistakes, too," she says. "With lire shows, everything is kept super-electric. Everybody — the musicians, the background singers, me — had to be very alert and very present." Accompanying Siberry on "New York Trilogy" is a diverse collective of musicians and singers, including pianist Tim Ray; vocalists Cather- ine Russell, Rebecca Campbell, and Gail Ann Dorsey; trumpet player David Travers-Smith; drummer Dean Sharp; cellist Evan Richey; and guitarists Debbie Knapper and Larry Baeder. Rita Houston, music director at WFUV New Yurk, finds "New York Trilogy" a major musical achieve- ment. "That Jane was able to pull it all together and release it herself says a lot about Jane and her com- mitment to artistry" Houston says. According to Houston, the station has been a fan of Siberry's since the early '90s, when it began playing tracks from the artist's album "When I Was A Boy." Since then, Houston says, the station has conducted sev- eral on-air interviews with Siberry "We've even had Jane Siberry days," she says. On Dec. 6. WFUV began playing various tracks from "New York Trilogy," including "When Last I Was A Fisherman" and "Valley Of The Dolls." "And as we get closer to the hol- idays, we'll certainly play tracks like 'Twelve Days Of Christmas' and Are You Burning, Little Can- dle,' " says Houston. In October, Siberry embarked on the Pilgrim tour, which she describes as a one-woman tour that intertwines new and old songs, tra- ditional songs, and poetry. "The pil- grim concept is woven throughout," she says. "In both space and time." After traveling throughout the U.S., Belgium, Ireland, and Eng- land, Siberry will complete the teut- on Monday (20) in Toronto. Looking ahead. Siberry confirms that a new album will be ready by spring. "It will include some of my favorite old songs," she explains. "Expect a combination of tradition- al songs, as well as Celtic and American spirituals." Aiming worldwide! A new iniernational Swedish Production Company.. Tel: +46 8789 2941. Fax: +46 8 7892947. e-mail: clouds cloud pp. BILLBOARD DECEMBER 25, 1999 www.billboard.com 17 Copyrighted material Artists & Music Songs Are Still What Makes Rock Roll Performers Who'll Last Are Those Who Connect With Audience BY LARRY FLICK NEW YORK— As 1999 blends into 2000 amid an appropriate flurry of hoopla, it's hard not to pause and wonder: Shouldn't music have evolved more than it has? Certainly, the technological ad- vancements have been phenomenal. But, upon reflection, music is kind of like a new-model automobile. Re- gardless of the increasingly complex composition of the engine, the vehi- cle won't move without wheels — which can be mildly modified but never reinvented. 1999 has ultimate- ly reminded us that with music, as much as we continually strive to explore new methods of presentation, we cannot truly forge forward with- out employing a few basic elements. Consider this: There were many moments when 1999 felt like a pleas- ant throwback to 1975 or 1963 or 1956 — or any other year during which meticulously manufactured teen idols ruled the roost Some might find it blasphemous to compare legendary figures like Frank Sinatra, Elvis Presley, and even David Cassidy to Backstreet Boys, Ricky Martin, and Britney Spears. But there's no denying their similar impact on young record buy- ers — not to mention the fact that all were at least initially the result of masterful, star-making A&R and marketing. "[They] owe their success to their talent and to the songs that they haven't written," Epic executive Da- vid Massey told Billboard earlier this year, noting the cyclical nature of 1999* IN* REVIEW THE 'TOP 'STORIES • The Teen Pop Machine Rages On As Backstreet Boys. Britney Spears Top The Charts. • The Line Dividing Hip-Hop And Hard Rock Blurs, Thanks To Kid Rock, Limp Bizkit. • The Internet Becomes Big Music Biz With The Rising Prominence of MPS, Amazon, com, Others. • Ricky Martin-Mania Sparta A Latin Invasion Of The Pop Charts. • Woodstock '99: The Quintes- sential Concert Of Love Goes Up In Violent Flames. • Columbine Tragedy Draws Negative Attention To Hard- Rock Acts Like Marilyn Manson. A& R and pop music. Forecasting the future, he added, "The need for real A&R, combining artists with great songs and great producers, will be more important than ever." By and large, the current artists in question tend to agree. "I've been fortunate to have been offered great material," Spears said in an inter- view earlier this year. "Making an album is a collaborative effort, espe- cially a pop album. I don't feel like a puppet who's told what to do, but I do have great, talented people help- ing to make my music strong." If there is a difference between the teen idols of the past and pres- ent, it's that many teen-driven art- ists now insist upon actively contrib- uting to their musical focus and content. "That's essential to our growth," Backstreet Boys member Kevin Richardson said in an inter- view earlier this year, indicating the group's songwriting contributions to its multi-platinum Jive opus, "Mil- lennium." "If we are going to con- nect with our audience on an honest level, then we must make that kind of contribution to our music." Some industry observers disagree with that idea. "The moment a man- ufactured pop star begins to believe that he or she is an 'artist' is the beginning of the end of their career," says a major label A& R executive. "They're performers, not artists. There's an enormous difference be- tween the two. I've never met a per- former who could actually create material better than what's handed to him." Regardless, the widespread suc- cess of modern-day teen idols is proof that kids continue to be a dom- inant record-buying force. And when young music buyers grow out of per- fectly coifed, ultimately harmless pop performers, a broad range of rebel-rockers will be (as they have always been) waiting to induct them (Continued mi ikh/<' Ji>i THE CHART-TOPPERS RAGE AGAINST THE MACHINE AGUILERA Following is a chronological listing of the albums that logged time at No. 1 on The Billboard 200 in 1999. The figure in parentheses is the num- ber of weeks each title spent at No. 1. Titles that debuted at No. 1 are indicated in bold type. (Note: "Double Live" by Garth Brooks spent three weeks at No. 1 in 1998.) "Double Live," Garth Brooks, Capitol (1). "Flesh Of My Flesh Blood Of My Blood," DMX, Ruff Ryders (.1). ". . . Baby One More Time," Britnev Spears, Jive (6). "Made Man," Silkk The Shocker, No Limit (1). "Chyna Doll," Foxy Brown, Violator (1). "Fanmail," TLC, La Face (5). "I Am . . .," Nas, Columbia (2). Various artists, "Ruff Ryders: Ryde Or Die Vol. I," Ruff Ryders ( 1 ). "A Place In The Sun," Tim McGraw, Curb (1). "Ricky Martin," Ricky Martin, C2 (1). "Millennium," Backstreet Boys, Jive (10). "Significant Other," Limp Bizkit, Flip (4). "Christina Aguilera," Christina Aguilera, RCA (1). "Fly," Dixie Chicks, Monument (2). "Let There Be . . . Eve— Ruff Ryders' First Lady," Eve, Ruff Ryders (1). "The Fragile," Nine Inch Nails, Nothing (1). "Human Clay," Creed, Wind-Up (2). "Supernatural," Santana, Arista (3). "The Battle Of Los Angeles," Rage Against The Machine, Epic (1). "Breathe," Faith Hill, Warner Bros. (1). "Issues," Kom, Immortal (1). "All The Way ... A Decade Of Song," Celine Dion, 550 Music (2). d\/[ozait. ^Broadway. You're never far from exceptionally good company. From Lincoln Center to the Met. when you stay with us. we'll keep you close to the best things in Manhattan. Including fine dining at our Conservatory Restaurant & Cafe. Happy Hour 5 p.m. -7 p.m. M90 Single X210 Double S2f>0 Suites For reservations, call 800-223-4164. The Mayflower Hotel ON THE PARK • NEW YORK 15 Central Park West al 61ft Street. New tori, NY 10023 212-265-0060 www mayllowerhotcl com Martin Is Artist Of The Year; Presley, The Century; Welcome Back, Santana & Bruce WHAT'S OUR MOTIVATION? No matter what kind of music you were looking for in 1999, chances are you didn't have to go far to find it. For those already over the boy-band phenom, there was a new round of teen females, including Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera, for young girls (and their dads) to eye. For rock fans, bands like Lit and Blink-182 showed that the genre doesn't have to be as menacing as Limp Bizkit and Kuril often make it out to be. For anyone older than 30, there were the returns of San- tana and Bruce Springsteen & the E Street Band. For everybody in between, there was the Latin-influenced pop explosion signified by Ricky Martin and Jennifer Lopez and their hips. In terms of business, the fallout from the Uni- versal/PolyGram merger continued, with staffs still being rearranged more than a year after the deal's completion and a number of artists' fates still in limbo. BMG and Arista took their battle public over BMG's need for a successor for Arista founder Clive Davis and his resistance to naming by Melinda Newman 1 999 * IN* REVIEW an heir. Jeff Ayeroff and Jordan Harris uncere- moniously took leave of their Sony-distributed label, the Work Group, just as it began to experi- ence its greatest commercial achievement, with Lopez. It was a year with pockets of success but with no clear winner, no "Jagged Little Pill" or "Cracked Rear View." The wealth was spread more even- ly, which makes for less excite- ment and obvious news hooks, but it was undoubtedly better for the business. Faster than van HALEN PARTED WAYS with lead singer Gary Cherone, music-devoted Internet compa- nies dotted the landscape like dandelions this year. Just as we spent much of 1999 watching the uprising, next year, I predict, we'll be watching many of the upstarts crash and burn. No, that's not the sound of a Luddite pro- claiming that we should all wind up our Victrolas but a voice of reason. I blame no one for trying to stake their claim on the wild, wild Web, but it (Continued on impe .'->) 18 www.billboard.com BILLBOARD DECEMBER 25. 1999 Artists & Music 'IM Sync made headlines by shifting from RCA Records to Jive, as well as break- ing away from its manager. Lou Pearlman of Transcontinental. Lava/Atlantic artist Kid Rock made waves with his rock radio hit "Cow boy," as well as his multi-platinum album. "Devil Without A Cause." Billboard. After scoring a hit throughout Europe, Lou Bega brought mambo music back to the U.S. radio airwaves with his RCA smash "Mambo No. 5 (A Little Bit Of...)." DECEMBER 25. 1999 TO p new Age Ainums * ■/I J i s z li i'r COMPILED FROM * KAIXMAI SAMPLE Of RETAIL STORE. MASS MERCHANT. AM HTERNET SALES " " — I ! : '"-' "i'l;. Ji.: w SouikiScw TITLE HIIIII IMPRINT & NUMBERDiSTRIBUTING LABEL ARTIST CD 1 10 WINTER SOLSTICE ON ICE^ N °' 1 VARIOUS ARTISTS WINDHAM HILL 1 1459 2 WMfcS M Nil 1 CD 2 11 PLAINS WINDHAM HILL 1 1465 CD 3 13 WINTER LIGHT YANNI PRIVATE MUSIC 82 1 76/W1NDHAM HILL CD 14 6 ENTER THE HEART ESTEBAN OAVSTAR 00 1 fi TJH 5 4 16 25 YEAR CELEBRATION Of MANNHEIM STEAMROLLER MANNHEIM STEAMROLLER AMERICAN GRAMAPHONE 25 CD C 40 MANNHEIM STEAMROLLER MEETS THE MOUSE MANNHEIM STEAMROLLER AMERICAN GRAMAPHONE 86054 ■'•'.'•J DISNEY 7 5 46 DESTINY • JIM BRICKMAN WINDHAM HILL 11396 8 1 36 LOVE SONGS YANNI PRIVATE MUSIC 82167/W1NOHAM HILL 9 8 13 HEALING ANGEL ROMA DOWNEY PHIL COULTER fi ta victor 10 9 8 WHISPER TO THE WILD WATER MAIRE BRENNAN WORD 63659/EPIC 20 11 10 16 SIMPLY GRAND LORIE LINE TIME LINE 16 QD 12 45 ONE WORLD JOHN T ESH GTSP 559673 CDD 16 90 ALL THE SEASONS OF GEORGE WINSTON - PIANO SOLOS GEORGE WINSTON WINDHAM HILL 11266 14 13 s THE CHRISTMAS ALBUM DAVID LANZ NARAOA 47848WIRGIN 15 15 34 DAWN OF A NEW CENTURY SECRET GARDEN PHILIPS 538838 16 11 4 CHRISTMAS RAUL Dl BLASIO ARIOLA ■OJ.'..i ■('.' , LATIN 17 1/ 62 FORBIDDEN DREAMS YANNI BMG SPECIAL PRODUCTS 44801 18 19 58 GRAND PASSION JOHN TESH GTSP 539804 19 20 PURE MOVIES THE JOHN TESH PROJECT GTSP 539779 20 22 2 THE MAGIC OF CHRISTMAS GIOVANNI DAMIAN 12220 21 21 20 NO STRINGS ATTACHED GOVI REAL MUSIC 811 22 24 29 INNAMORARAE7SUMMER FLAMENCO OTTMAR LIEBERT EPIC 60673 23 23 2 THE CHRISTMAS BOX PAUL CARDALL NAPADA X8327 VIRG1N G£> RE-ENTRY GREATEST HITS YANNI BMG SPECIAL PROOUCTS 18601 RE-ENTRY SEASONAL AIRE WESTWIND ENSEMBLE untS ICODl A I p*mwi WW*™-* Ptemrr, of Diam ■im tns hkbIl ♦ Rtnidhig InduWry <a*n. Of iVm Ht tNpiTiHif ot I rmltofl unb iPjIinui"! 4J> RtAA id lyrntjol indicate* album 1 tTXjrb f^Blfmjm iettt For tr iliipmontj by Ore numtxi ut duo and/cr tam Ml • ^c«tI •tBiranir. titiK c 1999. BriBcwTlBPI CaTtti 20 www.billboard.com BILLBOARD DECEMBER 25, 1999 IF IN DOUBT... At Americ Disc, we consider the copyright issue to be one of professional integrity. In our determination to protect intellectual property rights, we have developed one of the most stringent Anti-Piracy Programs (APP). Our program involves extensive human, material, and financial resources and underlines our commitment to making sure that every order we receive is rigorously checked before it goes into production. We're taking positive steps to protect intellectual property rights and know that you will support our intiatives. By working together, we can attack piracy head-on. AT AMERIC DISC WE SAFEGUARD THE INTEGRITY OF YOUR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS (0 Your global disc solution AMERIC DISC INC. California 1-888-545-7350 • Florida 1 -800-364-0759 . Minnesota 1-800-903-1770 . Canada 1-800-263-0419 www.americdisc.com Artists & Music Matt GA GARBO has just released his latest CD which Includes the remake of the hit "Time Wont Let Me" by the Outsiders. Don t miss this high energy mix of Latin, alternative rock* contemporary ballads, and old fashioned rock 'n roll. The Most Versatile Recordings Ever Released By One Artist! Contact CMI Records • P.O. Box 2127 • Clifton, NJ 07015 r, r frr. Fax (973) 473-3211 www.mattgarbo.com THE BEAT (Continued from page IS) remains completely unclear as to how big the turf will be. One thing that does seem clear is that there's no way all of these companies — who are currently supporting themselves via deep pockets, certainly not Internet profits — can survive. I'm not say- ing the Internet isn't going to be extremely meaningful in how music is heard, distributed, and sold; I just predict it's not going to be the widespread mother lode many hope it will be. Everybody loves a HAPPY ENDING, and I don't know anyone who wasn't rooting for Santana this year. The band, led by Carlos Santana (no, I don't really understand why San- tana just doesn't always mean Carlos either), had more than a stunning comeback this year; it reached heights never before achieved in its 30-year career. Santana scored its first No. 1 on The Billboard Hot 100 with "Smooth," in no small part due to the singing and writing talents of matchbox 20's Rob Thomas. And the album "Supernatural" became the group's first chart-topping al- bum in 28 years. There were other welcome Melissa Etheridge ended a five-year hiatus from recording with the Island/ Def Jam set "Breakdown." comebacks, including Bruce Springsteen & the E Street Band's first tour in more than 10 years and the reuniting of Eurythmics with "Peace." The comeback that aroused the biggest yawn? Crosby, Still, Nash & Young's "Looking For- ward," their first album together in 25 years, drew startlingly little attention. Here's helplessly hop- ing they'll get more respect when they tour next year. Wi f HAT'S SO FUNNY ABOUT PEACE, LOVE, AND UNDER- STANDING? Woodstock '99 was the defining moment of the year for many. While it was easy to convince yourself that you could go hack to the garden for Wood- stock '94 — you just better take your Visa card — the 30th anniver- sary event this summer tarnished the name sufficiently enough to make it doubtful that the organiz- ers' plan to hold a Woodstock fes- tival every five years will be real- ized. In all likelihood, the majority of people at the Rome, New York, three-day concert had a good experience, but the ugly tone of some of the music, combined with the violent actions by some of the crowd, made for a disturbing com- mentary on disaffected youth and the mean-spiritedness that per- meates many of our movies, music, and videos now. Some predicted Woodstock '99 would mean the end of multi-day rock festivals. We don't think so. We think it will just mean better crowd-control procedures and more judicious band lineups. (Continued on page 24) mature audiences only. he Smalt Batch Bouibon Coiiecfion" is Knt Maks responsibility part ol your •njoyment. The perfect gift for the millennium: Size: 20 x 27.5 inches • Weight: 66 lb. • 480 pages $ 1,500 • £ 1,000 Limited edition of 10,000 copies worldwide, all numbered and signed by the artist. Each SUMO comes with a table specially designed by Philippe Starck. Only 2,500 copies will be available at the end of 1999, the remaining copies will follow by April 2000. Numbered copies will be supplied in strict sequence of orders received. Info on Newton's SUMO book: tel. (+1) 212 683 3377 • fax (+1) 212 683 5858 • c.akbari@)taschen-america.com tel. (+44) 171 437 4350 • fax (+44) 171 437 4360 • k.kaisers@taschen-uk.com www.taschen.com choose fkom ovea ioo ^KAPPr famul/ 2000 CONTAINS THE FOLLOWING LAdELS ANO mAitrfETiNC- PAitTNEitS . fiO0 «W« C0 206 iliL Or! J j jsiteccwos AGO JAZZ acoustic nee AFTEitNH*E ALlVE/ TOTAL ENEitW ALULA itECOltDS ALLit*ioit*ECCttDs AMtATA CVEDiA APPLAUSE NETVOitKS MMOOUt nCORK AXKAJlA ENTEitTAlNmENT AUDhJOUEST mUSK. ax nm itECOKDs ■MSI dA&NONE MKXXD6 dEFOitE BMW aEc-GA*ts aANOuET ae loved ENTE«rrA*NmENT diLLdOAit D TALENTNET dLACicropitEco«Ds aiOOOSHOT itECOltDS aLUE ORCMD BUMS aEACON aompvvow aonomuNE diiOKEN itECOltDS a*uc*swkCititECOiiDs aw c*d* ccwrtw discs CANNON -■>'-'' ilECO*DS CELLULOiD ItECOltDS CEltTiFiED *ECO*DS cexton 8KOOBD6 CHASE NlOC GitOUP CMEStfitECOitDS COmmODOttES ENT. CORNUCOPIA KECOilDS CPC ItECOltDS DAMUSiC David J deep Elm MGOBK DEC X - « v- / DEL n MOBS DELMAM DELlOOUSVkNrt. DELTA ENTEitTAlNmENT DiOWSUS MCOW iNTEiiNATiONAL OMSK* itECoaDS DmitEOMOS DmPitECOilDS DOUdLETifflE MOOBK DitfcE AltCHlVE DUNE itECOltDS EAitVAG ^aOXJ'L EDELA»E»CAiteCO*DS Mn pbmcobx P-AmiNGOJAZZ FVAGitANT H«K FXONTi&t GAmACtt/SliC GENES4S mUS*C cn? rmsmiffp GOLDEN itECOitDS HECTtC itECOitDS HAKD HAT itECOttOS hightone w-coitDs Kipaop HIGH POiNT itECOXDS tCHiAAN itECOitDS (EG itECOitDS HfTEttMAT (ONaL OXOC4 tHTEiWA *ECCMDS iAZZ CLASSES J d*iDitECC*DS itCACTtC «UViA KWGa&CUT UNiTTkNG FACTO*/ HOCV JAZZ NOCK WORLD it-TEly DOmiNON LANDiwr. itECOitDS 1 , - ■ . ; ■ . > i t i ■ BOON RfGONK LEViATHAN LIGHT /E Ait ENTErtTAiNmENT LmA-SAJA WjSjC LOST AitTS NMMM monarch muuimusiCA AMD A*TS mUS* FAitTOKi' itECOitDS MMHJ6 NK.-HT SiU* OCEAN ItECOitDS PACIFIC mooN PaND«SC NUSlC KPMCDRK PO*NT classics PltAVDA ItECOitDS pnsrtsttaooRos QUlCl&ilVElt ^Cl.vj-. HADtCAL itECOitDS liAS «COltDS MM AND TiE itEADEif S DIGEST muSiC BUM ACHAiiDdAiiOWE/ THEaONGOS (lOaEitT VALE tfECOKDS MM SAGESTONE SATELLITES ItECOitDS SCHWANN SELECT neons MUM ENTEiTAlWVENT SiCUNK SHANACHIE TmtnmtiniTi music SUVA SCVEEM supatcatoatM SOUTWJCS LlWtTED SOUL CLASSICS SrtALlSTONE SCUTH NUStC C-iKMiP Srt« A*T WOOBDS S* itECOltDS ssr STASH liECCWDS ST IFF ItECOltDS STttEEiaEAT ItECOltDS STitiDE itECObtDS sua POP SLAHAitnONjC SUGAil aEATS ENT SIfGAit HiU itECOltDS sue-owtjbic tUBUtll SUN KECOKDS SWEJtVE TAANC-! Tea nLSJC RtMC THE HWG CO TMSBV EAit tiptoe Taptexxx TTEDDETT itECOltDS TOUCHWOOD TUFF GONG uaiOUlTl' itECOitDiNGS VANGU AitD ItECOltDS VAN ftCHTE* ItECOltDS ucwor WAitLOCKitCCOiilDS VlPEitSNESTitECOitDS VISUAL ItECOltDS 'JONDEltFUL itECOltDS wild pitch noom ZEaXAitECCWDS ZEitO HOUlt A'JEjtNATiVE PliESS fflAGAZ**E ALLAaouTJAZZ con AOUZENETCCWt AUDlOCAFECOn aiLLaOAKD TALENT NET aLUESXEVUE com dLUESAC CESS CON a«G SPECIAL PitOOUCTS aottDEits.com CDOUEST CD IMMM CDNOW cjazz con CLE Ait CHANNEL coLLec-Eciua.com OOMtMPOflMK W»ZZ COm CttEATiVE LOAFING MiHGHMOOV es. com EVEitiCDCON GETmus<c.com GOODSONUNE C0« HAitmONlf HOUSE/ SlGrtA 0 HOUSE OF aLL^ES HOT TOPIC iNDrtwsiC.com lN»£TOmi ONUNE SHOPPiNC- wrritNETDJ-COm MWTMCMC1DW KIONOKG JAZZiZ MAGAZkNE JAZZONU«E.CO« JAZZ*EViEWCOm JAZZSTUFFCOm JAZZwOitLDCOm JONES itADtO NETWOitK jumao.com KNlTTtNG RMCIDW KLONOAC USTENCOm mETEOKClUCOm miCKOSOFT NETU«C«lt mtcitosOFT/ SiDEUAiy.com music ho com miiSiCLAND COttPOMATlON musiccom HWiM II M'l.lM* mrcacom mtm com iN« l kcomd w outcn «usk.' PLANET DiSC itEADEjrS DIGEST SOW SPECIAL PaODUCTS SPltEECOm TOWEiHECOitDS COm TWEC.COm iritANSUKKitUr TWtCVCOm/ itOLLtNG STONE xoomcom wcasmcom HrM8.COM ZEdilAmAltT.com ^CUStOf TldlSC.com _ 203- 323- 890 ( WWW.CUSTOWDlSC.COM Artists 8c Music THE BEAT (Continued fnmt page JJt D ON'T FORGET TO READ THE FINE PRINT: There were the usual array of lawsuits bandied about this year, but two that really caught our attention for making it personal were pro- ducer Joe Thomas' suit against Brian and Melinda Wilson, in which Thomas alleged that Melin- da referred to Irving Azoff in particularly ugly anti-Semitic terms, and 'N Sync's lawsuit against, among others, Transcon- tinental head Lou Pearlman, whom the boys refer to as a "con man." I have a great deal of sympathy for the members of 'N Sync, and I know that I'm probably expecting too much, but was there no one among the group, the group's par- ents, inner circle, etc., who sug- gested that getting someone else to look at the contract other than their shared lawyer with Pearl- man may have been a good idea? It used to be that legal travails among acts, their labels, and their management were fairly arcane matters, but now, with Entertain- ment Weekly, "Access Hollywood," and "Behind The Music," news of legal troubles for acts serves as both cautionary tale and primer for anyone entering the business. While it certainly would have helped, no one in 'N Sync's camp should have had to read "This Business Of Music" to be a little suspect of the deal. ARTIST OF THE YEAR: Brit- ney Spears sold more records in the U.S., and so did Backstreet Boys, but my artist of the year is Ricky Martin. To witness the explosion he experienced after his appearance on the Grammys is to catch lightning in a bottle. Many people, Chris Rock among them, say it will be too soon if they never hear "Livin' La Vida Loca" again. Not me. I still love it. Martin's win was cinched when I saw him in concert this fall at the Staples Center in L.A. Sel- dom have I seen an artist put so much into his show in an effort to make sure his audience is enter- tained. Through his costume changes, set changes, and mov- able sidewalks onstage, not to mention his voice and overwhelm- ing charisma, he kept 20,000 peo- ple enthralled. Sure it's unlikely that he can stay this hot, but he won't be on "Where Are They Now?" for years, if not decades, to come. Artist of the decade: is there really any other choice? I know plenty of rock crits will pick Nirvana, but in my mind it has to be Garth Brooks. Love him or hate him, you couldn't escape him in the '90s. He's sold more than 90 million albums in the U.S. this decade, according to the Record- ing Industry Assn. of America. His career has been a juggernaut, with each record release accom- panied by a cavalcade of TV With her Jive debut, ". . . Baby One More Time," Britney Spears had the best-selling album by a female teen artist ever. appearances and press an- nouncements. His critics often saw him as motivated only by numbers, but Brooks never sacrificed quality for quantity. For him, they just often went hand in hand. Critics might be wise to notice that, for someone who catches such hell for his marketing techniques, Brooks is one of the few artists who's never accepted a corporate spon- sor and still kept his concert tick- ets below $20. His shows didn't skimp on pro- duction either. Makes it a little hard for other groups, many of whom critics hail with hosannas for never selling out, to explain their $150 tickets, doesn't it? We'll let him share the award with Chris Gaines. Artist of the century: Given that I'm only looking at the modern rock era, I have to apolo- gize in advance for all the great artists I'm not even considering. But with a song in my heart and a swivel in my hips, I pick Elvis Presley as my artist of the centu- ry. I'm hardly going out on a limb here, although I know there are a handful of other likely con- tenders — my runner-up is Frank Sinatra (although even I admit, it's hard to make Frank second to anyone). Presley took what had been the province of black musicians and brought it to the mainstream. He was also one of the first true crossover artists, having success with pop, country, and gospel audiences. He's been dead now for longer than he was making records, and yet the fascination and respect just continues to grow. What would he be doing if he were still alive? (He'd now be 64.) Could he have had yet another comeback, or would he have retired or be singing in a lounge somewhere? The beauty of it is, we'll never know. Part of his great appeal is that he can remain for all of us whatever we want him to be. The THINGS WE LEAVE BE- HIND: Every year on New Year's Eve, my sister asks me what I'm going to leave behind in the end- ing year, meaning bad habits, hurt feelings, unhealthy relationships, as if the changing of the calendar can help us shake off the unde- sired parts of ourselves like snakes shedding their skins. It doesn't always work, but I like the thought of it. The turn of the year, decade, century, and millennium seems like a great time for the industry to consider what we've learned and want to take into the next mil- lennium and what is best left behind that great, big heavy door of history. Smash mouth enjoyed a successful 1 999 with its Interscope collection "Astro Lounge," which spawned the pop hit "All-Star." "It's everything you wanted in every other record you bought but didn't get," says band front man Steve Har- well. The band spent much of the year on the road, gigging with such acts as Sugar Ray. 24 www.billboard.com BILLBOARD DECEMBER 25. 1999 "...this • saucy Dallas-based group of country divas vith attitude - has brought its own dash of sass to the music vorld..." Billboard Year End Awards Top Country Artist Top Country Duo Or Group Top Country Album Artist . L J^ter^T, Thanks monument O 1999 Sony Mu.ie En1.rt.inm.nl ln< WWW.SOnyn3Shville.COm Copyrighted material Advertisement D-IIL _l billboard IbaLenb nebl THE NEW MUSIC SHOWCASE www.billboardtalentnet.com The first professionally oriented virtual marketplace developing artists to the music industry and audicn o promote unsigned and cs worldwide. DEJAMUSE.COM Every other week BTN features new radio show interviews in the Inside The Music section of the homepage. These interviews, courtesy of Dejamuse.com, discuss the entertainment industry, how to profit from investing in it. examples of artists working their way up the ladder of success, and timely interviews with key decision makers in the industry. For details log onto www.billboardtalentnct.com Top 1 0 Favorite Artist Picks December 3. 1999 The Most Popular New Talent On BTN 0 Artist Genre Weeks On 1 Atello Hard Rock. Rock 3 2 You Were Spiraling Rock 3 3 Never On Sunday Rock. Pop 1 4 Modern Yesterday Alternative, Rock 2 5 Tommy Shows Hip Hop 4 6 Sevenkind Rock, Alternative 4 7 Leonard Moss, Jr. R 'n B, Pop 8 8 Sin boy Electronic, Techno 1 3 9 The Shed Spell Rock, Pop 1 10 Diamond R'nB 9 WrMhf mum »rt (Mirt on wtei c»u by Wtft f jnltrrt ofitin* »wd*ntr *or »ny tnte totwrt d tr* vtt Votn tt limited to one vote per irtat if nr. Top 10 pa*bon . delemined try iHe tvertfe a* ill note* Radio BTN Favorite Song Requests December 3. 1999 The Most Listened-to New Tracks On BTN > Composition. Artist Genre Weeks On 1 Keeping Time, The Wavstation Acoustic, Pop 2 2 Corne Back a Stay, Pavilion Pop, Reggae 1 3 So. You Tell Me-You Love Me, Never On Sunday 4 Lost All Control. Clay Rock. Pop 1 Alternative, Rock 21 5 And The Story Goes Like This, Everett B. Walters 6 1 Had A Dream...AII The World Is Blue. Ava Jazz, R'nB 13 Dance, Electronic 12 7 Facing The Truth. The Shed Spell Rock, Pop 1 8 Fall 4 U, Warm Target Alternative, Electronic 3 9 B-4, N.U.M. Hard Rock, Hip Hop 2 10 Hazelhurst, Xing Pop 3 The Most Outstanding And Available Acts On BTN FLICKERSTICK - TALK SHOW HOST In 1997, while attending the University of North Texas, singer/guitarist Brandm Lea and guitarist/ keyboardist Cory Kreig hooked up to form the band Ftickerstick. Brandm's brother. Fletcher was brought in to play bass and in May of 1998. former Stranger Than Fiction drummer Dominic Weir took over on drums, completing today's version of Ftickerstick In 1998. Flicfcerstick released a self-produced 3-song demo CO called Demonstration that received airplay on local radio and created a buzz locally and regionally. Musically compared to bands ranging from Radiohead to Foo Fighters to Superdrag, Ftickerstick is a diverse mi* of pop/rock and space rock. Genre: From: Deals sought: Modern Rock, Alternative Dallas. TX, USA Recording Contract. Publishing, Producer, Booking Agent For further artist details log on to www.biilboardtalentnet.com/flickerstick For details about these and other up and coming artists visit our website at Phone: (212) 757-2031 , Fax: (212} 757-2041 , inforfi billboardtalentnet.com Sponsored by Artists & Music I've spent the last few years focused on becoming the best possible song- writer," she adds. "If you study the great artists of our time, the thing that many of them have in common is that they've mastered the craft of songwriting. That has given them longevity and relevance." One of the problems, according to Annie Lennox, is that "you can't really control how your work as a songwriter will be received by peo- ple. I'm often surprised by which songs strike a chord and why they do." While promoting "Peace," her Eurythmics reunion set with Dave Stewart, she told Billboard, "You SONGS ARE STILL WHAT MAKES ROCK ROLL (Continued from page IS) into the realm of angst and aggres- sion. "As long as there have been estab- lished forces of oppression, bands like ours have existed," said Rage Against The Machine guitarist Tom Morello in an interview earlier this year. Discussing the long-term effect of his band's acclaimed recent Epic release, "The Battle Of Los Ange- les," he added that "the heart of rock'n'roll is rebellious expression. In many ways, we're carrying on the legacy of so many bands before us. It's our turn to carry the banner." He adds, "The key for bands embracing that spirit is to be fo- cused. Inciting riots just for the sake of making noise and throwing bottles has never been the answer — nor will it ever be. You want to lead your audience responsibly. That's what the great bands of the '60s did, and that's what we've always set out to do." Kid Rock agrees, but he also be- lieves that "there's nothing wrong with just blowing off some steam with your fans." In an interview reflecting upon the violence that marred Woodstock '99, the Atlantic artist told Billboard that if there's any real difference between the aggressive, rebel-rockers of the past and present, it's that today's bands "don't always pay close enough attention to the trip that the audi- ence is on." "Sometimes we're all just too pre- occupied with the concept of takin' it to the next level that we're turnin' up the heat without fully knowing if they can handle it," he says. And it's that occasional danger of the heat sparking into an unbridled fire that continually kept more gen- tle, though no less impassioned, singer/songwriters prominent "You can communicate just as much — if not more — with a soft voice and a lone guitar as you can with a scream and an aggressive band," said Amy Ray of Indigo Girls in an interview earlier this year. "It's cool to rock out. We're doing it more and more as we evolve as an act. But you can't let the message or the point of your lyric get lost in the noise." For Melissa Etheridge, who of- fered her first-ever politically charged composition on the Island/ Def Jam set "Breakdown," it was a matter of "not being able to shake a mental image that affected the whole world." She told Billboard this fall that "Scarecrow," which was trig- gered by the murder of Matthew Shepard, "was among the more in- tense experiences" of her songwrit- ing career. "After it was finished, I felt incredibly proud — like I'd made a contribution." That's always been the key goal of any tunesmith, regardless of the genre. When you peel away the lay- ers of production and/or the image of the artist at hand, all you have are the words and melody. "And if you don't have both in place, then no amount of studio tricks is going to save you," says Warner Bros, artist Janice Robinson. "I take great pride in the fact that Backstreet Boys dominated the charts in 1 999 with their Jive collection "Millenni- um." which spawned the multi-format smash "I Want It That Way." write and you wish for something grand to come out of it, but more times than not, you simply do not know. It's lovely when people can take a song and bring it close to their hearts — or attach a personal memo- ry or emotion to it." And that breaks music down to its core. Technological advancements are fine, but without words and mu- sic that people can form a human connection to, it's all quite useless. "Nothing will ever replace the sig- nificance or beauty of an artist pick- ing up a guitar and playing a great song," says Epic's Massey. "Every- thing else pales in comparison. It always has, and it always will." Dave Stewart, left, and Annie Lennox reunited as Eurythmics for the first time in five years, issuing the album "Peace" on Arista this fall. Flip/lnterscope's Limp Bizkit was among the acts forging a hip-hop/hard-rock hybrid in 1999. The band's album "Significant Other" debuted on The Billboard ZOO at No. 1. 26 www.billboard.com BILLBOARD DECEMBER 25. 1999 HAVE Emerging Artists & Talent in Music oihe' Internet VISION to hear THE FUTURE r Artist Submission Form A Subsidiary of Solutions Media, Inc. Conference, Showcase & Festival www.eat-m.com • 702-837-3636 June 7-10, 2000 In Las Vegas, Baby! Hosted by. RIO ALL-SUITE CASINO RESORT Amidst the sparkling Vegas skyline towers the Rio All-Suite Casino Resort-with non-stop excitement and a famous flair for culinary distinction all rolled into one. It's no wonder that this all-luxury-suite resort has been recognized the "best" by both visitors and experts alike. The Rio invites guests to enjoy the very best. The Rio All-Suite Hotel has given EAT'M a special group rate of S85 per night. Make your reservations by calling the Rio Hotel directly at 1-888-746-6955 and identifying "Group EAT'M" for this rate. This special rate is only available until February 2, 2000. CALL NOW! Music Scholarships by: BERKLEE COLLEGE OF MUSIC, Boston, MA, the leading college of Berklee contemporary music education is proud to announce that several tuition < <» 1 <" M1 slr scholarships will be awarded to emerging, talented artists being showcased during the EAT'M Conference. For more information on applying for these scholarships, please contact Berklee directly at 1-617-747-2579. EAT'M is the World's Premiere Music Conference • Showcase • Festival Now looking for the BEST unsigned Musicians, Singers, Songwriters. CALL NOW! Our Artists Get Signed!!! Name of Band/Artist Home Town & State No. Performers No. Road Crew_ Produced by: Sponsored by: | CLE by: quKKBovucf, veqas * rnm las vegas weekly Primary Contact (nonpublished information) Style of Music Name Address City Work Phone Work Fax Cellular State Pager Zip Home Phone Home Fax E-Mail Country . Community Partners: n V/QKriter Other Contact (Published information, used on Website, Program Guide, Kiosk, etc.) O Artist O Manager O Agent O Other Name Address City Industry Partners: ^ wtlnizi MM, TAW 1 II State Work Phone . Work Fax Cellular Pager Zip Home Phone Home Fax _ E-Mail Country . Method of Payment (Please do not send cash) r=l ) Check ) Money Order O Cashier's Check O BB O W J O Credit Card No: Q j j I | ] Expiration: Cardholder Name: Artist Showcase Package Please enclose in one package: 1 . A completed artist submission form. 2. CD or cassette of original materials (minimum 3 songs). 3. Photo, bio, current press kit, and video (if available). 4. ABSOLUTE FINAL DEADLINE — must be postmarked no later than 2/15/00. 5. S 100.00 artist submission fee. Note: For selected showcase artists EATM may use up to two musical compositions for the EAT'M CD. EAT'M will pay the artists or songwriters the statutory US mechanical licensing rate. The Official Ge.r Provider Of iTertini Arttsu t ltMBt liv ".usic Guitar Center Is The Nation'* Leading Retailer Of Musical Equipment Including GUITARS DRUMS KEYBOARDS PRO AUDIO Over 70 Locations Cooit To Coon Authorized Signature: Receipt of your application will be acknowledged by mail. Please help us with our efficiency in selecting bands by not calling regarding the status of your application. All artists will be notified of selections no later than February 29, 2000. Sorry, no refunds. Submission fee can be applied towards registration of choice for artists not selected. Conference Registration Hotline: 702-837-3636 For Expo, Sponsorships, and Registration Info: 702-792-9430 Mail Showcase materials to: EAT'M • 2341 A Renaissance Drive • Las Vegas NV • 89119 www.EAT-M.com • Phone (702) 792-9430 • Fax (702) 792-5748 Copyrighted material BILLBOARD'S |— | E /\T S E E KE R S , ALBUM CHART THIS WEEK LAST WEEK WKS. ON CHART COMPILED FROM A NATIONAL SA