“Jersey Boys” is returning to New York; La Jolla Playhouse has just extended its run this fall of a world-premiere musical about disco queen Donna Summer; and the members of a presidential panel on arts and humanities resigned today in protest over Donald Trump’s comments on the race-related violence in Virginia.

Believe it or not, those items all tie together (if you’ll bear with us a minute).

First: After “Jersey Boys” — the smash-hit, Playhouse-bred musical that had a decade-plus run on Broadway — closed in January, director and former Playhouse artistic chief Des McAnuff hinted there’d be more incarnations of the show to come.

Now we know at least part of what he meant: The off-Broadway company New World Stages has announced it will mount a new production of the musical about the pop-rock group The Four Seasons, beginning this November.

Reviving recently shuttered Broadway shows has become a specialty of New World Stages, which hosts a long-running production of the Tony Award-winning “Avenue Q” and also staged the Playhouse-launched “Peter and the Starcatcher” (another Tony-winner) after its Broadway run ended in 2013.

The cast and creative team have yet to be announced for New World’s “Jersey Boys.”

Meanwhile, McAnuff — who served as Playhouse artistic director for two fruitful stints beginning in 1983 — is returning to direct “SUMMER: The Donna Summer Musical” there in November.

And today the theater announced a one-week extension for the show, which features songs by Summer, Giorgio Moroder and others, and a book by Colman Domingo, Robert Cary and McAnuff.

“Summer” will now run Nov. 7 to Dec. 17 in the Playhouse’s Mandell Weiss Theatre. Tickets for the added week go on sale this Sunday (Aug. 20); call (858) 550-1010 or go to LaJollaPlayhouse.org.

And finally: The members of the President’s Committee on Arts and the Humanities announced they were quitting today; the advisory panel is the latest to dissolve amid President Trump’s comments blaming “both sides” for the violence that left a young protester dead at white-supremacist-dominated rallies in Charlottesville, Va.

“Reproach and censure in the strongest possible terms are necessary following your support of the hate groups and terrorists who killed and injured fellow Americans in Charlottesville,” the members wrote in a joint letter to the president.

Among the departing panel members: John Lloyd Young, who won a Tony as the original Frankie Valli in the Broadway production of “Jersey Boys.”

videojim.hebert@sduniontribune.com

Twitter: @jimhebert