Donna Summer was known by such titles as the "Queen of Disco" and "Dance Floor Diva" during the disco era as she put out a string of hits from the mid-to-late 1970s into the early 1980s.

But while the terms were affectionate, there was something more about Summer and her music as well. The singing could be electric, but a song like "I Feel Love" (1977) was really revolutionary as far as expanding the boundaries of electronic dance music including introducing trance-like passages to go with an insistent beat, a Moog synthesizer, and Summer's hypnotic, dream-like vocals rising over everything. David Bowie was among those who knew this was something new.

So it's no surprise that there's a story to be told about Summer as well as simply enjoying the music in "Summer: The Donna Summer Musical," which ran on Broadway in 2018 and is now on a national tour.

"Summer: The Donna Summer Musical" will be at The Hanover Theatre and Conservatory for the Performing Arts in Worcester for a six-performance run March 31 to April 3 as part of The Hanover Theatre's Broadway Series.

"I'd describe her (Summer) as — she is resilient. Very caring of others. I just think she's very empowering," said Amahri Edwards-Jones, who is playing one of three incarnations of Donna Summer in the musical.

Summer's story includes being born as LaDonna Adrian Gaines in Boston, the third of seven children, and being a shy girl until she found her singing voice at Grant AME Church in Roxbury.

That's just the beginning, so it's also understandable that the musical has three actors and singers playing Donna Summer at different parts of her life — a life that was cruelly cut short at the age of 63 in 2012 by lung cancer, even though Summer didn't smoke.

Edwards-Jones plays the youngest version of Donna Summer in the show in her teenage years, called Duckling Donna. There's also Disco Donna (Charis Gullage) and Diva Donna (Brittny Smith).

Diva Donna narrates the musical, recalling aspects of her life against the backdrop of a final show, and all three get to be on stage at the same time for certain numbers including "MacArthur Park" and the show-stopping "Last Dance."

"I like that there's a really physical thing presentation-wise and I feel like the harmonies are all good," Edwards-Jones said of the three Donnas.

At the beginning of the show it is Diva Donna who appears first, and introduces her younger selves, Duckling Donna and Disco Donna, Edwards-Jones said.

Duckling Donna is "not as confident" as we might remember Donna Summer as being later. "She sings around the house. She finds herself in the church. She finds her voice in the church," Edwards-Jones said.

Duckling Donna's solo numbers in the show include "I Remember Yesterday," "On My Honor" and Pandora's Box."

Donna Summer dropped out of high school, and moved to New York City and then Germany where she met up with producers Giorgio Moroder and Pete Bellotte, who helped develop Summer's sound. The three shared cowriting credits for "I Feel Love."

"Summer: The Donna Summer Musical" shows some of the challenges Summer faced, especially as a solo female artist, Edwards-Jones said. The hit "She Works Hard for the Money" plays out against dealing with record company executives. Meanwhile, in her early years Summer made some unfortunate choices with the men in her life.

"I think you get to know a lot. It intrigued me. You think Disco Diva but it's how she overcame things in her life," Edwards-Jones said.

But of course, a Donna Summer musical is also going to have plenty of hot stuff musically speaking, and the disco visuals should be a treat as well. The score features more than 20 of Summer’s classic hits including, besides those already mentioned, “Love to Love You Baby,” “Bad Girls” and “Hot Stuff."

'"By the end they're like standing up and dancing with us," Edwards-Jones said of the audiences.

The clothing and hair styles of the disco era didn't last, but does Summer's music still stand up?

"I feel like it has. There are generations passing it on, and I feel that's how it lives," Edwards-Jones said.

The current tour opened Nov. 16 in Pittsburgh with bookings for over 40 cities. "It's been going well," she said.

"Summer: The Donna Summer Musical" is Edwards-Jones' first national tour with a production.

One of her challenges is "having the right amount of clothes for different climates."

She was in Detroit for a tour stop as she spoke on the phone recently. The show has already been to Boston, which was Edward-Jones' first time in Massachusetts. Coming to The Hanover Theatre will be her first time in Worcester. "I'm excited," she said.

Edwards-Jones is from Suffolk, Virginia, and said she started performing musical theater at the age of 11. She's been pursuing it right through her freshman year at Shenandoah University in Winchester, Virginia. Theater credits include "Freaky Friday," "Mamma Mia," and "Chicago" at Virginia Musical Theatre, and "Matilda the Musical" at Virginia Stage Company.

She also intends to minor at college in business. "When you think of the long term, that would be very cool to be on the other side as well," she said the show business and business divide. She might have been able to help Donna Summer in that regard. "Donna Summer did have to get through that a little bit to get her money that she deserved," Edwards-Jones said.

After a year at Shenandoah University, she was planning to transfer to Montclair State University in Montclair, New Jersey, which would put her nearer the theater universe of New York City.

But speaking of Donna Summer, Edwards-Jones heard about auditions taking place last summer for a national tour of the show, and sent two songs online to the producers. She received an email response asking her to come to New York City for in-person call back auditions.

Her birthday was July 26. The call back auditions lasted two days, July 27 and 28.

"I waited and waited," she said.

Then she was told she had been cast as Duckling Donna.

"I was so shocked, all I could so was laugh. People said, 'No school for you.' And I said, 'I'm alright. Ok."

"Summer: The Donna Summer Musical" is currently scheduled to tour until June 5.

Whether or not it tours longer, Edwards-Jones feels Montclair State College can wait for now.

If the tour ends, "My goal is to book something else and just keep working," she said. "I know school will always be there. We'll see what happens."

'Summer: The Donna Summer Musical'

When: 7:30 p.m. March 31; 8 p.m. April 1; 2 and 8 p.m. April 2; 1 and 6:30 p.m. April 3. ASL & Audio Description Services at 1 p.m. April 3.

Where: The Hanover Theatre and Conservatory for the Performing Arts, 2 Southbridge St., Worcester