Charlottesville Area Transit (CAT) is bringing on Via as the TransitTech software and operations provider for its new low-emission microtransit pilot program, which is launching in Albemarle County, Va., this fall.

The service, tentatively called MicroCAT, will provide app-based, on-demand rides by using technology to better connect riders with CAT's system and services. The tech will function as an extension of CAT’s existing fixed-route bus lines and will provide coverage in Pantops and along Route 29 North – both identified as areas of high need for increased mobility access in a 2022 Albemarle County transit study.

"The selection of a vendor for microtransit service marks a major milestone in our ongoing efforts to improve transportation options for the people who live and work in Albemarle County,” said Donna Price, chair of the Albemarle County Board of Supervisors. “This innovative service will bridge the gaps in our current transit system, providing convenient and efficient mobility solutions to our community. We are excited to see this service come to fruition."

"We are pleased to have identified the perfect partner for our microtransit service. Via brings a wealth of experience and expertise, aligning perfectly with our vision for enhanced transit services. Microtransit will pave the way for a more connected and accessible transportation network. We look forward to working closely with Via to ensure a seamless implementation and a successful launch this fall," said CAT Director of Transit Garland Williams,

Riders will typically be directed to a nearby virtual bus stop around 500 feet away for pickup and dropoff. The result is an efficient transit option that combines the affordability and sustainability of the bus with the convenience of a private car. The fleet will consist of hybrid electric vehicles and wheelchair accessible vehicles are available upon request.

The upcoming launch of CAT’s microtransit service aligns with similar transit initiatives throughout the commonwealth and across the country. Via’s software powers programs in Alexandria, Williamsburg, Gloucester, Wise County, Richmond County, Roanoke County, and Hampton Roads.

The service will be made possible through a $1.5 million Virginia Department of Rail and Public Transportation grant to CAT and a match of $388,000 from Albemarle County.

More information about the microtransit program will be available in coming weeks through a comprehensive public awareness campaign and a presentation to the Albemarle County Board of Supervisors on Sept. 20.