The Thomas Jefferson Planning District Commission (TJPDC) coordinates planning across a wide variety of jurisdictions and regulatory agencies. The TJPDC provides resources to the City of Charlottesville and surrounding counties. Services rendered include grant applications and management, assistance with strategic and comprehensive plans, and technical assistance with transportation, land use and economic development plans.

The TJPDC totals 2,169 square miles and includes 227,107 people in five counties and one city. [1] The agency will get a new website in the fall of 2020. [2]

The organization was formed in 1972. [3]

History

The TJPDC was created in 1972 in order to "promote the orderly and efficient development of the physical, social, and economic elements of the Thomas Jefferson Planning District by planning and encouraging and assisting governmental subdivisions to plan for the future. [1]

Current Programs

Central Virginia Regional Housing Partnership

North 29 Corridor Plan

Regional Broadband Partnership

Charlottesville Rideshare

Charlottesville-Albemarle Metropolitan Planning Organization

Rivanna River corridor planning [4]

Rivanna River Basin Commission

Thomas Jefferson HOME Consortium

Rural housing issues

In the summer of 2019, the TJPDC applied for a Housing Preservation Grant from the U.S. Department of Agriculture for the rural area. If successful, it will be the fifth year the TJPDC has administered the program, which subcontracts with a variety nonprofits throughout the area, including AHIP, Fluvanna/Louisa Housing Foundation, Skyline CAP, and the Nelson County Community Development Foundation. [5]

Previous Programs

Previous Planning Assistance

2017-2019 – Work for City of Charlottesville on small area plan for Cherry Avenue

2018 – Completed Ruckersville Area Plan

2019 – Working with Town of Scottsville on community engagement assistance for small area plan there

2019: Staff working on scope of work for small area plan for Zion Crossroads in both Fluvanna and Louisa [6]

Projects requested by Albemarle County

Stream buffer study

In 2012, Albemarle County staff asked the TJPDC to evaluate whether a program to waive property taxes on stream buffers would encourage conservation and increase water quality in the Chesapeake Bay. In 1998, the General Assembly passed enabling legislation allowing localities to do so. The study concluded that a program would benefit landowners with high-value and smaller properties. Large parcels would likely not see a benefit because of the high costs with planting vegetation as well as the fact that many of the parcels are already in land use taxation.[7]

Projects requested by Nelson County

Nelson has received as much as $35,000 toward the revitalization of Lovingston. [6]

Livable Communities Planning Project

In October 2010, TJPDC received a three-year $999,000 grant to develop a regional sustainability implementation plan. The Sustainable Communities Regional Planning Grant is sponsored by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.[8]

Billie Campbell, TJPDC's Chief Operating Officer, said it was a highly competitive grant application process with 225 submissions, 45 awards, and only 3 in Virginia (Roanoke, Radford, and Charlottesville).[9]

Campbell shared the following additional details about the grant:

Lead applicant: Thomas Jefferson Planning District Commission and Metropolitan Planning Organization

Major Partners: City of Charlottesville, Albemarle County, University of Virginia

Other partners: Jefferson Area Board for Aging, Thomas Jefferson Partnership for Economic Development, Rivanna River Basin Commission, and Local Energy Alliance Program

A Sustainability Advisory Committee will be created.

The Technical Committee of the area Planning and Coordination Council will serve as a steering committee for the project.

Three contract staff (one each for Charlottesville, Albemarle and UVA) will be hired for 2.5 years and work out of TJPDC. No outside consultants are expected to be utilized on the project.

Summary of Objectives and Expected Results

"The existing Regional Plan for Sustainable Development in the Charlottesville/Albemarle metro area is the Sustainability Accords. These policies were adopted in 1998 as a result of a four-year process with broad regional support and wide participation by members of the public..."

"Four problems have been identified that are preventing sustainability initiatives from moving into implementation in the region:

Problem: Sustainability planning has been proceeding, but under a series of separately focused initiatives...

Problem: Sustainability goals have been established in major plans (Comprehensive Plans for Charlottesville and Albemarle County, MPO Long Range Transportation Plan) in the region but strategies for implementation have not been developed and adopted...

Problem: Sustainability is not being fully implemented in either the built environment or in the habitats of citizens and businesses...

Problem: Lack of available metrics to identify the region's status in pursuing sustainability..."[10]

The Charlottesville Planning Commission and Albemarle County Planning Commission will discuss how implementation will affect their work at a joint session on March 22, 2011.

Tea Party opposition

The Jefferson Area Tea Party was highly skeptical of the Livable Communities Planning Project grant, and were concerned it is a sign that international organizations have usurped power that they say belongs to local officials. [11]

Comprehensive Plan Database

In July 2012, the TJPDC unveiled a searchable database that allows the public to view and compare documents from the Charlottesville and Albemarle County Comprehensive Plans. The database was developed through a $1 million grant from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and contains over 12,000 documents. [12]

Controversy over management of funds

At the September 2012 meeting of the TJPDC, Williams told his board that two planners hired as part of the initiative would be let go several months earlier than expected. City and county staff have disputed his interpretation of why the grant money was running out.[13] Williams' contract was not renewed. [14]

Commissioners

The TJPDC is guided by a locally appointed, twelve member Commission, of which at least 51% are local elected officials. Member localities include the City of Charlottesville and the Counties of Albemarle, Fluvanna, Greene, Louisa, and Nelson. Commission meetings, which are open to the public, are held the first Thursday of each month at 7 pm in the TJPDC Office.

Commissioners (2022)

Jesse Rutherford, Chair, Representing: Nelson County Board of Supervisors

Dale Herring, Vice Chair, Representing: Greene County Board of Supervisors

Jim Andrews, Representing: Albemarle County Board of Supervisors, Samuel Miller District

Tommy Barlow, Representing: Louisa County, Mountain Road District

Dylan Bishop, Representing: Nelson County Planning Department

Ned Gallaway, Representing: Albemarle County Board of Supervisors, Rio District

Rachel Jones, Representing: Louisa County Board of Supervisors

Tony O'Brien, Representing: Fluvanna County Board of Supervisors, Rivanna District

Michael Payne, Representing: Charlottesville City Council

Keith B. Smith, Treasurer, Representing: Fluvanna County

Lyle Solla-Yates, Representing: Charlottesville Planning Commission

Andrea Wilkinson, CPA, Representing: Greene County

Commissioners (2020)

Dale Herring, Chair, Representing: Greene County Board of Supervisors

Donna Price, Representing: Albemarle County Board of Supervisors, Scottsville District

Keith B. Smith, Treasurer, Representing: Fluvanna County

Bob Babyok, Representing: Louisa County, Greene Springs District

Tommy Barlow, Representing: Louisa County, Mountain Road District

Rory Stolzenberg, Representing: Charlottesville Planning Commission

Tony O'Brien, Representing: Fluvanna County Board of Supervisors, Rivanna District

Ned Gallaway, Representing: Albemarle County Board of Supervisors, Rio District

Ernie Reed, Representing: Nelson County Board of Supervisors

Jesse Rutherford, Representing: Nelson County Planning Department

Michael Payne, Representing: Charlottesville City Council

Andrea Wilkinson, CPA, Representing: Greene County [15]

Current Staff

Christine Jacobs, Executive Director (Feb. 15, 2021 - present)[16] [17]

David Blount, Deputy Director

Sandy Shackelford, Director of Transportation and Planning [18]

Former Leaders

Wayne Harbaugh (retired 1986)

Harrison Rue served as executive director from 2002-2008. Harrison Rue stepped down June 30, 2008 to take a position with ICF International.

Stephen W. Williams served as executive director from 2009-2013. The TJPDC Board of Directors voted unanimously not to renew Williams' contract. His contract expired August 1, 2013.[19]

Charles P. “Chip” Boyles, II, Executive Director (2014 - Feb. 15, 2021)[20] [21]

Location

The TJPDC is housed in offices on Water Street in downtown Charlottesville. The organization leases the space and that lease expires in August 2020 with a potential extension until August 2021. As such, the TJPDC is considering new office space. [6]

References