The first week of pride month is bringing you all the opportunities to sing and dance! Kick things off on Saturday June 1 with a dance party at The Looking Glass at Ix Art Park. Be sure to save a little bit of energy on the dance floor because Umma's Second Annual Tea Dance and Market is the next day!

Give yourself a few days to rest before bringing your best voice to Queeraoke at Holly's Diner on June 8 - a monthly standing tradition here in Charlottesville!

The second week of Pride starts with a special performance at the historic Paramount Theater on the Downtown Mall. Paramount Presents: Pride Anthems will explore 50 years of Pride-themed songs, from Donna Summer and Queen to George Michael, Erasure, Madonna, Lady Gaga, and much more.

Later that week, South Street Brewery will host a Pride-themed trivia with questions about favorite politicians, actors, and queens in the queer community. And the Alamo Drafthouse brings back the iconic queer film "But I'm a Cheerleader" to the cinema on June 11!

Clear your calendars for the weekend of June 15 - 16 because there's so much you won't want to miss!

Out and About VA will host a wine event at Montifalco Vineyard - the only LGBTQ+-owned winery in Virginia - on Saturday June 15 from 5-8:30 PM.

Also happening that night is a Drag Bingo night at Bar Botanical in Crozet, just twenty minutes from downtown Charlottesville. The rooftop of this 100% plant-based restaurant and bar is the perfect place to spend a summer evening while enjoying performances from some amazing queens!

Later on in Charlottesville, Random Row Brewing Co. will host the annual CLAW (Charlottesville Lady Arm Wrestling) event starting at 7 PM! This well-loved event draws a huge crowd and sells out every year, so be sure to get your tickets ASAP. Cheer on your favorite wrestlers and see who will take home the prize! Costumes not required but absolutely encouraged.

Need some sustenance after a night of fun? Botanical Fare (the sister restaurant of Bar Botanical) will host drag brunch at their location on Charlottesville's Downtown Mall starting at 11:30 AM on Sunday June 16.

Afterwards, head to Visible Records for a Pride Fruit Market from 12 - 4 PM! Meet local LGBTQ+ artisans and vendors and take part in the fun, including a DIY Pride shirt printing station

Don't miss out on all the action! Book your stay in Charlottesville and Albemarle County for a June getaway where you can take part in Pride Celebrations and enjoy everything our destination has to offer this time of year. Use our Ultimate Summer Bucket List for more ideas of what to do during your stay and be sure to explore all the hotels, B&Bs, and resorts that will make the perfect accommodation during your visit.