"Beggars in Spain" by Nancy Kress

Review by Nicholas Whyte

This is the second in a series of reviews of those pieces of written science fiction and fantasy which have won both the Hugo and Nebula awards. Nancy Kress' novella, "Beggars in Spain", published in Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine in 1991, is the subject here; it beat off strong competition (two other novellas, by Kristine Kathryn Rusch and Connie Willis, were also nominated for both Hugo and Nebula that same year and were beaten both times by "Beggars in Spain") and is still the best-known of Kress' works. I have not read the novel-length expansion with the same title published in 1994; unlike the novella it did not win any awards. It was followed by two more books continuing the story, Beggars and Choosers and Beggars' Ride.

I think this was the first work by Kress that I ever read, just around the time that my own daughter was born in 1997. The story begins with the planned conception of a genetically modified child, Leisha Camden, and her "normal" twin sister, Alice, and follows them until their early twenties, so as a new father myself I was gripped from the start. All parents know that their child is the most marvellous creature in the world, of course, and part of the monstrosity of Roger Camden is that he barely acknowledges the existence of the ordinary Alice and concentrates his affection on the augmented Leisha. The dysfunctional family of Camden, his wife who gradually disintegrates, the geneticist who Camden subsequently marries, and the girls themselves, is all too credible and painfully (if sparsely) portrayed; likewise Leisha's discovery of a new community with the other children born with the same modification that she has. However it is not the main point of the story.

Leisha has been genetically modified so that she does not need to sleep. Along with this most obvious change come other benefits: the Sleepless (for she is among the first of many such children) are more intelligent, more capable, and more content than the Sleepers (as we normal humans become known). As the Sleepless progress to maturity they have to deal with the prejudices that many display against them. The story of prejudice against children who are not just different but who are feared to be superior is an old SF trope, going back at least to 1911 and J.D. Beresford's The Hampdenshire Wonder. Kress' triumph here is that she displays a certain compassion for both the ordinary humans who are terrified by the emergence of the Sleepless, and indeed for the isolationists among the Sleepless who want to build a new society for themselves, leaving cut off the rest of humanity. Howwever we are in no doubt that her sympathies lie with those including Leisha Camden who want to maintain a single human society including both Sleepers and Sleepless.

Dealing with prejudice is a hall-mark of Kress' best work; it is the main theme of her Nebula-winning "Out of All Them Bright Stars" and prominent also in her other Nebula-winning novella, "The Flowers of Aulit Prison". Her understanding is that many, perhaps even most, will be prejudiced against those who seem insufficiently "human", but those of us who do not feel that way must stand up and be counted against such bigotry, even if it seems that the odds are stacked against us. It's a powerful and profound argument. But that too is not the main point of this particular story.

The main theme of the story concerns the responsibilities of those who have favourable positions in society towards those who are less fortunate. The intellectual underpinning of the argument here is a fictional philosopher/scientist called Kenzo Yagai, who has not only invented cheap energy but propounds a moral code based on these principles: "That spiritual dignity comes from supporting one's life through one's own efforts, and from trading the results of those efforts in mutual cooperation throughout the society. That the symbol of this is the contract. And that we need each other for the fullest, most beneficial trade." In a crucial passage where Leisha debates this issue with Tony, an embittered fellow Sleepless, later martyred, he introduces the metaphor of the story's title:

"What if you walk down a street in Spain and a hundred beggars each want a dollar and you say no and they have nothing to trade you but they're so rotten with anger about what you have that they knock you down and grab it and then beat you out of sheer envy and despair?"

Leisha didn't answer.

"Are you going to say that's not a human scenario, Leisha? That it never happens?"

"It happens," Leisha said evenly. "But not all that often."

"Bullshit. Read more history. Read more newspapers. But the point is: what do you owe the beggars then? What does a good Yagaiist who believes in mutually beneficial contracts do with people who have nothing to trade and can only take?"

"You're not--"

"What, Leisha? In the most objective terms you can manage, what do we owe the grasping and nonproductive needy?"

"What I said originally. Kindness. Compassion."

"Even if they don't trade it back? Why?"

"Because..." She stopped.

"Why? Why do law-abiding and productive human beings owe anything to those who neither produce very much nor abide by just laws? What philosophical or economic or spiritual justification is there for owing them anything? Be as honest as I know you are."

Leisha put her head between her knees. The question gaped beneath her, but she didn't try to evade it. "I don't know. I just know we do."

Kress' source for Yagaiism is quite explicitly the philosophy of Ayn Rand, as expressed in her 1957 novel Atlas Shrugged (famously mocked as Telemachus Sneezed by Robert Shea and Robert Anton Wilson in the Illuminatus! trilogy). In one interview, Kress says of Rand: "although there's something very appealing about her emphasis on individual responsibility, that you should not evade reality, you should not evade responsibility, you should not assume that it's up to the next person to provide you with your life, with what it is that you need, whether that's emotional, or physical... [it] lacks all compassion, and even more fundamental, it lacks recognition of the fact that we are a social species and that our society does not exist of a group of people only striving for their own ends, which is what she shows, but groups of people co-operating for mutual ends, and this means that you don't always get what you want and your work does not always benefit you directly."

She goes on to draw another contrast in the other direction, between the society she depicts in her own fiction and the society of Anarres in Ursula Le Guin's The Dispossessed, but I guess this must have more relevance to the expanded, novel version of Beggars in Spain which I have not read. There is an interesting discussion of both Rand and Kress on the everything2.com discussion site. The central message of "Beggars in Spain" is that our humanity as individuals is bound up in our obligations to the rest of humanity, and if we forget that, we become less human.

It would be easy to write a didactic and boring story about how we all ought to be nice to each other, even including the two subsidiary themes identified above. "Beggars in Spain" is not that story. We have vivid characterisations of Leisha and her sister Alice, their stepmother the geneticist, and several of the other Sleepless (perhaps the father is a little too monstrous here). Also Kress has a very strong sense of place, with the Camdens' mansion by Lake Michigan, Leisha's student environment in Harvard, and the middle America through which she and Alice eventually flee having rescued a Sleepless child from abuse, all depicted convincingly. And there are a couple of beautiful vignettes; a scene where Leisha confronts a pregnant Alice, slightly (deliberately?) reminiscent of the end of Lolita; an earlier scene where the Sleepless kids try a drug that will make them sleep for the first time, with their sense of anticipation - and then disappointment when they all wake up hung over - wickedly portrayed. This story is strongly recommended.

There are numerous reviews on the web of the novel Beggars in Spain, of which this novella forms the first part. I have not read it, but I get the impression that not every reader felt the quality was sustained for the whole book, and I note both Kress' own comments that she feels more comfortable writing shorter fiction, and the fact that I was rather disappointed by both Beggars and Choosers (the next novel in the series) and her unrelated novel Maximum Light. The only on-line review (besides this one) that I know of specifically looking at the novella, rather than the novel, is by Eliot Mercury in Palm Pilot Monthly. The novella is not that easy to find in print but is available (for a price) electronically from Fictionwise.

Nancy Kress is, as far as I know, unrelated to Simon Kress, the unpleasant hero of George R.R. Martin's novella "Sandkings". She is however the widow of Charles Sheffield, author of "Georgia On My Mind". Both of these will be reviewed later in this series; next up though is "The Bicentennial Man" by Isaac Asimov.

"Beggars in Spain" won the 1992 Hugo Award for Best Novella

Other novellas shortlisted for Hugo: "The Gallery of His Dreams" by Kristine Kathryn Rusch; "Jack" by Connie Willis; "Griffin's Egg" by Michael Swanwick; and "And Wild for to Hold" by Nancy Kress.

Other winners of 1992 Hugos: Barrayar (novel) by Lois McMaster Bujold; "Gold" (novelette) by Isaac Asimov; "A Walk in the Sun" (short story) by Geoffrey A. Landis.

"Beggars in Spain" won the 1991 Nebula Award for Best Novella

Other novellas on Nebula Final Ballot: "Man Opening a Door" by "Paul Ash" (Pauline Ashwell); "Apartheid, Superstrings, and Mordecai Thubana", by Michael Bishop; "Bully!" by Mike Resnick; "The Gallery of His Dreams" by Kristine Kathryn Rusch; "Jack" by Connie Willis

Other winners of 1991 Nebulas: Stations of the Tide (novel) by Michael Swanwick; "Guide Dog" (novelette) by Mike Connor; "Ma Qui" (short story) by Alan Brennert.

Other awards

won 1992 Asimov's Reader's Poll for Novella

won 1992 SF Chronicle Award for Novella

nominated for 1992 Locus Award for Novella (beaten by "The Gallery of His Dreams", by Kristine Kathryn Rusch)

the novel-length expansion came second for John W. Campbell Award 1994 (there was no winner); nominated for 1993 HOMer award (beaten by Fossil Hunter, by Robert Sawyer); nominated for 1994 Hugo and 1994 Locus (beaten by Green Mars, by Kim Stanley Robinson); nominated for 1993 Nebula (beaten by Red Mars, by Kim Stanley Robinson); nominated for 1994 Prometheus Award (beaten by Pallas, by L. Neil Smith).

Publication details

Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine, April 1991

Beggars in Spain (novella only), Nancy Kress, published by Axolotl Press, 1991

The Year's Best Science Fiction: Ninth Annual Collection, ed. Gardner Dozois, 1992

Hugo and Nebula Award Winners from Asimov's Science Fiction, ed. Sheila Williams, 1995

The New Hugo Winners Volume IV, ed. Gregory Benford & Martin H. Greenberg, Baen, 1997

The Science Fiction Century, ed. David G. Hartwell, 1997 (I found a pile of paperback copies in the American Discount bookstore in Vienna, Austria)

Beaker's Dozen, Nancy Kress, 1998

in The Hard SF Renaissance, ed. David G. Hartwell & Kathryn Cramer, Tor, 2002 - contains "Beggars in Spain" and 40 other stories by different authors.

Available for download for $3.29 from FictionWise

See also the novel-length expansion, Beggars in Spain, Nancy Kress

Related pages on this site:

sf index page | sf thoughts and links | a check-list of sf and fantasy set in Ireland

list of joint Hugo and Nebula winners | meta-review of the 2006 Hugo nominees | meta-review of the 2005 Hugo nominees | meta-review of the 2004 Hugo nominees | meta-review of the 2003 Hugo nominees | reviews of the 2002 Hugo nominees | thoughts on the 2000 Hugo nominations | all Hugo and Nebula winners | analysis of winners by age and year of birth | first time winners and gender balance

Authors: Tepper / Bujold / Willis / Russell | Pratchett / Martin / Gentle | Simmons / Strugatsky / Lem / Wells / Brunner | Zelazny | Clarke / Aldiss / McDonald / MacLeod

Reviews:

Poul Anderson, "Goat Song"

Isaac Asimov, "The Bicentennial Man"

Isaac Asimov, "The Gods Themselves"

Greg Bear, "Blood Music"

Greg Bear, Darwin's Radio

Terry Bisson, "Bears Discover Fire"

Terry Bisson, "macs"

Lois McMaster Bujold, A Civil Campaign

Octavia Butler, "Bloodchild"

The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction

Mark Campbell, Pocket Essentials: Doctor Who

Orson Scott Card, Ender's Game

Ted Chiang, Hell Is the Absence of God

Arthur C. Clarke, The Fountains of Paradise

Neil Gaiman, American Gods

Neil Gaiman, Coraline

Joe Haldeman, Forever Peace

Joe Haldeman, The Forever War

Frank Herbert, Dune Daniel Keyes, Flowers for Algernon

Nancy Kress, "Beggars in Spain"

Ursula Le Guin, The Dispossessed

Fritz Leiber, "Catch That Zeppelin"

Fritz Leiber, "Gonna Roll The Bones"

Kelly Link, "The Faery Handbag"

Barry B. Longyear, Enemy Mine

Vonda N. McIntyre, Dreamsnake

George Mann (ed.), The Mammoth Encyclopedia of Science Fiction

Frederik Pohl, Gateway

J.K. Rowling, Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban

Charles Sheffield, Georgia On My Mind

Clifford D. Simak, Grotto of the Dancing Deer

Neal Stephenson, Cryptonomicon

Vernor Vinge, A Deepness in the Sky

Connie Willis, Doomsday Book

Connie Willis, "Even the Queen"

Connie Willis, "Fire Watch"

David Wingrove (ed), The Science Fiction Source Book

brief reviews of the joint winners of the Hugo and Nebula awards, 1st page, 2nd page and 3rd page

Front page | About this site | My Weblog

Your comments, please! Send me an email or fill in this form.