JOHN COTTON DANA

by Lyman Whitney Allen

That is his portrait,—high bequest

To our Museum’s hall.

The artist painted at his best

The one whose features well attest

What mind and heart install.

There is no genius such as his

Midst Newark’s throngs of men.

To him be praise for what he is,

And for his gracious ministries

Past threescore years and ten.

His name and fame are heralded

Where lore has reverence.

Courageous followers daily tread

Ascension paths his faith has led

Soul’s triumph over sense.

He holds the keys of Learning’s doors

To Wisdom’s House of Light.

He gathers Culture’s golden stores,

Interpreting the metaphors

A city’s dreams incite.

His vision lured the princely gift

Of a great merchant’s heart.

Fine natures, they together lift

The veils from Beauty, turn the drift

Of wealth to calls of Art.

What streams of inspiration flow

Out of his life’s survey!

’Neath healing shades they gently go,

While time can never overthrow

The hopes along their way.

All hail to Newark’s honored Sage

This five and twentieth year!

For him be long and mellowing age,

With vistas of earth’s heritage

That comes from his career.

LIBERATOR

by Gerald Raftery

He hurled no ultimatum at the state

Nor led a revolution out to cry

An empty creed against the empty sky.

Nor ever did he play upon the hate

Of poor for rich, of ignorant for great.

And since his slow revolt was fine and high

For him no banners dip along the sky,

No cannons roar, no millions venerate.

His deed was not a sudden, blaring thing;

It was a lifework, patient, unacclaimed.

And now before the searching mind of youth

The serried thinkers of the ages fling

Their gold. This man made knowledge free, unchained;

He loosed the slow, invading tide of truth.

To John Cotton Dana, Newark’s great champion of democratic culture, the worth of poetry and the other arts lay in one’s own experience of them. The pioneering director of the city’s library and museum considered popular songs and jingles “good poetry to the thousands who read and love them.” Dana insisted on the presence of poetry “in life itself, in homely everyday relations, in passing sentiments,” whether or not it found expression in the written word. (The Newarker, July 1912)

Lyman Whitney Allen composed his tribute on seeing Douglas Volk’s portrait exhibited in the newly opened home of the Newark Museum. The museum building, paid for by businessman and philanthropist Louis Bamberger (“the princely gift / of a great merchant’s heart”), was dedicated in 1926. In the same year Dana turned 70—on August 19—and marked 25 years of service to the artistic and cultural life of his adopted city. Since 2009 Volk’s painting has been displayed in the Dana Room of the Dana Library, on the Newark campus of Rutgers University.

Allen’s poem was printed in the Newark Sunday Call of March 6, 1927. Gerald Raftery’s, one of many homages paid Dana after his death, appeared in the New York World on September 16, 1929, and in the Newark Evening News three days later.