IntelliJ IDEA Supports Flex Development

JetBrains' IntelliJ IDEA is one of Java developers' the most favorite development IDEs. The recent IntelliJ IDEA 7.0.3 release includes some new features supports Flex application development. To understand how Flex RIA developers can utilize InitelliJ's new features and future plan for Flex, InfoQ spoke with Ann Oreshnikova, marketing director of JetBrains.

Flex Startup Helps Learning New Languages

It's not uncommon lately for startup companies utilizing RIA technologies to delivery their ideas and services. Adobe Flex based startup Babbel is one good example. To allow our readers learn the insight on how a Flex startup's architecture is designed and implemented, InfoQ spoke with Thomas Holl, CTO of Lesson Nine GmbH, the company behind Babbel.

Top 10 Mistakes when building Flex Applications

In this post, Adobe’s James Ward teams up with InfoQ.com to bring you another Flex Top 10 (our most recent Flex Top 10). Overall, Flex is a powerful framework that is easy to use, but today let's focus on some of the common mistakes that are made when building Flex applications.

Flex and the Open Web

Kevin Dangoor of SitePen recently blogged about Flash, Silverlight and the Open Web. He offers his defense for open standards as the best future for the web. Adobe's Ryan Stewart, a Flex evangelist, responds.

HotRuby - Ruby 1.9/YARV opcode interpreter in Javascript

HotRuby is a new way of running Ruby code: compile it down to Ruby 1.9 bytecode and run it in a client side interpreter written in Javascript. We take a look at what makes HotRuby work.

What Will it Take to Transition from Desktop-Based Application to Cloud-Based Applications?

Cloud-based applications are everywhere these days (Enterprise, Office Suites, Groupware, Business Intelligence...), while technologies like Google Gears, Mozilla Prizm, Fluid, S3... are creating an environment where it will be hard to know which is which.

FleXtense Helps Flex Applications Access Web Services

Most of RIA applications connect to the servers to retrieve data. FleXtense is one of the tools to help a RIA, such as a Flex application, to consume web services. FleXtense 2.0 is scheduled to release in April 2008. InfoQ spoke with Murat Cim and Ozkan Yilmaz, the founder/creator of FleXtense, for details on how FleXtense can help RIA development.

Stephan Janssen On Parleys.com And The RIA Landscape

InfoQ.com sat down with Stephan Janssen to learn about Parleys.com and ask his perspective on the emerging RIA platforms. Stephan is the founder of the JavaPolis conference held annually in Belgium. JavaPolis is currently the second largest Java conference, behind only JavaOne.

Integrating Flex 3.0 and RabbitMQ Using STOMP

Derek Wischusen shared his experiment that integrating RabbitMQ with a Flex 3 using an ActionScript 3 STOMP client. It's a demonstration of messaging oriented RIA application concept.

Interview: MLB.com on Their Use of Silverlight

In this InfoQ exluclusive interview Jonathan Allen sits down with Henry Belmont & Thaniya Keereepart on their implementation of Silverlight and how it integrates with their Java back-end.

AIR 1.0: Kevin Hoyt and Matt Rozen From Adobe Give Platform Overview

With the production release of Adobe AIR, InfoQ sat down with Adobe’s Kevin Hoyt and Matt Rozen to learn more about the platform.

Flex 3.0: Update From Adobe's James Ward

With the production release of Flex 3, InfoQ sat down with Adobe’s James Ward to find out more about Flex 3. Last year, Ward gave InfoQ readers an overview of Flex 3 and discounted a number of Flex misconceptions. In this interview, Ward discusses Flex and open source, along with a number of items from the Flex ecosystem.

Adobe Releases AIR 1.0 and Flex 3.0 - Continues Move to Open Source

12 months after the initial SDK alpha of AIR, Adobe has released Flex 3.0 and the 1.0 version of AIR (the Adobe Integrated Runtime). Adobe is also continuing the open sourcing of Flex with the availability of a SVN repository of the Flex API.

How to Develop New Activities for the One Laptop Per Child Project?

The One Laptop Per Child project has starting shipping its first generation of XO laptops. OLPC "is not a laptop project, it is an education project", explains Nicholas Negroponte, director of the project. A full Sugar based development environment is available for developers to contribute new activities to the project. Sugar supports collaborative activities when XOs are meshed together.