Leopold von Ranke (1795-1886) was a modern German historian who significantly impacted historiography in the nineteenth century through his emphasis on critically examining primary sources and valuing each age of history. After being a classics schoolteacher for seven years, Ranke wrote controversially in his History of the Latin and Teutonic Nations that the study of history “seeks only to show what actually happened [wie es eigentlich gewesen].” Historians were encouraged by Ranke to methodically stick to the facts, but Ranke also encouraged looking for the main ideas behind the facts. As a Protestant, Ranke strongly believed that historians should try to find God’s presence in history; thus, there was some idealism in his view of study as he stressed understanding “the particular” (individual lives) as well as “the universal” for a well-rounded view of the past. Ranke also contended that each age was valuable and important to study, not believing like some of his contemporaries that each age of history was superior to the one before it. Primary sources and looking at historical events through the lens of that time were crucial to Ranke’s view of historiography. Always writing about the history of something, the ninety-one-year-old Ranke was still working on an extensive six-volume project on world history at the time of his death.

I would interview Ranke because when I had to read over a thousand pages of different historians’ writings for my historiography senior seminar class last semester, Ranke’s works were the first ones I most clearly understood (maybe that’s not saying much – reading Herodotus was quite the ride) and enjoyed. I agreed with his view on factual representation and of the necessity of studying both “the particular” and “the general” in history. Anyone interested in studying the methods of carefully examining multiple types of evidence would be interested in learning more about Ranke too, since he is the one who taught historians to look at history in a new light, preserving and critically assessing evidence. Ranke’s methods transformed historiography in the nineteenth century until the rise of the influential Annales school at the start of the twentieth century.

Five questions I would ask Ranke are…