Leopold von Ranke (1795 – 1886)

Leopold von Ranke was one of the leading German historians of the 19th century, whose scholarly method and way of teaching (his historical seminar programme at the University of Berlin) had a great influence on Western historiography. He was born at Thuringia, Germany in 1795 into a devout family of Lutheran pastors and lawyers. After attending the renowned Protestant boarding school of Schulpforta, he entered the University of Leipzig. He studied theology and the classics, concentrating on philological work and the translation and exposition of texts. This approach he later developed into a highly influential technique of philological and historical textual criticism. His predilection for history arose from his studies of the ancient writers. But he decided in favour of history only in Frankfurt an der Oder, where he was a secondary school teacher from 1818 to 1825. Apart from the contemporary patriotic enthusiasm for German history, his decision was influenced by Barthold Georg Niebuhr’s Roman history (which inaugurated the modern scientific historical method), the historiographers of the Middle Ages, and Sir Walter Scott’s historical novels, as well as by the German Romantic poet and philosopher Johann Gottfried von Herder, who regarded history as a chronicle of human progress. Yet Ranke’s strongest motive was a religious one: influenced by the philosophy of Friedrich Schelling, he sought to comprehend God’s actions in history. Attempting to establish that God’s omnipresence revealed itself in the “context of great historical events,” Ranke the historian became both priest and teacher. He was ennobled in 1865. Ranke died on May 23, 1886 at Berlin.

Ranke’s Works:

His first major work, History of the Latin and Teutonic nations, 1494 – 1535 , was published late in 1824. This was based on archival research, viewed by Ranke as the foundation of all historical work, and it established his reputation as a historian. The most influential part of the work was its appendix in which he assessed previous literature on the basis of the critical analysis of sources. For him, this was scholarly history. It was in the preface to his work that he stated his often-quoted dictum, that he was writing history as it had actually happened, ‘wie es eigentlich gewesen’. Due to the success of his work, Ranke was appointed Professor of History at the University of Berlin. Ranke also published a number of works which greatly enriched the development of historical scholarship. Particularly noteworthy are The Conspiracy against Venice (1831), History of the Popes (1834-36), History of Germany during the Reformation (1839-47), History of France (1852-61), History of England (1859-68), etc.

Ranke was also awarded many honours: He was granted entry to the hereditary nobility, adding ‘von’ to his surname in 1865 and he was made an honorary citizen of Berlin in 1885. Ranke’s university career concluded in 1871 when he retired from his chair at Berlin. Nonetheless by the time of his death in Berlin in 1886, he had completed nine volumes of his Universal History.

Contribution of Leopold von Ranke to Historical Scholarship:

Leopold von Ranke endeavoured to understand political order within its own historical context. To understand the nature of historical phenomena, such as an institution or an idea, one had to consider its historical development and the changes it underwent over a period of time. Historical epochs, Ranke argued, should not be judged according to predetermined contemporary values or ideas. Rather, they had to be understood on their own terms by empirically establishing history ‘as things really were’. In fact, according to Ranke, this is the task of history / historians: “to show what actually happened,” implying that historians have to be scientific and objective in their approach as well as be impartial and unbiased in their dealings with any historical events/facts. In the preface of one of his works: History of the

Latin and Teutonic nations Ranke wrote: “To history has been assigned the office of judging the past, of instructing the present for the benefit of future ages. To such high offices this work does one aspire: it wants only to show what actually happened.” He, therefore, helped establish history as a separate discipline, independent from philosophy or literature.

In order to achieve the first task, according to Ranke, the historian had to recognize that “every epoch is immediate to God” – that is, God in His eternity made no distinction between period of history; all were the same in His eyes. In other words, the past could not be judged by the standards of the present. It had to be seen in its own terms. This was the second major contribution which Ranke made to historical scholarship; the determination to strip away the layer of subsequent presumptions applied to the past by philosophizing historians such as Voltaire and to reveal it in its original colours; to try to understand the past as the people who lived in it understood it, even while deciphering patterns and interconnections of which they had been largely unaware. One conclusion that followed from this doctrine was that at any given time, including the present, whatever existed had to be accepted as divinely ordained. Ranke was a profoundly conservative figure, who equated the actual and the ideal and regarded the European states of his days as “spiritual substances ... thoughts of God.” This distanced him from the Prussian school of German historians, from nationalists such as Treitschke who condemned his impartiality and regretted his universalism. The fact that he regarded all states, not just Prussia, as supreme examples of God’s purpose working themselves out on earth gave him, on the other hand, a reputation for impartiality that greatly helped the spread of his influence abroad.

Third, and perhaps most important, the above two tasks are possible only if historians critically analyze the sources. In this connection, Ranke introduced into the study of modern history the methods that had recently been developed by philologists in the study of ancient and medieval literature to determine whether a text was true or corrupted by later interpolations, whether it was written by the author it was supposed to have been written by, and which of the available versions was the most reliable. Historians, argued Ranke, had to root out forgeries and falsification from the record. They had to test documents on the basis of their internal consistency and their consistency with other documents originating at the same period. They had to stick to “primary sources,” eyewitness reports and what Ranke called the ‘purest, most immediate documents” which could be shown to have originated at the time under investigation, and avoid reliance on ‘secondary sources,” such as memoirs or later histories generated after the event. Moreover, they had to investigate and subject to the critical method all the sources relating to the events in which they were interested. They should not be content, to rely on printed documents and chronicles generally available in libraries. They had instead to sally forth, into archives, to work their way through the vast unpublished hoards of original manuscripts stored up by the state chancelleries of Europe. Only then, by gathering, criticizing, and verifying all the available sources, could they put themselves in a position to reconstruct the past accurately.

Critical Analysis of Ranke:

While Ranke’s methods remain influential in the practice of history, his broader ideas of historiography and empiricism are now regarded by some as outdated and no longer credible. They held sway among historians until the mid-20th century, when they were challenged by E. Carr and Fernand Braudel. Carr opposed Ranke’s ideas of empiricism as naïve, boring and outmoded, saying that historians did not merely report facts; they choose which facts they use. In the 1980s, A. Dickens investigated Ranke as a Reformation historian and pointed out that Ranke simply copied earlier works on the reformation. Moreover, Ranke had also been