Godzilla (1998)

Promotional Poster

Country United States Directed by Roland Emmerich Release Date 1998 Language English Studio Centropolis Entertainment

Fried Films

Independent Pictures Distributor TriStar Pictures

Main Cast Character Actor Dr. Niko "Nick" Tatopoulos Matthew Broderick Audrey Timmonds Maria Pitillo Philippe Roaché Jean Reno Victor "Animal" Palotti Hank Azaria

Godzilla is the 1998 American "reimagining" of the legendary radioactive "kaiju" first featured in the original 1954 Japanese science fiction film. Directed by Roland Emmerich, the film was lambasted by critics and by fans of the Toho-produced series. This particular version of the creature (referred to as "Zilla" in later media) would be lampooned in the subsequent Japanese-made 2004 Godzilla film Godzilla: Final Wars. A new US feature film adaptation directed by Gareth Edwards was released in 2014.

The following weapons were used in the film Godzilla (1998):

Submachine Guns

Heckler & Koch HK94A3 (mocked-up as MP5A3)

The French DGSE agents, including Agent Philippe Roche (Jean Reno), bring Heckler & Koch HK94A3 carbines, converted to resemble Heckler & Koch MP5A3 submachine guns, when they infiltrate Godzilla's nest in Madison Square Garden (one of which has a Surefire flashlight grip). Some of the US soldiers in the movie are also seen with the pseudo MP5A3s.

Rifles

M16A2

The M16A2 is used by US Army personnel throughout the movie. During the scene in the French DGSE warehouse, several agents are seen unloading crates full of M16A2s and laying them on tables.

M16A1 (fitted with M16A2 hand guards)

Some of the M16s seen in the movie are actually M16A1s fitted with M16A2 hand guards, likely due to a shortage of genuine M16A2s on-set.

M4A1

During the US Army's confrontations with Godzilla, several soldiers are seen firing M4A1 carbines, which have had their carry handles removed and replaced with C-More (CTAC) sights, and have something attached directly above the barrel. These are the exact same M4s used in Air Force One (which had the same armorer as this movie - Harry Lu).

AK-47

AK-47s are carried by Ukrainian soldiers when they arrive in the Chernobyl exclusion zone via helicopter. From these scenes, it appears the Ukrainian soldiers are armed with the original, milled-receiver AK-47s and not the more modern AKM and AK-74 rifles the real-life Ukrainian Army is armed with. Note that they inaccurately exit a 1950s era Piasecki H-21 Shawnee tandem rotor helicopter of US origin.

Shotguns

SWD/Cobray Street Sweeper

When Godzilla charges a US Army roadblock, some of the soldiers are shown firing at him with, oddly, SWD/Cobray Street Sweeper shotguns, a weapon that has never been used by any branch of the US military.

Franchi SPAS-15

When the military has set its first trap and is waiting for Godzilla to show up, at least one soldier can be seen wielding a Franchi SPAS-15, yet another weapon which is not used by the US military.

Machine Guns

M60

The M60 machine gun appears on US Army Humvees.

M60E3

M60E3 machine guns also are mounted on Humvees.

Heckler & Koch HK21/23 (?)

During the military's second attempt to lure Godzilla into the open and take him down, one of the soldiers accompanying Sgt. O'Neil is carrying some type of belt-fed machine gun that has no ammunition box or belt. Judging by the weapon's appearance and the fact that it has a forward grip and folded bipod, it appears to be either a Heckler & Koch HK21 or HK23, though this is not certain.

Browning M2HB

Browning M2HBs are seen mounted on US Army armored vehicles.

Apache Machine Guns

AH-64 Apache gunships are seen opening fire with what appear to be dual pylon-mounted machine guns instead of the 30mm chain gun.

Launchers

DefTech 37mm launcher

Some of the US soldiers are shown using DefTech 37mm launchers, including Sergeant O'Neil (Doug Savant). Some are also seen on a table in the DGSE warehouse where weapons are being unpacked. As in most Hollywood movies, the DefTech (and similar 37mm launchers) is inaccurately depicted as a weapon capable of firing HE grenades, whereas in real life it can only fire less-than-lethal ordnance.

M136 AT4

Some of the US soldiers in the film fire at Godzilla with M136 AT4 rocket launchers. More are also visible in the DGSE warehouse where the weapons are being unpacked.

M203 Grenade Launcher