A two-time Tony award-winning stage actor and instantly recognizable film presence, Matthew Broderick was most recently seen on screen alongside Ben Stiller, Eddie Murphy and Casey Affleck in Tower Heist, and in Margaret with Matt Damon and Mark Ruffalo. In the spring of 2008, he was also on the big screen in Helen Hunt’s directorial debut Then She Found Me.

Broderick recently finished the award-winning Broadway run of Nice Work If You Can Get It. Previously, he starred in the blockbuster Broadway production of Neil Simon’s The Odd Couple. He also starred in the hit off-Broadway play, The Foreigner, at the Roundabout Theatre. In 2005, he starred in the feature film version of The Producers, reprising the Tony-nominated performance he gave on Broadway in this smash hit musical.

Broderick starred in the critically acclaimed You Can Count on Me opposite Laura Linney. He also earned considerable acclaim starring opposite Reese Witherspoon in the critically lauded and Independent Spirit Award winning political satire Election, directed by Alexander Payne.

A New York native, he made his professional stage debut opposite his father, James Broderick, at age 17 in the production of On Valentine’s Day. His performance in Harvey Fierstein’s Torch Song Trilogy, won him the Outer Critic’s Circle Award for Best Supporting Actor. Broderick won his first Tony Award for Neil Simon’s Brighton Beach Memoirs, and starred in the play’s sequel, Biloxi Blues. He won his second Tony for his role as J. Pierrepont Finch, in the Broadway revival of How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying.

Broderick has also starred in such blockbuster movies as Ferris Bueller’s Day Off, Glory, War Games, and Disney’s The Lion King, as the adult voice of Simba. Additional credits include Bee Movie, Godzilla, Addicted to Love, The Cable Guy, Inspector Gadget, Deck the Halls, Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle, Max Dugan Returns, Project X, Family Business, The Freshman, The Night We Never Met, The Last Shot and The Stepford Wives.

In addition to his stage, screen and Broadway credits, he has also appeared on Modern Family, 30 Rock, the Showtime film Master Harold…and the Boys and received an Emmy nomination for the TNT production of David Mamet’s A Life in the Theater in which he starred opposite Jack Lemmon.

Broderick resides in New York with his wife Sarah Jessica Parker and their three children.