Singin’ in the Rain is a comedy musical which was released on 11 April 1952 in the United States. The story is about a nostalgic look at Hollywood in the 1920s.It showed a big star’s life. This film also talks about Hollywood’s star system. Hollywood’s Star system is the promotion and marketing of movie stars in Hollywood which started in the 1910s.The pros and cons of Hollywood’s star system which were depicted in Singin’ in the Rain will be discussed.

In the essay, “All Over But the Shoutin’,” Rick Bragg, the author, depicts the painful strain inflicted upon family’s relationship caused by the reckless action of a father to forgo the future of his wife and kids in pursuit of his own selfish ambitions. The author’s use of rhetorical moves such as tone, stance, and imagery effectively portrayed to his audience that, regardless of how debauch a deed may be, there is always room in one’s heart for forgiveness—you just have to be receptive to its backlash.

The iconic number “Singin’ in the Rain”, introduces the scene with Don (Gene Kelly) giving Kathy a good night kiss, and then begins to sing about his joy of being in love. Which is why the song is carefree and has an upbeat sound, showcasing the songs vibrant and happy mood. The song is in a 4/4 time signature.The tempo of the song is moderato and allegro. The dynamics in this song first starts out quite soft and then it gradually gets louder and stays at that level. It eventually gets louder, mainly the instruments, at sudden points and goes back to a quieter sound. The dynamics goes through many changes from loud then soft then it ends on a soft point. Since the song is sung only by Don (Gene Kelly), the pitch of the song is at the alto.

The transition from the era of silent films to the sound era in the mid 1920s was a big transformation for the American film industry and mass entertainment in general. This phase initially brought about much excitement for movie goers who were thrilled with the expectation of hearing the voices of their favorite actors for the first time. However, such expectations were met with much disappointment when the highly fancied actors had voices that did not much the preconceptions of the fans. The technical difficulties and various issues that the American film industry faced during this transition are actually captured in the 1952 movie, “Singing in the Rain”. In part, the film is actually about movie making during the silent-to-sound era as its

Singing in the Rain and A Clockwork Orange are both Classical Hollywood films. However, singing in the Rain closely follows what classical Hollywood film is supposed to be and A Clockwork Orange definitely tests the idea. Classical Hollywood Cinema is a type of traditional studio based style of making films in both the sound and silent periods. The directors of these types of films want you to simply watch and not worry about why the characters are doing what they’re doing. They want you to enjoy what you’re watching. They are also filmed with a sort of structure in the beginning the characters are all introduced to the viewers. There are then complications or conflict added to the plot. Then the resolution occurs where the conflict of the film has a confrontation and the protagonist ways his or her options. Finally, all major conflicts and issues in the film are resolved and generally the protagonist lives happily ever after. While the protagonists live happily ever after the antagonists of the films are punished from their actions throughout the film.

Whiskey Lullaby is a song sung by Brad Paisley (ft. Alison Krauss) which narrates the story of a soldier coming back from war to find his wife in bed with another man. After this, the man drinks away his life trying to escape the pain until he commits suicide. Then the song continues to talk about how the woman follows down the same path after hearing about his death. In the end of the song they both get buried next to each other which symbolizes how they are finally together. The audience for this country song is those who have served or who have had family members serve. The unexpectedness of how life will figure itself out when the soldiers return. Also, how hard it is for families when their loved ones are out fighting, and they are

The movie Singing in the Rain was released in 1952 by Stanley Donen and Gene Kelly. They explorer the thoughts & ideas on how movie production is being changed with new and improved filming equipment. Three main ideas that are explored in this movie are the transition of silent films to audio/voice recording films, how Hollywood produces movies, and a love story to tie it all together. At the beginning of the film you see Don Lockwood played by Gene Kelly, Cosmo Brown played by Donald O’ Connor and Kathy Selden played by Debbie Reynolds walking in the rain singing the song “Singing in the Rain”.

To define a film by a certain genre, there are several elements and signatures that a film will display in order to signify its place amongst the genre. A film from the gangster genre is characterized by violence and lawlessness of american capitalism and The American Dream. The short lived classical era of the gangster genre in Hollywood is also greatly influenced by the production code which manifested the iconic moral narrative of the gangster genre. William A. Wellman’s 1931 film The Public Enemy can be considered a film of the gangster genre when one examines the conflict with the American dream, the rise and fall of the protagonist Tom Powers, as well as the visual storytelling employed to support the narrative.

On September 15th I went to go see Great Theatre’s Singin’ in the Rain at the Paramount Theatre. Singin’ in the Rain is a musical about silent film star Don Lockwood, who while walking the streets one night meets Kathy Selden, an unknown actress whom he becomes infatuated with, and they become unlikely friends. When the Jazz Singer premiered, the first talking picture, Don’s film studio began to go under, so Don, his best friend Cosmo, and Kathy turn the silent film Don is working on into a talking film, the only issue is his film co-star Lina can’t do the film as she has a very unattractive voice. This moment is when Don begins to help Kathy jump start her career, as he suggests she does the vocals for the movie. There are debates and arguments

The song I chose is a song sung by Martina McBride, a country singer, called Concrete Angel. The song was written by Rob Crosby and Stephanie Bentley, later released on November 18, 2002. The song is about a young girl, Angela Carter, who doesn’t have the most stable and safest home. At home she is domestically abused by her drugged mother, neglected and forced to take care of herself; she packs her own school lunch, walks to school by herself, and is wearing the same dress showing her mom does not care to give her new clothes. When watching the music video, in the beginning children are laughing at her, which shows she is bullied, another main theme tackled in the song. The bruises are seen by her teacher and the neighbors hear her

The use of music is a key to determining if a film is in the musical genre. Not only are songs used to further the story along in a musical, but they also have the ability to put the audience in the emotional state of the character singing. Song has always been used as a good conductor for emotional understanding. For example, during the song "You Were Meant for Me" in Singin’ in the Rain, Don Lockwood is able to confess his love to Kathy Selden in a way that feels magical and shows a connection between the two would be lovers. Also, the song “There Are Worse Things I Could Do” in Grease is able to betray the emotional depth of the character Rizzo’s fear, shame, and anger. At the time this film came out, topics such as teen pregnancy were not generally presented in films. By having this character sing her issue, the audiences, who may have dismissed her outright for her actions, are able to sympathize with her plight. Moreover, in Rent, the song "I'll Cover You" by Angel and Collins allow the viewer to get caught up in this young couple's relationship without having to worry or even consider that this is a gay couple.