From the time that the first commercial movie theatres showing projected pictures started to open (1902 in the United States), entrepreneurs and technicians alike tried a variety of methods to replace the clicking of the projector with something more engaging. Sometimes either the theatre owner or somebody hired by him might stand behind the screen providing dialogue and sound effects, something a bit disarming or awkward at times. Edison and his counterparts experimented with synchronized discs but they did not always synchronize properly, as highlighted to great comic effect in the 1952 film Singing in the Rain. The most obvious and low cost answer to creating a film sound track that would convey some of what was happening on the screen was to provide music.

So it was that nearly simultaneously, theatre owners sought out pianists of either gender to provide entertainment between reels and accompany the action during. Many were able to make a career of this, not the least of which was Canada's fabulous ragtime composer/performer Willie Eckstein. But even Aunt Myrtle could make a pretty decent income playing for the ten-cent shows on the corner. Many premieres and some of the higher-end theatres used orchestras of varying size with pre-composed scores written specifically for a certain film. In other instances, in an effort to provide versatility and variety, organs were installed in theatres that not only created a great venue for organ concerts, but also threw in a variety of sound effects and timbres not available on the piano. Many organs, in addition to their many stops ranging from xylophone to diapason horns, also featured moos, quacks, barks and other sound effects at the performer's disposal.

Still, this was hard work. The 1985 Dire Straits song Money For Nothing says about the perception of musicians, "That ain't workin', that's the way you do it, Money for nothin' and your chicks for free!" But consider that not only was the performer captive for four or five shows a day, up to ten hours, they were tasked to provide the proper mood music for a wide variety of genres, cultures, emotions and specific incidents. And if the movie was bad - well, they had to endure that bad movie and try to keep it fresh or improve on it with their music. Some were even asked to play appropriate music under newsreels, a singular challenge that might be hard to imagine now. If you think about memorable movies, you will often note how well you remember parts of the score. So in some ways, a good pianist/organist or orchestra could subtly affect the opinion of a movie reviewer or audience member. To ease some of this pressure, and often to cut costs, automated orchestrions with multiple rolls were manufactured specifically for the cinema. This would give the better pianists some time off (albeit permanently on many occasions) and allow the lesser pianists an opportunity to play on occasion between manipulating the rolls or where there was nothing else appropriate available.

To facilitate the proper moods, some studios commissioned scores for their movies, or perhaps just specific songs, and sent these out with the prints. It is little known that one of the more prolific composers of music for both comedy and pathos was Charlie Chaplin himself, who frequently composed music (notated by a professional arranger) for chase scenes, sad love scenes, and the like for distribution with his films. In many cases, you were able to purchase sheet music in the lobby of a piece you heard inside that could be viewed as either a memento or an advertisement. But the customized film score was an exception. The rule remained that the keyboardist was often on his own. In an effort to address this market, a few enterprising publishers created folios of mood music that was suited specifically for cinema. They provided music for varying cultures, using stereotypical musical motifs, as well as a variety of love scene schmaltz, military and Civil War tunes, mysterious melodies, and the inevitable chase or hurry scene music. With a little bit of practice a pianist could prepare for the next week of music in just a couple of hours based on the contents of one of these collections.

Two of the better know folios of "Moving Picture Music" are presented here, along with what will be a growing collection of movie-specific tunes. They will also eventually be available on a CD, allowing you to create your own film soundtracks for anything from home movies to Chaplin classics. Please note that some of the compositions do present cultural stereotypes in their melodic makeup, but that this is a historical treatise of these books only, which does not necessarily reflect this performer's point of view on these cultures. In addition are some pieces known to have been written for or used in silent "fotoplays." So grab your popcorn, turn the TV sound down, and enjoy these musical vignettes.

J.S. Zamecnik - 1913: In many cases, such as with the Remick Folio below, theatre musicians used a combination of original pieces and snippets of other well-known works from popular songs to classical music. In an effort to be both specific to the task and to avoid copyright entanglements, Zamecnik composed the contents of this folio from scratch. Also, many of the common melodies used for Civil War or similar scenes were widely available and well-known, and where that didn't work the pianist could certainly fill in a waltz or a rag. In this folio, Zamecnik successfully addresses the issues of appropriate music to help bolster the action or emotional content of what was on the screen at any particular time. It also provided a nice style template for pianists who were less experienced and lacked the improvisational variety necessary to keep the music fresh. Zamecnik further designed it so that the pieces were not out of the technical reach of the average semi-professional musician.

Some of the more ethnic pieces may sound vaguely familiar, but this is largely a result of the use of stereotyped chord progressions or intervals based either in fact or perceptions of such music in regard to its intended country of origin. Also note some changes in perception that have occurred in the decades since this folio was released. Cowboy music was well-defined starting in the 1940s with bold and sweeping soundtrack scores, but at this time it was usually some kind of loping or trotting rhythm that defined the genre, and bears little resemblance even to the cowboy singing style that would emerge in the 1930s. There are many varieties of "hurry music" available in part because dialogue scenes of any length were difficult to pull off in a media where the voice was not available to emote, prompting directors to include more action and less talk. While this folio lacks much of the world-music themes prevalent in the Remick Folio, it is still well-crafted and often referred to for content or adaptations of modern music soundtracks applied to silent films restoration, something in which I have been fortunate enough to participate in.