Charleston, SC – (Aug. 31, 2020) – Inc. magazine revealed that UNITS® Moving and Portable Storage, a leading moving and portable storage franchise, is No. 4332 on its annual Inc. 5000 list, the most prestigious ranking of the nation’s fastest- growing private companies. The list represents a unique look at the most successful companies within the American economy’s most dynamic segment—its independent small businesses. Microsoft, Dell, Domino’s Pizza, Pandora, Timberland, LinkedIn, Yelp, Zillow, and many other well-known names gained their first national exposure as honorees on the Inc. 5000.

“Being recognized by Inc. as one of the fastest-growing private companies in America is a real honor,” says CEO and Founder Michael McAlhany. “This commitment is exercised daily helping the UNITS brand continue to expand on both a national and global level.

Not only have the companies on the 2020 Inc. 5000 been very competitive within their markets, but the list as a whole shows staggering growth compared with prior lists as well. The 2020 Inc. 5000 achieved an incredible three-year average growth of over 500 percent, and a median rate of 165 percent. The Inc. 5000’s aggregate revenue was $209 billion in 2019, accounting for over 1 million jobs over the past three years.

Complete results of the Inc. 5000, including company profiles and an interactive database that can be sorted by industry, region, and other criteria, can be found at www.inc.com/inc5000. The top 500 companies are also being featured in the September issue of Inc., available on newsstands August 18.

“The companies on this year’s Inc. 5000 come from nearly every realm of business,” says Inc. editor-in-chief Scott Omelianuk. “From health and software to media and hospitality, the 2020 list proves that no matter the sector, incredible growth is based on the foundations of tenacity and opportunism.”

UNITS® Moving and Portable Storage is a fast-growing moving and portable storage franchise that provides self-storage, on-site storage, self-service moving and long-distance moves to clients across the country. Directly competing in a $42 billion industry that continues to grow. UNITS® Moving and Portable Storage offers a variety of solutions to meet the long- and short-term storage needs for consumers and businesses, allowing customers to move and store at their pace. Learn how you can start your moving and portable storage franchise and join the expanding moving and portable storage industry at https://www.unitsfranchisegroup.com/.

The annual Inc. 5000 event honoring the companies on the list will be held virtually from October 23 to 27, 2020. As always, speakers will include some of the greatest innovators and business leaders of our generation.

About UNITS® Moving and Portable Storage

Established in 2004, UNITS® Moving and Portable Storage was founded by Michael McAlhany during the emergence of the moving and portable storage industry. The company’s mission was to provide personal customer service and supply the most innovative and highest quality equipment. Nationwide UNITS Moving and Portable Storage are locally-owned and operated and familiar with the communities they serve. UNITS Moving and Portable Storage offers high-quality constructed containers featuring barn-style doors and all-steel construction. The UNITS Moving and Portable Storage container is clean, weather-resistant, spacious, and available in 12-ft and 16-ft. lengths. The UNITS Moving and Portable Storage robotic delivery system is the most technologically advanced in the industry, virtually eliminating any shift in contents when lifting containers on and off transport vehicles and placing them in tight areas where competitors cannot. The container may be placed in a UNITS Moving and Portable Storage service center or at the customer’s desired location, always at ground level for easy access. The national network of UNITS Moving and Portable Storage and Service Centers currently services over 500 cities in North America and continues to grow.