Type of itinerary: Loop

Estimated time: 6 h

Distance: 12,5 km

Elevation: +320 m

Physical difficulty: Intermediate

Technical difficulty: Intermediate

Los Pintanos belongs to Cinco Villas county, located northwest in Zaragoza region. In the north, it is bordered by Sigüés, Artieda and Mianos belonging to Jacetania county.

Pintanos valley has a beautiful landscape highly populated by a series of lush forests of pines, oaks and other local species such as quejigo. It is traversed by Regal River, and affluent of Aragon River which flows into the nearby reservoir of Yesa.

RELEVANT BIRD SPECIES

Residents: Bearded Vulture, Griffon Vulture, Eurasian Sparrowhawk, Buzzard, Common Kestrel, Peregrine Falcon, Golden Eagle, Little Owl, Hoopoe, Great Spotted Woodpecker, Common Wren, European Robin, Redstart, Red-necked Warbler, Sardinian Warbler, Lesser Wren, Common Myth , Capuchin blue tit, Coal tit, Blue tit, Common great tit, Eurasian jay, Red-billed chough, etc.

Summer residents: black kite, common Egyptian vulture, short-toed European, booted eagle, common cuckoo, necked nightjar, common swift, European bee-eater, common swallow, common plane, Aleppo warbler, mirlona warbler, papialbo mosquito net, gray flycatcher, etc.

Wintering species: royal kite, common goshawk, common skylark, Meadow pipit, alpine accentor, royal thrush, common thrush, capirotada warbler, common mosquito net, single wren, etc.

Migratory stopover: European beekeeper, eaglets, common crane, tree pipit, alpine pipit, redstart, gray wheatear, reddish thrush, musical mosquito net, mosquito warbler, warbler, falco flycatcher, etc.

RELEVANT PLANT SPECIES

Among the species of Mediterranean forest vegetation, we can highlight: Quercus ilex rotundifolia (holm oak), Quercus coccifera (kermes oak), Quercus faginea (oak), etc.

During the proposed route, between the months of April and May, we can observe the following orchids: Anacamptis pyramidalis, Anacamptis morio, Cephalanthera damasonium, Cephalanthera longifolia, Dactylorhiza fuchsii, Himantoglossum hircinum, Limodorum abortivum, Ophrys apifera, Ophrys insectifera, Ophrys lupercalis, Ophrys lutea, Ophrys scolopax, Ophrys sphegodes, Ophrys subinsectifera, Orchis purpurea, Orchis simia, Neotinea ustulata, Platanthera bifolia, Platanthera chlorantha, Serapias lingua.

This area is located in the north of the so-called outer Sierras. Its north face is part of the so-called "Middle Depression" formed by Aragón River.

In the area converge two different climatic regions. The Mediterranean region is located on the south face of these sierras whose vegetation includes the holm oak (Quercus rotundifolia) together with a dense juniper underbrush that is the origin of the name “Sarda”. On the north face of these sierras, the so-called Atlantic region, vegetation includes other species such as oak (Quercus faginea) and Scots pine (Scots pine) as well as an underbrush consisting mainly of boxwood.

This area is located in the north of the so-called outer Sierras. Its north face is part of the so-called "Middle Depression" formed by Aragón River.

In the area converge two different climatic regions. The Mediterranean region is located on the south face of these sierras whose vegetation includes the holm oak (Quercus rotundifolia) together with a dense juniper underbrush that is the origin of the name “Sarda”. On the north face of these sierras, the so-called Atlantic region, vegetation includes other species such as oak (Quercus faginea) and Scots pine (Scots pine) as well as an underbrush consisting mainly of boxwood.