Abereiddi Bay

Pembrokeshire

Location Guide

Abereiddi has a small black sand beach, with pebbles and rocks. It was awarded the Blue Flag rural beach award in 2005.

Look out for tiny fossils on the beach, known as graptolites.

A large car-park adjoins the beach, where in the summer an ice cream van can usually be found. The beach also has public toilets which are open from Easter to November half term.

Nearby are the ruins of a harbour built to export stone. On the edge of the car park is the ruin of a small group of houses known as 'The Street'. These houses were built for the quarry workers of the Blue Lagoon and were only abandoned after a flood in the early 20th century.

North of the beach a wheelchair-accessible path leads to the "Blue Lagoon", a flooded slate quarry filled with seawater, past ruined quarry buildings and slate-workers’ cottages. It’s well worth the short walk to see this.

The Pembrokeshire Coast Path gives fine walking in both directions. The south east goes around St David's Head and on to Whitesands Bay. Whilst the other direction leads to Porthgain, this is a 40 minute walk.

It can get quite busy in summer. When bathing, beware of currents and undertows in some places.

Abereiddi other claim to fame is it's use as the main location for the 1961 film Fury at Smugglers Bay, staring Peter Cushing.

Please let us know any other information that we can add to the Grid(s) or page and any errors that you discover. Before making a long trip to any location it is always wise to double check the current information, websites like magazines may be correct at the time the information is written, but things change and it is of course impossible to double check all entries on a regular basis. If you have any good photographs that you feel would improve the illustration of this page then please let us have copies. In referring to this page it is helpful if you quote both the Page Ref and Topic or Section references from the Grid below. To print the planning grid select it then right click and print the selected area.