Genre: Adventure

Country: UK

Duration: 82 min.

Story: It is the end of the 18th century and smuggling is considered to be a legitimate spare-time occupation for most fishermen around the British shores. But when a gang of cut-throats, led by the infamous Black John (Bernard Lee) begins to lure ships onto the rocks of Smugglers Bay, and murdering their crews for the sake of loot, the fishermen begin to fear for their livelihoods. In desperation, they appeal to the local magistrate Squire Trevenyan (Peter Cushing).

Genre: Adventure

Country: UK

Duration: 94 min.

Story: Years after fleeing his ancestral home with his mother, Jason returns home to claim his birthright, only to find his way blocked by his evil cousin Thomas. In order to reclaim his title, Jason must do battle with his cousin, who calls upon the ...

Style: psychotronic, independent film

Plot: nudity, skinny dipping, female nudity, relatives, victim, rescue, historical event, exploitation, bare chested male, bathtub

Time: year 1961, 18th century

Genre: Adventure

Country: Germany

Duration: 186 min.

Story: A terrible storm is raging the night it all begins - with a knock on the door. 17-year-old Jim Hawkins helps his widowed mother run their little tavern on the coast of 19th century England. When the door is opened they are startled by a sight that ...

Style: serious, captivating, exciting, intense, talky

Audience: kids, teens

Plot: pirate, treasure map, ship, adventurer, obsessive quest, heroes, daring rescue, rebelliousness, betrayal, escapades, danger, gang ...

Time: 18th century, 21st century

Place: fictional island, caribbean

Genre: Adventure

Country: UK

Duration: 190 min.

TV show

Story: Treasure Island is a 1977 television adaptation of Robert Louis Stevenson’s famous 1883 novel. It was filmed in 1977 on location in Plymouth and Dartford, and in Corsica, and also at BBC Television Centre at Wood Lane, London. Jim Hawkins ...

Plot: treasure map, pirate, pirate ship, piracy, bird, child in peril, father figure, ship, tropical island, gunfight, murder, betrayal ...

Genre: Adventure

Country: Italy, France

Duration: 90 min.

Story: Tigre is the skipper of the Santa Maria, a pirate-ship, but he feels tired and decides to leave the command of the ship. Unfortunately he has only a daughter, Consuelo. So he will leave the command and the ship to the winner of a challenge among his ...

Plot: pirate, pirate ship, peplum, noblewoman, pirate captain, castle, ship, daughter, sword fight, spaniard, sailing, mute ...

Genre: Adventure

Country: UK

Duration: 150 min.

Story: It's a theatre adaptation of well known story of Jim Hawkins and his adventures in search of treasure of Treasure Island.

Plot: medieval, pirate, pirate ship, theater, piracy, treasure map, parrot, map, treasure

Genre: Adventure, Drama

Country: UK

Duration: 82 min.

Story: What secret lay behind the dreaded Marsh Phantoms, the ghostly riders whose silent approach in the darkness of the bleak, unwelcoming Romney Marshes causes men to die of fright? Are they a genuine manifestation or a cover for illegal smuggling ...

Style: classic horror, psychotronic, offbeat, gothic horror, grindhouse ...

Plot: ghost, swamp, scarecrow, supernatural, smuggling, monster, pirate, occult, folk horror, 666, village, attempted rape ...

Time: 18th century, future

Place: england

Genre: Action, Adventure, Drama, Romance, Thriller

Country: UK

Duration: 87 min.

Story: A group of ruthless pirates attack a 17th Century Huguenot settlement on the Isle of Devon in search of treasure and will stop at nothing to obtain it.

Style: exciting, entertaining, captivating, light, tense ...

Plot: pirate, treasure hunt, swashbuckler, danger, rivalry, escapades, infidelity, island, village, pirate ship, gold, greed ...

Time: 17th century

Place: caribbean

Genre: Adventure, Drama

Country: UK

Duration: 103 min.

Story: In 1870, a Jamaican colonial family sends its children to Britain for proper schooling, but their ship is taken over by pirates, who become fond of the kids.

Style: exciting, realistic, captivating, serious, stylized ...

Plot: pirate ship, pirate, sea battle, ocean, sailboat, child in peril, sword fight, pirate captain, kidnapping, danger, escapades, ship ...

Time: 19th century, year 1965, 1870s, victorian era

Place: jamaica, caribbean

Genre: Adventure, Family

Country: USA

Duration: 88 min.

Story: Ahoy Maties! There's a treasure chest of gold buried on Pirate's Point. When the living descendant of legendary pirate Captain Vane lets Ray in on the secret, there's mutiny in the town. Now, Ray and his friends are on a mission to ...

Style: humorous, semi serious, surprise ending

Audience: family outing

Plot: friendship, pirate, friends, best friend, family life, family relations, danger, escapades, treasure hunt, rivalry, heroes, ocean ...

Genre: Adventure

Country: Italy, France

Duration: 92 min.

Story: The Albatross travels from England to the New World in 1675, with a number of passengers, a couple of political prisoners along with a dozen other women convicts, these to be sold into slavery on arrival. The woman activist frees the dozen of ...

Plot: ship, pirate, slavery, mutiny, new world, punishment, fistfight, parrot, blood, torture, bare chested male

Time: year 1961

Genre: Adventure

Country: UK

Duration: 91 min.

Story: Set in ancient Britain, at a time when much of Europe was ruled with harsh tyranny by Rome, a tribe of Britons led by Selina, set out to defy the invaders and discard their yoke of bondage. The Roman commander, Justinian, is sent to quell the ...

Style: psychotronic, cult classic, sexy, realistic, serious ...

Plot: ancient rome, ancient world, ancient, celtic, roman, rebellion, ancient history, roman soldier, peplum, female whipping, viking, exploitation ...

Time: 1st century, year 1967

Place: rome italy, england, europe

Genre: Adventure

Country: Italy

Duration: 85 min.

Story: A mysterious knife-throwing viking warrior protects a young peasant woman and her young son from the clutches of a evil regent bent on claiming the title of king and the woman for himself.

Style: grindhouse, serious, exciting, psychotronic

Audience: boys' night

Plot: viking, peplum, medieval, sword and sorcery, sorcery, barbarian, beach, ocean, woods, rescue, adventurer, vengeance ...

Time: medieval times, middle ages, 60s, 8th century

Genre: Adventure

Country: Russia

Duration: 112 min.

Story: "The Three Musketeers " - a story about the young Gascon D'Artagnan , who , without knowing all the joys of love, is drawn into the vortex of political intrigues of the royal court of Louis XIII. In the company of the king's ...

Style: funny, exciting, semi serious, realistic, psychotronic ...

Plot: musketeer, medieval, friendship, heroes, buddies, courage, heroic mission, justice, good versus evil, rivalry, duel, daring rescue ...

Time: 17th century

Place: paris france, france

Genre: Adventure, Drama, War

Country: UK

Duration: 93 min.

Story: Horatio Homblower, now promoted to Acting Lieutenant, captures the French ship Le Reve off the Spanish coast. The Captain of the French ship is furious that such a youngster has pulled off such a coup. But far more daunting is Hornblower's ...

Style: period piece, feel good, serious, exciting, period drama

Plot: ship, napoleonic wars, sea battle, pirate, sailing, heroes, napoleonic era, sea, swashbuckler, time machine, captain, sorcery ...

Time: 18th century, victorian era, 19th century

Place: europe, england

Genre: Action, Adventure, Fantasy

Country: USA, Australia, UK, Canada

Duration: 129 min.

Story: Thrust into an all-new adventure, a down-on-his-luck Capt. Jack Sparrow feels the winds of ill-fortune blowing even more strongly when deadly ghost sailors led by his old nemesis, the evil Capt. Salazar, escape from the Devil's Triangle. ...

Style: fairy tale, dark fantasy, witty, entertaining, humorous ...

Audience: family outing, teens, chick flick

Plot: pirate, swashbuckler, sword fight, fantasy world, ship, treasure hunt, sea, sailboat, ghost, ship captain, revenge, jungle ...

Time: 18th century, year 2017

Place: caribbean

Genre: Action, Adventure, Thriller

Country: UK

Duration: 86 min.

Story: A pirate ship, fighting in 1588 on the side of the Spanish Armada, suffers damage and must put into a village on the British coast for repairs. The village is small and isolated and the Spanish convince the villagers that the English fleet has been ...

Style: cult classic, independent film, psychotronic

Plot: pirate, pirate ship, swashbuckler, captain, ship, sword fight, courage, ancient, historical event, roadblock, sabotage, blacksmith ...

Time: 16th century

Genre: Adventure, History

Country: UK

Duration: 81 min.

Story: 1880. British India. Robert Case, a half-caste lieutenant, is unjustly discharged from the British Army. He joins the rebel Bengali tribesmen offensive against the colonial enemy. They capture a foreign journalist and Case recounts his story of ...

Style: independent film, realistic, serious, rough, bleak ...

Audience: boys' night

Plot: british empire, revolution, injustice, danger, hopes, military, life is a bitch, rebellion, soldier, rivalry, vengeance, heroes ...

Time: 19th century, victorian era, 1850s

Place: india, england

Genre: Adventure

Country: Spain, Germany

Duration: 180 min.

Story: The end of the 14th century. Parents send the eldest son Jan to study in Hamburg, and the youngest - Klaus - to the monastery. No sooner had the children moved away from their homes, as on Klaus'es eyes the robbers kill their parents and burn ...

Style: suspense, captivating, tense, disturbing

Plot: pirate, piracy, nude women, medieval, brother brother relationship, revenge, relationship problems, family problems, escapades, life is a bitch, family relations, rich and poor ...

Time: 14th century, ancient times

Place: northern germany, hamburg germany