Maria das Neves Ceita Baptista de Sousa (born 1958) is a former Prime Minister of São Tomé and Príncipe.

She is a member of the Movement for the Liberation of São Tomé and Príncipe-Social Democratic Party (MLSTP-PSD).

Before becoming head of government, Maria das Neves worked as a civil servant in the Ministry of Finance and in the African Development Bank. She held major government posts as Minister of Economics (1999-2001) and of Commerce, Industry, and Tourism (2002).

Prime Minister of São Tomé and Príncipe

She held the post of Prime Minister from 3 October 2002 until 18 September 2004, and was the nation's first female head of government. President Fradique de Menezes appointed das Neves as a Prime Minister after the previous three-party Government of National Unity led by Gabriel Costa collapsed following complaints from the army over recent promotions.

Prime Minister Maria das Neves is also a member of the Council of Women World Leaders, an International network of current and former women presidents and prime ministers whose mission is to mobilize the highest-level women leaders globally for collective action on issues of critical importance to women and equitable development.

Coup-d'état, 2003; subsequent events

On 16 July 2003, she was detained and briefly hospitalized after suffering a mild heart attack during a short-lived coup d'état. Other key government officials were also detained. The democratically elected government was restored a week later.

Maria das Neves resigned as Prime Minister on 1 August 2003,[1] but three days later President Menezes reaffirmed his confidence in her. She retained her post when a new cabinet was sworn in on 9 August 2003.

President Menezes dismissed her from the post on 15 September 2004 and asked her party to choose a new Prime Minister, after allegations of corruption were brought against her and members of her government which led to a near total collapse of her government. She denies participating in any corrupt practices. Three days after her dismissal, a new government led by Damião Vaz d'Almeida was sworn in.

References

Political offices Preceded by

Gabriel Costa Prime Minister of São Tomé and Príncipe

2002–2004 Succeeded by

Damião Vaz d'Almeida