Culture of Uttarakhand - Traditions, Festivals and More

₹ 2,500 onwards View Packages

Uttarakhand is known for its beautiful Garhwali and Kumaoni culture. The various traditions, religions, fairs, festivals, folk dances, music are what distinctly separate them.

Garhwali Culture

Garhwali is the main language spoken here that has a number of dialects too including Jaunsari, Marchi, Jadhi and Sailani. Garhwal is inhabited by people belonging to a number of ethnic groups and castes. These include Rajputs who are believed to belong to the Aryan origin, Brahmins who migrated after the Rajputs or later, tribals of Garhwal who stay in the Northern tracts and comprise of Jaunsaris, Jadhs, Marchas and Van Gujars.

Kumaoni Culture

The people of Kumaon speak 13 dialects including Kumaiya, Gangola, Soryali, Sirali, Askoti, Danpuriya, Johari, Chaugarkhyali, Majh Kumaiya, Khasparjia, Pachhai and Rauchaubhaisi. This group of languages is known as the group of Central Pahari languages. Kumaon is also rich in its folk literature which comprises myths, heroes, heroines, bravery, Gods, Goddesses and the characters drawn from Ramayana and Mahabharatha. The most popular dance form of Kumaon is known as Chhalaria and it is related to the martial traditions of the region. All the festivals are celebrated with a lot of enthusiasm and witness such traditional dance forms even today.

Festivals of Uttarakhand

Kumaoni Holi is celebrated in three forms namely Baithki Holi, Khari Holi and Mahila Holi. The unique feature about this festival is that it is celebrated with a lot of music.

Harela is a festival that marks the beginning of the rainy season or monsoon. The people belonging to the Kumaon community celebrate this festival during the month of Shravana, i.e., July-August. This festival is followed by Bhitauli, which is celebrated in the month of Chaitra, i.e., March - April. It revolves around agriculture where women sow seeds in the soil and by the end of the festival they reap the harvest which is called harela.

Jageshwar fair is carried out in the temple of Lord Shiva in Jageshwar on the fifteenth day of Baisakh month which is the period extending from late March to early April. People take a dip in the pool known as Brahma Kund as a kind of belief during the fair.

Kumbh Mela is one of the biggest and the most popular festival of Uttarakhand. This mela is a 3-month long festival and takes place once in every four years rotating between Allahabad, Haridwar, Ujjain, and Nasik, i.e., only once in 12 years in any one place.

Folk Dance and Music of Uttarakhand

The lives of the people of Uttarakhand are filled with a lot of music and dance. Dancing is considered to form a major part of their traditions. Some of the folk dances include:

Barada Nati is the popular dance of Jaunsar Bhawar area in Dehradun district

Langvir Nritya is an acrobatic dance form performed by the men

Pandav Nritya is the narration of Mahabharatha in the form of music and dance

Dhurang & Dhuring are popular folk dances of the bhotiya tribals.

Folk songs include:

Basanti is composed to welcome the spring season

Mangal is sung during the marriage ceremonies

Jagars is used during the worship of ghosts

Bajuband talks about the love and sacrifice of the shepherds,

Khuded talks about the suffering of a woman who gets separated from her husband

Chhura talks about the experience of the shepherds and the advice passed on by them to the younger generation.

Food Of Uttrakhand

The food of Uttarakhand is dominated by Garhwali cuisine and Kumaoni cuisine, two of its main regions. The dishes are simple and locally grown without being dominated by complex spices. Some of the most famous dishes of Uttarakhand are cooked over a slow fire and consists of lentils. Some of the most delicious mouth-watering specialities of Uttarakhand include-

Urad Dal ke pakode which are spicy pakoras prepared from different pulses.

Phanu made from dals

Jhangore ki kheer which is a sweet dish prepared with Jhangora.

Chainsoo which is made from black gram dal.

Bhang ki chutney which is a sour-tasting chutney prepared from roasted bhang and cumin seeds mixed with lemon juice.

Traditional Dresses Of Uttarakhand

Residents of Garhwal Hills have their own pattern of wearing clothes due to the cold weather of the place as a result of which, wool obtained from sheep or goat is used to prepare woollen clothes.

Traditional Dress Of Men

Almost everyone follows a similar dressing style. The most commonly worn lower garment is either a Dhoti or a Lungi. Various coloured Kurtas are worn as the upper garment. In addition, headgear or a turban is a must add-on to complete this traditional costume. Kurta-Pyjama is another very famous alternative for the men of Uttarakhand. Women, as well as men, wear woollen jackets as well as sweaters in the winter season.

Traditional Dress Of Women

Ghagri is a long skirt that is worn by mostly all the women of Uttarakhand. It is complemented with a beautiful coloured Choli which is an Indian blouse and a cloth covering the head i.e., an Orni. This Orni is generally fixed firmly to the waist. This is the traditional dress of the women of both Garhwalis as well as Kumaonis. Ghagra-Pichora is the traditional bridal costume of the Kumaoni women which is similar to the Ghagra Lehenga-Choli. Pichora is a Kumaoni covering (more like a veil) that is decorated with gold and silver embroidery.

Uttarakhand is thus a hub of different traditions, ethnic groups and languages brought together. This is what brings out the beauty of the state. Do plan a visit to the wondrous state and we are sure each one of you is likely to have an amazing time.

Related Articles

Art & Culture

Kumaoni Holi 2024 - The Colourful Festival of Uttarakhand

Art & Culture

Panch Kedar - Trek And Yatra

Art & Culture

Traditional Dresses of Uttarakhand

Art & Culture

Languages of Uttarakhand - 6 Languages From The Devbhoomi Of India

Art & Culture

Historical Places in Uttarakhand For A Heritage Tour

Social

Uttarakhand Government Wants You To Have A Spooky Experience In Your Next Trip - The Ghost Tourism Project!

Adventure

Kailash Mansarovar Yatra

Transport

5 Airports in Uttarakhand

Religious

Panch Prayag - The Five Sacred Rivers

Fairs & Festivals

21 Festivals of Uttarakhand - India's Devbhoomi

Adventure

Enthralling Places For Camping in Uttarakhand

Travelogue

The Faraway Travel – Sari Village in Uttarakhand #TWC

Travelogue

Trek in Uttarakhand: How I survived the cloudburst

Travelogue

5 Life Lessons Learnt on a Himalayan Trek #TWC

Travelogue

My First Encounter with the Majestic Himalayas #TWC

Travelogue

Trekking in Uttarakhand To Shikar Varnavat #TWC

Food of Uttarakhand : Scrumptious Delicacies From The Land of Natural Beauty

Social

Are You Ready To Watch The Most Awaited Man vs Wild Episode Yet?

Adventure

The Mystery of the Skeletal Remains at Roopkund Lake

Backpacking

137 More Peaks Opened For Trekking in Himalayas: Good or Bad?

Adventure

Experience Nature At It's Best At This Mid-Himalayan Range in Uttarakhand!

Experiences

Visit Gangolihat For A Blend of Adventure and Pilgrim Sites!

Fairs & Festivals

Uttarakhand Food Festival To Be Held This Week – What Are Your plans?

Travelogue

The Journey To And Through The Hidden Valleys Of Uttarakhand

Social

Junoon in the Hills, a Homestay Just 300 Kms from Delhi!

News

Uttarakhand Is Set to Get a Summer Capital!

News

4 Very Rare Snow Leopards Sighted in Uttarakhand! Read More Here

Delving into the forbidden – the Nelang Valley

Wildlife & Nature

National Parks in Uttarakhand

Hill Stations

Hill Stations in Uttarakhand Perfect to Beat the Summer Heat

Comments on this post

Browse Package Collections

Uttarakhand Package Collections

Uttarakhand Honeymoon Packages

Badrinath Kedarnath Tour Packages

Top Listed Packages

Uttarakhand Religious Tour Package

3 Days Tour Package in India: Char Dham Yatra By Helicopter