story: Sibu Tripathi

creative : Rahul Gupta

----------------

Known for being the winter abode of lord Badrinath, a resting place for tourists visiting the Valley of Flowers and Auli, and a staging ground for troops headed to the India-China de-facto border, Joshimath is more than just a quiet scenic town in the foothills of the Himalayas. But its scenic and geographical attributes are now the Uttarakhand town's biggest curse. The picturesque hills are literally moving and Joshimath is sinking under its own weight.

WHAT IS HAPPENING IN JOSHIMATH?

Spread over an area of 2,458 square kilometres, Joshimath is one of the six tehsils (blocks) in Uttarakhand's Chamoli district. It was all quiet and business as usual in the city until the last few months of 2022 when forces of nature began to push back and residents began to protest. Their homes -- and other manmade structures in the city -- started developing cracks. Sitting atop ancient glacial debris, the region had been a disaster waiting to happen, say geology experts.

Joshimath is hit by a geological phenomenon known as land subsidence, which is a gradual settling, or sinking of the surface due to the removal of water, oil, natural gas, or mineral resources from the ground. According to the US-based National Ocean Services, subsidence is also triggered by natural events such as earthquakes, soil compaction, erosion, sinkhole formation, and an infusion of water to fine soils.

The town sits on the intersection of the Main Central Thrust 1, 2, and 3, the intra-crustal faultlines, where the Indian Plate has pushed under the Eurasian Plate along the Himalayas. The reactivation of these faultlines nearly 50-60 kilometres under the surface remains a big mystery.

Joshimath is a classic case of all these factors working together to create a recipe for disaster, as the government rolls up its sleeves to relocate people from the area. The Prime Minister’s Office said the safety of the people is the priority and has asked the state government to establish clear and continuous communication with the residents.

HOW DID WE REACH HERE?

Joshimath was always vulnerable to earthquakes as the region falls in the seismic zone V. What really made things worse is the weak foundation of the city. Sitting atop a glacial moraine, which are distinct ridges or mounds of debris that are laid down by a glacier, the town's foundation has no solid rocks.

Every structure needs a strong foundation, but Joshimath, which houses over 20,000 people, apart from the heavy tourist influx, has none. The debris has angular sediments, which are worse than river-deposited sediments. These sediments have voids, making them extremely unstable, geologically.

This unstable foundation, when burdened with heavy construction in the region, began caving by centimetres in the beginning. In the last several decades a boom in construction has made this region extremely vulnerable and susceptible to major land deformation.

WHY HAS CONSTRUCTION GONE UP?

Experts blame the rapid rise in construction activities in the area to the widening of the Char Dham Yatra road and the National Highway 7, which runs through the town taking tourists and cargo to the holy shrine of Badrinath every year. When Prime Minister Narendra Modi visited Kedarnath and Badrinath in October last year, he joined a record number of 41 lakh pilgrims that thronged the shrine that year.

The widening of the road was not just a big contributor, but also led to more and more hotels springing up in and around Joshimath. Dr. Bahadur Singh Kotila of Kumaon University said that the roads in the geologically sensitive region should have been seven metres wide, but the government widened the roads to 12 metres, which led to more and more cleaning of the hills. This made the already ecologically sensitive region highly vulnerable to landslides as the top layer was cleaned for the road construction.

Locals also blame NTPC Limited’s 4×130 megawatt Tapovan Vishnugad hydel project for the situation -- a 12-kilometre tunnel has been carved into the hill. NTPC has denied allegations, saying that the tunnel does not pass under Joshimath town.

NATURE PLAYS THE BRUTE FORCE

The land subsidence was also triggered by an incessant spell of rain in the region in the last few years, which deposited more water on the surface. However, due to the unavailability of solid rocks underneath, the water seeped into the soil and loosened it from within. With the top surface of the soil already gone due to intense construction, the region has remained on the edge.

That is not all. In the last decade, the ridge that houses Joshimath has been traversed by running streams with a high gradient from Vishnuprayag, a confluence of the Dhauliganga and the Alaknanda rivers. The confluence has survived two big glacial and cloud outbursts that deposited heavy sediments causing major erosion in the region. "The outbursts brought debris worth 10,000 houses in one day, which made things worse for Joshimath," Dr. Kotlia adds.

JOSHIMATH NOT ALONE

The geological developments underway in Joshimath should be a case study for every town planner working in the hills. The factors at play in Joshimath are also found in other cities such as Nainital, Champawat, and Uttarkashi. All these cities are witnessing rampant construction, deforestation, population boom, and poor civic management. The only silver lining is that they are not on top of ancient glacial debris.

Nature has its own way of claiming its resources. Government, civil bodies, and citizens need to factor in these parameters when developing new cities.