Overview of Currency in Hungary

As we saw earlier, the currency in Hungary is the Hungarian forint.

As the official legal tender in Hungary, it's the sole currency recognized by the Hungarian government, and you can use it to settle all financial obligations in the country, from paying for your hotel stay, to the entrance fee at the Hungarian Parliament, to a bite to eat in the trendy centre of Buda.

Best Currency to Take to Hungary

Because it's the local currency and because you won't have any trouble buying goods with it, the best country to have on hand and spend while visiting Hungary is, unsurprisingly, the Hungarian forint.

However, if you're taking another currency along with you, the US dollar is a safe bet, as it's highly exchangeable at banks and currency exchange offices in Hungary, even if it's neither official nor used ubiquitously across the country.

You can check out the prevalence of a few of the most popular tourist currencies in Hungary below:

US dollars in Hungary

US dollars aren't accepted at all in Hungary, which only accepts Hungarian forints. If you're from the USA, we recommend using Chime's debit card, which charges no foreign exchange fees, to make low-cost card payments while travelling in Hungary. However, out-of-network ATM withdrawal fees and over-the-counter advance fees may apply.

British pounds in Hungary

Sterling isn't accepted at all in Hungary, which only accepts Hungarian forints. If you're from the UK, we recommend using Revolut's travel debit card, which has market-low currency exchange charges.

Euros in Hungary

Despite the proximity of the Eurozone, euros aren't accepted in Hungary. If you're from the European Union or EEA, we recommend using Revolut's debit card, which charges no foreign exchange fees, to make low-cost card payments while travelling in Hungary.

Although Hungarian forint is the best currency to use and the US dollar can be helpful at times too, exchanging currencies in the form of cash almost invariably leads to poor exchange rates for tourists (we've seen as high as 20% commissions, although the average is between 5% and 15% of the amount exchanged).

For this reason, it's generally a better idea to use your credit or debit card to pay at local points of sale wherever possible or (if cash is urgently needed) to withdraw some money from a local ATM. This will let your card provider handle the conversion, which is usually, although not always, a better deal than bringing foreign currency into Hungary and exchanging it there. However, as we'll see below, a conversion-friendly debit card is the best choice of all!

ChangeGroup

ChangeGroup is a viable option If you need physical Hungarian forint in cash in hand before your flight abroad to Hungary. When it comes to popular currency pairs like GBP to EUR, ChangeGroup maintains a low FX markup of approximately 2.2%.

For less common currency pairs like GBP to Turkish lira, however, their rates may be comparable to those offered by traditional services, hovering around 15%. This is why we tend to recommend Revolut and Wise for less common currencies.

FX Margin: 2.2% - 28.7%, varies by currency pair

Home Delivery: For a fee

Cash Pick Up: Free

Guaranteed Buyback: For a fee

Availability: UK, USA, Australia, Germany, France, Austria, Spain, Denmark, Sweden, Finland

How to Pay in Hungary

When it comes to paying your way in Hungary, you'll have the following three options broadly speaking:

Method 1: Cash

As we mentioned earlier, cash is an important medium of exchange in Hungary. Pretty much all shops, restaurants, and commercial establishments around the country will accept Hungarian forint banknotes, and we recommend having some on hand when you travel. Foreign cash can be purchased before your trip from your bank in your home country, or during your trip at a local Hungarian bank or currency exchange office or (most affordably) from an ATM.

Note that in Hungary, currency exchange offices normally go by the name valuta átváltás, so if you want to exchange your home currency for Hungarian forint, be on the lookout for signage with this name.

Cash prevalence in Hungary: Very prevalent

Cost to exchange: 5% - 15% on average

Method 2: Credit Card

Although cash is king in Hungary, credit and debit cards issued by major global providers like VISA and Mastercard are commonly accepted too. If your card is issued by American Express, Diner's Club, or another card company, there's a good chance they'll also be accepted in Hungary, but we recommend checking with your bank or card provider directly to make sure that Hungarian forint currency conversion is indeed supported, and that card machines and ATMs in Hungary commonly support cards of this type.

Card prevalence in Hungary: Very prevalent

Cost to exchange: 2% - 5% on average

Method 3: Travel Debit Card

Just like credit cards, prepaid debit cards (which are also normally issued by VISA or Mastercard) provide an excellent way to pay while visiting Hungary, the main difference being that you normally pay lower fees and exchange rates. Depending on where you live, you'll probably have options from your bank or a third-party provider to use a commission-free debit card or a multi-currency card which can help you dodge high Hungarian forint conversion costs, including DCCs.

According to our analysis of dozens of providers, the top two options for travelling to Hungary, in general, are the following:

Revolut

Revolut is an excellent option for paying in Hungary. Its all-in-one mobile finance app and debit card offer competitive exchange rates to the Hungarian forint and low fees. What's more, you can easily manage everything through your money through Revolut's user-friendly app.

Monthly fee: $0

Card type: Mastercard debit

Card payment cost in Hungarian forint: 0.5% - 1.5%

Cash withdrawal fee: 0% - 2%

Hungarian forint balance: Yes

Hungarian forint bank details: No

Wise Account

The Wise Account is another great option for paying in Hungarian forint. It gives you the lowest possible currency exchange rates with complete transparency and no hidden fees. It also allows you to hold and manage over 50 currencies in one account and provides fast and secure cross-border money transfers at a fraction of the cost of traditional banks.

Monthly fee: $0

Card type: VISA debit

Card payment cost in Hungarian forint: 0.5% - 1.5%

Cash withdrawal fee: 0% - 2%

Hungarian forint balance: Yes

Hungarian forint bank details: Yes

Wise and Revolut are excellent options that are available in many countries around the world. However, depending on where you live, you might have access to better deals still. We go over a few of them below:

United Kingdom

Revolut: Best spending and budgeting app.

Wise: Best for multiple foreign currency balances.

United States

Chime®: Best all around; no fees for non-USD transactions.

Revolut: Best all-around spending app.

Wise: Best for foreign currency spending and holidays.

Canada

KOHO: No foreign transactions fees on Extra or Everything plan.

Wise: Best for foreign currency spending and holidays.

European Union

Revolut: Excellent for spending abroad.

N26: Best full bank account with low fees (even abroad)

bunq: Best credit card (also a fully-licensed bank).