Shade Empire – Omea Arcane

(Candlelight Records 2020 CANDLE879914)

Sleeve & Blue Double Vinyl in MINT condition

MINT CONDITION – SEALED – BRAND NEW

Shade Empire is a Finnish symphonic black metal band, formed in 1999 in the city of Kuopio.

Shade Empire’s prevalent lyrical subjects are death, destruction, hatred, anti-religion and pain. The music on their first three official full-length releases, Sinthetic, Intoxicate O.S. and Zero Nexus, bears a melodic sort of black metal, featuring the usage of both electronic and symphonic elements. Their lyrics are mainly in English, except for one song that has lyrics in Finnish, “…Ja Pimeys Laskeutui”, the title of which can be translated as “…And Darkness Descended” (the last word “Laskeutui” can also be translated as “Fell”, “Came” or “Landed”).

The third demo CD of the band, Essence of Pain, raised the interest of the Italian label Avantgarde Music. As a result, their debut album Sinthetic was released on March 29, 2004, under the aforementioned label.

In 2006, the band signed with the Finnish label Dynamic Arts Records. The same year, their second album, Intoxicate O.S., was released on May 24, 14 days after the release of the single “Slitwrist Ecstasy”. Intoxicate O.S. had moderate success, reaching number 25 in weekly Finnish album sales.

After releasing the album, Shade Empire continued playing at several events such as Jörisrock and Qstock, mainly beside other Finnish artists. They also performed on a series of independent gigs. The same year, Shade Empire played their first official concert outside of Finland, in the encompassment of the Popkomm trade show in Berlin at the Kulturbrauerei (Culture Brewery). The band released their fourth album in the 6 May 2013. Called Omega Arcane, it was released via Candlelight Records.

On April 11, 2017 the band announced that their long-time vocalist Juha Harju has been dismissed from the band, to be replaced by Henry Hämäläinen. The upcoming album will still feature Juha on vocals.

Omega Arcane is the fourth studio album by the Finnish metal band Shade Empire. It was released 6 May 2013 by Candlelight Records.

Track listing

“Ruins” – 8:03

“Dawnless Days” – 5:23

“Until No Life Breeds” – 4:42

“Ash Statues” – 5:00

“Disembodiment” – 12:59

“Malicious Winds” – 5:20

“Traveler of Unlight” – 4:47

“Devolution” – 2:38

“Slumbering Giant” – 6:29

“Nomad” – 6:46

“Omega Arcane” – 12:13

Personnel

Band members

Juha Harju – vocals

Janne Niiranen – guitars

Juha Sirkkiä – guitars

Olli Savolainen – synthesizer

Eero Mantere – bass guitar

Erno Räsänen – drums

Additional credits