Daphne June Hellard left this world peacefully in her sleep on the morning of May 12th, at the John M. Parrott Centre.

She was in her 91st year and had battled the growing effects of dementia for multiple years. She was defiant, willful, and still possessed a wicked sense of humor, right up to her last days.

Daphne was born in England on May 24, 1931. She was one of seven children. She had a comfortable, fun childhood, spending summer vacations on her grandma’s farm.

She trained and became an excellent stenographer. She worked for multiple firms in England and then in Canada. Her last gig was as the head secretary at George Street Public School in Aurora.

She met and married Frank (after a couple of proposal attempts). It must have been a good decision because they remained married for 67 years until his death. On every anniversary Daphne could often be heard saying, “__ years with the wrong man.”

They emigrated to Canada in 1956, aboard the ship, “Salacia”, with $200 in their pocket. The adventure started early when another vessel collided with theirs on the St. Lawrence Seaway.

They started life in Aurora, saved up, and had a house built. Their son Grant was born in 1967 and Daphne was a doting, protective and proud mother.

She spent summers making memories at the family cottage. In retirement the couple moved to Bath and joined the winter snowbird migration to Indiantown, Florida.

Daphne excelled at all she tried. She was skilled in cooking, sewing, knitting, gardening, golf, lawn bowling, skiing, theatre, upholstery, and line-dancing.

She had the gift of the gab and loved to socialize, host parties, and was a member of multiple clubs. She travelled the world with Frank and her friends. She was also an avid volunteer; clocking in multiple miles canvassing for donations on behalf of the Cancer Society.

Daphne was a real beauty (inside and out). She would not leave the house without her lipstick on, clothes just so, and not a hair out of place. Never did she utter profanities (well maybe to Frank and when the dementia started to take hold). She was generous with her time and her resources. Daphne was a true, classy lady!

Daphne was a wonderful mom to Grant; a super mother-in-law to Sherri; and Nanny to her only grandchild; her pride and joy, Ava.

On Daphne’s request, there will be no funeral. Cremation has taken place at Milestone Cremation Services. The family will host a celebration of life for her later.

Thanks to all the wonderful, caring staff at the John M. Parrott Centre who looked after Daphne for the last four years. Any donations can be sent to any charity of choice in Daphne’s memory.

The most vibrant and beautiful flower in the English garden is now gone.

She has rejoined Frank to continue their adventure and share a shanty.

She will be sadly missed but never forgotten.

Love always!!