On April 1, teacher of the AGBU Aleppo Martiros Saryan Academy Hrazdan Tokmajyan presented his book “Embroidery of Aintab” during an event held as part of the Days of Aintab Program at the Mesrop Mashtots Institute of Ancient Manuscripts in Yerevan. Among the participants of the event were RA First Lady Rita Sargsyan, RA Minister of Diaspora Hranush Hakobyan, President of the “Pyunik” Pan-Armenian Human Resources Development Foundation Levon Sargsyan, member of the Foundation’s Board of Trustees Gabriel Jemberjian and other guests.

The event was held under the high patronage of the First Lady and at the initiative of the RA Ministry of Diaspora, the Armenian Krtasirats Cultural Union of Aleppo, “Pyunik” Pan-Armenian Human Resources Development Foundation, the Mesrop Mashtots Institute of Ancient Manuscripts of Yerevan and the Center for Coordination of Syrian-Armenians’ Issues NGO. The Days of Aintab Program is part of the events dedicated to the Armenian Genocide Centennial.

The event began with the national anthem of the Republic of Armenia and the march song of Aintab. After the Lord’s Prayer, the gathered were greeted by Dean of the Faculty of Theology at Yerevan State University, His Grace, Father, Bishop Anushavan Zhamkochyan, who mentioned that Tokmajyan’s book is a unique achievement in the history of Armenian culture and further evidence of how the Armenian people had lived and created in their historic homeland even before the Armenians before them.

Congratulating the gathered, Minister of Diaspora Hranush Hakobyan attached importance to the fact that the presentation of the valuable book presenting the history and culture of Aintab was being held on the day marking the 95th anniversary of the Battle of Aintab when the detachment of 500 Armenian heroes managed to resist the thousand-man army of the enemy with 150 weapons until French troops extended a helping hand and made the enemy retreat. The minister particularly mentioned: “Unfortunately, years later, France was compelled to cede the Armenian Cilicia to Turkey, and it was emptied of the Armenians. More than 100,000 Armenians abandoned Zeytun, Aintab and settled in Syria. However, they managed to not only build churches and schools, but also develop culture. Brilliant evidence of that is this book, which shows the world that we Armenians rose from the ashes like the phoenix. Our cause is just, and we must continue the struggle so that genocide doesn’t happen ever again.”

The author of the book, Hrazdan Tokmajyan presented his book. Among other speakers were President of the Armenian Krtasirats Cultural Union of “Pyunik” Foundation Alexan Karadanayan, the book’s editor Svetlana Poghosyan, one of the editors of the book Karine Bazeyan and others. The preface for the book is by Rita Sargsyan.

The Minister of Diaspora, fulfilling the request of the inheritors of Avetis Galemkearyan, who was one of the participants of the Battle of Aintab, granted the remains of Galemkearyan (whip, glasses and wallet) to Head of the National Museum of History of Armenian Ethnography and the Liberation Struggle Karen Aristakesyan.

The guests also viewed unique samples of embroidery of Aintab and photos showing episodes of the Battle of Aintab.