Fifty years after the death of Iowa-born President Herbert Hoover, his legacy as a humanitarian will be marked with ceremony and volunteerism.

In his hometown of West Branch, members of Hoover's family will join local volunteers Oct. 25 to help pack meals to be distributed to low-income families.

Later that day, the 50th commemoration of the Hoover State Funeral in West Branch will recall the day an estimated 75,000 people came to pay their final respects to the 31st President of the United States.

'We really want to honor his life accomplishments and particularly want to honor his humanitarian aid,' said Jerry Fleagle, executive director of the Hoover Presidential Foundation. 'We're celebrating Hoover's life and legacy this week.'

Volunteers hope to package 100,000 meals during the Hoover Hunger Project, a partnership between the West Branch Lions Club and the Hoover Presidential Foundation. Half the meals will be distributed to food banks around the state and half will be shipped internationally through the Lions Club.

The project is a tribute to Hoover's work during World War I, when he organized the shipping of food to Belgium and other areas behind German lines, feeding an estimated 2.9 million children and up to 9 million adults in Belgium.

'He was known as the great humanitarian,' Fleagle said.

Emphasis on Hoover's food aid efforts will continue at the funeral commemoration, with World Food Prize president Kenneth Quinn as a guest speaker. Quaker minister Ruthie Tippen, formerly of West Branch, will read the eulogy for Hoover, originally given 50 years ago by Dr. D. Elton Trueblood. Wreaths will be laid on behalf of the White House, the Kingdom of Belgium and the Hoover family.

The program begins at 3 p.m. at Hoover's gravesite at the Herbert Hoover National Historic Site in West Branch.

Also on Oct. 25, a park ranger will discuss archival photos and documents that illustrate Hoover's legacy.

The Hoover family is also participating in several other commemorative events throughout the week, visiting schools in the region named after the president, presenting scholarships and speaking at a banquet.

Hoover's great-grandchildren Allan Hoover III and Leslie Hoover Lauble will take part in the Uncommon Student Award Program Oct. 18 at the Hoover Presidential Library and Museum. The program awards $30,000 to high school seniors from across the state.

On Oct. 20, Andrew Hoover, Herbert Hoover's grandson, and Margaret and Alexander Hoover, great-grandchildren of the president, will visit Herbert Hoover Elementary School in Iowa City as part of the school's 60th year celebration, while Lauble will visit students at Herbert Hoover Middle School and Lou Henry Hoover Elementary in Waterloo.

On Oct. 23, Margaret Hoover, Clifton Truman Daniel and John Taft will speak at the Foundation's Celebration Banquet. The three are all descendants of U.S. Presidents and will focus on carrying on the legacy of their presidential ancestors.

Remembering Herbert Hoover

What: Celebration Banquet

When: 5:30 p.m. Oct. 23

Where: Sheraton Hotel, 210 S. Dubuque St., Iowa City

Cost: $75, on sale through Oct. 19 at

http://www.hooverassociation.org/

What: Hoover Hunger Project

When: 9 a.m. Oct. 25

Where: West Branch High School, 900 W. Main St, West Branch

More information: Call (319) 643-5327

What: Ranger Talks: The Legacy of Herbert Hoover

When: 1:30 p.m. Oct. 25

Where: Figge Auditorium, Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum, 210 Parkside Dr., West Branch

Cost: Free