As for his academics, Dyke completed his basic education in Atlanta itself. However, she joined Pierce Junior College in Los Angeles. Barry later graduated with a BA in Theater Arts from the institution.

Barry Van Dyke: career

Dick Van Dyke was a massive influencer for Barry, who came from an all-star lineage. He then started acting when he was only 9 years old. Barry began by appearing on his father’s television show “The Dick Van Dyke Show.” However, he avoided television for a few years to focus on his studies.

Subtitle : Barry Van Dyke in 6 Guns.

Source : imdb.com

Barry was back in the middle of all the action after graduating. He landed a minor role for his father’s TV show from 1971 to 1974. After a couple of years, Barry was cast in movies like “Gemini Man” and “Stalk the Wild Child,” thanks to his father’s connection. However, it was the ’80s that brought Dyke great success. He started appearing in movies like “The Love Boat”, “Gun Shy”, The Redd Foxx Show” and “Foxfire Light”. Just like in the ’80s, he was still landing some of the most amazing roles on television. He was cast in movies like “Murder”, “Diagnosis of Murder” and “Murder 101”.

Barry Van Dyke: personal life

Looking at his love life, the charming Barry Van Dyke is a married man. He has been in a relationship with his wife Mary Carey Van Dyke since 1974. The two are blessed with four children, Carey, Shane, Wes and Taryn. According to sources, Barry met Mary when he was just a teenager working at a movie theater. They instantly fell in love with each other and said their vows 7 years later.

It seems that the Dykes have a tendency to carry on the legacy of their parents. Barry followed that of his father and the same goes for his children. Barry’s first son, Carney, is also an actor and made an appearance alongside his father and his grandfather in the movie “Diagnosis: Murder.” Similarly, Shane is the writer, director, and actor of the 2010 adventure film Titanic II. Like these two, his two other children have also made notable appearances in various projects.

Barry Van Dyke: Net Worth

Subtitle : Family photo of Dick Van Dyke.

Source : gettyimages.com

Now coming to his earnings, according to 2018, Barry has a net worth of $3 million. He has gained a lot from his acting career and being the son of the award-winning actor clearly has his advantages. However, he has been able to shine on his own and is constantly proving himself in the industry. He started at age 9 and has been involved in over 100 TV shows and movies.