You can’t just ‘become’ a sailor.

nothing can rid of ones fate, even if that means all sense must leave the world and life around you in order for it to unfold, it will do so.

we ourselves may struggle to comprehend this, we may find it difficult to see the light and to search for a brightness when everything is merely sending us upon a ship, a journey that will never truly end, one that can never ultimately come to any fulfilled conclusion, for there will always be more paths to take.

we may become so overwhelmed with this feeling that there is a possibility of eternal life, of eternal opportunities, an eternity of fate drawn out before us,…

Throughout Three Crowns of the Sailor, I'm thinking, "Please let this be just a giant surrealist experiment, a bit of fun, an endlessly inventive visual playground laden with symbolism but ultimately meaning nothing...I'm really enjoying not having to think about any of this too hard." Turns out every scene is actually a treasure trove of, well, EVERYTHING. I've honestly never seen anything like this. I guess all I can say is it feels like Resnais, Buñuel and Jodorowsky were just playing with things they didn't really understand - or simply dipping their toe into the lake. Raoul Ruiz, the director of this film, doesn't just jump into the lake, he fucking reigns beneath it like some prehistoric water demon.

Not…

Three Crowns of the Sailor is a film that exists in drunken memories, perhaps in dreams, having been passed on from one sailor to another, elaborated into legend; stories of treasure and debts, and others of treason and death, these are tales that go on being told long after the teller has died.

Raúl Ruiz spins these tales with the slippery logic of nightmares: a woman with only one orifice (her mouth, if you must know); sailors who defecate by sweating worms; doppelgängers and preternatural children; ghost ships that sink and resurface…

The tales swirl around each other, with their mood held constant by the gently waltzing score. They summon the ghosts of the dead. Their stories are immortal while…

This is the kind of film that showcases how masterful Raúl Ruiz was. This film is flawless in terms of visual storytelling. Beautiful shots all over, with colours that reminded me of silent films when they were completely tintetd in red or blue. If his other films showed how much he likes deep-focus shot (but is it really deep-focus? Does someone know the name of these kind of shots?), in this one he is telling us that he finds them to be the best cinema has to offer. He even manages to put us in a first-person point of view in a very natural but also bizarre way.

It is a disorienting tale, courtesy of a drunk (or not so…