Click Portugal Flag Image to Download

Flag of Portugal

The Portugal flag was formally approved on June 30, 1911. Green is illustrative of King Henry the Navigator, a famed Portuguese voyager. Portugal Flag centered shield is typical of ocean exploration and the growth of Portugal's influence throughout the reign of King Afonso Henriques. Red recalls the interior revolution of the early 1800s.

The consequence of hundreds of years of changes, Portugal's present coat of arms was formally approved on June 30, 1911, and is based on the arms used by the kingdom since the middle Ages. The shield latent in front is calm of seven golden castles, which signify the Moorish castles occupied during the reconquista.

History of Portugal Flag

According to tale, in 1139 Count Afonso Henriques won a conclusive victory in contradiction of Moorish forces at Ourique. The five shields he allegedly struck from the hands of five Moorish kings were later reproduced in the five blue protections on his white excellent. Each protection bore five white disks for the five wounds of Christ, who, rendering to tradition, seemed before the battle and guaranteed the count’s success. In the 13th century King Afonso III added a red border with gold castles to the protection as a symbol of the neighboring kingdom of Castile; this may have befell in 1254, when he married Beatriz of Castile and decided for the territory known as the Algarve to be moved to Portugal.

Overcame by a crown, those arms seemed on many Portuguese flags over the periods—for example, after 1640, when Portugal recovered its individuality from Spain, its flags were white with the regal arms. In 1816 a symbol for Brazil, the armillary sphere was added late the shield. The armillary sphere was used as a navigational tool by previous Portuguese kings who had backed worldwide voyages of survey and defrayal in the 15th and 16th centuries. Although that sign was uncontrolled in the 1820s, when Brazil developed independent, it was revitalized on June 30, 1911, next the October 1910 revolution that conquered the monarchy and made Portugal a state. At the same time green and red substituted the blue and white contextual bands of the flag, in use since 1830. Red was the color of the radical flag.

About Portugal

Portugal is a southern European country bordered by Spain situated on the Atlantic Ocean. The population of the nation estimated is 10.3 million. The population density is 112 per Km2 (290 people per mi2).

The country has parliamentary democratic republic government. The official language of Portugal is Portuguese and the currency is Euro. Portugal comprises of two letters Portugal code i.e. PT and its three letters Portugal code is PRT and in digits it is 620. The calling code is +351 and the UTC i.e. standard time followed in Portugal is UTC +1 hour.

Being a democratic republic, Portugal comprises a total of eight provinces.