Kristen Alderson made a name for herself in one of the most memorable daytime T star roles. At just six years old, Alderson landed the role. From then she was known as Star Manning, daughter of the iconic couple, Todd Manning (Roger Howarth and Blair Cramer (Kassie DePaiva).

Sadly, One Life To Live ended in 2012. But according to GH news, Alderson joined the cast of General Hosoital. First, she continued her Llanview role and brought Star Manning to Port Charles. Then, due to legalities ABC was no longer permitted to use the. Jaya get names from OLTL and AMC. Thankfully, that’s not the case today.

Kristen Alderson Pregnant!

GH news reports confirm that Alderson’s boyfriend Taylor Crousore popped the question, and they became engaged on July 15th, 2023. Kristen and Taylor’s baby girl is expected in January of 2024!

Alderson joined General Hospital as a crossover from OLTL. However, Starr Manning didn’t stay in Port Charles for long due to legal issues with the network. That’s when the writers brought on Kiki Jerome. Ultimately, Alderson left GH and Kiki behind in 2020.

Congratulations to Kristen, Taylor, and their families on the upcoming birth of baby girl Coursore.

Martin Grey (Michael E. Knight) can’t keep up with his own shenanigans. He lied to Lucy Coe (Lynn Herring) about the Deceptor, and now he’s gaslighting her to no end. The more she tries to give him credit for the idea, the more that Martin quickly shuts it down.

General Hospital Recaps: Moreover, Martin knew darn well that what he was doing when he leaked Blair’s business idea. Of course, his ex-wife was right. She played him like a violin and set him up to take himself and Lucy down. Blair no longer wants to pay her ex $50K per month in alimony. I mean, who would? Besides, he’s a lawyer for crying out loud. Yes, anyone would accept $50K a month from an ex-spouse. But does he really need it?

Blair’s plan to get Lucy so broke that she has to marry Martin to stay afloat. But, if those two say “I do,” then Martin won’t be living off of his Blair any longer. Additional, when Lucy finds out that Martin has been lying, gaslighting, and essentially manipulating the situation, will she want to become his bride?

General Hospital spoilers reveal that Martin’s in hot water. Apparently, his actions don’t just get under Blair’s skin, but Martin turns Lucy against him as well. Also, let’s not forget Tracy. All she wants his Lucy’s 1% of ELQ. She definitely doesn’t care about Martin. Will Martin manage to turn three women against him over this Deceptor ordeal?!

Oh what a shame, Martin looks so nervous. In my opinion it serves him right for how he treats Lucy. Martin Grey (Michael E. Knight) and Lucy Coe (Lynn Herring) may appear to have had a solid, healthy, relationship, but his secrets say otherwise.

Port Charles has become a melting pot for fictional cities from ABC soaps. Like Jackson Montgomery (Walt Willey) from Pine Valley, Blair Cramer from Llanview is from one of ABC’s since cancelled, sister soaps. Personally, I love that ABC keeps these characters alive. They’ve been a part of our culture for so long, and shouldn’t be forgotten. I believe that General Hospital, (and Port Charles) is the perfect place to bring these names back to life. Meaning, the character and the actors who are most famous for portraying them.

Blair Comes For Martin and Tracy- The Deceptor Belongs to Blair

Previously, GH Blog shared the news with fans that Blair Cramer is Martin’s ex-wife. You know, the one who pays him $50K a month? Yeah, that one. We also predicted that Blair would have something to do with the Deceptor. And boy were we right! According to the latest General Hospital spoilers, DePaiva will share scenes with Jane Elliot as Blair Cramer and Tracy Quartermaine.

Ok, so we know that Blair will share scenes with Tracy. That said, is Blair there to confront Tracy about the Deceptor? Or, are they working together against Lucy Coe? Still, it’s possible that Martin stole the Deceptor idea from Blair, and now she’s in Port Charles to settle the score.

Erica Kane buys Deception?!

…Thanks to Tracy, Lucy and Maxie found themselves racking their brains over who is behind this bogus lawsuit. Lucy Coe (Lynn Herring) is beside herself with Deception’s current state of affairs. Shockingly, Tracy Quartermaine (Jane Elliot) revealed herself as the Plaintiff in the case against Lucy Coe and her company, Deception.

Reveal the Snake

Over at the courthouse, Lucy, Maxie, and even Brook Lynn (Amanda Setton) stand by in disbelief while Tracy remains irritatingly confident. Poor Brook Lynn feels the weight of the guilt on her shoulders after Tracy blackmailed her into stealing evidence. As a result, everything Lucy has worked for could be gone. Not to mention, Maxie may not be CEO, but she has executive status. Therefore, the fate of this company will greatly impact its employees if it indeed goes bankrupt.

Erica Kane Saves Deception With Fusion-Deception Merger

The judge ruled that it’ll be 6 months before they even go to trial. In that time, Lucy fears she’ll lose her previous company. Desperate times call for desperate measures, and Deception’s fate is out of Lucy’s hands. According to GH rumors, Pine Valley entrepreneur and founder of Enchantment follows Jackson (Walt Willey) to Port Charles. Both having Boss Babe experience in the Erica and Lucy have a lot in common, as well as a lot to offer each other in the business world.

Erica’s past experiences with Enchantment spark an idea to save Deception. Back in the day, Erica’s company merged with her daughter Kendall’s start up, Fusion. In Lucy’s darkest hours, will she agree to a buyout? GH rumors hint that Erica Kane buys Deception in a merger with Fusion.

Port Charles feels like a revolving door as of late. Kassie DePaiva returns to GH! Familiar faces are all around if you’re familiar with Llanview and Pine Valley. All My Children and One Life To Live made up 2/3 of three iconic pieces of American history. Although AMC and OLTL may have ended their run over a decade ago, the shows live on as characters resurface in Port Charles.

Over the years, AMC and OLTL’s characters and their portrayers became like household names to so many Americans. So when the two daytime dramas ended their run in 2011 and 2012, a great loss was felt all over the country and beyond. Meanwhile, other shows in various genres tried and failed to successfully fill those time slots. Sadly, nothing every stuck and we soap fans are still missing our favorites. Thankfully, Port Charles seems like it has an unlimited population limit. ????

General Hospital news reports confirm that OLTL actress Kassie DePaiva returns to GH as the iconic Blair Cramer! While her purpose in PC has yet to be determined, GH rumors hint toward the lady from Llanview and the man from Pine Valley stick around the same crowd. According to GH spoilers, Blaire arrives in PC in September.

First I have to start off by stating that I am still saddened by the cancellation of AMC and OLTL. Just as GH, I grew up watching AMC and OLTL with my Mother. That being said, I for one was really excited to hear that some of the OLTL actors would be crossing over and taking up residence in Port Charles. Some viewers have been having mixed emotions on the news of One Life to Love characters coming over to General Hospital. For me, it is definitely a plus. I don’t understand what would possibly be bad about these interjections. I mean, Port Charles gets new residents all the time anyways, so why not have some be familiar faces from other fictional towns? I watched Starr Manning grow up on OLTL and am happy to see her make such a splash on General Hospital. She is doing a fantastic job. Her first few days in PC were very emotional and Kristen Alderson brought it! I felt her pain almost as if it were real. And I say “almost” because let’s be honest, no TV show can compare to the very human, very real feeling of personal loss. But she definitely got us as close as it can get. Every Mother’s worst nightmare was played out in those scenes and Kristen really knew how to bring it home. As the weeks have been going on Starr is mingling her way through the people of PC and establishing some important personal as well as business relationships. I can’t wait to see where they will take this character in the near and distant future. I am liking her with Michael right now, but I am also open to other options. Matt maybe? Please feel free to leave a comment below and let us know what you think! Congrats Ms. Alderson, and welcome to GH. You are doing a stellar job!