Attending college at Llanview University in 1993, Todd Manning has led a life of crime with a sordid past to explain every bit of it! Raised by his adoptive father, Peter Manning, Todd was the product of childhood verbal and sexual abuse. In his college days, Todd was a football star and leader of his fraternity. On one drunken, rage filled night, Todd and two of his frat brothers raped Marty Saybrooke and was sentenced to prison. This event caused a long line of crimes to ensue. While on work release, Todd escaped from prison, unintentionally caused Suede Pruitt's death and later kidnapped Rebecca Lewis to avoid capture. Todd was eventually shot and thought to have drowned but survived and headed back on the run. Surprisingly, his run from the law came to an end when he risked it all to save Marty, Jessica and Sarah from a burning car and was caught and taken into custody by Bo Buchanan. With luck on his side, Todd was granted a pardon and released from prison.

Later would come power when Todd found out that he was the son and lost heir to Victor Lord. With part of his inheritance, Todd bought Dorian Lord's paper, The Intruder, out from under her and changed it to The Sun.

Todd met his match when he hooked up with Blair Cramer who claimed to be pregnant with his child as a way to get in Todd's wallet. Unexpectedly, the two fell deeply in love and have been ever since. However, the relationship between Todd and Blair hasn't always been a healthy one. Todd has done everything from taking a bullet for Blair, to selling their infant son Jack after thinking that Max was the father, to kidnapping their children to get back at Blair, to undergoing plastic surgery and changing his identity just to win her back... Everyone thought the man with Walker Laurence's face was Todd but...

A huge mystery surrounded a man who appeared on May 13, 2011 with the old face of Todd Manning. While John agreed to help T.M. prove who the real Todd Manning was, he made his rounds and startled not only the man we've known as Todd but the people in his life. DNA tests proved that both Todds had the same DNA.

When John, Brody and Tomas found Irene Manning to be behind the goings on at the agency where Baker was from, they dragged her back to Llanview. She admitted to having had twin boys. She gave one to Peter Manning to raise, named Todd, and kept the other, named Victor Jr. After Todd was beaten to a pulp years ago, she had him brought to her and brainwashed Victor Jr. into thinking he was Todd by making Todd replay all of the memories in his life.

On August 17, 2011, T.M. found out he was the real Todd Manning.