Kristen Alderson made a name for herself in one of the most memorable daytime T star roles. At just six years old, Alderson landed the role. From then she was known as Star Manning, daughter of the iconic couple, Todd Manning (Roger Howarth and Blair Cramer (Kassie DePaiva).

Sadly, One Life To Live ended in 2012. But according to GH news, Alderson joined the cast of General Hosoital. First, she continued her Llanview role and brought Star Manning to Port Charles. Then, due to legalities ABC was no longer permitted to use the. Jaya get names from OLTL and AMC. Thankfully, that’s not the case today.

Kristen Alderson Pregnant!

GH news reports confirm that Alderson’s boyfriend Taylor Crousore popped the question, and they became engaged on July 15th, 2023. Kristen and Taylor’s baby girl is expected in January of 2024!

Alderson joined General Hospital as a crossover from OLTL. However, Starr Manning didn’t stay in Port Charles for long due to legal issues with the network. That’s when the writers brought on Kiki Jerome. Ultimately, Alderson left GH and Kiki behind in 2020.

Congratulations to Kristen, Taylor, and their families on the upcoming birth of baby girl Coursore.

Former General Hospital actress Kristen Alderson (ex-Starr, ex-Kiki) is very active on social media, giving fans glimpses into her personal life after starring on ABC’s General Hospital.

Sadly, General Hospital news reports recent heartache for the actress. In a recent Instagram story, Kristen Alderson shared a photo of herself and her beloved pet, Pooka. If you’re been following Kristen throughout the years, you’re familiar with her dog, Pooka, and how much love she has for furry friend. Alderson announced the passing of her dog, while revealing a prior loss.

General Hospital spoilers reveal Kristen Alderson not only shared news of her dog Pooka’s death, but that she had also lost her Granny a short time prior. Alderson disclosed that she lost her Granny on Saturday, just days before having to say goodbye to Pooka.

We extend our sincere condolences to Kristen and her family during this difficult time.

Daytime TV alum, Kristen Alderson has been an iconic part of the soap opera world since age six. In 1998, Alderson auditioned and took on the role of, Start Manning. That name become a household familiarity after she stole the hearts of her One Life To Live, audience.

After the cancellation of ABC’s OLTL, Kristen joined the cast of General Hospital, as her all familiar role, playing Starr Manning. Shortly after her character, along with Roger Howarth’s portrayal of Todd Manning, arrived in Port Charles de Llanview, the characters then has to be renamed due to lawsuits regarding the usage of character names. Alderson remained on General Hospital with a new identity, Kiki Jerome. She then left the soap opera in 2015.

General Hospital rumors have developed surrounding Roger Howarth’s character Franco Baldwin and his untimely death. Since General Hospital news confirmed that Howarth will in fact be returning to GH, fans have been coming up with theories for Howarth’s return and just “who” he will be when he returns. There has been talks surrounding Roger’s OG character from One Life To Live, and a possible revival of Todd Manning.

A major fan theory involving the return of Todd Manning could involve the return of Starr Manning as well. When asked about the possibility of returning to General Hospital, Anderson was quick to reply with a positive response. She said, “It would be a dream come true.” When reflecting on leaving GH back in 2015, she believes it was the best situation for her personal life at the time. She continued Bobby explaining, “I just learned a lot about who I am. But I would be really sad if someone said you could never play Starr Manning again because she is a part of me. So, if I had the chance to play her again it would just be the happiest thing.”

General Hospital news and spoilers have confirmed Roger will return to GH. However, his character, Franco Baldwin, seems to be undeniably dead. Franco’s death, along with GH news confirmation of Roger’s return has left GH fans open to theories for his comeback. It’s been rumored that Howarth will reprise his role on GH as Todd Manning, possibly leaving an open opportunity to reunite the Manning family.

What are fan thoughts on the return of Todd and Starr Manning? Feel free to share and discuss!

The story of Nina Reeves (Cynthia Watros) and the search for her biological daughter has come back and forth to the front burner of story lines. It first looked as though Kiki Jerome (Kristen Alderson, Hayley Erin) would be written as not the daughter of Ava Jerome (Maura West), but that of Nina Reeves. Then the story went on the back burner for a while, only being mentioned here and there.

Nina has most recently been hurt when she thought she had finally found her daughter, just to have it ripped away like a cruel joke. Sasha Gilmore (Sofia Mattsson) led Nina to believe she was her child as instructed by Nina’s own fiancé, Valentin Cassadine (James Patrick Stuart). When that mess hit the fan, Nina was devastated. It’s been a little bit of time since this let down and Nina is revisiting her situation.

General Hospital previews show Nina confiding in Jasper ‘Jax’ Jacks, tell him she still feels her daughter is out there.

In a new promo video for General Hospital, General Hospital spoilers reveal Willow Tait (Katelyn MacMullen) spots Nina with one half of a pendant which seems to strike a cord in Willow, promoting her to mention the necklace.

In recent General Hospital rumors, it has been claimed that two woman may be candidates for being revealed as Nina’s daughter, some claiming both women will be her daughters, claiming Nina had twins. General Hospital rumors suggest Nelle Benson (Chloe Lanier) and Willow Tait could be long lost twin sisters. However, other GH news and spoilers have indicated just one woman will end up with that title.

Did Willow recognize the pendant because she has the other half, it or did she see it in Nelle’s possession at a given point in time?

This cannot be expressed enough, “don’t believe everything you read.” Especially when it comes to the internet. Today, many internet sources post false information and completely misleading headlines just to get an audience to view their posts. In this particular case, that is exactly what has happened.

Despite the rampant rumors regarding the return of Kristen Alderson as Kiki Jerome, that line of you know what, is absolutely false. This rumor is the result of a non-credible source, trying to cause a stir with GH fans, simply for the clicks and publicity.

General Hospital Blog wanted to clarify, and let you all know that Nathan Varni has confirmed, Kristen Alderson is NOT returning to GH, that it’s not in the works.

Please check out the screen shot below which a fan asks about Kristen, and Nathan responds.

Kristen also clears up the rumor via twitter.

Thank you Nathan Varni, for clearing up that mess!

We have very exciting news for General Hospital fans. GH news confirms that the longest running soap opera is up for 28, yes 28 Daytime Emmy nominations this year, leading the ! GH has an extraordinarily talented cast and crew, and this year on April 26th, 2015, their hard work will be formally recognized.

General Hospital is nominated for:

Best Drama Series at the 42nd Annual Daytime Emmy Awards.

Laura Wright (Carly Corinthos Jacks) and Maura West (Ava Jerome) are up for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series.

Tony Geary (Luke Spencer) and Jason Thompson (Dr. Patrick Drake) are up for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series.

Nominated for Best Supporting Actress in a Drama Series are GH’s own Lisa LoCicero (Olivia Falconeri) and Finola Hughes (Anna DeVane).

Chad Duell (Michael Corinthos) is nominated for Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series.

Kristen Alderson (ex-Kiki Jerome) and Hayley Pullos (Molly Lansing Davis) are up for Best Younger Actress in a Drama Series.

Bryan Craig (Morgan Corinthos) and Tequan Richmond (TJ Ashford) have been nominated for Best Younger Actor in a Drama Series.

In the category Special Guest in a Drama Series, Linda Elena Tovar (Rosalie Martinez) and Donna Mills (Madeline Reeves) have been nominated for this award.

General Hospital’s Writing Team, as well as it’s Directing Team have been nominating for the corresponding Daytime Emmy Awards.

GH has also been nominated for Outstanding Art Direction/Set Decoration/Scenic Design, among more nominations.

As you can see, General Hospital leads the entire Daytime Emmy Awards with the most nominations among any other Daytime TV show. General Hospital Blog could not be more proud of these wonderful accomplishments. These are hard working and extremely talented people who deserve to be recognized for what they do. 52 years of entertaining millions isn’t easy. Keep up the good work, General Hospital! Good Luck at the Awards ceremony!

Don’t forget to tune in to the 42nd Annual Daytime Emmy Awards on April 26th 2015 on the Pop Channel (formerly TV Guide Channel).

For the full list of 2015 Daytime Emmy Nominations please visit www.variety.com

It’s no secret that co-stars Chad Duell (Michael Corinthos) and Kristen Alderson (Kiki Jerome) are a couple on screen as well as off screen. The real life romantic life of Chad Duell and Kristen Alderson has captured the hearts of their fans through up close and personal photos via Instagram and tweets.

Since the news came out that Kristen Alderson is leaving General Hospital over the weekend, fans have been stirring, trying to figure out the full story.

General Hospital Blog previously reported that the actress will be making a video to explain the situation and why she is leaving GH. We do know though, thanks to real life boyfriend, Chad Duell, that it was definitely Kristen’s decision to leave the show, Alderson was not let go from General Hospital, but has decided to go in a different direction. Check out Chad’s tweet to Soap Opera Digest.

The aftermath of the Corinthos family shake up has torn Michael away from the ones he loves. He has completely written Sonny off as his father, refuses to even call him Dad, he refers to his mother now as Carly, and his hatred fro Kiki and Morgan exude from every fiber of his being. He has already lashed out by sleeping with Rosalie, and Kiki caught them in the act. He is pushing everyone who loves him out of his life because he feels completely betrayed by their actions and lies.

As a result of this Corinthos family fall out, Michael Corinthos, the adoptive son of Michael Sonny Corinthos, is dead set on changing his name to reflect his biological roots. He now wants to legally be named Michael Quartermaine, after his biological father, AJ Quartermaine. After learning that Sonny shot AJ, and all of his family kept this secret from him, Michael wants nothing to do with his family… not even his name.

Do you think Michael will go through with it and change his name to Quartermaine? Will he regret his choice after all the smoke clears? Let us know if you think Michael should remain a Corinthos or if he is justified in changing his name to Quartermaine.