About Meridio

Our mission is to help people make smarter benefit decisions by combining technology with our insurance experts.

Meridio is a powerful benefits communication and enrollment platform that allows small business owners to easily offer benefits to their employees. Through our own priorities-first approach, Meridio helps individuals to understand their insurance needs and purchase select benefits based on their specific needs.

The Opportunity

As a Sales Development Representative you will reach out to businesses and provide them with a better way to offer benefits to their employees. Your sales process will run from initial prospecting to interaction while building genuine connections with business owners and ultimately closing. You will consistently be provided with leads from our extensive list of Meridio partnerships.

Key Responsibilities

Manage your own opportunities. Utilize online and offline sources to cultivate new leads while developing and maintaining your pipeline.

Drive the full sales cycle primarily through inside sales: make introductory calls, assess business goals through qualifying, and close the deal.

Become an expert in Meridio's unique platform by asking probing questions; handling objections will be critical to your success

Achieve and consistently exceed monthly sales goals

What we’re looking for in you

Ambitious with strong desire for continuing growth and learning.

Focus on converting feedback into action and training into continuous self-improvement

Committed to a high standard of integrity and work ethic

Comprehensive listening skills, assertiveness, persistence, and persuasiveness

Adaptability and ability to thrive in a fast paced environment

Must-Haves

2 years or more of outbound sales experience

Excellent communication skills - no fear of the phone

General computer and email proficiency, experience with working in a CRM is a must

Positive attitude and a drive to win

Ability to effectively prioritize tasks and manage time within a fast-paced environment

Training and Development

Learn industry-leading communication and sales techniques that will enable you to find solutions for your clients and close deals

Gain extensive knowledge of an automated sales platform including Pipedrive, Aircall and Autopilot

Mentor directly with highly experienced sales managers and closers and and receive daily feedback

What's in it for you?

Medical, vision, and dental coverage

Wide range and suite of additional voluntary benefits

14 days PTO and 8 paid holidays

An extremely dedicated team to grow with

At Meridio, we believe that diversity is an expression of all the unique characteristics that make us human: race, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, disability, and education — and those are just a few. We recognize that diverse backgrounds and perspectives strengthen our teams and our product. The foundation of our diversity efforts are closely tied to our core values, which include “Playing Well With Others” and “Authenticity.”

We’re proud to be an equal opportunity employer and consider qualified applicants without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital or family status, veteran status, medical condition or disability.

Note: Meridio does not accept agency resumes. Please do not forward resumes to any recruiting alias or employee. Meridio is not responsible for any fees related to unsolicited resumes.

Base: $30,000

On-target Earnings: $50,000

This position has been filled. Would you like to see our other open positions?