Presentation on theme: "Meridio added Value to MOSS"— Presentation transcript:

1 Meridio added Value to MOSS

Günter Sandmann -General Manager Central- & Eastern Europe-

2 Meridio the company Global Document and Records Management Vendor

Develops and Markets Products for large Scale EDRM Exclusively Microsoft Platform Deep and transparent Integration with Office and server products / SharePoint 100% Channel Sales Meets the Records-Management-Standards like DOD , PRO 2002, etc. Microsoft Gold Certified and Global ISV Partner Participate in Microsoft Partner Advisory Council (PAC) and the Developer Advisory Council (DAC) Collaborated with Microsoft RM team on Office 2007 since 2004 Microsoft Go To Market Partner for Records Management World HQ- Belfast, Northern Ireland R&D in Redmond - Offices in US, UK, Germany, Spain, Australia Privately held 165+ Employees

3 Customers convince Financial Services Manufacturing Automotive

Government Utilities Professional Telecom Others

4 Meridio the platform Document Management Records Management

Archiving and Storage-Management Replication and Federation for worldwide distributed Systems Offline Function Fileplan represent the Organisation Platfom for Compliance + SOX, Solutions low Integration- + Training cost + effort This slide shows how Meridio provides a central architectural role as a store for all unstructured business information from s and instant messaging to spreadsheets and word documents and to receive or deliver to standard business applications and Microsoft environments from MS Word to Outlook and SharePoint. Because Meridio integrates so closely with these products, users find it much easier to adopt eDRM disciplines into their daily work. This overcome one of the biggest problems the industry has faced in EDRM deployments – securing rapid user acceptance and buy-in. At a more detailed technical architecture level Meridio has been designed for optimal operation in a wide range of business operations, and supports innovations such as remote usage, replication and federated systems. Meridio has also been designed to the highest security levels and meets the latest international standards for RM systems Intependent from Type + Source of Information Management + Archive (Exchange/Outlook/Notes) SAP Archive Link Interface (certified)

5 Hierarchical Fileplan Usability and Control Feature for Records Managers

A Fileplan is the structure that represents an organizations records classification scheme Used to classify records in context Every record must have a defined location within a fileplan A record may be classified in multiple locations within the fileplan Allows users work in common classifications A Hierarchical Fileplan provides an a familiar way for users and administrators to organize and classify records Essential for a Centralized approach to Records An important usability feature in an eDRM system is a Fileplan. A fileplan is the tool a records manager uses to define the organizations records filing. Meridio represents a fileplan as a hierarchy. This has several usability advantages. It appears as a familiar foldering system. More than foldering system though, changes can be ‘rippled’ up and down the hierarchy, easing the task of maintenance and adding new fileplan members. A Meridio fileplan allows the records department the control it needs to define records policy. A Meridio fileplan is also a tool to allow easy declaration of records. Fileplan entries typically map to how user work. For example, everyone knows how to work in a project. Projects are organized around themes, like they are for customers, and for each customer, there are different project. In a specific project, there are different kinds of container, one for customer communications, one for internal specifications. This model translates directly to a fileplan. Users operate in the project, and never really know they are doing the work to declare records. 5

6 Document / Record Lifecycle

Document / Record Lifecycle with MOSS 2007 Document / Record Lifecycle Author control Corporate Control Collaboration Document Creation Version Control and / or Regulatory Compliance Business Rules Records Router Audit trails Life Cycle Management Secure Archiving Publish/Declare Activity Archive Transfer ILM Storage management Replication, Federation Scalability High security Hierarchical Fileplan Destroy DM process / time RM

7 Meridio provides… Massively scalable repository for storing all information of an organization Securely, reliably, and meeting compliance requirements Seamless access to that information through familiar Microsoft applications SharePoint, Outlook, Office Flexible storage lifecycle management of content within an organization Storage devices, archive etc. Advanced Records Management DoD5015, TNA, Moreq compliant Replication, Federation, Smart client functionality to support requirements of globally dispersed organizations 7

8 Customers No1 Requirements

Document and Records Management Requirements Manage business records which have long retention periods Drive retention and policy centrally Control and Share large amounts of information within an Organization Cost Efficiency in Storage Infrastructure Allowing non-active content in SharePoint to be stored externally in low cost storage Industry figures show the TCO of at least 2X to maintain content inside of a SQL database over a file system There is an additional savings of almost 2X by storing content in a special-purpose device, like EMC Centera or NetAPP Need for seamless end user experience SharePoint as a collaboration platform Use of SharePoint team sites to access information (whether it is active or not)

9 Requirements for Governance Key Organizational Goals

Satisfy Regulatory Compliance Deliver the Right Information Manage the Proliferation of Information Enterprise Access and Performance Excellent Usability and Flexibility Control the Cost of Storage Organizations look to technology to help meet key Governance Goals: First, eDRM technology has to satisfy the organizations compliance requirements. These are varied, and industry specific, but driven by industry best practices. Content is a key asset of an organization. An eDRM system should be an active information repository, delivering the right information must be delivered to the right people, at the right time. At the same time, information must be controlled, to manage its proliferation to control litigation risk To be a true information tool, the document and records must have true enterprise access, and the scalability to deliver good performance for all users regardless of the geographic diversity in the organization. eDRM technology must have excellent usability to be successful. Usability issues have stopped many an eDRM initiative, so proprietary software must be kept at a minimum. It also must be flexible enough, to satisfy the compliance mandate of the industry it operates in. Lastly, storage costs must be minimized. An eDRM system manages a great deal of content. IT is under pressure to keep their storage costs down. Meridio links content to expected usage over time to minimize storage costs.

10 Meridio Extends MOSS 2007 Regulated and Complex eDRM Requirements

Regulated Industries Manufacturing Automobile, Plant, Energy, Oil & Gas and Utilities Sector Financial Services Banking, Insurance, Brokerage Research & Dev Biotechnology, Pharma, Hi-tech-Industry Government Central Gov, Defense, Security and Intelligence Specialized Security Regional Government Information Complexity Multi-department, multi-site, multi-national Growing No of internal + external rules, regulations, laws Deal with the needs of long term Archiving Ongoing Litigation, Legal Discovery, Audit issues Now, lets talk about just how Meridio Extends MOSS 2007 to meet the needs of Regulated and Complex eDRM Requirements. Regulated Industries, such as the Energy segment to the Manufacturing and the Financial Server ices markets are highly regulated. At the same time, they rely on intellectual capitol to gain a competitive advantage. eDRM systems must not only comply with the regulations that drive these industries, they must keep their litigation exposure down, and at the same time, re-purpose records as an information source. A tall order. Government is highly standards driven. At the same time, Defense, Security and Intelligence drive the needs for specialized security and the desire to have a shared services environment The more an organization relies on their eDRM system for decision making, the more Meridio is a requirement. The more distributed the organization is, the more challenging it is to meet their information management needs with MOSS. Meridio meets an organizations information management needs, regardless of how difficult the environment is. And all this time content is building, putting a strain on the IT infrastructure. Meridio delivers storage management to help deal with this long term issue.

11 Meridio and Office 2007 Meridio 5.0 Linking Records to ERP Data

RM Standards Instant Message Capture Hierarchical Records Classification Cross-Repository Legal Discovery Content Replication Information Lifecycle Management Enterprise Policy Management Manage Legacy Repositories Government Security High Volume Journaled Physical Records Records Re-use Basic Content Services Collaboration Holds Management of Records Repository Policy Based File Plan Record Routing Office Server 2007 RM Document Level Security (Build Slide) Meridio and Microsoft Office 2007 work together to deliver comprehensive Records Management. The Microsoft platform is the foundation for our solutions. (1) Microsoft Office Server 2007 adds key capabilities to address collaboration, document and records needs. Office Server 2007 RM adds what Gartner Group has termed “Basic Content Services” of management, policy based file plan, holds, document security and routing. (2) Meridio value on top of the Microsoft Office 2007 platform starts with Enterprise Policy Management, a centralized repository of corporate-drive policy that can be pushed to team-sites as they are created, allowing them to follow and organizational-driven policy. (3) Meridio supports a hierarchical records classification model, that makes it easy for organizations to define their policy, and even easier for an end-user to categorize records. (4) Meridio delivers high-volume management, to support an organizations compliance needs. (5) Meridio replicates content, to make sure key documents and records are with the users that need them. (6) Meridio supports the legal discovery needs of an organization, with an industry-leading legal discovery solution integrated into SharePoint. (7) Meridio supports an organizations ILM strategy, allowing content to tied to usage and value. (8) Meridio manages instant messages as records, critical in some regulated industries. (9) Meridio can manage in place legacy repositories, allowing an organization a consolidated view of records. (10) Meridio links records to key processes in ERP systems such as SAP. This allows an organization to link structured to unstructured data in the support of business decisions. (11) With Meridio, your records are a live and active part of your organizations information management strategy. Corporate memory is not only preserved, but securely shared within your organization. (12) Meridio supports not only electronic records, but Physical records as will. (13) Meridio support key RM standards, like DoD with chapter IV support, to ensure that we comply with the best practices in an industry (14) And Meridio has advanced security, to support the needs of security-conscious organizations in the defense and financial services industries DoD

12 Meridio and MOSS for eDRM How we work together

Practical Scalability Regulatory Compliance Information Management Information Complexity Manage Storage Cost Specialized Security Meridio and Microsoft Office SharePoint Server 2008 work together along the following dimensions. MOSS is designed to meet the needs of the widest possible audience. Meridio is targeted at the segments of the market who have Specialized eDRM requirements, and have complex information management needs. On the Information Complexity Dimension, Meridio helps manage the cost of storage, by implementing an ILM strategy not only on Meridio content, but content stored in MOSS directly. Meridio helps an organization leverage their records as an information management tool, using records as a key knowledge source. Meridio has the practical scalability for enterprise document and records management, using 100% Microsoft technologies to meet the capacity needs of the most demanding and dispersed organization. On the Application Specialization dimension Meridio has specialized security, needed in many markets including Government/Defence, Professional and Financial Services. Information Complexity and Specialization combine to define the needs for Regulated Industries, who have complex eDRM requirements. Application Specialization

13 Regulated Industries Require Comprehensive and Flexible Control from Meridio

Increased Control for the Records Manager Centralized Control Delegating Authority to Records Administrators Controlling how much flexibility users have Enhanced Security and Auditing Meet Government and Industry Needs Weigh Security needs with Usability Specialized Content Management of and Instant Messages Regulations challenge an organization. They have to build policies that allow them to comply with a mandate. This puts considerable pressure on the organization, as lack of compliance can result in fines, penalties and bad publicity. To satisfy the needs of Regulated Industries, you have to allow the Records Management function the freedom to decide how they want to define records: through a centralized policy, administrated from the records department, to some delegation of control to records administrators, who implement policy in departments and sites. How much users involvement is also key. In some industries, it is only the end user who can properly categorize records. In others it is a business process driven by the records management function. All are valid, all have to be supported by an eDRM product. Security goes with industry. Government and Defense in particular has its own security model. The art with implementing security is not impacting usability. The two, security and usability can be at opposite ends of the spectrum unless they are designed in. Regulatory Compliance deals with specialized content, like high-volume management. eDRM systems must not only support this requirement, but they must meet the performance needs demands,.

14 Specialized Security Balancing Security and Usability

Government and Regulated Industries have demanding security requirements that extend to the entire document lifecycle Additional Security at the feature and system level are needed to satisfy this requirement Meridio can deliver advanced security for the entire document lifecycle Ethical Walls “Government” or Security for Classified Processing Penetration testing A common requirement in regulated industries and government is advanced security. Meridio delivers advanced security as a feature to the system. Meridio is certified by the US Department of Defense for use in classified processing. Meridio is also used in specialized intelligence applications, where it has to pass stringent penetration testing to be compliant. Many industries have specific security requirements. Industries such as professional services and audit have strict “ethical wall” requirements, to ensure that customer who are competitors do not have their proprietary information shared.

15 Microsoft Meridio 5.0 Microsoft brings records management to a wide audience in Office 2007 Meridio focuses on complex RM needs and market segments who have these high security - for Military, R&D, etc. scalability geographically, on User and content ILM, storage management and secure archiving replication, federation, offline high-volume -management, instant message capture certification for DOD, TNA, PRO, etc. all with usage of familiar tools for eDRM Meridio and Microsoft offer a joint value proposition in records management. According to the Gartner Group, less than 20% of organization today have their electronic records properly managed. That is a staggeringly small number, given the risks involved. Microsoft Office 2007 will integrate records features directly into the Office platform. This will expand electronic records by making records technologies more readily accessible. Meridio will focus on the more complex records management capabilities that are faced in regulated industries and government. Microsoft enables record creation for the enterprise, Meridio ensures the records are managed in a compliant manner.

16 Records Center Integration Meridio for Practical Scalability

An organization wants to use out-of-the-box records functionality within SharePoint Routing via content types SharePoint Hold functionality Records Reports Retention of records driven by SharePoint policies Need to store records content externally In a compliance storage device (e.g. EMC Centera) In more cost-effective storage As active information within the daily processes of the organization To combine out-of-the-box records functionality with some advanced Meridio records functionality

17 Declaring a Record User selects a document to make it a record

They send the Document to the Standard Records Repository

18 Routing Records through Meridio

Records Content can be stored Externally in Meridio – but still be used within the Records Center

19 Meridio Records in the Records Center

The Records appear as Smart Shortcuts in the Record Center

20 Smart Shortcut Records in Context with Collaboration

Smart Shortcut links a Meridio Record to a SharePoint Collaboration Linkage is transparent to users Full access to the record through the collaboration Includes Records Metadata Fully Searchable in SharePoint Extend Records Re-Use to SharePoint No question if SharePoint Content has been made into a record Users do not loose track of the records made in the collaboration

21 Records Re-Use Turning Raw Content into Knowledge

Records carry the memory of an organization Where raw content is validated as a definitive, final record Meridio leverages Records in Information Management Not just a discovery archive, but an active information source Delivers the Practical Capacity to support Records Re-use Environment where end users constantly access the records repository directly as an information source Meridio will Link Records to their source in SharePoint with a Smart Shortcut™

22 End User View of Record Re-Use

The Smart Shortcut links the TeamSite back to the Meridio Records Repository

23 Administrative Interface

A Smart Shortcut is Defined for this Document Library

24 Meridio Email Management in 2007

Server-Side capture Meridio continues to integrate with the Journal within Exchange 2007 Exchange journal rules combine with the Meridio rules for selecting which s are stored as records Client-side capture The Meridio Outlook client gives access to the Meridio repository through Outlook – and allows users to store and categorize s through drag-and-drop For organizations that organize and manage s like a normal letter and fax - Outlook 2007 managed folders can be used to target the Meridio repository

25 Server-Side Email integration with Meridio

Exchange Store Outlook Managed Folders Journal Rules (e.g. triggered by Classification) Exchange Journal Auto-Copy rules Rules Engine Listener Process IM Listener Process Filestore Listener Rules Meridio Functionality Meridio Rules Composer

26 Management of E-Mail Manually in Outlook

Drag & Drop s and attachments from Inbox to Meridio Meridio automatically capture the Metadata and index the content from the and the attached documents Outlook rules can be used as well While stored in the Fileplan the appropriate Retention period become assigned User are familiar with the process because it’s pretty much the same than move s to *.PST But s then in context with the relevant Case (Order, contract,etc) User has the same responsibility for Letter, FAX and Mailboxes (and Exchange-Server) and storage space become reduced Users are forced to decide and act Industries such as Financial Services have strict requirement for the management of . An eDRM system must ensure that

27 Practical Scalability Requirement to Leverage Records as Knowledge

Users have to be “close” to the information they need to do their jobs Replication moves documents and records for performance and scalability Federation combines different systems into the same interface

28 Replication In geographically distributed environments, Replication is essential to achieve performance Meridio supports selective replication One to one One to Many Replication allows Meridio to meet the most demanding of performance needs in the face of broad geographic diversity in centralized implementations System A File Plan System B System C File Plan File Plan

29 SharePoint Storage Management ILM for SharePoint Content

Content is migrated from SharePoint to Meridio automatically or manually Meridio ILM migrates content between storage devices Content continues to be accessible to users from within SharePoint document libraries and searching Regardless of storage device

30 Information Lifecycle Management Links content to its expected usage and value

Storage Class Rapid Access High Availability Low Cost Elsewhere Document Storage Policy assigns a single Schedule to each piece of content Storage Class maps to target device Schedule 1 Schedule 2 Schedule 3 60 days since content last accessed AND Not the latest version of the document File format is JPEG Within a schedule any storage class whose conditions evaluate to true will store the content

31 Exposed in Policy Management

SharePoint Policy is leveraged to define when content is migrated to External Storage

32 No Impact on the User Experience

Document exhibits normal behavior in the TeamSite

33 No Impact on the User Experience

Access like any other document

34 Meridio Solution for Governance

Robust Information Management Facility Turns Content into Knowledge to drive an Organizations Information Management needs Satisfies Regulatory Compliance Requirements With certified Document, Records and Management Provides Enterprise-class Scalability Handle the highest volumes and most demanding geographic diversity Delivers Lowest Cost of Ownership in Storage Robust Information Lifecycle Management (ILM) strategy Complements Office 2007 Leverage Office 2007 User Experience Delivers advanced Storage Management

35 RecordsManagement Statoil, Norway – 60% market share on Oil in Scandinavia Requirement was general EDRM and Compliance approx new documents every month Requirement to store and manage content for 50years plus Microsoft has involved Meridio and won against well know competitors Microsoft renewed their EA agreement and replaced Notes with Exchange User in 29 countries uses Meridio via SharePoint Portal SharePoint 2003 MS Office Outlook Replication EMC Centera “Meridio, together with Microsoft®, addresses our requirement to provide a records management capability to our employees quickly and without a major change management programme building on the Microsoft® collaboration platform”. Ole Jorgensen, ICT Director, Statoil "Meridio has become an important element within the Statoil Information Architecture and will allow us to securely manage all of our essential business information assets. It will improve collaboration, introduce new business efficiencies and minimize compliance risk” Ole Jorgensen, ICT director, Statoil

36 - Management ConocoPhillips - Housten, Texas - users, 43 location worldwide - revenue 2005 approx. 136 billion US s were year by year stored in local PST-files Loss, no general access, no compliance, etc. They found approx PST’s files with an average size of Ø 2 GB ConocoPhillips did an evaluation of 12 vendors Microsoft brought Meridio “in the game”… - RFI, PROC, Pilot, … After six month ConocoPhillips decide for Meridio Deep and transparent Integration in Microsoft Outlook, Office, .NET and Web, Storage management for the whole life cycle of content High security on content Integration in Exchange Server 100% Microsoft Platform for all Server’s Scalability for volume and also geographically without limit Reference Customer in same the Industry with the same structure and size “Best – Fit” for the -Management and support regard the Compliance requirements at ConocoPhillips ROI – shows up very very soon Conoco can fulfil their compliance requirements first time ever since foundation Search, selection and presentation of content reduced from up to 500 MT to 2 to 8 MT First time ever they can reuse every ever generated information for “Best-Practice” and to be faster Well known Infrastructure, well known tools – Outlook

37 Summary Office 2007 Meridio combined with SharePoint provides

External storage for archived data External storage for records in the records repository Collaboration on archived data Flexible management of information ILM for externally stored information Full integration with Office 2007 policy and records features, including workflow Seamless Office 2007 experience for end-users Advanced records management for companies with complex information requirements, or in highly regulated industries

38 Summary general Secure Archiving, Document- and Records-Management

Deepest Integration in Office and SPS/MOSS – 100% .NET Provides the platform for your Compliance and SOX – Solutions Meets local and international Standards – DOD, TNA, MoReq, ISO, etc. Low training- and integration effort and also TCO high acceptance while using familiar interfaces Enable distributed Infrastructure - from over the street to worldwide Approved from 50 to >300 K User’s and hundred Millions of documents All type of information also physical Records, s and IM certified SAP Interface Best Performance and Cost-Balance for your stored content with ILM

39 Thanks for your time ! Your questions ? Günter Sandmann

- General Manager Central- and Eastern Europe - Phone: Web: