NEWS RELEASE

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

April 23, 2020

UTILISMART CORPORATION ACQUIRES MERIDIO SOLUTIONS

(LONDON,ON) Utilismart Corporation (“UC”), a North American leader in utility data management and analytics, announces the acquisition of Meridio Solutions.

Meridio Solutions is a software business that provides cloud-based engineering and operations software for utilities. Headquartered in Vancouver, BC, the company provides products and services to customers across North America.

“We’re excited to welcome Meridio Solutions to Utilismart Corporation,” said Steve Ray, President of Utilismart Corporation. “We’re confident that this acquisition will bring new opportunities for our combined customers and we look forward to expanding our offering and expertise in this sector. As we add depth to our product lineup, ultimately it is our customers who benefit.”

Meridio Solutions will conduct business under the name Meridio Solutions powered by Utilismart and will continue to operate from its office in Vancouver. UC intends to integrate Meridio Solutions’ software technology into its own portfolio, offering new and existing customers even more options to make use of their many data sources for decision making.

“We are thrilled to be joining Utilismart Corporation and its subsidiary companies. Meridio Solutions is a great strategic fit and we believe that by leveraging our combined strengths, we can offer even greater value to our new and existing customers.” Mark Liljefors, CEO, Meridio Solutions.

Utilismart Corporation offers a “big data” solution for electrical, gas, and water utilities. The solution includes an advanced meter data management system as the foundation of the sophisticated digital utility platform that integrates data from many sources, enabling utilities to unlock 21st-century smart grid technologies. The company prides itself on helping customers convert data into prudent decisions and offers secure cloud-based technology to do so. Utilismart is an ISO 27001:2013 certified company.

###