On this page (Skip to Section)...

Book: Carrie by Stephen King

About the Author Stephen King

Excerpts from the original text

Carrie Book Summary

Carrie's Book Review

Introduction: Stephen King Carrie Book Review & Summary

Stephen King's legendary debut is about a teenage outcast and the revenge she enacts on her classmates.

Carrie White may have been unfashionable and unpopular, but she had a gift. Carrie could make things move by concentrating on them. A candle would fall. A door would lock. This was her power and her sin.

Then, an act of kindness, as spontaneous as the vicious taunts of her classmates, offered Carrie a chance to be normal and go to her senior prom.

But another act--of ferocious cruelty--turned her gift into a weapon of horror and destruction that her classmates would never forget.

Carrie White is no ordinary girl.

Carrie White has a gift of telekinesis.

To be invited to Prom Night by Tommy Ross is a dream come true for Carrie-the first step towards social acceptance by her high school colleagues

But events will take a decidedly macabre turn on that horrifying and endless night as she is forced to exercise her terrible gift on the town that mocks and loathes her.

"Not since Dickens has a writer had so many readers by the throat...King's imagination is vast. He knows how to engage the deepest sympathies of his readers...one of the great storytellers of our time."---- Guardian

"A writer of excellence...King is one of the most fertile storytellers of the modern novel."---- The Sunday Times

"One of the few horror writers who can truly make the flesh creep"----- Sunday Express

Book: Carrie by Stephen King

Carrie is a 1974 horror novel, the first by American author Stephen King. Set in Chamberlain, Maine, the plot revolves around Carrie White, a friendless, bullied high-school girl from an abusive religious household who discovers she has telekinetic powers. Wikipedia

Originally published: April 5, 1974

Author: Stephen King

Genres: Horror, Horror fiction, Epistolary novel

Pages: 199

Buy from Amazon

About the Author Stephen King

Stephen King is one of the American novelists with the most readers and the greatest reputation in the world today. Born in Portland, Maine, USA in 1947, he studied English Literature at Maine State University.

In the mid-1970s, Stephen King rose to fame and was hailed as the "master of modern thriller novels" by the New York Times.

Since the 1980s, his works have always topped the list of bestsellers in the United States over the years, and his royalties have exceeded tens of millions of dollars.

He won the Bram Stoker Award six times, the International Horror Literature Association Award six times, and the O. Henry Award in 1996.

In 2003, he was awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award of the National Book Awards for "inheriting the great tradition of American literature of paying attention to plot and atmosphere, reflecting the beautiful and tragic moral truth deep in the human soul".

He was awarded the Allan Poe Master Award in 2007-Lifetime Achievement Award. He is known for his horror novels, which vividly summarize the entire development of this type of novel. His works also include science fiction, fantasy novels, and other novel types.

But his works are far beyond the category of genre novels. He is not a cheap wholesaler of horror. His works go deep into the heart, question humanity, and show the soul.

What it achieves is a true psychological thriller is a true man. Not a literary master.

In the 30-year creative career of Stephen King, he has written more than 200 short stories and 40 books, which have been translated into 33 languages ​​and distributed to 35 countries, with a total of more than 300 million copies printed.

What's more worth mentioning is that more than 70 movies and TV shows are based on his works, thus setting the Guinness World Record.

Excerpts from the original text

People don’t necessarily get better, but they become smarter. When you become smarter, you will continue to do things like breaking the wings of flies. You just figured out a better reason for doing this kind of thing.—— Quoted from page 78

Carrie Book Summary

The most important precaution for reading a story is to remember that you have nothing to do with the story, but this is what a good story destroys in the end.

In this more than 200-page novel, there is a sentence: "The eyes are the only part of her body that has not been completely dyed red."

The difference between a novel and life is that after all this has happened, the novel has only seventy-four pages. This story begins with a girl’s menarche and ends with a fire that almost burns the entire town.

Of course, all this has never happened, no matter from which point of view. It may even be a conjecture of this girl in the novel, fortunately at least not in the novel.

I used to think that when I opened my debut work, I would get blood on my hands. After many disappointments, I no longer imagined it.

But when I opened Mr. Si's "debut" in a sense, I accidentally tasted the sweetness similar to menarche.

The painstaking work of reading a writer is actually very close to the break. Whether there is a second time is really a matter of life and death for everyone.

This novel obviously belongs to the kind that can be "do it again". The novel chooses a closed town. The novel chooses a mother who feels that she is a serious disease of female genital organs, including pregnancy.

The novel also selects a bunch of people who witness the misfortune of others but only laugh. In the end, these people almost all died. In this sense, I think this novel can be regarded as a happy ending.

This is a story about a child unless you have never experienced the stage when you were a child. No matter how far away you are at that stage, or in the middle of it;

this is a story about prejudice unless you have never been marginalized, never regarded as an outsider by a strange group. Unless you never feel about it.

The process of a person's growth is almost a process of constant contact with strangers. The path of the intestines where the pupa turns into a butterfly is full of doubts, crowding out, and hurting.

The biggest harm is that "Where did you get this confidence" can be a pupa turned into a butterfly, why can't you accept that you are a caterpillar for the rest of your life?

In this way, when you want to insult someone when you want to hurt, you can naturally accept that you are just a public spare tire.

That is to say, the original intention of hurting and insulting a person to the point of being exhausted is often just idle or idle.

In the novel, the injury suffered by the girl along the way is characterized as "everything seems logical and inevitable" so that she can get used to it, so she can also deceive herself into believing that all people are inevitable.

What people have to learn is to get used to being isolated, excluded, hatred and insulted, and more importantly, they need to realize that passers-by who are paying attention to all of this will turn a blind eye to these, not just because they are commonplace, but because everyone is busy.

If this is not a novel but a life, then the years will really be quiet and sunny. It's a pity that this is a novel, but fortunately, this is a novel: "Suddenly, all of this and the overwhelming criticism have reached a critical point.

The ultimate contempt, insult, and ridicule that have been sought for a long time have finally appeared. Fission." If you say Menarche is like breaking the seal, at this moment the little sister Jiali finally turned into a super demon.

"They want to extinguish my fire." At this time, the little girl doesn't care about "Her melancholy in an instant gives people the illusion of beauty." She will burn everyone's illusion with fire, the illusion that she can be bullied at will...

The novel depicts the scene of the massacre like a carnival: flesh and blood are flying, the fire is raging, no one can stay out of the matter, and no one can just laugh at one side.

Something will always happen in the novel, unlike in life, it can only be the same in most cases.

Nothing in life is the same, and the story is never really irrelevant to the reader.

Carrie's Book Review

Many readers always want to read good stories, and there are people who aspire to be writers who want to be inspired by good stories, but when you get such inspiration, how to play with it is what everyone expects, just like the Lord of the Rings.

The novel is not long, but after reading it, my hands tremble uncontrollably. I do not know why either. The novel is based on campus bullying and female revenge.

Under the superpower setting of "spiritual actuation", Carrie completes the rebellion against her mother and revenges her glamorous and stupid classmates.

The entire town of Chamberlain is almost destroyed by fire. Water flow and electric current.

When I was reading a novel, I couldn't help thinking about how shocking the movie scene should be.

The multi-angle narrative method makes people know from the beginning that this story will go to an irreversible and destructive ending, but the delicate psychological description makes people tempted to follow the depressed and bullied Jiali all the time to hope for the moment before the explosion. A short period of anxiety and sweet tranquility.