Hopkinton, Mass. - October 04, 2007 -

EMC Corporation, the world leader in information infrastructure solutions, today announced that it has acquired Utah-based Berkeley Data Systems, Inc., a privately-held provider of online information backup and recovery services. Berkeley Data Systems provides Mozy - the industry’s premier online subscription services for the protection of data that resides on desktops, laptops and remote office servers. The transaction will not have a material impact on EMC revenues or EPS for 2007.

“Mozy’s technology and online delivery model has proven itself to be one of the industry’s most admired offerings for customers looking to safely and cost-effectively backup and recover their digital information stored on desktops, laptops, and remote office servers,” said Tom Heiser, EMC SVP, Corporate Development and New Ventures. "The acquisition of Mozy is a natural extension of EMC’s leadership in the protection and security of personal and business information. We will continue to invest in Mozy’s full portfolio of online backup and recovery services and advance the Mozy brand in the marketplace."

“I have been researching and developing internet-scale storage and information management solutions throughout my career,” said Josh Coates, founder and former CEO of Berkeley Data Systems. "EMC and Berkeley Data Systems are a natural fit, and I’m confident that EMC is the right organization to take Mozy to the next level. I look forward to working with EMC to continue innovating in the storage and information management industry."

Among Mozy’s numerous service accolades this year, Walt Mossberg of The Wall Street Journal writes that he prefers Mozy; Time Magazine readers ranked Mozy.com as the #1 website in 2007; Consumer Reports recommended Mozy to readers on the strength of its feature set and control capabilities; and Smart Computing gave its "Smart Choice" award to Mozy for its full backup abilities, ease of use, and private key encryption option.