History

Founded in 2005, Mozy was originally created by Berkeley Data Systems of American Fork, Utah. In October 2007, EMC acquired Berkeley Data Systems, along with the Mozy product line for $76 million. Data Systems and PI corporation. Mozy is headquartered in Seattle, Washington, though the majority of its employees are in its Pleasant Grove, Utah offices. On September 7, 2016, Dell Inc. acquired EMC Corporation to form Dell Technologies, restructuring the original company as a subsidiary of Dell Technologies.

Products

Mozy produces three products: MozyHome, MozyPro, and MozyEnterprise.

MozyHome is the consumer version of the Mozy backup service.buy on a monthly subscription, or on various other plans. In January 2012 Mozy opened the public beta of its cloud storage / synchronization feature called Mozy Stash, for free. MozyHome previously offered users an unlimited amount of storage space. In February 2011 they closed the unlimited service and are charging according to how much space is used.

MozyPro is the business class version of the Mozy backup service. Originally launched in 2007, MozyPro pricing was updated in 2012 for businesses to back up any number of computers for one price. For server backup, a business purchases the Server Pass for an additional monthly charge and back up as many servers as they like.

MozyEnterprise is for larger organizations and includes support for Active Directory, user groups (in a company), and more administrator control over user rights. For Mozy administrators, the company detailed its keyless activation and pooled storage features in a 2013 EMC blog post. Mozy has more than 800 enterprise customers. With all Mozy products, after the initial backup, Mozy only backs up new or changed portions of files. Backups can take place when the computer is not in use, either automatically, and at scheduled times. All user data is encrypted locally with strong encryption prior to transfer via a 128-bit SSL connection. Users can choose a managed encryption key or choose a personal key for added security. Mozy's security does not let end-users shortcut the data deletion process. Mozy is both SSAE 16 Type 2 and ISO 27001 certified.

In May 2010, Mozy launched MozyHome 2.0 and MozyPro 2.0, adding support for local backup, increased performance and a new user interface for consumers and small businesses.

In December 2013 Mozy nearly won both "Backup and Recovery/Archive Product of the Year" and "Cloud Storage Product of the Year" title from SVC Awards with Barracuda Message Archiver by Barracuda Networks and Cloud Disaster Recovery Service by EVault products in front.

Restore

In 2011, Mozy launched "restore manager" - a software tool to simplify the process of retrieving files from the Mozy cloud. It is also possible to restore through the Mozy client, in the Windows file tree or by ordering DVD disks from Mozy. Users can restore either the last version of any file backed up or any previous iteration backed up in the preceding thirty days or ninety days depending on the product.