SEATTLE, Washington - November 17, 2008 -

EMC Corporation (NYSE:EMC), the world leader in information infrastructure solutions, today established Decho Corporation (www.decho.com), a new company focused on helping people protect, manage and enrich the ever-growing quantity of personal digital information in their lives, also known as an individual's "digital echo." Decho will be a combination of two formerly separate EMC businesses - Mozy, Inc. and Pi Corp. Decho will continue to offer consumers and businesses the top-rated MozyTM-branded online backup service ( www.mozy.com), as well as introduce new cloud-based services for individuals over time.

The personal information once stored in albums, boxes and filing cabinets-such as financial records, personal documents, family photos and videos, portfolios of professional work, and correspondence-comprises each person's digital echo. This information is increasingly scattered across different computers, digital devices and web sites. The quantity of personal digital information produced every year around the world is now measured in the hundreds of billions of gigabytes and is expected to continue to grow annually by almost 60 percent, according to analysts. Moreover, the lifespan of this information is beginning to be measured in decades, and it is ever more valuable and often irreplaceable.

The shift of personal information from physical to digital has not yet been accompanied by a parallel shift in the way this information is organized and preserved in digital form. Decho will help individuals take full control of their digital echo through a set of cloud-based services that will enable easy and full utilization, organization and enrichment of important personal information.

"There is an immense, untapped business opportunity as personal information management inevitably migrates into the cloud," said David Goulden, EMC Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer. "By bringing Mozy and Pi together to form Decho as a new subsidiary, we are creating a focused organization that can deliver on the promise of cloud-based personal information management and can help individuals everywhere preserve, manage and enrich the information most important to them."

Decho's initial service offering is the Mozy online backup service, the leading online backup service for both consumers and businesses. With over 900,000 users and over 25,000 business customers, Mozy safeguards over 10 petabytes (over ten million gigabytes) of customer information at its datacenters around the world. Mozy online back up offers the most comprehensive online backup solution on the market, and offers simple, automatic and secure online backup for both consumers and businesses, with support for laptops, desktops and servers running either Mac OS X or Windows.

Decho is wholly owned by EMC, which acquired Mozy, Inc. in October 2007 and Pi Corp. in February 2008. Pi was originally founded by Paul Maritz, who was named CEO of VMware earlier this year. The new company will maintain and grow its development and operations centers in Bangalore, Montreal, Seattle and Utah. The company will be headquartered in Seattle.