HOPKINTON, MASS - January 22, 2008 -

EMC Corporation (NYSE: EMC), the world leader in information infrastructure solutions, today unveiled its software-as-a-service (SaaS) strategy and the release of MozyEnterprise™ powered by EMC Fortress™ for online backup of desktops, laptops and remote Windows servers. EMC also announced several new reseller agreements with business partners to offer MozyEnterprise online backup services to their customers. Additionally, EMC is expanding its relationship with Verizon Business to offer this new set of SaaS capabilities.

"Our strategy is focused on bringing new software-as-a-service offerings to market, powered by EMC," said Tom Heiser, Senior Vice President and General Manager of EMC's new Software-as-a-Service Business Unit. "We've introduced EMC Fortress, a secure, multi-tenant, scalable SaaS delivery platform providing customers with centralized billing, management and metering. EMC has more than 25 years of information infrastructure management and protection market leadership, and has brought this continued innovation in infrastructure solutions to bear on delivering a new class of SaaS solutions designed to support the enterprise IT needs for customers of all sizes."

MozyEnterprise automates secure online backup and recovery over the Internet for consistent and reliable off-site data protection for remote desktops, laptops and branch office servers. It is the first EMC SaaS application to be built on EMC Fortress, a secure, hardened enterprise-class platform for SaaS delivery. EMC's SaaS strategy calls for the delivery of additional IT-based SaaS applications built on the EMC Fortress platform over time, in key areas such as trusted data services.

Today more than 500,000 business and consumer users trust the Mozy technology to back up their information, including General Electric, Pariveda, NTG Systems, Vanderbilt University and Free The Children.

"Mozy provides Free The Children employees-both domestic and abroad-with easy-to-use, secure and reliable automated backup and an ability to recover data should something happen to a computer," said Aimable Mugara, IT Director, Free The Children, the world's largest network of children helping children through education, with more than one million youth involved in innovative education and development programs in 45 countries. "This solution provides our organization with a centralized and automated view of our backup operation for desktops, laptops and remote Windows servers located anywhere on the network. Mozy's business continuity solutions offer a great way to maximize uptime and provide critical data recovery while minimizing gaps in data protection."

MozyEnterprise Integrates Enterprise-class Security and Support

MozyEnterprise is a new offering based on the award-winning Mozy™; family of online backup SaaS solutions that became part of EMC with the October 2007 acquisition of Berkeley Data Systems. MozyEnterprise is an enhanced, highly scalable online backup and recovery solution that has been made enterprise-ready with several new features important to enterprise customers, including:

Enhanced security through RSA, the Security Division of EMC™ including integrated key management, authentication and authorization security features

Rapid enterprise-wide deployment options such as assisted activation, auto-activation and proxy support as well as physical seeding up to 2 TB for larger devices to speed delivery of first backups and facilitate rapid rollouts in an enterprise environments

Enterprise-class availability and support options tailored to meet the more demanding performance and availability needs required by large organizations

Economical off-site data protection for remote servers, desktops and laptops located anywhere on a network—comparable solutions cost up to 10 times more than MozyEnterprise.

MozyEnterprise Available Through EMC and Key Resellers

MozyEnterprise is available through EMC's direct sales organization with the support of EMC SaaS sales specialists. Additionally, EMC will offer MozyEnterprise through reseller agreements with eFileCabinet, FusionStorm and TelX. EMC is also expanding its relationship with Verizon Business to leverage its EMC Fortress architecture and MozyEnterprise. Resellers and their customers will benefit from minimal ongoing maintenance and training requirements, customization options, and the lower total cost of ownership benefits inherent in the enterprise SaaS model.

"The total cost of ownership and speed of deployment of a SaaS model versus a 'traditional' on-premise model is impressive, especially long term. Online backup and recovery for edge devices, such as desktops and laptops, is a critical service our enterprise customers are asking for to protect data and address business continuity needs. By working with EMC, Verizon Business will be able to provide our customers with automated data protection services coupled with easy deployment. As Verizon Business grows its SaaS offerings beyond the communications applications space into IT management services, MozyEnterprise backup and recovery fits well into our expanding SaaS delivery capabilities."

-- Nancy Gofus, Chief Marketing Officer and Senior Vice President of Verizon Business

"We're pleased to partner with EMC, the world leader in next generation backup solutions. eFileCabinet's Concentsus™ online backup service, combined with the award winning Mozy online backup technology delivers a compelling and reliable high performance system for users to cost-effectively protect their valuable data assets from natural or computer disasters."

-- Matt Peterson, COO of eFileCabinet

"The cost-efficiency of a SaaS model is heralded by our customers as a huge advantage to their IT and business operations. Combining EMC's storage prowess, Fusion Storm's engineering expertise in providing full lifecycle services for IT, and Mozy's online backup technology offers customers a solution to satisfy their appetites for online backup and recovery of enterprise end user and application data. We're excited for customers to reap the benefits of this partnership."

-- Josh Krasnegor, VP of Marketing of FusionStorm

"EMC has a consistent track record of delivering powerful data protection and information infrastructure solutions. Its SaaS offering is a natural fit with Telx's offerings. Customers will now benefit from the combination of Mozy's award-winning online backup technology and Telx's world-class interconnectivity solutions available in our carrier-neutral network rich, collocation facilities nationwide."

-- Eric Shepcaro, Chairman and CEO of Telx

Pricing and Availability

MozyEnterprise powered by EMC Fortress is available immediately in North America through EMC and its reseller partners. EMC plans to offer MozyEnterprise to its partners and customers outside of North America later in 2008. MozyEnterprise requires no minimum contract and imposes no fees for early service cancellation. Monthly subscription list prices are:

Desktop/laptop - $5.25/mo. per desktop/laptop plus $0.70/mo. per gigabyte protected

Windows Server - $9.25/mo. per supported Windows server plus $2.35/mo. per gigabyte protected