Tennessee Williams was the pen name for the playwright Thomas Lanier Williams (1911 -- 1983), who was born in rural Mississippi before moving to St. Louis with his family at age seven. As a child, Williams was bullied at school for his Southern accent, which was how he acquired the nickname "Tennessee." Plagued by a distressing, unstable home life, he sought refuge in writing from a young age. Although he claimed to dislike living in St. Louis (he called it "St. Pollution"), his biographers have noted that the city thoroughly shaped Tennessee Williams as a writer. He received a strong education in the city's primary and secondary schools, and he later attended the University of Missouri at Columbia, as well as Washington University in St. Louis, where some of his early plays were produced. Eventually, he graduated with a B.A. from the University of Iowa in 1938.

Williams was best known for writing plays that explored complex, emotionally-charged family dynamics. Several of his Broadway plays were so successful that they were afterwards made into Hollywood films. These include The Glass Menagerie (1944), followed by A Streetcar Named Desire (1947), starring Marlon Brando in the role of Stanley Kowalski, a character based on a real-life figure whom Williams encountered while working at a shoe factory in St. Louis. Cat on a Hot Tin Roof (1955) was also produced on Broadway and later made into a movie starring Elizabeth Taylor and Paul Newman. Much like his plays, which featured troubled relationships, Williams' own personal life was challenging, and it provided fodder for his writing. Many of his characters were inspired by family members, including his sister, Rose, and by the other people that he met throughout his life.

Later, Tennessee Williams penned two volumes of poetry, as well as his memoirs, while also continuing to write plays that were influenced by his time in St. Louis. In 1977, he gave a poetry reading at Washington University's Graham Chapel. His play, A Lovely Sunday at Creve Coeur (1979) featured the landscape of St. Louis, where he spent a total of nineteen years, despite that he claimed to miss living in the rural South, a region romanticized in his writing. Although he often described St. Louis as confining, the city influenced the playwright as much as any other place he lived, particularly New Orleans and Provincetown, Massachusetts. Williams' long-term relationship with the Sicilian-American Frank Merlo, whom he met in New Orleans in 1947 and spent time with in Provincetown, lasted for fourteen years until Merlo's death in 1961.

A statue of the playwright was placed in the "Writers' Corner" section of the Central West End neighborhood in St. Louis where Tennessee Williams once lived. Designed by Harry Weber, it is located on Euclid and McPherson Avenues, near the statues of two other major American writers (the novelist Kate Chopin and the Modernist poet T.S. Eliot) who lived in the same neighborhood in earlier generations. Every year, the Tennessee Williams Festival of St. Louis continues to celebrate the playwright by performing his plays. In 2021, an outdoor performance of The Glass Menagerie was staged outside of the apartment building where Williams lived in the Central West End. As part of the temporary outdoor set, the performers made use of the building's fire escapes as significant theatrical elements that featured symbolically in Tennessee Williams' play.