The core of the work I do is to help humans tap into their authenticity, remove the masks they have worn for years, heal from the traumatic experiences that created the masks, so that they are able to live the lives they were sent here to live! So, when I saw this piece from my Mentor and Coach, David Adeoye Abodunrin , I knew everyone needed to watch and benefit from it! Coach David went deep on this one…yet, in the simplest form possible! https://lnkd.in/dA3u5ePy

Gibson TV's amazing YouTube series Metal and Monsters has returned with episode 3. That's my TV sorted for this evening! I've said this before but the marriage of metal and horror has inspired me possibly more than anything else in my life. It's most definitely a lifelong thing for a lot of people like me. But even if you're not a fan of metal or horror, you could learn an awful lot about fan engagement and audience development from both. They both talk directly to the heart of their audience. Not trying to appeal to everyone but recognising kindred spirits and communicating with them in effective ways that cultivate long-lasting communities. In your formative years, feeling like you're part of a tribe can mean the world and gives you confidence to go forward into adulthood knowing who you are. That's priceless. When you listen to the many great artists on this series, whether they make action figures, design ghost ride sets, play bass in Pantera or play Freddy Krueger in Nightmare on Elm St, they all discuss with great passion, the things that inspired them to become who they are. I highly recommend you watch this series. You'll love it if you like metal and/or horror culture. But I'd also suggest you watch it even if you don't - you won't find many better templates for audience development than metal music or the culture around horror movies. #musicdiscovery #musicindustry #gibson #guitars #culture #audienceengagement #audiencedevelopment #fanengagement

Who is the voice of Mike Wazowski in Monsters, Inc.? Since its release in 2001, the animated classic "Monsters, Inc." has won over fans all around the world. The film has a large ensemble of entertaining and colourful characters, with Mike Wazowski serving as one of its key stars. Mike, who is a beloved character and a pop cultural legend in his own right, is voiced by actor Billy Crystal. In this article, we'll examine Mike Wazowski, the endearing green monster with one eye, in more detail. We'll also examine his appearance in the film "Monsters, Inc.," as well as the effect he's had on viewers over the years. Click the link below for an interesting read! #film #voiceover #blogpost