It feels like a lot of horror movies these past few years have been begging a particular question, and In A Violent Nature might be the one that begs it the most: How many more slashers until we feel like we’re back in a slasher film golden age?

Can In a Violent Nature Birth the Next Horror Icon?

How many more iconic designs do you have to render, how many more insane kills that defy biology and physics and human decency before we feel we have a new crop of killers as iconic as Freddy Krueger, Michael Myers, and (most importantly to this film) Jason Voorhees? Because, outside of Art the Clown, the simple elegance of In A Violent Nature’s killer Johnny, is the closest I’ve felt to seeing an iconic new killer in theatres. He’s got the design, the backstory, the cool weapon, and the mask. And he is, if nothing else, more brutal than brutal. But those aren’t the only reasons why he and this movie work so well.

For those who haven’t been keeping up with the hype train surrounding this film, In A Violent Nature is your typical slasher, but with one big caveat: it is shot almost entirely from the killer’s perspective. This means eschewing non-diegetic sound, and not going too hard on the killer teleporting around in the woods or being too supernaturally skilled. It’s kept grounded, with the camera continuously following Johnny rather than only giving brief glimpses, granting the audience some intimacy in understanding him. Johnny is an ever-present force, and the unique nature of how he’s shown will be enough to hook many people (no pun intended).

The movie achieves its goal in terms of visuals, with naturalistic lighting and great directing to capture Johnny’s domain and the way he moves through it. Writer-Director Chris Nash and DP Pierce Derks are a natural team, and I should have expected the film to be this good-looking since they were carrying experience over from working on one of my favorite horror films of all time: The Void. On the audio side of things, I still wish the foley work had been a little louder and more pronounced given how gruesome the film gets, with some kills feeling weirdly muted and quiet given what he’s doing to these people. Otherwise, the cinematography passes with flying colors.

Can Johnny Take the Place of Jason Voorhees?

Despite the visual distinction and its fun kills, many will be crying out that In A Violent Nature is just another pastiche of Jason Voorhees traipsing through the trees with an axe, as a few of the disgruntled people leaving my theatre audibly felt. And the cast of mostly stock characters that are annoying by design doesn’t help the allegations. But Johnny is an iteration of the archetype that is explicitly sympathetic, and the film goes to lengths to make you like him and even feel bad for him in the same way many Jason fans feel about their favorite villain.

Advertisement

The movie takes something that would be delegated to a brief scene or to subtext in another slasher and makes it the driving force of the movie: the humanity of the monster gleaming through is at center stage here, with a personality underlying his titular behavior. The monster is equal parts unstoppable death machine and complex human, which I know sounds silly, but is a compelling spin when you’re telling an all too familiar tale.

Visually, this is communicated in some really fun ways. The juxtaposition of a monster man trudging through a field of daisies is a kind of funny if not endearing presentation. All of the nature documentary shots of our killer slipping through the underbrush and tall grass feel like we’re taking a journey with him rather than witnessing something sinister. That journey just happens to be broken up by a lot of scenes of him mutilating the people who get in his way.

Viewers Looking for Over the Top Kills Will Be Satisfied

In terms of his kills, plenty of moviegoers have been and will be talking about the movie’s most over-the-top fatality. It is nasty, unexpectedly brutal, and the effects for it and every other kill in the movie are unrelentingly good. This is most likely thanks to visual effects supervisor Jeff Bruneel, who worked on Jason X, one of the best in the franchise SFX-wise. In the right light, they even render some pretty disturbing shots.

But I do suspect there is one major issue people will have with the film, and one I’ve been wrestling with since I left the theatre: the ending. Not the ending ending, but the last 5 minutes or so before the ending. Because (LIGHT SPOILERS AHEAD) after a very suspenseful and well-shot sequence, a character hits the brakes on the film and tells a lengthy anecdote that is, as I interpret it, a metaphor for how we as audiences see slasher villains compared to the reality of the villain in universe.

While I like the concept, the way it’s delivered will probably end up distracting you from the great suspense the film was building at that moment. Your body is wracked with tension, waiting for a painful ending, but you’re too focused on the story being told to appreciate that tension. The final moments of the film do manage to restore the anxiety somewhat, but the finale’s ability to gut-punch you with genuine fear falters. This is especially a problem when it’s slow enough to drag the film out beyond its ideal pace, as the film’s final half does feel a bit drawn out compared to the brisk pace it begins with.

Advertisement

Coming in hot before we reach the halfway point of the year, In A Violent Nature is first and foremost, a fantastic slasher with a fun little twist. Its ending will certainly divide audiences, but I suspect many like myself will be able to forgive it and enjoy its simple but effective execution (and executions). It might benefit from watching in a packed theatre thanks to the reactions its grotesque kills can elicit, but its streaming release on Shudder will surely make it a staple for the streaming service. Hopefully, as it builds its audience, Johnny will find a place as a staple horror film icon.

As someone who spent their formative film viewing years in the aughts, I find myself connecting to many obscure films. The weed-protecting, survivalist Jason Vorhees was my Jason. The terrifying, and killer, tooth fairy from Darkness Falls was my kindertrauma. Jared Padalecki was part of my generation’s House of Wax. It feels like I sometimes find myself obsessed with films that no one really cares to talk about nowadays. Upon finding out an overall theme for August, road trips, one film came to mind immediately: Joy Ride.

Lewis Thomas (Paul Walker) exchanges a plane ticket back home from college for the chance to drive his crush, Venna Wilcox (Leelee Sobieski), to their hometown in New Jersey. The only problem is that Venna lives in Colorado, while Lewis lives in California…and he doesn’t have a car. After a spur-of-the-moment car purchase, Lewis prepares to embark on the road trip of a lifetime. Only now, he has to make a pitstop in Utah to bail his brother Fuller (Steve Zahn) out of jail. Fuller joins Lewis on the trip and installs a CB radio into Lewis’s new car. One fateful interaction with a trucker named Rusty Nail (Ted Levine/Matthew Kimbrough) turns this into a road trip from hell.

Off of a solid run of films, before turning to a life of television directing (no shade, make your money king), John Dahl would slightly pivot from his neo-noir style of film to a grittier horror action piece. Written by Clay Tarver and post(ish)-Felicity, pre(ish)-Alias J.J. Abrahams, Joy Ride is a high-octane, starstudded popcorn flick that puts others of its ilk to shame. While its budget of 23 million dollars (roughly 32 million in today’s money) sounds steep…it is! Joy Ride is a visually well-polished film, but it’s hard to see where those 23 million went. The action and set pieces stand out for their top-notch production value; seemingly, no expense was spared in that department.

Joy Ride’s charm comes from the relationships between Paul Walker, Leelee Sobieski, and Steve Zahn. Each actor embodies their characters with a level of tact and professionalism that wasn’t overly present in the films of this time period. Everything about Joy Ride feels too ahead of its time. Sinking that much money into a project like this seems like it should have been a futile task. But once Rusty Nail hammers his way back into the lives of these three weary travelers, the film gets more sinister than you could imagine.

Ted Levine is unquestionably an incredible actor. The tenor and masculine vibrato of his voice could make even the most macho person quake in fear. Rusty’s endless quest to bring justice from this incredibly messed up slight, crosses the lines in too many ways. Could you imagine Rusty Nail caught up in one of those awful YouTube pranks? (Sequel idea!) Once his revenge starts, there is no stopping it. And it’s one hell of a pulse-pounding ride.

Advertisement

John Dahl crafts a perfect balance between action, comedy, and thrills. I mean, you don’t put Steve Zahn in your film if you don’t want people to at least chuckle a little. Zahn’s quips and one-liners are used sparingly, but enough that when the jokes stop flowing, and the horror picks up, you miss the jokes. His role in the film is like that shot you have before you get onto the subway to go on a first date. The comedy is a social lubricant so by the time the film completely shifts to dark and threatening, you’re yanked back in.

If you have a physical copy of Joy Ride, I highly suggest checking out the almost 30-minute-long alternate ending. Walton Goggins is in it! There are so many endings to this film, and each one surprisingly works just as well as the previous one. The theatrical ending is the most enjoyable and is a great kickstarter to two less enjoyable films.

Joy Ride is a blast from the past and is a film everyone should revisit (or watch if you haven’t seen it.) Incredible performances, exciting action sequences, and a truly terrifying antagonist make Joy Ride all gas and no brakes.

Advertisement

Full Moon Features is a goliath of B-movies. With hundreds of films to their name, Charles Band created a truly historic production and distribution company. Band would become known for producing large quantities of low-budget genre fare with something for everyone. Some of Full Moon’s most acclaimed series consist of the Puppet Master franchise, the campy vamp franchise Subspecies, and even Stuart Gordon’s Castle Freak! Plus, who hasn’t seen the poster for Gingerdead Man with Gary Busey’s name plastered dead center on the top?

As someone who has enjoyed Full Moon films in the past, I’d be lying if I said they haven’t fallen off my radar in the past few years. The newest sub-label from Full Moon Features is Pulp Noir, and their first film is here! Quadrant is a bleak look at the future of Pulp Noir.

Quadrant follows Erin (Shannon Helene Barnes), who stumbles upon an experiment for the Quadrant helmet. Designed by “scientists” Harry (Rickard Claeson) and Meg (Emma Reinagel), the helmet will transport the [willing] user into a world of their choosing. For Erin, that is England during the Jack the Ripper murders. Erin also happens to be unhealthily obsessed with said sex worker serial killer. After meeting fellow Quadrant subject Robert (Christian Carrigan), Erin starts to blur the lines between reality and the Quadrant.

Let’s get one thing perfectly clear: I love low/microbudget films. It’s the films with shoestring budgets that pull out all the stops. When working within limited budgets, you must tap into every single source to get the best final product. It’s understandable when films of this nature cut corners when needed. What isn’t understandable or acceptable is someone like Charles Band greenlighting an idea like this. The amount of AI slop flung at the wall here is laughable. But let’s get to the positives of this film before diving into that…topic.

Written by Full Moon Pictures alumn C. Courtney Joyner, is Quadrant’s biggest asset. Respectively, Full Moon isn’t known for their most high-concept stories and ideas. Quadrant is a uniquely interesting take on true crime; what would happen if those obsessed with a series of murders could go into a simulation to recreate them? Joyner’s script takes the concept to fascinating corners, examining this maybe-not-too-farfetched idea with excellence.

Advertisement

Quadrant may not be entirely sure who its lead is supposed to be; to me, Erin is the main character. The story revolves around her and her reaction to the world within Quadrant, even if she shares equal screen time with Meg, Robert, and Harry. Though the cast is haphazardly white, Shannon Helene Barnes carries this film with the grace of Atlas. Barnes tackles Erin’s character with extreme charisma and horror, and it’s genuinely entertaining and alluring to watch Erin’s arc. And every shot of Erin going absolutely crazy looks fantastic. Honestly, she’s just trying to find somebody to match her freak.

And, yes, I know you’re asking, “Does Quadrant keep with the Full Moon tradition of unwarranted sexuality?” Yes! It even stars adult film star Lexi Lore.

My goal isn’t to unnecessarily crap on Quadrant. While it’s important to consider the Full Moon Pictures oeuvre, that doesn’t mean there still can’t be care and love put into a microbudget B-movie. Quadrant, and by proxy Band, is upfront and clear with the film’s use of AI. During the opening credits, the film happily boasts credits to AI Art Supervisor Chuck Cirino and AI Artist Michael J. Sechrest. At this point I took a step back and realized the credits were rolling over AI-generated backdrops of black and white London streets. Whenever someone enters Quadrant, they’re greenscreened over garishly atrocious AI images. Each background plate is rife with inconsistencies; windows don’t match up, and the facades of storefronts are crooked and an eyesore. That’s not even mentioning the truly atrocious AI-generated creatures.

This is where my anger came in. Charles Band was an inspiration to thousands of filmmakers. From the 80s and beyond, Band pushed the envelope of what is acceptable and what should be accepted as a film. Against all odds, Charles Band was a success story. He created some truly memorable genre IPs and was the true definition of independent filmmaking. Puppet Master was a practical film with practical puppets that were practically killing people! It was the sign of a hungry filmmaker. To see someone like Charles Band abandon what made him a success, and what made fans fall in love with him, is incredibly sad to see. As stated, I have fallen off the Full Moon train in the past few years, so maybe this doesn’t come as a surprise if he’s already been on the AI train.

Quadrant is a typical Full Moon Pictures film sullied by a lack of care for creating something meaningful. Just think of how many artists are out there who grew up on Full Moon and wanted to make art because of them. Most importantly, how many would have loved the opportunity to create something for them. From Late Night With The Devil, to The People’s Joker, and now to Full Moon Pictures, AI is a disease that is ravaging too many truly creative filmmakers.

Advertisement

What is the antidote? I genuinely don’t know.

If you’re a regular fan of Full Moon and Charles Band and don’t care about the use of AI, then Quadrant will work for you. But if you can’t stand to stomach the egregious overuse of fake art and find it sad that someone like Charles Band would agree to stoop to that level, then you should skip this one.

Quadrant will be available to stream across several services starting on August 23rd.

Love physical media?

Well then Full Moon Pictures has you covered, you’ll also be able to pick up Quadrant on Blu-ray, DVD, AND even VHS!

Advertisement