While I cannot say for certain whether Yevgeny Zamyatin was influenced by Jack London's The Iron Heel, Zamyatin does not acknowledge any debt to London in the most natural place for him to have done so. Zamyatin's collection A Soviet Heretic discusses his the influences on his life and his feelings about writers of the early twentieth century. While the focus is primarily on Russian literature of the period, Zamyatin also talks about his favorite authors from elsewhere in the world. However, I don't think he even mentions Jack London, and he certainly does not identify London as a major influence.

The book contains autobiographical material, chronicling what Zamyatin presumably considered the most interesting or influential periods of his life. While Zamyatin is widely reported to have worked as a translator of Jack London's work during or after his sojourn in London from 1916 to 1918, London is not mentioned as an influence. This is followed by reprints of fifteen critical essays, dealing with specific developments in Russian literature during the period from 1914 to 1933, although most of the essays were written during the first decade of communist rule. The focus in this section of the book is heavily on Russia, and there is very little discussion of foreign influences, which makes sense, since communications between the Russian literary community and the West had cut down to almost nothing during this early period of Soviet international isolation.

The end of A Soviet Heretic though, is where Zamyatin would naturally have written about his debt to London, if he felt that there was a debt that it was important to acknowledge. The books ends with portraits and critical studies of authors that Zamyatin considered important: Russians Andrei Bely, Alexander Blok, Anton Chekhov, Maxim Gorky, and Fyodor Sologub; Westerners Anatole France, O. Henry, and H. G. Wells; as well as the Russian artist Boris Kustodiev. Jack London again is absent, while Zamyatin write extensively about the importance of Wells' twisted visions of utopia (of the kinds seen in The Sleeper Awakes and The Time Machine). The inclusion of Anatole France among Zamyatin's chosen literary lights is also interesting in this regard, since France was a great admirer of London and wrote a famous foreword to later editions of The Iron Heel; Zamyatin was probably aware of France's evaluation of London but still does not find London important enough to discuss.

So it is clear that Zamyatin had ample opportunity to discuss any influence that London's work may have had on him, yet he does not. This strongly suggests that Zamyatin did not feel that London had been important to the development of his own ideas.