(From "$200 Billion Broadband Scandal", January 2006), Updated August 2012.

AT&T — SBC, Southwestern Bell, Pacific Telesis, Ameritech, SNET, AT&T, BellSouth

Verizon — Bell Atlantic, NYNEX, GTE, MCI, Alltel

CenturyLink— Formerly CenturyTel and Qwest, formerly US West.

They put Humpty Dumpty Back together again -- and it is to the detriment of competition, broadband and the US economy.

For over 100 years, Ma Bell, sometimes called the "Bell System" sometimes called "AT&T", controlled almost all telecommunications in the US. Once the largest company in the world with over one million employees, the company consisted of 22 local Bell companies, (including New York Telephone and Ohio Bell), AT&T Long Lines, (the long distance division) as well as Western Electric, (the subsidiary that manufactured telephone equipment) and Bell Labs, one of the premier research organizations.

Then in 1984, because of the monopoly control the company had over phone service, the company was broken-up and the local Bell phone companies were divvied up among seven, artificially created, very large companies called "Regional Bell Operating Companies" (RBOCs, pronounced "R-BOKS") or sometimes the "Regional Bell Holding Companies" (RHC) and sometimes the "Baby Bells".

Each company controls specific geographic regions of the US. For example, Ameritech controlled a five-state region: Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio and Wisconsin.

This diagram gives the original Baby Bells, the phone company(s) it controlled, and the state(s)

The original seven RBOCs were:

Ameritech

Bell Atlantic

BellSouth

NYNEX

Pacific Telesis

Southwestern Bell

US West

Originally, the Bell companies were excluded from offering long distance service. — a "Long Distance" phone call crosses state lines. A call from New York to New Jersey or from Texas to Arkansas is a long distance call.

AT&T, MCI and Sprint were the largest long distance companies in the 1990’s. In 1996, the Telecom Act of 1996 formally opened the “Public Switched Telephone Networks” (PSTN), the local phone networks, to competition. The long distance companies started to enter the local markets. Meanwhile, the Telecom Act also allowed the Bell companies to enter long distance once the networks were officially “open”.

Because of seriously flawed regulations and the power of the Bell companies to control the regulatory environment, the long distance companies were forced out of local service. Renting the local phone lines became unprofitable. Meanwhile, by 2005, the Bell companies have been able to garner over 60% of the long distance market because they could upsell local and long distance as a package.

In the "Unauthorized Bio of the Baby Bells" we argued that the Bells should never have been allowed into long distance services until there was stable competition. AT&T and MCI are currently sold, and merged into SBC and Verizon, respectively. SBC has taken the AT&T name.

As we will discuss, local and long distance distinctions are blurring — it’s all just

electrons over wires or through the air. The companies that own the wires can block competition, either through bad legislation or "friendly regulators", who have essentially been bought off or have not bothered to enforce the laws on the books.

In 2005, Verizon purchased MCI. SBC purchased AT&T and is now called “AT&T”, thus killing off the 2 largest competitors. AT&T and Verizon no longer compete, except with wireless services.

"Wireless," "PCS", "Cellular" "Wifi"

There are hundreds of other companies who offer a wide array of non-wireline services, such as the wireless, wifi, PCS, or cellular companies.However, over the last decade, there has been a serious consolidation of these companies and today, Verizon and AT&T are the largest wireless companies.

Originally, the Bell companies were given the wireless spectrum for all of their territories -- for free. However, by the 1990's the companies were able to merge.

Bell South and SBC formed "Cingular", which was renamed "AT&T once the company aquired AT&T wireless,

Bell Atlantic and NYNEX spun off their wireless services to become "Verizon Wireless"

But there were many other deals to build these companies, which should be thought of as playing cards being maneuvered.

In it's wisdom, originally there was only 1 competitor allowed to the phone companies in each market, and the other players of note were McCaw, and Sprint-Nextel and T-Mobile.

Today, Verizon and AT&T have about 80% of the marketplace and as of this writing, Verizon has offered to purchase many of the cable companies' wireless spectrum, which they purchase but never fully deployed.