It’s no surprise that the story of Czech film star Lída Baarová was taken up by editor Jakub Hejna and Helena Třeštíková, a documentary filmmaker who, pursuing one of her thematic lines, examines the ways in which individuals come up against History itself. In the case of the actress whose success led her to the big studios in Berlin, embarking on an affair with Goebbels proved ill-fated: it cast a dark shadow, from which she could not escape, even after death. After being banned from acting, she was taken into custody on suspicion of collaboration and was then forced into exile for the remainder of her life. Doomed Beauty, like the television documentary from the mid-1990s, is based on reminiscences captured on camera when director Třeštíková went to visit her in Salzburg; in this case, however, Baarová’s subjective perspective is juxtaposed with archive newsreels as well as numerous excerpts from the movies in which she appeared. The image of the sufferer is thus partly overlaid with a vision of an egoistical star who is clearly incapable of critical self-reflection, still living out her final years under a veil of false illusions.

Helena Třeštíková (b. 1949, Prague) has been one of the most prominent and most productive Czech documentarists since the 1980s. While at FAMU, where she graduated in 1975, she began applying the long-term observation technique that has become her trademark. Her impressive oeuvre, containing a series of feature-length docs and TV series (“Marriage Stories,” René, Katka, Forte and Piano, “Man and Time,” “Memory of the 20th Century”), meticulously creates a comprehensive image of the past century and the present day. Jakub Hejna (b. 1976, Prague) studied film editing at FAMU. He debuted as a director with Theatre Svoboda (2011), an award-winning, feature-length documentary about his grandfather, the world-famous stage designer Josef Svoboda. As a film editor he worked on various docs and feature films with the likes of Věra Chytilová, Jitka Rudolfová and particularly Helena Třeštíková.