A reader writes:

I work in an office of ~20 people. The majority of us have lunch together in the conference room most days. It’s not organized or mandatory, just a preference for most of us. People drift in and out and sometimes skip if they have errands or out-of-office meetings that day. The only person who consistently does not join in is Carrie. She has a chilly personality, but she’s not rude or outright unfriendly, just keeps to herself for the most part if something isn’t work-related. That’s fine! She attends holiday parties or any outside work event our bosses organize.

However, one day a month or so ago, our IT contractor came in to update software, and Carrie did come into the conference room for lunch because the contractor was working at her desk at that time. She was quiet except for greeting everyone, which is normal, until another coworker, Steve, brought up one of his “thought experiments,” which is a common lunchtime bit he does, although not every day. He proposes the questions to the group at large — along the lines of the immortality pill or Mary’s room (concepts I wasn’t familiar with myself until they came up in these conversations). This time, his question was essentially, “If you had to choose between the death of one person you’ve never met or the destruction of all the works of Shakespeare (or another author you prefer), what would your choice be?”

Everyone was being flippant for the most part (i.e., “If I save the person, no kid will be forced to read Shakespeare ever again!”) until Carrie chimed in and said, “Shakespeare teaches us more about humanity that saving one life would, so I would save the plays.” This created a very awkward silence and made several people visibly uncomfortable. Personally, I thought it was a theoretical discussion (and was scrolling on my phone anyway) so didn’t take it too seriously. Steve seemed to feel the same at the time and debated with her a bit, but no one else said anything related to it for the rest of lunch and most everyone excused themselves quickly. I thought it was awkward but just one of those things that would blow over.

…which it didn’t. People started avoiding Carrie or being very curt with her almost immediately (like, that very afternoon). It’s not really the vibe in our office to email each other since we’re so small, but most everyone started emailing her when normally they would just approach her or speak to her over her cubicle wall. I honestly can’t tell if Carrie even minds the different treatment, but it’s so pointed I have to think she’s noticed.

The next day at lunch, Steve expressed relief the IT update was over so Carrie would stay away. Many chimed in with their agreement. Unfortunately, every day at lunch since at least one person will bring up Carrie’s response to the question and how freaked out they were by it and that will prompt a prolonged discussion about the weirdness and how people don’t want to be around her and how she’s always been “off.”

I don’t really know what to do! It seems so silly, but people are not backing down on avoiding Carrie or talking about how strange she is, when they never seemed to feel that way before. Our bosses are both about 10 years older than most of us (a couple in their 40s; most staff are late 20s/30s) and I feel like if I bring this up they’ll see the whole thing as childish and gossipy, and particularly judge anyone who brings it up to them. We don’t have HR.

For my part, I’ve tried to continue to approach Carrie the same way I did before. She hasn’t complained herself, so maybe I’m just making something out of nothing and she’s fine with the cost of one remark she made! Is there something I should say to my coworkers, or should I just hope they move on soon?

This is a really extreme reaction to a pretty mild discussion. In fact, those thought experiments are designed not to have an obviously right or obviously wrong answer; that’s why they’re thought experiments!

So I have to think that your coworkers’ reaction to Carrie isn’t about her willingness to save literary works over a human life, and is more about their reaction to Carrie in general — as evidenced by those “she’s always been ‘off’” comments.

Would they be having this reaction if a different person had chosen Shakespeare? I’m betting no. They’re freezing out Carrie because they didn’t like her to begin with — simply because she keeps to herself?! — and now they have something to pin it on. And it sounds like they’re all feeding off each other and reinforcing/escalating each other’s reactions, rather than each independently deciding to freeze her out without consultation with each other. We all saw this play out in junior high at some point; it’s pretty horrible that it’s playing out in your office.

So please speak up for Carrie! For example: “Y’all, it was a thought experiment. The whole point is that there’s not an obvious right answer for everyone. This is really unkind.” And: “Carrie took it as a thought experiment, which is how it was presented. She’s not a monster, and it’s awful to freeze her out and talk about her this way.”

I don’t think you need to escalate this to your bosses unless it starts getting in the way of work, particularly given your concern that they would judge you for bringing it to them. That said … are you sure they would? This isn’t just a small interpersonal thing; your coworkers are trash-talking Carrie every day and avoiding talking to her. That’s a pretty big deal, and a good manager would want to know about it and shut it down.

But either way, you should stand up for Carrie when you hear your coworkers talking badly about her, and you I hope you’ll make a point of being warm toward her yourself. That’s the right thing when you see a group turning on someone who hasn’t done anything to warrant it.