PROGRAM PREVIEW

End-user applications and products paving the future of tinyML

The tinyML Summit end-user applications and products will feature presentations and demonstrations on the innovative ways neural networks and machine learning technologies are being used to develop groundbreaking products for consumers and industries across various sectors. From health wearables to electric vehicles, these technologies are being leveraged to revolutionize the way we live and work. For example, tinyML is being utilized in wearables that monitor our health, and deep learning in devices that check the state of health of EV batteries. Join us for this session to learn more about these exciting new applications of tinyML and how they are shaping future products

Software to accelerate TinyML Solutions

In the process of bringing machine learning solutions to low-power embedded systems, software is critical. Recent advancements in software utilities, libraries, ecosystems, and runtime environments have made it easier and faster to bring tinyML solutions to market and solve real user challenges. Software innovations brought to market from the tinyML ecosystem improve the performance, reliability, and efficiency of on-device inference to make new entirely solutions possible. Talks in this topic will highlight speakers who show the impact of such software innovation on the improvement and proliferation of end-systems encompassing tinyML, as well as discuss the challenges and future opportunities in the tinyML software space at large. They may also include joint presentations with end-users, key roadmap announcements, and advances that push the status quo for tinyML forward.

Optimized Sensing for tinyML product solutions

As more is done on the edge with less power, code and physical real estate, sensor requirements need to stay aligned with the rapid growth in demand for tinyML products For the tinyML Summit 2023, we are seeking sensing solutions presentations on innovative applications and products in vision, audio, inertial, environmental, medical sensing capabilities and more. We are interested in new innovations and ‘smart capabilities’ required to squeeze more performance, bandwidth, and ever lower-power edge sensing solutions. How this impacts processor and ASIC design, as well as the required changes in Machine Learning methods and tools should be discussed.

Enabling TinyML Applications via Innovations in Circuits, Hardware Architectures and Devices

Embedded AI has advanced in leaps in recent years. The combination of silicon technology size reduction, leading to higher memory densities and increased compute, and ever shrinking tinyML Inference algorithms has offered a compelling proposition for MCU-class applications. In this session we will be looking at the impact of the confluence of silicon design techniques and smarter algorithms/tooling in bringing tinyML technology to life on the edge. This session will focus on the challenges and opportunities faced by silicon vendors, and follow the impact that innovative hardware solutions have made all the way through the ecosystem – from tooling/SW up to deployment and end-customer applications.

Development Tools enable TinyML Solutions

The key to productively exploring solutions using tinyML is highly productive development tools. These tools can help collect and label data, use automatic machine learning techniques to select and train ML models, compile, and optimize tinyML libraries for specific devices, manage firmware deployment to fleets of embedded hardware, and even more. The innovations in supporting the entire tinyML solutions enable users to rapidly iterate, develop and deploy new solutions. In talks on this topic, speakers will demonstrate the business impact of development tool improvements and capabilities on end-user applications and solutions. The presentations may also include joint presentations with end-users, key roadmap announcements, and advances that push the state of the art for tinyML forward.