2. SALES FORCE AUTOMATION  It provides customer relationship management software and applications focused on sales, customer service, marketing automation, analytics, and application development.  Mobile workers relied on their portable computers in order to access and process data on the road  Availability of wireless modems has enabled them to travel and allow them to access to enterprise data  Mobile professionals to use the phone book and calendar while working out of office and stay in contact via email.  Used to access mission-critical data – contracts, technical descriptions, small database and graphics etc at anytime & anywhere.  Used to control the delivery of goods, update work assignment, submit orders, even billing info while on road.

3. HEALTH CARE  In healthcare, there is little room for new and complicated devices unless they have an immediate benefit for the patient.  Modern medicine already depends on a wide range of computerized devices, sensors, and actors.  Clinical professionals have to learn not only about new methods but also about how to use new devices. Nevertheless, many clinical professionals are now using hand-held devices.  The users of these devices have to learn new interfaces that are quite different to those of a PC.  The new devices also fall behind PCs in terms of screen size and ease of data entry.

4. HEALTH CARE  Despite all these problems, PDAs have found their way into modern healthcare.  Because of their size and mobility, they are able to integrate into fast- paced hospital work as well as into a doctor's daily routine.  They have turned out to be tremendously helpful in delivering up-to-the minute patient data and medical information.  Access to laboratory results and surgical reports, as well as ordering processes and physician directory look-up, can be improved by the use of PDAs.  Healthcare applications are probably the most sensitive in respect to Settings to security.  Integrity of data and privacy must be assured through proper hardware, software and system design.

5. HEALTH CARE  Patients must be identified correctly at all levels of treatment and medical record keeping.  Patient and clinical data must be exchangeable and accessible wherever needed, but access must be restricted to professionals with the need to know.  International healthcare organizations have standardized almost all data elements and structures required for documentation and data exchange between healthcare institutions, which is an excellent base for real mobile information.

6. HEALTH CARE  Modern healthcare systems are now using smart cards for patients and professionals.(Ayushman Bharath digital mission in India)ABHA number  Patient cards used for identification and administrative data.  Professional cards are used for authentication of professionals and to control access to critical data and systems.  The Health Card specification defines a public-key smart card architecture for an international health professional card to be used by doctors, pharmacists, administrators and other healthcare professionals.

7. HEALTH CARE

8. TRACKING Use of barcodes has revolutionized processes in many industries.  Provide fast and accurate identification of goods during transportation.  Barcodes on all products.  One dimensional barcode – encodes only few characters.  Two dimensional barcode – several hundreds of characters of information to be stored..

9. TRACKING  Allows tracking of goods – eg- airline luggage. Tags are attached to each luggage and detected at certain points on the journey – enables airline to track individual pieces of luggage from check-in to baggage claim.

10. TRACKING

11. CAR INFORMATION SYSTEM  Car manufacturers are very interested in using pervasive computing technology.  Nowadays cars are equipped with more than 30 microprocessors. To connect the car with outside world,  OGSI (open Service Gateway Initiative) is an industry group which defines features such as downloading software, application lifecycle management and gateway circuitry etc, which is implemented in JAVA,

12. CAR INFORMATION SYSTEM  The figure shows how an OSGi gateway can be integrated into a car information system.  The OSGi gateway can receive and send data via a wireless connection to the back-end system.  In the car, the gateway is connected to the car bus (e.g. an optical bus).  It has access to the car electronics and all car sensors, and can therefore transmit all relevant car data.  The back-end system can perform an analysis based on those data and inform the car holder about critical conditions.  Over the gateway, the car entertainment system can receive and initiate phone calls, connect to the Internet, and access multimedia information, such as route planning, traffic announcements, and videos.