By Ray Mcnulty

VERO BEACH — Mardy Fish will celebrate his 30th birthday here, in the seaside town where he grew up, playing tennis in front of a flock of family and friends on a Friday night that kicks off what has become a can't-miss weekend on the Treasure Coast.

"It's a fun time of year," Fish was saying the other day, before leaving his Los Angeles home to reunite with his childhood pal, country music star Jake Owen, for their annual charity event. "Not only do we get to do something to help the community, but, selfishly, we also get to come home and see our families and hang out with our buddies. It's a nice break from what we do the rest of the year.

"I look forward to it."

He should.

Both Fish and Owen are the hometown boys who've made it big, albeit on different stages.

And having put together another outstanding season on the ATP World Tour — the past two years have been the best of his career — Fish is sure to receive a warm welcome from his hometown fans when he steps on the court for the singles (with Sam Querrey) and doubles (first vs. the Bryan brothers and later paired with Serena Williams) exhibition at Grand Harbor.

He's coming off a sensational summer during which he won tournaments at Newport and Atlanta, reached the finals in Los Angeles and Montreal, got to the semis in Cincinnati and claimed the U.S. Open Series bonus. He's ranked No. 8 in the world. For the first time, he was among the eight men to earn a berth in the year-ending ATP World Tour Finals, held last month in London.

His confidence is brimming.

"I've played in big tournaments on surfaces that were good for me, and I feel I can win those tournaments," Fish said. "I feel I can beat anyone. I really do."

More important: He doesn't feel his age.

At a time when many players find themselves on the downside of their careers — 30 is considered old in tennis — Fish appears to be peaking.

Two years ago, he underwent a metamorphosis, drastically changing his eating and workout habits and shedding 30 pounds from his 6-foot-2 frame. He made himself fitter. He found that he was faster. And his game reached unprecedented heights.

"There are only 10 guys in the top 10 and it's special to be one of them, especially when you look at the names at the top," Fish said, referring to Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic, all of whom are Grand Slam champions who've held the No. 1 ranking.

"It's special to feel like you belong in that elite part of the game and be respected by your peers for what you've done.

"Maybe it's because I've been around a while or because I know what it took to get there, but I certainly appreciate where I am. Four, five, six years ago, this was a longshot. Nobody expected this to happen. So I'm not going to take anything for granted.

"I'm as hungry as ever," he added. "What's happened the past couple of years just makes me want to make the most of my last few years."

The challenge, however, gets only tougher as the challengers get younger and stronger — and he gets older.

Fish talked about the need to work harder and take even better care of his body as he embarks on his 30s in a sport with so many hard-hitting 20-somethings. He's more cautious when confronted by injury. He puts more thought into setting up his schedule, making sure he allows enough time off to stay mentally fresh and physically healthy.

"You don't wake up feeling like you're 20 anymore," he said.

Then there's this: The game is changing.

"The game has moved from the forecourt to the backcourt," Fish said, conceding that he accepts his growing role as one of tennis' elder statesman. "The courts are slower, the balls are heavier, the rallies are longer. It's a slower game. You've got to grind out points. And these younger guys are all as good or better than me from the baseline.

"My challenge is to figure out how to beat them doing what I do."

Fish believes he possesses enough weapons, grit, guile and fitness to do it.

He's determined to remain a top-10 player and, possibly, break into the top five. He still hasn't gotten past the quarterfinals at a Grand Slam tournament, but that's a goal he says is within his reach. He wants to be mentioned in every conversation about players with a chance to win major championships.

"You've got the four or five guys everybody talks about, the guys that are favored," Fish said. "Then you have the next group of guys that have a chance. I want to be one of those guys."

And, as good as he feels, he knows the clock is ticking. He'll be 30 when he walks on the court Friday night for the tennis half of the Mardy's Tennis & Jake's Music Fest.

"I feel I have a good run in me," Fish said. "Hopefully, it'll start in Australia. But I'm not thinking about that yet. The year just ended, and I've got a little time to get away from the game. I'm going to enjoy it."

He's coming back to Vero Beach to celebrate his birthday, see some old friends and play some fun tennis for a good cause.

"It'll be a good time," he said. "Even if we fall on our faces, people will love us, anyway."