Scaredy Squirrel is a Canadian animated television series based very loosely on the Scaredy Squirrel book series by Mélanie Watt.

The series premiered on April 1, 2011, on YTV in Canada, and August 9, 2011, on Cartoon Network in the United States, the final episode aired in Canada on August 17, 2013.

The show met negative reviews from critics, criticizing its source material, voice acting, writing, and heavily being a SpongeBob and Rocko’s Modern Life ripoff.

Why It’s Scaredy (In A Bad Way):

Absolutely ABHORRENT grasp on the source material: Similar to other animated tv shows like the 2019 version of Thundercats Roar! & the tv adaptation of Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs, the show has lost its routes compared to the book franchise. Can you guess what the tv series has to do with the book trilogy? and you guessed it: ABSOLUTELY NOTHING!

Another main issue is the primary criticism of the show is how heavily it loses its roots from the book series; where the original heavily relied on the characters development, storytelling, emotion and episode writing, but the show decides to push aside its focus on comedy, randomness and slice-of-life elements. While the show's concept does sound like a decent idea on paper, but executed rather excused very poorly

Unlike with the tv adaptation of Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs, instead of following any of the elements of the original book series, the show however is heavily criticized into nothing more than an bland canadian rip-off of SpongeBob SquarePants and Rocko’s Modern Life, but with none of the charm and cleverness the two shows had, even by that SpongeBob’s infamous Seasons 6-8 standards, here are some examples that are not limited to:

Scaredy is the same as SpongeBob and Rocko, seeing as he's an employee and a neat freak.

Dave is the same as Patrick and Heffer, as they are dimwitted best friends.

Richard (Scaredy’s pet plant) is mostly the same as Gary and Spunky as they are the protagonist’s main pet.

Momma is the same as Mr. Krabs and Mr. Smitty, since they’re the boss of the location.

Nestor is similar to Squidward and Ed Bighead as well, mainly due to his upsetting nature and lack of tolerance of the protagonist's antics.

The very idea of Scaredy working at a grocery store feels rather like a rehash of SpongeBob working at the Krusty Krab and Rocko working at Kind a Lot O’ Comics.

Although the theme song is catchy, it is very insufferable and annoying, it’s because of Scaredy loudly singing off-key gibberish.

Some episodes for the most part, end pretty badly:

In the finale, "Sinker, Sailor, Squirrel, Spy", Dave idiotically pulls the water plug before the episode cuts into black.

"Aisle of The Dead" ends up with everyone except Scaredy and Sally getting turned into zombies.

Most of the running gags are stale and annoying:

Similar to other tv shows like The Ren & Stimpy Show and Rocko’s Modern Life, the show overuses way too many stock cartoon sound effects, which comes off annoying.

Another gag is where a stock sound of an animal can be heard when someone throws an object after using or touching it.

Perhaps the most pointless gag is where Momma fires her employees and shoppers for no reason.

Most of the acting comes off annoying but poor, especially from actors Terry McGurrin (Dilweed from Numb Chucks), Jonathan Gloud, Patrick McKenna (Quincy Barrett from Atomic Betty), Jayne Eastwood (Charles' Granny from Skatoony), David Berni (Baby Brent and Hector Evilman from the tv adaptation of Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs), Linda Kash (Sloth from Almost Naked Animals) , Jamie Watson (Coach Halder from 6Teen) and Dwayne Hill (Samy from Jimmy Two Shoes).

The show’s humor tends to be hit or miss to bizarre and even racist at times:

One prime example includes a beaver talking in a racist Brad Garrett monotone, which is extremely offensive, even for a show aimed toward kids!

There are some awkward but weird moments, one example being Scaredy talking to his pet plant Richard in some episodes, and though plants are indeed a living organism, they aren't even sentient like Scaredy.

Overuse of gross-out and bathroom humor, especially in episodes "Suggestion Box Blues", "Where the Stink At?" & "Breaking The Mold" having such notorious gross out moments.

Unlike other animated tv shows such as Johnny Test, Sidekick, and the second half of 10th season of The Fairly OddParents, the animation is rather sloppy, but has worsened in the initial episodes.

Most of the character designs are sloppy and some don’t match their real life counterparts.

The animation is brimmed with errors such In "The Golden Paddleball", an error occurred when Dave saids "I want a turtleneck", his jersey number is reversed, Another example is in the beginning of "Children of the Acorn" where Scaredy and Dave go to a workout gym, the elephant in the first shot was light blue at first, and turned pink for some reason in the second shot, even other tv shows such as Sidekick, Rocket Monkeys, & the tv adaptation Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs didn’t have such noticeable animation errors.

The main protagonists are very annoying and unlikeable:

Scaredy himself is just nothing but an dumb and annoying neat freak and most of his voice and yelling comes out very obnoxious, In fact, he is just as much of an idiot to everyone else in Balsa City, and he is often unlikeable in episodes "Tubtastic Tuo", "Goat Police", and "The Paddy Party Problem".

In "Sticky Situation", Scaredy wears another uniform with a different name tag that makes everyone believe he's someone else. Most viewers think being a neat freak, Scaredy should've been smart enough to just replace Bob's name tag for his own while using his uniform.

In "Water Damage", when he gets a new job at a library and a nursery, he disturbs everyone at a library and stacks babies for no reason. Although being a perfectionist, viewers can think that he would've been smart enough to the doctor and get his problem sorted out.

In "Aisle of the Dead", when the slushie machine turns everyone except Scaredy and Sally into zombies, he soon realizes that it's because the slushie machine was set to zombie. The irony behind this is that he couldn't just turn off the zombie mode in the first place.

In "Halloweekend", Scaredy tries to set up a haunted house to scare people, but the haunted house is full of "scary" things like anuclean doorknob, a dirty ice tray and expired store bought yogurt in a bathtub.

In "Talented Mr. Peacock", Scaredy meets a peacock named Philmore, who starts to copy Scaredy, he copies Philmore back to snap him out of it. When they get to the paddleball tournament, the two are quickly disqualified due to Scaredy’s outfit resembling Philmore, even though Scaredy should've been smart enough to switch out of his peacock outfit before he went to the paddleball tournament.

In "Lean Green Fighting Machine", When a rabbit named Mario is planning on eating the world's most powerful houseplant, at one point, Scaredy calls him a “monster” despite the fact that he should've been smart enough to know that rabbits are herbivores as Dave even points that out.

In "Ice Cream Headache", When Scaredy and Dave cover the city in ice cream and the townsfolk cheer for the two, the maker of said ice cream says that there is no need to buy ice cream anymore and they ruined his business, yet Scaredy is still happy for what he did.

Dave is Scaredy's gluttonous and dim witted friend who always acts like an idiot like Scaredy and always riding the fire truck. He was also a crybaby in "Fancy Some Tea?".

Nestor is annoying and mean to Scaredy who does nothing but yells and whines and always gets tortured by his mother. To add salt to the wound, his yelling comes off annoying alongside Scaredy.

Paddy is just a generic popular sportsman and rapper.

Sally is nothing more than just a savage and an abhorrent love interest for Scaredy.

Nestor's mother is by far the most hated character in the series, since she treats her employees abhorrently and fires them with no explanation. She can also torture Nestor a few times; one infamous example is that where Nestor cheers for her, she puts him into a toy truck and turns it on at full speed, causing the toy truck to launch Nestor into a wall.

A lot of episodes come of as rehashes from episodes from SpongeBob & Rocko’s Modern Life, at least with different plots:

"Life Saver" rehashes the life saving plot of "SpongeGuard on Duty" from Season 3 of SpongeBob.

"Talented Mr. Peacock" rehashes "Big Pink Loser" from Season 2 of SpongeBob.

"Water Damage" lazily rehashes "SpongeBob, You’re Fired" from Season 9 of SpongeBob and "Canned" from the first season of Rocko’s Modern Life.

"Nothing But the Tooth" rehashes "Rinse & Spit" from Season 1 of Rocko’s Modern Life.

"Snerd Envy" copies "Patty Hype" from Season 2 of SpongeBob.

"Grand Olde Grocery" is nothing but "The Plays The Thing" and "Culture Shock" from Season 7 and 1 of SpongeBob.

Unlike other tv shows like Sidekick, the tv adaptation of Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs, and Rocket Monkeys, the show's writing is weak, formulaic, and mediocre, the show has a big parade of bad/mediocre episodes, examples that are not limited to:

"Sticky Situation" (which started the show in production order, on a mediocre note)

"Pranks for Nothing" (which started the show in airing order, on a awful note)

"Fistful of Quarters"

"Children of the Acorn"

"Cowlicked"

"Luck Be a Penny"

"There Is No "I" in Groceries"

"The Golden Paddleball"

"Water Damage"

"Life Saver"

"Who's Your Paddy?"

"Snerd Envy"

"Dream Weaver"

"Acting Silly"

"Lumberjack Day"

"Suggestion Box Blues"

"Aisle of the Dead"

"Where the Stink At?"

"Paddle Dogs"

"Nothing But the Tooth"

"When Thugs Attack"

"Fancy Some Tea?"

"Mr. Perfect Balsa"

"Tubtastic Tuo"

"Mrs. Nestor's Mother's Momma"

"Halloweekend"

"Stackinator"

"Goat Police"

"Store Wars" (which ended season 1 on a mediocre note in airing order)

"Less Nestorman" (depending on your view)

"Neat Wits"

"Mall Rats"

"Seth is a Salesman"

"The Great Mistack" (arguably the worst episode of season 1 and the entire series)

"Grand Olde Grocery" (which started season 2 on a sour note)

"Grounded Hog"

"Talented Mr. Peacock"

"Hiccup Hicdown in Balsatown"

"Nutters Almanac" (depending on your view)

"Empty Nestor Syndrome"

"A New Dave"

"Breaking The Mold"

"Hip To Be Squirrel" (depending on your view)

"The Paddy Party Problem"

"Hamsticorn"

"Ice Ice Scaredy"

"Freaky Fur Day"

"Mascot In The Act"

"Stack to School"

"Store Terk"

"Safety Corner Conumdrum (which ended season 2 on a sour note)

"Straighten Up and Flu Right"

"Ice Cream Headache"

"Abracagrandma"

"Momma Lisa Smile"

"Arachnofriendly"

"Double Decker Danger"

"Actually It Is Rocket Science" (depending on your view)

"For a Few S'Mores More"

Similar to the manner with Teen Titans Go! and seasons 4-6 of Johnny Test, there are a lot of terrible morals and life lessons in several episodes. these include, but also not limited to:

"Fistful of Quarters" teaches viewers that arguing with your boss can help you earn money.

"Mascot in the Act" encourages viewers that cheating is an okay thing, which is a serious offense, especially in school.

"Children of the Acorn" teaches viewers that crying can get you what you want.

"Lumberjack Day" and "Snerd Envy" teaches viewers commercialism is okay.

"There Is No "I" in Groceries" encourages viewers that teamwork is wrong because it will get you in trouble.

"When Thugs Attack", "Nothing But the Tooth", "The Great Mistack" and "Fudge-Filled Fib" encourages viewers that you should always get away with lying.

"Nutters Almanac" encourages viewers that spreading rumors is acceptable.

"Mr. Perfect Balsa" encourages viewers that winning is everything.

"Goat Police" failed to show how bad your show would be if it told morals, similar to Teen Titans Go!’s "Finally A Lesson".

"Talented Mr. Peacock" teaches kids that being yourself is wrong.

"I Think Therefore I Clean" teaches kids that being dirty is an okay thing when someone else does the cleaning for you.

"Hip To Be Squirrel" and "Safety Corner Conundrum" encourage viewers to listen to others' opinions without accepting their own.

"Arachnofriendly" encourages viewers to always judge a book by its cover.

Most of the episode’s writing is mediocre, lazy, and effortless, to the point where the head writers of the show are not making good storylines:

"Water Damage" has Scaredy losing his hearing and losing his job, he decides to take new jobs instead, he could’ve just gone to the doctor to get his problem fixed instead of getting fired and getting new jobs.

"Sticky Situation" has Scaredy having a stain on his uniform and tries to prevent everyone from seeing his stain, but as he puts on Bob’s name tag to make everyone believe that he is Bob instead, which his switching name tag idea gets Scaredy into trouble, he couldn’t have put his uniform in the washing machine in the first place.

"Where the Stink At?" has Dave losing his ability to fart, which is nonsensical since skunks use their spray to ward off predators, the writers couldn’t be smart enough that skunks rarely use their spray as a weapon to ward off predators.

Unlike with The Bikini Bottom in SpongeBob seasons 6-8, Balsa City is structured poorly and very uncivilized, for example:

In "Lumberjack Day", the townsfolk treat holidays with commercialism without knowing what holidays are really about.

In "When Thugs Attack" and "Nutters Almanac", the townsfolk believe in rumors and quickly jump to conclusions.

In "Grounded Hog", the townsfolk don't seem to be bothered that a giant monstrous groundhog is destroying the city.

In "I Think Therefore I Clean", when the vacuums start cleaning up Balsa City, the townsfolk start to pour garbage all over town and in the river.

In "Hip to Be Squirrel", when Scaredy says that the best way to be cool is not to care about what others say, the townsfolk stop caring and act like morons.

In "Mascot in the Act", the townsfolk immediately start liking the game of cricket even though Scaredy mentioned that nobody has heard of it until now and start beating up Scaredy and Dave when they revealed the Pool Cats were cheating since they didn't care if they were cheating and that they would've won the championships.

In "Ice Cream Headache", the townsfolk go berserk when the only ice cream truck in town somehow breaks down with the mayor complaining it's the “worst” thing to happen in the city’s history.

In "Double Decker Danger", the police show a video to prove Scaredy and Dave thefted a artifact from the museum, but the video shows two random burglars thefting the artifact while Scaredy and Dave just stand there coughing and not doing anything to stop them.

"Safety Corner Conundrum" is by far the worst example. When the city’s television studio puts Paddy in charge of the show, He starts to criticize what everybody believes and when Scaredy and Dave make a new show to stop people from watching Paddy's, the city decides to destroy their tvs and exile television.

Redeeming Qualities:

The brief warning at the end of the intro is at least a reference to the book, but failed to reference at all other than the main character's name and the logo.

The animation (while sloppy) had somewhat improved after the infamous first few episodes:

The 1950’s eśque cartoon art style is decent for the most part.

There are a few likable characters:

Scaredy (in some episodes)

Dave (also in some episodes)

Philmore

Buck

Hatton

Mildred

Sally (in some episodes)

Sue (despite being in one episode)

While being both a safety freak and an idiot, Scaredy is the only character that tries to set a good example for kids.

Decent soundtrack by Paul Intson.

There are a few funny moments every now and then, mainly because of the humor

thankfully getting stabilized after the first few episodes.

The show does have a fair share of good/decent episodes such as:

"Awaken the Stacker Within"

"The Coast is Fear"

"Chili Con Scaredy"

"Camp or Consequences"

"Rock-A-Bye Rock" (depending on your view)

"Fairweather Squirrel"

"From Rodent to Love"

"It's Not Easy Being Green"

"The Corgin"

"Lean Green Fighting Machine"

"Soup of a Nova" (depending on your view)

"Shop Cop"

"Extrasquirrelstial"

"To Cat a Thief"

"Inskunktion"

"Captain Nuts"

"Nobody Likes Hatton" (depending on your view)

"28 Daves Later"

"Buck Up Buck"

"Trophy Catastrophe"

"Sinker, Sailor, Squirrel, Spy" (which ended the series on a good note, despite ending in disaster)

The show improved a tiny bit around season 2.

The theme song is catchy, despite the annoying lyrics.