In Hyderabad you’ll find many apartment for rent that have a variation of –

1 RK – 1 room and kitchen for rent in Badichowdi

1 BHK – 1 bedroom, hall and kitchen for rent in Badichowdi

2 BHK – 2 bedrooms, hall and kitchen for rent Badichowdi

3 BHK – 3 bedrooms, hall and kitchen for rent in Badichowdi

4 BHk - 4 bedroom, hall and kitchen for rent in Badichowdi

Villas - Independent Houses for rent in Badichowdi

If you are living alone, then a 1RK and 1BHK make the most sense. If you need space for an office at home, then you can even go for a 2BHK.

For those with families, a 2BHK or more is better, depending on the number of people in your family.

Nowadays, most builders have a 2.5 BHK (2-and-a-half-bedroom apartment) and so on. These half rooms are not as big as a regular bedroom and you can use this as a study/home office/ storage room and so on.

When you are talking about apartment furniture, there are three types –

Fully furnished

Semi-furnished

Unfurnished

In a fully furnished apartment for rent in Badichowdi, Hyderabad everything is available. From TV cabinets, to beds and kitchen cabinets to cupboards, the apartment will have everything you need.

A semi-furnished apartment for rent in Badichowdi, Hyderabad will have some essential furniture but not everything. You might find things such as built-in cupboards, light and fans available, but you will need to arrange for the other furniture you need like seating and tables etc.

In an unfurnished apartment for rent in Badichowdi, Hyderabad, you will need to arrange for all the furniture yourself. This is a good option for those people who have purchased furniture and don’t want to sell it. If you love to do your own decor, then this is the best option for you.

The best way to look for property for rent without a broker in Badichowdi, Hyderabad is by searching on NoBroker. The NoBroker app and website has plenty of options that you can choose from. The best part is that there are no brokers on the website. You get to connect DIRECTLY with landlords.