RocknRolla

Movie Poster

Country United Kingdom United States

France Directed by Guy Ritchie Release Date 2008 Language English Studio Dark Castle Entertainment Distributor Warner Bros.

Main Cast Character Actor One-Two Gerard Butler Johnny Quid Toby Kebbell Stella Thandie Newton Lenny Cole Tom Wilkinson Mumbles Idris Elba Handsome Bob Tom Hardy Archy Mark Strong

RocknRolla is a 2008 gangster film directed by Guy Ritchie that stars Gerard Butler and revolves around a painting, originally owned by Uri Omovich (Karel Roden), given to London mob boss Lenny Cole (Tom Wilkinson) for quick building planning permission, which is stolen by rockstar Johnny Quid (Toby Kebbell). In the midst of all of this, a bunch of small-time robbers, calling themselves "The Wild Bunch", themselves indebted to Lenny, undertake a series of robberies dictated by glamorous accountant Stella (Thandie Newton), who happens to work for Uri Omovich.

The following weapons were used in the film RocknRolla:

Handguns

Browning Hi-Power Mk. III

Archy (Mark Strong) uses a Browning Hi-Power Mk. III as his sidearm.

Beretta 84

A Beretta 84 with a threaded barrel and sound suppresser is held by one of Archy's men during the final stages of the movie.

Colt M1911A1

A member of Archy's team holds an M1911A1 pistol when they enter One Two's (Gerard Butler) home.

Smith and Wesson Model 36

Johnny Quid (Toby Kebbell) plays with a Smith & Wesson Model 36 along with his lighter in front of a mirror.

Smith & Wesson Model 64

Handsome Bob (Tom Hardy) keeps a Smith & Wesson Model 64 loaded with blanks as a sidearm.

Taurus Model 85

Both Lenny (Tom Wilkinson) and Bandi use Taurus Model 85s.

Shotguns

Double Barreled Shotgun

A double barreled shotgun is briefly seen in the hands of Pete (Michael Ryan) at the beginning of the movie and is never seen again.

Assault Rifles

AKS-74U

A Russian bodyguard uses an AKS-74U to fire at "The Wild Bunch" after the botched robbery. One-Two takes it and empties an entire magazine into a bodyguard, whose bulletproof vest (rather unrealistically) protects him.

Other

Cigarette Lighter