Washington, December 2, 2009 — The Hewlett-Packard Company Foundation has contributed more than $1 million this year to help fund American Red Cross disaster response.

The largest contribution, $350,000, was given to help Philippine communities affected by typhoons in September and October. Other gifts to the American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund and International Response Fund helped survivors of flooding in Georgia, earthquakes in Indonesia, wildfires in Australia, an earthquake and tsunami in American Samoa and Samoa, typhoons in Vietnam and the earthquake in Costa Rica.

In addition, through the holiday season, Hewlett-Packard's Create Change with HP campaign will provide further support to the Red Cross. The company's campaign includes contributions flowing from consumer purchases, and a contest in which non-profits will receive a percentage of a cash prize based on the number of widgets downloaded for posting on social networks.

"Financial support of the Hewlett-Packard Company Foundation has helped the Red Cross to provide relief to people here in the United States and across the world in disasters such as floods in Georgia, an earthquake in Costa Rica, and bushfires in Australia," said Gail McGovern, president and CEO of the American Red Cross. "We are grateful for the company's continuing generosity with its selection of the Red Cross as one of the participants in its Create Change with HP campaign."

There are several ways to participate in the Create Change with HP campaign. When any product is purchased in the HP Direct Store between now and the end of January, HP will deliver 4% of the purchase price to the American Red Cross or one of six other selected non-profit organizations which the consumer can designate.

Visitors to the Create Change with HP Web site can also personalize and post a widget featuring their favorite charity from among the seven selected by HP on social networks. HP will be monitoring the number of widgets that consumers have posted to their various social networks from November 15 until January 31. Based on the percentage of total widgets posted for each organization, HP will then make a charitable donation of that same percentage from a $50,000 pool.