LILYA 4-EVER — ** 1/2 — Oksana Akinshina, Artyom Bogucharsky, Pavel Ponomaryov, Liliya Shinkaryova, Lyubov Agapova, Elina Beneson; in English, Russian and Swedish, with English subtitles; rated R (profanity, sex, rape, violence, drug use, vulgarity, brief veiled nudity); see "Playing at local movie theaters" for complete listing of local theaters.

"Lilya 4-ever" is bound to divide audiences. Either the film goes way too far, or it doesn't go nearly far enough.

Ultimately, it depends on your perspective toward the depiction of sexual violence against women. It's an ugly, repellent subject that's become the subject of several recent films, most notably the even more divisive "Irreversible."

"Lilya 4-ever" never really reaches the level of malignancy that "Irreversible" achieved, and takes an odd turn toward fantasy during its second half. But in the end, "Lilya 4-ever" is a rather unsettling mix of light and dark, which robs it of power and causes it to become muddled.

Still, there's no denying the strength of the central performance, by young Oksana Akinshina, who stars as the title character. She's a 16-year-old Russian whose mother is moving to the United States. That thrills Lilya, who wants nothing more than to get out. Unfortunately, her mother leaves her behind in the care of an aunt who wants nothing to do with her.

Lilya is understandably upset and turns to a younger outcast, Volodya (Artyom Bogucharsky), for comfort. However, she quickly throws him over in favor of Andrei (Pavel Ponomaryov), a charming twentysomething who promises to take her with him to Sweden. Of course, it's all a ruse to get Lilya into the country illegally, where she quickly finds herself working as a prostitute.

This is extremely bitter material. And as such, it's a drastic departure for writer-director Lukas Moodysson, whose previous films include the enjoyably sweet "Show Me Love" (1998) and "Together" (2000). While the screenplay does feature some of his characteristically odd humor — and while he does nail some realistic youthful dialogue — neither the fantasy nor the real-life elements are entirely convincing.

Akinshina is something of a revelation, however. The camera loves her, and there's real depth to her performance. Same goes for the cherubic Bogucharsky, whose character is so winning you sort of wish the movie were about him instead.

"Lilya 4-ever" is rated R for frequent use of strong sex-related profanity, scenes of simulated sex and sexual contact, scenes depicting rape, violence (beatings and violence against women), simulated drug use (glue sniffing and prescription drug abuse), use of crude sexual slang terms and brief, veiled female nudity. Running time: 109 minutes.