LILYA 4-EVER [ 1/2]

In Russian and Swedish, with English subtitles. Running time: 105 minutes. Not rated (sex, violence). At the Lincoln Plaza and the Cinema Village.

—–

LUKAS Moodysson’s two previous films, the teen-lesbian drama “Show Me Love” and the communal comedy “Together,” only hinted at the talent of the Swedish director.

His newest, “Lilya 4-Ever,” proves Moodysson to be one of the brightest young directors today.

Lilya is a poverty-stricken, 16-year-old girl living in a dreary Russian suburb.

When her mother abandons Lilya and goes to America, the fragile girl is left on her own.

Her nasty aunt takes over Lilya’s apartment, sending the girl to a battered flat elsewhere.

It isn’t surprising that she forms a brother-sister relationship with a cocky 11-year-old street kid, and the two fantasize about a better life.

But times are hard for Lilya. She turns to prostitution, vomiting after her first trick.

Then she meets a good-looking, seemingly nice guy who promises to take her away to a better life in Sweden.

He sends her on ahead. At the airport, she is met by a man who takes her to an apartment and locks her in.

It takes awhile, but Lilya realizes that she has been sold into prostitution slavery, an all-too-common tragedy in Europe.

Lilya is portrayed by Oksana Akinshina, who gives a dynamic, heartbreaking performance.

Her only previous film was Russian director Sergei Bodrov Jr.’s “Brothers” (2001). She played 13-year-old Sveta, who goes on the lam with her half-sister to escape mobsters seeking the money they claim Sveta’s gangster dad owes them.

She was wonderful in that role, but is even more astonishing in “Lilya 4-Ever.”

(Akinshina made one film after “Lilya 4-Ever,” and is working on a second.)

Moodysson takes on a sensitive subject, and he conveys its horrors without even a hint of exploitation.

As in “Show Me Love,” the director proves that he can coax fine performances from untrained young people.

Surreal fantasy sequences serve as brief respites from the otherwise serious mood of “Lilya 4-Ever.”

Perhaps the film will draw attention to the serious problem of young women being forced into prostitution in Europe – and help fight it.