Additional information

General

This is the webcam overview page for Svenska Hogarna in Stockholm County, Sweden. Windfinder specializes in wind, waves, tides and weather reports & forecasts for wind related sports like kitesurfing, windsurfing, surfing, sailing or paragliding.

Webcams

You can view all wind and weather webcams as well as live cams nearby Svenska Hogarna on the above map. Click on an image to see large webcam images.

Whether you are planning your trip for today or you just want to explore, Windfinder has webcams for spots and locations in Sweden and all over the world. Quickly check swell, wind and cloud coverage by examining webcam feeds from around your destination. Webcams at Svenska Hogarna are discoverable on a map for further exploration or a convenient list view sorted by distance up to 25 kilometers from this spot.

Statistics

For statistical and historical real weather data see the wind and weather statistics for this location.

Severe Weather Warnings

When a severe weather warning or advisory is provided by the local meteorological institute, we display it as a banner above the wind forecast.

The weather warning, for example a high wind warning, can help you prepare for dangerous weather conditions and avoid weather-related risks. The color scale indicates the intensity of the predicted weather event. For more details click or tap on the warning. General information about severe weather warnings can be found in our help section.

Please be aware that severe weather may occur without a prior severe weather warning being reported.

Units

We use knots and degrees Celsius as our default units. These units are often used by sailors, kiters, surfers, windsurfers and paragliders. Use website settings to switch between units and 7 different languages at any time. For converting between wind speed units such as knots, km/h (kilometers per hour), m/s (meters per second), and mph (miles per hour) use our wind speed calculator.

Help

Do you want to know more about how to use this website? This and many other topics are covered in the website help section.