Bird sanctuary. Access prohibited April 1—July 31.

Please come and enjoy the birdlife, but from a distance! Many of the islands in Svenska Högarna are protected for birds, such as murre, black guillemot, razorbill, eider and velvet scooter, during their critical breeding period. It is forbidden to enter these areas during this time—please keep at least 100 m distance from these areas. Be mindful on other islands as well; birds breed all throughout the archipelago.

The Svenska Högarna archipelago and nature reserve is the final outpost of the Stockholm Archipelago in the Baltic Sea, located about 35 km (19 nautical miles) east of the island of Möja.

The islands are only reachable by private boat, boat taxi or chartered boat.

In order to protect the Svenska Högarna nature reserve, please respect the following rules. Areas A - C are defined on the map in the original reserve proclamation (in Swedish).

Within the reserve, it is forbidden to:

during the period of February 1 - August 15, traverse or stay within Area A, as marked on the map (see Appendix 1B of the proclamation, "Område A" in Swedish),

during the period of April 1 - July 31, traverse or stay within Area B, as marked on the map (see Appendix 1B of the proclamation, "Område B" in Swedish),

during the period of May 1 - June 30, traverse or stay within Area C, as marked on the map (see Appendix 1B of the proclamation, "Område C" in Swedish),

operate a boat, ship or other watercraft within the area marked on the map in Appendix 1C of the proclamation ("Område med båt- och fiskeförbud, föreskrift C4 & C7" in Swedish),

operate a boat, ship or other watercraft at a speed higher than 5 knots within the area marked on the map, Appendix 1C of the proclamation ("Område med fartbegränsning, föreskrift C5" in Swedish),

anchor a boat or ship in the area marked on the map, Appendix 1C of the proclamation ("Områden med ankringsförbud, föreskrift C6" in Swedish),

fish within the area marked on the map, Appendix 1C of the proclamation ("Område med båt- och fiskeförbud, föreskrift C4 & C7 " in Swedish),

dig, cut, carve, drill, paint, move boulders or in any other way damage rock, soil, stone or the seabed,

break branches, fell or in any other way damage living or dead trees and bushes,

damage the vegetation by digging up plants, mosses or lichens or remove attached algae or mussels;

damage or disturb wildlife, e.g. by climbing trees, trapping, stalking or killing mammals, birds, reptiles or amphibians,

bring dogs or other pets ashore that are not on a leash,

make an open fire or use a grill outside of designated sites;

put up a sign, poster or similar,

camp for more than two consecutive days in the same place outside of designated campsites,

moor a boat or ship, by right of public access ("Allemansrätten"), for more than two consecutive days at the same beach or pier (this rule does not apply to landowners and tenants),

discharge waste water, oil and water ballast or other liquid or solid waste from boats or ships,

wash boats or ship hulls,

idle a motor or use an electric generator while moored at a pier,

use a sound system, musical instruments or similar in a disruptive manner,

take off or land by aircraft,

disembark with more than 10 people without prior permission from the reserve management authority,

without prior permission from the County Administrative Board, carry out research activities that may disturb wildlife, such as collecting or trapping organisms (e.g. ring-marking birds) or using sonar or other sound-generating technology.