Additional information

General

This is the wind, wave and weather forecast for Svenska Hogarna in Stockholm County, Sweden. Windfinder specializes in wind, waves, tides and weather reports & forecasts for wind related sports like kitesurfing, windsurfing, surfing, sailing, fishing or paragliding.

Forecast

This forecast is based on the GFS model. Forecasts are available worldwide. The horizontal resolution is about 13 km. Forecasts are computed 4 times a day, at about 7:00 AM, 1:00 PM, 7:00 PM and 1:00 AM Central European Summer Time. Predictions are available in time steps of 3 hours for up to 10 days into the future. The arrows point in the direction in which the wind is blowing.

Check the wind forecast for Svenska Hogarna when you search for the best travel destinations for your kiteboarding, windsurfing or sailing vacations in Sweden. Or use our wind forecast to find the wind speed today in Svenska Hogarna or to have a look at the wind direction tomorrow at Svenska Hogarna.

Statistics

For statistical and historical real weather data see the wind and weather statistics for this location.

Severe Weather Warnings

When a severe weather warning or advisory is provided by the local meteorological institute, we display it as a banner above the wind forecast.

The weather warning, for example a high wind warning, can help you prepare for dangerous weather conditions and avoid weather-related risks. The color scale indicates the intensity of the predicted weather event. For more details click or tap on the warning. General information about severe weather warnings can be found in our help section.

Please be aware that severe weather may occur without a prior severe weather warning being reported.

Units

We use knots and degrees Celsius as our default units. These units are often used by sailors, kiters, surfers, windsurfers and paragliders. Use website settings to switch between units and 7 different languages at any time. For converting between wind speed units such as knots, km/h (kilometers per hour), m/s (meters per second), and mph (miles per hour) use our wind speed calculator.

Help

If you need more information about our wind forecast for Svenska Hogarna, have a look at our help section.