Hidayat Orujov, a prominent writer and theater figure who has a prominent place in Azerbaijani literature, is known as a great intellectual who served every moment of his life in the cause of the people and his homeland. The stage embodiment of Hidayat's plays, who lived a dignified human life, reflected in his works and the credo of his life, which has been confirmed and celebrated from time to time, has always been met with interest.

On April 19, at the Academic State Russian Drama Theater named after Samad Vurgun, the two-part historical-chronological drama "A Thousand Horsemen Passed by Here" was watched with great love by his fans. Hidayat, who headed the Azerbaijan Drama Theater in Yerevan for sixteen years while living in Yerevan, is considered the native author of this theater. That is why the creative team of the Yerevan State Azerbaijan Drama Theater named after Jafar Jabbarli presents the two-part historical-chronological drama of the poet-dramatist Hidayat "A thousand horsemen passed by here" from time to time with great honor. The play, which premiered on the stages of the Azerbaijan State Academic National Drama Theater (December 2, 2014) and the Azerbaijan State Musical Theater (December 8, 2014), reflects the sharp and uncompromising position of the Great Leader Heydar Aliyev against the actions of those who pursued a secret policy to ignite conflicts in the Caucasus in the late twentieth century, as well as the intense struggle of Western Azerbaijanis against Armenian chauvinists and extremists. The events of the play cover a period from 1968 to the present day. The book describes the socio-political conditions of the Azeri Turks in Western Azerbaijan, the historical and cultural environment, the activities of the Yerevan State Azerbaijan Drama Theater, and the struggle of Azerbaijanis against the insidious Armenian policy for decades.

The playwright, who lived most of his life in those lands, wrote in the drama "A Thousand Horsemen Passed by Here" (for information, the play is based on the novel of the same name) skillfully portrayed the scenes about the events he personally saw and participated in, the courage and perseverance of the sons of the fatherland against the Armenian reaction. "Let's face the deeper layers of history. Let's face the great lands we call Yerevan. At that time, the Soviet flag was still on the Armenian head. Armenian chauvinism was still in its infancy. But what is important for us is the intellectual struggle of our compatriots living in those great lands against the Armenian chauvinists ... ”the author draws attention to the fact that the Great Leader of the Azerbaijani people Heydar Aliyev stood at the forefront of this struggle.

The play, prepared by the state order, was directed by the chief director of the Sumgayit State Musical Drama Theater named after H.Arablinsky, People's Artist Firudin Maharramov. The scales given by the director are very precisely aimed at revealing the idea of ​​the work. The director's handwriting, the director's thinking, the idea are clearly felt in every point of the play, in all moments of the acting. It should be noted that the actors of the Yerevan, Young Spectators, Shusha and Sumgayit theaters create memorable images in the play. Sharing a stage with such a diverse ensemble of actors is a confirmation of the artist's skill and professionalism. The image of the protagonist of the work Heydar Aliyev is skillfully created by Iftikhar Piriyev, an honored cultural worker, Presidential Award winner, director of the Yerevan Theater, who won the love of the audience with his many memorable images in theater and cinema, art series. The image of Heydar Aliyev in his performance opens the way to hearts with its grandeur. The actor presents the Great Leader's gait, posture, mannerisms, hand movements, tone of voice, pauses in speech, facial expressions, details of gestures, words and expressions with very subtle and precise strokes. This, of course, is a clear example of the actor's ability to penetrate into the image with perfect artistic professionalism. In the image of the National Leader of our people Heydar Aliyev, the actor pays more attention to the inner life of the image, he can create a genius whose pulse beats with the pulse of the homeland, just as in life.