Le Tigre is perhaps best known as Kathleen Hanna’s other band. Hanna was the frontwoman of Bikini Kill (which kickstarted the riot grrrl movement), has had several documentaries made about her, and (fun-fact) is married to Ad-Rock. But I only heard about Le Tigre yesterday while looking for dance-punk bands. I had no idea Hanna was involved until the first verse of the first (and perhaps best) song, “Deceptacon,” which tears down preconceptions, sets expectations, and takes a shot at pop music in five lines:

Wanna disco? / Wanna see me disco? / Let me hear you depoliticize my rhyme. / One! Two! Three! Four! / You got what you been asking for.

It’s a classic Hanna takedown, one which sets the tone nicely for the rest of Le Tigre.

It’s this spirit which lies at the heart of the album, and its strengths. Hanna is at her best as a lyricist when she’s telling you what’s wrong and how it should be. While “Deceptacon” is the standout track of the album, it’s closely followed by “Hot Topic,” a song about pop music that builds up to a “Losing My Edge”-style list of strong female artists that would take ages to explore. Third track “What’s Yr Take On Cassavetes?,” in which the band debates the merit of John Cassavetes, is also memorable.

The album never quite regains the dance-punk spark of the first three tracks, but the rest is still an enjoyable listen, especially for those who can’t get past Bikini Kill’s hardcore influences. Hanna’s spirit and message infuse even the weaker tracks with an energy that carries them to greater heights. Whenever the songs begin to feel bland and uninteresting, Hanna manages to pull out a clever lyric or harsh statement that directs the listener’s attention front and center once again.

Perhaps Le Tigre’s greatest trait is its ability to deliver punk spirit entwined with shockingly catchy dance numbers. The album may not be stuffed with conventional dance or punk numbers, but it’s a brilliant and vicious strike against oppression and dull pop that will linger in your head for a long time.