P:01

﻿Southern Industrial & ProsperitaMonday 21 September 2020 Republikein Country captured on canvas One of Anja's artworks titled Remnant. Capturing Namibia’s learning curve, painting between “In a landscape where, after kilo- her job and being a new mother. metres of nothingness, you unex- landscape and nature, Anja pectedly ﬁnd a cluster of boulders, “With no formal training in art, a kokerboom or a welwitschia, a Benseler’s art can be found the ﬁrst couple of paintings were lonely wandering springbok or a a learning curve and painting re- ruin, these are magniﬁed in their in homes and businesses mained a hobby next to my day job. signiﬁcance by their isolation in Still, I sold my ﬁrst works in 2010, the immense vastness of their sur- here and around the world. whereafter I was commissioned by roundings. It is these elements a Pretoria investment company to that form the centrepieces of my Hidden in a small studio in the produce six paintings,” she says. paintings and it is for this reason Grüner Kranz complex, you that I am drawn to fairly large can- will ﬁnd artist Anja Benseler In 2013, Anja switched to oil as vasses to better portray the big-sky behind the easel. From here a medium and began painting full vastness of the desert,” she says. she creates beautiful artworks that time in 2015 when she and her are literally picture perfect. family moved back to Namibia. Having participated at the Omaruru Artists Trail from 2015 Anja says her journey as an artist “My ﬁrst solo exhibition in Swa- to 2018, the artist is now growing began in 2008 when she bought kopmund at the end of 2015 at both her local and internation- her ﬁrst canvas and started paint- the Fine Art Gallery in Swakop- al client base, having completed ing in acrylics. mund was a great success,” she various commissioned pieces for says, since all her work sold out. private and corporate clients. The South African-born artist “Air Namibia’s inﬂight magazine, completed her schooling in Flamingo, featured an article on Her paintings can be found Germany, but returned to her my work in May 2017 and later locally and in homes in the US, motherland in 1997 to study Po- that same year I held a second Europe and other parts of Africa. litical Science. It was in this time solo exhibition, this time at Die that she began playing around Muschel.” To view her work, visit her online with pastels and inks, and sold a portfolio at www.anjabenseler. number of pieces in Namibia. Inspiration com “I graduated in 2001 and began When it comes to inspiration, Anja Scan the a ‘real job’ as consultant, so it was says it comes from the beauty of QR code only seven years later that I bought Namibia’s landscape and nature, for more. my ﬁrst canvas and acrylics,” she with her striving to capture its Artist Anja Benseler is happiest in her studio in the Old Grüner Kranz says. essence by combining minimal- complex. Photo contributed ist compositions with detailed In 2009, Anja completed her realism. ﬁrst piece, titled “Ibis”, which she describes as a steep 6-month Speak to our consultants for your commercial and industrial lighting requirements. Windhoek Blue House Decor Center, 13 Voigts Street, Swakopmund Shop 4, Antonius Gardens I Tel 064 400 214 Luminaires Direct is a premier lighting store, DM0202000368155_IK Southern Industrial www.ld.com.na bringing you the latest in outdoor, indoor and Windhoek Luminaires Direct 36-40 Cobalt Street, Prosperita www.facebook.com/luminairesdirect Tel 061 236 691 www.eglo.com decorative lamp designs. Visit our website at ld.com.na or in store to get Inspired by Lighting.

P:02

2 Focus What is happening in your area? We would like to share your achievements, events and activities Southern InduStrIal & ProSPerIta Monday 21 SepteMber 2020 From custom woodwork, to cute clothing Upgrades and new trails at Farm Windhoek Just the best for baby and mama Whatever you seek for the tom-made furniture, Isabelle also wear,” she says. Scan the handles interior design and renova- However, it’s not just about QR code latest human addition to your tions to make bedrooms for babies for more. right up to teenagers something mommies and babies here – there family, you are sure to ﬁnd it special. And when she can’t create are also selected gifts for daddies, like The so-called 'play pit' at IJG Trails at Farm Windhoek. something herself, Isabelle says that mix and match cigars, flasks, leather here! she sources the rest. “Interesting- bags, vellies and more. The IJG Trails on Farm Wind- focused on, is security,” he says. ly enough, most of my suppliers are hoek are undergoing some “Unfortunately we don’t have Belle's Baby Boutique opened women that custom-make their own The boutique offers an online shop- changes that the team is very guards on duty 24-hours a day. a mere three months ago, but products too. They work from home, ping experience for out of town excited about. So as soon as it gets dark, we has grown in leaps and bounds have a factory, employ seamstresses clients as well as an online gift reg- According to Peter van der have difficulty securing the area. since then. and manufacture themselves,” she istry that can be hand delivered to Merwe, these changes are At this point we have a strict According to owner Isabelle van says. your doorstep. mostly on the Kleine Kuppe side curfew and visitors must be off der Walt, her journey in the in- of Farm Windhoek, which are the trails by 18:00 because that’s dustry began about four years ago “Here in Namibia, we also try our In spite of the current situation, Is- being carried out mainly due to when our guards knock off and with Belle's Designs that focused on best to source locally. Most of our abelle says she has a number of plans the fair portion of area they are our roaming guards come back custom woodwork. “I started off re- suppliers are also women. Our up- in the pipeline. While she doesn’t losing because of developments from their posts all over the storing old furniture,” she says, while holsterer is a woman and we also have want to elaborate too much, she is on the Waldorf side of the farm. farm, which leaves the area un- we are seated on comfortable cus- our own in-house seamstress here willing to share that come spring, “We’re building a number of protected.” tom-made seats in the boutique. at Belles.” Belle’s will be launching an in-house new trails to compensate,” he Van der Merwe said that like all photographic studio with a full range says. “While the farm has a businesses, they have also felt Three years later she and a partner International brands of props and backdrops for both baby couple of nice mountain bike the impact of Covid. ventured into a baby company, boys and girls. trails for advanced riders, they “The situation is tough. We ex- however about a year ago she spread However, Belle’s also stocks well- are fairly limited for beginners. perienced a drastic increase in her wings and opened Belle's Baby known international baby care This project is particularly close to So, we’re putting in lots of effort day users during the initial lock- Boutique. Today, in spite of Covid brands. “We try to stock exclusive her heart because many of the cute to build trails that are more down, which we are grateful for. wreaking havoc on businesses, Isa- products from all over the world,” little outfits for boys were made from suited for beginners and inter- Providing an area where you belle is excited about what the future she says. These include well-known her late father’s shirts. mediate riders and trail runners can get out and enjoy nature, holds. “celebrity” bottles like Comotomo in a bid to broaden our offering especial during a lockdown from the US and Nip from Germany, She says the studio can be rented on the farm.” scenario, has been beneficial to She says her focus is on providing Haakaa from New Zealand, and the with all the props along with a pho- He said that they’ve also made us because we could fill a gap top notch products which are locally Sleepy range from Switzerland. tographer, or you can bring your own some changes to the entrance in the market that was and is produced as far as possible, along photographer to handle shoots. to make the area more upmar- needed.” with the best client service. “We’ve also expanded into ma- ket and to improve the overall IJG Trails offers a variety of ternity wear and the cutest baby For more information and to keep experience for members and membership packages to suit Besides the shop that is full of cus- up to date on Belle’s regular specials persons who want to get out different needs and different and giveaways, check out Belle’s Baby into nature. pockets, ranging from weekend Boutique Namibia on Facebook. Along with new general look packages to annual member- upfront, is secure parking, new ship. The trails are open seven Scan the Owner Isabelle van der Walt toilets and an electric fence days a week, from 07:00 to QR code says her focus is on providing around the coffee trailer area. 18:00. For more information, for more. top notch products. “The major area that we’ve visit IJGtrails.com. Visit Belle's for the cutest outﬁts for boys and girls. Email: Water tanks Compression fittings CM220V Booster Pumps Irrigation equipment [email protected] Valves Water filters HDPE Pipes Driplines Galvenised fittings Impact sprinklers Tel: (061) 231 189 Address: 3 Planck Street, Southern Industrial, Windhoek

P:03

Focus What is happening in your area? We would like to 3 share your achievements, events and activities Southern InduStrIal & ProSPerIta Monday 21 SepteMber 2020 Zimmer­ mann Drive local, Garage support local has been in the This family-owned business gramme for school leavers who would market for like to become a mechanic or work with 57 years has been in the market for 57 motor electronics,” he says. and still offers years and still offers the best When it comes to servicing vehicles, the best Zimmermann stocks over 15 000 parts Volks­ Volkswagen service you could that are available on hand. “In the event wagen of a specific part not being in stock, we service wish for. can easily order it from Volkswagen you could South Africa (48 hours) or Germany (7 wish for. If you are in the market for a new or to 10 days),” Norbert says. used Volkswagen, or if your prized pos- session needs a specialised service, Customer loyalty is very important to then look no further than Zimmer- Zimmermann Garage. “Be it a new or mann Garage at 5 Wright Street in Wind- used vehicle, remember that cheaper hoek’s Southern Industrial Area. is not always better, especially when it comes to services,” he says, adding that “Being a specialist Volkswagen dealer, with the cost that people perceive as a service at Zimmermann Garage comes being higher, they can also be sure of with highly specialised equipment, tools receiving original parts and excellent and training,” says Norbert Zimmer- service by highly trained mechanics. You mann. This includes top of the range fault can rest assured that your car is in good finding equipment to pin point any me- hands when serviced by a Zimmermann chanical issues your car may experience. mechanic that has the right knowledge, because they have been well trained. Zimmermann Garage has the correct equipment for smaller repair jobs like Doing their bit for the environment, windscreen and chip repairs, wheel align- Norbert says they make sure to collect all ment and balancing. tapped off vehicle oil to be disposed of in a responsible manner and which used in In their electronic workshop, they can industries elsewhere, while bigger parts take care of any electrical issues like like brake pads and drums, oil filters and window winders, handle air condition- such, are sold to scrap iron and metal ing gas refills and make sure your radio reusers. and cellphone are perfectly in Bluetooth sync. For more information on what Zim- mermann Garage has to offer, visit their But it is the staff he is particularly proud showroom in Wright Street, or their of, who all undergo regular and rigorous website at zimmermanngarage.com training to keep their skills up to date. “We also have an apprenticeship pro- Being a specialist Volkswagen dealer, a service at Zimmermann Garage comes with highly specialised equipment, tools and training.

P:04

4 Focus What is happening in your area? We would like to share your achievements, events and activities Southern InduStrIal & ProSPerIta Monday 21 SepteMber 2020 Take a breath at The Yoga Shala Feel healthier, think more clearly, Scan the At the moment there are anywhere between QR code five and ten instructors hosting the classes. breathe better and change your inter- for more. “Yoga teachers travel quite a lot, so they’re coming and going all the time. But we have a action with the world. Lara-Lyn Ahrens of the Yoga Shala teaching a lession at the studio in Windhoek. couple of teachers that are the cornerstones of the Shala. Three are teaching very regularly “Iread a quote recently that said it doesn’t limited amount of people due to Covid-res- 1 lockdown to keep offering classes to students. and the rest are on an ad hoc basis.” matter how you start with yoga, it works trictions, so we’ve also begun teaching online, “What we didn’t expect to happen was that in- either way,” says Lara-Lyn Ahrens of The which has been working very well.” ternational students have started joining these Changes Yoga Shala in Windhoek. classes, too!” “Yoga means union, and at The Yoga Shala She says initially they went online during stage Lara-Lyn says that since yoga is a very old prac- we’re aligning the different ‘sheets’ of a person – tice, it is also changing. “Recently one of the the physical body as well as your mental and spi- great yoga teachers said that ‘there is no space ritual body. In theory, once all these are aligned, in this world for dogma without purpose’. That’s wellness is a byproduct. The result is feeling why things are evolving and changing, and that’s healthier, you think more clearly, you breathe why yoga should be able to move into a modern better and it changes your interaction with the world,” she says. world around you,” she says. Besides being a yoga and acroyoga instruc- Originally Lara-Lyn got into yoga through tor, Lara-Lyn is also a Thai massage therapist. kickboxing and in an effort to become a little “These three serve as cornerstones that make more flexible. “Slowly I started doing more and up the triangle of my life. “I love them all for dif- more, and now it’s become a way of life.” ferent things. Yoga is something I do very much for myself and for a community; acrobatics is so- Yoga has given Lara-Lyn opportunities to mething I do for the fun, to do tricks and achieve travel all over the world. “This is through a com- goals; and Thai massage is something I feel I can bination of yoga and acro- or partner yoga. The offer other people. I can’t say I enjoy one more communities are incredibly welcoming. Once than the other, but there are times that I enjoy you’ve attended an acroyoga event, you are gua- practicing one above the other.” ranteed to have made new friends who will de- finitely invite you to their home, city, or to join For more info, visit theshala.yoga or check out them at another retreat,” she says. their Facebook page at TheYogaShala/Wind- hoek, or follow them on Instagram TheYoga She’s also been invited to teach at some of Shala. Otherwise, send an email to Lara-Lyn these retreats. at [email protected] “Currently I teach at the studio, taking a FRESH WISE TRADING A FRESH PRODUCE FRUIT AND VEGETABLES WHOLESALER AND RETAILER WE DM0202000367039_IK Vir heerlike vars vrugte en groente, maak gerus 'n draai by Fresh Wise. DELIVER IN VISIT OUR SHOP FOR WINDHOEK Vir die heerlikste vars EXCELLENT SPECIALS. YOU WILL groente en vrugte BE SURPRISED BY THE PRICE! TRADING HOURS Fresh Wise Trading CC in Prosperita aanbiedings wat gereeld beskikbaar is is ’n groothandelaar wat die heerlikste en interessante wenke gedeel word. Monday – Friday vars vrugte en groente aan kleinhande- laars asook spysenieringsmaatskappye Openingstye is Maandag tot Vrydag 7h30 – 16h45 teen grootmaatpryse verkoop. vanaf 07:30 tot 16:30. Fresh Wise Trading is in Cobaltstraat geleë. Saturday Daar is egter ook ’n “fabriekswinkel” waar die publiek vrugte en groente Scan the 7h30 – 12h00 aankope kan doen teen billike pryse. QR code for more. 32 – 34 Cobalt street, Prosperita, Windhoek | Tel: 061 226 206 Maak dus gerus hier ’n draai om vir jou huishouding heerlike vars produkte te koop. Kyk ook op die maatskappy se Facebook-blad vir die talle spesiale

P:05

Focus What is happening in your area? We would like to 5 share your achievements, events and activities Southern InduStrIal & ProSPerIta Monday 21 SepteMber 2020 Pipes made in Namibia, for Namibia AGA Pipe Products started being assembled and will be oper- well as advice on what product to operation in 2014 and is owned, ational by the end of 2020 in a bid select for each individual need. managed and run by Namibians to minimize delivery times. for the Namibian market. Currently AGA Pipe Products AGA’s HD pipes are produced ac- is the only Namibian factory that Currently the company runs three cording to SANS 4427-2:2008 and produces multi-duct pipes for the production lines in their factory, their LD pipes according to ISO 161- telecommunication market in which produces low (LDPE) and 1:1996. They do in-house testing in Namibia. high-density polyethylene pipes their laboratory based on these (HDPE) in all pressure classes up standards along with lab testing and Going green to PN25, as well as cable ducting for consultancy services for customers. the telecommunication and con- AGA Pipe Products is committed to struction markets. AGA Pipe Products offers com- doing their part for the environment plete customer solutions based on as well, with most of the factory’s Their fourth production line is type and length requirements as power consumption being catered for by a solar power system they im- Prosperita seems naturally prone to termites. plemented last year. Pest control This was done because the factory against termites consumes vast amounts of elec- tricity during production and they in Prosperita wanted to decrease power con- sumption. This not only saves the When these critters get you be good to talk to your neighbours prior The company runs three production lines in their factory, company money, but this saving is under, look no further than this to doing a treatment. which produces low and high-density polyethylene pipes in all passed through to production costs, treatment pressure classes up to PN25, as well as cable ducting for the which in turn means they can offer Under threat telecommunication and construction markets. a saving to customers. Inesfly has carried out several applica- tions against termites in the Prosper- Areas under threat are essentially any AGA Pipe Products has one aim – ita area. premises that contains wood – so ba- to serve the Namibian market and The area seems naturally prone to sically all premises! Termites will eat its people with a quality product termites and the problem is exacerbat- their way through concrete to get to which is backed up by service and ed when inadequate insect treatment your kitchen cupboards and over a long workmanship that is always guar- of the foundations is done prior to the enough period, its bound to happen es- anteed construction of buildings. Thereafter, pecially if the termites were there before insects exploit cracks and joints as build- you were. Besides offering a personal experi- ings age and find it easy to enter build- ence to assist clients with his or her ings and feast on the tasty things that Some termite favourites include any needs, they also transport product humans bring. joinery, wood pallets, thatch roofing, to the required destination. plants – living or dead – and untreated In the past, insect treatment post-con- timber. Also, be careful when buying fire AGA Pipe striction required tedious and expensive wood for the office or home – you may in- drilling. However, now Inesfly provides advertently be importing termites into PRODUCTS lasting protection with minimal inter- your premises directly from the farm ference due to the micro-encapsulating as fire wood is often collected, stored We are the only Namibian factory that technology that slowly releases active in- and processed already infested with ter- produce multi-duct pipes for the gredients over time. The product con- mites. Best is to buy fumigated wood. Use tains a mixture of several active ingre- firewood quickly and store in smaller Telecommunication market for Namibia. dients as well as an irritant to which the quantities to reduce the risk of termites termites and other insects are sensi- becoming permanent residents. We are currently running 3 production lines in our factory which produce HDPE, LDPE pipes tive to. in all pressure classes up to PN25, as well as Cable ducting for the telecommunication and Use this! construction markets. Our 4th production line is being assembled and will be operational In this manner insects that come into contact with the treated area are erad- • Pre- and post-construction treatment end 2020 in order to minimize delivery times. icated and also repels insects to find can be done with Inesfly EM House Mul- \"greener\" pastures elsewhere. tipurpose Coating with a back pack CUSTOMER CARE FORMS PART OF THE FOUNDATION OF AGA PIPE PRODUCTS AND WE ARE sprayer. Apply directly to foundations, COMMITTED TO ENSURING THAT ALL YOUR NEEDS ARE MET. WE ARE AVAILABLE TO FIELD This often results in termites moving brickwork, wood, thatch, insect nests from one building to another, so it may and other problem areas as a spot treat- ANY FURTHER QUERIES YOU MAY HAVE REGARDING AND WELCOME YOUR CALL. ment. Pre- and post-construction treat- • Inesfly SP Coating, a clear finish treat- 31 Platinum Street, PROSPERITA | Tel: +264 61 247872 | Fax: +264 61 247873 ment can be done with Inesﬂy EM ment that maintains the original quali- Cell: +264 81 308 5513 | Mail: [email protected] House Multipurpose Coating. ties of the treated surface such as wood and natural stone. Apply with air sprayer, www.agatechnicalservices.com | www.agapipeproducts.com roller or brush. • Inesfly interior and exterior paints offer the longest lasting insect protec- tion of buildings and roof trusses. Use as a normal paint or primer. • Additionally, Inesfly offers a range of products to protect, homes, plants, animals and people. Learn more about Inesfly Technology at www.inesfly.com.na As a matter of interest, domestic and professional products like Inesfly 2in1 Floor Cleaner, Bed Bug Solution and Inesfly EM House are available from the online store and off the shelf at leading retailers. Inesfly Namibia also does applications and treatments so you don’t have to. Call the team at 081 275 2257 or 061 238059– they can’t wait to hear about your problems!

P:06

6 Focus What is happening in your area? We would like to share your achievements, events and activities Southern InduStrIal & ProSPerIta Monday 21 SepteMber 2020 POSitive Solutions is For all your a family business that POS solutions currently employs 23 staff members. Converting large reels of paper into rather get into farming, but Chris persevered. also recently appointed an in-house graphic de- Scan the After further investments into equipment and signer and acquired a specialised digital printer. QR code point-of-sale solutions, is the name of expansion on their product range, today the “The biggest benefit of this machine, is that it for more. company is the only jumbo reel converter in can handle ‘short runs’, which means it can print this family’s game. Namibia with a 100% Namibian shareholding. anything from ten labels and up without having ing process, people who are often in contact with Moreover, they are a proud member of Team to make polymer plates to print.” BPA-coated receipts, have a higher level of BPA Ever given a second thought to where your Namibia and of the Namibia Manufacturers in their bodies. BPA has been linked to causing till slip comes from? Or the receipt the Association. This machine can also cut labels into just about reproductive, immunity, and neurological prob- ATM spits out after withdrawing your hard- any shape imaginable. lems, as well as an increased likelihood of Alz- earned cash? “We supply to around 70% of the market, with heimer's, childhood asthma, metabolic disease, This is where Prosperita-based POSitive Solu- clients from Katima Mulilo to Noordoewer, Rosh In terms of quality, Chris says they have strict type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. tions comes in: They specialise in the convert- Pinah and Gobabis. We also have a branch in control policies in place, which are followed ing and printing of large paper reels into cash Swakopmund. through every aspect from converting to fin- All their paper is imported from Germany. register rolls, speedpoint rolls, ATM rolls, fax ishing and packaging. rolls, plotter paper rolls and self-adhesive labels. POSitive Solutions is a family business, with At your service Chris’ son managing the Windhoek branch and BPA-free POSitive Solutions was established in April his daughter managing the branch at the coast. Looking to the future, Chris says that their main 2002 after owner Chris Liebenberg came across Together they are dedicated to empowering Na- Chris is very proud of the fact that all the paper objective is to supply a truly Namibian product a dismantled single converting machine that mibians and currently employ 23 staff members POSitive Solutions uses, is BPA-free. to all the major role players in Namibia and ex- printed cash register rolls. “After contacting mainly from previously disadvantaged groups panding into Angola, Zambia, Botswana, Zim- the owner who was in Walvis Bay, he said he and of which only five are men. Bisphenol A – BPA – was developed to act as babwe and South Africa. had some other dismantled printers too. I told a dye developer in coatings on thermal paper. him I didn’t have much money, but he was im- Technology While these heat resistant qualities allow a “As we move towards our main objective, we mediately willing to discuss payment options.” stable image to be produced in the thermal print- hope to gainfully employ additional staff.” Chris says they are the only manufacturer of Once everything was arranged, together with scale labels (both printed and unprinted) as well POSitive Solutions’ prices are market related a friend that was mechanically inclined, they as self-adhesive labels in the country. Except for and their service top notch. tackled the business. the printing presses they use – which are clearly loved, because each machine has a name – they For more information, call 061 269 362. Eight years later, his partner decided he would Digitally printed specialized Keeping young and labels, Cut to any shape and size old entertained Printed on various coated and If you’ve ever wondered how you can ternational safety standards, so it really uncoated papers keep your kids or perhaps even yourself is safe to use. entertained for hours, look no further No minimum quantities than Sand Art! Anja says a variety of packages are avail- able: from Home Kits with 20 cards and Locally distributed by artist Anja enough sand for 300 cards, to smaller gift Benseler, Sand Art is a creative process packs. Cards can also be purchased in- where children (and adults!) peel sec- dividually and are available in a variety tions off a laser-cut sticker with a pretty of sizes and as fridge magnets. design and pour beautifully coloured sand on the adhesive sections to create For more information, contact Anja at fun images. 081 567 6474 to visit her studio at the Old Grüner Kranz complex in the Southern According to Anja, there is nothing Industrial Area, or visit Sam’s Hobbies easier than creating art than by using and Toys, or the Auas Valley Pharmacy Sand Art. “The adhesive is already on the in Windhoek, and the Fun Shop in Swa- pre-cut board. You literally just peel the kopmund. picture in stages, sprinkle on coloured sand and you’re done!” Scan the QR code She says that Sand Art is actually a fam- for more. ily-run South African business that has DM0202000368053_IK expanded the distribution of its prod- ucts internationally. Best of all is that the sand adheres (pun intended) to in- Positive Solutions specializes in the converting and SandArt provides hours of fun for young and old! printing of jumbo paper reels into Cash Register Rolls, Speedpoint Rolls, ATM Rolls, Fax Rolls, Plotter Paper Rolls and Self-adhesive Labels. Only quality Bond, Thermal and Lasergraphic papers are used in the converting process as well as the best quality Top coat and Econo self-adhesive reels for our scale and self-adhesive labels. We also specialize in Deep freeze, Matt and Semi-gloss labels We also supply a wide range of printer consumables (toners and cartridges) price label strips and in-store pricing and display solutions. Tel : + 264 61 – 269 362 | Fax: + 264 61- 269 361 | e-mail : [email protected] Unit 4-7, Prosperita Worx, 100 Nickel street Prosperita Visit our website for more information https://possol.biz/

P:07

ZIMMERMANN GARAGE WINDHOEK STANDS FOR PEACE OF MIND DRIVING For all your needs, under one roof, when it comes to finding any Volkswagen Vehicle, New, Light Commercial and Used vehicles OPEN WEEKDAYS 07:30 AM – 5:30 PM Master Cars Mechanical Workshop Contact Details Electrical Workshop Service Booking +264 61 372 500 Sales Department +264 61 372 541 Parts Department +264 61 372 516 / 372 519 Workshop Enquiry +264 61 372 523 Commercial Vehicles Sales +264 61 417 420 Commercial Workshop + 264 61 417 424 Used Cars + 264 61 372 504 Parts Department Showroom Windscreen Repair Wheel Alignment Physical Address 5 Wright Street, Southern Industrial Area Windhoek, Namibia (We're here to help in any way we can.) Whether you are looking for your perfect vehicle or would like more information on parts and services, our team is ready to assist. You can contact us in a variety of ways - enquire online or connect with us directly. http://www.zimmermanngarage.com/contact Look us up on Facebook

P:08

8 Focus What is happening in your area? We would like to share your achievements, events and activities SOUTHERN INDUSTRIAL & PROSPERITA Monday 21 SepteMber 2020 Lighting up your life Scan the QR code for more. When you walk into the Lumi- At your service: Staff at the Prosperita branch of Luminaires Direct. can also visit www.ld.com.na to see naires Direct showroom in first-hand the wide range of options Prosperita or at their branch Swakopmund. And finally, around 18 providing clients with home lighting and vintage lighting is very fashion- available. “If you see what you like, in the Southern Industrial months ago, we got the opportunity and bulbs, as well as commercial and able at the moment, and is available we will make sure to you get a quota- Area, you will be truly amazed at the to open our Blue House showroom in industrial ranges. “We now also stock as ceiling or wall mounted options,” tion as soon as possible,” Johan says. variety of lighting options available. the Southern Industrial Area, which a variety of ceiling fans just ready for Johan says. Besides the stunning fix- has now grown into a branch in its the summer, as well as plugs and tures, Luminaires Direct also stocks The company is also active on Face- And if you aren’t already in the own right.” switches from a host of South African globes, bulbs and lighting strips to book and Instagram, where you can process of sprucing up your home, and international manufacturers.” suite every taste and requirement. check out the latest lighting trends. office or any other indoor or outdoor Sales consultant Johan Beukes says Products can be couriered country- space, you will soon be thinking about that Luminaires Direct focuses on What’s hot at the moment? “Rustic Besides the three showrooms, clients wide. it, because here you really are spoiled for choice. Find Luminaires Direct at: The company boasts a compre- • Blue House Decor Centre hensive and diverse range of light- (13 Voigts Street), [email protected]. ing products, featuring the hottest na or 061 236 691. Open: trends, latest technical developments, Weekdays from 08:00 - 17:00 and top notch lighting products all and Saturday 09:00 - 13:00. while providing clients with the best • 36 Cobalt Street, Prosperita, possible service and advice. [email protected] or 061 236 691. Open weekdays from Luminaires Direct is a Namibian- 08:00 - 17:00 and owned family business and besides Saturday 09:00 - 12:00. the two branches in Windhoek, also • Luminaires Direct Swakopmund has a branch in Swakopmund. (Shop 4, Antonius Gardens, Hendrik Witbooi Street), swk@ According to owner Claudia Spoerer, ld.com.na or 064 403 355. the branch in Prosperita opened five Open weekdays 08:00 - 17:00 years ago and since then the business (closed during lunch) and has grown in leaps and bounds. “In Saturday 08:00 - 12:00. time we realised that coastal residents also want beautiful lighting options, so then we opened our branch in Scan the QR code for more. LET LUMINAIRES DIRECT LIGHT YOUR WAY ON YOUR QUEST FOR BEAUTIFUL ONE OF A KIND LIGHTING. Visit our website at ld.com.na or in store to get Inspired by Lighting. Leani Smit welcomes shoppers to Windpomp Meat Market & Deli's trailer in Prosperita. Get all your (braai) Luminaires Direct is a premier lighting store, meats met here bringing you the latest in outdoor, indoor and decorative Originally hailing from Omaruru and clients with quality meat products at af- lamp designs. Karibib, Windpomp Meat Market & Deli fordable prices and with friendly cus- now also boasts a beautiful trailer selling tomer service. DM0202000368158_IK delightful meaty products in Prosperita in the capital. “Anyone is welcome at Die Windpomp Windhoek Blue House Decor Center, 13 Voigts Street, Swakopmund Shop 4, Antonius Gardens I Tel 064 400 214 – from serious braaiers who want to Southern Industrial www.ld.com.na On the menu is fresh beef, mutton, choose their own meat for an occasion, biltong, droëwors, and a variety of other to a learner who just wants a good braai Windhoek Luminaires Direct 36-40 Cobalt Street, Prosperita www.facebook.com/luminairesdirect farm products. pack for a ‘kuier’ around the fire,” he said. Tel 061 236 691 www.eglo.com According to Leani Smit that manages Visit the trailer at Fresh Wise in Cobalt the trailer, their most popular products Street. are the biltong and droëwors. Buy fresh beef, mutton, biltong, “The raw products come from farmers droëwors, and a variety of other and farms in the Omaruru and Karibib farm products here. area, and is then taken to our butchery in Omaruru, where it is processed,” she says. From there it is brought to Wind- hoek. These delicious products also include chilli bites, russians, cheese grillers, viennas, böckwurst, boerewors, brat- wurst, sirloin or rump steaks – all items the trailer has in stock. According to owner Eugene le Grange, who spoke to our sister publication Erongo previously, his vision is to serve