From 27 March our new commercial partner Teleperformance Ltd will take over the running of our Visa Application Centre (VAC) in Windhoek. They have subcontracted to the current supplier – FedEx - so there will be no change in the day to day management of the VAC.

The Visa Application Centre will move to Unit 9, Dresmaplatz, Nickel St, Prosperita, Windhoek.

The opening hours of the VAC in Windhoek are Mon – Fri 8.00 to 12.30.

We are making the following changes to the visa service that we offer:

User Pays charges. From 27 March, there will be a charge of £59 to use the Visa Application Centre in Windhoek. This will be in addition to the visa fee and will be charged at the point of booking the appointment and will cover the cost of providing the application submission facilities in Windhoek. Your appointment at this Visa Application Centre will not be honoured if this fee is not paid.

We will work closely with our Commercial Partners to ensure continuity of service during the transition period.

Recent changes have been made so that all visa applications will be submitted online and most visa fee payments will be made online by April 2014. Visa Application Centre appointment bookings will be made online from the point at which the newly transitioned Visa Application Centres become operational, but you will still need to attend a Visa Application Centre in order to submit your biometric data and any supporting documents.

All applications for a UK visa in Namibia must be completed using our online application system and paid for online in South African Rand before going to the visa application centre to submit biometric data.

You will be able to purchase a User Pay appointment or additional priority services online at the point of booking an appointment. There may also be local arrangements which enable payment on the day at the Visa Application Centre, in which case details will be available on our Commercial Partner’s website.

For further details please contact: pta.visaenquiries@fco.gov.uk or call locally: +264 (0)61 259023.