Christina Aguilera was born in Staten Island, New York to Xavier Aguilera and Shelly Moraine. Her father was in the US army which meant that they had to move from place to place and her mother was a violinist and a pianist. Her parents separated when she was only 6 years old and she moved to live with her maternal grandmother in Pennsylvania with her mother. Her father is said to be abusive to her and her mother, emotionally and physically. Aguilera always wanted to be a singer and was locally famous for her golden voice. In 1990, she made a public appearance for the first time on the show ‘Star Search’ but did not win the competition. She used to study in the Rochester Area School District and Marshall Middle School, Wexford. In both the schools she was bullied because of her singing talent and for having appeared on the television. In 1993, she did ‘The Mickey Mouse Club’ with other celebrities like: Ryan Gosling, Britney Spears, Justin Timberlake, etc. And, she was only 14 when she recorded her first song ‘All I Wanna Do’, a duet sung with a Japanese singer.

In 1998, Aguilera auditioned for the soundtrack of the animated movie ‘Mulan’. She recorded the song ‘Reflection’ and after that RCA Records signed her for a musical contract. In 1999, she came out with her debut album ‘Christina Aguilera’ and gave hit singles like ‘Genie in a Bottle’ and ‘What a Girl Want’ to the world. The album was a number 1 hit on the US charts and all over the world. In 2000, she sang a duet with Enrique Iglesias at the Superbowl XXXIV. She was awarded as the Best New Artist by Grammys in the same year. ‘Mi Reflejo’ came out, her Latin-pop Album for which she learnt Spanish. It had the hit single ‘Nobody Wants to be Lonely’, a duet with Ricky Martin. In 2000, Aguilera’s ‘My Kind of Christmas’ came out, it was a Christmas album, which was certified platinum and sold over 3 million copies all over the world. In 2001, Aguilera did a single called ‘Lady Marmalade’ with other renowned singers like: Lil’ Kim, Mya and Pink. The song was made for the movi9e ‘Moulin Rouge!’ and became one of the best selling singles of all time. In 2002, her fourth studio album called ‘Stripped’ came out. The video of its single ‘Dirrty’ was first premiered by MTV and because of the over sexual portrayal of Aguilera, it was highly criticized all over. The album was declared multiplatinum and sold 4 million copies all over. In 2006, her fifth studio album ‘Back to Basics’ came out. It sold 4.5 million copies throughout the world. It was a critically acclaimed album with hit singles like ‘Ain’t No Other Man’, ‘Fighter’, ‘Candyman’, etc. She won a Grammy for ‘Ain’t No Other Man’. In 2008, Aguilera did Martin Scorsese’s documentary ‘Shine a Light’. It featured her performing ‘Live With Me’ with Mick Jagger. She also did a little cameo in the movie ‘Get Him to the Greek’ in the same year. In 2010, Aguilera’s sixth studio album called ‘Bionic’ came out for which she collaborated with artists like: M.I.A., Nicki Minaj, Peaches, etc. The album had hit numbers like ‘You Lost Me’, ‘Not Myself Tonight’, etc. The album was not a commercial hit. In 2010, she did her first full feature film called ‘Burlesque’, it was a musical. The movie was written and directed by ‘Steve Antin’ who wrote the movie keeping her in mind. Aguilera cowrote many of the tracks for the movie and worked alongside Kirsten Bell, Stanley Tucci, etc. In 2012, Aguilera did her seventh studio album called ‘Lotus’. The album received mixed reviews from the critics and could not do very well commercially. It included singles like: ‘Your Body’, ‘Just a Fool’, etc.