The Secret Life of Words

Directed and written by Isabel Coixet

Starring Sarah Polley and Tim Robbins

Classification: 14A

Rating: **

The Secret Life of Words is a film. ... No, scratch that and start again, because The Secret Life of Words is at least two films and possibly three.

First, there is the earnest drama about how a Croatian refugee might recover from the crimes committed against her. Then there is the bittersweet drama about a bunch of misfits working on a North Sea oil rig. And finally there is the inappropriate Hollywood ending tacked onto to the unconvincing union of this pair.

The Secret Life of Words, a new feature from the Spanish director Isabel Coixet, is a frustrating film full of many wonderful parts that the filmmaker ultimately betrays.

The film begins by charting the eccentric ways of the mysterious Hanna - that's Canadian actress Sarah Polley, who also starred in Coixet's last film My Life without Me. Hanna is an utterly solitary deaf woman who works in a textile factory in some grim but unidentified setting in the British Isles. She never misses a day of work, never talks to her co-workers and apparently never eats anything but chicken nuggets, white rice and apples. The factory boss tells her that she is getting on her colleagues' nerves and orders her off on vacation.

This material could be very funny, but Coixet plays it with such sorrow that the tone remains heavy even when Hanna asks her boss, as he pushes holiday brochures across his desk, "What if you do not want to do aerobics in the pool?"

So, having ruled out aerobics in the tropics, Hanna takes a bus ride to some grey, North Sea port, where she overhears a man in a bar who says he is looking for a nurse he can hire on the spot. She volunteers. Driving her to a helicopter pad, the stressed-out recruiter (a wonderfully harassed Eddie Marsan) provides a desperate description of how the smell of his children's vomit pollutes his cluttered car. That is one of many small, brilliant moments where Coixet achieves a kind of heart-breaking comedy. It's also what makes the ultimate failure of this film so disappointing.

The recruiter flies Hanna, who apparently did work as a nurse in her homeland, to an oil rig where her job is to tend to Josef (Tim Robbins), a worker who has been temporarily blinded in an explosion and can't yet be moved to shore.

The deaf nurse and the blind patient: It sounds self-consciously symbolic and a bit formulaic, and indeed, the romance that blossoms when Josef reveals his guilty secret to Hanna never rings true.

Polley is very good at playing those wounded characters who see much but say little and is perfectly at home on both sides of the story. In the first, she suggests, with a wide-eyed glance, knotted hands and a little swallow, the depths of both Hanna's intelligence and her pain. In the second, she successfully plays off the more overtly comic work of a cast of sweet eccentrics - which includes an idealistic young oceanographer (Daniel Mays) and a soft-hearted Spanish cook (Javier Camara) - to show Hanna gently thawing.

The notion, however, that it is Josef's persistent flirting and emotional confession that do the trick seems forced and Coixet has drawn much more nuanced work from Polley than from Robbins, who seems stuck here playing some sunny American out of place on both sides of the story. Coixet never examines the moral implications of Josef's behaviour, largely avoiding the gulf between his personal mess and Hanna's much greater suffering, so Robbins cannot convey the character's guilt as anything more than a passing pang.

Perhaps many a victim of abuse dreams of the white knight who will make the hurt go away, but Coixet gets horribly muddled by actually proffering the fellow. The scenes where Josef gets a lecture on the forgotten victims of the Yugoslavian civil wars from a counsellor (that's a very soignée Julie Christie in an oh-so-helpful cameo) are painfully expository. Similarly, the voice-over narration offered by a ghost from Hanna's past, which brackets the film, is confusing at the outset and unnecessary in the end.

Moved by his plight, Hanna makes Josef a gift of her story. Coixet knows that's all there is between them, yet persists in a happy ending set in an implausibly fancy kitchen. What is one to make of a filmmaker who has the vision to see a big white goose wandering an oil rig and the wisdom to offer without explanation a scene in which two lonely male rig workers tentatively kiss, yet would let her audience believe that the Yugoslav rape camps might be erased by transporting the survivors off to expensive houses in happier lands?