Ray Charles, also known as the "Genius" and the "Father of the Soul Music," was an acclaimed musician during the 1950s. Ray produced charismatic music by experimenting and mixing different genres like jazz, blues, and gospel. His world-famous hits like "I've Got A Woman," "Unchain My Heart," and "What I'd Say" are still ruling our hearts!

Ray tragically died in 2004 after suffering from years of illness. But his 50 years of a remarkable career earned him a place among the top musicians in the world. The contemporary harmonic music we listen to today is all by the grace of Ray Charles!

Early Life

Ray was born in the beautiful land of Albany, Georgia, on Sep. 23 1930. His family later moved to Florida when Ray was still a baby. His parents had no link with the music industry or music; his father was a mechanic, and his mother was a sharecropper.

However, during his childhood, Ray witnessed the tragic death of his younger brother. Not long after this traumatic event, Ray Charles began to lose his eyesight gradually, most likely due to glaucoma, leaving him completely blind by age 7.

After he went blind, Ray was enrolled in the Florida School for the Deaf and the Blind in St. Augustine, where he learned music. He learned every instrument offered, from piano to trumpet and sax to clarinet. In short, Ray entered the world of music at a young age and never let his visual impairment come in the way of his success!

Career

After Ray saw the death of his parents and all of his siblings by the age of 15, music was the only thing with which he was left. At 16, he moved from Florida to Seattle, where his music career started flourishing. He started performing with different musical groups around the city and received massive appreciation for his remarkable singing.

Ray was so dedicated to music that he released his first song, "Confession Blues," at 16 in collaboration with the Maxin Trio. In the coming years, he released countless solo songs that consistently topped the charts of R&B music.

Ray's songs "Kissa Me Baby" and "Baby Let Me Hold Your Hand" were among his best-performing productions that his fans appreciate to this day. His idea of the mixed music templates became super popular after his single hit song "I Got A Woman" was released. This single was classified as "Soul Music," and it became a genre of its own.

Ray continually experimented with different styles of music in his career. He had revealed that he took musical inspiration from world-famous musicians like Nat King Cole and Charles Brown. Moreover, his songs and performances always had hints of the African American Culture.

Though Ray was blind, he never let this handicap stop him from achieving the best of the best in his career. After years of struggle, Ray became a critically-acclaimed music "Genius."

Personal Life

Ray Charles became a heroin addict at a very young age. In fact, he was arrested in 1965 for possessing heroin and other drugs. This arrest was a huge risk for his career and name. Fortunately, he got admitted to the Los Angeles Rehab Clinic, where he recovered from his addiction in a few months.

Ray got married twice, first to Eileen Williams and then to Della Beatrice Howard Robinson. Both these marriages ended in divorce after only a few years. Ray has 12 children, and these kids are from 10 different women.

Ray’s Death and Legacy

When Charles was 73 years old, he underwent serious hip surgery. This surgery put a pause on all his musical tours and plans. Months after the surgery, Charles was diagnosed with terminal liver disease and died a few months later, in 2004. His death was a shock for all of the music industry, and his friends and fans mourned his death for months.

His old friend Quincy Jones once stated, "There will never be another musician who did as much to break the perceived walls of music genres." To this day, Charles is one of the best singers, composers, and artists this world has ever seen.

Accomplishments

One of the most significant accomplishments of Charles's life is that his pop music once reached number 1 on the R&B chart and number 6 on the pop chart. Here is a list of some accomplishments and awards he achieved in his fruitful career:

Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award - 1976

Grammy Award for Best R&B Performance - 1963, 1964, 1967

Grammy Award for Best Vocal Performance - 1961

World Music Legend Award for Outstanding Contribution To The Music Industry - 1994

NAACP Image Award - Hall of Fame Award - 1983, 2004

Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Song - 1961

Ray's career and life are a story of hard work and dedication. After his death, his story was transformed into hit movie "Ray." Indeed, Ray faced many hardships and challenges in his life, but he stood by his passion and never lost hope!