Department of Physical Therapy

School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences

Bridgeside Point 1

100 Technology Drive – Suite 210

Pittsburgh, PA 15219-3130

Directions to the Department of Physical Therapy/ School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences

From I-376 (aka "Parkway East"):

Take I-376 west towards Pittsburgh

Use Exit 3A - Glenwood

Turn right onto Bates Street

Continue straight onto Technology Drive

Turn right to stay on Technology Drive

From I-279 South (aka "Parkway West"):

Take I-279 north towards Pittsburgh

Go through the Fort Pitt tunnel and across the Fort Pitt bridge

Merge off at Exit 6A - I-376 East

Merge onto I-376

Merge onto Boulevard of the Allies

Turn right onto Bates Street

Continue straight onto Technology Drive

Turn right to stay on Technology Drive

From I-279 North (aka "Parkway North"):

Take I-279 south towards Pittsburgh

Merge onto the Veterans Bridge

I-279 becomes I-579 (aka "Crosstown Boulevard")

Merge onto Boulevard of the Allies

Turn right onto Bates Street

Continue straight onto Technology Drive

Shuttle Service

The University provides a shuttle service between the Oakland Campus and Bridgeside Point I for faculty, staff, and students. The passenger shuttle bus is available Monday through Friday from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. Service is also provided during lunch hours to South Side Works. The schedule is detailed below. Download a printable shuttle schedule.

Bridgeside Point Parking

Visitors who are driving to Bridgeside Point I must park their cars in the Pittsburgh Technology Center Garage, a public five-story garage operated by the City of Pittsburgh. The garage is located directly across the street from Bridgeside Point I.

Take a ticket. Neither a University of Pittsburgh nor UPMC parking tag is accepted for garage access.

Upon entering the garage, an automated attendant dispatches a ticket.

Upon leaving the garage, an automated attendant calculates the parking fee by inserting the original ticket.

Parking Rate

The parking garage weekday rate is $3 for the first hour and a $1 for each additional hour. There is no staffed cashier station. Parking on Technology Drive is prohibited.

Only credit card payments are accepted.