NEWCASTLE UNIVERSITY

THE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION, COMMUNICATION AND

LANGUAGE SCIENCES

MASTER OF EDUCATION

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT & EDUCATION

Primary Education and Entrepreneurship in East Africa:

A case study of private schools for the poor in Kibera (Kenya)

Eric Nodem Keunne

089108996

Supervisor: Dr Pauline Dixon

September 2010

SCHOOL OF EDUCATION, COMMUNICATION AND

LANGUAGE SCIENCES

I certify that all material in this

Master's dissertation

which is not my own work, has been identified and that no

material in included which has been submitted for any other

award or qualification.

Signed:

Date: Friday 3rd September 2010

This dissertation is dedicated to my Supervisor Dr Pauline Dixon

who helped me throughout these years to keep on smiling in spite of

the abyss in which I was plunged...

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Holding this precious piece of work at hand at this particular moment still gives the deep impression that I am not yet awake from the dream in which I have been plunged into for the past two years. Indeed reaching the completion point of my master degree has not been easy at all and I humbly feel that I have definitely made a great step ahead in the accomplishment of my goals. All the way from Cameroon my home country to the UK via Belgium, the path has been dotted with so many obstacles. These unbearable moments in my life could have led to a total surrender of the project, but yet I was still able to stand and «fight for my future» as Dr Dixon would say.

It is not only my responsibility but my utmost pleasure to extend my first feeling of heartfelt and warm gratitude to all the scholars and people who have in one way or the other one contributed to make this dream come true. My tremendous gratitude is extended to Dr Pauline Dixon who has been my first support as well as an unquantifiable resource from day one at Newcastle till date. As my personal advisor, supervisor and pathway leader of the International development and education master's programme, Dr Dixon has nurtured me indefatigably with perseverance, hardworking, patience and particularly hopes for a better future ahead. Dearest Pauline, may you find in the significance of these words the true and sincere recognition of my gratitude. You have helped me to realise this dream and i shall always be indebted to you.

My gratitude and recognition go to the Master of Education staff of Newcastle University for their enormous support in accompanying all the students throughout the academic year. I hereby acknowledge and salute the job carried on by the program director, the program secretary, all the lecturers and staff of the EG WEST CENTRE. All my friends and colleagues

from the programme have equally played a great role in my social wellbeing at Newcastle in such a way that omitting to mention their contribution will definitely look pretty unfair. From various origins at the very beginning, we all emerged gradually and finally became one single group. Wherever they may be, I should like thank each and every one of them. On a particular note, I would like to single out Mr George Mikwa of the Kenyan Independent Schools Association (KISA) for the unstinting and unconditional assistance in the completion of this work. Through him and thanks to Dr Dixon, we were able to carry out this research in Kibera. He acted as our main resource person in Kenya and was very helpful in collecting our data on the field and further channelling these at the EG WEST Centre, Newcastle University.

Furthermore, I will like to extend my sincere and warm gratitude to Professor Augustin, Bame Nsamenang, of the university of Yaoundé and Director of The Human Development resource Centre (HDRC) Bamenda, Cameroon. He initiated and guided my ways in the area of research right from my early beginnings at the Teacher's training college in Bambili, Cameroon and has always encouraged me to pursue my academic dreams with conviction and enthusiasm, in spite of the difficulties that could hamper my success. Many thanks Prof.

Finally, I extend my sincere thanks to Dr Nguendjio of the Teacher's Training college in Cameroon, friends, family who have always trusted and encouraged me. Without the tremendous support of all the people mentioned above as well as so many others, this dissertation could not been as more meaningful as it is to me now.

ABSTRACT

Primary Education and Entrepreneurship in East Africa:

A case study of private schools for the poor in Kibera

The dissertation describes and analyses the study of primary education and entrepreneurship in Kibera, one of the largest slums in East Africa. The research is carried out to establish the contribution of the private educational sector in the global campaign of Education for All (EFA) in Kenya. With the euphoria created by era of free primary education which has taken place in most African countries in the early 2000's and the negative impressions that have been noted as a result of this embracement , this study set out to critically appraise the role played by private schools owners in the provision of «quality education». The research which is a case study uses information from 20 school owners, 25 pupils and 25 teachers from selected schools in the slum of Kibera to answer the research question and sub questions.

The dissertation commences with a general introduction in which the scene is set up through background information and specific details concerning the focus and the aim of the study. It equally discusses in a succinct way the motives and reasons behind the exploration of private schools in Africa. The review of literature provides a general picture of recent and ongoing debates on private schools for the poor especially in Africa; this is followed by related discussions on entrepreneurship and the development of the continent. The overall method used for the study is then addressed in the third chapter and this opens an avenue for the examination and analysis of the data collected through the research instruments. At this point every question is critically explored and the results being commented accordingly. All the respondents' answers in addition to relevant documentation are given serious concern in the quest of a response to the main question of the research and to determine the general

satisfaction expressed for the investments in education. The summary and suggestion section concludes the whole study.

The findings suggest that even in the context of free primary education, many parents and pupils still prefer the private schools in spite of the fact that these schools charge fees. Some of the pupils taking part in the research who have been in the past enrolled in government schools deplore the overcrowded classrooms, teachers' absence and lack of attention which is rampant in government schools. The private schools owners, who in the majority are familiar with the Kenyan educational system, mentioned some of the above points as the motivations for setting up their own schools. Two recurrent points were «inadequate schools» in the slum and the desire to focus on HIV/AIDS orphans and socially excluded children. Both teachers and pupils actually expressed their overall satisfaction with the investments except for issues like infrastructures, facilities and salaries for the case of teachers. It was found that the information about the regulations governing the opening of private schools in Kenya is flawed given that few entrepreneurs barely knew what they were. The action of the Kenya Independent Schools Association (KISA) is considered extremely important for the development of the sector and suggestions are given at the end in favour a potential support for the association. The private schools in Kibera and certainly elsewhere in Africa are considered a crucial partner in the achievement of Universal Primary Education given their potential. It therefore would seem quite bizarre not to value the contribution of the educational entrepreneurs in the overall process of education and above all the development of Africa.

Contents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 4

ABSTRACT 6

1.1Presentation of the topic 13

1.2 Focus and aim of the Study 14

1.3 Why the Private educational Sector? 15

1.4 Why Kenya (Kibera)? 16

1.5 Why look at Entrepreneurship? 17

1.6 Why mixed methods? 18

1.7 The dissertation 19

Chapter Two - Literature Review 22

2.1 Introduction 22

2.2 Private education in Africa 23

2.2.1 Free Primary Education and Private school for the poor in Sub Saharan Africa 23

2.2.2 Critics of private school for the poor 27

2.3 Entrepreneurship and development in Africa 28

2.4 The Kenyan Independent School Association (KISA) and the Development of Private

School for the Poor 30

2.5 Summary 32

Chapter Three - Methodology 33

3.1 The research methods of the study 33

3.1.1 Theoretical framework 33

3.1.2 Research method used and description of data collection 35

3.1.3 Target population and sampling 38

3.1.4 Reliability and Validity of the research 39

3.2 Permission and Ethics 40

3.3 Conducting the research in Kibera 41

3.4 Limitation of the study 42

3.5 Data presentation and Analysis 42

3.6 Conclusion 43

Chapter Four - Analysis 45

4.1 Introduction 45

4.2 Background 45

4.2.1 School and school owners 46

4.2.2 The Slum of Kibera 49

4.3 Motivations for Investment in the field of Education 52

4.3.1 Lives within the community 52

4.3.2 Inadequate schools in the area 52

4.3.3 Focus on orphans, poor and vulnerable children 54

4.3.4 Profit motive 55

4.3.5 Equity 57

4.3.6 Regulations of private schools in Kenya 61

4.4 Have these schools suffered from the government's introduction of 'Free Primary Education (2003)' in terms of enrolment? 63

4.5What is the satisfaction level of entrepreneur's investments as perceived by pupils and

teachers? 66

4.5.1 Pupil Satisfaction 66

4.5.2 Teacher satisfaction 74

4.6 Factors identified as the major gaps in private provision 83

Chapter Five - Conclusion, Summary and the Way Forward 86

Bibliography 93

Appendices 99

Appendix A- Letter of permission 99

Appendix B- SCHOOL OWNER QUESTIONNAIRE 100

Appendix C- PUPILS' QUESTIONNAIRE 102

Appendix D- Teacher Questionnaire 104

Appendix E- INTERVIEW ON THE BUSINESS OF EDUCATION 110

Tables of Figures

Figure 1: Year in which school was opened 47

Figure 2: Age of school owner 48

Figure 3: School ownership type 49

Figure 4: A view o the slum of Kibera 49

Figure 5: Number of adult and children living in the family home 50

Figure 6 Monthly fees 55

Figure 7: Number of girls in the 20 schools this year 59

Figure 8: The number of boys in the 20 schools 60

Figure 9 Teachers' gender 60

Figure 10: First year Enrolment 65

Figure 11: Current enrolments 65

Figure 12 - The Rating of the Class teacher's ability in their subject 69

Figure 13 - The rating of the teacher's punctuality for lessons 69

Figure 14 - The rating of the teacher's attendance at school 69

Figure 15: Teachers' fairness for students 70

Figure 16 - The Rating of the school buildings 70

Figure 17- Rating of the school facilities 71

Figure 18 - Rating of English lessons correlated with English scores 72

Figure 19- Rating of maths and maths scores 72

Figure 20 - English results by school 73

Figure 21 - Kiswahili means plot by school 73

Figure 22: Teachers' age 74

Figure 23: salaries' satisfaction 76

Figure 24: Teachers' salaries 76

Figure 25: Irregular salary payments 77

Figure 26: Holidays' satisfaction rate 78

Figure 27: Satisfaction with the work environment 79

Figure 28: Satisfaction with facilities 80

Figure 29: Satisfaction with the school infrastructure 81

List of tables

Table 1: School owners 47

Table 2: School owner 48

Table 3: Mum has a job 51

Table 4: Father's job 51

Table 5: The school offers scholarships for orphans 56

Table 6: The school offers scholarships for outstanding students 56

Table 7: Orphans' financial support 58

Table 8: Girls in school 59

Table 9: Boys in school 59

Table 10:Teacher's age 74

Table 11: Teachers' educational level 75

Table 12: Teachers' salaries 76

Table 13: Social status in the community 78

Table 14: First important problem 82

Table 15: Second important problem 82

Table 16: Third important problem 83

Chapter One: Background and Introduction

1.1Presentation of the topic

The increasing queries and support for primary education in Africa in the perspective of achieving Universal Primary Education (UPE) by the year 2015, has been for some time at the centre of many concerns both at national and international levels. In spite of commendable strategies and reforms adopted by governments, scholars, educational specialists, international agencies and donors from conferences held in Jomtien (1990) and in Dakar (2000), general reports about primary education in Africa are still alarming. The general consensus typically agrees that the demand for education at all levels especially in Africa and Asia has greatly outpaced supply. (Karmokolias et al 1997:4)

This dissertation's main focus is to study primary education in east Africa and to establish related development of educational entrepreneurship in Kenya and their contributions to one of the most important Millennium Development Goals (MDG), which is making basic education accessible to all through Universal Primary Education campaigns. In the light of information gathered through research instruments, the study discusses variables of the trend which is currently being observed in developing countries: That of the mushrooming of private schools catering for the poor and the socially excluded especially in slums and remote areas of Africa Tooley et al 2007, Watkins 2000). Moreover it sets to find out the entrepreneurs' motivations for setting private schools in slums, the impact of their investment on the development process of their communities as well as it critically analyses teachers and pupils satisfaction on private schools in Kibera, one of the largest slums in East Africa. A review of literature on private education and entrepreneurship in Africa has been covered at

this effect so as to enable a good understanding of the topic and relevant scientific approaches to the theme.

The study gives an interesting picture of private schools in Kibera and the efforts undertaken by school entrepreneurs to render the quality of these schools better. The pupils and parent's heart of this slum seem to be beating for private schools in spite of the Free Primary Education initiated in Kenya in the year 2003. However, some shortcomings have equally been noted especially at the infrastructural and financial level. Nonetheless, the private schools in Kenya and elsewhere in Africa are playing a key role in forging ahead basic education for all especially for the poorest.(Tooley et al 2008)

This research has benefited from a logistic support of the EG WEST centre, Newcastle University and strong collaboration from its board members as well as we have been able to get in direct touch with private school entrepreneurs in Kenya thanks to George Mikwa, the president of the Kenya Independent Schools Association (KISA).

1.2 Focus and aim of the Study

In the perspective of understanding and addressing issues related to primary education and Entrepreneurship in East Africa, the following main research question constituted the central starting point:

`How and why do private school entrepreneurs contribute to education for all in Kenya?'

Further, the main question was segmented into four sub areas. This structure will provide analysis of the data to answer the overall thesis question through the following sub questions:

· What are the entrepreneurs' major motivations for investment in the field of education?

· Have these schools suffered from the government's introduction of 'Free Primary Education (2003)' in terms of enrolment?

· What is the satisfaction level from their investment as perceived by pupils and teachers?

· What factors could be identified as the major gaps in this type of provision?

To cover all these questions, specific areas of investigations were chosen and appropriately explored with close respect to many critics' point of view to this type of provision (Watkins 2000, Lewin 2007, Rose 2006). These specific areas ranged from entrepreneurs motivations for setting up private schools in Kibera, actions taken to improve the quality of their provision including the facilities offered in the teaching process in the selected schools, to the study of the prevailing investment climate of Kenya. Hence, a great importance was given to various opinions expressed concerning the satisfaction level of direct beneficiaries of this investment, which are pupils and teachers.

The identification of the major gaps in the private schools provision equally formed part of the research and an analysis of pupils' tests scores was equally carried in order to establish the correlation between the overall satisfaction expressed and the achievements in these schools.