Google Scholar TEDx Talk KATS: Kid's Action Thru Science. Rising Tide Project KATS: UK/International

Background

Pauline Dixon is a Professor of International Development. She has extensive experience working in Asia and Africa. Her major research interests are the theory of Austrian Economics, spontaneous order in economics, school choice, children's literacy, giftedness and creativity. She also is involved in research that considers interdisciplinary issues around informal settlements including health, gender, water, sanitation and nutrition.

Pauline gained her PhD in 2003 from Newcastle University and has a First Class Honours degree from the Open University. She lectured in economics at the University of Northumbria in both the Business School and Economics departments from 1997 to 2000, before lecturing in international development and education at Newcastle University.

She is the Principal Investigator on a project funded by the Rising Tide Foundation - Identifying Best Practice for Empowerment Through Entrepreneurial Freedom and a Co-Investigator on the £17 million Water Security and Sustainable Development Hub where she is the creator of KATS (Kid's Action Thru Science) and the associated research.

She has just completed being a co-Investigator on two British Academy funded projects in India.

She was the co-investigator on the John Templeton and USB projects from 2003.

Current research projects are:

Rising Tide Foundation - Identifying Best Practice for Empowerment Through Entrepreneurial Freedom - India, Principle Investigator 2021-2024

UKRI GCRF Water Security Hub - India, Colombia, Ethiopia and Malaysia, Co-Investigator 2019-2024

Newcastle University in 2023 has won a prestigious Queen’s Anniversary Prize for Higher and Further Education in recognition of its long-standing excellence in water research.

Past research projects include:

British Academy GCRF Early Childhood Education - India and Pakistan, Co-Investigator 2019-2021

British Academy GCRF Youth Futures - India, Co-Investigator 2020-2022

Jersey Overseas Aid Commission: Inclusive WASH for sustainable schools in Sierra Leone, Longitudinal Study, 2019-2021

ESRC - Identification and Nurturing of High Ability Children in Low Income areas of Dar Es Salaam 2014-2015

John Templeton Foundation research - Education in Difficult Places 2011-2013

UBS AG - Extending Access to Quality Education for the Underserved 2011-2013

DfID - Lagos State Household Poverty and School Choice Research Study. 2012

She has published three books and over 60 peer reviewed articles and chapters. Her book "International Aid and Private Schools for the Poor: Smiles, Miracles and Markets" published by Edward Elgar in 2013 in the UK and US and was named as one of the top 100 books by the Times Literary Supplement. Her second book (2015) edited with Dr Steve Humble and Dr Chris Counihan is the "Handbook of International Development and Education". The third book is "School Choice Around the World" (2019) edited with Dr Steve Humble.

Dixon has lectured at Brown University USA and presented on Capitol Hill, USA. She is associated with the London based charity Absolute Return for Kids (ARK). She has been awarded a prestigious Luminary Award from the Free Market Foundation of South Africa. The award identifies and honours individuals making a unique contribution to the advancement of mankind, and was presented in Johannesburg, South Africa in the Autumn 2013.

Pauline is a member of the expert advisory group on the $2 billion USAID CATALYZE programme in LAC (Latin American and Caribbean)

She is:

A Fellow of the Academy of Social Sciences

A Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts

A Member of the Peer Review College for the ESRC/UKRI

Qualifications

PhD - Newcastle University

BSc (Hons) First Class - Open University

Diploma in Economics - Open University

Diploma in Music - Open University

Honours and Awards

Awards

Fellow of the Academy of Social Sciences March 2022

The Times Literary Supplement Books of the Year for “International Aid and Private Schools for the Poor: Smiles, Miracles and Markets” Edward Elgar, 29th November 2013.

Luminary Award from the Free Market Foundation of South Africa. The award identifies and honours individuals making a unique contribution to the advancement of mankind. Awarded September 11th 2013 in Johannesburg, South Africa.

Informal Interests

Home, family and friends. Northumberland, cats, running and India.

Research Interests

Pauline's main area of research is around grassroots development within informal settlements in the developing world. Comparative analysis as well as carrying out census and survey field work on a large scale in India, Ghana, Nigeria, Kenya, China, Sierra Leone, South Sudan and Liberia is one of her areas of expertise. Pauline also looks at choice in developing countries and was instrumental in the running of a randomised control trial (RCT) to consider the impact of the implementation of a voucher scheme in a slum in Delhi. This resulted in a longitudinal study lasting five years. Her work focuses on dispelling myths and carrying out research that informs policy initiatives that are based on solutions from the grassroots and poor communities themselves.

Other Expertise

Other areas of expertise include investigating children's multiple intelligences and creativity in poor areas of Kinondoni, Tanzania. She also considers the cross cultural transferability of different tests. Pauline carries out research concerning the use of phonics in schools in India to improve reading in English. She provided teacher training around the use of phonics in poor areas of India and China. Pauline has produced children's workbooks and teacher lesson plans around a phonics programme to be used in developing contexts.

Research

Current Research

Rising Tide Foundation - Identifying Best Practice for Empowerment Through Entrepreneurial Freedom, India $600,000, 2021-2024 Principle Investigator

UKRI GCRF Water Security Hub - India, Colombia, Ethiopia and Malaysia, Co-Investigator, £17 million - 2019-2024

Past Research

British Academy GCRF Early Childhood Education - India and Pakistan, Co-Investigator, £293,391 - 2019-2021

Jersey Overseas Aid Commission: Inclusive WASH for sustainable schools in Sierra Leone, Longitudinal Study, 2019-2021

British Academy GCRF Youth Futures - India, Co-Investigator, £220,539 - 2020-2022

ESRC - Development Frontiers - The Identification and Nurturing of High Ability Children in low income areas of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, £100,000 - 2014-2015

John Templeton Foundation research - Education in Difficult Places, $2,000,000 - 2011-2013

UBS AG - Extending Access to Quality Education for the Underserved 2011-2013

DfID - Lagos State Household Poverty and School Choice Research Study. 2012 - 2013

Absolute Return for Kids Aspire and Enable project in Delhi, India. RCT for Education Vouchers 2010-2015

Orient Global Project 2007-2009

John Templeton Project was completed in December 2003- 2005, $1,000,000

Future Research

Further research is being carried out to explore choices available for the poorest living in different types of informal settlements around the world including within fragile states. This includes provision of schooling as well as healthcare, water, sanitation, transport and the effects of urbanisation on mental health. Pauline's focus is on the SDGs looking at how communities themselves can shape the achievement of these goals.

Research Roles

Director of Impact ECLS 2023- current

Co-Director Global Challenges Academy 2018-2022

Deputy Director of the Centre for Research on Entrepreneurship, Wealth and Philanthropy (REWP) 2018-2020

UoA23 Director 2017-2019.

Newcastle Academic Lead "Global Challenges Summit" and "Women in Development" Network 2018-2022

Postgraduate Supervision

International development and education issues, school and parental choice in fragile states, the use of synthetic phonics in developing countries. Implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.

Esteem Indicators

Top Five Esteem Indicators:

(1) Elected Fellow of the Academy of Social Sciences, March 2022

(2) Expert witness called to provide oral and written evidence to the International Development Select Committee on the role of DFID funding and low cost private schools, 21st February 2017, (Watch Parliament TV)

(3) Speaker at the High Level Panel Discussion "Education in Emergencies - Advocacy Event" House of Lords hosted by General the Lord Dannatt GCB CBE MC Opened by Sarah, Duchess of York and Chaired by The Rt. Hon. Sir Stephen O'Brien KBE, 19th February 2019

(4) Participant in the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Global Teacher Crisis as a guest of Stephen Twigg, MP, Thatcher Room, Palace of Westminster, London, November 2018

(5) The Times Literary Supplement Books of the Year for “International Aid and Private Schools for the Poor: Smiles, Miracles and Markets” Edward Elgar, 29th November 2013.

Keynote/guest speaker and TV and radio appearances include (selection only):

Keynote at the XVIII International Gottfried von Harberler Conference 2024 at the University of Liechtenstein hosted by Prince Phillip von Liechtenstein

Presentation at the Rising Tide Grantee Summit, Zurich, Switzerland, 2024

International School Choice Forum and meetings with the Hoover Institute at Stanford University, Madrid, Spain 2024

Dissemination and Presentation of the Rising Tide project at the CATO Institute, Washington DC and Atlas Network, Arlington Virginia, USA October 2023

Presentation at the McCourt School of Public Policy, Georgetown University, Washington DC, USA with Professor Jishnu Das, Distinguished Professor of Public Policy, October 2023

Discussion with the Right Honourable Andrew Mitchell, Minister of State for Development and Africa at the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO), London, July 2023 around research in India

Distinguished panel member ESRC Festival of Social Science, Durham University alongside Ziauddin Yousafzai (Malala's father)

Keynote, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, “SDGs and School Choice”, July 2019

THINK! Royal Geographical Society, London, July 2019 “School Choice” Symposium Keynote

Speaker at the High Level Panel Discussion "Education in Emergencies - Advocacy Event" House of Lords hosted by General the Lord Dannatt GCB CBE MC Opened by Sarah, Duchess of York and Chaired by The Rt. Hon. Sir Stephen O'Brien KBE, 19th February 2019

All Party Parliamentary Group Global Education for All “International Aid and the Global Teacher Crisis?” Invited attendee and participant, Palace of Westminster, Westminster, London, November 2018

Invited attendee and participant "How to strengthen the quality of learning in education PPPs in sub-Saharan Africa" Roundtable event discussing the financing, structure and running of partnership programmes for quality outcomes, CDC Group, Westminster, London, April 2018

Invited speaker ARMA Conference (Association of Research Managers and Administrators), Liverpool, "Challenge-led Research - Challenge or Opportunity?" June 2017

Keynote speaker and dinner guest at the University of Arkansas, USA,"School Choice in sub-Saharan Africa: Dispelling Myths" 17th April 2017.

Invited attendee and participant Dubai "Global Education and Skills Forum" - The Davos of Education where the worlds Teacher Prize is announced. Bringing together leaders form the public, private and social sectors to find solutions which achieve education, equity and employment for all. March 2017.

Invited as an expert witness to provide oral and written evidence to the International Development Select Committee on the role of DFID funding and low cost private schools, 21st February 2017,

Invited to take part in the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Global Education for All, guest of Mark Williams, MP, Jubilee Room, Palace of Westminster, London November 1st 2016

The Times Literary Supplement Books of the Year for “International Aid and Private Schools for the Poor: Smiles, Miracles and Markets” Edward Elgar, 29th November 2013.

Lecture at Uppsala University, Sweden, “Private schools for the poor and implications for Sweden’s education policy – choice, for profit and vouchers” November 19th 2013

Lecture in Riksdagen, the Swedish Parliament: "The significance of the research findings in developing countries for Sweden’s voucher programme, school choice and for profit schooling". November 20th 2013.

Luminary Award from the Free Market Foundation of South Africa. The award identifies and honours individuals making a unique contribution to the advancement of mankind. Awarded September 11th 2013 in Johannesburg South Africa.