Professor Dixon at the European Centre of Austrian Economic Foundation

Watch Pauline’s talk from Liechtenstein University around the Rising Tide project and the work on flourishing, dignity and life with purpose and meaning in the slums of Delhi.

School Choice Conference, Madrid

Pauline and Steve attended the International School Choice and Reform Conference in Madrid, Spain, January 2024. They met up with some old friends, including Professor Eric Hanushek, Stanford University and 2021 winner of the Yidan Prize, the world’s highest education accolade. Pauline and Steve disseminated the ideas and findings of the Rising Tide project, illustrating choice from education, health and neighbourhood perspectives. Others attending the conference included Professor Paul Peterson (Hoover Institute), Dr Ian Kingsbury (Educational Freedom Institute) and Robert Enlow (EdChoice).

Safetipin film

Reflections from Empower

Professor Karen Ross has produced a film that comprises a series of personal reflections on the fieldwork from the community advocates and Newcastle University research team who spent time working with communities on the ground. This inspirational film is part of a series of outputs showing our engagement with the communities in Delhi.

Dissemination in Washington DC

Professor Pauline Dixon and Dr Steve Humble presented some of the findings from the project at the McCourt School of Public Policy, Georgetown University, the Atlas Network Arlington Virginia and the CATO Institute Washington DC. This was to students, faculty members as well as Think Tank executives including Matt Warner, President at Atlas Network pictured on the right.

Dissemination with The Right Honourable Andrew Mitchell

Pauline and Steve met with The Right Honourable Andrew Mitchell, Minister of State for Development and Africa at the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) in London, July 10th 2023. Discussions were held around the Rising Tide project and the uniqueness of looking at different settlement types. Andrew was interested in the BMJ article and looked forward to hearing more at future meetings.

The Education Awards 2023

Research Supervisor of the Year

Professor Karen Ross’s visit to India

Professor Karen Ross visited three of our project’s sites in April 2023 alongside Priyanshi Sharma working in conjunction with the Janya Collective. Karen has made a youtube video of her thoughts as well as interviews with women entrepreneurs, women commuters, and those providing bottom up solutions to safety issues, including SafetyPin.

BMJ Open Publication

Our Rising Tide project goes from strength to strength. Working with communities, partners and our research team our data collection phase has been very successful. Our project themes “Women’s Empowerment” “Entrepreneurial Freedom” “Health and Well-Being” and “Water, Sanitation and Hygiene” have all been informed by our empirical data gathering. Entering into our third year, we are focusing on producing peer reviewed journal articles, podcasts, radio programmes, films, animations, policy papers, and education content. Our first paper published in the BMJ Open sets out findings from our household survey. In neighbourhoods where there is a sense of belonging, satisfaction with life and freedom of choice a communities subjective well-being is significantly enhanced. Do download the paper by clicking on the image above.

ESRC Festival of Social Science

Professor Pauline Dixon was one of a distinguished panel at Durham University on the event “Improving Schools for Disadvantaged Children“. Along side Pauline was Ziauddin Yousafzai, who is well known for being Malala’s father. The event was Chaired by Professor Stephen Gorard with Professor Nadia Siddiqui also being one of the expert panelists. The event commenced with a summary of the key findings and implications from the British Academy study of early child education in India and Pakistan, on which Pauline was one of the Co-Investigators. Ziauddin Yousafzai provided the Keynote address and stayed at the event for the panel discussions.