Presentation on theme: "Hjortsberg Primary School 4D Ljungby, Sweden In our class we are 22 pupils. 15 girls and 7 boys. We like sports, many subjects at school, dancing, computergames."— Presentation transcript:

1 Hjortsberg Primary School 4D Ljungby, Sweden In our class we are 22 pupils. 15 girls and 7 boys. We like sports, many subjects at school, dancing, computergames instruments and to be with friends.

2 My name is Isak. I am ten years old. I live in Ljungby in Sweden. My family is my sister, her name is Annie and she is 8 years old, my brother, his name is Erik and he is 4 years old. My mother is 34 years old, her name is Karen and my father,he is 35 years old, his name is Torbjörn. I play the trumpet. I like apples. I don’t like fighting. My favourite colour is green. And I have an orange bike. My best friend is Adam.

3 Hallo!! My name is Alva Stridsberg.I am 10 years old. I live in Sweden/Ljungby. My family is my: Mom, her name is Annika. My dad his name is Tomas. My bigsister her name isAmelia. My twin her name is Meja. I play the guitar, I dance and I lika to be with friends. I like my family. I don’t like rain. My best friends areJulia and Almen. My favourite animals is turtle. My favourite colour is blue. I love France and Paris.

4 Hello My name is Tova. I am ten years old. I live in Ljungby and Lagan. I have two sisters. My big little sisters name is Alva. She is nine years old. And my little sisters name is Enya. She is two years old. My daddys name is Johan. He is thirtyfive years old. And my mothers name is Jenny-anne. She is thirtytwo years old. I play the piano but I do not take any lessons. I like horses. I have taken lessons. But I have stopped. I dont like my big little sister.She is so noisy.

5 My name is Almina Rastoder. I am ten years old. I live in Sweden in Ljungby. My family is my dad Edin, my mom Velida, my sister Ajsa and my cat Biber. I play Moviestarplanet. I like to dance. I don`t like bumblebees. My best frend is Ajla.

6 My name is Emran and I am 10 years old. I live in Ljungby in Bond street 3. I like to play computer and watch the Simpson. I do not like to be beaten and teased. My mothers name is Zakia and my dad names is Parwez. My little brothers name is Aldin and he is 6 years old. My greater brothers name isMehran.

7 My name is Vedad. I am 10 years old. I live in Sweden in Ljungby. My family is my mother my father and my sister. My mother’s name is Tajma she is 34 years old. My father’s name is Elvir he is 41 years old. My sister’s name is Lejla she is 6 years old. I play football, I go skiing and I play handball. I like sport I like the school and I like to be with my friends. I don`t like walking in the night. I have a budgie his name is Johny and he is 2 years old. When I`m alone I`m watching TV. My favourite sport is football.

8 My name is Moa. I am ten years old. My family is my mom and my dad and my little brother. I play games I like cats. I don´t like to be ill.

9 Hello my name is Clara. I am ten years old. My favorite color is red and my favorite food is lasagna. We are five in my family. My mother Maria and my fader Robert. I have two younger sisters Tuva and Nora. Tuva is seven years old and Nora is three years old.

10 My name is Anna I am ten years old I live in Sweden My family is my brother, mother father and two cats and two dogs I gymnastics and play the violin I like my friends I don`t like fish.

11 Hi! My name is Selma Kujundzic and I’m 10 years old. I live in a small town named Ljungby. My family is my mom,my dad and my sister. My mom is 37 years old. My dad is 46 years old and my sister is 16 years old. I play football, the violin and I dance belly dance. I like when I get what I want. I like my friends. I like dogs and dolphins and I like mushrooms. I don’t like bees, spiders, insects and I don’t like when it thunders. My favourite colour is turquoise. And my best friend’s name is Sara. I hope you enjoyed reading this story.

12 Hello!! My name is Elina and I´m ten years old. I got 1 brother and 1 sister. My brother is 2 years old and my sister is 12 years old. Their names are Linnéa and Algot. My father is 43 years old and my mother is 37. Their names are Mats and Viktoria. I got 6 fishes, 1 cat and 1 guinea pig.

13 Hello. My name is Clara Wallberg. I am ten years old. I live in Sweden in the town Ljungby. My family is my mother Cecilia, my father Claes and my little brother Hugo. I play football, floorball and I like to dance. I like music and dance. I don´t like to loose in sports.

14 Hi! My name is Filip I`m ten years old. I live in Sweden the town is Ljungby in Kronobergs county. My family is my mom her name is Slavica she is thirtyfive years old. And my dad´s name is Boban he is thirtyseven years old. My brothers name is Dusan he is seven years old. I play the guitar and kung fu. I like music, sport and sweets.But I dont like to fight.

15 My name is Timmy. I am ten years old. I live in Ljungby Sweden. I have two brothers and five sisters. I play tv-games and I like computers. I like rap and skaters and bikers. I don’t like hockey.

16 Hello! My name is Meja. I`m ten years old. My moms name is Annika. My dads name is Tomas. My two sisters are named Amelia and Alva My mom is 41 years old. My dad is 41 years old. Amelia is 14 years old. Alva is my twin and she is also ten years old. I like athletics, rabbits, icecream,friends and my family. I don`t like spiders, caviar and bees. And I want to help children that have a hard time in their lives.

17 My name is Alicia. I am ten years old. I live in Sweden. My family is my father Roger, my mother Carina, my sister Emilia and my brother Alfred. I like to listen to music. I don´t like war. My favourite colour is purple. My favourite animal is surikat.

18 My name is Omid and 1I am 10 years old. My dads name is Hussein and he is36 years old. My mom is called Masoma and she is29 years old. My little sister name is Meri. She is 6 years old. my little sister name Mahdya. She is 3 years old. My little sister name is Nadia,. She is 8 months years old. I play Ea sports. I like chess and football. IÍ don`t like snakes

19 My name is Julia. I am ten years old. I live in Sweden. My family is me, my sister Amelie, Johanna and Dan. I play the flute, athletics, dance, juniors and sings in a choir. I like to swim and toski I don´t like bad songs.

20 My name is Wilma. I am ten years old. I live in Ljungby. My family is my sister and my mother and my father. I play shotokan and piano. I like my family and my dog. I don’t like spiders and snakes.

21 My name is Kajsa. I live in Ljungby. We are five people in my family. I have two brothers. Their names are Daniel and Mikael. I have two cats. Their names are Mimmi and Lola. I like to play football. And I like gymnastic. I was born in Östersund. I like to skii in the mountain during the winter time.

22 My name is Karim. I am 10 years old. I live in Sweden My family is my dad Anish my mum Anna and my sister Samira. I play badminton and chess. I like to travel, to watch tv, to swim. I don´t like snakes and to wake up early