Ljungby weather in July (Kronoberg, Sweden)

Interested in knowing the climate of Ljungby in July? Here's what you need to know about the weather for the month.

Temperatures

In July, Ljungby typically experiences high temperatures and high rainfall. The summer season takes place during July. Daytime temperatures generally peak at 22°C, but after sunset, they often decrease to around 12°C. On average, it is the month with the highest temperature of the year.

Precipitation

Ljungby in July usually receives high rainfall, averaging around 103 mm for the month. With frequent rain showers this month, having an umbrella on hand will keep you dry. Historically, the month has about 15 days of rain.

In case you lean more towards enjoying temperate temperatures and rain-free days June and August typically offer the most optimal weather. In contrast, January, February, March, November and December tend to have less optimal conditions.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized Ljungby climate page with graphs.

Ljungby, monthly averages in July

Min Temperature 12°C

Max Temperature 22°C

Chance of Rain 48%

Precipitation 103 mm

Rainy days 15 days

Where to go in Sweden in July

Find out more about the weather in Sweden and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

For visitors traveling to Ljungby, we recommend wearing layers. So maybe a skirt, t-shirt, shorts for during the day and jeans and a warm jacket for some days and evenings. Bring a rain jacket in case it rains during your stay. Plan on layering your clothes.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Cycling 9/10

Walking 9/10

Camping 6/10

Outdoor sports 9/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in Ljungby.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to Sweden? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in Sweden. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.