Ljungby weather in May (Kronoberg, Sweden)

Will it be rainy or sunny in Ljungby this May? Is now the perfect time to visit? Find all the weather insights for this month on this page.

Temperatures

The typical weather for May in Ljungby includes moderate temperatures and moderate rainfall. During the day, temperatures can climb to about 17°C. At night, they may fall to a cooler 6°C.

Precipitation

Ljungby in May usually receives moderate rainfall, averaging around 71 mm for the month. Looking at the last 30 years, the data shows about 13 days with rain.

If you prefer dry days with pleasant temperatures, June and August typically offer the best circumstances. While January, February, March, November and December tend to showcase less optimal conditions.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized Ljungby climate page with graphs.

Ljungby, monthly averages in May

Min Temperature 6°C

Max Temperature 17°C

Chance of Rain 42%

Precipitation 71 mm

Rainy days 13 days

Where to go in Sweden in May

Find out more about the weather in Sweden and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

For visitors traveling to Ljungby, we recommend wearing layers. So maybe a skirt, t-shirt, shorts for during the day and jeans and a warm jacket for some days and evenings. Bring a rain jacket in case it rains during your stay. Plan on layering your clothes.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Cycling 6/10

Walking 6/10

Camping 4/10

Outdoor sports 9/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in Ljungby.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to Sweden? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in Sweden. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.