Two years later, on her marriage to the actor Robert Taylor, she retired from the screen with only a handful of credits to her name. She steadfastly refused to return to acting, turning down offers from Clark Gable and Alfred Hitchcock, among others, so earning the accolade: "Hollywood's Most Reliable Housewife".

She was born Ursula Schmidt on May 15 1924 in Hamburg, Germany, where her father managed a small print business. In 1939, with the rise of Nazi Germany, she was taken out of school and made to work as a farm labourer.

She began her career as a model in Hamburg, then later Berlin. In 1942 she met and married the film producer George Thiess, with whom she had two children, only to divorce him two years later. A popular fashion model, subsequent photographs of her were often released to press agencies, and before long she was a magazine cover star with various small film roles coming her way (she dubbed American films into German). In March 1951, at the invitation of Howard Hughes, she left Germany for Hollywood and a contract with RKO Studios. The trip coincided with a cover shoot in Life magazine.

Although her first film roles were small, she quickly became a dependable leading lady supporting a host of popular leading men, including George Nader in Monsoon (1953); opposite Robert Stack in The Iron Glove (1954); with Rock Hudson in Bengal Brigade (1954); and Robert Mitchum in Bandido (1956).

A popular pin-up in film fan magazines, she was the often the source of juicy fodder for the notorious gossip columnists Hedda Hopper and Louella Parsons. Ursula Thiess's name had been linked to various Hollywood heart-throbs, including John Derek, Tab Hunter, and Troy Donahue, before she announced her engagement to Robert Taylor, a prolific leading man with an enviable wartime record, in 1952.

Marrying in May 1954, they became one of Hollywood's golden couples. Ursula Thiess, who had two children with Taylor, curtailed her acting career in favour of bringing up her family at their ranch in the San Fernando Valley.

Ronald and Nancy Reagan, Roddy McDowell and the former silent screen actress Alice Terry were neighbours.

Ursula Thiess took occasional roles with her husband in his weekly television series Robert Taylor's Detectives. Four years after his death from lung cancer in 1969, she sold the ranch, moved to Bel-Air and married Marshall Schacker, an international film distributor. He died in 1986.

In retirement Ursula Thiess became an active volunteer at a children's hospital linked to the University of California at Los Angeles.