Deborah Sonia Meaden is best known for being one of the wealthy investor dragons on BBC's Dragons' Den.

The 62-year-old born in Taunton, Somerset is a British businesswoman and TV personality.

Deborah initially set up a glass and ceramics export agency to retailers such as Harvey Nichols, which soon failed, when she briefly lived in Italy at the age of 19 before taking off in her business career.

The entrepreneur took over as a Dragon from Rachel Elnaugh in the third series of Dragons' Den in August 2006. Deborah was the only woman investor at the time. As of 2021, she has agreed to invest in 63 businesses, valuing at over £3.3 million on the programme.

She returns to out screens on BBC One tonight, alongside new Dragon, Steven Bartlett, a 29-year-old University dropout turned business mogul.

How did Deborah Meaden make her money and become rich?

Deborah is reportedly worth £40 million and runs a multi-million pound family holiday business.

After her first unsuccessful business straight out of college, Deborah bought one of the first Stefanel textile franchises in the UK along with a partner, then later sold out to her business partner for £10,000.

The dragon went on to have several successful leisure and retail businesses as well as operating a Prize Bingo at Butlins in Minehead.

Deborah joined her family business in 1988 and ran its amusement arcade. In 1992, she went on to join Weststar Holidays - a family holiday park in Devon. Then in 1999, Deborah got a management buyout of the company and acquired the majority shareholding. Weststar was in excess of £11 million by the time Deborah sold it in 2005 for a deal worth £33 million. She still kept a 23 per cent stake in the company by 2007 until the company was liquidated and sold for £83 million, making her stake value at £19 million.

In 2009, Deborah also acquired Fox Brothers - a Somerset textile mill established in 1772. In 2011, she launched The Merchant Fox - an online store selling British-made luxury goods.

Is Deborah Meaden married?

Yes, she is married to Paul Meaden.

She met her husband in 1985, working at Weststar during his university break. The pair had briefly separated but after a trip to Venezuela, Deborah returned to London and got married in 1993.

Deborah does not have any children. She lives with her husband in a period property near Langport in Somerset with lots of animals.

The dragon is a self-described atheist and in October 2020, began a plant-based, vegan diet.

When she was younger, her parents divorced and her mother moved Deborah and her sister, Gail, to Essex. Her mother went on to remarry the man Deborah calls dad, Brian, and have two more daughters - Cass and Emma.

When was Deborah Meaden on Strictly?

The dragon joined the cast of BBC's Strictly Come Dancing for the eleventh series in 2013.

She was partnered with former Strictly professional dancer Robin Windsor and was eliminated on 26 October after starting on 13 September.

Deborah once said on failing businesses : "I consider it a failure to slog on with a business that is going to die sooner rather than later. And that's a skill I've had from my very, very early days.

"It's very difficult to realise that you're not going to make any money out of something. A lot of people are blinded. They think, 'I can't give this up. I'd feel like a failure.'"