Although weather conditions would have permitted the inauguration to be held outdoors, the ceremony was planned as an indoor event. Marland was not inaugurated in the Senate chamber, however. Instead, the event took place in the capitol rotunda, with Marland and other dignitaries seated on a two-story platform under the dome and more than two thousand seats filling the legislative corridors. Among those seated on the platform were former Governor Henry D. Hatfield, United Mine Workers President John L. Lewis, and UMWA District 17 President William Blizzard.

Ceremonies began at noon with the playing of the national anthem, the invocation, and the singing of "The Lord's Prayer" by young Julliard-trained tenor James L. Bailey of Charleston. After taking the oath of office, Governor Marland, who, in a departure from the formal morning attire of his predecessors, wore a dark blue suit, delivered his inaugural address. The inauguration was filmed, and, according to the Raleigh Register, film was to be flown to Huntington for airing on WSAZ-TV.

A public reception was held in the governor's reception room in the evening.

In a move similar to that of Matthew Neely in 1941, Cecil Harland Underwood was administered the oath of office at 12:06 a.m. on Monday, January 14, 1957, in the Hotel Kanawha by Wayman R. Brown, a notary public and agent for Columbian Fuel Corporation. In order to have the oath officially filed, Brown and others then visited Secretary of State D. Pitt O'Brien, administered the oath to him, and had him sign Underwood's oath.

Shortly after 10:00 a.m., the inaugural parade began, traveling east on Kanawha Boulevard from Summers Street to the capitol. Although 23 bands had been planned, weather made several late and kept some from arriving at all. Temperatures were below freezing, and several inches of snow had fallen overnight. A few participants slipped and fell on the icy ground during the parade. A reviewing stand had been erected across the boulevard from the capitol for Underwood and other dignitaries. WCHS-TV and WSAZ-TV covered the parade, and WSAZ-TV provided the first live television coverage of the inauguration of a West Virginia governor.

At the end of the parade, Underwood entered the capitol only to exit on the other side of the building, where a platform had been constructed over the fountain. After the new governor took the oath of office for the second time, the West Virginia National Guard gave a 19-gun salute before Underwood gave his inaugural address. Before the benediction, Prince A. Williams, a music professor at West Virginia State College, sang "Onward Christian Soldiers."

The formal ceremonies ended and the governor held a reception for the high school musicians who had participated in the parade, the first and only time that such an event was held as part of a gubernatorial inauguration. The students also were provided a box lunch. Starting at 8:00 p.m. that evening, a public reception was held in the governor's reception room; the Underwood's three-year-old daughter Cecelia had her own receiving line for several very young attendees. Afterwards, a semi-formal dance, sponsored by the Young Republicans, was held at the Daniel Boone Hotel.