Best Practices/Case Studies

Construction of Check Dam in Bommarajupet, SKR Pet Panchayat, Pallipet Union, Tiruvallore District

Abstract

Bommarajupet is a rural habitation in Sri Kaverirajulu Karipet Panchayat of Pallipattu block which is categorized as over-exploited area (GEC 2003). The main source of drinking water is ground water from bore wells and Open wells. The village is underlain by gneissic rock with weathered zone of 10-12 m. The groundwater Level during summer months is 18 m to 24 m and in order to sustain the source a check dam is constructed under State programme at a cost of Rs 3.98 lakhs. The check dam is completed during 2009 and the water levels in the near drinking water well was monitored and it is observed that water level vary from 2 m to 8 m bgl.

Introduction

Bommarajupet is a rural habitation in Sri Kaverirajulu Karipet Panchayat of Pallipattu block near Pothatturpet in Tiruvallur district. This block has been categorized as over-exploited area. The main source of drinking water and irrigation is ground water from bore wells and Open wells. Generally ground water level goes below 18 m during summer. Hence it was felt that through artificial recharge structure, rain water runoff can be controlled and maximum rain water can be recharged in to the aquifer.

View More Details...

Success Stories on Defunct Borewells

Sustainability of Sources – Success Stories Recharge through defunct bore wells, Karukurichi Village, Namakkal District, Tamilnadu:

A research and development project to facilitate recharge to deep seated fracture system through defunct bore wells (deep bore wells, which have become defunct due to lowering of water table )have been taken as pilot project study. The village taken for this project is Karukurichi habitation belongs to Puduchatram block, Namakkal district of Tamilnadu. The population of the habitation is 2310 as per 1991 census. This habitation comes under partially covered category and the level of supply is 30 LPCD.

View More Details...

Success Stories on Sub surface Dykes

Sustainability of Sources – Success Stories Sustainability through Sub Surface Dykes, Venganoor Village, Perambalur District, Tamilnadu:

Under PMGY 2003-04 Programme, a Sub surface dyke was constructed near Venganur habitation of Venganur Panchayat in Veppanthattai union of Perambalur District. The Veppanthattai block comes under over exploited category wherein the present stage of ground water development exceeds 100%.

View More Details...

Success Stories- Ooranies

Sustainability through Surface Water Harvesting Edaiyur/ Pattikadu Oorani, Kanchipuram District, Tamilnadu:

The ancient Tamil verse from Thirukkural says, “No place in the globe can survive without water”. The ancient civilizations mostly thrived on the banks of perennial rivers and their livelihood is identified with the river water.

As the history of many habitations start from river/ water, the great people of have their Kanmois (are tanks, they are reservoir with earthen bunds, constructed across the slope. These tanks are constructed over a period of centuries and are still the mainstay of agriculture in the peninsular India) and Ooranies (or ponds which are the main sources of drinking water for more than a million people in many of the districts.

Most of the districts in the State have a Oorani in many hamlets Ooranies have their wide spread occurrence and traditionally the village assemblies took the construction of the Ooranies. The local community and the caste groups also play an important role in the proper upkeep and maintenance of these structures. Ooranies were designed hydrologically to have adequate and assured inflow of surface runoff. Almost all the drinking water Ooranies are well connected with the nearby irrigation tanks called Kanmoi’s or other supply channels. During summer whenever the scarcity is foreseen, the villagers give top priority to fill their Ooranies by pumping water from the irrigation tanks. Ooranies are apposite for people maintenance and the village assemblies have their own ways of regulating the use through a set of code of conduct.

Ooranies serve as apt source for groundwater recharge. Development of Ooranies by deepening up to the sandy layer triggers the percolation and helps the shallow wells to provide clean drinking water.

Pattikadu Oorani Improvement Project

The village community in Pattikadu, in Kancheepuram district has shown utmost interest in developing the village pond and hence it has been taken up for development with technical inputs. The village is underlain by weathered hard rock zone and hence it has been designed that the Oorani should be covered with clay in liner so as to avoid any seepage to the subsurface.

The Project incorporates the holistic approach for water management, which benefits a population of 370.The Area of the Oorani is 2735 sq m and the depth of the Oorani is Depth 4.75 m with a Catchment area of 100,000 sq. km. and the volume of water that could be stored in the Oorani 8135 cu.m.

The Oorani is designed with clay liner. Revetment, silt trap, settling basin with vertical roughing filter and sand filter. A draw well with two hand pumps with sand filter media clay lining was provided to avoid vertical seepage. Compound wall in brick all through. Flow meter fitted with hand pumps. A weather station to monitor Daily temperature, rainfall, Evapotranspiration is the part of renovation works. The scheme is implemented under the Rural Development agency Government of Tamilnadu (DRDA) with Public participation and with the Technical Co-ordination of the Centre for Environmental studies, Anna University.

The cost of the Oorani improvement is Rs. 7.55 lakhs