Milind Soman is happily married to Ankita Konwar for the last two years. The couple’s love story caught many headlines a couple of years ago due to their massive age gap of 26 years. They were subjective to brutal trolling on social media but that didn’t deter the love birds from tying the knot. Milind and Ankita are currently leading a happily married life together, posting frequent workout and romantic pictures on social media.

However, as many of us know, Milind Soman has been one of the most desired men in India. Right from his days into modelling, the actor was often deemed as the hottest Indian model of his time. Having a massive female fan following, Soman also had a coloured love life. The actor has dated many women before tying the knot to Ankita Konwar. Also, previously he was married to Mylène Jampanoï and stayed married to her for 3 years before calling it quits.

ADVERTISEMENT

In this list, we have clubbed together all the lovely ladies that Milind Soman has dated in the past.

1. Madhu Sapre

Madhu Sapre was the first woman with whom Milind Soman acknowledged his relationship publicly. The model from Maharashtra also lived with Milind Soman during the time of 90s when live-in relationships were not accepted very openly.

The actor, being flamboyant as he was, accepted his relationship publicly and even opened up about his live in relationship with her. The couple is also known for their fiery photoshoot in which they posed naked intertwined with each other with nothing but shoes on. When they broke up, their fans were disheartened to see them part ways.

2. Mylene Jampanoi

Milind Soman, long before tying the knot to Ankita Konwar, was married to Mylene Jampanoi, a French artist he met during filming of Valley of Flowers. The duo remained married for a very short tenure of 3 years. Even before their divorce, they parted ways citing professional differences. The actress was based in France while Milind Soman had his career in Mumbai, India. This made working their marriage out impossible.

ADVERTISEMENT

3. Shahana Goswami

Milind Soman and Shahana Goswami remained the talk of the town for a long time during the 2010s. Despite their age gap of 21 years, they were undaunted by public scrutiny and continued to stay in relationship till 2013. It was said to be Milind’s first relationship after the divorce with Mylene Jampanoi. After 4 years of togetherness, they finally parted ways.

4. Dipannita Sharma

Milind Soman was rumoured to be dating his 16 December co-star Dipannita Sharma. They were rumoured to be dating since 2002. Reports were also rife that the couple lived together in a flat in Mumbai along with Bollywood actress Bipasha Basu.

5. Gul Panag

Rumour mill was churning that Milind Soman and Gul Panag had fallen in love after working together in Bobby Deol starrer Jurm. However, after seeing media reports regarding their relationship, Milind Soman denied any such speculations and cleared the air that they shared a professional relationship and nothing beyond that. Soon, the rumours of their relationship died a slow death. Currently, Gul Panag is happily married and is a mother to a boy named Nihal.

Currently, Milind Soman seems to have found the love of his life in Ankita Konwar. After dating her for 6 years, he finally tied the knot with her in Alibaug in 2018. Despite the criticism, the couple stood strong and is continuing to stay so. For the uninitiated, Ankita Konwar was a flight attendant and met Milind Soman at a hotel. They clicked instantly and went on to go for a date which culminated into many more dates. What happened next is a history. Milind and Ankita has age difference of 26 years.

ADVERTISEMENT