Kathmandu is the capital city of Nepal and is also densely populated compared to other cities. It has a multiethnic population with a Hindu and Buddhist majority. Also known as the city of temples, the city stands at an elevation of approximately 1,400 meters (4,600 feet) above sea level in the bowl-shaped valley in central Nepal.

Religious and cultural festivities form a significant part of people's lives in Kathmandu. It was the royal capital of the Kingdom of Nepal and hosted palaces, mansions and gardens of the Nepalese aristocracy.

Weather and climatic conditions of Kathmandu

Kathmandu Valley falls within the warm temperate zone, where the climate is relatively temperate, atypical for the region. Under Köppen's climate classification, portions of the city with lower elevations have a humid subtropical climate, while portions with higher elevations generally have a subtropical highland climate. The city generally has a climate with warm days followed by cool nights and mornings.

Famous landmarks of Kathmandu

Kathmandu is particularly famous for its religious monuments. Various temples, monasteries, and stupas adorn the city's landscape. The Pashupatinath Temple, Changu Narayan, Swayambhunath etc., are famous for their stunning, intricate religious artworks.

Universities and Colleges in Kathmandu

Kathmandu offers every kind of study course and college a student wants. Tribhuvan University affiliated colleges, Pokhara University affiliated colleges, Purbanchal University affiliated colleges and some foreign universities affiliated colleges, you can choose accordingly per your course.

Pulchowk Campus, affiliated with Tribhuvan University, is the best engineering college in Nepal. Kathmandu University School of Management (KUSOM) is the best management college. College of Information Technology and Engineering (CITE) is Kathmandu's first and best IT college.

Food in Kathmandu

The staple food of most people in Kathmandu is dal bhat. This consists of rice and lentil soup, generally served with vegetable curries, achar and sometimes Chutney. Momo, a Nepali version of Tibetan dumplings, has become prominent in Nepal, with many street vendors and restaurants selling it.

It is one of the most popular fast foods in Kathmandu. Consumption of beef is very uncommon and considered taboo in many places. Consumption of buff meat is widespread. The Muslims forbid eating buff from the Quran, while Hindus eat all varieties except beef as they consider the cow a goddess and symbol of purity.