Kathmandu

Kathmandu is the capital city of Nepal. It is also the biggest city there. There are various place that you can visit there. It will be your first destination if you fly directly to Nepal. Kathmandu, also known as "City Of Temples" with one of the oldest Pagoda known as Pashupatinath Temple, stands at an elevation of approximately 1,400 metres (4,600 feet) above sea level in the bowl-shaped Kathmandu Valley in central Nepal. The city was the royal capital of the Kingdom of Nepal and hosts palaces, mansions and gardens of the Nepalese aristocracy.

Pokhara

Pokhara ticks all the right boxes, with spectacular scenery, adventure activities, and accommodation and food choices galore. Whether you’ve returned from a three-week trek or endured a bus trip from hell, Lakeside Pokhara is the perfect place to recharge your batteries.

Nagarkot

Nagarkot has a reputation as the top spot for enjoying Himalayan views from the comfort of your hotel balcony. Just 32km from Kathmandu, the village is packed with hotels lining a ridge, affording one of the broadest possible views of the Himalaya, with eight ranges visible (Annapurna, Manaslu, Ganesh Himal, Langtang, Jugal, Rolwaling, Everest and Numbur). However, timing is everything, as the mountains are notorious for disappearing behind cloudy skies. The best viewing seasons are October to December and March to April, when clear skies are likely.

Annapurna Base Camp

The Annapurna Sanctuary is a high glacial basin lying 40 km directly north of Pokhara. This oval-shaped plateau sits at an altitude of over 4000 metres, and is surrounded by a ring of mountains, the Annapurna range, most of which are over 7000 metres. Annapurna base camp trek is an amazing walk through diverse landscape and culture complete with rich mountain vistas, terraced fields, quaint Gurung villages and a wide variety of flora and fauna. Mt. Annapurna (8091m) of Nepal is the 10th highest mountain in the world and the journey to its base camp, which is at 4130m/13549ft height, is one of the most popular walks on earth.

Bhaktapur Durbar Square

The ancient city Bhaktapur lies on the Eastern part of Kathmandu valley which is also known as Bhadgaon or Khwopa. The historical monument on around signifies medieval age culture and tradition of Nepal and this old city is inhabited by indigenous Newari people in large group. you can visit to this place to experience Nepali culture,tradition,religion from right way.we are here to support you for your tours.

Chitwan National Park

At the foot of the Himalayas, Chitwan is one of the few remaining undisturbed vestiges of the 'Terai' region, which formerly extended over the foothills of India and Nepal. It has a particularly rich flora and fauna. One of the last populations of single-horned Asiatic rhinoceros lives in the park, which is also one of the last refuges of the Bengal tiger. This is the best sport for Jungle Safari in Nepal.