Redwood Shores-based Oracle Corp. on Tuesday bought Emeryville-based Sleepycat Software Inc., a vendor of low-cost open-source database software that’s typically embedded in electronics gear such as telecommunications networks.

The 25-person Sleepycat staff will all become Oracle employees, Bob Shimp, an Oracle technology vice president, said in an interview.

Sleepycat makes Berkeley DB database, which is popular among many electronic gadget makers. Because it is open source, it is cheaper to acquire and more easily adapted to a customer’s use. Open source refers to software whose code is made public and built upon by other programmers around the world who might want to use it in their work. The original designers of the code tend to charge either nothing or very little for its use.

Oracle plans to continue selling Berkeley DB under that name and to continue the existing licensing terms, Shimp said.

The financial terms of the deal were not disclosed. Sleepycat is privately held.

Open source is a growing presence in the software market. Not only are small companies using open source as a way to save money and innovate faster, but even very large companies are running some operations on open source. Linux is based on open-source operating system software. Google Inc. and Yahoo Inc. each built their businesses on Linux.

Oracle has two other embedded database products, Oracle Database Lite Edition and Oracle TimesTen, the latter of which is open source. But in buying Sleepycat, Oracle acquires an embedded database widely used in telecommunications gear.Shimp said the Berkeley DB database fills “a hole in our product line,” particularly for customers wanting embedded database for telecommunications applications. Berkeley DB is “pre-eminent open-source technology,” he said.

Also on Tuesday, Oracle said it plans to sell a small business unit that was part of San Mateo-based Siebel Systems Inc., which Oracle acquired earlier this month. The unit, OnTarget, trained sales people. Oracle said that was not a core part of its strategy. Oracle has spent about $20 billion acquiring companies in the past two years, including $5.85 billion for Siebel and $11.1 billion for PeopleSoft Inc. of Pleasanton.