KENT, Wash. -- LPGA Tour veteran Judy Dickinson set her alarm clock for 3 a.m. so she could wish her husband, PGA Senior Tour player Gardner Dickinson, a happy 59th birthday.

'He was in Richmond, Va., for a men's senior tour event,' Dickinson said. 'And I had to catch him before he left his room. The first thing he said was, 'You fool.''

Judy Dickinson then went back to sleep before getting up for the final round of the Safeco Classic golf tournament Sunday and winning it and $30,000 with a 5-under par 67 for 14-under par 274, a tournament record by two strokes.

Dickinson was co-leader after shooting a tournament and course record 9-underpar 63 in Saturday's third round. She grabbed sole possession of the lead on the first hole Sunday with a 15-foot birdie putt.

Hollis Stacy shot a 3-under 69 for 278 and second place. Jan Stephenson, who was tied for the lead at 9-under with Dickinson entering the final round, faded to a 73 and finished at 280 for third.

Beth Daniel and Kris Monaghan tied for fourth at 6-under 282. Daniel, who started the day one stroke behind the leaders, shot a 2-over 74. Monaghan shot an even-par 72.

Additional birdies for Dickinson came on 5 and 9 -- both par-5s - and 12 and 13. But she clinched the tournament on No. 14 with a scrambling par.

She clipped a tree on the hole with her drive, played short of a gully below the green, then pitched to within four feet and sank the putt. She raised her face to the sky in relief.

'I four-putted that green Friday, so it was a relief to get it in the hole,' she said. 'After that, I started thinking about Gardner's birthday. This is a great present for him.'

The eight-year tour veteran first went to Gardner Dickinson, a former PGA Tour player and one-time protege of Ben Hogan, for lessons and advice about joining the women's tour. That was in 1977, and they married last September 28.

The 36-year-old pro from Tequesta, Fla., who has improved her ranking every year since joining the tour at the relatively advanced age of 28, credits her husband with helping her find success on the women's tour.

The Safeco title was the third victory of her career and her second this year, putting her 1986 winnings up to $182,907.

'Because of all his experience, Gardner was able to leap boundaries for me,' she said.

Dickinson said an encouraging phone conversation with her husband and a change of putters Friday night turned the tournament around for her.

After five three-putts and a four-putt in the first two rounds left her eight shots behind the leaders, she switched to a lighter bulls-eye putter.

She needed only 23 putts in shooting her tournament-record round of 63 -- 9-under par. Her final round Sunday continued the hot putting streak.

She played solid golf from tee to green and needed only 27 putts. Her last 40 holes were without a bogey.

Dickinson was challenged in the middle of the round by Stacy, who eventually finished four strokes back in second place. Stacy pulled within one stroke with a birdie on No. 10, but rushed a 3-footer on No. 11 for a bogey. She finished with a 3-under 69 for 278.

'I thought one more birdie, one more birdie,' Stacy said. 'But Judy would answer with one more, one more, two.'

Stephenson, who started the day tied for the lead with Dickinson, never really got going and finished with a 73 for 280.