Kanye West biography contains huge variety of accomplishments. Kanye is an outspoken Grammy Award-winning rapper, record producer, and fashion designer, has made his mark on the music industry. Kanye West biography showcased his own abilities as a rapper with his 2004 debut, College Dropout, and cemented his place atop the hip hop world via such chart-topping albums as Late Registration (2005), My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy (2010), Yeezus (2013), and Ye (2018).

Kanye West Net Worth

Kanye West net worth is $400 million. Kanye West net worth includes cash, real estate, the value of his music catalog, and a 5% stake in his ex-wife Kim Kardashian West’s shapewear brand Skims.

Kanye West Wife

Kanye West wife was Kim Kardashian from 2014 to 2021. After his split from Kim, he reportedly tied the knot with Bianca Censori.

Kanye West New Wife

Kanye West’s new wife is Bianca Censori. Bianca Censori is an Australian architect who works for West’s company Yeezy and allegedly married him in a private ceremony in 2023.

Kanye West Height

Kanye West height stands tall at 5 feet 8 inches tall. Despite his larger-than-life star power, some fans might be surprised by the Knaye West’s height.

Kanye West Kids

Kanye West kids are from his ex-wife Kim Kardashian. Kanye West have four children together Kim Kardashian: North, Saint, Chicago, and Psalm. The couple agreed to joint physical and legal custody of their four children after their divorce.

What is the age of Kanye West?

Kanye West age is 47 Years, his date of birth Jun 08, 1977, horoscope Gemini , place of birth Atlanta, Georgia, United States, nationality as American and residence Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

What is the Profession of Kanye West?

Kanye West is an American Rapper, Singer, Songwriter, Record Producer by profession.

Who is Kanye West's wife?

Kanye West wife or spouse name is Bianca Censori, Kim Kardashian.

Who is Kanye West's Parents?

Kanye West father name is Ray West and mother name Donda West.

Who is Kanye West's siblings?

Kanye West siblings name is Aliya Jones, Hal Carmichael, Kanye Omari West (step- siblings).

What is the net worth of Kanye West?

Kanye West net worth is $410 million.

What is Kanye West education?

Kanye West education is Graduated.

What is the height of Kanye West?

Kanye West height is 5 feet 8 inches.

What is the weight of Kanye West?

Kanye West weight 79 kg.