Kanye West’s height is 5’8” (173 cm).

Certainly, the two biggest sources through which West gains public attention are his music and his controversies. Above all, the star recently got divorced from Kim Kardashian, with whom he shares four children.

Kanye Omari West was born on the 8th of June 1977 in Atlanta, Georgia, U.S., to the family of Ray West and Dr. Dona C. Williams. However, West’s parents divorced after his third birthday. While living with his mother, West moved to different places, such as Chicago and even China.

Likewise, West’s mother saw his interest in the arts from an early age. By age 13, the kid even wrote a rap song and persuaded him to get “a little basement studio”. A year later, West learned to sample and program beats from producer/DJ No I.D.

Kanye West Bio

West was an excellent student, which even got him a scholarship to attend Chicago’s American Academy of Art. But at age 20, he dropped out of college to pursue music. Although it greatly worried his mother at first, she later realized West was paving his own path “rather than following the path society has carved out for you”.

Although West achieved success as a producer, his true goal was to be a rapper. In 2002, his car accident required his shattered jaw to be wired shut. That’s when he composed “Through the Wire” to express what he was going through.

In 2004, West’s debut album, The College Dropout, was ranked number two on the Billboard 200.

Physical Measurement & More

Although West has received countless criticism and praise throughout his career, one thing we can all agree on is that he has dated some of the biggest female names in the planet. And surely, you might want to know whether his physical appearance has anything to do with that.

Social Media Account Link

West uses his social media accounts to openly share his opinions. As a result, there are lots of controversial topics you can find on his accounts. Nonetheless, we have listed all of them below to make it simple for you.

Instagram

@kanyewest

18M followers

Twitter

@kanyewest

31.3M Followers

Facebook

@kanyewest

321K followers

YouTube

Kanye West

8.67M subscribers

TikTok

N/A

N/A

Snapchat

@yekanyewest

N/A

Facts

After his parents divorced when he was three years old, West moved to China with his mother.

Despite being a really good student, West dropped out of college at age 20 to pursue his musical dreams.

West got into a car accident in 2002, after which he released his composition “Through the Wire”, which also helped him lay the foundation for his debut album, College Dropout.

Before his success as a rapper, West worked as a producer for Roc-A-Fella but also worked normal jobs, including telemarketing and insurance sales.

While West is better known by his birth name, Kanye West, he actually changed his legal name to “Ye” in 2021.

While being the subject of many controversies, the star holds much hate for the paparazzi, as evidenced by many videos of the star wrestling them to the ground.

Commonly Asked Questions About Kanye West

What did Diddy say to Kanye West?

Diddy told West that his behavior was hurting “our people” and that he needed to stop. West, on the other hand, responded by saying he would post anything Diddy texted him.

Why does Kanye West call Pete Davidson “Skete”?

West nicknamed Davidson “Skete”, which according to Urban Dictionary means “a pale, skinny white dude who’s banging your ex”.

Is Kanye West still with Adidas?

Yes, West’s contract with Adidas is to expire in 2026.

Did Kanye West live in China?

West moved to China at age 10 as his mother was teaching at Nanjing University as a Fullbright Scholar.

You might also like: