Poppy Montgomery

On 15-6-1972 Poppy Montgomery (nickname: Poppy) was born in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. She made her 8 million dollar fortune with Without a Trace . The actress her starsign is Gemini and she is now 52 years of age.

Poppy Montgomery Facts & Wiki

Where does Poppy Montgomery live? And how much money does Poppy Montgomery earn?

Birth Date 15-6-1972 Heritage/origin Australian Ethnicity White Religion - believes in God? Other Residence She owns a house in New York City, New York, U.S..

Poppy Montgomery Net Worth, Salary, Cars & Houses

Poppy Montgomery is an Australian actress who has a net worth of $8 million. She is best known for her FBI agent role in "Without a Trace" from 2002 to 2009. Poppy also played detective role in "Unforgettable" from 2011 to 2016.

Estimated Net Worth 8 million Dollar Celebrity Net Worth Revealed: The 60 Richest Actresses in 2024 Yearly Salary N/A These Are The 10 Best-Paid Television Stars In The World Product Endorsements Carl’s Jr. Colleagues Anthony LaPaglia, Enrique Murciano & Dylan Walsh

Houses

Brentwood, Los Angeles house ($3.6 million)

Cars

RELATED:These 10 Whopping Homes & Cars Of Celebrities Look Amazing!

Poppy Montgomery: Husband, Dating, Family & Friends

Poppy Montgomery started dating director of lifestyle marketing for Microsoft, Shawn Sanford in 2011. The couple got married in 2014 at Disneyland in the presence of their children Violet and Gus. Poppy has another son, Jackson with ex-boyfriend Adam Kaufman whom she dated from 2004 to 2011.

Who is Poppy Montgomery dating in 2024?

Relationship status Married (Since 2011) Sexuality Straight Current Husband of Poppy Montgomery Shawn Sanford Ex-boyfriends or ex-husbands Adam Kaufman Expecting a baby? She is not pregnant Has any kids? Yes, mother of: Jackson, Violet & Gus

Will the marriage of Australian actress Poppy Montgomery and current Husband, Shawn Sanford survive 2024?

These Are The 15 Hottest Wives And Girlfriends Of Hollywood!

Family

Names of father, mother, kids, brothers & sisters:

Phil Donahue (Father) Nicola Montgomery (Mother)

Jackson Phillip Deveraux Montgomery Kaufman (Son)

Violet Grace Deveraux Sanford (Daughter)

Gus Monroe Deveraux Sanford (Son)

Rosie Thorn Donahue (Sister) Daisy Yellow Donahue (Sister) Lily Belle Donahue (Sister) Marigold Sun Donahue (Sister) Jethro Tull Donahue (Brother)

Height, Weight, Body Measurements, Tattoos, Skin, Hair & Eye Color

50 Celebrities That Were Caught On Tape Without Makeup On!

This cheerful actress originating from Sydney, New South Wales, Australia has a slim body & triangle face type.

Hair color Regular blond Hairstyle dressy Eye Color Hazel Height 163 cm Weight 62 kilo Bra-size 34D Feet size 7.5 Dress size 12 Waist size 28 Buste size 38 Butt size 37 Does Poppy Montgomery smoke? No, never Caught Smoking: These Are The 60 Most Shocking Celebrity Smokers Does Poppy Montgomery have a tattoo? Yes

These 50 Celebrity Tattoos Went Horribly Wrong Fitness, workout and diet Poppy Montgomery is working out regularly with celebrity trainer Joe Dowdell. Her workout routine includes circuit training, strength training exercises and cardio exercise.

50 Celebrities That Were Caught On Tape Without Makeup On!

Left lower arm tattoo

Wrist tattoo

Does Poppy Montgomery have official Social Media profiles?

Follow this page to stay up to date about the latest gossip and rumors (plastic surgery, scandals, new photos or videos and so on) of Poppy Montgomery!

Trending

Lo and behold, this is our Top 60 of celebrities that have been caught smoking or

Celebrities don’t always wear makeup anymore. In fact, many of them lately like to show off

40/ 40Cardi B’s dream mansion in Atlanta rap-up.com After two years of house hunting Cardi B

55/ 55Sean Penn – $70,000,000 via bz-berlin.de Sean is a dinosaur in Hollywood, but he manages

A lot of celebrities do not know what to do with their money anymore in 2022.