Poppy Montgomery, the very pregnant actress from Without a Trace(Thursdays, 10 pm/ET, CBS), is trying to remember if she's ever changed a diaper. "Let me think…. I don't know. Adam, have I ever changed a diaper?" Adam is actor Adam Kaufman, the father of Montgomery's son-to-be and, for the moment, Montgomery's surrogate brain. "Poppy's been having some memory issues," Kaufman says with a laugh. "Sometimes she tells the same story three times." He gives Montgomery a playful nuzzle. The couple are sitting on a jumbo couch in their gorgeous, sun-drenched living room in Los Angeles' Pacific Palisades. Montgomery sighs, rubbing her Buddha belly. "OK, go ahead," she says. "Tell TV Guide about the candy."

"I find random, half-eaten bags of M&Ms all over the house," Kaufman says. "But Poppy's given me strict instructions." Montgomery interjects: "If he finds it, he hides it!"

Call it "What to Expect When a TV Star's Expecting." The countless little side effects of pregnancy are taking their toll on Montgomery, 32, who's due this week. "If it's not the chocolate cravings, it's the nonstop peeing and the constant weepiness," she says. She burst into tears upon hearing the national anthem while watching the World Series, she reveals — even though she's a native Australian. "And don't get me started on TV commercials. I can cry over a dog-food ad!"

Still, the couple couldn't be happier about the bundle on the way, and not just because it's bringing them closer professionally. As Without a Trace viewers saw recently, it turns out the babydaddy of Montgomery's character, FBI agent Sam Spade, is her one-night stand from last season, Brian Donovan, played by Kaufman, 33. "The writers called and said, 'What do you think if Adam gets you pregnant on the show?'" she says. "We thought, 'How cool is that?!' "

Kaufman is set to stick around for at least three more episodes, partly to see if their fling can become a lasting thing. "We'll try to make a go of it but it could be tough for Samantha," Montgomery says. "She's always been a commitment-phobe. But I'm hoping pregnancy will soften Sam up a bit and help her make better choices romantically."

Montgomery and Kaufman have to make some important choices themselves, starting with naming the baby. That might be tricky, given the names in Montgomery's family: The actress' full name is Poppy Petal Emma Elizabeth Deveraux Donoghue Montgomery, and she has sisters named Rosie Thorn, Daisy Yellow, Lily Belle and Marigold Sun. "I think Adam and I will probably take a less hippie-ish approach," Montgomery says. "We have five or six names that we like, but we want to wait to meet the boy before we name him."

The kid certainly has a comfy crib to come home to. His nursery is already done up in pastel hues and filled with enough toys to open a boutique. Says Montgomery, "We had 140 people at our baby shower," complete with milkshakes and cupcakes for the guests and a live animal show for the 30-odd children in attendance. "I want to be a fun mom, so I thought I'd start with the shower."

The couple met three years ago on the set of an independent movie called Between, and Kaufman has also appeared on Law & Order and Dawson's Creek. Though they're not married, Montgomery says she hasn't ruled out the idea. "He wants to get married. It's something we'll probably get around to doing for the sake of the baby, but right now I'm just focusing on getting him out safely," she says. "It's going to be such a miracle. I can't believe this whole thing.… "

Kaufman looks over at her. "Oh, there she goes again," he says, as Montgomery's eyes start to well up.

"Well, don't just sit there," Montgomery says, beaming angelically. "Get me a tissue!"

Check out Adam and Poppy on Without a Trace in our Online Video Guide.

Check out the latest issue of TV Guide on newsstands now, featuring CSI's "big shake-up" and a Survivor Showdown! Try four risk-free issues of TV Guide now!