How old is Bob Dylan, what is his real name and where is he from?

Bob Dylan was born on May 24, 1941. He celebrates his 80th birthday in 2021.

His birth name was Robert Allen Zimmerman, and he was born in Duluth, Minnesota.

Bob's paternal grandparents, Anna Kirghiz and Zigman Zimmerman, emigrated from Odessa in the Russian Empire (now Ukraine) to the US in the early 1900s. His maternal grandparents, Florence and Ben Stone, were Lithuanian Jews who arrived in the US in 1902.

Read more: Bob Dylan looking awkward during 'We Are the World' recording is absolutely hilarious

His father Abram Zimmerman, and his mother Beatrice 'Beatty' Stone, were part of a small Jewish community. They lived in Duluth until Bob was six, when his father had polio and the family returned to his mother's hometown in Hibbing.

There, his father and paternal uncles ran a furniture and appliances store. It was here that he first listened to the radio to blues and country stations.

How did Bob Dylan get his start in music?

Bob Dylan - Like A Rolling Stone (Live at Newport 1965)

Bob Dylan formed various bands at high school. With the Golden Chords, he performed covers of songs by Little Richard, and Elvis Presley. Their performance of Danny & the Juniors' 'Rock and Roll Is Here to Stay' at their high school talent show was apparently so loud, the principal cut off the microphone. What a square.

At his fraternity, he began to perform at a coffeehouse near campus, and began to introduce himself as 'Bob Dylan'. He later explained that he wanted to use the surname Dillon before finding poems by Dylan Thomas, and decided upon that less common spelling.

He said: "You're born, you know, the wrong names, wrong parents. I mean, that happens. You call yourself what you want to call yourself. This is the land of the free."

In May 1960, he dropped out of college at the end of his first year. The following year, he travelled to New York City to perform and visit his idol Woody Guthrie.

He soon began playing at clubs around Greenwich Village, and became close to other folk singers such as Dave Van Ronk, Fred Neil, Odetta, and the Clancy Brothers.

After positive reviews and appearing as a backing artist on some albums, he signed a record deal with Columbia Records.