“Voice-over artist Jonathan Kydd has worked on more than 6,000 commercials, lending his voice to campaigns for brands such as Ferrero Rocher. Here he talks to Metro about his daily 9-5”

I started doing voice-overs as I thought it would be a nice way to help my acting and enable me to make some money when I wasn’t working. I made a reel of me doing hundreds of different voices and tried to get a voice agent. My break came when I played a cockney cat in a cat food commercial. You never know what you’re going to be doing as a voice-over artist. Unlike acting, you’re cast by your reel, you don’t have an interview first. There’s a fear that permeates life that you’ll never work again, that you might be found to be not very good at all. Occasionally, my agent calls and tells me to be somewhere in 20 minutes! My girlfriend doesn’t mind as she’s an actress and understands and does voices too! We both have to cover for each other at family events if necessary. My girlfriend does the whispery ‘take care…’ on the Garnier adverts and we actually met while doing the voices of a husband and wife in a commercial at Virgin Radio. We do silly voices a lot at home too and our three-year-old daughter loves it. It’s good fun when people recognise your voice as normally it’s a very anonymous world. I asked a bloke on the Underground a question recently and he said: ‘Excuse me, I think I recognise your voice. Do you do commercials?’ It never occurred to me that the Ferrero Rocher ‘excellente’ advert would become so iconic. The agency tried to make out the advert wouldn’t be shown in England, which is why they told me to do a silly voice. When people started saying ‘excellente’ as part of their conversation, it was fun. The weirdest job I’ve ever done was voicing two socks for a detergent commercial. When I’d done the first run-through, somebody actually said: ‘They don’t sound like socks to me.’ I’m often complimented on my clarity and have been told I sound very sincere. I’m also cheery in the studio and I never object to anything I’m told to do. You have to look after your voice. If I get a cold, it’s awful. I’m a hypochondriac – if I’m on the Tube and somebody starts sneezing, I change carriages. If you have a bunged-up nose, they won’t want you. I drink hot lemon with ginger and honey and I go to the gym a lot – it’s essential. I also do an exercise tape for my voice. The worst point of my career was getting down to the last two for a One Foot In The Grave Christmas special in 1993 and missing out. I think that the highlight is yet to come as I’m trying to make films and voicing allows me to do this in my spare time’ Sam Kydd