As a business owner, you know that the products you sell are crucial to your success. And when it comes to online sales, the presentation of your product label design is just as important as the products themselves. With careful attention to detail, you can create e-commerce labels that look great and convert browsers into buyers.

While many best practices for e-commerce labels can help you convert buyers, not all of them are created equal. To make sure your brand is as catchy and memorable as possible, it's essential to understand what works and what doesn't when it comes to labels.

Here are the five best ways to make your brand memorable and eye-catching while boosting your conversion rate:

Keep it Simple

One of the most important things to remember when creating a label design for your products is to keep it simple. Don't clutter your labels with too much text or graphics. This can be overwhelming for buyers and have the opposite effect of what you're hoping for. Making your brand look polished and professional is more important than cramming in as much information as possible.

Avoid adding unnecessary images or text that doesn't serve a purpose so that your labels can be sleek and easy to read. This will create a more positive first impression for potential customers and make them more likely to purchase from your store.

Use Colors That Stand out

While you want to keep your labels clean and simple, that doesn't mean they have to be boring. Adding a pop of color is an easy way to make your products stand out from the competition and grab your customers' attention. Use colors that complement each other well and create a visual impact that will leave a lasting impression on potential customers. While you'll want to avoid using too many colors, as this can be overwhelming, a few well-placed splashes of color can go a long way in making your products more visually appealing. Don't be afraid to experiment with different color schemes until you find one that makes your products sing on the shelf.

Be Creative With Your Typography

When used correctly, typography can be a powerful tool in your labeling arsenal. The font you use also affects how visually appealing your labels are. You'll want to choose a font that is easy to read so prospects can quickly scan the label and understand it.

At the same time, you don't want your label to look too plain or boring. Adding some personality with creative typography is a great way to make your products more memorable and stand out from the rest. Its arrangement can also help direct the buyer's eye to the specific information you want them to see.

Use Images to Add Visual Interest

Not all the information on your labels needs to be conveyed through words. Adding images and icons is a great way to add visual interest and break up the text so that it's easier to digest. You can use images to highlight your product's essential features or show what it can be used for. Icons are also a helpful way to direct the buyer's attention to specific information. When used sparingly, they can add a touch of personality to your labels and make them more fun and engaging. Using images and icons should be strategic, as you don't want to overload your labels with too much visual information.

Keep the Text Brief and Easy to Read

As we mentioned, you'll want to avoid adding too much to your labels. Buyers should understand what your product is and what it does without reading a novel. Although you'll want to include some information about your product on the label, you don't want to go overboard.

Keep the text brief and focus on the most critical information you want to convey so buyers can quickly scan it and understand what they need to know. The more concise your labels are, the easier they will be to read and interpret.

Boost Your E-commerce Labels With Leapin' Lizard Labels

Creating a visually appealing and informative design will be a continuous effort because as your business grows, so does the need to level up your branding. No matter how excellent your label design is, it's essential to find a quality printing company that will give you the best price and stellar labels that catch your customers' eyes.

Leapin' Lizard Labels specializes in high-quality custom printing for many different businesses. We understand the significance of making a great first impression, and we're dedicated to helping our clients with our excellent printing solutions. If you're looking for a reliable printing partner, we'd be happy to help you.