Our e-commerce shipping labels and forms are custom-made to meet your needs. Plus, we can print your logo, company information, special offers or whatever else you wish to display on your products.

That means every time your customers receive a package from your company, you have an opportunity to communicate your branding, build loyalty and boost the chance that they’ll purchase from you again.

Customization allows you to:

Communicate your marketing message

Provide coupons or other buying incentives

Connect customers to your social media sites

Recommend related products based on past purchases

Cross-sell with sister companies

Facilitate product returns

THE NEED FOR E-COMMERCE TAGS AND LABELS

Proper labels and tags for e-commerce are crucial. You need them for marketing and to reinforce your branding. They also are vital for order accuracy. When you need to make sure you have the correct items in the correct containers, custom e-commerce shipping labels are the key. They spell out what is being shipped and also can provide tracking capabilities and delivery instructions, so you can ensure items are sent where they need to go. Because of their ability to streamline and add accuracy to your processes, these labels are an important component of building a stronger business. With the right warehouse labels, you improve your workflow/process, create a better experience for customers and save money through greater efficiency.

WHY CHOOSE CHICAGO TAG & LABEL FOR E-COMMERCE TAGS

As an established leader in the custom form and label industry, Chicago Tag & Label is pleased to offer the best tags for e-commerce that you can find anywhere. Backed by more than 75 years in business, we’re the American manufacturer that specializes in creative print solutions. Not only are our products custom-made and of the highest quality, but they’re also competitively priced to save you money. We boast short lead times, so you’ll get your order quickly. And our customer service team is dedicated to your satisfaction, from order to delivery. When you’re ready to learn more about working with us on a project, reach out anytime for a quote!