Quick Plot

Originally released for the Apple II 8-Bit computer back in 1989, created by Jordan Mechner, Prince Of Persia was a game that created a leap forward in the quality of animation seen in video games.

The game is set in ancient Persia (a historical location based in Iran). Whilst the Sultan is fighting a war in a foreign land. His adviser Jaffar, rules the Sultan's Palace Tower with an evil vengeance. His only obstacle is the Sultan's Daughter. He commands her to marry him or die within an hour. She refuses and Jaffar starts the hourglass with the timer of how long she's got to live. Her only hope is her love, a Prince whom is a prisoner in Jaffar's dungeons.

Hide ads

You play as the Prince, and you must travel through loads of levels, defeating Jaffar's guards, avoiding dangerous obstacles such as spikes and slicers, and reach the top of the tower to save the Princess... within an hour. If you fail... she dies.

The original game was successful during the time of it's release, and has seen ports on the Genesis/Mega Drive, Super Nintendo, Amiga, PC and many other consoles. This version contains the same game-play and levels the player would originally see in the 1989 game. But now it contains HD Graphics, new abilities such as the wall jump etc, different swordplay, leaderboards, achievements, aesthetics from the Sands Of Time game and new game modes; "Time Attack", and "Survival".

Whilst this version on the Xbox has been given mostly positive feedback. It has suffered some issues, mainly because of it's challenging Survival playthrough and it's clunky controls which can make the player move un-expectedly at the slightest touch of a button.

My Hints & Tips

There are 5 things in this game which you will either need to attack, evade or dodge, and I have placed them in a list of difficulty with 1 as being the hardest, and 5 as the easiest.

1. Guards

2. Spikes

3. Slicers

4. Holes

5. Blue Potions

Guards

Jaffar's Guards are what I found to be the most annoying and stressful of enemies for you to encounter in the game. Whilst the first couple levels contains Guards you can easily take down, you will get some in later levels that you must judge correctly, or you will be killed. To defeat a Guard you must keep on attacking them, until their health indicated on the right side is completely drained.

The game only places a scene with one guard at a time, allowing you to take your time in fighting these guards, rather than multitasking on more than one. But to ensure you have enough health to kill all of them, you will have to attack and use a move called Parry.

Parry is when you use the Button when fighting to avoid the Guards sword attacks. You must judge it correctly because if you don't you will get hit. As you advance further into the game, some Guards will have more health and shields making it more tricky for yourself. The best way in defeating them is to attack when you feel it is right with the Button, and then use the Button to Parry when you feel the enemy is going to attack. If successful, you will have high chance that you can attack the opponent again, but don't be fooled because the Guard might try and attack once more.

I found originally there was a cut swipe attack that the Guards can do, which I just cannot seem to dodge. This is what made me get annoyed with the game, many times, particularly on the Survival Playthrough.

However after playing through this game multiple times, I found the best method in defeating guards is to hold down the button to Parry. And then "press" the button to strike the sword, then holding down the button to Parry at the same time. I noticed when I was doing this, the enemy had some tricky moments to hit me. Even the famous cut swipe attack also proved difficulty for the enemy.

You may also have an opportunity where you and the Guard will strike the swords at the same time. If this happens you will both create an electric chain reaction, and then you will both be in a dual. When this happens, you need to rapidly tap the button to push the opponent over on his side. If you succeed you will punch him, giving you a 100% chance in giving him another strike. If you fail and he gets you over on your side, he will push you back. You won't lose any health, but you will have to defend quickly, before he can strike you again. Another idea as well is to tilt your in the direction you wish to punch your opponent (left or right). This will possibly give you more of a good grapple against the Guard as well as bashing the button.

I found this quite annoying here and there, because I felt that despite that you've tapped the button as fast as you could, the game sometimes registers the guard as the victor rather than yourself. However I believe it is because I tend to let go of the button when a duel does happen, giving the guard an easy win.

Lastly, there might be a chance when you and your guard strike the end of your swords together. If this happens you will both swap sides of your fighting positions. If this happens you will now have a chance in running away from that guard. To do so quickly press your opposite direction button rapidly to step back and then press the button to put away your sword. You will then have a few seconds to turn and run, before your opponent tries and attacks you. This is very useful, especially if you're playing on Survival Mode. The trick in doing this move is to wait for your opponent to strike and just as he's striking hold down the button to Parry. This should make you switch positions with the guard.

Spikes

Spikes are scattered all over the levels you play in the game. Most of them are placed on the floors below you, but there is a chance where one or more can be placed on the platforms you're running on. You will notice one when there are holes all over the platform they are placed on. If you land, run or jump on them, you will be impaled and it's an instant death. This is something you don't want to play around with on Survival Mode.

To avoid them, you can either jump or walk over them. You will need to judge the jumping correctly, because if you don't you will land on them and they will kill you. You can however walk over them, as if you walk the spikes will appear and you will just tip-toe over them, allowing you to dodge them. To walk simply tap the lightly, or hold the Button as you run. I would suggest you get used to the Button trick, because I did Survivor Mode once and I used the , and then the game made me flick the stick, making me run... I was then impaled and killed by the spikes.

Slicers

Usually a slicer is noticed by a thick line of blood. When you or an opponent gets close to it, it will then go back and forth in opening and closing metal slicers, which link up together. If you get caught within these slicers, you will be cut which is an instant death. The same will go for any enemy that's close to it as well.

Traditionally they are easy to dodge, as you can just run through them when the time is right, or use the button to roll forward. However there will be occasions where you will either get more than 1 in the same room, or you get spikes next to it. If this is the case, you will need to judge your walking and jumping at the same time, to make sure you get through the slicer/s correctly.

Holes

There are a lot of holes in the game you will need to dodge, as if you fall down just even from a great height, it's an instant death. It is wise to plan out your levels accordingly, before you run forward and take a chance as if you make mistakes, the holes can cause you to fall through. The game also contains platforms which may collapse after you step on them. When this happens you must run past them quickly, or you will fall along with the platform.

Blue Potions

Red Potions replenish or give you extra health. Blue Potions are deadly toxic potions which reduce your health. If you see a Blue Potion, simply avoid it as if you drink it, it will reduce your health by 1 and you'll need all the health you can get.

Other Quick Tips

In the game, you only have 1 hour to rescue the Princess. If you fail within that hour, she will be taken away and executed. This doesn't mean you would have to start the game over again, as you can always continue with different features, such as the last levels based in the dungeon rather than the tower.

The clock stops when you have reached the 13th Level in the game. It will stay stopped in the 14th Level as well.

To open doors in this game, you will need to activate a Yellow Switch indicated on a platform. Most doors will then be on a time-strain, so you must cross through them as soon as possible, or you will not be able to get through the door. If you fail you must backtrack and press the switch again. Do not use the Red Switches unless you are indicated to do so. They will close a door which has been opened.

When you fall from a great height (in most cases, this would be done in Level 7), you can attempt to grab a ledge to prevent you from being a death fall. To do this press either the or the Button.

In the game, there is a butterfly that can help you find your way into completing the levels in the game. Whilst it will point you in the right direction into getting the levels done, it won't take you to any secret items such as the Life Potions.

Find anything you think is wrong with this walkthrough? Help us fix it by posting in its Walkthrough Thread.

This walkthrough is the property of TrueAchievements.com. This walkthrough and any content included may not be reproduced without written permission. TrueAchievements.com and its users have no affiliation with any of this game's creators or copyright holders and any trademarks used herein belong to their respective owners.