From the perspective of cinema history — and American history, for that matter — there has never been a more significant video release than “Pioneers of African-American Cinema,” a five-disc collection funded with a Kickstarter campaign and released by Kino Lorber on Blu-ray and DVD.

The set is devoted to the so-called race movies that featured all-black casts and were largely made by black filmmakers for black audiences beginning around World War I and continuing through the mid-20th century. This was the first alternative American cinema, the precursor to today’s independent films.

Some, like “The Bronze Buckaroo” (1939), were modeled on Hollywood genres. Others, notably those by Oscar Micheaux (1884-1951) and Spencer Williams (1893-1969), developed distinctive idioms. “Eleven P.M.” (1928), a late silent feature written and directed by the Detroit filmmaker Richard Maurice, who also plays a central role, is an unclassifiable psychodrama involving a hard-boiled reporter, an orphaned child and the transmigration of souls.

The oldest film in the set is a two-reel silent comedy from 1915, “Two Knights of Vaudeville,” produced by the Ebony Film Corporation, a white-owned Chicago company that employed black artists; the most recent feature is “Dirty Gertie From Harlem U.S.A.” (1946), an unauthorized version of the venerable W. Somerset Maugham sex-shocker story “Rain,” starring Francine Everett as a seductive cabaret singer on tour in the Caribbean.

There is also “The Moses Sisters Interview,” a 33-minute videotape made by the historian Pearl Bowser in the late 1970s that features the performers Ethel, Lucia and Julia Moses reminiscing about their careers. Other documentaries include the 1937 Works Project Administration short “We Work Again,” with footage from Orson Welles’s all-black Federal Theater Project’s production of “Macbeth,” and excerpts from fieldwork footage the novelist Zora Neale Hurston shot in the South as part of her ethnographic research.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.