On Friday we posted Part 1 of our exclusive interview with Angela Aki, the singer responsible for "Kiss Me Good-Bye" from the Final Fantasy XII soundtrack.

Now we are proud to bring you the conclusion of our interview with Ms. Aki.

Enjoy!

IGN Music: Will you be touring the US anytime soon?

Angela Aki: I'd love to, if I had a chance. By the way, I just have been a part of "PLAY! Vide Game Symphony" with Arnie Ross. He was amazing.

IGN Music: If you could perform your music at any concert hall in the world, which one would it be and why?

Angela Aki: Any pianist and singer/songwriter would say "Carnegie Hall." It's such a legendary place. I'd love to play at Carnegie Hall. That's definitely dream of mine.

IGN Music: You've been playing piano and singing since a very young age. Have you ever thought of doing anything besides being a performer?

Angela Aki: Music has always been an interest of mine. I've always loved it and played piano for a long time. But I had a specific incident by which I realized that music is the reason what I was born. It was when I was 18. I went to a concert-I think it took place at the collage I was going to-and the artist was Sarah McLachlan. Just watching the concert was enough for me to decide "this is exactly what I want to do with my life".

IGN Music: I heard you're currently touring in Japan. How's it going?

Angela Aki: I actually just finished my first tour. It just amazed me that so many people came to see my show even to a place that I've never been to. I was independent for a long time and I knew every parson who I sold my CD to. But now with a major record contract, you don't get to meet every person who buys your CD. It's a new feeling, and it's very inspiring that they have been waiting for me to come to their town and sing. It was amazing.

IGN Music: Do you ever have free time? If so, what do you like to do?

Angela Aki: I really don't have free time right now. I will probably have some free time at the end of this month. I want to see my friends who I have not seen about a year since I've started to do the whole recording thing. I love to sit down with them and have a coffee. I also want to go see movies.

IGN Music: What is your next project?

Angela Aki: I am in a writing period. Since my tour (in Japan) just finished, I started writing songs. I was inspired a lot while on the road and I have a lot to say and feel. I want to process those and write it down on paper and put my hands on the keyboard before they become the past. Also, I have a big show coming up at the end of this year at Nippon Budokan (one of the most prestigious concert halls in Japan) the day after Xmas. I have to practice and get ready for that show.