"Kiss Me Good-Bye" is a theme for Final Fantasy XII. It is the only song Nobuo Uematsu exclusively composed for the game and was arranged by Kenichiro Fukui. It was sung by Angela Aki who also wrote the lyrics and played the piano.

The English version is used in all of the game's versions; however, a Japanese version was commercially released on the single in Japan along with the English variant. The Japanese version was arranged by Motoki Matsuoka and Aki and the lyrics were also written by Aki.

Additionally, the release Selections from Final Fantasy XII Original Soundtrack included a DVD with a music video of the song's Japanese version.

Development[]

Uematsu and Square Enix team approached Angela Aki, asking if she would be interested in singing Final Fantasy XII's theme. Aki was deeply moved when she heard the song Mr. Uematsu wrote, and Uematsu wanted Aki to write the lyrics. The first thing in her mind upon hearing the melody was a scene of a new journey after good-bye, so she structured the lyrics based on it.[1]

"Kiss Me Good-Bye" was the first song written specifically for the Final Fantasy XII soundtrack. After composer Hitoshi Sakimoto joined the project, he considered the sound of "Kiss Me Good-Bye" when composing other tracks for the game.[2]

Lyrics[]

The official lyrics were released on the single and the Final Fantasy XII: Original Soundtrack.

English version[]

You say my love is all you need to see you through

But I know these words are not quite true

(So) here is the path you're looking for, an open door

Leading to worlds you long to explore

Go if you must move on alone

I'm gonna make it on my own

Kiss me good-bye, love's memory

Follow your heart and find your destiny

Won't shed a tear for love's mortality

For you put the dream in my reality

As time goes by I know you'll see this of me

I loved you enough to let you go free

Go, I will give you wings to fly

Cast all your fears into the sky

Kiss me good-bye, love's mystery

All of my life I'll hold you close to me

Won't shed a tear for love's mortality

For you put the dream in my reality

Kiss me good-bye, love's memory

You put the dream in my reality

Japanese version[]

Unofficial English translation

The door is open for you

Even when you are lost

You aren't satisfied with just a

World for the two of us, are you?

I will give you wings, so you should take a leap of faith

Kiss me good-bye, love’s memory

Even though I have lost you,

My beloved memories will give way to strength

Everyone falls in love while searching

For something definite, but

An unwavering love lies within themselves

Kiss me good-bye, farewell

I will change into a new me

Kiss me good-bye, love’s memory

If we transform into two new people,

Kiss me good-bye, I won't cry

I was able to love you

I was able to love you

Game appearances[]

Final Fantasy XII[]

"Kiss Me Good-Bye -featured in FINAL FANTASY XII-" plays during the game's ending. Its lyrics do not allude to the plot directly, but its tone fits the cast's ending, leaving the past and moving on in their lives. It is track 19 on disc 4 of the Final Fantasy XII: Original Soundtrack.

Theatrhythm Final Bar Line[]

Arrangement album appearances[]

Guitar Solo Final Fantasy Official Best Collection[]

Yuji Sekiguchi arranged and performed a solo classical guitar arrangement of "Kiss Me Good-Bye".

Distant Worlds III: more music from Final Fantasy[]

A recording of "Kiss Me Good-Bye" appears on this album, performed by Susan Calloway and the Distant Worlds Philharmonic Orchestra and Chorus and conducted by Arnie Roth.

Live performances[]

VOICES: Music from Final Fantasy[]

"Kiss Me Good-Bye" was performed live during the concert by Angela Aki (vocals and piano) and the Prima Vista Philharmonic Orchestra. It was arranged by Sachiko Miyano and Kenichiro Fukui.

It was also recorded and released on the album.

Distant Worlds: music from Final Fantasy The Journey of 100[]

An orchestral arrangement of "Kiss Me Good-Bye" was conducted by Arnie Roth and performed by Susan Calloway and the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra. It was arranged by Sachiko Miyano and Kenichiro Fukui.

Compilation album appearances[]

Final Fantasy Vocal Collection[]

"Kiss Me Good-Bye -featured in FINAL FANTASY XII-" is track 6 on the album.

Citations[]

[]