Forces loyal to Syria’s Bashar al-Assad on Thursday edged to within several kilometres of the Islamic State-held ancient city of Palmyra.

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group, said ground troops had reached some three miles west of the city and were engaged in fierce clashes with the jihadist militants.

"Regime forces could enter the city at any moment, they are not far away and the area between them and the city is desert," Observatory director Rami Abdel Rahman said.

The ancient city of Palmyra and its modern town of the same name, known in Arabic as Tadmur, fell under the control of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (Isil) in May. The militants have used its Roman theatre as a stage for ceremonial executions, and mined the surrounding site in an attempt to deter the expected government fightback.

Heavy regime airstrikes have backed the ground offensive to retake Palmyra, causing dozens of residents to flee Tadmur earlier this week. Although most have focused on the town itself, at least one has damaged parts of the Unesco-listed ruins.

Nestled along a strategically important highway between the cities of Homs and Deiz Ezzor, the town’s capture cut an important supply line for Mr Assad’s government, underscoring the troubles it is starting to face as Syria’s war continues through its fifth year.

As the country moves towards de facto partition, regime forces are retrenching around the core strategic areas of Damascus and the Mediterranean coast. Mr Assad’s overstretched army increasingly relies on manpower provided by foreign allies Iran or the Lebanese group Hezbollah.

The regime has been hesitant to commit significant resources to fight renewed rebel offensives in Deraa in the south or Aleppo in the North.

The death of the Assad family’s longest standing confidant, Mohammed Nasif Kheirbek, has also left the president’s inner circle shrunken and riven by infighting over the role played by Iran in Syria’s war.

Tehran's financial assistance has been seen as pivotal to the Syrian government and economy, which has shrunk by more than a half since the conflict in 2011 erupted. Syria’s state news agency said on Wednesday that Mr Assad had signed a law ratifying a $1 billion credit line from Iran.