Amnesia Moon is Jonathan Lethem’s second novel. It was published in 1995. It is allegedly a novel that was worked together by the author from a variety of shorter, and somewhat similar, pieces he had already written. I think that is very apparent in this book, and for once, it is very unimportant because the finished product works with this sort of cobbling together. Some things right out of the gate: this is not a book for most readers. The readers who read novels that are the standard traditional linear form of the novel, orthodox in every way like a high school English class would learn, will not want to read this. I have seen this book referred to as psychedelic, as avant-, as post-, etc. Sometimes some readers definitely want to read this style of book. At other times, I can see this being the last thing a reader wants to look at. Either way, I would be very surprised if the traditional reader would be very pleased with this novel.

I read (ahhh… mmm… skimmed) an essay I found online where the writer interpreted sections of Amnesia Moon as an example of the Frankfurt School’s understanding of the individual ensnared in the Capitalist edifice. It is not the case that I think the author of that essay is wrong. Its that I think it is too much. Adorno would toss this book. Good luck getting Horkheimer to look at it. Habermas (I think he’s still around) would patiently read it and then tell you why you are wrong in eight different ways that make sense only to him. Benjamin? I do not know – take your chances with him. Could see him going here and there with it.

Everywhere, though, there seems to be the universal agreement that this novel is so very Dickian (Philip K. Dick 1928 – 1982). Commenters are correct – PKD is an obvious and large influence on Lethem and this novel. Readers point to the dreams and hallucinatory experiences of the characters – and, of course, they are right. They are also correct about the in media res beginning, the locations (i.e. California), and the unnamed, unknown apocalyptic event.

The main character, variously named Everett and Chaos, is surviving in a post-apocalyptic situation. The setting is dusty, lack of resources, humans camped out in run-down malls, movie theatres, factories. These communities are reverting to more animalistic lifestyles – but with a variety of nearly-depraved behaviors, as well. Today is the day, however, when Chaos allows his instincts to get the better of him. For better or worse, he acts out in this community – especially at its imposing leader, Kellogg, and hits the road.

The first quarter of this novel is very edgy, raw, even disgusting at times. It is not easy reading, especially because it is confusing and feels random. But once Chaos is on the road, the reader expects that the author has a destination, a mission and a goal, for his characters. This is a major interpretation of this novel: another American Road Novel. I tend to avoid this subgenre, because it does not resonate with me at all. However, I am not utterly ignorant of the niche and I have read the requisite items in the subgenre. I am speaking of On the Road (Kerouac, 1957), The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test (Wolfe, 1968. Yeah, its not a novel per se, but it is the subgenre in my mind), Another Roadside Attraction (Robbins, 1971), and Fear and Loathing in LV (Thompson, 1971). I really dislike all of these works. I would say ‘hate,’ but that is a bit too strong. I read most of these as a teenager, though, so maybe that means something. None of these works resonate with me, though. (I should share that I am a bit fond of the 1996 film Beavis and Butthead Do America…. )

As for him, he wasn’t even sure he had problems, not in that sense. His life was too full of gaps for that. The world had problems; he was just on the receiving end. – pg. 108

So we might say that Amnesia Moon is also an homage to some of these “road novels” of our American literary past. In my reading, I bought into this interpretation as Chaos roared out of Little America: OK, this is going to be a survival road novel. For awhile, this interpretation holds up, but eventually, even this falls apart. Falling apart in a novel that is heavily influenced by PKD is not a strange or bad things, mind you. In fact, if things do not disintegrate regularly, then it probably does not have the PKD influence it should have. Chaos rolls into what I perceived to be the next “pre-written story” that Lethem had sewn together. This is the segment of the green fog.

Of all of the story bits, this is the one that I liked the most and wanted more out of. I wanted to return to this and I wanted it to play more of a role in the non-existent storyline. I liked how the “green” could be radiation or smog or fog or really anything – how it suddenly became the scene and was upon the characters. I liked how the “vision” of the characters is changed in this translucent air. I liked how to reader feels panicked by the “institutionalism” of the scene – the authorities, the interrogation, the building. This was the story that felt most post-apocalyptic and frightening for me.

But Chaos tells Melinda to kick him in the shins if he ever becomes so involved and lost in such a situation. Arguably, proving my point that this White Walnut place was the most dangerous!

The next thread that we encounter is the dream of Chaos and his house on the lake and the girl Gwen. Over and over this plays some sort of driving force in the story. The amnesia is most potent with this thread because Chaos is frustrated and driven over the images in this thread. His upsettedness spills over onto the other characters who, somehow, have to put up with his leaking dream-world. Obviously there is an emotional connection between Chaos and this dream-scene, but the amnesia (let’s call it) prevents him from understanding it fully. It eats away at him, though, for the entirety of the novel. The frustration and motivation that all of this has for the main character is really the crux of the novel. But closure is not really something Chaos or the reader is going to find…..

The next “pre-written” story is the Vacaville stuff. It is straight out of Twilight Zone, for sure. The concept of luck plays a role here as well. I think, too, one of the characters references Stephen King’s The Running Man. Suffice to say, this is the chunk of novel that most readers are going to spend the most time with and remember the most, I think. Here in Vacaville, Chaos meets Edie and her two sons. He also reunites with his biker-friend, Billy Fault. Fault is mechanism for the rest of the novel, pushing Chaos/Everett through the remainder of the story. I cannot remember, but the concept of luck as societal status seems very familiar. I feel like I read this before in a novel or short story. This seems way too familiar for it to just be a new idea for me.

Anyway, I do not want to work my way through the entire book, giving away the ersatz-storyline. I am glad I read this book – though I would not read it again, and maybe I did not enjoy it on the level of some readers. I appreciate the road-story and I love the Dickian stylings. I get a bit bored with some of the very, very psychedelic-psychological efforts, I admit, but they are not so terrible that they ruin the whole effort.

Customers squirmed into taquerias past drunks and children and pickpockets and drunken pickpockets and child pickpockets and drunken children. – pg. 133

My main thought reading this is that this is a book that will forever get overinterpreted. That is, of course, perfectly fine because I think, sometimes, that is the goal of the author here. If you get your work overinterpreted – you are assured of your work not being treated indifferently and shoved into some corner shelf with the other niche books that no one knows what to do with. Truthfully, I feel like there is something missing here in this book. I do not mean some orthodox novel aspect. I just mean that even in this post-apocalyptic, dream-funk, road-novel, there should have been something, big or small, that resonates a bit more and has a bit more weight to it. Overall, this novel is too light. It feels like there are a lot of cool segments, interesting sub-stories, interconnected but separate dreams, rhizomatic instances – but not enough to really ground anything so that the whole thing rather floats away… drifts away….

3 stars

It is difficult, I think, to write reviews of Agatha Christie novels. The most significant reason being that since they are so amazingly popular and well-known that there is not a whole lot left to “review” in 2023. Another reason is that much of these little novels is entwined in plot twists, red herrings, or key plot elements so that it could be easy to spoil the read for another reader. Beyond that, there are all the TV adaptations etc. that also color the contemporary reader’s image of Poirot and his author. It can be a bit sticky to try and separate some of these ideas out because they are just sort of homegrown things that do influence, rightly or wrongly, the actual reaction to the novel.

Thirteen at Dinner is the U.S.A. title for the 1933 novel Lord Edgware Dies. It is the eighth or ninth Poirot novel; I read the Dell 1969 edition. I am finally getting around to making my way through Christie’s novels. Its easier reading than Walter Burkert and Rene Wellek – the other things I am currently reading. I mention this to explain that I read Thirteen at Dinner mainly at night before bedtime just to wind down and read something entertaining. In this novel, Poirot is exceptionally patient and circumspect in his investigation. His calmness is opposite Inspector Japp’s activities, which entail chasing all over the place after every clue and trail. Throughout, Poirot’s reticence to do much more than ponder and have dinner really aggravates Captain Hastings. In this novel, in fact, it seems Hastings has quite a bit of animosity and frustration with the main character. Several times Hastings asserts that he is very fond of Poirot, but in his narrative asides, Hastings shares much of his impatience and annoyance.

And Poirot replied with a smile, “Alas! Not the cigarette ash – nor the footprint – nor a lady’s glove – nor even a lingering perfume! Nothing that the detective of fiction so conveniently finds.”

“The police are always made out to be as blind as bats in detective stories,” said Japp with a grin. — pg. 64, chapter 7

One of the things that I think was done well in this novel were the characterizations. By this I mean that Christie makes fairly interesting and insightful analyses of her characters – via the observations of Poirot et al. So, her characters seem realistic and have believable attitudes and personalities. The characters are a cross-section sampling of what Christie probably saw around her in London. Its not always flattering, its not always a judgment. It is keen observation and it allows for all the technical matters of a mystery novel to have their place. For example, the characters have idiosyncrasies that would lend themselves toward red herrings, motives, and plot twists.

Chapter 25 is probably the best chapter in the book. There is a dinner party. There is a reference to the “judgment of Paris.” I cannot tell you how amusingly coincidentally apropos this little segment is to my observations – I felt a lot like Hastings in this scene because recently I have seen and cringed at similar gauche gaffe situations. Needless to say, I am now mentally using “judgment of Paris” as a sort of half-serious litmus test in my social interactions. Anyway, Christie nails this scene perfectly and with an economy of words and with heightened insights. It is an excellent sample of writing – describing a scene perfectly.

The story itself is not one that I felt very intrigued by. Largely, it involves the relationships of a well-known, beautiful actress. In fact, the novel is, at points, quite a bit less of a detective mystery and more of a character study of this particular character. The character is self-centered, mercenary, but also utterly oblivious to their own flaws. If readers really consider this character, it is shocking and upsetting because also believable. And it is difficult to watch how right to the last this character exactly unable to engage their conscience. But I do not really care to read about marriages and actresses. So, the storyline generally was never going to pull me to the edge of my seat. I think it is a good read, nevertheless.

In fact, I encourage all readers to read this novel. It is a short novel, very available and well-known. It would not be an imposition on any tbr list to read this one. My reasons for recommending it are several, the characterization as I have mentioned, of course being one reason. Beyond that, I feel like many, many authors have copied, imitated, and borrowed some of the moments and ideas in this story. Its good to see some of the original presentation of these tropes and/or scenes. While I give this one a sort of middling score, that is more of a sign of my personal preference than Christie’s skills.

3 stars

The Switch by Elmore Leonard (1925 – 2013) is the first of two books about crooks Ordell Robbie and Louis Gara. I think most readers are more familiar with 1992’s Rum Punch. The Switch is a snappy, quick, crime novel that is a decent introduction, I suspect, to Leonard’s novel writing. It was first published in 1978. Leonard is known for his wry wit, his snappy dialogue, and his trimmed plotlines. Every reader has at least heard about his famous “Ten Rules of Writing,” which is an essay delineating what Leonard thinks good novelists should adhere to in order to make their novels readable. Allegedly, Leonard sticks to these rules himself, though his essay was only published in 2007.

Anyway, The Switch is a crime novel with a bit of humor, some karma trope-work, and a relatively fun ending. It is a satisfying read, for the most part, if you are a reader who enjoys character-driven, dialogue-heavy novels. Do not worry, the dialogue is not long-winded info-dumping. I just mean that there is nearly no waste spent on describing each scene’s lighting, furniture, color scheme, props, history, etc. You get enough context from the dialogue, which at points is a bit vulgar and direct, but is always straightforward and always pushes the plot.

Its a somewhat interesting realization that the reason Leonard does not have to overwrite this novel is because most readers already know the scenes, characters, and idiosyncrasies. In a sense, the novel works because the reader nolens volens supplies all the necessary stereotypes and imaging. So, I do wonder a little bit if someone very far from this reference point will enjoy this novel as much. Take a hypothetical reader that does not have any referent from any of these settings or characters and so they cannot automatically supply anything to the plot. In sixty years, this story may lose all of its abilities because those readers will be too far away to do the work.

Often I see Leonard’s style described as “realistic.” Well, for this novel I would say that the realism is because none of the characters is a “good guy.” There are no, really, good guys. There is at least one really ugly, nasty character, though. And his ending is, deservedly, worse than everyone else’s I reckon. Sometimes it is easy to read a book without any heroes in it because it feels more like real life and as a reader one does not feel forced into liking a very manufactured hero.

That is not to say that right there from page one I was not rooting for a particular character. Margaret ‘Mickey’ Dawson has plenty of flaws, but I was on her side, no matter what, from the start. How did that happen so quickly? I guess Leonard just knew the most efficient way to write the opening scene to kidnap his reader.

This is not a deep read or a story that needs to be explained. So it is also quite easy to spoil it for other readers. As I am continuing in my “Great Crime Read,” I have not read a lot of novels that I rated highly. The last crime novel I read actually lost the thread of the plot and was so over-the-top with some elements that I was very bored. The ending was kind of a let-down, too. Did that sway my feelings for The Switch? No. This one is a bit bawdy, but again, its a crime novel, not “inspirational fiction.” I felt the suspense and the action kept me very engaged in the story even if, as I actually think about the writing, there really was not a whole lot of action. For the most part, to be honest, all the characters sit around and drink and make phone calls. Kind of impressive how an author made a whole novel out of that.

Ridiculously, it does not feel there is very much crime in it. Alternatively, the previous novel I read had way, way, way too much crime in it. It feels really strange to compare the two novels and then also try to get any kind of measurement on how much crime should be in a crime novel. Expectation-wise, being aware that this novel takes place in Detroit, with criminals as main characters, and with Leonard’s writing described as “gritty” – I was ready for non-stop bad behavior!

Finally, the ending is satisfying because it has that karma-trope going for it that every reader likes even if they do not admit it. Sure, this cannot be true in absolutely every novel, but when it shows up nice and tidy like in this work, it definitely makes a solid, comfortable ending to the book.

It is not the sort of book you hand to just any reader, certainly. However, most adult readers can handle this one and be entertained by the caper. Definitely, I will read Rum Punch at some point. So, I am going to give this three stars, but truthfully, its probably closer to four stars. Its just not got a lot of re-readability and though it is clever, it is not permanent collection worthy, I suppose.

3 stars

Mistborn was published in 2006. This is the first in Brandon Sanderson’s Mistborn series, which is set in the world Scadrial. It is the second Sanderson novel that I have read. This review is one that I have procrastinated writing for several months. Unfortunately, due to my procrastination, some of the more detailed commentary I might have been inclined to write about has passed from my memory. However, some of the reason for my procrastination is exactly because I did not care to get into the details with this novel.

The question is obviously: well, why was I avoiding the detailed review? Mainly, because I very much feel like this is an entertaining novel that does not need to be picked apart with a fine-toothed comb. It is a novel that does not deserve to be examined under the critic’s most powerful microscope. Most important, I simply do not want to dig into the details of this novel.

Since this novel is such a popular novel, I am certain there are thousands of reviews and opinions that have already been given on it – and delve into all of its aspects from a multitude of perspectives. So, I certainly have nothing much to add in that respect anyway.

This is a Regency Romance with Allomancy and societal class struggle. If you think that that sounds like an interesting mash-up, by all means, pick up this novel and read it and enjoy the heck out it! If you do not – literally, if any of that sounds awful – then do not read it and also do not rant online about it.

In a lot of ways, this novel felt, to me, like a rewrite or a remix of Elantris. And that is okay because I enjoyed Elantris, for the most part. I did feel, as I read Mistborn, that Sanderson had taken people and places and moved them from the world of Raoden and Sarene to Scadrial – also giving them the necessary make-overs to present similar but different people. This is not a bad thing – there are a lot of fun “what ifs” out there that explore in similar ways. Readers who have only read these two books, though, might be a little concerned that Sanderson is not capable of anything truly new, even though what he does produce is detailed and well-planned.

The novel does seem, content-wise, to be a bit young adult in style. This is a difficult statement, because back-in-the-day, there were juvenile novels and then there were novels. “Young Adult” wasn’t really a genre. Most people now also have come to conclude that the majority of so-called “young adult” novels are not actually for young adults. So, what to do with this mess? To me, a lot of times it seems that if something is not full-on Grimdark, then readers feel it must be “ya.” This is a lack of nuancing among readership – and likely a problem that authors and publishers wrangle over as well. I do not read novels and say to myself, “Oh boy, this would have been better if there had been a lot more gore, explicit language, and smut!” So, if readers feel this is too clean or easy a read, well, I guess maybe I am not sure what they expect out of the novel. The thing is, the main character, Vin, is a teenager. Likely, she is between 14-17 years old. The perspectives, understandings, and worldview of the novel are going to heavily remain in that age range. Vin is just not going to view the world as a grizzled old man. In other words, well, maybe the “young adult” feel to the novel comes straightforward from the main character being a young adult; go figure.

There are themes here, too, that would be relevant to a young adult. Class struggle, the meaning of friends/family, duty to society, etc. Argument could easily be made that these themes are relevant to all people, but its rather a fact that by 30 most people are stubbonly set in their worldviews. As the storyline progresses, the main character does have a coming-of-age destiny. I think nowadays this is a type of storytelling called “progressive fantasy.” Now, if the reader does not take much of a shine to Vin, this novel will be one heckuva slog, because there is no escape from Vin here.

At times, I did not think this novel would end. I felt like there was a lot of repetitive storytelling going on for awhile, but maybe that is okay, too, because it was not horrible writing. It is a long novel. As I said above, if you want to read a Regency Romance with Allomancy, the length is not going to be a problem for you. For others, it might seem rather slow.

One of the things I did enjoy is the character Sazed and his endless supply of knowledge regarding the religions on Scadrial. It was fun because Sanderson allowed the pluralism of a planet to be understandable and valuable. These moments did not feel forced or strange and it was all done with a good reasonable tone. I liked that a lot. I could sit down and chat with Sazed.

Anyway, Mistborn was an enjoyable read. It was a bit longish and slow at times. But I cannot say that I did not enjoy my time. The magic (allomancy) is relatively interesting and fun – and much better than some magic systems I have come across. All in all this is an entertaining read, good as it is for what it is. No more, no less.

3 stars

I had “just” finished a César Aira (b. 1949) novel in late January, but here I am having read another. I finished The Literary Conference last night. I cannot help it; I find these strange little novels utterly enticing and, I guess, addictive. They are unique and fill this odd niche sort of space. I have no idea regarding the dates of publishing for this book. According to the front matter of the book in front of me, the novella was originally published in 2006 as El congreso de literatura. I am not going to lie – on Wikipedia [the Source of Truth and Wisdom] this is listed as being published in 1997. It does feel like an earlier work by Aira (I say as if I am an Aira-expert). My edition is the New Directions paperback with cover art by Rodrigo Corral, translated by Katherine Silver.

The main thing that I love about the Aira novels, and his writing style, is his ability to very subtly mix reality and fiction. I have read somewhere that he has a particular writing process involving cafés in the morning. He does not seem to agonize over his writing, either. In other words, once written he does not revise and edit endlessly. I do not think he even communicates with publishers or translators unless truly necessary. Now, I want to say here that this is definitely a privilege because most publishers and translators do not “allow” writers this kind of treatment. Overall, Aira does have a touch of elitistm about him; this does not bother me. Anyway, short-form novellas work for him. He seems slightly annoyed when having to put his writing into a category. Is it poetry? Fairy tales? Allegory? Autobiographical? It is what it is, I think, and our desperate obsession with pigeon-holing things makes readers uncomfortable when thinking about an Aira “novel.”

Until now, I have been drawing a portrait of a character who represents me in more or less fair and realistic – even if partial – terms. Until now, he could have been taken for a cold, clear-headed scientist writing a well-reasoned memoir in which even emotions take on an icy edge. . . To complete the portrait, though, we would need to paint in a background of passion, so alive and excessive that it makes the rest tremble.

It would be counterproductive to go into too many details, so I won’t. I know myself and I know that the triumph of my false modesty when I sit down to write would translate into such absurd fairy tales that I don’t know where it would end up. — pg 43

Is Aira being tongue-in-cheek? Because factually, this book’s “storyline” is a dizzying absurd tale that no, I do not think even the most seasoned reader would predict. When Aira uses the pronoun I, which I is he speaking of? The character César? The writer César? Or yet another, developing, César? Decide however you like – when I am reading Aira and have these sorts of pauses and questions, when I feel the story has moved beyond what I find clear, I just think of Aira having a coffee at a table in a café in the early morning and just letting his pen tell the story while he pays a small amount of attention to the activity on the downtown streets around him. Writing like that, an author does not really agonize over the problems of Identity and Self. So what if the plot is veering around?

Hence the subtle shift from reality to fiction – hanging around on the line of each, which apparently, runs right through the café our author is sipping beverages at. Speaking of “lines” – this is precisely the apropos moment to insert the wild side-story of the Macuto Line – a old pirate “cable” that runs around the lagoon by the Caribbean Sea that leads to treasure. No, this is not real – its part of Aira’s deadpan storytelling that makes the reader unsure what is real and historical and what is just some dip into some absurd idea he had at the café table.

Lines and translations. Those are, I think, Aira’s starting points in this little work. Maybe he is following these lines and translations through the character, César, whom the author has made into a mad scientist. What do the lines and translations symbolize or what is the author trying to show us? I feel like he is just having a fun time writing and seeing where things go.

Now, the actual storyline is a bit odd (no kidding, right?). I mean we have this mad scientist who is ALSO a literary author. He is going to a literary conference in Venezuela where they are staging one of his plays. His viewing of his own play, by the way, has a very unique feel to it and probably someone should be writing an essay just on that segment. Anyway, the mad scientist is cloning Carlos Fuentes – and his great attempt becomes a huge disaster. When this happens in this little novel, it is one of the most outrageous, but deadpan, moments I have ever read. The little novella is getting too introspective and esoteric and then suddenly – a catastrophe that you could never have guessed! Its awesome. And then when the explanation for what is happening is given, it is laugh aloud, slap your thigh, giggle for awhile legit funny.

The most quoted lines of this whole story are these; and I would never not join the crowd in once again quoting them:

Only through minimalism is it possible to achieve the asymmetry that for me is the flower of art; complications inevitably form heavy symmetries, which are vulgar and overwrought.

But my mania – to be constantly adding things, episodes, characters, paragraphs, to be constantly veering off course, branching out – is fatal. It must be due to insecurity, fear that the basics are not enough, so I have to keep adding more and more adornment until I achieve a kind of surrealist rococo, which exasperates me more than it does anybody else. – pg. 59

Yes, I am sure this is aggravating to the author Aira. It is also, probably, why he does not revise much and just sends his writing away as fast as reasonably possible without wanting to linger over it and return to it. However, this sort of “mania” as he calls it, mixed with that minimalism, is the very thing that brings so much delight and enjoyment to us, his readers.

This is not an easy novel to read. On the other hand, the prose is straightforward and uncomplicated. Aira does not sound obnoxious. He has this matter-of-fact delivery that is so engaging when contrasted with the absurd chaos his tales run to. Recommended for strong readers.

4 stars

Roadmarks by Roger Zelazny (1937 – 1995) was first published in 1979. I had heard it can be a difficult read due to its structure and style. I would agree with that, but that sort of stuff works out at least midway through the novel. The problem is that, at best, I can describe this novel as “interesting” when there is so much about it that should have developed into awesome and tremendous.

This is the second Zelazny novel that I have read, I do own several more to get through, but my interest in them is waning quite a bit. As with the previous novel that I read, This Immortal (1966), I get this feeling that Zelazny thinks he is the only chap to ever crack open a history book and he must be some kinda special because he has read some literature. To me he comes across as supercilious and obnoxious, which makes me grumpy. Do not get me wrong – I like erudite, intelligent, and clever authors. I like to read books that have some meat to them and the authors have big brain activity. I just do not want a cocky, snarky chap waving his ancient Greek quotes around at me. Nor do I need the lengthy French poems to prove he can read French poems.

Listen, I admit this is non-rational. Its just the feeling I get reading these novels. Others do feel differently, I am sure.

Problems with this novel: the novel is too short and too brisk to give the ideas and layout the room it needs to develop and breathe. Like I said above, so many neat ideas in such an unusual format that it is a supremely interesting novel. But capping at 189 pages, it does not give the reader enough of what is really, really good. It does not allow the ideas to play out. And here is the thing: every one of us has great ideas, I am certain of it. It is in the execution of the ideas that truly tests our ideas and our skill. Move that idea from theory into praxis, my friends. Half-baked potential is always going to be just that. Frankly, the ideas in this novel are so interesting that they deserve a better execution – and the readers are robbed of that.

Or maybe our author could not get the novel further………. Maybe it was 1979 and after the last segments were written the author felt “good enough” and “oh, aren’t I avant garde!” and that was it.

Dragons. I hated the whole element/theme of dragons in this. I do not want to be crass, but I found it stupid.

From what I have already said, you would think I just hated this novel. I did not. In fact, I really liked it. I loved banging down the Road in a beater truck that is also a Transformer when it gets the aid of Baudelaire’s “Alexa” device. I totally loved the books qua A.I., in other words. I also think this is one of the better time-manipulation stories because a Road with exits and on-ramps that relate, in some way, to history is fantastic. I mean, Zelazny is also brazen and bold because in chapter 2 (or one, however you like) we meet a character named Adolph looking for the time-place where “he won.” So, Zelazny shows us straight-away that he is not going to play it safe, let’s say, with his times and characters.

There are constant cigars, odd scenes in roadside hotels, and a completely strange robot that has at some point sustained damage and now spends its time as a potter in a cave. All of these elements do a great job of keeping the reader off-guard and making the storyline lively. However, some of the motives of the characters are absent or vague and underwritten. One guy is looking for his father, for no real reason. One guy is trying to “find himself.” A couple of characters are just hangers-on, somehow voluntarily tying their fate to the randomness of other characters. So, at the end, the novel has to end abruptly and without resolutions. There never was a point to it anyway. It was an exercise in ideas, not in novel-writing or character development or something.

I would certainly have loved a “sequel” or a spin-off wherein the author let us have more fun with the robots or characters from history. I think the hero-agenda that Zelazny is known for is present here, but it does not spoil anything. We can have a new hero for the sequel without taking anything away from Red Dorakeen (the main character). This is not really wishful thinking about what the novel might have been or what might have followed it. It is more so a realizing that this novel wanted me to waste my time on the Road as well. However, I am not as special, I guess, as Red Dorakeen and the purposelessness of a long road ahead with no particular destination does not appeal.

I have no idea what to say about Timyin Tin. Its like a caricature of a Shaolin monk. I find this a lot in society; it does not surprise me. But I feel Timyin Tin should have gotten more page-time or less, or another novel or just been omitted altogether. I am at a loss with this character. He needs a whole different novel series or something

Fritz Leiber’s The Big Time (1961) does it better. And Douglas Adam’s The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy (1979) does, too. No, those are not the same as Roadmarks, but I would hands down give those five stars. For all its interesting quirkiness, Roadmarks is fairly empty. Readers should read this novel so they know what the heck the rest of us are talking about. Yes, its a bit difficult. Yes, it is strange. A very interesting novel is the best I can say.

3 stars

Burglars Can’t Be Choosers by Lawrence Block (b. 1938) was first published in 1977. It is the first in his series that stars Bernie Rhodenbarr. As Block tells it, the story was written during a time when he was undergoing a rough time as a writer, etc. I think the story is that he was moving around the country from NYC to various points and finally he finished the thing in Greenville, SC. At that time, Block did not anticipate writing other Bernie Rhodenbarr stories. (I think there are now thirteen in this series.)

I bought my paperback copy used for $1 years ago. It is probably truer to say decades ago. At least 2004, let’s say. I just never felt like actually reading it before now. It has a ridiculously bright orange cover that just screams for attention, but Block is not for everyone. I think I own a stack of his novels around here somewhere; maybe having read this one will lead to more. I have read Hit Man, but I need to re-read it because I think I enjoyed it, but I cannot remember it and I would like to read the rest of that series. I am, obviously, going to live to be 450 years old.

The good: this is a feisty, fast-paced novel that can be read very quickly. There is some wit, some ribald stuff, and a dash of seriousness. Overall, this is one of Block’s lighthearted comical novels. I think I even liked how the ending played out and I found the bad guys consistent.

The bad: this novel is dated. So much of it just would not and can not take place anymore. So much of this novel becomes impossible/irrelevant with the technology we have today. I can take this displacement, but readers born 2000+ are probably going to be a wee bit frustrated with this novel.

Bernie Rhodenbarr is, for the most part, a self-made burglar. He taught himself lockpicking and basic skills for the job of burgling people. He has been to jail for his activities, though, so he does not have some magical perfect record. He does not go in for violence and destruction. He feels bad when he is outed at his residence, a NYC apartment building. He has an honest respect for the police that rather evens the playing field for Block’s storyline. He is also a Gemini, just so you know.

This novel can make a case for being a type of “locked-room” mystery. Maybe not exactly to definition, but it has elements that would fit in that category. The main point of the story is that Bernie is discovered by cops while burgling a place – and there is a dead guy in the place. Bernie is also, clearly, as dashing and handsome a fellow as any woman could want, because both of the female characters in the novel definitely throw themselves at him. Again, this is part of, I think, Block’s writing, the genre, and the expectations for airport novels in the 1970s.

The reader does not get all of Bernie’s thoughts, which is how the story gets to its conclusion. Bernie figures everything out and then lets us all know. I think the astute reader will put together who did what and when. There are not a lot of red herrings or misdirection in this one. Further, some of the elements have a “too obvious” feel to them when they happen. Nevertheless, this is a fast-paced lighter-side novel, not a dark noir. So, all of Bernie’s wit feels normal and carries along the storyline even when it does seem utterly unlikely.

For the most part the story is conversation – either between characters or the thoughts in Bernie’s head. There is not a whole lot of prose used on description or background. This keeps the 289 pages flipping quickly and the reader does not have time to forget any detail or get sidetracked. Zipping to the end there is not much substance to the novel; and there is too much, I guess, of that 70s swagger to it.

There is nothing here to hand out awards for since it is just a speedy NYC tale. Its not something, maybe, you give to your friend who only reads the purist, cleanest fiction, but everyone else should be able to handle it. Crime-light, if you will.

3 stars

I am very happily plowing through the stacks and shelves around my home lately. I have been reading, of course, heavy and tiring things like Foucault’s lectures (biopower) and a book on Mongolian warfare (invasions). Oh, also a really good book on growing and using hostas. Lately, I have been trying to read for quantity and mainly just very light, easy-breezy reads. I have not felt too much like some intricate tome of grand seriousness.

So I read the second book in Armand Rosamilia’s Dirty Deeds series. It is self-published/independently published crime fiction. I read the first book in the series in 2021 and enjoyed it. It ends on a “cliffhanger” (please read this as: a cheat to get the readers to buy the next book in the series.) Book two has been hanging around since then, so I decided to knock out this read without wasting any more time.

These books, which are just very short novels, are like reading 3 Musketeers bars. They are fun and easy to eat and absolutely nothing that one consumes all of the time. The brute fact is that these stories are easy readers, fun, and amusing. It is easy to follow the characters around, easy to suspend disbelief over the storyline or plot elements. The stories require nothing of the reader except a willingness to chuckle at stupid, but clean, humor.

I feel a bit odd trying to “review” these books because they do not lend themselves to reviews. Okay, since they are self-published/independently published there are a few typos/errors (particularly around chapter 11 where even character names are typos). Overall, this was not pervasive through the entire book. I am sure a quick edit would fix this – do people bother to have draft readers at all anymore? It does not matter. Any reader that is critiquing this book with any kind of vigor needs to stop because this is just not that sort of reading.

This is two hundred pages of easy font reading. Marisa has been kidnapped. A handful of characters converge during the main character’s efforts to find and rescue Marisa. Every element is superficial and maybe a touch stereotyped. Remember, this is to be read on hazy springtime days when the pollen has fallen two-inches thick and the chalky stuff is coating your eyebrows. No one is reading this to compare it to Graham Greene. As a reader, I do not want to plod through descriptions and backgrounds and esoteric theories. Just get in the car, stop at Taco Bell, and answer the phone when it rings. Stake out the hotel, have another coffee, argue with the FBI agent. See? Nothing needs to be overwrought or wrung out. No problem.

I honestly do not know why I like these stories. I think I like the main character and the setting. I like how the stories are amusing and almost made for lightweight TV series: like Monk or Psych or something. Its like reading popcorn. I cannot read these books consecutively, but they fit the bill when all my other reading and activities is heavy and exhausting. I’ve been nursing a bone bruise on my thumb from a punch that landed incorrectly. I have been trying to do some stuff outdoors daily to bring things up to speed for spring. I do not want to spend my time reading solely on the dispositif and its effects. I actually like Rosamilia’s writing because I feel like he knows what he wants to write and writes it. He seems comfortable not trying to be some other writer.

Anyway, I am enjoying clearing the to-be-read piles and reading adventurous fun things. Having a blast in 2023!

3 stars

At the end of February I finished Sweet Silver Blues by Glen Cook. It was first published in 1987 with cover art by Tim Hildebrandt. The novel is the first in the Garrett, P.I. series. I have read Cook before and enjoyed the read. This novel is everything one would expect in 1987, which was surprisingly comfortable and familiar to me as I read. I kept thinking to myself, “well, we will never see novels like this again” and “boy, this feels like the 80s.” I am not saying this is good or bad, I am just sharing that this is very much of its time.

True to his writing style in other novels, Cook is spare in the details. He keeps the whole story flying along by use of bantering conversation. He does not write out every step of the way for the reader – he does expect the reader to fill in the gaps and surmise what has happened in the interval. I do not feel this is really done nowadays in current fantasy. I feel like now everyone details every step, every moment, lest the reader get lost or separated from the characters as, say, they march from a pier to a tavern. On occasion, the spare writing and the action-stylings makes it difficult to follow what specifically is happening – but it does not really matter what the specifics are.

The expected 80s fantasy tropes are present and fun. Taverns and bars and a variety of fantasy species. There is a super fun thread between two characters related to health/diet and food. Its totally amusing and runs the length of the book; a subtle way to get the reader to engage with the characters without forcing them upon us.

I went to see my major right after I breakfasted, three eggs gently fried in the grease of a half pound of bacon slowly cooked to a crisp, a mountain of griddle cakes on the side, heavily buttered and buried in strawberry jam. Morley was despondent. He began holding a wake for my health. – pg. 128, chapter 27

The main character, Garrett, is a private investigator of sorts, probably a pre-cursor to the Harry Dresdens, Ishmael Jones, and Alex Verus of the now-world. Garrett is ex-military (he is no fan of the military or the never-ending war that he had to attend) and he now runs a shop in TunFaire. He drinks a lot, does odd jobs, and knows a lot of strange characters. We do not get much of Garrett’s background whatsoever, which is fine. I have gotten very weary of the long stories of a tormented background that somehow are the reason for whatever the character is currently. Garrett is awoken one morning by the Tate family, a family of gnomes. The Tates have run into a sort of legal issue with one of their members being recently deceased and having a fortune in precious metal.

Its true: an inheritance case among gnomes does not sound all that interesting. The interesting part comes from the travel-adventure and the other, criminal, parties that are interested in the fortune in question.

There are a number of parties interested, too. Most of them with criminal, malicious intent. There is also a sidestory that creeps about with Morley and his business intentions. Most of these threads, to be honest, get tangled and lost. I am not sure that the plot makes sense to the degree that it should or was written capably enough to produce the plot. At the end of the day, though, the story is a fantasy adventure and it seems like it all works out in the end.

Interestingly, there are a number of species of creatures that we do not see much in fantasy any more. For example, I do not know the last time I read a book with a centaur in it. There is also a Loghyr, which is a very strange character that in this novel is playing the rôle exactly of Nero Wolfe. Garrett might borrow a bit from Archie Goodwin whenever he meets the Loghyr for a consultation. I probably added a star to my rating just because this element of the story amuses me.

The best thing about the story, maybe, is that the vampires in it are bad. Not just bad vampires, but bad creatures. There is nothing romantic, sparkly, or intriguing about them whatsoever. Thank you, 80s.

There are enough fun things to make this series something I would continue reading. Especially since, currently, I am reading adventure, action, pulpy things. Garrett is interesting enough to read onward and the world populated by unicorns, vampires, and gnomes is different enough from the typical farm-boy progressions with elves and dwarves. I also like how the entire book is sloshed in beer, food, and mayhem. Truthfully, the banter does display a very, let us say, male perspective, so the book is probably geared toward a male audience. This sort of writing does not go over too well in 2023, I think. But the 80s were a blast and people should ingest this novel as the junk food that it is.

3 stars

Over the weekend I finished The Engines of God by Jack McDevitt (1935). The novel was first published in 1994 and is the first in the Academy series. There is a long gap between this novel and the next in the series, so I am not fully convinced this book was supposed to be a series. The second novel, Deepsix, was published in 2001 and the last few pages of The Engines of God really seem like they are finalizing and there is no further except in the imagination of readers. I read the ACE edition with cover art by Bob Eggleton.

The first few chapters were, for me, very slow-going. I had been concerned that this would be like one of those Alastair Reynolds, Greg Bear, Peter Hamilton novels. I was unsure that I currently had the stamina to read a slog. A few further chapters in, though, the book does settle into a nice mellow pacing. In fact, this novel is actually exactly what I think of when I hear the words “space opera.” There is nothing I have read that more fits that category than this novel. I think the book has suffered criticism through the years because readers have approached it wanting it to be something akin to one of those authors I mentioned above, but it just is not. That is not to say that it is pulpy or goofy.

The basic plot of the novel involves alien structures that a team of space-archeologists/anthropologists is working on placing in a historical timeline and/or researching to perhaps locate such aliens (extinct or not). At times, some of the threads of this plot were difficult for me to follow – not because, I think, that it is hard science or that it is too big a concept – honestly, I think the writing just does not sharpen the resolution enough on what is going on. Perhaps, there is not really all that much there, too. So, the concept is made to seem bigger than it is and is kept somewhat just out of focus. At least, this is how it felt to me.

In my opinion, this is not a hard-science fiction novel. This is a space opera that tries to be realistic. I remember 1994 and it is 2023 now and The Engines of God mainly takes place in the years around 2202: and I do not think McDevitt got far enough into the future with his story. That is to say, I think the dying earth concept is pretty legit (will we make it to 2202?) but I feel his cultural and sociological concepts are right back in the 1990s. Sure, some of the technology seems sufficiently advanced, I suppose. I feel those things, too, would be further along. When I am feeling rueful and cynical, I might think I am being too optimistic. I think the author just tried to write his story with a realism so that his reader would feel the characters could be taken seriously as the main focus is on the “big idea” of the alien monuments etc. and not really on the technology of the times. The failpoint is that the author made the novel realistic to 1994… not 2200. And of course, only in science fiction can readers make such epistemological complaints, I suppose.

I think the main complaint of readers who did not like this novel is they felt they could not “engage” with the characters, and that the plot and characters were not immersive. It seems to me like that is a sentiment about the readers. I, personally, had no problem whatsoever liking the characters – they are all likeable and have their plusses and minuses, just like real people. I enjoyed the characters quite a bit. I felt they were interesting folk, if a bit scattered. Also, their conversation/dialogue was on par with the expectations I have for a 1990s space opera. Some of the “immersion” factor that readers talk about escapes me. However, I think I can make some guesses about it. The Engines of God is a super chill read. It is a space opera like daytime soap operas on television with a couple of shuttles, anti-gravity discussions, and some galactic star references. Even the two or three “action scenes” in the novel are just easy reading. I feel bad, in some way; the characters are having life or death moments and I am utterly mellow. Hey, characters do die! Characters do experience stress and drama and all of the key ups and downs of novels, but its all written so relaxed that its not a big deal, somehow. Hence some readers feeling it is not immersive. However, for me, this is part of space opera: no matter what happens, the show goes on.

The nitpicking: what is the author’s fixation with Chablis? I was appalled and it was probably my biggest emotional reaction to the book, when the main character has a steak with a glass of Chablis. I just chalked it up to a weird moment. But then! Later on several characters are on the surface of a planet doing their archeological work (or whatever they think they are doing) and after hours they break out a few bottles of Chablis. The future is bleak, my friends………

Another thing, well, because this is a space opera and the plot moves on, there is an oddness to how the characters experience trauma, both physical and psychological, and then can suddenly refocus back into their work. Its jarring and strange. But at the same time, well, as a reader I certainly do not want to be dragged through some lengthy convalescing and rehabilitation scenes!

The main problem with the novel is that everything has soft edges. The overarching problematic (the aliens and their monuments) has blurry edges. The science has soft edges. The roles of the characters and their areas of expertise are all over the place and sketchy and random. In fact, its difficult to know if these members of “The Academy” are anthropologists or archeologists or engineers (and that too has so many very important subdivisions!). Its just like everyone – including all the pilots – is a generic scientist. Blurry and soft and all the inexactitude and vagueness that is kept in soap operas so that those forms of media can perpetually self-replicate as needed in any direction. However, this should not be a criticism – because if a reader is looking for a general science fiction space opera: here it is. A lot of readers who tend to write critical reviews think every reader is looking for what they are. There is always something to be remeasured with regard to expectations of novels.

In the second half of the novel, some characters are researching/exploring a planet and of course things go sideways because people do not stick to their orders, make ridiculously stupid errors, and fail to use any kind of common sense. Do not attack the characters please, because I see these errors every day from real humans. Anyway, the scenes in this segment are very action-thriller (but chill…) and actually rather amusing. Native life forms with maybe hive-mind attack the “away team” and I think any good horror/SF flick director could make a movie just out of the team on this planet and their evasion and escape. It is sad when characters do not make it, but its worth it (maybe?) when the threat bringers are so savage in their comic book styling.

Overall, a good 3.47 stars. I do not know what that means. I am giving it three stars. I will likely read more in the Academy series because if I need some chill space opera, I like knowing where to find it. Plus, I think readers are too harsh on the 1990s. Recommended for readers who want beach-read science fiction and for readers who can separate textbook from fiction.

3 stars