Who? A pop rock band from Minneapolis.

Sounds like: When Greensboro-based band Farewell posed the question “Isn’t this supposed to be fun?” in its 2007 debut, it was to a music scene ridden with fashion police, cliques and snobby attitudes toward new bands. Sing It Loud responded with a resounding “Yes!”

Sing It Loud’s tight approach to making heartfelt songs igniting that warm, fuzzy feeling in listeners’ bellies is so true to its mark that the band was signed to famed independent rock label Epitaph Records after only playing seven shows together.

Pat Brown’s upbeat, sing-song vocals help bring out Sing It Loud’s positive atmosphere, but Ben Peterson’s subtle keyboard jingling in the background gives the music its sugary presence.

Most of the band’s brand of pop rock is already stuffed with infectious choruses and melodic guitar riffs, so Peterson’s presence doesn’t appear that bold.

However, if songs such as “Don’t Save Me” didn’t have the keys ringing behind the leading melody, the band’s sound would definitely lose some of its charm.

But that asset also contributes to one of Sing It Loud’s faults. Although it does help that the keyboard work is subtle, it’s not quite as pronounced throughout their work as it could be.

The keyboard could carry some of their songs that don’t have enough “oomph” to the proper level. It’s good that the keys don’t feel tacked on, but underusing such an important instrument can be as detrimental as overdoing it.

As tightly put together as Sing It Loud is, they’re still young and seem eager to fulfill their obvious potential.

“We don’t want to be a band that lasts for only one or two albums and then drops off the face of the Earth,” says Brown on the band’s introductory MySpace message.

“We want to be able to play shows and support ourselves by doing this for the next 10 to 20 years, hopefully. We love doing this, and there’s nothing else we want to do.”

Sing It Loud is touring nationally in support of its full-length debut, “Come Around,” with well-versed pop acts Cobra Starship, Forever the Sickest Kids, and Hit the Lights.

They will all play at Tremont Music Hall in Charlotte, N.C., on Nov. 16. Three songs from Sing It Loud’s debut are streaming at its MySpace page: www.myspace.com/singitloud.

Latest release: “Come Around” — Sept. 23, 2008

Download this: “Don’t Save Me,” “We’re Not Afraid” “Marionettes,” “Best Beating Heart”

Rocks like: “Sticks and Stones” by New Found Glory, “Put Up or Shut Up” by All Time Low, “Isn’t This Supposed To Be Fun?” by Farewell

Reach Myles Griffin at savesthegreenday@gmail.com.