When I play guitar and sing, it isn’t very loud because I mix my head voice with falsetto. It’s impossible for me to know what this sounds like without recording my voice- but the only way to record is with a microphone, and it sounds exactly like I want it to. However, I’m nervous to sing around people because I don’t feel like the recording is a true representation of what someone would actually hear.

For example, usually in a pop or rock chorus the singer will sound like they’re yelling or shouting, and when I record with my mouth closer to the mic and the guitar farther away, I can replicate that sound and it’s as powerful as the original. But I know that I’m manipulating my falsetto and pretending that I’m yelling, when it’s actually no louder than speech level singing.

I did find this article about microphones, but I’ve never heard this information from any YouTube videos or singing websites. It says:

When you listen to the vocal in a sound recording, you don’t actually hear the singer. Usually what you hear is a loudspeaker illusion of the vocal, one so compelling that you think you know the voice of your favorite singers. But it’s likely that they would sound very different singing to you in your living room or in your car. In fact, they might sound wrong. The discipline of pop music production includes the creation of sounds that are better than those in real life— exaggerated, unmistakable, and often unforgettable. And although that’s true for all the members of a band, the vocalists get special attention.

I understand that pop and rock singers must use microphones to be heard, and that effects are added to live shows. I also understand that a microphone automatically makes our voices much louder and fuller. What I’m having trouble understanding is what a few friends in a singer’s living room would hear if they sing without a microphone- using the same techniques they use to practice and record.

Would it sound weak and would their “shouts” sound artificial?

Would their voices project towards their audience better than in their own ears, so that the audience hears the same sounds that a recording in a smartphone would provide?

Or should singers sacrifice range and “emotion” for volume if they don’t have access to a microphone.

Or maybe I have it all wrong and don’t make any sense lol.

Here is an example of Bruno Mars singing Count on Me in front of an audience without a microphone. He doesn’t sing the bridge, and I think the reason why is because he traded range for volume. Not that he couldn’t hit that C5 (you’ll always have my shoulder when you cryyyyy) with volume, but that it would come out like a heavy metal scream instead of a controlled, soft rasp. Hopefully that makes sense.

By microphone, I basically mean a recording device that would be used for practice. Does the conversion of natural(?) sound to electronical allow for unconventional singing techniques that would sound “wrong” if sung in a completely acoustic setting?

The proximity of a mic to a singer will have a profound difference in the sound captured. Good vocalists use this phenomenon a lot - you'll see someone holding a mic at various distances from the mouth - to vary volume and to an extent tone. Add that to the almost infinite variation of tone and volume naturally, and there's a heck of a range.

On a personal note, I like my mic's volume to be fairly high. This is because I'm usually playing an instrument at the same time, and the mic's on a stand, so I have to move to and from the mic to get effects I want. And, yes, it's switched off when I'm not singing!

Listening to one's own voice singing in a room will sound 'nothing like you'. One of the reasons is that we partially hear our own voice through sympathetic vibrations of the bones in our head. That's one of the reasons most of us are surprised (pleasantly or not...) when we first hear our own recorded voice.

One way to alleviate the problem is to use a mic away from the singer, so he's not singing directly into it, or anywhere near. That eliminates the proximity effect. But at the same time, it includes any coloration the room may give - soft furnishings, curtains will make it sound quite different from no carpet, stark walls and a couple of wooden chairs.

Another factor is that during recording in a studio, a myriad of effects is available to improve and/or change the singer's voice. Hope this answers at least part of your question.

answered Aug 22, 2018 at 8:00

TimTim

195k1818 gold badges193193 silver badges482482 bronze badges

For a historical perspective:

Before the use of vocal microphones, singers needed to be heard , unaided, at the back of the hall. In classical music, for example, the development of opera-singing technique was partly due to the need to be heard over progressively larger and louder orchestras and choirs! In popular music, too, singers needed a very loud style to be heard over a band.

When sound started to be broadcast over radio and recorded, microphones allowed singers to be heard even when singing quietly, and crooning developed, as popularised by singers like Bing Crosby. This allowed singers to use a much more personal, intimate style that suited more sentimental music, even when backed by a full orchestra or band.

Of course, a microphone doesn't require such a style; by adjusting placement and amplification, it can still be used with louder, more forceful singing too. So we now have a wide range of singing styles and levels, all suitable for concerts and broadcasting and recording.

As for what a singer would sound like without amplification, it depends. If they kept the amplified backing, but still sang in an intimate style, then they probably wouldn't be heard over it. However, in a relatively small space, if the backing was quieter and ‘unplugged’ to suit the song, it could still work very well. Alternatively, the singer could sing louder to be heard over the backing — how this sounded would depend upon how much their singing changed as a result (which would in turn depend upon how much louder they needed to be, the style of music, their ability and technique, &c), so it's hard to generalise. Certainly few singers could maintain an intimate, gentle style while singing very loudly — though some could approximate it better than others.

And if you want to find out what you sound like, I'd suggest getting a ‘distant’ mic (capacitor/condenser, or even just a smartphone), setting it up across the room, recording yourself singing and playing, and then listening to the results. (Yes, it's always painful listening to yourself, but it's the only way!)

answered Feb 5, 2019 at 18:03

giddsgidds

1,62788 silver badges1111 bronze badges