Citation preview

Maps, ﬁgures and tables

Maps

5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 6.1 6.2 6.3

The district of ‘Ajlun in regional context The district of ‘Ajlun: topography and nahiyes Villages of the district of ‘Ajlun Land use Total number of houses Average value of houses in village Houses: total taxable value Registration of villages Land values Type of landholding

56 58 59 60 61 62 63 69 76 78

Colour plates 9.1 Hawwara: allotment of ﬁelds to shareholding sections in 1933 1o.1 Kufr ‘Awan: allotment of ﬁelds to shareholding sections in 1939 Figures

6.1 7.1 9.1 9.2 9.3 9.4 9.5 10.1 10.2 10.3 10.4 10.5 10.6 11.1 11.2 11.3 11.4 11.5

Arabic document concerning the lands of the village of Makhraba Musha‘ landholdings of the Sharaida family in Tibna, 1883 Bait Ra’s, households of Hasan al-Sabbah’s family and aﬃnes in 1910 Bait Ra’s, households of the ‘Uwaida family and aﬃnes in 1910 Hawwara, genealogy of the Gharaiba families with shares in 1895 and 1933 Hawwara, holdings of the Abu Kirsanna family, 1876–95 Hawwara, ﬁeld allotment of the Gharaiba half in 1895 Kufr ‘Awan, households of families 28 and 29 in 1910 Kufr ‘Awan, households of family-2 in 1910 Kufr ‘Awan, households of family-6 in 1910 Kufr ‘Awan, sequence of inheritance of one share in family-10, 1884–1931 Kufr ‘Awan, households of families 9 and 10 in 1910 Kufr ‘Awan, shares of family-10 in 1939, showing holdings of women Tannash family holdings in 1933 Jammal family holdings in 1933 Marriage relations of the Abu Tair family Shar‘ family holdings in 1933 Gharaiba intermarriages in the upper generation viii

74 92 120 121 133 134 146 160 162 169 170 171 172 189 192 195 198 203

11.6 11.7 12.1 12.2 12.3 12.4 12.5 12.6

Ahmad ‘Abid-Rabbuh’s descendants and their shares in 1933 Holdings of ‘Abdul-Ghani al-Shahada’s descendants in 1933 Family links of Husna Salih Hamdan Marriage links of Ahmad Khalifa Sa‘d al-Ahmad Family links of Ni‘ma Muhammad Mahmud al-‘Abid The marriages of Ibrahim Husain ‘Abdul-Rahman The children of Sheikh ‘Awad Family links of Yumna Mustafa Nimr al-Muﬂih

205 207 211 215 218 221 225 229

Tables

9.1 9.2 9.3 10.1 10.2

Bait Ra’s, complete holdings 1880, 1895 and 1921 Bait Ra’s, landholdings by families 1880, 1895 and 1921 Hawwara, landholdings in 1876 and their history to 1895 Kufr ‘Awan, properties of musha‘ shareholders in 1884 Khanzira, share per person and per holding in 1884

ix

112 124 130 157 179

Note on transliteration, datation and abbreviation

Transliteration

When citing from documents and archival sources, transcription follows the language of the source: Arabic transcription when from text in Arabic and modern Turkish forms when from Ottoman Turkish. As a result, two spellings may be found in the text for technical terms; both are given in the relevant entries of the index. Terms originally Arabic or Ottoman Turkish but naturalized in English are spelt as in the Oxford English Dictionary, with the exception of eﬀendi, spelt throughout as efendi. Choices have had to be made when discussing terms in the text and not citing directly from documents. In general, in passages about the villages, terms that are Arabic in origin and meaningful also to the villagers are spelt in Arabic transcription; terms that are Turkish in origin are spelt as Turkish. Likewise in Chapter 7 where a document translated from Arabic into Turkish is cited, Arabic words not common in Ottoman Turkish are transliterated as Arabic in quotation marks. In single transliterated words, neither the Arabic nor the Turkish plurals are used, but an s as in the English plural is added to the transliterated word. In Part three the abbreviation q, standing for qirat/carat, is also used. In Parts one and two Arabic names follow the ordinary conventions whereby a personal name is followed by a father’s and grandfather’s personal names, with or without the indication ibn, ‘son of’. In Part three following village usage the deﬁnite article is often employed with an ascendant’s name, e.g. Ahmad al-Mustafa. Although marks indicating vowel length are not generally given, where there is a danger of confusion between two names, long marks are used. Datation

In this study three calendar systems appear: the Gregorian (common Christian era), the hijri (AH), and the Ottoman ﬁnancial (mali) calendar (AM). The Ottoman ﬁnancial calendar was a solar system beginning on 13 March of the Gregorian calendar. The common Christian era is used as a chronological base. According to the datation of the source, either the hijri (AH) or the Ottoman mali (AM) date is given; and the spelling of the months depends on the language of the source, Turkish or Arabic. Abbreviation

The following Turkish conventional abbreviations for the hijri months are used in footnotes: M Muharrem/Muharram x

S Ra R Ca C B Ş N L Za Z

Sefer/Safar Rebiyülevvel/Rabi‘ al-awwal Rebiyülahir/Rabi‘ al-akhir Cemaziyelevvel/Jumada ’l-awwal Cemaziyelahir/Jumada ’l-akhir Recep/Rajab Şaban/Sha‘ban Ramazan/Ramadan Şevval/Shawwal Zilkade/Dhu ’l-Qa‘da Zilhicce/Dhu ’l-Hijja

Abbreviated codes are utilized for archival and manuscript sources in the footnotes; these are explained in the bibliographical sections on archival and manuscript sources. Lastly, the following abbreviations are occasionally employed for kin relations: F (father), M (mother), B (brother), Z (sister), H (husband), W (wife), S (son) and D (daughter). For the conventions used in genealogical ﬁgures see Laslett (ed.), Household and Family in Past Time (1972), pp. 41–2.

xi

Acknowledgements

We have accumulated many debts during the research and writing of this book. The study was made possible by research aﬃliation with the Institute of Archaeology and Anthropology of Yarmouk University, Jordan, 1989–92. The Irbid and Amman Department of Lands and Surveys, the Irbid Civil Court, Civil Registry and Tax Department, the Yarmouk University Research Centre, and the Jordan University Library Special Collections all shared their documents with us. The municipal authorities of the villages of Bait Ra’s, Hawwara, Kufr ‘Awan and Ashraﬁya welcomed us, as did many of the village residents. Special thanks are due to Ghassan al-Sharaida, Hasan ‘Ababna, Husam ‘Azar, Hala Hijazain, Sari Fanik and Kamil Nasrawi of the DLS; to Lucine Taminian, ‘Adil al-Zu‘bi, Ahmad Jaradat, and Maisun and Maisara al-Zu‘bi (of Sirin) in Irbid; to academic colleagues Mu‘awiya Ibrahim, ‘Adnan al-Bakhit, Naufan al-Hamoud, Cherie Lenzen, Seteney Shami, Hind Abu ’l-Sha‘r and Ayman al-Sharayda; and to all those of the villages of Tibna, al-Taiba, Hawwara, Bait Ra’s, Kufr ‘Awan and Ashraﬁya who shared their memories with us. Some of these men and women are named in Chapters 9–12. Special thanks are due to Umm Jamal and the late Abu Jamal Muhammad Falih Ibrahim Khashashna, Umm Hashim and the late Abu Hashim Budaiwi Mustafa Mufaddi Gharaiba, and ‘Abd al-Haﬁz Hamid Musa Salama Shatnawi. We ask their forgiveness for any errors they may ﬁnd in our rendition of their personal, family and village histories. This work is but our interpretation; the history belongs to them. In Damascus special thanks are due to Abdul-Karim Rafeq who ﬁrst suggested work on the fetwas of the Damascus muftis in the Zahiriya Collection; to academic colleagues Faisal ‘Abdullah, Khairiya Qasimiya and the late Nazim Kallas; to Amira Burniya and successive directors of the Asad Library; and to the Syriac Catholic Bishopric for its generous reception. In Istanbul work was possible thanks to the staﬀ of the Prime Ministry Archives and of the Millet, Bayezit and Süleymaniye Libraries, and to the hospitality of the American and Swedish Research Centres. Special thanks to Necati Aktaş for his gracious welcome. In Beirut thanks are due to colleagues in the History Department and the Library staﬀ of the American University of Beirut, and to Akram Jamal al-Din for help with page layout. Lastly, thanks to Ottomanists who suﬀered our intrusion: Halil Sahilloğlu, Marc Aymes, Laurent Mignon, Suraiya Faroqhi, Colin Imber, and most particularly Engin Akarlı. Anne LeFur drew the maps in Paris, Michael Howley edited the prose in New xii

York, and in London Neslihan Abdurrazak corrected our transcription of Turkish, and Ewan Smith designed and set the book. Financial support came from many sources: the Wenner Gren Foundation (1989), UCLA Kerr Fellowship (1989–90), the Social Science Research Council (1990–91), the Centre d’Etudes et de Recherches sur le Moyen Orient Contemporain (1992), the British Institute of Archaeology and History (1992–93), the Wissenschaftskolleg zu Berlin (1995–96), the Council of American Overseas Research Centres (1996–97), the British Academy (2000–2002), the London School of Economics and the American University of Beirut. Finally, thanks to Jack Goody for his practical help and his unﬂagging intellectual curiosity about property.

xiii

1 | Introduction

Two documents

On 11 March 1882 the court of ﬁrst instance in the town of Irbid, the headquarters of the district of ‘Ajlun, sent two notices to the land registry in the same town. The ﬁrst was a copy of the instruction to the district governor’s oﬃce and the second a notice to the land registry concerning the title deeds for the disputed land.1 The ﬁrst notice in Arabic read: To the honourable Oﬃce of the Governorate of ‘Ajlun District: Given that it has been judged in favour of sheikh Na’il al-Gharaiba, recognized by this court as legal representative of Yusuf al-Suwaidan of the people of Hawwara, concerning the validity of the ﬁrst transfer made by his above-mentioned client to Qasim al-Sabbah and Musa al-Khlaif, henceforth Muhammad al-Hasan, Mustafa al-‘Abdul-Qadir, Ahmad al-Muhsin, Hasan al-‘Isa, Isma‘il al-‘Abdul-Hadi and Ahmad al-Mustafa, all of the above-mentioned village, are to be notiﬁed that they must give up the share and a half of land (al-rub‘a wa-nisf ard) which the above-mentioned sheikh Na’il established as belonging to his client and concerning which he obtained a written statement from this court. To this eﬀect the defendants have been denied their claim and they have been notiﬁed of this since they are refusing to hand over the above-mentioned share and a half of land to Qasim al-Sabbah and Musa al-Khlaif along with the title deeds, which they assert to be valid. Legal costs amounting to 206 ghurush and half of the miri tax due on the land will be collected from the defendants, to be delivered to the account of the court. This decision is to be enforced according to due procedure. Court of First Instance, ‘Ajlun, dated 27 Shubat 1297AM [11 March 1882].

The second notice in Turkish read: Latterly because on 21 Rebiyülahir 1299AH the case in the court of ﬁrst instance was judged in favour of Qasim, ‘Ali, ‘Alaiyan and Khalaf sons of Muhammad al-Sabbah and Musa ibn Khlaif and his son ‘Ali and because the status of joint holder (halit ve şerik) was not accepted as valid, the land registry (tapu oﬃce) is ordered to register an entry in the names of the purchasers. In accordance with the instruction given by the court of ﬁrst instance on 27 Şubat 1297 number 225 corresponding to the document written by the court dated 21 Rebiyülahir 1299, since title deeds had been given to the ﬁrst parties in the transfer on the grounds of their being halit ve şerik, and because they refuse to hand over the documents, according to the above-mentioned instruction, the above-mentioned title deeds no longer have any legal validity. 1

Introduction | 1

Disputes over property are the bread and butter of courts and lawyers, banal yet central to social relations. The two short notices concerning the judgment of this case reveal certain of the terms of ownership of land in late Ottoman southern Syria. They may thus serve to introduce the conceptual and historical issues explored in this book. Persons and things

Anthropological analyses have long considered property as a social relation between persons concerning material or immaterial ‘things’.2 How then are the persons and the objects in the social relationship of ownership deﬁned in the notices above? The persons are of two kinds: institutional personae and individual persons. Anthropology generally focuses on the second, but let us begin with the ﬁrst. Central to the making of property here are the court, the tapu oﬃce, and the governor’s oﬃce above them. The court issues the basic notice of the judgment in Arabic, dated in the Ottoman ﬁnancial calendar, whereas the notice sent to the tapu oﬃce is in Turkish with the date of the decision in the hijri calendar. The institutional personae have deﬁned responsibilities: the court to judge by the law on the challenge mounted against the original sale, the tapu oﬃce to amend the title registers and issue new deeds accordingly, and the governor’s oﬃce to oversee implementation of the judgment, all the more so as the challengers to the sale were refusing to hand over the deeds they had received for the land. The language of the court is formal and technical in both Ottoman Turkish and Arabic, the latter the mother tongue of the villagers. The double forms of dating reﬂect the court’s character as part of Ottoman government as well as its august Islamic genealogy. Before the institutional personae framing property relations stand the individual parties to the dispute. Although all are men from the same village, they have diﬀerent statuses in the court case. The original owner of the 1½ shares, Yusuf al-Suwaidan, appears in the register but not in the court where he is represented by sheikh Na’il al-Gharaiba. Sheikh Na’il is the only individual granted an honoriﬁc designation, a political distinction coherent with his capacity to act for another villager before the court. Lastly, those to whom Yusuf al-Suwaidan is judged to have transferred the land appear formally as two individuals; the notice to the registry, however, reveals that they stand for other kin in the transaction, one brother for four brothers and a father for himself and his son. The dispute did not question the status of Yusuf al-Suwaidan as owner nor his power to transfer his land. Rather the six challengers argued, and their argument was at ﬁrst accepted by the registry, that they had suﬃcient common interest in the land to contest its alienation to a third party. In the end, their claim to a right to challenge the transfer was overridden by the judgment of the court. On what basis was the judgment made? Essentially, the deﬁnition of common interest, indicated by the term halit ve şerik, had been narrowed to co-ownership. We return to this below. 2

3

Introduction

Legal doctrine here frames property: it deﬁnes the legal persons, institutional and individual, and their powers with regard to the objects it recognizes. Hence a ﬁrst task in our study is to sketch the terms of the law. This requires reading legal concepts, such as tapu and halit ve şerik, from inside a legal tradition evolving over time. In the case of late Ottoman law it proved diﬃcult to rely solely on secondary legal scholarship. In spite of diﬀerences in interpretation, European scholarship on the 1858 Land Code generally treated the law as bearing a unitary meaning and intent. A ﬁrst school of thought considered the Code an expression of the central state’s attempt to regain control over the administration of land lost from the seventeenth century onwards.3 Revisionist historiography responded by interpreting the Code as the culminating legal expression of the development of eﬀectively private rights to land over the same two centuries.4 But neither of these schools undertook detailed reading of the history of the terms of the Code.5 With regard to the administration of the Code, European scholarship of an earlier generation, guided by Eurocentric Mandate or Zionist readings of Ottoman reform, judged it a failure compared to Western property modernization.6 Turkish scholars have made a greater contribution, but for two reasons their readings of the Land Code ignored, more than built upon, the work of jurists of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.7 Turkish historical scholarship had two core foci, the classical Ottoman regime and the Tanzimat reforms of the later nineteenth century, but it left the seventeenth-, eighteenth- and even early nineteenth-century background to Tanzimat legal reform obscure.8 The Republican secularism of Turkish scholars led them to neglect debates of Islamic jurists in their reading of Ottoman law.9 Thus, in a manner that might otherwise appear surprising, the present account of late Ottoman property relations will begin with a sketch of the development of legal doctrine long before the nineteenth century. But let us return to the case at hand. If the persons engaged in the social relations of ownership are clear enough, how was the object of right described in the notices? The ‘thing’ owned appears to be 1½ shares of the land of the village of Hawwara: a fraction of all the lands of the village, not a plot delimited by four borders in the manner of Islamic legal tradition nor a plot numbered with reference to a map. In the tapu register of 1876 the borders are given for three great blocks of land of the village each of which is divided into 46½ shares. In fact the regulations for registration of land nowhere prescribed such a form of description. Thus, although not in contradiction with the terms of the law, the description of the object of right was not simply dictated by the law. How then can we explain it? The answer to that question will be developed in Part two of this book which examines the political administration of property, notably, the negotiation of the terms of registration of land between the oﬃcers of the administration and regional leaders. This negotiation occurred at the level of the district, as well as in every village. Hawwara was the third village of the district to undergo land registration

Introduction | 1

but the ﬁrst where property was represented as shares in village land. In the two villages registered before Hawwara descriptions of the borders of the separate plots of land of each owner had been entered in the register. The apparent innovation, which was thereafter widely adopted across the district, resulted from a kind of political settlement. In this, oﬃcers of the state met regional and village leaders to negotiate the representation of rights in land in accordance with the law, the techniques of registration, the character of tax accounting, and the social organization of production on the ground. Individual property rights were constructed at the intersection of law, administration and production. The three parts of this book consider these in turn. With regard to law, the nineteenth-century Tanzimat reforms are not a failed attempt at Western legal modernization. Nor are they simply a by-product of the imposition of a world market. Rather the reforms, transforming legal vocabularies from within Ottoman tradition, sought to respond to the competitive world system.10 Law is constructive; doctrine matters. But following Wittgenstein, there is no straightforwardly meaningful rule; meaning arises from interpretation. In the nineteenth century, interpretation was not an eﬀect of pure doctrine but of an increasingly powerful administration of interpretation. Thus, the antinomy between law and governmentality sketched by Foucault is best taken as rhetorical, resting on an elegant but excessively narrow vision of law as God’s and the Prince’s command.11 Law did not give way to specialized techniques of government in the nineteenth century; rather, it became increasingly bound up with administrative formalization. In this study we examine the forms of registration and cross-referencing of persons and objects introduced by the Tanzimat reforms. Such processes of registration can be interpreted as part of systems of power-knowledge in the manner sketched by Foucault and developed subsequently in studies of ‘governmentality’. But we go beyond ‘discourse’ to consider the political context of the production of entries in particular registers and the consequences of registration for the social agents appearing in the grids. Such analysis works against the ‘dissolution of the subject’ characteristic of discursive analyses of power-knowledge. Government registers were forms ﬁlled out by identiﬁable agents, institutional and political, acting at two administrative levels: the district and the village. The methodology adopted here moves back and forth: from a reading of the systems of registration to a reconstruction of relations captured by that lens. Thus, through the ﬁlter of the register something of the ‘local knowledge’ concerning right-holders in agricultural production can be discerned. As this implies, the processes of agricultural work, domestic labour and childbearing entail a density of social knowledge and exchange distinct from their partial representation in the registers. Hence, in Part three, diﬀerent kinds of sources are drawn upon to portray the interaction of village men and women with state administration and the character of property relations in particular villages and in individual families. And so, before we leave the case with which this chapter opened, let us brieﬂy place the parties to the dispute in the context of Hawwara’s political economy. 4

5

Introduction

The case occurred some ﬁve years after the land of Hawwara had ﬁrst been registered in November 1876 in accordance with legislation promulgated almost two decades earlier. Prior to registration in 1876 the government had apparently not recorded individual rights in Hawwara. This did not mean that land was not highly valued in this fertile wheat-producing part of the Hauran plain. On the contrary, there is ample evidence of contest over right in the case of Hawwara to which we shall return in Chapters 6 and 9. Because of this conﬂict, as well as the absence of records of tax paid by individuals, those awarded rights paid the higher bedel-i misl rates for title. The village authorities of Hawwara noted at the time of registration in November 1876: ‘In this register are written the names of 31 individuals, farmers of long standing among whom cultivation has always been joint (müşterek); the distribution has been made justly.’12 The men of the village council of Hawwara followed the law by designating individuals as holders of property right, neither the village nor any other corporate body of its residents being permitted by law to be registered as owner of such right.13 They also respected the law in their description of the object of right.14 But this legal individuation of right did not sweep away all the practices of joint cultivation alluded to in the statement by the village council members. In the 1876 registration of Hawwara, 31 individual owners held a total of 46½ shares in the three great blocks of Hawwara’s village lands named and deﬁned by their borders and size in dönüms. To understand the court case we need to see how this representation of ownership translated into patterns of cultivation on the ground. In other words, what kind of claim was being advanced, ﬁrst accepted by the tapu oﬃcials and then rejected in court, under the terms halit ve şerik? We do not know how land was laid out in 1876 at the initial tapu registration, let alone in 1882 at the time of the court case. It is only with the tax survey of 1895 (and again much later with the 1933 cadastral registration) that documentary evidence of the layout of ﬁelds is available. Yet, combining the evidence of the 1895 tax register with accounts of practice in the years following the First World War, we can extract the salient characteristics of Hawwara’s farming system. First, the distribution was one of considerable complexity with each holder having many individual parcels of land, the aim being to equalize qualities of land synchronically (see Chapter 9). Second, all the land save the village site was allocated to holders; there were no common pastures, and ﬂocks were let on the ﬁelds after harvest, a practice that necessitated tight collective discipline at the level of sub-blocks concerning type of crop and timing of planting and harvesting. Third, the coordination of this discipline and of a triennial pattern of crop rotation occurred at the level of the sub-holding units. If there was diachronic redistribution of plots, it also occurred at this level of collective holding, not at the level of the village as a whole except after long intervals (15–30 years). And fourth, although the major sub-sections of shareholding groups often comprised genealogically unrelated families, this unit of everyday coordination was important in agriculture. To return to the sale by Yusuf Suwaidan, the legal contest concerned an

Introduction | 1

alienation of right to persons who were resident in the village but had come in as associates of Na’il Gharaiba. Those who opposed the transfer were led by ﬁgures from the two major families of the village, Muhammad al-Hasan al-Shatnawi and Mustafa ‘Abdul-Qadir Abu Kirsanna.15 Cultivation arrangements for Yusuf Suwaidan’s land were probably also at issue.16 The case was fought not on grounds of the purchasers being outsiders but in terms of a violation of the principle of common interest. The common interest of the cultivators corresponded to the etymological meaning of the terms under which they appealed, halit ve şerik or khalit washarik in the Arabic of the villagers.17 The basic linguistic distinction between khalit and sharik is that khalit refers to a property which began as individual but was combined (for example, sheep in a ﬂock) as opposed to a notionally single property or interest held jointly and shared between persons (each a sharik in a joint property).18 Thus the cultivators presented themselves as khalit, their plots interlaced with or adjoining the land of Yusuf Suwaidan, and sharik, members of a co-cultivating association. It was not, however, the etymological sense of the words but their changed juristic interpretation that was to prove decisive.19 The court apparently followed the contemporary interpretation of the terms in the Land Code. We do not have a full record of the legal decision, but the published legal interpretations of the phrase halit ve şerik, which occurs once in the Land Code in clause 41, may give some indication of why the claimants lost the case. Clause 41 concerns miri land but the commentaries on the Code all cite as deﬁnitions for the terms those given in the Mecelle with reference to mülk property.20 The transposition of deﬁnitions from mülk to miri land in this manner was problematical, marking a break from Ottoman tradition where the distinction between the principles governing miri or ‘state’ land as opposed to mülk or private land was clear.21 But all commentators cite the Mecelle where the deﬁnition of halit is one sharing a common servitude, such as a road or irrigation channel, and şerik, a co-sharer in a holding of property.22 The commentators on the Land Code render the term halit entirely dependent on co-ownership and without independent force.23 And so, although the cultivators unquestionably shared servitudes, because they were not registered as co-owners with the seller in the tapu records, their claim challenging the transfer failed. A court case is never just an academic reading of the text of law. In the case in question, the ‘lawyer’ (wakil) for the winning party, Na’il Gharaiba, would have been well equipped to persuade the members of the court: the deputy governor, two prominent men of the region (one a rural leader of the ‘Azzam family of the Wustiya sub-district and the other from a prominent Christian family of al-Husn village involved in regional ﬁnance) and a scribe. Na’il Gharaiba appears to have acted at the level of several villages, perhaps as the semi-formal government agent for tax aﬀairs of the village or sub-district, a function that in earlier decades could give a man the title of sheikh.24 He had close relations with ﬁgures in the ﬁnance administration. That Na’il Gharaiba acted as legal agent in this case reveals the exemplary, educative function of the district court 6

of ﬁrst instance.25 Only a few years after tapu registration, the villagers became familiar – not always successfully – with the institutions of the new legal order. That Na’il was an accomplished performer in this system surely escaped no one; and that he had a particular interest in assuring the sale by Yusuf Suwaidan to the Sabbah, a family allied to his own as putative agnates, provoked vehement resistance by men cultivating the land. Property in land is constructed at the articulation of three moments: the law as text and interpretive tradition; the administration of law by government institutions wherein a regional elite comes together with government employees appointed from above; and lastly, the translation and negotiation of legal categories by actors in productive systems where right is generated, in part, by forces independent of the ﬁrst two moments. While the letter of the law may be common to all the empire, administration entails a regional realization of models of governance. And the recasting of property in land occurred at yet a smaller scale – in each and every village. In order to understand the ‘translation’ so eﬀected, we need to consider not only the techniques of registration and the character of local administration but also how the registration related to the genesis of right from below. The administration could not impose law on the village as if the latter were a tabula rasa. Agriculture entailed social relations of production in the course of which claims to rights in objects and labour were recognized by actors of the locality. The administration thus negotiated the imposition of its new terms upon the living and inherited grid of claims established in production. This process led to divergent outcomes in the diﬀerent systems of village social production. §

7

Introduction

This introduction has given a brief sketch of the central themes and argument of our study; in later chapters we shall consider in turn the three moments of property: law, administration and production. Part one of the book sketches a genealogy of the nineteenth-century law governing miri land. This genealogy covers a long period of time: Chapter 2 the sixteenth century, Chapter 3 the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and Chapter 4 the nineteenth century. This historical depth is required both to read the legal changes of the nineteenth century as internal to the juridical tradition and to understand how Ottoman Hanaﬁ legal tradition responded to economic change. Against this background of the legal context, Part two documents nineteenthcentury political administration in one district of the empire. This limited compass is methodologically important since the eﬀects of reform, which itself evolved over the course of the nineteenth century, diﬀered according to the timing of its introduction and to the political economic relations obtaining in particular regions. The district of ‘Ajlun formed part of the Ottoman province of Suriye, the chef-lieu of which was Damascus; since the Mandate partition of the Near East in 1922, it has formed part of (Trans)Jordan. The analysis of Part two highlights the centrality of political administration in the reworking of property relations, but it

Introduction | 1

does so without dissolving the agency of regional elites. Negotiation, translation and conﬂict, not simply imposition, marked the process of governmental change. The regional elites mediated the demands of central government with the social dynamics of agricultural production and village reproduction, the third moment of property in our analysis. Part three documents in detail the registration of property in four villages. The four villages belong to two distinct systems of production: the Haurani plain where market-oriented production of wheat and lentils dominated village economies, and the Kura foothills, where village agricultural production was only partially integrated into the market, and livestock provided the major source of cash income. In Part three systematic diﬀerences in the forms of actual right are seen to correspond to diﬀerences in the two systems of production. Lastly, micro-level analysis of household organization reveals how the object of property, land, was eﬀectively a diﬀerent ‘thing’ in the two village systems, and hence why, the law notwithstanding, women came to accede to such property in one system whereas they were almost entirely excluded in the other.

8

2 | Jurisprudential debate in the sixteenth century

The practices of Ottoman administration were set down from the ﬁfteenth century in texts of administrative law, kanuns and kanunnames, but it was only in the sixteenth century that the technical terms of land tax administration were subject to systematic interpretation and critique by the developed tradition of Islamic jurisprudence (ﬁqh).1 This juridical analysis of administrative terms went beyond an instrumental legitimation of administrative (the sultan’s) law to form an integrated system of law administered by the Islamic courts of the empire. And in the course of this, jurists engaged in sustained debate concerning the central legal concepts, notably the status of land and payments made by the cultivator, and the legal personality of the administrator and cultivator. The development of an integrated system of land tax law reﬂected two aspects of the institutionalization of Islamic learning and jurisprudence under the Ottomans: oﬃcial adoption of a single law school, the Hanaﬁ, and government appointment of teachers, muftis and judges not only in the capital but also in lower administrative jurisdictions.2 Within this institutional structure the sheikhul-Islam could sanction rules emanating from administrative law and could select interpretations within Islamic jurisprudence.3 As the Ottomans oﬃcially adopted Hanaﬁ jurisprudence, jurists were to build upon the existing corpus of Hanaﬁ doctrine concerning rights in land. This was particularly true in Syria and Egypt where Ottoman supplanted Mamluk rule only in 1516–17. In the late ﬁfteenth century, Cairo, not Istanbul, had been the intellectual centre of Hanaﬁ jurisprudence; thus, Ahmed Şemseddin Güranî, sheikh-ul-Islam between 1480–88, had in his youth studied in Cairo.4 From the late fourteenth century Hanaﬁ jurists had recast the theoretical basis of property in land and thereby broken with earlier doctrine. A word is in order concerning the earlier history of doctrine since some familiarity with its terms will be required to follow Ottoman debates on the nature of property in land. Classical Hanaﬁ doctrine on the character of property in land

Classical Hanaﬁ doctrine considered ownership of land to derive from the imam’s recognition of possession by individuals at the time of the Islamic conquest and from his allocation of abandoned or uncultivated land to Muslim supporters; in return individual owners owed tax to the treasury.5 At the Muslim conquest the personal religious status under which owners entered the dominion of Islam deﬁned the nature of tax obligation on their landed property: ‘ushr (the tithe) being restricted to Muslims and the much higher kharaj the rule for nonMuslims with treaty relations. Thereafter, however, the tax status of kharaj land 11

Part one | 2

remained ﬁxed regardless of change in the religious status of its owner arising from sale of the land or conversion of its owner to Islam. Jurists justiﬁed this principle, which served to divide the religious status of the owner from the tax status of the land, in terms of the need to preserve revenue.6 The basic understanding that ownership was individual was likewise reﬂected in a principle governing litigation over ownership, whereby the person with ‘a hand on the property’ (wad‘ al-yad), i.e. in possession, was presumed owner, the onus being on the claimant to disprove that presumption. Unlike other schools of law, classical Hanaﬁ doctrine, while not excluding the possibility of the ruler/imam designating conquered land as waqf (mortmain) or as property of the treasury, treated such a possibility as exceptional and anything but the rule for territory conquered.7 Hanaﬁ doctrine under the Mamluks

The new doctrine articulated in the ﬁfteenth century viewed ownership of agricultural land not as arising from possession by individuals but as vested in the treasury/imam and delegated in diﬀerent forms to intermediaries and cultivators. Kamal al-Din Muhammad, known as Ibn Humam (d. 1457), is recognized by Hanaﬁ tradition as having ﬁrst articulated the doctrine concerning land ownership adopted by subsequent jurists of the school.8 Ibn Humam developed an historical argument to explain a transition of such magnitude: as a result of the successive deaths of its proprietors the land of Egypt had passed entirely to the state treasury.9 The doctrine of escheat to the treasury was ancient, but its extension to all the lands of the Mamluk domains in justiﬁcation of treasury ownership of land marked a radical departure from the doctrine of earlier centuries.10 The earlier doctrine was not formally rejected nor was it forgotten; rather, history – in the form of the gradual death without heirs of tax-paying owners – had simply rendered it obsolete. Once treasury ownership of land became the norm, debate was to turn to how secondary rights, required to farm the land, were to be conceived. At issue were the legal statuses of cultivator and administrator and the nature of the payments made by the ﬁrst to the second. These debates were pursued under the rubric of land taxation (‘ushr wa-kharaj) in legal compendia and specialized epistles. In earlier doctrine tax was due from an owner of land to the Muslim treasury. But land was now the property of the treasury. Ibn Humam therefore noted: ‘indeed what is taken nowadays is in lieu of rent (badal al-ijara) not tax (kharaj)’.11 A student of Ibn Humam, shaikh Qasim ibn Qutlubugha (1399–1474), in an epistle on the question of rental of an administrative grant, went on to explore the consequences of this deﬁnition for the legal status of the cultivator and the administrator.12 The administrative grant (iqta‘) had earlier been treated in accordance with the principle of individual property right, notably in the foundational ninth-century text, Kitab al-kharaj of Abu Yusuf. Abu Yusuf had distinguished between two types of iqta‘: either an outright grant of property, usually of uncultivated or abandoned land, or the partial or complete granting 12

of kharaj tax revenue to the grant holder.13 But the legal character of such grants had to be rephrased once the doctrine of treasury ownership of land replaced that of individual ownership. In conceptualizing the rights held by the military grantee and the cultivator, Ibn Qutlubugha deployed the basic vocabulary of property in his tradition. This distinguished between the use-right or object of utility (manfa‘a), conceived as an ‘accident’ distinct from the essence – the raqaba (‘neck’) or ‘ain – of the person or object owned.14 Of things or slaves owned, some formed objects of free commercial exchange (mal, with the attribute maliya) whereas others, such as the service of a slave, could only be transacted by the owner of the raqaba. The concept of lease (ijara, applicable to real property or services) built upon the distinction between the ‘essence’ that remains with the owner and the use-right that temporarily becomes the property of the lessee.15 Thus for Ibn Qutlubugha, as for Ibn Humam, the era of kharaj tax died out with the owners of the land.16 By contrast, their own era was one of rent. Hence the administrative grantee acted as a kind of co-owner (of the manfa‘a, deﬁned as his remuneration for military service) alongside the treasury (owner of the raqaba) to sublet the use of the land to cultivators. Ibn Qutlubugha explicitly ruled out a competing interpretation whereby the grantee would have the legal status not of a co-owner but of an agent.17 Ibn Qutlubugha’s interpretation entailed the following legal consequences: rental contracts with cultivators could be renegotiated by a newly appointed grant holder; and relations between cultivator and grant holder would be subject to the provisions of Islamic jurisprudence governing lease and sharecropping contracts. Ibn Qutlubugha’s formulation was not long to survive the Ottoman conquest of Egypt. Ibn Nujaim (1520–63), who wrote after the Ottoman conquest, attempted a kind of balancing act: he ﬁrst accepted Ibn Qutlubugha’s analysis of the relation between grant holder and cultivator as one of rent but then proceeded to identify the nature of the grant holder’s right with Abu Yusuf’s second form of iqta‘ entailing rights to the tax of the land, not to any part of its ownership.18 This solution, while theoretically incoherent, appears a compromise between a conception of subsidiary right in terms of property and one in terms of taxation and oﬃce. Ibn Nujaim could be said to have met the Ottomans halfway.

It was for the Ottoman imperial muftis to try to work out a doctrinal solution coherent with both Hanaﬁ legal doctrine and the practices of Ottoman administration developed in the course of conquests in Anatolia, the Balkans and Hungary. A brief sketch of the most important features of the classical land taxation regime will make clear what the muftis sought to interpret in terms of Hanaﬁ jurisprudence. On conquest the administration conﬁrmed the particular imposts paid by the cultivators in formal kanuns, within a thoroughgoing doctrine of treasury ownership of land.19 The land was known as miri (of the ruler) distinct from individual 13

Debate in the 16th century

The readings of Ottoman jurists

Part one | 2

mülk land. The Ottoman political regime rested upon a status distinction between oﬃce holders (asker), most notably the timaris or military ‘ﬁef holders’, and the ﬂock of subjects (reaya): the ﬁrst were recipients of taxes and the latter the tax-payers.20 The grant holder of land was legally empowered within the limits ﬁxed in the administrative register (defter) to collect both Islamic and customary taxes and to regulate transfers of cultivation rights so as to assure continuous tax revenue and cultivation of land. In principle, the names of the cultivators were recorded in registers (tahrir defterleri) based on centrally organized surveys renewed every few decades. In the case of infringement of the limits deﬁned by the central administration, notably if the administrator imposed new rates or forms of taxation not in the registers, or if he unjustly deprived a cultivator of his lot, the cultivator could appeal to the Islamic judge. But the duties that administrators owed the state formed part of administrative law and were not subject to the jurisdiction of the Islamic courts. The cultivator had a right of continuous exploitation of his lot of miri land; this could not be taken away from him so long as he paid the tax due on the lot. Only if he abandoned cultivation for more than three years would he lose rights to his lot. Any transfer of a lot from one cultivator to another required the accord of the timari and payment of a considerable fee, the resm-i tapu, which reﬂected the value of the land.21 In such transfers priority was given to cultivators resident in the same village, the village being the basic unit for registration and administration. Without the agreement of the administrator, the cultivator was not able to give up his lot for any reason save physical incapacity; if he left a son (or sons), the latter would be held responsible for the cultivation of the lot. The nature of this responsibility diﬀered from that of an owner of mülk property: an owner of mülk land was similarly obliged to cultivate and to pay tax on his land but in the event that he failed to do so, the imam could rent out his land to another or could even sell the property to cover the costs of the tax if no one accepted to rent the land. But in the case of miri land, should the cultivator’s lot remain uncultivated and no one else be found to take it on, since it was treasury property, the land could not be sold. Rather, the cultivator was to be returned to the lot. Hence in sixteenth-century kanun, if a cultivator ﬂed, he or, after his death, his son was to be returned to the village so long as ten years had not passed.22 And, if no other person had taken on the land left behind, the original cultivator remained liable for the taxes due on the lot, as was his son after him. These taxes were termed resm-i çift bozan/kasr al-faddan, i.e. ‘abandoning the plough team’; they applied in principle until another cultivator took on the lot.23 The taxes were due from individual cultivators, the sipahi not being able to hold the village collectively liable for the tax on the lot of a cultivator who had ﬂed.24 Although the principles governing succession at death changed over the centuries, they were designed to avoid subdivision of a cultivator’s lot. The right passed without tapu fee only to a man’s son/s. Following a sultanic decree in 1568, 14

15

Debate in the 16th century

a daughter, followed by a brother or sister living in the village, could exercise a preferential claim (ahakkiyye) to take on the lot by payment of the tapu fee.25 The imperial order introducing a right for a daughter stated that, were daughters unable to claim any part of their father’s land, they would be deprived of that part of paternal income spent on maintenance or improvement of the land. In this manner, justiﬁcation of female rights made reference to a distinct budget of individual property. The most important elements of this property arising from work and investment were trees or vines, walls, mills and buildings as well as livestock, agricultural implements and personal belongings. The distinction between this personal property and the cultivator’s lot was maintained: unlike the former, the lot could not be sold for debt or bequeathed, nor, as we have seen, inherited according to the terms of Islamic ﬁqh governing mülk property.26 Such were the broad rules of the classical land regime, which the Ottoman muftis took for granted when debating legal relations between state, administrator and cultivator. The two great imperial muftis of the sixteenth century, Kemal Paşazade (1525–34) and Ebussuud (1545–74), addressed this task.27 For both, agricultural land belonged to the imam/treasury. Kemal Paşazade notes, however, that in the Ottoman case the exact history of how lands came to the treasury is unknown, some (arazi-i havz, ‘impounded lands’) having accrued to the treasury through the inability of cultivators to assure its cultivation and other (arazi-i memleket, ‘crown lands’) through the disappearance or death without issue of its owners.28 This reading respects earlier Hanaﬁ interpretation whereby a basic presumption of individual ownership was overwritten by historical events.29 Ebussuud, by contrast, abandoned this reasoning, oﬀering two explanations for state ownership. The ﬁrst referred to the interpretation advanced by ‘certain schools of Islamic law’ that the area of the Sawad of Iraq had become property of the treasury at the time of conquest.30 Here the most prominent Hanaﬁ scholar of all time went beyond his school in justiﬁcation of Ottoman practice. And in a second interpretation Ebussuud abandoned established doctrinal arguments, advancing an interpretation on the basis of public interest or necessity.31 Arazi-i memleket was originally haraç land but – in the translation of Colin Imber – ‘if it had been been given to its owners, it would have been divided on their deaths among many heirs, so that each one of them would receive only a tiny portion. Since it would be extremely arduous and diﬃcult, and indeed impossible to distribute and allocate each person’s tribute [haraç], the ownership of the land was kept for the Muslim treasury, and [the usufruct] given to the peasants by way of a loan.’32 In this fetwa Ebussuud justiﬁes state ownership in terms not of history or school doctrine but of the need for impartible devolution of cultivators’ lots. Concerning the grant holder, Kemal Paşazade deﬁned the timar as a form of ikta in which the grant holder possesses the right to collect customary dues and Islamic taxes.33 The term for this right is hakk-ı karar, denoting a power to act with regard to a property but not a property right itself in the ﬁqh tradition.34 Ebussuud states rather little concerning the nature of the timari’s right, but his fetwas make clear that he regards it as an oﬃce where in return for part of the

Part one | 2

tax revenue the timari or sahib-i arz carries out tasks of administration, including the delegation of rights to land. The legal character of the administrator, whom later jurists will term a naip (deputy) or vekil (agent) of the treasury, appears not to be doctrinally problematic, unlike that of the cultivator. With regard to the cultivator’s right to land, Kemal Paşazade judged that it was obtained by purchase of the land or by inheritance from father to son(s). Out of respect for Hanaﬁ interpretation where ‘sale’ and ‘inheritance’ cannot be used for such a quasi-property right, Kemal Paşazade stated that these legal forms derive from the kanun not the şeriat.35 Thus, Kemal Paşazade made no attempt to legitimate the tapu fee or impartible devolution of rights at death in terms of ﬁqh. By contrast, sheikh-ul-Islam Ebussuud made no reference to the kanun in his legitimation of the Ottoman land regime. In what may be a ﬁrst formulation, Ebussuud followed earlier Hanaﬁ doctrine by describing the cultivator’s relation with the treasury as a defective rental (icare-i faside) – defective because for a valid lease the duration of the rental contract must be speciﬁed whereas it is not here – and by interpreting the dues (tapu resmi) cultivators pay for the tenure of use-rights as a form of entry-fee or advance on the rent.36 But in perhaps a later formulation, Ebussuud avoids the term rent (icare), presumably because this can entail limited power to further devolve land to others, rendering problematic the control over transactions between cultivators exercised by the grant holder. Rather Ebussuud interprets the cultivator’s right in terms of a delegation (tefviz) of userights, or a loan (ariyet), or an object held in trust (vedia), categories which do not allow the cultivator to transfer any part of his rights to land permanently.37 In these formulations the tapu fee is again described as ücret-i muaccele, a fee paid in advance for the use-rights of land.38 Ebussuud here implicitly equates the cultivator’s rights to those of an oﬃce holder – a subordinate, subject oﬃce to be sure, but an oﬃce none the less.39 The fetwas of Kemal Paşazade and Ebussuud were not written as highly argumentative epistles for other scholars; even the longer of them remain didactic and the shorter verge on the imperious.40 In part this may reﬂect the attempt by the oﬃce of the sheikh-ul-Islam to silence challenges to the legitimacy of the Ottoman land tax system. By comparison with the doctrinal bricolage of the imperial fetwas, the criticism to which we now turn built impeccably on the categories of Hanaﬁ ﬁqh. A contemporary of Ebussuud, Taqi ’l-Din Pir ‘Ali al-Barkali al-Rumi, known as Birgevi or Birgili in Turkish (d. 1573), has left us a learned counter-argument.41 A similar argument can also be read in an anonymous fetwa of the second half of the sixteenth century.42 There is thus no reason to think that the argument was unknown in mid-sixteenth-century Istanbul, but equally none to think that either of these two versions represents the original formulation of the argument. Given just how opposed its conclusions are to those of the sheikh-ul-Islam, it is perhaps not surprising that both the statements were penned in Arabic not in Turkish. In the case of Birgili’s al-Tariqa al-muhammadiya, the arguments are tucked 16

away at the end of his long denunciation of the evil ways of this world and the departure of contemporary practices from those of the faith. The argument forms part of a stern warning against ‘eating the food of oﬃce holders’.43 Birgili begins by deploring the legal contradictions presented to Hanaﬁ doctrine by Ottoman land law. The argument is here translated in full.44 The state of land in our time is very confused since its holders (ashabu-ha) contract the land by sale, rental, sharecropping and suchlike and pay its kharaj tax to the military or to other persons appointed by the sultan, but if they sell [their land], then the person appointed by the sultan to collect the tax takes part of the price. And if they die leaving sons, then the sons take all the inheritance to the exclusion of other heirs, and no debts or bequests are paid out of it. Otherwise [if there are no sons] the person appointed by the sultan sells [the land].

Birgili then goes on to propose two possible legal interpretations of the land regime. The ﬁrst starts from the principle that possession denotes ownership. This will prove to be utterly damning for the legality of the land regime. [First thesis] So if we start from the principle of possession (fa-idha i‘tabarna bi-’l-yad) we would say that the land is individual property (mulk) and that inheritance should then include all heirs after deduction of debts and bequests. Exclusion of all [heirs] save sons and failure to honour debts and bequests would entail injustice (zulm). Transactions [by the sons to the exclusion of other heirs] or by the sultan’s appointees in the absence of male heirs would represent disposal of property by a third party, the result being foul (khabith). … So if the sultan’s appointee takes all or part of the price for the sale of land, this is forbidden (haram). In this manner, over the years, all or most of the land would pass from the ownership of its possessors creating great corruption.

A second less radical interpretation starts from the principle of treasury ownership of land.

17

Debate in the 16th century

[Second thesis] If we say not that the lands are owned by their occupants but rather that the essence (raqaba) belongs to the treasury as has been the practice in our time and the time of our fathers and grandfathers; that when the sultan conquered a region he did not divide its land among those entitled to a part in the booty since the imam may choose between dividing the land and keeping it for the Muslims until the day of resurrection on condition [of payment] of tax (kharaj); then the possessor (dhi ’l-yad ﬁ-ha) would enjoy use-rights. It was said in the Tartarkhaniya that lands with no owner, which we call state lands (aradi al-mamlaka), may be given to people who then pay the tax and that this is legally valid for one of two reasons: either (1) the cultivators stand for the owners in cultivation and tax payment or (2) they pay rent equal to the value of the tax so that what is taken from them is tax to the imam but rent to them.45 In either case, transactions such as sale, gift, pre-emption, waqf, inheritance and suchlike are not valid. Thus according to (1) the cultivators are allowed to stand for the owners

Part one | 2

only out of the necessity of preserving the rights of the ‘askar (military), that is the kharaj, from destruction, but that necessity does not extend beyond this [to the other powers of a true owner]. And according to (2) it is evident that sale by the possessor is illegal and the price paid a bribe.

In other words, sale between cultivators and payment to administrators (the resm-i tapu) are not legally valid. The latter constitutes an illegal bribe. The [Second Thesis] is stronger, less in contradiction with Islamic jurisprudence (al-shar‘) and less harmful to people so it should be preferred. Thus, transmission to sons can be [interpreted] not as inheritance but in one of two ways according to whether the cultivators are seen as standing for the owners in the payment of tax or as acting as lessees of the land. As for treating its sale as a defective lease wherein the value of a fair rent is paid to the seller, this is completely invalid and without any legal basis. Rental cannot be contracted with the words denoting a sale; this is the chosen opinion [of the School] especially if the duration is not stated.

In this manner Birgili begins to challenge the interpretation of the legal character of the tapu fee advanced by Ebussuud. … So too according to (2) [where the cultivator stands for the lessee of land] the tax cannot be considered as rent paid by the possessor of land because the true conditions are absent. It is a tax (mu’na) imposable only on the owner of the land. Only out of necessity is it treated as if rent to the possessor [i.e. the cultivator] and hence is it permitted not to deﬁne the amount of the rent to be paid … But its true nature is tax and paid only to those entitled to tax; it is not a true rent. Its possessor cannot further sublet the land. Second, if we instead say that tax is taken from the person using the land, and so consider his purchase rental and its price an advance fee on the rent (ujra mu‘ajjala), in fact tax cannot be made into a rent paid by the person using the land; rather he must pay the tax. Thus if what was paid is considered as part of the tax, then the seller [the previous cultivator and/or administrator] not the buyer [the new cultivator] should pay [to the treasury] what he received as part of the tax due. A further problem is that if either the buyer or seller should die during the rental period and the rental agreement be terminated, the advance rental fee [resm-i tapu] should be repaid. [But this is not done.] Thus the truth is that the sale is null and void and what is taken [the resm-i tapu] is a bribe that should be returned to the person [cultivator] who gave it.

Here Birgili rejects Ebussuud’s attempt to ﬁnd a legal basis in ﬁqh for the tapu fee. In keeping with earlier Hanaﬁ doctrine this argument permits the quasi-lease of land in lieu of tax, so as to maintain the revenue of the state and its military administration, but it rejects the tapu fee paid for acquisition of cultivation rights as a bribe inadmissible according to Islamic jurisprudence. If this is a complex argument, it is one that adheres better to the categories of Hanaﬁ jurisprudence 18

19

Debate in the 16th century

than the judgments of the sultan’s sheikh-ul-Islam.46 Birgili’s doctrinal rigour notwithstanding, it was not his scholastic argument that was to hold sway. Rather the power of practice and of the imperial oﬃce of the sheikh-ul-Islam was to deﬁne Ottoman Hanaﬁ doctrine on land law. These debates reveal tensions both practical and ideological. At a practical level, Birgili’s description of everyday exchanges of land reveals that there was a kind of market wherein cultivators exchanged their rights to lots and drew up contracts governing factors of production such as work in ploughing, weeding and harvesting. Yet this was a market heavily conditioned by administrative control over permanent exchanges of lots, subject to a tapu fee extracted by the timari. Thus, as Kemal Paşazade and Birgili state, cultivators and administrators employed terms such as sale and rental when referring to such contracts, but the conditions required by ﬁqh for such contracts were absent. At a more ideological level, legal models of right were developed under the Mamluks to articulate hierarchically disposed rights. This was what Ibn Qutlubugha elaborated using the vocabulary of lease, and further innovations to contracts of lease were to be introduced under the Ottomans concerning rights in waqf properties.47 But Ottoman jurisprudence resisted such a conceptualization for rights in miri land. Thus, the timari, or what became the standard legal abstraction, the sahib-i arz, acted as an agent or oﬃcer of (rather than co-owner with) the state. And what the cultivator owed was really tax and not actually rent, even though he was no more a proprietor than he was a lessee. Moreover, the legal vocabulary in which the rights of the cultivator were expressed was composed of terms governing rights to oﬃces not to mülk property.48 Similarly, the devolution of the cultivator’s plot from father to son(s) follows the model for the devolution of oﬃce not of mülk property. Hence, in many ways Ottoman jurisprudence treated the cultivator more as a quasi-oﬃce entailing rights over objects and produce than as a subject contracting property through lease. In conclusion to this review of the central debates of the sixteenth century we may ask why Ottoman jurisprudence did not proceed to theorize the cultivator’s legal persona as an oﬃce in the hierarchy of delegation of powers. Why was such a deﬁnition to remain implicit in the terms characterizing the cultivator’s rights to land rather than being made explicit? The answer may be political. Ottoman political ideology rested on a distinction between those who received tax (the asker or military, later more generally oﬃce holders, those with a mansıp or vazife) and those who paid tax (the reaya or ﬂock: cultivators, artisans and traders). The administrator (sahib-i arz) was regarded as an oﬃce holder, a deputy of the state who received tax payments. Ottoman practice, whereby the cultivator paid an entry-fee (resm-i tapu) for his lot and was subject to the approval of the administrator for any contracts concerning his land, proved diﬃcult to legitimate in terms of Islamic conceptions of propertyright. Likewise, Ottoman administrative practice governing the devolution of the cultivator’s plot proved diﬃcult to justify in terms of Islamic jurisprudence. The practice entailed impartible devolution to son(s), itself the pattern for the

Part one | 2

devolution of oﬃces, but modiﬁed by the end of the sixteenth century to allow, in the absence of a surviving son, a daughter(s) resident in the village to pay the entry-fee for the lot. In short, whereas the practical arrangements governing cultivators in Ottoman administrative law (kanun) corresponded to a subject oﬃce or status, the ideological necessity of restricting the category of oﬃce to the elite of the Ottoman order rendered the jurisprudential deﬁnition of the cultivator’s legal persona doctrinally problematical. It was the sheer political eminence of Ebussuud, the sheikh-ul-Islam of sultan Süleyman ‘the lawgiver’, that closed debate over terms legally ambivalent.

20

3 | Jurisprudential debate in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries

This chapter examines doctrinal debate concerning major aspects of the land and tax regimes during the centuries between the classical regime of the sixteenth century and the modern reforms of the nineteenth century. Emphasizing change in doctrine, we sketch a genealogy of the jurisprudential tradition against which to judge nineteenth-century codiﬁcation regarding land. The account draws on a continuous series of fetwas and related epistles by Damascene jurists.1 The reading presented here remains tentative; if subsequent scholarship should challenge its theses, so much the better. Before we turn to the Syrian material, let us brieﬂy consider the wider historical background. If Ebussuud is heralded as reconciling the kanun with the shari‘a, he introduced few changes in the forms of the two traditions.2 It was in the decades after his death that a marriage of form between the two traditions was to be developed. At the beginning of the seventeenth century, a manual of law, Zahir ül-Kudat, was drawn up by Pir Mehmed el-Üskübî; this took the form of fetwas.3 From then on, texts of kanun could adopt the formal aspect of ﬁqh. The Kanun-i Cedid or ‘New Law’, dated in its ﬁnal recension to 1673, took the question and answer form of fetwas written by ulema of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries crowned by a ﬁrman.4 The judicial counterpart to this Islamic formulation of land law was the role granted to kadis in the provinces to adjudicate cases of dispute between the cultivators and administrators of land.5 These changes in the form of law corresponded to a shift in the character of Ottoman governance, when within a more monetarized economy the militaryadministrative complex gave way to tax farming during the seventeenth century. Monetarization and wider social access to small ﬁrearms changed political relations in rural areas.6 At the very end of the century (1695) lifelong tax farms known as malikane were introduced in lieu of short-term farming of taxes. It was argued that this legal innovation would serve to bind the interest of the tax farmer to that of the cultivators more closely.7 The character of political and economic change in the seventeenth century remains the object of debate among scholars. It is agreed that the century witnessed considerable civil strife at the same time as the numbers on the state payroll greatly increased.8 What Faroqhi terms ‘the establishment of a developed political bureaucracy’ cannot be foreign to the more discursive character of kanuns written by administrators.9 Bureaucratic development at the centre was matched by a deepening of the Ottoman culture of Arab provincial elites who came to 21

Part one | 3

enjoy greater political autonomy. This shift in the locus of governance was to continue in more stable forms throughout the eighteenth century.10 How exactly the monetarization of tax-assessment aﬀected relations between cultivators on the ground is largely undocumented. In the case of southern Syria, it is unclear even for the sixteenth century how the information in the register (tahrir defteri), where total assessments for diﬀerent crops and the names of heads of cultivating households were listed for each village, was matched by individual responsibility for meeting the collective assessment of the village.11 In the seventeenth century regular updating of registers generally ceased.12 Given further monetarization of block tax assessment, village-level management of the tax burden can only have increased. Bearing in mind this wider context, let us consider the major issues in land law debated by the Hanaﬁ ulema of Damascus. The Syrian scholars belonged to the Ottoman tradition and context, but they appear also to have maintained, or even renewed in a spirit of neo-classicism, their references to the pre-Ottoman tradition of the Hanaﬁ school. Until further research on jurists writing in Turkish in Anatolia and the Balkans is published, it remains unclear whether there were systematic diﬀerences between imperial and provincial ulema in this regard. 13 Although none of the major Syrian jurists called into account the legitimacy of the land regime in its entirety, there were marked diﬀerences in their positions. Those who held the formal position of mufti in Damascus appeared more punctilious with regard to doctrine sanctioned in Istanbul than the three great ﬁgures, Khayr al-Din al-Ramli (1585–1671), ‘Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulusi (1641–1731) and Muhammad Amin Ibn ‘Abidin (1784–1836) whose fame rested more on their writing than on their oﬃcial position.14 But our focus will be more on the nature of the themes debated than on the diﬀerences arising from such institutional positions – al-Nabulusi went so far as to call into question the right of the sultan to impose as binding the decisions of his appointed sheikh-ul-Islam.15 The degree to which the Damascene muftis make reference to Turkish terminology drawn from the kanun or to juridical texts written in Turkish changed markedly over the period surveyed here. Although the Syrian muftis of the seventeenth century occasionally referred to one or another very famous fetwa of Ebussuud, there is otherwise no evidence that they employed Turkish in their scholarly, as opposed to their practical, work. Of the some three hundred fetwas in a collection that appears to have served as a kind of register of questions posed to the oﬃce of the mufti of Damascus, only ﬁve were recorded in Turkish.16 It is noteworthy that a translation into Arabic does not appear to have been made of the Maruzat or the fetwas of Ebussuud. Certain of these fetwas were given in works compiled in Arabic by ulema, such as the Surrat al-fatawi of al-Saqizi, but generally direct citations of kanun and sultanic decisions appear in the corpus of Syrian ulema only from the middle of the eighteenth century. A late Ottoman ‘classicism’ then marks the vocabulary, with the sahib al-ard or mutakallim cast as timari whatever his actual role and with the term tapu appearing in the fetwas on land, even with 22

regard to waqf land, whereas it rarely appeared earlier.17 Nevertheless, even by the end of the eighteenth century Syrian ulema did not necessarily read Turkish: Ibn ‘Abidin notes that he relied upon the translation of sixteenth-century fetwas in al-Fatawa al-hamidiya supplemented by a translation of other oddities from the kanun on the margins of a copy of al-Durr al-mukhtar.18 This in no manner decreased his intellectual stature.19 The central issues of debate with regard to land administration concerned the legal persona of the administrator, the administration of tax imposition, the legal persona of the cultivator, and his right to land. We now turn to examine shifts within juridical understandings of these topics. The powers and properties of the administrator

The ulema left to the kanun and administrative practice the detailed deﬁnition of the powers of the military and civil administrators of land.20 Hence it is rare to ﬁnd discussion of the legal persona of the military or ﬁscal administrators in fetwa collections. It is apparent from two collections of fetwas from the ﬁrst half of the seventeenth century that the managers of waqf endowments frequently came into conﬂict with tax-collecting authorities, or even more commonly with military ﬁgures rather ambiguously referred to as ‘men of force’ (ahl al-shauka or ahl al-shauka wa-’l-jah).21 In a fetwa of Muhibb al-Din al-‘Imadi (d. 1602) the man holding the tax (‘ushr) of a waqf village arranges with the cultivators to cheat the waqf by threshing their grain in a place away from the view of the waqf administrator – an act which the mufti roundly condemns.22 In two fetwas, the mufti ‘Abd al-Rahman al-‘Imadi (d. 1641) supports the interest of the waqf and the cultivators against the administrative judge (hakim al-‘urf).23 In a fetwa concerning a forced transfer of rights by cultivators to ahl al-shauka without permission of the waqf authorities, ‘Abd al-Rahman al-‘Imadi writes: ‘The sultan, Almighty God give him victory, decreed that cultivators of waqf villages not transfer their cultivation rights without the agreement of the waqf authorities.’24

23

Debate in the 17th and 18th centuries

The legal persona of the sahib al-ard In discussing the respective powers of diﬀerent ﬁgures, the muftis develop arguments concerning the legal powers of the administrator of land. In the fetwas of ‘Ali al-‘Imadi (d. 1706), mufti of Damascus and grandson of ‘Abd al-Rahman, we ﬁnd a response to a fetwa by Khair al-Din al-Ramli (d. 1671) that explores the matter concretely.25 Al-Ramli had judged that since the sibahi does not own the raqaba of state land, he cannot act legally against a person who claims ownership of the raqaba as mulk or waqf; possession entails not ownership but merely safeguarding the land (fa-yadu-hu ‘alay-ha yad amana).26 ‘Ali al-‘Imadi responded by citing the same three jurists invoked by al-Ramli, two of whom were Ibn Qutlubugha and Ibn Nujaim. ‘Ali al-‘Imadi distinguished in principle between diﬀerent types of administrators, a timari on the model of the iqta‘i of the earlier jurists who has the right to rent out the land, as opposed to a sibahi who has no power beyond tax collection and whose income is the

Part one | 3

equivalent of a grant or salary (‘ata’) from the state (diwan).27 In the latter case it is rather the daftardar, the registrar of land, who has the power to act in defence of the state’s ownership interest. ‘Ali al-‘Imadi then returns to the ﬁrst case but goes on to distinguish between a sibahi who collects ﬂat sums (kharaj muwazzaf) and one who collects his due as a percentage of the crop (kharaj muqasama) and is intimately involved in the contracts for cultivation of the land, the farming of part of which he may even supervise himself.28 In the second case the sibahi has the power to litigate concerning ownership of the land, since he eﬀectively has the speciﬁc legal power (wilaya khassa) as against the judge’s general legal jurisdiction (wilaya ‘amma) in a manner parallel to that of a waqf administrator as against the more general powers of a judge. What is striking here is how the older uniﬁed category of military grant holder has been divided into a categorization of administrators according to their actual roles and how, in the case of a ﬁgure eﬀectively little more than tax collector, legal power lies with the registrar. ‘Ali al-‘Imadi’s concern with practical authority over land ﬁnds a parallel in ‘Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulusi’s long excursus in his commentary responding to the argument of Birgili translated in Chapter 2. Al-Nabulusi notes that Birgili’s criticisms presumably applied to the system of land in his native Rumelie. By contrast, al-Nabulusi notes that ‘in our country and elsewhere in Islam of our day’ land falls into diﬀerent categories: (1) waqf land taxed with ‘ushr or kharaj and rented out to cultivators by its administrator, (2) mulk land similarly farmed out, (3) treasury land rented out to cultivators by the agent of the treasury, (4) treasury land the farming of which is under the direct control of the agent of the treasury, (5) mulk or waqf land on which cultivators hold mashadd maska by virtue of the labour they invested in amelioration of the land, and (6) miri land. Al-Nabulusi’s two types of treasury land, distinguished according to the role of the administrator in production, resemble the two categories of al-‘Imadi. Al-Nabulusi’s ﬁfth category, deﬁned by the type of right held by the cultivator, is yet more striking. It is to al-Nabulusi’s sixth type that the question posed by Birgili applies directly. Al-Nabulusi writes of lands which have been treasury property since the conquest and which the sultan has delegated to people, as his agents, to cultivate and to pay the tax (kharaj or ‘ushr) to the treasury. They hold the land on condition that if they die leaving sons, their sons take over the lands, but if they leave only daughters, the land reverts to the treasury. As administrative agents of the sultan, they may sell [rights to] the land without the [other powers of ownership] held by the treasury. The sale is thus valid; in return for acting in lieu of the treasury, the agent of the sultan for the collection of the kharaj takes part [of the price paid] and the seller the other part.29

Al-Nabulusi thus legitimates what Birgili had rejected – a fee taken for the ‘sale’ of usufructuary rights to miri land. He does so on the basis of the judgement of 24

Tax collection and land administration: the village and the tax farmer Muftis of the seventeenth century were concerned with the application of principles for the distribution of sultanic, as opposed to Islamic, taxes, within a tradition that, from the end of the twelfth century, had distinguished between taxes on property and those on the person (li-hifz al-amlak, li-hifz al-ru’us/nufus).35 Hence in one fetwa where a timari attempts to tax his villagers for land they cultivate in another timar, Muhammad al-‘Imadi judges that because taxes belong to the authority over the land in question, the claim is invalid.36 In a 25

Debate in the 17th and 18th centuries

the ‘later scholars’ (al-muta’akhkhirun) that the sultan could sell treasury land if there were a need or an interest (maslaha) in so doing. Al-Nabulusi accepts that general interest alone suﬃces to justify sale and then goes on to assert that a deputy would be similarly entitled to sell land. Al-Nabulusi’s solution to the problem of the legal status of these transactions is not entirely satisfying. Unlike Kemal Paşazade who described such a sale as in accordance with kanun not ﬁqh, al-Nabulusi legitimates it simply by reference to late doctrine according the sultan the right to sell treasury land. In line with his emphasis on oﬃce, al-Nabulusi then justiﬁes the exclusion of female heirs from succession to such oﬃce.30 Although he here appears to have in mind the administrator of land, one of his fetwas makes clear that he believes a similar principle of male succession applies to the cultivator’s lot.31 Al-Nabulusi notes that rights arising from oﬃce devolve entirely in the male line, unlike the inheritance of property; he proceeds to apply this rule systematically, in a manner that neglects to mention the allowance made for a daughter or a sister to take on land by payment of tapu fees in the absence of a male descendant. Concerning the administrator of land, al-‘Imadi and al-Nabulusi share two understandings. First, they conceive the oﬃce of military grant holder in terms of the actual role of the administrator in the management of agricultural production. Second, the administrator is not a property-holder but an oﬃcer of the state. In the fetwas of al-Nabulusi’s contemporary Muhammad al-‘Imadi (d. 1723) reference is made to the administrator of miri land acting by virtue of a malikane.32 But in another fetwa concerning a waqf village the powers of the malikane holder are described as those of a tax collector, bound by the speciﬁc terms of his appointment, whereas the waqf administrator holds eﬀective legal power.33 The malikane holder thus could enjoy the prerogatives of an administrator of land or could function as a mere tax collector. The basic distinction, and a tendency to restrict the legal power granted a tax collector, mark the fetwa tradition through the eighteenth century: ‘if a village pays ‘ushr to a timari who then claims that he has [the right] to administer land and to collect the tapu fees’, so long as he holds only the tax, no consideration should be given to his claim that the cultivator requires his permission.34 The emergent distinction between tax collector and land registrar will prove critical to the nineteenth-century reinterpretation of the cultivator’s right as less a prerogative of oﬃce and more a power over property.

Part one | 3

fetwa concerning a cultivator who has his home in one village where he threshes the grain from land he cultivates in a second village, Isma‘il al-Ha’ik (d. 1702) recognizes the right of the administrator to collect fees or rent, the term used being ujra, for the land on which the cultivator has built his house and for his use of the village grounds to thresh his grain.37 The fetwa is noteworthy for a slight archaism of idiom, the village being described as in the iqtita‘ of Zaid, but more so for the power given to Zaid not only to collect a fee for the house plot and use of the threshing grounds but also to prevent the cultivator from placing his grain without permission on the threshing grounds of the village where he lives but does not cultivate. Elsewhere in the fetwa collections, the terms designating authorities in the villages often do not refer to oﬃcials of the state. While the term za‘im al-qariya indicates a tax collector, ustadh al-qariya and shaikh al-qariya denote village headmen rather than government administrators. In one fetwa, ‘Ali al-‘Imadi (d. 1706) judges that having no legal document to prove his exemption from tax the shaikh al-qariya like other villagers has to contribute his part of the tax (qism) to the administrator.38 The fetwas grapple with two issues: ﬁrst, which taxes a landholder who does not live in a village is liable to pay, and second, how to avoid injustice in tax collection when there is substantial inequality in landholdings between persons in a village. The two issues come together in a fetwa of ‘Abd al-Rahman al-‘Imadi (d. 1641) where he supports the custom of a village distributing capitation taxes according to wealth including the property of persons who do not live in the village. ‘Abd al-Rahman likewise rules that Christian weavers, resident but without any property, should not pay any part of the exceptional taxes (takalif ‘urﬁya).39 Al-Ha’ik also judges that ‘the people of a village’ should apportion exceptional taxes on the basis of wealth, not a head count, and the fee for village watchmen on the basis of a mixed criterion of landholding and head count.40 Village-level leaders are described as trying to haul a cultivator back to a village or to extract back taxes from the son of a man who had ﬂed the village.41 In several fetwas the corporate ‘people of the village’ (ahl al-qariya) demand compliance concerning tax payment and size of contributions. Moreover, the mufti rules against the people of a village who demanded that Zaid contribute an excessive amount in relation to the ploughs of land (faddans) he cultivates.42 These fetwas suggest that governance did not end with the relations sketched in the classical kanuns where a grant holder dealt with individual cultivators unmediated save by the record of the register and the overseeing eye of the judge. Government entailed more layered structures: ‘the people of the village’ and the ‘village head’ played central roles, and corporate village interest often acted long before a higher-level administrator in disciplining cultivators.43 This is a power of self-governance that the muftis on occasion commended. Al-Nabulusi supported the right of the people of a village to expel a man who failed to contribute his portion of the tax burden. For him this collective interest was valid whereas a 26

demand by the tax collector that a cultivator must live in a particular village was not.44 By the middle of the eighteenth century the muftis begin to oppose constraints on the movement of cultivators and the imposition of double taxes on them. But the counterpart to individual freedom was collective responsibility or autogovernance by the village. The practical reasons for this are made clear in a discussion by the mufti ‘Ali al-‘Imadi (d. 1706) of the principles and practice governing the distribution of taxes within a village, an issue on which his son Hamid ibn ‘Ali (d. 1758) will also comment.45 ‘Ali al-‘Imadi attempts to distinguish between taxes by head or by wealth, and notably what the imposition by head should be, imagining a village without landed property on the model of the taxation of bedouins or Kurds. But his son Hamid throws up his hands at the attempt: most of the taxes imposed on the villages in this day are neither for the preservation of property nor that of bodies, indeed they are simply injustice and aggression, and most of the expenses of the governor and his followers, the buildings he uses and those of his soldiers, and what is paid to the envoys of the sultan, God Almighty preserve him, who come with orders, bans and suchlike, all of that is taken from the villages and they call it provisions. In our lands this is taken twice a year and, on top of that, money and bribes to the aides and followers of the local notables; so it has become the custom to divide all this according to the number of ploughs (faddans) in the village or sometimes according to the units of water in irrigated land. Thus the person who has a faddan or an hour of irrigation will pay accordingly, regardless of whether a man, woman or youth. The [older] principles … do not apply since none of these are for the preservation of properties or persons. The only exceptions are … [penal taxes and blood-money payments] and what is taken for soldiers sent by the commander to some villages to protect crops and herds from bedouins and thieves …46

27

Debate in the 17th and 18th centuries

Hamid ibn ‘Ali winds up his argument by saying that since the level of imposition is so excessive and its legitimation so unclear, then it is logical to follow the principle enunciated by Qadi Khan that the distribution of taxes by property has priority. The custom of village people should stand. This discussion suggests that, by the mid-eighteenth century, the distribution of taxes was a matter of village management, with scarcely any reference to names of individuals in a government tax register. A continuing tension between the emerging legal freedom of the cultivator and village management of tax imposition and resources is evident.47 The counterpart to such village administration of tax distribution was monetarization of tax payments organized through tax farming. Although Baber Johansen has stated that the ulema condemned tax-farming, 48 the Damascene muftis of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries rarely address the issue and when they do, they appear less categorical. It is true that jurists such as Khair al-Din al-Ramli and Ibn ‘Abidin denounce such practices.49 So, too, the oﬃcial muftis Muhibb al-Din (d. 1602), ‘Abd al-Rahman (d. 1641), ‘Ali (d. 1706) and

Part one | 3

Muhammad al-‘Imadi (d. 1723) all judge illicit rental (ijara) of the right to collect tax revenue.50 This did not mean, however, that intermediaries in the process of tax collection were rejected. In the case of waqf land, appointing a deputy (wikala) or employment for a share (sharaka) appear acceptable to the Damascene ulema.51 ‘Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulusi judges that a person who was paying the taxes for a group of village people should be repaid by the cultivators the amount he had advanced on their behalf.52 The Istanbul muftis are yet more forthright in legitimating commercial arrangements for tax collection (iltizam) treating such contracts under the legal rubric of agency (vekalet), not rental (icare).53 The fetwa collections of sheikh-ul-Islam Abdürrahim (d. 1716) and Abdullah Yenişehirli (d. 1743–44) contain chapters on iltizam.54 In a manner parallel to the imperial muftis, ‘Ali al-Muradi (d. 1771) sees no diﬃculty in another party taking on a timar promising to increase its revenue.55 The legal problem is not when an administrator subcontracts tax collection, but when an agent rents the right to collect tax since that would constitute rental of an object in order to consume it.56 In summary, while the Damascene muftis did little to provide a ﬁrm doctrinal basis for tax farming, they rarely refused outright to countenance emerging practices legitimated by the sheikh-ul-Islam. The powers and properties of the cultivator

The nature of the cultivator’s right The nature of the cultivator’s right to the land he ploughs is a subject of juridical interpretation requiring translation between imperial and local concepts. Syrian ulema oﬀer individual solutions, and only from the middle of the eighteenth century do they attempt a systematic reading of the various equivalences established by their predecessors. In his fetwas Khair al-Din al-Ramli (d. 1671) employs neither the imperial vocabulary nor the vernacular terms of Damascene jurists. He distinguishes between the right not to be evicted of a lessee arising from occupation (wad‘ al-yad) and the much stronger right of tenure and management arising from ownership of real objects arising from investment of labour such as buildings, planting of trees, or moving new soil to a ﬁeld, known by a term deriving from Central Asian jurists, kirdar, which entails a haqq al-qarar.57 By contrast, from the beginning of the seventeenth century, if not before, Damascene jurists refer to the cultivator’s right to a farming lot with a local term – mashadd al-maska. The Damascene mufti Muhibb al-Din sought to prevent the extension of claims to a maska in waqf lands advanced by long-term lessees but he nevertheless recognized the right in well established cases.58 Similar tensions also mark the fetwas of ‘Abd al-Rahman al-‘Imadi, ‘Imad al-Din al-‘Imadi (d. 1658) and ‘Ala’ al-Din al-Haskaﬁ (d. 1677).59 No principles are advanced in the fetwas concerning exactly how a maska is established, save that it requires an established link between village residence and cultivation.60 We learn from a later work that, following a diﬀerence 28

between representatives in the court, ‘Abd al-Rahman al-‘Imadi was asked by the head of the scribal administration in Istanbul to clarify the distinction between falaha and maska. He responded: There is no doubt that the two terms diﬀer in meaning and legal import. As for maska it represents the right to plough in the land of another … and in law it does not represent a commodity, it cannot be owned, nor sold nor inherited. As for falaha, it designates ploughing itself and in law it may form a commodity and be bought and sold and inherited.61

29

Debate in the 17th and 18th centuries

The mufti of Damascus at the end of the seventeenth century, Isma‘il al-Ha’ik, devotes a chapter in his fetwa collection to the cultivator’s right, mashadd almaska. This exists in waqf and in two types of treasury land (miri and timari in al-Ha’ik’s words). Like his Damascene predecessors he does not make reference to kirdar and haqq al-qarar.62 It is striking that al-Ha’ik discusses the local term mashadd al-maska without reference to the legal terms of the imperial kanuns and with very little claim for the genesis of this right from labour invested.63 Only in his justiﬁcation of the exclusively male character of succession to such rights does al-Ha’ik stress how the sultan entrusted land to men who were capable of tending and improving it and hence how women are necessarily excluded from succession.64 Al-Ha’ik notes – and this is in conformity with the kanun – that a person who cultivated without legal challenge and paid tax/rent on land for ten years acquired rights that prevented an administrator from transferring his lot to another person. But unlike the provision of the kanun, here such rights were established for the cultivator in waqf land as in miri land. The use-right was of value; al-Ha’ik judges that a cultivator might borrow against such rights or transfer them to another cultivator, subject to the accord of the administrator of the waqf or miri land.65 Compared to later Damascene muftis and in spite of his using only the Syrian term for the cultivator’s right (mashadd maska) al-Ha’ik’s fetwas depart little from the classical imperial vision of the cultivator as a quasi-oﬃce. Thus he does not argue, as will his successors in the post of mufti of Damascus, ‘Ali al-‘Imadi (d. 1706) and ‘Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulusi (d. 1731) that the right of mashadd al-maska arises from the cultivator’s labour in clearing, ploughing, fertilizing and working the land. Although al-Ha’ik’s reference to the ten-year rule makes it clear that he writes in the context of wider Ottoman government, he nowhere draws the equivalence that ‘Ali al-‘Imadi does between haqq al-qarar/kirdar and mashadd al-maska. If we turn from the diﬀerences in the formulations of the seventeenth-century Syrian ulema to their common understandings, we ﬁnd that there begins to emerge a single type of right for the cultivator. Unlike the kanun, which governs primarily miri lands, a vernacular legal category mashadd maska – perhaps derived from Mamluk idioms?66 – comes to be set alongside a term designating right created by labour/investment, kirdar, and a term haqq al-qarar, resonant in the imperial kanun. There appear to be several intertwined factors that render problematic the

Part one | 3

character of the cultivator’s rights in land by the mid-eighteenth century. First, whereas in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth century the rights of a cultivator were ultimately sanctioned by the entry of his name in the register (defterli) kept by the state or the grant holder (sahib-i arz), by the eighteenth century there is scarcely ever a reference to such registers as evidence in disputes over rights, even if as with ‘Ali al-‘Imadi, the registrar (defterdar) was recognized to have ultimate authority for deﬁning rights in miri land. Hence arguments about rights had to be built on other grounds. Second, the uniﬁcation of the principles of devolution of the cultivator’s right in waqf and in miri land – the reasons for which do not lie in legal doctrine but in the impossibility for the waqf to maintain short-term leases whereas in miri land cultivators had long-term tenure – meant that a diﬀerent basis from rental or quasi-oﬃce had to be elaborated for this general right.67 Discussions of maska in plough land often drew a parallel with kirdar: real property rights in trees, plantings, walls and sheds, the introduction of which required the permission of the land administrator. The problem encountered by the ulema was that if in the case of kirdar, labour invested in concrete objects (trees and buildings) resulted in commodities that could be bought and sold, where exactly could one draw the line with plough land? If a cultivator brought abandoned state land under the plough, he could obtain the haqq al-qarar in six years whereas the standard rule for previously cultivated land was ten years.68 And what of dung or other fertilizer, or clearing rocks, or bringing new soil into a plot? It is not surprising that the term kirdar was often used, with its associated haqq al-qarar, also for plough land. At issue then is not simply al-Ramli’s priority of possession but a potential claim to a ﬁrmer quasi-property right. And the character of the doctrinal solution to this question had consequences for the endlessly recurrent question of women’s succession to cultivation rights in plough land. Behind these debates over intermediate property rights, there may be, in a manner that corresponds to an absence of ‘rule by records’ of individual cultivators, a more general development of a self-governing corporatism in society.69 It is not only in the agricultural arena that we observe a ﬁrming of the quasi-ownership rights but even more clearly in the urban environment where intermediate ownership rights marked the entry to a craft oﬃce, and hence membership in the collective legal persona of a trade.70 This parallels attempts by villages to obtain a collective mashadd maska.71 The very least that can be said is that Johansen’s reading of late Hanaﬁ ﬁqh as a clear narrative of the end of peasant property right needs to be heavily qualiﬁed for the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.72 It is rather that the conception of property had changed quite deeply. Such developments may be one reason for the integration of Ottoman kanun vocabularies into the Syrian tradition in texts from the middle and later eighteenth century, the terms of the kanun setting limits to the property-character of the cultivator’s right and to collective right. Noteworthy are Bab mashadd al-maska of the fetwas of Hamid ibn ‘Ali (d. 1758) with extensive commentary by Ibn ‘Abidin (d. 1836) and ‘Ubaidu’llah ibn ‘Abd al-Ghani’s epistle, dated 1796, al-Nur al-badi 30

The legal person of the cultivator We have seen that jurists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries divided the various powers vested in the administrator between two personae, tax collector and state registrar (or waqf administrator); similarly, they debated the nature of the legal persona of the cultivator. A central issue of debate concerned 31

Debate in the 17th and 18th centuries

ﬁ ahkam al-aradi, ‘Shining a light on the land laws’.73 The ﬁrst is remarkable for its size and citation of works in Turkish; the subsequent commentary of Ibn ‘Abidin widens the discussion of maska into a comparative analysis of every type of ‘intermediate property right’ of the day: maska, kirdar, qima, gedik, khuluw and marsad.74 Yet more clearly than Hamid al-‘Imadi, Ibn ‘Abidin seeks to limit the right of the cultivator in plough land to an immaterial right (haqq mujarrad) dismissing readings that derive right from the transformations wrought by labour in a plot of land or from the objects (dung, soil, etc.) introduced by the cultivator. Ibn ‘Abidin interprets these as separate objects subject to the rules of inheritance but not as creating a change in the character of rights in land. Nineteenth-century codiﬁcation was likewise to adopt this approach to the object of ownership in miri land. ‘Ubaidu’llah, a little known ﬁgure who identiﬁes himself as a student of the sheikh of the sheikh who studied with ‘Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulusi, states that he composed his epistle at the request of friends to clarify the deﬁnitions and rules governing land.75 The structure of the epistle departs from the ordering of Damascene fetwa and ﬁqh texts. It begins by listing the legal categories of land: ‘ushriya, kharajiya, aradi al-mamlaka wa-aradi al-hauz. Following a classical deﬁnition of kharajiya, ‘Ubaidu’llah introduces al-Nabulusi’s six-part classiﬁcation of land from al-Hadiqa al-nadiya.76 ‘Ubaidu’llah expands Nabulusi’s ﬁfth category into a discussion of the maska, and then moves from Nabulusi’s sixth type into a long discussion of all the major theoretical themes and practical provisions from Ottoman imperial sources on miri land. The epistle reads like a kind of research paper reviewing all relevant historical debates. Although his analysis is less incisive than that of Hamid al-‘Imadi and Ibn ‘Abidin,77 ‘Ubaidu’llah gives an unparalleled exposition of the rules governing the cultivator’s right to land including dated references to sultanic rulings as well as the rules deriving from the major Turkish fetwa collections of Ebussuud but also of el-Üskübî. If the work has an underpinning argument, it appears to be that the Ottoman taxation system, rather than the regulations governing the cultivator’s right, rests on dubious legal bases. Such judgements were not uncommon among ulema, and we have seen one such condemnation earlier in this chapter. But where ‘Ubaidu’llah’s epistle departs from the earlier Arabic canon is in its taking land, not tax, as organizing principle; this rubric, it should be noted, had become common in Istanbul fetwa collections by the eighteenth century.78 ‘Ubaidu’llah’s epistle looks not backwards but forwards to the conceptual ordering of the major legal text of the following century, the 1858 Kanun-i Arazi, which opens with the same categorization of types of land.

Part one | 3

the provisions of the kanun stipulating that a cultivator who abandoned his lot (kasr al-faddan) was liable to pay the tax upon it (a liability that passed to the son after his father’s death) and that an administrator had the right within ten years to return the cultivator to his village by force.79 The restrictions on the freedom of the cultivator to leave his land and to move from his village came to be the focus of debate. The review below ﬁrst considers the fetwa collections penned by oﬃcial Hanaﬁ muftis of Damascus, before turning to jurists writing as independent scholars. Oﬃcial Damascene muftis of the seventeenth and eighteenth century The seventeenth century witnessed population movement and rural migration into cities. Hence practical and not only doctrinal tension surrounded the principle that the cultivator who left his lot was to be returned. The fetwas of the early part of the century criticize violence exercised by political and military authorities but do not reject the application of rules concerning kasr al-faddan or limits on the movements of cultivators sanctioned by the kanun. Beginning with the mufti ‘Abd al-Rahman al-‘Imadi (d. 1641), such issues become prominent in 