VIC MORROW

Signed report and estimate of his income as a director

Document signed: "Vic Morrow", 1 page, 8½x11. Los Angeles, California, 1968 December 19. Annual Filing required by the By-Laws of the Directors Guild of America. Morrow fills in his Los Angeles address and reports $5,711.72 in earnings from directing in 1968. He estimates $10,000 income of this type in 1969. Vic Morrow (1932-1982) is a film and television actor, most notable for dying on set during the production of Twilight Zone: The Movie. Originally studying law using the G.I. Bill after leaving the Navy, Morrow took an interest in acting after participating in a school play.He made his professional acting debut at the age of 22 in this film, The Blackboard Jungle, in which he played a muttering juvenile delinquent. The roles he took often saw him type casted as a heavy, but after refining his skills, he continued to pursue his career. Morrow, who starred in a number of feature films, was later seen as Sgt. Chip Saunders on Combat, which was telecast on ABC from 1962-1967, and was the longest-running of the several World War II dramas of the 1960s. Ironically, it was during the filming of a Vietnam War sequence in Twilight Zone: The Moviethat Morrow passed away following a stage accident. Morrow only directed one feature film, the Western A Man Called Sledge (1971). Multiple mailing folds. Ink stamp on front (not effecting signature). Otherwise, fine condition.

This website image may contain our company watermark. The actual item does not contain this watermark

See more listings from these signers

Following offer submission users will be contacted at their account email address within 48 hours. Our response will be to accept your offer, decline your offer or send you a final counteroffer. All offers can be viewed from within the "Offer Review" area of your HistoryForSale account. Please review the Make Offer Terms prior to making an offer.

If you have not received an offer acceptance or counter-offer email within 24-hours please check your spam/junk email folder.