Silapathar Post Office Services

Traditionally the primary function of Silapathar post office was collection, processing, transmission and delivery of mails but as of today, a Post Office offers many other vital services in addition to its traditional services. The additional services provided by a Dak Ghar include – Mail Services, Financial Services, Retail Services and Premium Services.

Mail Services

Mail Services are the basic services provided by Silapathar P.O. Mails and mail services include all or any postal articles whose contents are in the form of message which may include Letters, Postcards, Inland letter cards, packets or parcels, Ordinary mails etc.

Parcels

Mail Service also includes transmission and delivery of Parcels. A parcel can be anything ranging from a single written letter or anything addressed to an addressee. No parcel shall be by any chance be in a shape, way of packing or any other feature, such that it cannot be carried or transmitted by post or cause serious inconvenience or risk. Every parcel (including service parcels) that needs to be transmitted by post must be handed over at the window of the post office. Any parcel found in a letter box will be treated and charged as a registered parcel. Delivery services are provided by some selected delivery and branch post offices. This dakghar have the facility of delivery, thus the people of Silapathar and nearby localities can avail all the types of mail services.

Retail Services

Post offices in India serve in various ways and Silapathar Post Office offer most of the retail services. They offer the facility to accept or collect constomer bills like telephone or mobile bills, electricity bills for Government and private organizations through Retail Post. Some of the aditional agency services that Post offices offers through retail services are as follows - Telephone revenue collection, e-Ticketing for Road Transport Corporations and Airlines, Sale of UPSC forms, university applications, Sale of Passport application forms, Sale of Gold Coins, Forex Services, Sale of SIM and recharge coupons, Sale of India Telephone cards, e-Ticketing of Railway tickets etc. The postal customers of Silapathar can pay their bills and avail other retail services from this Dak Ghar.

Premium Services

Most of the premium services can be availed by the Silapathar peoples and nearby living people. The premium services provided by Silapathar Post Office are - Speed Post, Business Post, Express Parcel Post, Media Post, Greeting Post, and Logistics Post.

Speed Post

Speed Post is a time bound service in express delivery of letters and parcels. The max weight up to which an article or parcel be sent is 35 kgs between any two specified stations in India. Speed Post delivers 'Value for money' to everyone and everywhere, delivering Speed Post upto 50 grams @ INR 35 across the country and local Speed Post upto 50 grams @ INR 15, excluding applicable Service Tax. Kindly check official website for updated Speed Post service charges.

India Post Speed Post Tracking

Speed Post offers a facility of on-line tracking and tracing that guarantees reliability, speed and customer friendly service. Using a 13 digit barcode that makes a Speed Post consignment unique and identifiable. A web-based technology (www.indiapost.gov.in/speednettracking.aspx) helps the Silapathar customers track Speed Post consignments from booking to delivery.

Tracking System

Except Speed Post, India Post also allows people to track their order information for certain products like Parcels, Insured letters, Speed Post, Registered Post, Electronic Money Orders (EMO) and Electronic value payable parcel (EVPPs) etc. The tracking number is available on the receipt given at Silapathar Post Office. Using the tracking number postal customers can find out the date and time of dispatch of an article at various locations. The time of booking and the time of delivery of article.

India Post Tracking Number Formats

Different types of postal service have different kinds of tracking number formats. The tracking number for Express Parcel is a 13 digit alphanumeric format. The format for Express Parcel is XX000000000XX. The tracking number for a Registered Mail is a 13 digit alphanumeric number and its format is RX123456789IN. But a Electronic Money Order (EMO) has a 18 digit tracking number and its format is 000000000000000000. For domestic Speed Post (EMS) there is a 13 digit alphanumeric tracking number with the format EE123456789IN.

Bharatiya Dak Ghar SevaTracking Number FormatNumber of DigitsElectronic Money Order (eMO)00000000000000000018Express ParcelXX000000000XX13International EMS Artilces to be delivered in IndiaEE123456789XX13Registered MailRX123456789IN13Speed Post (EMS) DomesticEE123456789IN13

Express Parcel Post

In Express Parcel Post, the Silapathar postal customer gets time bound delivery of parcels. These parcels will be transmitted through air or any other fastest mean available at that time. Minimum chargeable weight for which Express Parcel consignments will be booked is 0.5 Kg. Maximum weight of Express Parcel consignments which shall be booked across the Post Office counter by a retail customer shall be 20 Kg and maximum weight that can be booked by corporate customer is 35 kgs.

Media Post

India Post offers a unique way or concept to help the Indian corporate organisations and the Government organizations reach potential customers through media post. Through media post people can advertise on postcards, letters, aerogramme, postal stationary etc. Customers get to see the logo or message of the respective corporate or government organizations. The Aerogramme even gives the organizations the opportunity to make their product have a global impact.

Greetings Post

Greeting Post is yet another innovative or unique step by India Post. It consists of a card with an envelope with pre-printed and pre attached postage stamp on the envelope. The stamp on the envelope is a replica of the design that appears upon the card but in miniature form. Thus there is no need affix postage stamps on the envelope implicitly saving your time of going to post offices and standing in the queue. All the rules and that are applicable for the postage dues will also be applicable to the Greeting Post.

Logistics Post

Logistics Post manages the entire transmission and distribution side of the parcels. It deals with collection of goods, storage of goods, carriage and distribution of the various parcels or goods, from order preparation to order fulfilment. And that too at the minimum possible price. Logistics Post services provides the Silapathar postal customer with cost-effective and efficient distribution across the entire country.

ePost Office

The advent of internet made communication very rapid through emails. But, the internet has not yet reached most of the rural parts of India. To change this division between rural & urban life, and to get the benefit of internet technology to Silapathar people's lives, Indian Postal Department has introduced e-post. e-post is a service in which personalized handwritten messages of customers are scanned and sent as email through internet. And at the destination address office, these messages are again printed, enveloped and delivered through postmen at the postal addresses. E-post centres are established in the Post Offices, covering a large geographical area including major cities and districts. These e-post centres are well equipped with internet connection, scanners, printers and other necessary hardware equipment. However, this e-post service doesn’t particularly need a e-post centre, but can this facility can be availed at any normal Post Office or you can visit www.epostoffice.gov.in to access postal services on your desktop, laptop or even on mobile. If a message is booked at Silapathar post office, the post is scanned and sent to an e-post centre by e-mail and a mail received at e-post centre is printed and sent to nearby Post Office for dispatch.

A Silapathar customer can also avail these services of an e-post, at his/ her home. All he/ she has do is to register as a user at www.epostoffice.gov.in website. After registration, a user can use e-post by scanning and sending messages, printing and receive messages. The message to be scanned must not be written in a paper not more A4. There is no limit for sending number of sheets of messages in e-post.

E-Post Office offers certain services like – Philately, Postal Life Insurance, Electronic Indian Postal Order, Information Services, Track & Trace and Complaints & Guidelines services.

Philately

Philately service deals with collection, sale and study of postage stamps. Philately includes lot of services Philately Information, Stamp issue Program, Stamps List and Buy Stamps service.

Postal Life Insurance (PLI)

A service offered by the Government to pay a given amount of money on the death of an individual to his prescribed nominee. The amount may also be paid to the person himself, in case he survives that maturity period. The two services offered under Postal Life Insurance are – Pay Premium service and PLI information.

Electronic Indian Postal Order

eIPO or Electronic Indian Postal Order is a facility to purchase an Indian Postal Order electronically by paying a fee on-line through e-Post Office. This service is launched by the Department of Posts, Ministry of Communications & IT, Government of India.

eIPO can now be used by Indian Citizens living in India for paying online fee, whoever seeks information under the RTI Act, 2005. eIPO offers 2 types of services – eIPO information and payment of online fees.

Information Services

This helps Silapathar customers to get information regarding certain products like – Pin Code search, Speed post, Banking, Insurance, Business Post, Logistics Post, IMTS and many more other services.

Track & Trace

The track & trace service is very helpful as it aids in getting information of our valuables. Track & Trace service offers 5 different services – Pin Code search, EMO tracking, Speed Post tracking, WNX tracking and International mail service.

Complaints & Guidelines

Using e-post office service Silapathar postal costumer can access services based on – complaint registration, complaint status and guidelines on complaints.

ePost Office Websitewww.epostoffice.gov.in

Financial Services

The customers of Silapathar can enjoy the various savings schemes available in this post office that prove to be highly beneficial for the people living in Silapathar area. The Financial service offered by PO includes Savings and Postal Life Insurance (PLI). There are various options available to save and invest with post-offices. The commonly used ones include - Savings account, Recurring Deposit, Monthly Income Scheme, Monthly Public Provident Fund, Time Deposit, Senior Citizen Saving Scheme, National Savings Certificate, Kisan Vikas Patra and Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana. Post Office also offers Insurance product through Postal Life Insurance (PLI) and Rural Postal Life Insurance (RPLI) schemes that offer low premium and high bonus.

Post Office Financial ServicesKisan Vikas Patra (KVP)Monthly Income Scheme (MIS)Monthly Public Provident Fund (PPF)National Savings Certificate (NSC)Recurring Deposit (RD) AccountSavings Bank (SB) AccountSenior Citizen Saving Scheme (SCSS)Sukanya Samriddhi Accounts (SSA)Time Deposit (TD)

Savings Bank (SB) Account

A Savings bank account serves the need of regular deposits for its customers as well as withdrawals. Cheque facility is also avail by Silapathar postal consumers.

Recurring Deposit (RD) Account

A post office offers a monthly investment option with handsome return at the time period with an option to extend the investment period. Insurance facility is also available with certain conditions.

Monthly Income Scheme (MIS)

MIS offers a fixed investment technique for five or more years with monthly interest payment to the account holder. There is also a facility of automatic crediting of interest to SB account of the Silapathar postal customer.

Monthly Public Provident Fund (PPF)

This service offers intermittent deposits subject to a particular limit for a time period of 15 years with income tax exemptions, on the investment. It also offers loan and withdrawal facilities for the postal customers.

Time Deposit (TD)

Fixed deposit option for periods ranging from one, two, three to five years with facility to draw yearly interest offered at compounded rates. Automatic credit facility of interest to SB account.

Senior Citizen Saving Scheme (SCSS)

Offers fixed investment option for senior citizens for a period of five years, which can be extended, at a higher rate of interest that are paid in quarterly instalments.

National Savings Certificate (NSC)

NSC is offered with a fixed investment for 5 or 10 years on certificates of various denominations. Pledging facility available for availing loan from Banks.

Kisan Vikas Patra (KVP)

Kisan Vikas Patra is a saving certificate scheme in which the amount Invested doubles in 110 months (i.e. 9 years & 2 months). It is available in denominations of Rs 1,000, 5000, 10,000 and Rs 50,000. Minimum deposit is Rs 1000/- and there is no maximum limit. The KVP certificate can be purchased by any adult for himself or on the behalf of a minor. This certificate can also be transferred from one account holder to another and from one post office to another. This certificate can be en-cashed only after 2 and 1/2 years from the date of issue.

Sukanya Samriddhi Accounts (SSA)

Sukanya Samriddhi Account Yojana offers a small deposit investment for the girl children as an initiative under 'Beti Bachao Beti Padhao' campaign. This yojana is to facilitate girl children proper education and carefree marriage expenses. One of the main benefits of this scheme is that it is very affordable and offers one of the highest interest rates. Currently its interest rate is set as 8.6% per annum that is again compounded yearly. The minimum deposit allowed in a financial year is INR. 1000/- and Maximum is INR. 1,50,000/-. Subsequent deposits can be made in multiples of INR 100/-. Deposits can be made all at a time. No limit is set on number of deposits either for a month or a financial year. A legal Guardian can open an account in the name of a Girl Child. Account can be closed only after completion of 21 years of the respective child. The normal Premature closure allowed is after completion of 18 years only if that girl is getting married.