The nation had been stunned by President Franklin Roosevelt’s death in Warm Springs, Georgia on Thursday, April 12, 1945.

The Friday, April 13, Elmira Advertiser morning edition headline read, “Roosevelt Dies Unexpectedly; Truman Takes Oath Of Office.” They would run an “Extra” that day. The evening Star-Gazette headlined, "Nation Mourns Loss Of President; Funeral Train Leaves For Capital.”

The funeral train arrived in Washington, D.C., on Saturday morning the 14th. The president would lie in state for five hours and then be transported to his home in Hyde Park, New York.

Elmira, like the rest of the nation, was surprised by the president’s death. Barb Ramsdell, who was in seventh grade at the George Washington School at the time, told me, “We had known FDR for so long, and we either loved him — as my dad did and therefore I did as a kid, for all he had done for the country — or hated him, as I’m sure some folks did. It shows how emotional the whole country was when he died. Now we know how sick he was in his later days, but back then, I don’t think most of the country knew.”

Elmira Mayor Emory Strachen called a meeting of civil and religious leaders for 10 a.m. at City Hall on Friday “to take action on President Roosevelt’s death and make plans for observance of the funeral” (Elmira Advertiser Extra, April 13, 1945).

It was decided to request “all business places not engaged in war work to close Saturday from 3:30 to 6 p.m. in respect to President Roosevelt. Industrial plants are asked to observe a minute of silence at 4 p.m., the hour of the president’s funeral. Mayor Strachen also requested that church chimes and bells be tolled from 4 to 5 p.m. and that all flags on public buildings be flown at half staff for 30 days to begin today” (Star-Gazette, April 13, 1945).

City schools held memorial assemblies that day. (As a retired teacher of American history and government, I found these assemblies, from the perspective of our time, to be very interesting.)

The Southside High School program began with an assembly in the auditorium. “The students repeated the pledge to the Flag, sang the Star-Spangled Banner and Onward Christian Soldiers, and Jack Tillinghast, Student Council president, read an appropriate passage from Scripture. After a period of silent prayer, Paul Lemon sang the Lord’s Prayer. The students then gathered in front of the school and the Flag was raised as buglers Richard Hamlin and Donald Weisenfluh played 'To The Colors.' The Flag then was lowered to half staff as the buglers played taps” (Star-Gazette).

In the afternoon, the program at Elmira Free Academy began with the “Pledge to the Flag, Star Spangled Banner, two hymns, O God Our Help In Ages Past, and God Of Our Fathers; one verse of Home On The Range, one of the President’s favorite songs; recitation of Walt Whitman’s, O Captain, My Captain, by Alan Biddle; violin solo, Handel’s Largo, by Julia Viscelli; talk Dr. Albert B. Helmkamp; violin arrangement of the Lord’s Prayer, Julia Viscelli; special arrangement of taps sung by the chorus, then sounded on the bugle by John Muccigrosso; last verse of the Star-Spangled Banner” (Star-Gazette).

According to the White House Historical Association, “FDR did not wish to lie in state at the U.S. Capitol, and it was decided to remove many aspects of a state funeral in the atmosphere of the nation at war. With so many men and women overseas, and so many families sacrificing at home, formalities seemed inappropriate.”

His point was made in the April 13 Star-Gazette when it reported that “One Elmira serviceman was officially reported today to have given his life in action, two families received information that their sons are prisoners of the Germans and another serviceman, a marine was reported to have been wounded on Iwo Jima.”

The soldier killed in action was 26-year-old Pfc. Leslie R. Whitney. He had been missing in action since March 24.

Four special religious services were held in Elmira: at 4 p.m. at the Southside Baptist Church, Trinity Episcopal Church and Grace Episcopal Church, and at 8 p.m. at the Orchard Street Synagogue. Trinity Episcopal Church bells were tolled 63 times to represent the president’s age.

The Sunday Telegram of April 15 reported: The service held at the Southside Baptist Church under the auspices of the Southside Ministerial Association was led by Rev. O. Glenn McKinley of the Wesleyan Methodist Church. He likened the service as that “for our most humble soldier. The soldier gave a life; our president could not do more. We give them both our sincere respect and for them both, our tears freely flow.”

More Elmira history: Chemung Chapter of Daughters of the American Revolution helps remember local connections

More Elmira history: This year marks milestone anniversary of a flood that devastated Elmira — but not in 1972

McKinley was chosen to lead the service because his son was listed as a war casualty. “Lt. Merrill W. McKinley has been missing in Italy since March 24, 1944. He was a Liberator pilot.”

A congregation estimated at 450 to 500 filled the Orchard Street Synagogue Saturday night. Rabbi Soloman Roodman eulogized, “He was a friend to the common man regardless of race, color, or creed and he was a friend to every man who favored the common man. He was a particular friend of the Jewish people. The world has lost a friend and lost the best friend we ever had.”

McKinley stated, “May we be able to say in the words of one of our noble presidents when he lay dying from an assassin’s bullet, ‘It is God’s way. His will be done— not ours.”

Jim Hare is a former history teacher and mayor of the City of Elmira. His column appears monthly in the Star-Gazette.