Ranger-Led Programs

To book a field trip, please call 706.655.5870.

Learn and Discover the Amazing History of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, Grades K-12

Discover the amazing history of our 32nd President, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and how he was able to lift America from the Great Depression and World War II. We will discuss President Roosevelt’s ties to Georgia, including his visits to Warm Springs and his impact on the state and the nation. Examine the effects of the New Deal in terms of the impact of the Civilian Conservation Corps, Agricultural Adjustment Act, Rural Electrification Administration, and Social Security Administration. You will also learn the interesting history of how Roosevelt’s visit to Warm Springs changed the lives of thousands of polio patients nationwide. The tour consist of the opportunity to see the museum, FDR’s Little White House, and the historic pools and springs.

Program length: 1 hour and 30 minutes

Program cost: $6.50/Student Free/two teachers $6.50/extra teachers

GSE: SS5H3, SS5HH, SS8H8

Georgia Standards Information

SS5H3a. Discuss the Stock Market Crash of 1929, Herbert Hoover, Franklin Roosevelt, the Dust Bowl, and soup kitchens.

SS5H3b. Analyze the main features of the New Deal; include the significance of the Civilian Conservation Corps, Works Progress Administration, and the Tennessee Valley Authority.

SS8H8d. Discuss President Roosevelt’s ties to Georgia, including his visits to Warm Springs and his impact on the state.

SS8H8e. Examine the effects of the New Deal in terms of the impact of the Civilian Conservation Corps, Agricultural Adjustment Act, Rural Electrification Administration, and Social Security Administration.

Ranger-Led FAQ:

Q: What comes included with the program cost?

A: The tour consists of a visit to the Franklin D. Roosevelt Memorial Museum, Tour of the Little White House and outbuildings, a viewing of the Unfinished Portrait, and a visit to the Historic Pools and Springs Complex.

Q: Do you offer a discount to Title 1 schools?

A: No

Q: How do these programs relate to what I am teaching?

A: Each of these programs were designed to align specifically around the grade-specific standards outlined by Georgia’s Standards of Excellence.

Q: Is there a cost or limit for chaperones?

A: You must have 20 or more paying participants to qualified for the group rate. There is no limit for the number of chaperones that can come on a field trip to the Little White House. Chaperones who pay in advance and included in the school payment pay the adult group rate of $9.00. Chaperones who pay upon arrival pay the regular adult rate $12.00 or senior rate $10.00.

Q: How early in advance do I need to book our program?

A: Two weeks.

Ranger-Led Additional Information

Educators and group leaders will be responsible for the behavior of their students at all times.

Please be on time for your scheduled program. If running late, call to let us know. We try to keep to schedule so that you may return to school on time. Occasionally, we have groups scheduled back-to-back and late arrivals may either be shorten or hurried.

Rain dates are available. We still present the program indoors as well as outdoors in misty rain or cold weather, so please have your students dress accordingly.

If you have any questions regarding ranger-led program reservations, please call the Little White House at 706.655.5870.

The Rangers will split the group into smaller groups if possible.

The gift shop offers souvenir packets for sale in advance. If anyone is interested in the packets please call the Little White House for more details.

Cost for Ranger led school group tour:

$6.50/Students

Free/two teachers

$6.50/extra teachers

$2.25/Students 5 and under

$10.00 Adult Pay in advance

$13.00 Adult pay upon arrival

$9.75 Senior Adult pay upon arrival

Self-Guided Explorations

Educators and group leaders have the opportunity to experience the Little White House on a self-guided basis. This consists of a 12-minute film, museum, flags and stones of America walk, the Little White House, and the Historic Pools and Springs Museum. Rangers are stationed at different locations to provide information and answer questions. We offer scavenger hunts for groups upon request.

Cost for groups of 20 or more paying participants:

$6.50/Students

Free/two teachers

$6.50/extra teachers

$2.25/Students 5 and under

$10.00 Adult Pay in advance

$13.00 Adult pay upon arrival

$9.75 Senior Adult pay upon arrival

Other Information

For any questions, visit the Visitor Center or call us at 706.655.5870.