Congratulations are in order for Sam Mendes and classical musician Alison Balsom, who are husband and wife. A spokesperson confirmed the happy news to HELLO! Online, simply stating that "Sam and Alison are married". The newlyweds chose to officially tie the knot in a registry office, before holding a blessing at the weekend at St Michael & All Angels, in the quaint vilage of Great Tew in Oxfordshire.

"The couple had a blessing," Rev Ginny Thomas revealed to the Daily Mail. "The wedding had been help previously at a register office. That's all I can say."

Sam Mendes and musician Alison Balsom have tied the knot

Sam, 51, and Alison, 38, have kept their romance largely out of the spotlight, although they did make a public appearance together in November, when Sam accompanied Alison to Buckingham Palace as she collected an OBE for her services to music from Prince Charles.

Prior to dating Alison, Skyfall director Sam was in a five year relationship with actress Rebecca Hall, following the end of his eight year marriage in 2011 to Kate Winslet. He and Kate are parents to a 13-year-old son, Joe, together.

Trumpet player Alison, meanwhile, separated in 2011 from her long-term partner, conductor Edward Gardner, with whom she has a six-year-old son Charlie.

Alison, 38, is an accomplished trumpet player

It's not known exactly when Sam and Alison started dating, but romance rumours first emerged last October when it was reported they were moving into a seaside home together in Dorset. An onlooker said at the time; "It's the talk of the village. They have moved here because Alison loves sailing and is keen to teach Sam."

Sign up to HELLO Daily! for the best royal, celebrity and lifestyle coverage

Email Address

By entering your details, you are agreeing to HELLO! Magazine User Data Protection Policy. You can unsubscribe at any time. For more information, please click here.

More Weddings

See more

Nicole Kidman's $20,000 wedding dress is a vintage masterpiece – see photo

The Big Little Lies actress married Keith Urban in 2006

Clare Balding's wife Alice Arnold: everything you need to know

BBC presenter Clare has been married since 2006

Rock heiress Faye Harris stuns in denim hotpants for hen party ahead of wedding to Ronnie Wood's son

Steve Harris' daughter Faye is preparing to marry Rolling Stones star Ronnie Wood's son Tyrone

GalleryAnant Ambani and Prince Charles's nuptials: Inside the top 5 most expensive weddings of all time

Anant Ambani and Radhika Merchant spent over $600 Million

Exclusive: How Victoria Beckham dodged dress 'disaster' pre-wedding

David and Victoria Beckham tied the knot in Dublin in 1999

Ambani bride Radhika dons iridescent bridesmaid dress and wedding jewels in unearthed video

Anant Ambani's new wife was her sister-in-law Isha Ambani's bridesmaid in 2020

Kate Hudson's rock-star dating history — from Chris Robinson to Danny Fujikawa

The Almost Famous star is also a mom-of-three with her three partners