In Folder Viewer, you can create folders and document tasks to optimize document control functionality.

When you create tasks from Folder Viewer, task assignees are able to view their tasks in the context of a folder. You can create document deficiency and pointer tasks for folders. In addition to folder tasks, you can create tasks for documents in the folder.

Task assignees can view document tasks in the context of the folder if the task is associated with the folder and document. You can create document deficiency, pointer, and signature required tasks for documents.

You set the following Folder Viewer options.

Launch a new viewer when opening a folder.

Open the documents in this folder in an associated viewer.

Dock the associated viewer.

Note that when creating folder and document tasks, the location options available are based on the options selected in the task template you are using.

As an illustration of a folder task, the admissions department at YUR University creates a folder for each student applicant and routes the student folder to admissions counselors for review. A complete student folder contains the following documents: application letter, counselor evaluation, transcript, and personal statement. When reviewing the documents for applicant Jane Smith's folder in Folder Viewer, the admissions counselor discovers that the application letter is missing. The admissions counselor creates a document deficiency task for the Jane Smith folder, and routes the folder back to the appropriate queue so that the application letter can be added to the folder.

As an illustration of a document task with folder associations, the Medical Records department at CM Hospital creates folder charts for each patient that visits the hospital. Elle Walker is responsible for reviewing patient charts after an outpatient visit or an inpatient discharge to identify deficiencies. Elle is currently reviewing the chart for patient Z1602037. Based on the Folder Viewer options Elle has selected, patient Z160237's documents opens in a docked viewer. Elle discovers that patient Z160237's chart contains an unsigned physician order. In Folder Viewer, Elle creates a new signing task for the unsigned order. Because Elle creates the task on the document in the Folder Viewer, the signing task is associated with the folder and the document. When the physician of record opens the signing task, it opens in Folder Viewer. The physician is able to review patient Z160237's other documents as needed, and signs the signing task.