Accessible Services, Collaborative Support

Compassionate Mental Health Care in Huntington Beach, Anaheim, & Garden Grove, CA

About Us

At Insightful Matters, we believe in providing a supportive and nurturing environment to help individuals, couples, and families discover their path to mental wellness. Our expert team of Therapists and Psychiatric Mental Health Nurse Practitioners (PMHNPs) is dedicated to offering personalized care tailored to meet your unique needs.

With multiple locations throughout Southern California including Anaheim, Huntington Beach and Garden Grove, we are your local partners in fostering resilience, understanding, and emotional growth.

It is hard to find therapy practices where the team is as committed as Insightful Matters is to providing excellent treatment. If you are struggling with mental health issues - or general life angst - consider calling this counseling center. They will work with you to help you meet your goals and feel better.

Casey T.

The owner of Insightful Matters Family Counseling Professions, Alison Johnson, is one-of-a-kind. You get so much heart with this therapy practice and if you have found them, consider yourself lucky. It can be challenging to find the right fit with a therapist and this place takes such care and thoughtfulness in providing top of the line care. Well done Alison for running such an incredible group practice with clinicians of the highest standards.

Emily C.

I have known Alison for a few years and feel comfortable and confident when referring clients over to her practice. Her office responds quickly to clients in need of appointments.

Crystal G.

Insightful Matters has been very easy to work with and accommodating. I know that when I refer to IM, the clients will be in good hands. It’s also a bonus that IM has bilingual therapists to serve a wide range of needs and populations as well as times for accommodating those who need weekends and after hours. It’s been great seeing clients being able to get in with seeing a psychiatrist as well. It’s nearly impossible to find a psychiatrist who accepts insurances and has availability! Insightful Matters is unique in that they try their best to work with the insurance plans of the clients and offer an array of specialties.

Christian N.

Alison is a gem of a therapist and human being. I have seen how she is so passionate to provide excellent and top quality mental health services with the OC and surrounding areas. They even provide medication management here now! This place is known for being one of the very best in Southern California. Highly recommend!

Adella J.

Our Services

Individual Therapy

Tailored to meet the personal challenges and growth goals of adults navigating life’s complexities. Our therapists help you develop coping strategies and strengthen your mental health in a one-on-one setting.

Couples Therapy

Foster deeper connections and overcome relational challenges with your partner. Our couples therapy is designed to address conflicts, enhance communication, and rebuild relationships based on mutual respect and understanding.

Child & Teen Therapy

Specialized support for the youngest members of your family. Our child and teen therapists use age-appropriate techniques to help children and teens express themselves and manage emotions through creative and engaging methods.

Family Therapy

Improve family dynamics and strengthen bonds through our family therapy sessions. We address issues affecting the family system, helping members understand one another better and communicate more effectively.

Medication Management

Our Psychiatric Mental Health Nurse Practitioners (PMHNPs) are dedicated to providing comprehensive evaluations and medication management tailored to your specific mental health needs. We focus on holistic care that respects your personal treatment preferences.

Farsi Speaking Therapists

Providing culturally sensitive therapy for Farsi-speaking individuals. Our Persian therapists understand the unique cultural nuances and challenges, offering personalized support to help you navigate life’s complexities and enhance your mental well-being.

Spanish Speaking Therapists

Offering culturally sensitive therapy for Spanish-speaking individuals, our Spanish therapists are well-versed in the specific cultural nuances and challenges faced by the Hispanic community. They provide personalized support to help you navigate life's complexities and improve your mental well-being.

ASL Therapy

Offering therapy in American Sign Language (ASL) for the Deaf and hard-of-hearing community. Our ASL therapists are skilled in communicating through sign language, ensuring accessible and effective mental health support tailored to your needs.

Online Therapy

Connect with our therapists from the comfort and privacy of your home. Our online therapy options provide flexibility and accessibility for ongoing support, no matter where you are.

Ready To Take The Next Step?

Book your initial intake with one of our therapists today and start your journey towards a healthier, happier you.