Our team has utilized the services of Central Escrow Group in Huntington Beach for over 10 years.

During that time we have found them to be head and shoulders above their competition.

They are an independent escrow company, meaning they are not affiliated with any real estate sales/brokerage office ensuring a completely neutral transaction which is exactly what an escrow company's primary responsibility is.....to be neutral in the transaction.

"Words cannot describe the amazing work of Central Escrow Group. As an experienced agent, I have dealt with many escrow companies. But the service that Central Escrow Group has provided is outstanding. Andrew Chan had introduced me to Central Escrow Group, and ever since then, I have not used another escrow company. The quality of service that Erika Valencia provided to me and my clients, made every transaction smoother. They are always on top of the deadlines, required documents, and answer every question in a simple manner. I highly recommend every agent to use Central Escrow Group in every transaction. They are just the best.”

Victor Shum

REALTOR

"Having professional and reliable services are nearly as important as the services you offer as a real estate professional business owner. Among these services, the Escrow company and Escrow Officers are the most important. They are the facilitators and the experts who know how to navigate and resolve many of the complexities that can occur during the real estate transaction. They arrange paperwork, make adjustments and communicate with all parties involved. They are, essentially, the mediators between all sides of every transaction to achieve goal of a successfully closing the transaction. Central Escrow Group is exactly this type of Escrow company and Sherri Wu & Lynn Lam are these types of Escrow Officers.”

“I sold a 4plex - a somewhat complicated transaction - in which Central Escrow managed all the paperwork. The sale went as smooth as could be expected during a turbulent time in the economy. Many years later I required some paperwork and Heidi at Central went above and beyond the call of duty to get me the necessary, time sensitive documentation in record time. Heidi is the Best! Much appreciated. Highly recommended.”

Sherry T.

Yelp Review, Laguna Beach, CA

“Faye Mazaheri and Central Escrow Group helped my client on closing the real estate transaction in Irvine, CA. Faye is super professional with solid experience in escrow procedures. Her knowledge about terms, clauses and documentations are really impressive to me. Faye is very detail oriented and has monitored each step in the escrow to make sure everything is in good shape.

I am a real estate agent and have worked with many escrow officers in the past. I strongly believe that Faye is one of the best I have worked with!”

Josh G.

Yelp Review, Irvine, CA

"I have been working with Heidi and Kimmie since 2005, I think was my first transaction with Central Escrow. I was referred by a friend and lender from B of A, and have been using them every time I am listing, and as often as possible when I can convince another listing agent we should use them. I sometimes forget how great they are until I don't get to choose Escrow and SURPRISE something comes up that would NOT have come up with Heidi or Kimmie. When I work with Heidi and Kimmie I never have to worry about whether a buyer's loan is funding or whether we are heading into rough waters, I get a call from Heidi prior forewarning me that things aren't progressing as they should be, which gives me time to get the ship back on tract. I can say nothing but the very best about Heidi and Kimmie. Cheers and thanks for your professionalism and brilliance.”

Perry H.

Yelp Review, Long Beach, CA