Each year, the Nobel Prizes are presented by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, the Swedish Academy, the Nobel Assembly and the Nobel Committee.

These renowned awards recognize and reward excellence in disciplines as varied and important as physics, literature, economics, chemistry, psychology, medicine and the well-known Nobel Peace Prize.

In the history of the Nobel Prizes (inaugurated in 1901), seven Spaniards have been the protagonists of the international scene by receiving such important recognition: José Echegaray, Santiago Ramón y Cajal, Jacinto Benavente, Juan Ramón Jiménez, Severo Ochoa, Vicente Aleixandre and Camilo José Cela.

Who are the winners of the 2022 Nobel Prizes and why?

The Nobel Prize in Physics 2022

Alain Aspect

“for experiments with entangled photons, establishing the violation of Bell inequalities and pioneering quantum information science”

John F. Clauser

“for experiments with entangled photons, establishing the violation of Bell inequalities and pioneering quantum information science”

Anton Zeilinger

“for experiments with entangled photons, establishing the violation of Bell inequalities and pioneering quantum information science”

Morten Meldal

“for the development of click chemistry and bioorthogonal chemistry”

K. Barry Sharpless

“for the development of click chemistry and bioorthogonal chemistry”

The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 2022

Svante Pääbo

“for his discoveries concerning the genomes of extinct hominins and human evolution”

The Nobel Prize in Literature 2022

Annie Ernaux

“for the courage and clinical acuity with which she uncovers the roots, estrangements and collective restraints of personal memory”

The Nobel Peace Prize 2022

Ales Bialiatski

“The Peace Prize laureates represent civil society in their home countries. They have for many years promoted the right to criticise power and protect the fundamental rights of citizens. They have made an outstanding effort to document war crimes, human right abuses and the abuse of power. Together they demonstrate the significance of civil society for peace and democracy”

Memorial

“The Peace Prize laureates represent civil society in their home countries. They have for many years promoted the right to criticise power and protect the fundamental rights of citizens. They have made an outstanding effort to document war crimes, human right abuses and the abuse of power. Together they demonstrate the significance of civil society for peace and democracy”

Center for Civil Liberties

“The Peace Prize laureates represent civil society in their home countries. They have for many years promoted the right to criticise power and protect the fundamental rights of citizens. They have made an outstanding effort to document war crimes, human right abuses and the abuse of power. Together they demonstrate the significance of civil society for peace and democracy”

The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 2022

Ben S. Bernanke

“for research on banks and financial crises”

Douglas W. Diamond

“for research on banks and financial crises”

Philip H. Dybvig

“for research on banks and financial crises”

More information:

Nobel Prize webpage

Nobel Prize 2021