About this Item

First American Edition. Large 12mo. Maroon cloth binding with stamped, gilt lettering and bands to front cover and spine. Former owner plaque tipped inside front cover. Jacinto Benavente y Martínez(12 August 1866 ? 14 July 1954) was one of the foremost Spanish dramatists of the 20th century. He was awarded theNobel Prize for Literaturein 1922 for the happy manner in which he has continued the illustrious traditions of the Spanish drama." Aliberalmonarchistand a critic ofSocialism, he was a reluctant supporter of theFrancorégime as the only viable alternative to what he considered the disastrous republican experiment of 1931?1936. In 1936 Benavente's name became associated with the assassination of the Spanish poet and dramatistFederico Garcia Lorca. This happened when the Nationalist newspapersEstampa,El Correo de Andalucia,andIdealcirculated a fake news story that Lorca had been killed as a reprisal for the Republican murder of Benavente. Very Good. Lower corners slightly bumped. Binding tight. Some, although few, stray pencil marks to interior. Seller Inventory # 33588

Contact seller

Report this item

Specialists in Americana, rare maps, and novels published before 1940 and with their original dustjackets.

Visit Seller's Storefront

Association Member Members of these associations are committed to maintaining the highest standards. They vouch for the authenticity of all items offered for sale. They provide expert and detailed descriptions, disclose all significant defects and/or restorations, provide clear and accurate pricing, and operate with fairness and honesty during the purchase experience.

Seller's business information

Yesterday's Gallery, ABAA

CT, U.S.A.

Terms of Sale:

We guarantee the condition of every book as it's described on the Abebooks web sites. If

you're dissatisfied with your purchase (Incorrect Book/Not as Described/Damaged) or if the

order hasn't arrived, you're eligible for a refund within 30 days of the estimated delivery

date. If you've changed your mind about a book that you've ordered, please use the Ask

bookseller a question link to contact us and we'll respond within 2 business days.

Earl Manz

Eastworks

Suite 314

116 Pleasant St.

Easthampton...

More Information

Shipping Terms:

Shipping costs are based on books weighing 2.2 LB, or 1 KG. If your book order is heavy or oversized, we may contact you to let you know extra shipping is required.