Definition of post-punk revival: It is 1999 (but you wish it was 1983). You have been listening to a lot of post-punk artists recently and want to start a band that has a similar sound. Your band consists of a guitarist, a bassist, a drummer, a synth player, and a vocalist, all of whom are about equal when it comes to musical experience. You wear a suit almost everywhere you go.

Imo, for me this tag transcends and changes. Before 2012-2014, there could be bands as listed, but for now there's real post-punk revival - bands like Skeleton Hands, Ritual Howls, Soft Kill, Traitrs, et cetera. Just whole new mass of true post-punk that was produced lately, being enormously huge rise of a genre.

Most of these are just indie bands and have little in common with true post-punk.. That said I have discovered quite a few gems in this sea of shite, so thank you taggers.

PROFANE. Altough this is somewhat nice to listen with your girlfriend (at last better than the other pop bullshit a girl might prefer to listen), still this is a BLASPHEMOUS name for this music. Gothic rock even has more of the romanticist, ethereal cold sound of original post-punk...

Most of these are a disgrace to post punk and honestly i don't see the justification to call them post punk in the first place they all play the same brand of indie rock

There is no characteristic sound or style that makes a band Post-punk Revival. It essentially just means bands that were influenced or have a similar to sound to bands from the Post-punk movement, which in itself was extremely broad and general. Stop being so surprised that a certain band is listed here.

Joy Division was great, better than Interpol, but am I such a douchebag to dislike Interpol to prove my love to Joy Division? Oh well. [2] Also huge 'seen live' fan too!

I'm an elitarist myself, but debating the indie genre or dismissing the garage rock and post-punk revival seems like a very low level of elitarism to me. I mean, Joy Division was great, better than Interpol, but am I such a douchebag to dislike Interpol to prove my love to Joy Division? Oh well. You all got very much to learn, Padawans.

so wait, i don't mean to be a jerk, i think he listens to stuff i like and he doesn't seem like a bad guy, but a question, how do death cab for cutie, kings of leon and interpol relate? and don't come to me with "because they suck" kind of arguments...