GERMANY-Saxony. Augustus, 1553-1586, dated 15 78 in field. Dresden Mint; Hans Biener, mintmaster. AR Thaler: 29 gm, 40 mm, 12 h. Obverse: Augustus bare-headed & facing right, armored & wielding a two handled sword, inscription: .AGVVSTVS. D:G. DVX. SAXO. SA. ROMA. IMP. Reverse: 12 part coat-of-arms topped by 3 ornate helmets. Inscription: HB .ARCHMARS CHAL. ET. ELEC. Davenport 9798, PCGS AU55, AWK Collection. I acquired the above coin recently, & despite areas of weakness, the coin has little wear & lovely toning 😊. Many large coins made by the early screw press method have this fault ☹️.

Augustus (July 31, 1526 - February 11, 1586) was son of Henry IV, Duke of Saxony, & Catherine Mecklenburg. He was Lutheran, belonged to the Albertine branch of the house of Wettin, & attended the University of Leipzig. He lived a life of wealth, privilege, & extravagance. When Henry IV died in 1541, his eldest son Maurice became Elector of Saxony, & Augustus received a lesser role. On October 7, 1548 Augustus married Anna, daughter of King Christian III of Denmark, & Dorothea of Saxe-Lauenburg. Together the couple had 15 children 😲! When Maurice died in July of 1553, Augustus became Elector of Saxony. Throughout his electorship he was at odds with the Ernestine branch of the family, & to strengthen his position he cultivated a friendship with the Habsburgs. The Habsburgs were a powerful family dynasty that ruled much of central Europe for a long time. Lutheranism evolved into a number of different sects & Calvinism made an impact in the state of Saxony. Augustus managed to restore genuine Lutheranism to Saxony by 1580 with the Lutheran Book of Concord. Augustus did expand his power base by adding a number of weaker territories to his realm.

Diptych paintings of Augustus & his wife Anna, by Lucas Carnach, circa 1572.

His wife, Electress Anna, died in 1585 & three months later he married Agnes Hedwig, the daughter of the prince of Anhalt. Agnes was 13 years old 🫢, & Augustus was almost 60 🙄. Augustus died one month later & was succeeded by his oldest son Christen I.

The British Museum has one of Augustus' treasured toys, pictured below, an exquisitely made model of a galleon that functions as a clock-automaton. This magnificent toy has a small clock inset showing hours & minutes while sailors wielding hammers in the crow's nests strike the hours & quarters. The ship traveled independently along a table, originally on wheels, & as it moved it played tunes on a small pipe organ that were accompanied by drumbeats. While all this was going on a group of miniature figures representing the Electors of the Holy Roman Empire would circle around Emperor Rudolf II who was seated on a throne below a canopy. As a grand finale the ship fired it's main cannon in the bowsprit that triggered a fuse firing the rest of the cannons 😂. I wish I had a toy like this as a kid instead of a stupid Erector Set 🤔....

Wikipedia was used as a reference.

13 hours ago, Al Kowsky said:

Donna, That's a lovely coin 😍, the post Renaissance German engravers really knew how to "strut their stuff". A quick comparison of the coat-of-arms of our coins reveals how the state of Saxony grew 😉.

At least according to Numista, it seems that most of the coat of arms is actually Spanish. Here's my full write-up of my example, based on the Numista description at https://en.numista.com/catalogue/pieces32828.html . (Back in 1986 when I bought it, I certainly wasn't doing write-ups; I only got into that habit when I started collecting ancients. Fortunately, I did keep most of the receipts for coins and medals I purchased, which is how I know when and where I bought the coin. I've been writing up my British and other world coins and medals very slowly over the last few years, mostly when I post them online.)

Saxony (Albertine Line), AR Broad Thaler 1626, Johann Georg I, Elector of Saxony (1615-1656). Obv. Half-length armored figure to right, holding sword over right shoulder and helmet (with visor facing front) in left hand, IOHAN. GEORG. D. G. DVX SAX. IVL. CLIV. ET. MONTI / Rev. Spanish shield of manifold arms (divided into 18 shields within), with central shield of electoral Saxony, 6 ornate helmets above divide date 16 – 26 to upper left and right, SA. ROM. IMP. ARCHIM. ET ELECT., mint mark H – I (Dresden) divided by the Spanish shield. 45 mm., 29 g. Davenport 7601, KM 132. Purchased from Harmer, Rooke Numismatists, Inc., New York, NY, March 5, 1986.

I must say that some of the "6 ornate helmets" above the Spanish shield are very peculiar-looking, including the one (third from the right) that has a top portion resembling a medieval court jester.