The Kingdom of Saxony (Königreich Sachsen), is after Prussia, the second largest German state east of the Elbe river. Previously it had risen its status from an electorate to an independent kingdom with the support of France, then the dominant power in Central Europe, during the Revolutionary Wars. Thought after the Peace of Vienna, and because of the diplomatic lobby of Prussia and Austria, it was not allowed to become a member of the Confederation of the Rhine.

After the Revolutionary Wars Saxony experienced a huge industrial boom. The country was the first real industrial region in Central Europe. Fortunate to have coal fields near its main urban centers, Leipzig, Chemnitz and Dresden, it could easily industrialize thereby have autonomy over its more powerful neighbours to the north (Prussia) and south (Austria). This helped Saxony rise to a leading industrial and commercial state in Central Europe, thanks to its sales successes and the economic dominance of Saxon industry and the rapid establishment of a powerful long-distance railway network.

Government[]

The Saxon Basic Law (Sächsische Grundgesetz) of 1850, was established in the wake of the German Revolutions of 1848. It transformed Saxony into a constitutional monarchy, with the King as the head of state and a Minister-President as the head of government.

The Constitution guarantees the civil liberties of the citizens of Saxony, including freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, freedom of religion, and the right to a fair trial. It also establishes the principle of equality before the law, regardless of social status, religion, or gender. The legislative power is vested in a bicameral parliament (Landtag of Saxony) consisting of First Chamber (I. Kammer) and Second Chamber (II. Kammer)

The executive power is exercised by the King and the Cabinet, led by the Minister-President. The King retains the power to appoint and dismiss the Minister-President, but the Cabinet is responsible to the parliament. The judiciary is independant with a Supreme Court (Höchstgericht) and lower criminal civil and admintrative courts. The judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the King on the recommendation of the Minister-President.

Any constitutional amendment requires the approval of a two-thirds majority in both houses of parliament and the consent of the King.

Kings of Saxony

Frederick Augustus I (1805-1827)

Anthony (1827-1836)

Frederick Augustus II (1836-1848)

John I (1848-1854)

Albert I (1854-1873)

Frederick Augustus III (1873 to date)

The Royal Saxon Army (Königlich Sächsische Armee), other than Prussian, was one of the firsts to implement military reforms of French usage. Instead of advertising in Germany for recruitment it establish a nationwide recruiting circuit with commissions. Soldiers were enlisted for fixed period of service of eight to ten years.

The consistories of Saxony were dissolved and integrated into the official Evangelical Lutheran State Church of Saxony (Evangelisch-lutherische Landeskirche des Sachsen, EvLKS)

The district (Kreis) of Saxony are the following: