Described by the Boston Globe as “a phenom, whose pose and pipes are astounding” and by Variety Magazine as having “a lovely, clear soprano,” Andrea Ross is an internationally recognized vocalist, theatre performer, and recording artist. Ms. Ross has been singing professionally for 20 years as an interpreter of musical theatre repertoire, bringing Broadway classics and the American Songbook to leading venues across the world, both in symphony settings and in recital.

Ms. Ross’s career began in her hometown of Boston, MA, where she was the youngest recipient of the prestigious Elliot Norton Award for Outstanding Actress. She then caught the attention of legendary Broadway and West End composer, Andrew Lloyd Webber, who became her mentor and took Ms. Ross under his wing for several years. Andrew Lloyd Webber and Universal Classics and Jazz, produced Andrea’s solo album, Moon River, which debuted on the Top 50 UK Charts.

During her time in the UK, Ms. Ross performed as a soloist at prominent venues including the Royal Albert Hall, Hampton Court Palace, St. Martin-In-The-Fields, and Andrew Lloyd Webber’s Sydmonton Festival. A highlight was a performance at Wembley Stadium, where she was a guest artist for Concert for Diana, hosted by the Royal Family to commemorate Princess Diana.

Andrea Ross has been a soloist with top symphony orchestras including the Boston Symphony Orchestra, Baltimore Symphony Orchestra, Detroit Symphony Orchestra, Utah Symphony Orchestra, Phoenix Symphony, South Dakota Symphony Orchestra, Bangor Symphony Orchestra, Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra, BBC Symphony Orchestra in London, and KBS Symphony Orchestra in Seoul, South Korea. She has worked with conductor greats such as Simon Lee, Keith Lockhart, and Andy Einhorn. With Walt Disney’s music director and arranger, Ted Ricketts, Ms. Ross also performs symphonic Disney concerts throughout the country and internationally. Andrea Ross has sung at music festivals such as the Grand Tetons Music Festival and the Lakes Area Music Festival, performing Broadway programs and her Judy Garland Tribute concert.

Andrea Ross was handpicked by Andrew Lloyd Webber to originate the lead role of ‘Swallow’ in the US tour of Whistle Down The Wind. Ms. Ross then went on to perform in the Broadway Tour of Rodgers and Hammerstein's The Sound of Music, directed by Jack O’Brien and music directed by Andy Einhorn. She has performed leading roles across the country with professional theater companies, including Theatre Aspen, Arizona Theatre Company, Pasadena Playhouse, Trinity Repertory Company in Providence, Wheelock Family Theater and the Lyric Stage Company in Boston. Ms. Ross was featured at the esteemed 92nd Street Y in New York City for the celebrated ‘Lyrics and Lyricists’ concert series, which honored Broadway composer Jerry Herman. Andrea Ross has also performed solo shows at Feinstein’s/ 54 Below and other New York City venues.

Andrea Ross is the Gold Medal Winner of the 2022 American Traditions Vocal Competition and a recipient of Boston’s most prestigious theatrical award, the Elliot Norton Award for Outstanding Actress.

Andrea’s recording credits include her solo album, Moon River, produced by Universal Classics and Jazz, multiple tracks on Andrew Lloyd Webber 60, produced by Universal Music Group, and Over the Rainbow charity album, which peaked at No. 1 on the UK Compilation Charts.

Upcoming concerts for the 2022-23 season include appearances with the Lakes Area Music Festival, Savannah Philharmonic, Phoenix Symphony, and Detroit Symphony Orchestra.