Charlene Choi Tsoek-jin, 蔡卓妍 known as “Ah Sa 阿Sa” is a Hong Kong Canadian actress and singer. She is a member of Cantopop group Twins, along with Gillian Chung.

Aside from her musical career, Choi has become a successful actress in the Hong Kong film industry, co-starred alongside actors such as Andy Lau, Eason Chan, Jay Chou, Mike He, Wu Chun and Nicholas Tse.

Now, let’s take look at her BaZi four pillar of destiny.

Charlene Choi and Ronald Cheng knew each other through the film "The Pursuit of August 15", scandals are spread that they are dating in the set of this film. At the beginning of 2010, a news broke out on the internet that they got married. On March 17, 2010, at the promotion of the film "The Secret Order of Beauty", she said that she had broken up with Ronald Cheng for some time, and the two were separated because of mutual understanding. On the other side, Ronald Cheng also admitted that he had been separated from Charlene Choi during the promotion of the movie "The Treasure Box of Yue Guang". On March 27, 2010, the "Apple Daily" in Hong Kong published the marriage certificate that the two married in the Vannes District of Los Angeles, USA as early as January 31, 2006. In the evening of the same day, the two attended a press conference and admitted that they were married as early as 2006 and had completed the divorce procedures for several months in 2010.

Afterwards, Charlene Choi and William Chan publicly kissed each other after their collaboration in the film "The Secret Order of Beauty", and they publicly admitted their relationship on October 10, 2010, on September 20, 2015, they both issued a statement on Weibo announcing their breakup.

In the fall of 2017, Charlene Choi was rumoured to be dating billionaire 'Mahjong Prince' boyfriend Anthony Shi Hengcong, and later confirmed her new relationship in person during an event. A number of reports claimed that Charlene and Anthony had actually broken up.

Now let's go back to her BaZi Four Pillars of Destiny. Her fame comes from her Useful Ten Gods 喜用神, metal her output stars. With strong useful metal, earth is also her favorable but earth cannot be too strong. This is why 2007 WuShen 戊申 TaYun was good for her career. This BaZi is most afraid of fire but whenever fire appears, Bing 丙 and Ding 丁 get combined to become her favorable. In terms of career and finance this is a good BaZi.

But, this is not good BaZi in terms of love life. Can you see the reason? As a couple, she will always face some problems.

Read more at

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charlene_Choi