Earlier in March this year, Charlene Choi and Ronald Cheng Chung Kei’s secret marriage and subsequent divorce were revealed. Shortly after Charlene separated from Ronald, there were rumors that she was dating a wealthy man. It turns out that Charlene is truly dating EEG colleague, William Chan Wai Ting instead!

Rumors claim that Ronald Cheng (while married to Charlene) may have pursued Angelababy last year, who was dating William Chan at the time. During the filming Happy Home<花田囍事2010>, Ronald allegedly sent her frequent text messages. An inside source said, “One time, Angelababy saw a beautiful outfit in a magazine and asked for Ronald’s opinion. Ronald quickly asked his friend in Hong Kong to purchase the item and send it to mainland [where they were filming at the time]. Angelababy was ecstatic over the gesture. Ronald used the same gesture when he pursued Miriam Yeung Chin Wah. Angelababy told her friends that a ‘CEO’ [the title refers to Ronald’s father’s position as Director of EMI Asia] was pursuing her. When the news reached Charlene’s ears, she was hurt deeply.” Labeled as the third party in Charlene and Ronald’s relationship last year, Angelababy was quite upset.

Furthermore, rumors claim that Charlene and William may have fallen in love during the filming of Beauty on Duty <美麗密令> last year. At that time, Charlene was still married with Ronald and William was dating model, Angelababy. William started dating Angelababy after they filmed a Disney program together in 2005. Since the pair was often separated due to work schedules, Angelababy and William broke up last year.

Dispelling the rising cheating rumors, Charlene clarified the timing of her relationship with William. Charlene said, “We just started dating. We were both single at the time and have been together for three months.” Charlene added that she has been friends with William for a long time. Due to their frequent work collaborations, it was very natural for mutual feelings to develop.

William also stressed that he and Charlene were single when they started dating. “I did not want to hide our dating relationship because I did not want to hurt Charlene. We decided to admit our dating publicly because we want to lead happy, normal relationship where we can hold hands publicly when we go shopping and to the theaters. We hope to receive everyone’s blessing.” William also said that he did not mind that Charlene was married previously.

Charlene’s ex-husband, Ronald Cheng, was rumored to be dating anchor woman, Yu Si Man. Ronald said, “I had dinner with her a few times. We are still in the development stage and not much can be said.” Ronald gave his blessings to Charlene and William regarding their dating relationship.

Some netizens even declared that Charlene’s dating of William was to seek revenge on Angelababy, who was was rumored with Ronald Cheng. Nevertheless, Charlene’s good friends, Gillian Chung and Joey Yung Cho Yi, sent their blessings and told William to treasure Charlene.

Excerpt from Tom.com

Jayne: Ronald and Charlene’s marriage seemed to be on the verge of collapse by the end of 2009, which was when Charlene started filming a movie with William Chan and when Ronald was rumored to be pursuing Angelababy. From past tabloids, Ronald seems to have a flirtatious past. When Charlene and Ronald announced their divorce, it was on good terms and no one spoke poorly of each other.

The love rectangle is too difficult to digest. I hope it’s not true because it implies a lot of cheating for all the people involved.