The graphs below provide an overview of the climate in Zürich (Canton of Zurich), Switzerland. They present long-term patterns and averages of weather conditions over a 30-year period.

Average day and night temperature

The mean minimum and maximum temperatures over the year.

Monthly hours of sunshine

The average monthly total hours of sunshine over the year

Daily percent of sunshine

The mean percent of hours of sunhours during the day over the year

Monthly precipitation

The mean monthly precipitation over the year, including rain, snow, hail etc.

Monthly rainy days

The average number of days each month with rain, snow, hail etc.

Average humidity

The mean monthly relative humidity over the year

Average wind speed

The mean monthly wind speed over the year (in meters per second)

The best time of year to visit Zürich in Switzerland

Zürich has an oceanic climate and the weather is very changeable due to proximity of the mountains. The temperature is pretty low and large differences can occur between day and night. Therefore, always prepare for both hot and cold weather when you pack your suitcase. However, because Zurich is on the southern side of the mountains the temperature is almost always a bit higher than the average in Switzerland. And in summer the temperature can even rise to pleasant heights.

Summer is the best time to travel, although it can rain more. When you can settle for slightly lower temperatures, then you can choose to go in May, June and September with a lot less tourists around.

During the months of June, July, August and September you are most likely to experience good weather with pleasant average temperatures that fall between 20°C and 26°C.

Other facts from our historical weather data:

Which is the warmest month in Zürich?

July has an average maximum temperature of 25°C and is the warmest month of the year.

Which is the coldest month in Zürich?

The coldest month is February with an average maximum temperature of 5°C.

Which is the wettest month in Zürich?

June tops the wettest month list with 140 mm of rainfall.

Which is the driest month in Zürich?

February is the driest month with 90 mm of precipitation.

Which is the sunniest month in Zürich?

July is the sunniest month with an average of 230 hours of sunshine.

No idea where to travel to this year? We have a tool that recommends destinations based on your ideal conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.