ATLANTA RHYTHM SECTION

Formed from the cream of Atlanta’s studio musicians, the Atlanta Rhythm Section (actually hailing from nearby Doraville, Georgia) came together in 1970 after working on a Roy Orbison recording session.

Keyboardist Dean Daughtry and drummer Robert Nix had been members of Orbison's backing group, the Candymen, and Daughtry and guitarist J.R. Cobb had been members of the Top 40 hitmakers Classics IV (“Spooky,” “Stormy,” “Traces”). Rounding out the original ARS lineup were vocalist Rodney Justo (replaced after the first album by Ronnie Hammond), guitarist Barry Bailey, and bassist Paul Goddard.

The group recorded two albums for Decca Records in 1972, neither of which made an impact, before signing to Polydor Records in 1974. Their first album for that company, Third Annual Pipe Dream, only reached number 74 in the US. The next two albums fared worse. Finally, in 1977, “So In To You” became the band’s breakthrough single, reaching the US Top 10, and the album from which it came, A Rock And Roll Alternative, went Gold. Their platinum followup album, Champagne Jam, broke into the Top 10 in 1978, together with the blockbuster single “Imaginary Lover” (“I’m Not Gonna Let It Bother Me Tonight” was another major hit from the same album). Nix left after that, replaced on drums by Roy Yeager. During this magical timeframe, ARS performed at the White House for President Jimmy Carter, another notable Georgia product.

After an extended break, the band got back together in the mid-‘90s and re-recorded some of their best and best-known songs. The live-in-the-studio sound of Atlanta Rhythm Section ‘96 presents a different, less polished take on some classic tunes and captures the sound of their live performances from that period. Three original band members returned: singer Ronnie Hammond, guitarist Barry Bailey and keyboardist Dean Daughtry. They were joined by Steve Stone on guitar, Justin Senker on bass and Sean Burke on drums. The group also cut a second version of these songs with the same lineup except for new drummer R. J. Vealey.

It was around this time that ARS was elected to the Georgia Music Hall of Fame. The band was honored at a September 1996 induction ceremony at the Georgia World Congress Center. In the first part of 2001, lead singer Ronnie Hammond made a commitment to perform with the ensemble touring group Voices of Classic Rock and this led to a parting of ways with ARS.

Original singer Rodney Justo and original bassist Paul Goddard returned to ARS in 2011 after lengthy absences from the group. Sadly, Goddard passed away April 29, 2014 of cancer in Atlanta. Nonetheless, Atlanta Rhythm Section will carry on, continuing to make concert appearances showcasing their many classic hits and outstanding musical abilities.

The Strand and Capitol Theatres at the Appell Center for the Performing Arts continue to feature the very best artists and stories from around the region and across the country. We are excited to welcome you to experience the joy and inspiration that can only come from the live performing arts!

The 2024-25 season is here! We know you will have an amazing experience at this performance, and welcome you to click through all the pages to see all that we have coming this season... You won't want to miss it!

Tickets and Appell Center Memberships can be purchased online at appellcenter.org, in person at 50 N. George Street, York, or by calling the Box Office at 717-846-1111.

THIS MONTH

OLD GODS OF APPALACHIA (7/25) is an eldritch horror fiction podcast set in an Alternate Appalachia, a world where these mountains were never meant to be inhabited. This world feels eerily similar to the hills and hollers we’ve grown up with, but there are some tell-tale differences. Names of towns and counties may be altered. Historical events slide forward or backward in time. And then, of course, there are the monsters. This live show includes a staged storytelling performance similar to an old time radio play, featuring show creators Steve Shell and Cam Collins, a rotating cast of professional actors, and live musical performances.

GLATFELTER INSURANCE BROADWAY SERIES - SUBSCRIBE TODAY!

We are excited to continue presenting BROADWAY'S BEST for your enjoyment in the 2024-25 season with the Glatfelter Insurance Broadway Series! Whether you have seen these shows before or if they are new titles to you, we welcome you to experience them all here in the glorious Strand Theatre.

CHICAGO THE MUSICAL (11/27) Still the one musical with everything that makes Broadway shimmy-shake, this classic American musical tells the universal tale of fame, fortune and all that jazz, with one showstopping song after another and the most astonishing dancing you’ve ever seen. After 27 years and more than 10,000 performances, it is hotter than ever!

TINA: THE TINA TURNER MUSICAL (1/27) An uplifting comeback story like no other, the inspiring journey of a woman who broke barriers and became the Queen of Rock n’ Roll is set to the pulse-pounding soundtrack of Tina Turner's most beloved hits. This electrifying sensation will send you soaring to the rafters.

DEAR EVAN HANSEN (3/26) The TONY and GRAMMY-winning Best Musical Sensation DEAR EVAN HANSEN is the first musical to take a groundbreaking look at our complex, interconnected and social media-filled lives. It’s a powerful story about how we can find each other—and ourselves—along the way, with some of the most iconic musical theatre songs from the last decade: “You Will Be Found,” “Waving Through a Window” and more.

Ordering all three shows now provides you with a host of exclusive subcriber benefits...

The same seats for all 3 Glatfelter Insurance Broadway Series shows* in advance of public single ticket sales

Discounts on select performances (and even more savings as an Appell Center Member)

Ticket exchange benefits, beginning September 3 (Appell Center Members may exchange when placing their subscription order)

Payment plans available to pay over time

Immediate access to additional single tickets for all three shows within this series!

* When purchasing a subscription online, “Best Available” seating is the only option. If you prefer to choose your own seats, please call the Box Office at (717) 846-1111 and a representative will assist you.

Don't miss your chance to experience these amazing shows in the best available seats at an amazing price... and in the region's premier venue—the historic Strand Theatre!

For even greater savings and more perks for the entire household, become an Appell Center Member, starting at just $75 for a full year of benefits!

QUESTIONS? Call our Box Office at (717) 846-1111 or email boxoffice@appellcenter.org and a representative will be happy to help you.

COMING THIS FALL

CROCE PLAYS CROCE - 50th Anniversary (9/11) Backed by legendary band members Gary Mallaber (Van Morrison/Steve Miller Band), bassist/singer David Barard (Dr. John), and guitarist/violinist James Pennebaker (Delbert McClinton), and accompanied by singers Jackie Wilson and Katrice Donaldson, gifted multi-instrumentalist A.J. Croce presents a moving, multi-media experience featuring original songs and tracks from his beloved father's mega-successful albums included in THE DEFINITIVE CROCE, which is being released this year for what would have been Jim’s 80th birthday before his untimely passing.

THE MUSIC OF BILLY JOEL & ELTON JOHN STARRING MICHAEL CAVANAUGH (9/12) features the greatest hits of these two great rock piano legends. Songs include “Piano Man,” “Rocket Man,” “Bennie and the Jets,” “Movin’ Out,” “I’m Still Standing,” “My Life” and many more. Ranked in the Top 50 touring shows in the last two years, it has been called “Amazing” (The New York Times) and “Brilliant” (Variety). Michael Cavanaugh, who was handpicked by Billy Joel to star in the hit Broadway musical Movin’ Out, receiving both Tony and Grammy nominations in the lead role, stars in this production.

GARRISON KEILLOR TONIGHT (9/19) An evening of stand-up, storytelling, audience song, and poetry. One man, one microphone. There are sung sonnets, limericks and musical jokes, and the thread that runs through it is the beauty of growing old. PLUS, the latest News from Lake Wobegon!

... there are simply too many shows to list, including TODD RUNDGREN, THE PRICE IS RIGHT LIVE!, STOMP, BÉLA FLECK & ABIGAIL WASHBURN, THE ULTIMATE QUEEN CELEBRATION, CHARLIE BERENS, PUDDLES PITY PARTY, BEN FOLDS and so much more. Join our email list and get all the news as it happens!

FILM

CAPFILM continues to provide unique opportunities for moviegoers of all ages and styles...

We are excited to once again welcome families and young movie fans to our FREE SUMMER FILM SERIES on Wednesday mornings at 10am in the historic Capitol Theatre. For 5 weeks beginning on July 10 we will be featuring the initial films of your favorite animated franchises - How to Train Your Dragon, The Land Before Time, Kung Fu Panda, Shrek and Despicable Me! Come inside and cool off... and bring the whole family!

Experience the world of anime with our STUDIO GHIBLI FIM SERIES on the big screen in the Capitol Theatre every Saturday night in September, and explore some of the most beloved and celebrated films in animation history—NAUSICAÄ OF THE VALLEY OF THE WIND - 40th Anniversary (9/7) - one of the most breathtaking and exhilarating animated films of all time... and the foundation Studio Ghibli was built upon... PRINCESS MONONOKE (9/14) - an epic masterpiece that is possibly the most action-packed of all the Studio Ghibli films... SPIRITED AWAY (9/21) - another dazzling masterpiece and winner of the Academy Award® for Best Animated Feature... THE BOY AND THE HERON (9/28) - legendary filmmaker Hayao Miyazaki’s critically-acclaimed fantasy adventure and winner of the 2023 Academy Award for Best Animated Feature. All films will be in Japanese with English subtitles.

Click HERE for more CapFilms... new titles are being added all the time!

These are just the HIGHLIGHTS of our 2024-25 schedule! New events are being added to the calendar all the time, so visit appellcenter.org for the most updated schedule… and be sure you are on our email list for announcements.

While we are no longer requiring COVID safety precautions, unless required by artists or rising conditions, our audiences can have confidence that their Appell Center experience will be healthy and safe. We continue to encourage guests to wear masks should they choose. Our facilities are sanitized before and after all performances, deep cleaning practices are in place, and our HVAC systems feature MERV 13 filtration and maximum fresh air circulation. Up-to-date health and safety information is always available at appellcenter.org.

We look forward to welcoming you through our doors often in the coming months!

The Appell Center continues its focus on bringing the very best entertainment to diverse audiences of all ages… but wait, there’s more!

In addition to planning the shows on our stages, the entire organization is committed to recognizing and celebrating the artistic talent of our community in many ways.

Learning Workshops for All Ages

Acting... dance... singing... storytelling... jazz... improvisation... even circus arts! These are just a few of the focus areas that are available for students age 3 and up to explore. PLUS, we have added Tot Rock, an early learning program for our youngest friends age 0-2!

THIS SUMMER ~ Sharpen your skills, not your pencils!

A brand new slate of weeklong summer camp workshops are on sale now!

TOT ROCK RETURNS! • June 1, 22, 29, 10AM - 3PM

Ages: 0-5 and their adults

This early childhood music learning program shares a well-rounded musical experience with infants, toddlers, and their families—an experience rooted in melody, rhythm, repetition and collaboration. Even more important than these musical concepts is the quality time Tot Rock will provide you and your children in a safe, fun, positive space full of music, laughter, and shared experiences. Music can be a foundation of family learning, so let’s make some joyful noise here at the Appell Center!

SOUND DESIGN FOR FILM • June 17 - 20, 10AM - 3PM

Ages: 13-18 (entering 7th grade and up)

Design a short film and learn all about “foley” – the art of finding or creating the right sound for what is on-screen. Watch your work on the big screen with your guests in the Capitol Theatre at the end of the week!

GREAT FILMS, STARRING YOU • June 24 - 28, 10AM - 4PM

Ages: 13-18 (entering 7th grade and up)

This camp encourages active observation and creative exploration of plot, theme, character, relationships, emotions and subtext. All students will receive their own copy of the final film that will premiere on screen at the Capitol Theatre.

WHAP-AMA-PHONE • July 8 - 12, 2 - 4PM

Ages: 13-18

With Keystone Kidspace, design and create your own PVC Pipe “Whap-ama-phones.” Then, learn a few songs and perform a concert at the in the Capitol Theatre! No maker or music experience required.

COMEDY IMPROV • July 22 - 26

Ages: 8-12, 10AM - 1PM

Ages 13-18, 1:30 - 4:30PM

Come ready to laugh the day away while learning classic and new wave improv games that will jostle your brain and tickle your funny bone! The week ends with a student performance on the historic Capitol Theatre stage!

Click HERE to register your child today for one or more of these amazing and unique workshops they will only experience at the Appell Center!

Community Engagement

In July 2022 the Appell Center began a collaboration with Creative Generation, a group committed to pioneering projects in the arts and cultural, education and social change fields to support those organizations driving systemic change in their communities. This work produced an actionable plan elevating knowledge within our community to help inform a set of tools to create a societal hub for arts and cultural education in York County, PA. Listening sessions with key partners and their constituents were conducted, and information gathered from those sessions has helped inform the next steps of our strategic plan in this area.

At the completion of the active phase of this collaboration, the following statement was crafted and made public on our website:

The Appell Center for the Performing Arts seeks to be a cultural hub for the community in York.

We play a vital role in the local ecosystem, collaborating with educational, civic and other cultural organizations, informal networks, and individual artists to create experiences as outlets for healthy, creative expression.

Together, we believe in connecting the arts with education, personal wellbeing and family life.

We seek to build meaningful pathways in arts, cultural and creative learning for the York community through consistent, reliable opportunities which provide

engagement with a diversity of artistic and cultural forms;

multi-generational creative participation; and

transformative experiences for creative youth.

We strive to be a relationship-builder, convener and host.

PARTNER WITH THE APPELL CENTER

There are many ways to join us in partnership, but here are some common starting points:

Attend a free or low-cost workshop and event. We have workshops and classes where you can pick a price that feels right for you and your family.

Host an event or program at the Appell Center. Our Community Support Fund helps support local non-profits and mission-aligned projects with reduced rental fees.

Bring a group to one of our performances. The Community ConnecTix program offers complimentary tickets to local nonprofit groups every season.

Invite us to support an event or program. Our team can host tables at your events to promote performing arts opportunities in the community.

Click HERE to learn more about our Discovery Sessions and Community Engagement initiatives, and how you might work with us in partnership to bring one of your ideas to the community at large!

Covid-19 policy

For current policies and updates, please visit appellcenter.org.

The Appell Center will continually monitor Covid-19 data with guidance from the Pennsylvania Department of Health. All are encouraged to regularly visit our website or call the Box Office for up-to-date information, a list of Frequently Asked Questions and any specific instructions for your scheduled performance.

Bag check

It is recommended that you do not bring any bags with you in order to expedite entry. Bag checks are mandatory and conducted by our security team. Metal (or wooden) rods will be used to search each bag. Guests will be asked to open and hold their own bags while they are being searched for any items not permitted in the building.

Concessions

Concessions are available at both the Capitol and Strand Theatres. All alcoholic beverages are sold in reusable cups which must be purchased with your first drink. Guests are encouraged to bring their cups back to our concessions stands during future visits to purchase drinks at the refill price. Non-Appell Center cups will not be eligible for refills.

Restrooms

Restrooms are located on both levels of the Strand Theatre and on the first floor of the Capitol Theatre. Accessible restrooms are available in both theatres.

Accessible Services

ADA-compliant seating is offered in several locations. Assistive-listening devices are available for all Strand Theatre shows and select films. These devices can be requested from a member of our Front of House staff when you arrive or by calling the Box Office in advance at 717-846-1111. We also offer audio description and closed captioning for some films. Sign language interpretation may be available when requested at least two weeks in advance. Notify the Box Office of any needs when purchasing tickets. We’re happy to arrange the perfect seats and services for you.

Smoking

The Appell Center is a non-smoking facility, including e-cigarettes and vape pens.

Child booster seats

Complimentary booster seats are only available in the Strand Theatre on a first-come, first-served basis. Please see one of our Ushers when you arrive for assistance.

Electronic devices

We appreciate your cooperation in silencing all electronic devices before the performance begins.

Photo/recording policy

For most events, photography/recording of any type is prohibited. However, for some events, non-professional, non-flash, photography is permitted. Any adjusted policy will be advertised on signs at the entrance to the venue. The Appell Center reserves the right to confiscate any photo or recording device if policies are ignored. Patrons found possessing professional equipment not expressly authorized will be asked to leave their cameras in their vehicles or will otherwise be escorted from the venue.

Click HERE to learn more about our policies.