Scarlett Johansson attends the Focus Features and Loreal premiere of "Scoop" at the Museum of Modern Art in New York on July 26, 2006. The gorgeous actress plays Sondra Pransky, an American journalism student in London, who scoops a big murder story and begins an affair with an aristocrat (Hugh Jackman) as the incident unfurls.

Wilmer Valderrama, host of MTV's "Yo Momma," attends the Focus Features and Loreal premiere of "Scoop" at the Museum of Modern Art in New York on July 26, 2006. The comedy, written and directed by Woody Allen, focuses on a young college journalist who lands the biggest scoop of the century from a spirit that arose while she was a volunteer in a magic trick.

Lauren Bacall, who recently starred as herself in an episode of "The Sopranos," attends the Focus Features and Loreal premiere of "Scoop" at the Museum of Modern Art in New York on July 26, 2006. Woody Allen was forced to shoot the movie in London after Hollywood studios, tired of the dwindling box-office grosses his films have generated, revoked the creative freedom he had enjoyed for most of his career.

Vogue Editor in Chief Anna Wintour, who was the inspiration for Meryl Streep's character in "The Devil Wears Prada," attends the Focus Features and Loreal premiere of "Scoop" at the Museum of Modern Art In New York on July 26, 2006.

Television personality Regis Philbin and wife Joy attend the Focus Features and Loreal premiere of "Scoop" at the Museum of Modern Art in New York on July 26, 2006. The film, written and directed by Woody Allen, who also stars in the picture, opens nationwide on July 28.

Model Lauren Bush, who is President George W. Bush's niece, attends the Focus Features & Loreal premiere of "Scoop" at the Museum of Modern Art in New York on July 26, 2006.

Scarlett Johansson attends the Focus Features and Loreal premiere of "Scoop" at the Museum of Modern Art in New York on July 26, 2006. This is Johansson's second film with Woody Allen. The first was "Match Point," which grossed a solid $78 million dollars last year and received some critical acclaim.

Lisa Edelstein, who stars on the FOX network's hit show "House," attends the Focus Features & Loreal premiere of "Scoop" at the Museum of Modern Art in New York on July 26, 2006.

TV personality Bryant Gumbel and his wife, Hilary, attend the Focus Features & Loreal premiere of "Scoop" at the Museum of Modern Art in New York on July 26, 2006.

Focus Features executives James Schamus, left, and Andrew Karpen pose with Scarlett Johansson, while attending the Focus Features and Loreal premiere of "Scoop" at the Museum of Modern Art in New York on July 26, 2006.