Town of Wayland, New York

Wayland is a large and rural town in Steuben County, New York. It is located in the Finger Lakes region, approximately fifty miles directly south of the City of Rochester. Within the town, is a village of Wayland and the hamlets of Patchinsville and Perkinsville. The village is the main population area and the location of most town businesses. , the total population was estimated at 3,600.

Traffic Tickets in the Town of Wayland

The Town of Wayland Justice Court (Wayland Town Court) handles many traffic tickets. This is due to the Genesee Expressway (Interstate 390) that crosses the town in an east-west direction. The I-390 is patrolled by Troop “E” of the New York State Police. They conduct many traffic stops in the Wayland area, mostly for speeding violations. The speed limit on the I-390 does not exceed 65 miles per hour. However, motorists tend to exceed the speed limit on this stretch of highway, mostly inadvertently. The most common speeding citation is for speeding in the 80-90 mph range. However our firm has seen many 100+ mph speeds in Wayland. Some traffic tickets originate from local town streets. The main routes in the town proper are New York State Route 415 (NYS-415), New York State Route 21 (NYS-21), New York State Route 63 (NYS-63) and New York State Route 15 (NY 15). Traffic violations alleged to have been committed in the village boundaries are made answerable to the Village of Wayland Justice Court (Wayland Village Court). There is little practical difference between the courts as they share the same building and court personnel.

For any traffic related charges in Wayland, it is best if you contact a traffic ticket attorney before you do anything with the ticket. A ticket not handled properly can be costly. Serious traffic violations carry points, fines, and fees. More importantly, they cause substantial increases in insurance premiums for several years and may cause loss of driving privileges in New York. On the other hand, if the ticket is handled properly it can allow for the charges to be dismissed entirely with no points and zero fine. For more information, you can contact the Benjamin Goldman Law Office.

The Benjamin Goldman Law Office

The Benjamin Goldman Law Office is a New York State traffic ticket defense firm. We opened in 2011 with the goal of helping motorists fight traffic related charges. Since 2011, our firm has handled hundreds of traffic tickets in Wayland. Attorneys from our firm are diligent and persistent in their quest for the best possible disposition for each case. Our efforts have paid off. The Benjamin Goldman Law Office has received hundreds of five-star testimonials across several online platforms. The verified reviews often speak to the advantageous results we obtain and the stellar customer service we provide. The team at the Benjamin Goldman Law Office is willing to take on the most challenging cases and will be glad to review your Wayland ticket. Consultations are entirely free.

Points Reduced or Money Back Guarantee*

Our firm offers a Point Reduction or Money Back Guarantee*. This means we will issue a full refund of your legal fee if we are unable to reduce the points added to your license as a result of the ticket.

*Traffic tickets only. Does not apply to misdemeanors and felonies.