Frozen Planet

Frozen Planet is a nature documentary series, co-produced by the BBC, the Discovery Channel and The Open University, focusing on life and the environment in both the Arctic and Antarctic. The series consists of seven episodes which provide a portrait of Earth's polar regions: the last great wilderness on the planet. The first episode introduces the program, taking us on an extraordinary journey across the polar regions of our planet, North and South. The subsequent four episodes depict the changing seasons at the polar regions - Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter. The sixth episode focuses on mankind's activities in the regions. And the seventh and final episode investigates what rising temperatures will mean for the people and wildlife that live there and for the rest of the planet.

Episode 1 - To the Ends of the Earth

Episode 1 - To the Ends of the Earth

David Attenborough travels to the ends of our planet, the Arctic and Antarctic that are the greatest and least known wildernesses of all.

Episode 2 - Spring

Spring arrives in the polar regions, and the sun appears after an absence of five months; warmth and life return to these magical ice worlds - the greatest seasonal transformation on our planet is underway.

Episode 3 - Summer

It is high summer in the polar regions, and the sun never sets. Vast hordes of summer visitors cram a lifetime of drama into one long, magical day; they must feed, fight and rear their young in this brief window of plenty.

Episode 4 - Autumn

For the animals in the polar regions, autumn means dramatic battles and epic journeys. Time is running out - the Arctic Ocean is freezing over and the sea ice is advancing at 2.5 miles per day around Antarctica.

Episode 5 - Winter

There is no greater test for life than winter, as temperatures plummet to 70 below and winds reach 200kph. Darkness and ice extend across the polar regions and only a few remarkable survivors gamble on remaining.

Episode 6 - The Last Frontier

This episode reveals the extraordinary riches and wonders of the polar regions that have kept people visiting them for thousands of years.

Episode 7 - On Thin Ice

David Attenborough journeys to both polar regions to investigate what rising temperatures will mean for the people and wildlife that live there and for the rest of the planet.

Related Links Frozen Planet - wikipedia

Frozen Planet is a nature documentary series, co-produced by the BBC, the Discovery Channel and The Open University. Life in the Freezer

Life in the Freezer is a BBC nature documentary series presented by David Attenborough, tracing the seasonal cycle of Antarctica and human exploration of the continent. Antarctica, BBC Horizon

This is a three-part BBC documentary series narrated by Jo Unwin, uncovering how life forms have adapted to life in the freezer, what created Antarctica, and what controls the movement of ice. Planet Earth - Ice Worlds

This episode looks at the polar regions (the Arctic and the Antarctic) where have the greatest seasonal extremes and life is heavily influenced by the advance and retreat of the ice.