Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz was a German polymath rationalist philosopher, mathematician, diplomat, and scientist.

Leibniz was well-known for the history of mathematics and the history of philosophy. He was known for the last universal genius and was famous for being one of the greatest thinkers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

Time and Place of Birth

Leibniz was born on 1 July 1646, in Leipzig, Germany

Gottfried Leibniz Early life

In his childhood, he went to Nicolai school for his education but mostly he self-taught himself as his father died in 1652 and he got access to his father’s library very early.

He went to the University of Leipzig in 1661 and graduated from there, and studied philosophy and mathematics, and built interest in both these subjects.

In 1667, he completed his Doctorate in law which was three years of study and was asked for the position in the same, but he had different plans in his mind.

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Adulthood

In 1672, he got a huge opportunity in his life: he was sent to Paris for a diplomatic mission, he stayed in Paris for four years and there he met a lot of the greatest mindsets, and he was tutored about physics, philosophy, and mathematics by John Locke.

While living in Paris he also designed a machine now known as a “calculator” and in 1673 he presented his designs to the Royal Society in London.

Gottfried Leibniz Education and Career

Since his childhood, he learned and was fluent in speaking Latin and studied about Greek scholars as well.

And, completed his graduation from the University of Leipzig and learned mathematics and philosophy. After graduation when he was just 12 years old he was awarded the degree of Doctorate in law by his professors as they were impressed by his work in the thesis.

Leibniz’s career started when he was 19 as his first book De Arte Combinatoria was published. In an Alchemical society, he was a secretary with a paid position. In the court of appeal, Leibniz was scheduled as an assessor in the year 1669.

Discover Georg Cantor’s mathematical innovations and explore more visionary minds reshaping our understanding of infinity and numbers! Dive into related captivating insights now.”

Personality

Gottfried Leibniz’s personality wasn’t revolutionary as his questioning, thinking, and research was. He was very relaxed about his duties but never disobeyed them. He didn’t feel shy from intrigue and disloyalty while he was chasing his dreams.

Interesting facts

Leibniz is known as the greatest German Philosopher but a lot of his works are in French.

Leibniz worked on a weighty theological thesis and that turned to be extended ideas for Roman Catholics and the Lutherans.

Unveil Riemann’s ground breaking contributions and explore more mathematical trailblazers redefining the essence of geometry and analysis! Delve into related captivating insights now.”

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Contributions

Other than mathematics and philosophy Gottfried Leibniz also contributed in the field of library science and also in physics, technology which we know as biology, medicine, geology, etc. Leibniz’s contributions were in vast varieties so it was dispersed into various journals.

Death

At the age of 70, Gottfried Leibniz died on 14 November 1716, in Hanover. His grave remained unnamed for more than 50 years.

Uncover Alexander Grothendieck’s revolutionary math and explore more pioneering minds reshaping the landscape of modern algebraic geometry! Dive into related captivating insights now

Books published

Monadology in 1714

Philosophical writings in 1677

Theodicy volume 1 in 1710

Disclosure on Metaphysics Correspondence with Arnauld Monadology in 1686

Awards

Awarded for exceptional scientist and academics in 1985

Quotes

This is the best of all possible worlds.

Why is there something rather than nothing?

If you could blow the brain up to the size of a mill and walk about inside, you would not find consciousness.

Explore Albert Einstein’s cosmic revelations and uncover more scientific luminaries shaping our understanding of the universe! Delve into related captivating insights now.

FAQ

What is Gottfried Leibniz famous for?

Gottfried Leibniz was a famous German mathematician who developed the present-day symbols for differential and integral calculus. Gottfried also invented an early calculating machine.

Where did Leibniz go to college?

Gottfried Leibniz went to the Leipzig University in the years 1661-1666, and in the year 1663-1663 went to the University of Jena.

Did Leibniz write in French?

Gottfried Leibniz wrote in various languages, first and foremost in Latin, French, and German, but also in English, Italian and Dutch.

Conclusion

I would like to conclude by saying Leibniz was an untiring hard worker, a writer with more than 600 communicators, a great scientist, a person who had a lot of contacts in different countries, and a patriot.