Rover Dangerfield, an animated film that reimagines Rodney Dangerfield as a dog, is available on Blu-ray via the Warner Archive Collection.

I was curious about the film mainly because of the comedian. Unfortunately, it was a bit too much of a letdown. I wish I was writing something positive about the film but alas, I’m not. You know an animated film is bad when a 74-minute movie is struggling to keep your attention. Despite having a talented voice cast, I wish I could say good things about this film. It’s sad when there are so many people putting their hard work into a film, whether it is animators, voice talent, or other crew. They put in their best efforts even if the film is ultimately a letdown. If anything, I did get to listen to another score composed by David Newman of the legendary Newman family.

Dangerfield’s style is better suited for live-action than animation. If you’re going to have him star in an animated film, trying to recreate his style just doesn’t really work. I’m sorry to say that but it’s true. Moreover, it can be somewhat weird to keep looking a a dog walking on their hind legs. Say what you will about this being a movie but there is only so much disbelief that one can suspend. It’s not even realistic in that regard!

The end titles start closer to the 1:07 mark so this is not that long of a film. Trust me when I say that this is probably for the best. Furthermore, seven minutes of end credits for an animated film does feel particularly absurd.

Just about anything is a better use of your time than watching Rover Dangerfield.

Synopsis

You know the voice, the mannerisms, the red necktie. And you know you’ll laugh. Rover Dangerfield, written by Rodney Dangerfield and featuring his inimitable voice talents, is a cartoon fan’s best friend. The makers of The Brave Little Toaster team with the comedy legend for this tuneful, all-family treat about a brave basset hound whose every move and joke is purest Rodney, captured as the funnyman was filmed recording his lines so the animators could recreate his uproarious personality. We meet Rover in Las Vegas, living the good life of a high-rolling hound. But — win some, lose some — he’s transplanted to a farm where he gets the barnyard blues. Soon he has new friends and adventures, setting up and begging the question of whether the pooch will be genuinely happy in his new home. Find out by calling Rover over.

Bonus Features

Dog Daze (1937)

Dog Collared (1950)

Original Theatrical Trailer

DIRECTORS: James L. George and Bob Seeley

SCREENWRITER: Rodney Dangerfield

CAST: Rodney Dangerfield, Susan Boyd, Ronnie Schell

Warner Bros. released Rover Dangerfield in theaters on August 2, 1991. Grade: 1/5

Please subscribe to Solzy at the Movies on Buttondown.