NOTE: This page is truely dedicated to one of the Czechosolovia voice actors of Fred Jones, Pavel Vondra (1969-2024).

Frederick Herman Jones also known as Fred and Freddy is a fictional character in the Scooby-Doo franchise. He is the leader of Mystery Incorporated, and is a great loyal friend to his teammates. He's the man with the plan when solving mysteries and trapping bad guys.

Why He's Our Fred Jones

He's the very likable and unforgettable leader of Mystery Incorporated.

He has many memorable catchphrases and lines of dialogue, such as ”Hold the phone’”, "It’s trapping time!" or “Well, gang, it looks like we’ve got another mystery on our hands”.

He's a great traps expert, as he knows when to build traps to catch villains, and usually has Shaggy and Scooby as bait to lure the bad guys to the traps.

Frank Welker does an amazing job portraying/voicing the character.

Freddie Prince Jr., despite his character Fred being unlikable in the live-action movies, did a good job potraying Fred.

The late Carl Steven also did an awesome job voicing him.

His plans usually end up failing hilariously, but it's also nice when his plans actually work sometimes.

He's a good detective, as he's great at finding clues and knows that splitting up is a great way to cover more ground.

He is a great and loyal friend to his teammates, especially Daphne, because most fans suspect they are in a relationship, which is actually explored in Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated and some of the animated movies in the franchise, and they have some cute moments.

He's generally very handsome, but he's also a nice guy, especially towards his friends, and is always there to help anyone who needs it.

Bad Qualities

While his design looks good in most Scooby-Doo media, there were unfortunate times where it did not look good:

In Shaggy & Scooby-Doo Get a Clue!, he looks really weird and a little uncanny. It's interesting to note that he’s supposed to represent his live-action appearance from the live-action Scooby-Doo movies.

In Be Cool, Scooby-Doo!, his redesign is awful and looks very little to nothing like his original counterpart, and instead looks more like a bad attempt to imitate Seth MacFarlane's art style like Family Guy, American Dad! or Brickleberry's art style. Speaking of his redesign, it is unfitting in the Scooby-Doo franchise, as it fits more into an adult cartoon or parody.

He's absent in a few Scooby-Doo shows, most notably Shaggy & Scooby-Doo Get a Clue! after appearing in just one episode, which was wasted potential.

There have been unfortunate times where he fell into flanderization land:

In A Pup Named Scooby-Doo, he became a complete idiot who constantly bully Red Herring for no good reason other than that he doesn't like him and doesn't give him a break.

In Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated, while he wasn’t actually flanderized, it felt like he was, because he became stuck in his own ego much like he was in A Pup Named Scooby-Doo, and has a huge obsession with traps.

In Be Cool, Scooby-Doo!, he was flanderized into dialing it up to 11 and is stuck in his own ego even more than he was in A Pup Named Scooby-Doo and Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated, where he is into traps.

His worst flanderization is in the 2023 TV show Velma, where his personality was heavily flanderized into a very unlikeable stereotypical rich boy, in which he is egotistical, spoiled, childish and idiotic in the show itself.

He can arguably be a horrid friend to Shaggy and Scooby as he always forces them to be bait for traps, stand guard, or even just go along with mysteries when they didn't want to or were putting their lives in serious danger so he and girls wouldn't have to, making him look like a very toxic friend.

Ever since the writers first made Fred obsessed with traps, they've refused to let it go even when many fans and other viewers find it very irritating.

Although Frank Welker still does a great job voicing Fred, as said above, he still voicing him during years and currently his voice looks very mature for his age, but it's still good to hear anyway.

Trivia

Fred is the only character that will have his character design faithful in the Scooby-Doo spinoff Velma, which was released in 2023.

Video

Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.