The Fred Jones Jr. Museum of Art is “all ears” this spring as it premieres a new exhibition of Walt Disney animation cels, including Mickey Mouse and dozens of characters from classic Disney films. A Century of Magic: The Animation of the Walt Disney Studios, Animation Cels from the Collection of Janis Scaramucci and Domer “Jay” Scaramucci is open from March 3 – September 16.

The exhibit surveys many of the major animated films, beginning with the first feature, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937), and concluding with Fantasia/2000 (1999). This exhibition, from a private collection, includes more than 80 cels used in the original production of the animated films and offers visitors the opportunity to view the artistry of the animators’ work.

“Children and adults alike will enjoy this look at Mr. Disney’s magical world of animation,” said Ghislain d’Humières, museum director. “As a matter of fact, we are using this opportunity to lower the artwork a bit for our younger visitors.”

Throughout the spring, the museum will host multiple free programs around the exhibition, including viewings of popular Disney films, a multimedia concert and more. Upcoming events include:

Saturday, March 4, 4-6pm—family-friendly opening reception

Saturday, March 10, 10:30am—free screening of One Hundred and One Dalmatians at the museum’s Sandy Bell Gallery.

Sunday, March 11, 1-4pm—A Century of Magic: The Animation of the Walt Disney Studios Family Day includes free admission to the museum and hands-on activities for the entire family.

Sunday, April 1, 1:45pm—The Magic of Music multimedia concert and Disney Costume Parade for Children at Catlett Music Center (500 W. Boyd, Norman). Tickets are $9 for adults, children age 12 & younger are free.

Saturday, April 14, 10:30am—free screenings of Robin Hood in the museum’s Mary Eddy and Fred Jones Auditorium.

Saturday, May 19, 10:30am—free screenings of Beauty and the Beast in the museum’s Mary Eddy and Fred Jones Auditorium.

Saturday, June 9, 10:30am—free screenings of The Lion King in the museum’s Mary Eddy and Fred Jones Auditorium.