This article is about the original incarnation of Fred Jones. For other incarnations, see Fred Jones (disambiguation).

Fred "Freddie/Freddy" Jones[3] is the leader of the Mystery Inc. gang, and (more often than not) the driver of their van: The Mystery Machine. Fred is statuesque and brave; everything that the group's other male human member, Shaggy Rogers, isn't.

Over the years, Fred has come to build overly complicated traps for villains, which Scooby-Doo and/or Shaggy would often set off by mistake, only for the villain to wind up captured by the trap anyway. He also takes charge by splitting the group up to search for clues. Fred usually takes Daphne Blake and Velma Dinkley with him, while Shaggy and Scooby go off by themselves, although he would sometimes send Velma along with Shaggy and Scooby; Fred's main catchphrase is related to this divide-and-conquer clue search method: "Let's split up, gang..."

Physical appearance

For a full list of what Fred wears, see Fred's outfits and disguises

Fred is a teenage male, with blond hair. His original and current wardrobe consists of a white sweater over a blue shirt and also wears blue pants. His trademark accessory is his orange ascot.

At the time Scooby-Doo and Shaggy Rogers moved into Shaggleford Manor, he was wearing a light blue jacket over a white shirt, dark blue pants, and brown shoes.

Personality

For many years, in the first period of his ascot days, he was the level-headed and stoic leader. Although in the later years, when he had become a mystery novelist, he showed signs of possible fear of being arrested after it was believed he was the Red Skull.[3]

His cowardice is further implied (during his blue-striped sweater years), when Fred, Daphne, and Velma have to split up to find Shaggy and Scooby in an Ohio Scooby Snax factory, and Daphne asked if he minded searching alone, with Fred reacts a little worriedly, "You mean by myself? In this haunted fact-" until he realised what he is saying and tried to act cool.[4] Another instance of this, was when Farmer P. came to them while they're investigating, offering them some warm milk to calm their nerves, with Fred politely declining. But after Farmer P. told them about the story of the devil farmer, Fred changed his mind and asked, "I think I'm ready for that glass of warm milky" in a scared tone.[5] Additionally, he also is shown as somewhat less intelligent, rather scatterbrained and more clueless to his surroundings. After Daphne comments on how Gary Snipper is "technically proficient," he adds that he's good at making things, too.[6]

As a child growing up in Coolsville, he was the polar opposite to the fearless leader type, being slightly hyperactive and superstitious. He was frequently picked on by Red Herring, the neighbourhood bully. He subscribed to a magazine, the National Exaggerator, that "reported" real monsters (his favorites being the Mole People and the mud monsters). Fred also almost always gets something wrong at the end of a case, as he always (or almost always) accuses Red as being the villain.

He also has an extreme obsession with nets, that he sets up traps along the walkway to his homes front door, sleeps with one and tries to decide which type to use when trying to catch the Ghost of Dapper Jack. His resistance was put to an ultimate test during his stay at the Grand Sandy Resort.

History

Animated history

Main article(s): Fred Jones/animated history

Comic history

Main article(s): Fred Jones/biographical account of comic appearances

Novel history

Main article(s): Fred Jones/biographical account of novel appearances

Video game history

Main article(s): Fred Jones/biographical account of video game appearances

Family and relatives

For a complete list of Fred's family members, look here. For other relatives, look here.

Romantic interests

There have been instances where Fred has noticed and gained the attention of the opposite sex over the years.

Daphne Blake: As they grew up, Fred began to develop romantic feelings for Daphne, but is too shy to confess to her, not knowing she feels the same way.[7] They mostly get jealous of each other whenever the other is paid attention to or they fawn over someone themselves.

Lena Dupree: There seemed to be a mutual attraction, but she was just using him to get him to Moonscar Island, so she and Simone Lenoir could drain his and the gang's lifeforce to preserve their youth and immortality.[8]

Thorn: He was slightly attracted to Thorn, noticed by Daphne.[9]

Dottie: A waitress who flirted with Fred, who seemed flattered, but did not reciprocate.[10]

Gretchen Mueller: He was momentarily enamoured by her when they met.[11]

Lindsay Pagano: She asked him if he wanted to get something to eat, after he saved her from being crushed, but he was ignorant to her advances.[12]

Marcy: She flirted with Fred, but he was either ignorant or not interested.[13]

Crystal: He fawned over Crystal, who was already in a relationship with Whirlen Merlin.[14]

Jessica: He was attracted to Jessica, but since there was obviously already a mutual attraction between Fred and Daphne, he tried to "let her down easy".[15]

Melanie Staples: There's a noticeable attraction between the two, although he is unable to act cool about it, and makes awkward remarks about bringing attention to it. But she turned out to be the culprit, so it didn't progress any further.[16]

Black Canary[17]

Occupation

Being only an amateur sleuth doesn't pay the bills, so Fred has had to find a source of income (and a sometimes a stable profession when the gang decide to part ways for a while), and has taken on a variety of different jobs through his life. This is a list of them:

Junior detectives-for-hire: Contrary to the above, when the gang was in their preadolescence, they worked out of a clubhouse, calling themselves the Scooby-Doo Detective Agency, and charged a minimal fee for their services in solving the mysteries in their hometown of Coolsville. (APNSD)

Movie extra: The gang was given parts as extras in Sandy Duncan's film, after solving the case at Mammoth Studios. [18]

Carnival owner: The whole gang, was given a share of Dick Van Dyke's carnival, after saving it from going under.[19]

Construction worker: Fred, Scooby, and Shaggy took questionable jobs at a construction site. This was simply to make some extra cash.[20]

Author: A few years after the first time Mystery Inc. dissolved, had become an aspiring mystery novelist.[3]

One-man crew: The second time the gang split up, he stuck with, and aided Daphne in her investigative TV program, by becoming her producer and cameraman (along with everything else).[8]

Additionally, pre-teen Freddie was hired by his Uncle Eddie to write an article for the National Exaggerator,[21] and he and Daphne formed a singing duo to compete in Talent Star.[7]

Behind-the-scenes

In the development of Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!, Fred started as "Geoff", "Harvey",[citation needed] and "Ronnie" was also in storyboards.[citation needed] "Fred" came from the insistence of CBS' then head of children's programming, Fred Silverman.[citation needed]

Fred was based on the titular fictional characters of Jack Armstrong, the All-American Boy from radio,[22] and the 1960's TV sitcom The Many Lives of Dobie Gillis (played by Dwayne Hickman).[23] Voice actor, Frank Welker, was specifically instructed to play it like the former by voice director, Joe Barbera.[22]

Voices of Fred

In the original cartoon series, and all but one of its spin-offs, Fred is voiced by Frank Welker; the junior high version of Fred featured in A Pup Named Scooby-Doo was voiced by Carl Steven.

In other languages

Actor Language Notes Gergely Bódy Hungarian Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!, The New Scooby-Doo Movies, The Scooby-Doo Show, Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo, Scooby Goes Hollywood, What's New, Scooby-Doo?, Shaggy & Scooby-Doo Get a Clue!, Scooby-Doo on Zombie Island, Scooby-Doo! Pirates Ahoy!, Scooby-Doo! and the Goblin King, Scooby-Doo! and the Witch's Ghost, Scooby-Doo and the Alien Invaders, Scooby-Doo and the Cyber Chase, Scooby-Doo! and the Legend of the Vampire, Scooby-Doo! and the Monster of Mexico, Scooby-Doo! and the Loch Ness Monster, Aloha, Scooby-Doo!, Scooby-Doo! in Where's My Mummy?, Chill Out, Scooby-Doo!, Scooby-Doo! and the Samurai Sword, original, current Tamás Markovics Scooby-Doo! Abracadabra-Doo, Scooby-Doo! Camp Scare, Scooby-Doo! Legend of the Phantosaur, Scooby-Doo! Music of the Vampire, Big Top Scooby-Doo!, Scooby-Doo! Mask of the Blue Falcon, Scooby-Doo! Spooky Games, Scooby-Doo! Haunted Holidays, Scooby-Doo! Stage Fright, Scooby-Doo! WrestleMania Mystery, current András Borbíró A Pup Named Scooby-Doo Francesco Bulckaen Italian What's New, Scooby-Doo?, Shaggy & Scooby-Doo! Get a Clue!, Scooby-Doo! Pirates Ahoy!, Scooby-Doo! and the Goblin King, Scooby-Doo! and the Samurai Sword, Scooby-Doo! Abracadabra-Doo, Scooby-Doo! Camp Scare, Scooby-Doo! Legend of the Phantosaur, Scooby-Doo! Spooky Games, Big Top Scooby-Doo!, Scooby-Doo! Haunted Holidays, Scooby-Doo! Mask of the Blue Falcon, Scooby-Doo! Stage Fright, Scooby-Doo! and the Spooky Scarecrow, Scooby-Doo! Mecha Mutt Menace Massimo De Ambrosis Scooby-Doo and the Alien Invaders Jacek Kopczyński Polish Current (since the 90s)

Notes/trivia

He has been hypnotized five times so far in all the Scooby-Doo series combined:

The first time he was hypnotized was in The Phantom Clown, from Gold Key's Scooby Doo... Where Are You!, when he was hypnotized with Shaggy by the ghost clown to act like horses.

The second time was in the What's New, Scooby-Doo? episode Mummy Scares Best, where he was hypnotized to be a slave of the mummy with Daphne and Velma.

The third time was briefly in another What's New, Scooby-Doo? episode Reef Grief!, when he looks into the medallion that Spencer Johnson used to hypnotize the sand castle builders, he even said the famous line, "Yes, Master" in a tranced voice (this line is very common in many cartoons that have people who are hypnotized).

He fourth time he was hypnotized with Daphne, and Velma in the video game Scooby-Doo! Mystery Mayhem.

The fifth time was in the Scooby-Doo! Team-Up story Go West, You Meddling Kids, he was briefly hypnotized by the Some-Trance Kid, being freed by a knock from El Kabong's guitar.

A recurring gag in What's New, Scooby-Doo? is that he can bench press up to 220 pounds.

In the What's New, Scooby Doo? episodes A Scooby-Doo Valentine and Ready to Scare, he claimed to have hay fever and be allergic to cats, respectively. Although neither of these claims have yet to be proven.

Some fans have posited that Fred and Daphne share an attraction to each other,[24] but this has yet to be truly declared as such in the series itself (though Cartoon Network, in its various promotional bumpers, has had fun with this notion), although the direct-to-video film Scooby-Doo! Stage Fright did have the two of them finally admit this behind each other's backs, as well as actually kissing each other on the lips during their song.

Earlier incarnations suggest that Fred's catchphrases are something similar to "Another mystery solved", "Let's split up" or "looks like we have a(nother) mystery on our hands". Later on, in Scooby-Doo! and the Samurai Sword, he miserably admits that he still doesn't have one when the rest of the gang say their unique catchphrases after being being surprised. Since then, however, he has been known to say "Hold the phone." (Scooby-Doo! Haunted Holidays, Scooby-Doo! Mask of the Blue Falcon). This was adapted from his Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated counterpart, Fred Jones, Jr., which was adlibbed by Frank Welker.* Frank Welker adlibbed Fred's catchphrase, "Hold the phone."[25]

In Scooby-Doo! Adventures: The Mystery Map his full first name was given as Fredward. Since this was from a puppet film and the fact that his first full name has already (and currently) been given as "Fredrick" in standard continuity, it's debatable whether it can be considered valid or not.

The Capstone books refer to him as Fred Jones, Jr., even giving that as his full name (without his middle name) in their Scooby-Doo! Encyclopedia, despite the fact this is taken from the alternate universe Fred Jones, Jr. from the Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated TV series.

Gallery

Artwork

Toys

See also: LEGO; Playmobil.

See also

Categorised gallery

Scooby-Doo and Fred Jones

Fred Jones and Daphne Blake

Shaggy Rogers and Fred Jones

Fred Jones and Velma Dinkley