Fred Jones is one of the main protagonists of the 2002-2004 Raja Gosnell Scooby-Doo live-action film series. He was portrayed by Freddie Prinze Jr..

Why This Fred Sucked

Fred is the most unlikable and mean-spirited member of the team. It doesn't help that he is portrayed as like a jerk jock.

Fred can be creepy towards Daphne and Velma. While inside Daphne's body, he says, "Hey! I can look at myself naked!", which disgusted Velma. He also tells Velma, "I'm a man of substance. Dorky chicks like you turn me on, too.".

Fred doesn't seem like a good leader. Him disagreeing with Velma, Daphne, and Shaggy resulted in Mystery Inc. disbanding for two years.

While Fred was trying to expose Heather Jasper Howe for taking things out of context, he inadvertently said "I think Coolsville sucks!" where the news portrayed him as a villain.

Fred berated Scrappy-Doo for marking his territory on Daphne, causing him and his team to get rid of Scrappy-Doo by a desert all alone.

In the second film (Scooby-Doo 2: Mystery Incorporated), his hair is nowhere as blonde as in the first film or the animated series.

Despite a good performance, Freddie Prinze Jr. was miscast.

Redeeming Qualities

In the first film (Scooby-Doo), he looks very similar to his animated counterpart complete with blonde hair and an orange ascot.

He was a much better character in the animated Scooby-Doo franchise, and in the second film, his relationship with Daphne is healthier and he is a little more likable.

Freddie Prinze Jr. did a good job playing Fred, despite his unlikability and him being miscast (as mentioned in WTFS#5).

"I think Coolsville sucks!"

Trivia

"I think Coolsville sucks!" became a meme among Scooby-Doo fans when things are taken out of context.

Freddie Prinze Jr. regretted playing Fred, but he enjoyed the memes and cult following of the movies.

Freddie Prinze Jr. reprised his role in episodes of Robot Chicken, which was co-created by Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed co-star Seth Green.

Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.