Donald M. Moritz, 88, of Overland Park, Kansas, formerly of Kansas City, Kansas, passed away August 31, 2018. A visitation will be held from 10-11 A.M. with the Funeral Mass beginning at 11:00 A.M. on Friday, September 7th at St. Patrick’s Catholic Church, 1086 N. 94th Street, Kansas City, KS 66112. Burial will be at Gate of Heaven Cemetery. In lieu of flowers the family suggests memorial contributions to the Donald and Connie Moritz Scholarship Fund at K.U. School of Education.

Don was born on June 1, 1930 in Tipton, Kansas to Matt and Christina Moritz. Don was raised in Tipton, Kansas along with his four siblings: Elizabeth, Robert, Laura and Raymond.

Don attended Emporia State University, but while there enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in 1950. Don served for four years, three of which were spent in Germany. After returning to Emporia State he met his future bride, Connie Diller on a blind date. Don graduated with a Bachelor of Science Degree in 1957. He obtained a Master of Science degree in 1958. Don and Connie were married Thanksgiving weekend of 1958 in Kansas City, Kansas at St. Peter’s Cathedral. Don obtained his Doctorate of Education from the University of Kansas in 1977.

Don was employed by the Kansas City, Kansas School District #500, first as a Math teacher, then as a Counselor. He was offered the job of Director of Student Services and Research where he was responsible for overseeing 52 schools with 35,000 students. He tried to keep students in school and reduce the dropout rate. He retired after 29 years.

Don was very active in many educational, charitable and community groups including United Way and Boys and Girls Clubs of America. Don was president of Cancer Action and Wyandotte County Mental Health Association. Don and Connie sponsored scholarships at Emporia State, Sumner Academy and the University of Kansas, School of Education.

Don was an avid KU Basketball fan and he and Connie attended games for many years until her health prevented her going. They had many fishing trips and enjoyed playing golf. After Don retired, he and Connie traveled internationally. He was preceded in death by his wife, Connie, and his siblings, Elizabeth Beasley and Robert Moritz. He is survived by his brother, Raymond (Suzanne) Moritz of Prairie Village, Kansas and his sister Laura (Charles) Conroy of Denver, Colorado, and numerous nieces and nephews.

Arrangements by Porter Funeral Homes & Crematory, 8535 Monrovia, Lenexa, KS 913-438-6444.