Plant Manager Assistance

Missed Pick Up Report

Is today your service day?

Yes - Please allow vendor until 6pm to service your bins

No - Submit a missed pick up request using route code OEHS-31 through the Plant Manager's Kiosk. Please note the missed pick up date, the bin location, bin type, and number of bins in your request.

Please note that the Plant Manager's Kiosk is only available while using the District internet network. If you are not connected to the District internet network, please use the M&O Online Service Request.

Extra Pick Up Request

Submit an extra pick up request using route code OEHS-32 through the Plant Manager's Kiosk. Please note the bin location, bin type, and number of bins in your request. You may choose to use empty trash bins for extra recycling, or empty recycling bins for extract trash if you have overflow/ bags on the floor. If you use empty bins for extra rubbish services, please note the number of bins used for recycle or the number of recycle bins used for trash.

Please note that the Plant Manager's Kiosk is only available while using the District internet network. If you are not connected to the District internet network, please use the M&O Online Service Request.

Blocked Access Report

If your site experiences a missed pick-up due to blocked access, please submit a request through the Plant Manager's Kiosk using route code OEHS-40. Please specify the problem, request a return to your site, and provide contact information.

Please note that the Plant Manager's Kiosk is only available while using the District internet network. If you are not connected to the District internet network, please use the M&O Online Service Request.

Customer Service Request

Customer Service Issues Include:

Bin Relocations

Security Concerns (unlocked gates, vagrants, lost/missing keys, etc.)

Discourteous Driver

Spills

Property Damage

On-Call Pick Ups

General Complaints

Place a Customer Service Request through the Plant Manager's Kiosk using route code OEHS-40. Please specify the problem and provide contact information.

Please note that the Plant Manager's Kiosk is only available while using the District internet network. If you are not connected to the District internet network, please use the M&O Online Service Request.

Diversion Goals

New Senate Bill 1383:

Under California Senate Bill 1383, effective January 1st, 2022 all public schools and school districts must subscribe to an organic waste collection service. Administrators will be working towards educating school district staff about organic waste prevention and how to properly sort materials into correct containers. School staff will be required to properly sort their organic waste into the correct containers.

Organic waste includes food, green material, landscape and pruning waste.

Goals within SB 1383:

Effective Date: January 1st 2022

Enforcement required: January 1st 2024

First Goal: 75% Reduction in Organics by January 1st 2025

Second Goal: 20% Increase in Edible Food Recovery by January 1st 2025

What does this all mean for District sites?

The District will be working with our Vendors to bring green and food waste bins to all locations, along with training programs to help everyone learn how to sort all materials properly. These changes will be occurring over the course of the next two years to help the District come into compliance with these regulations quickly and effectively.

Expanded Recycling Program

What is offered?

As part of the District’s Rubbish Contracts, all sites can request the following services for their site:

In-class 5-gallon recycling bins (limited qualities)

Recycling Assemblies

In classroom recycling training

Classroom recycling learning material

Site assessments for green waste programs

For more information regarding specific availability per vendor please check out:

Republic Services

Ware Disposal

American Reclamation

How do you request these services?

Sites have a few different methods available to make these request:

Plant Managers

Submit a request using the Plant Manager's Kiosk

Site Administrators

Submit a request using the M&O Online Service Request

Non-School Site Personnel

Email: OEHSwastemanagement@lausd.net

Submitting a request via email?

Please fill out our Recycling Program Request Form

Los Angeles Unified is implementing food scraps and recovery programs district-wide to comply with new California state mandates and to help achieve the District’s sustainability goals.

Food Scraps Pilot Program

What services are currently available?

Food Waste bins

Food Waste Training for staff administrators and students

Site assessments for food waste programs

What is a Food Scraps Disposal Program?

In efforts to divert waste from the landfills, a specialized rubbish disposal container will be used by sites to toss all food scraps. These food scraps are collected by our rubbish providers and taken to special facilities to process and divert the material from the landfills.

Pilot Program Information:

Republic Services

52 sites are participating in the pilot

Started October 2023

American Reclamation

26 sites are participating in the pilot

Started November 2023

Ware Disposal

35 Sites

Started December 2023