Skip to content

Connected Solutions for the Office of the CFO

insightsoftware is the most comprehensive provider of solutions for finance, accounting, and operations. We turn information into insights, empowering business leaders to strategically drive their organization.

The insightsoftware Platform

Your data, connected. When and where you need it. From every major ERP, data warehouse, modern data stack, and cloud vendor, we connect to 200+ environments with pre-built content and logic for your business. Our platform is an AI-enabled integrated solution for the Office of the CFO built on an advanced data virtualization layer.

Finance

insightsoftware streamlines financial processes with intuitive solutions, enabling accurate planning, reporting, and analysis for informed decision-making.

Learn More

Accounting

Our solutions give you reliability and up-to-date visibility to support compliance and strategic decisions on everything from your day-to-day accounting needs to developing long-term financial strategy and policies.

Learn More

Data & Analytics

Gain actionable insights with our BI, embedded analytics, data integration, and data management solutions that unleash the power of data and analytics for everyone, anywhere.

Learn More

Actionable Business Strategy Begins & Ends With Accessible

Financial Business Operational

Data

Automated Workflows

Free up time and minimize errors by automating routine data workflows. Focus on strategic analysis and insights, not manual data entry.

Pre-Built Templates

Accelerate reporting and analysis templates designed for common ERP use cases. Ensure consistency across reports and dashboards.

Real-Time Data

Access real-time data within applications. Eliminate static reports and gain immediate visibility into performance to drive decision-making.

See for yourself why 500K+ are using insightsoftware to draw instant data insights, react swiftly to market changes, and outpace their competition

50%

Less Reporting Time

Christian Ortmann CEO

I’m a big fan of Jet Reports. I tell everybody Jet Reports is the best tool we’ve ever had for the company. If you don’t already have Jet Reports, you need it.

70%

Less Time

Brian Meyers Controller

"It’s not just the huge amount of time that is saved; it’s also the sheer amount of information that's available at the click of a button."

30%

Faster

Laura Martinez ERP Project Manager

Jet Reports has changed the way we do business, and today, most of our team cannot imagine going back to the old ways of doing things. Jet Reports helps us to perform at the top of our game.

Unlock Insights Faster

Focus on what matters. Our open business data fabric unlocks insights quickly with pre-built views for popular ERPs. Translate complex ERP data into clear reports and dashboards. Share insights from your finance, accounting, and operations applications. Analyze data faster and make smarter decisions. Free your IT team. Unlock new possibilities.

Resources To Help You Drive an Actionable Business Strategy

Research Report

The State Of Operational Reporting in 2023

Demand for operational reporting is rising. Over the past year, IT decision-makers experienced an increase in operational reporting…

Download Research Report

White Paper

Top 10 Best Practices for Financial Reporting in Excel

From financial statements to annual reports, accurate reporting is essential to the livelihood of your business. Microsoft Excel is one…

Download White Paper

White Paper

How to Compare Reporting & BI Solutions

Reporting and Business Intelligence (BI) solutions begin and end with data—not just how the data are collected, but also how…

Download White Paper

Webinar

Financial Reporting, Budgeting, and Planning Trends for 2023

Economic challenges like rising inflation and interest rates make it harder for businesses to make long-term decisions. To address this,…

Download Webinar

Webinar

Embrace Continuous Planning To Adapt To Continuous Change

The world is undergoing rapid and continual change. Now more than ever, finance teams need to stay agile to help…

Download Webinar

Dashboard

Strategic Planning KPI Dashboard

After strategic planning comes execution, and that’s where things get tricky. The best laid plans can quickly go off the…

Download Dashboard

Webinar

Navigating the Future: Generative AI, Application Analytics, and Data

Generative AI is upending the way that product developers and end-users alike are interacting with their data insights. Despite the…

Download Webinar

Webinar

Vizlib Collaboration Ep.3 – Unleash Business Value

Save April 17th in your calendar for Episode 3 in our Vizlib Collaboration series. In episodes 1 and 2 we…

Download Webinar

Research Report

Hype Cycle™ for Analytics and Business Intelligence, 2022 – A Gartner® Report

As per Gartner®, “Transitioning from static analytics outputs to more dynamic contextualized insights, embedded or automated, means analytics can be…

Download Research Report