Genre: Fantasy

Published: 1999 (JP) 2003 (US)

Episodes: 26

Languages: Japanese/English

“Movie” Rating: PG

It seems we’re sticking with the 26 episode theme going on, as well as switching genre once again. We’re going old school once again, pre-2000. Unlike Lost Universe however, Eden’s Bowy gets a positive review.

It’s not as if the two don’t cross ideas at all, or that Eden’s Bowy is perfect. On the contrary, Eden’s Bowy has a few of the same complaints, which I’ll be going into. What it does right makes up for a few of those faults however, as it does those things quite well indeed.

If I had to pick something Eden’s Bowy does the best in direct comparison, I’d touch on character development. While not every characters gets enough development for my tastes, the ones that do are done so in a full on way that leads to investment in what happens to them. The villains are less clear cut, with most people seeming to have their own selfish sides, but always for a clear reason. This all causes tension, suspense, interest. A lot of my favorite anime are older anime that do all that right, and Eden’s Bowy is one of them,

The people flesh out a world that holds some interest as well, with a few key locations touched on with more significance, rather than a new location added every episode. The two “Eden” that give the series a part of its title (I never figured out the Bowy part) are both very characterful, and just like the characters, both nations show both a good and a dark side so that one can’t categorize them as heroes or villains.

It’s all that interest that makes the ending a disappointment to me. They have a wrap up that’s nothing more than some text explaining what everyone ended up going on to do, something I feel like they could have done in the second half of the last episode. It does wrap up actually though, and things definitely aren’t returned to how they all started, so I have to give Eden’s Bowy kudos for being bold. With how many anime end abruptly or “safely” without resolution, that’s quite a praise, and it’s makes my criticism feel a little nitpicky, even if it doesn’t change my mind.

There are a lot of things that I liked about Eden’s Bowy, more than I did about a lot of anime. The plot moves along at a fine pace, and the mood swings well from tragedy to comedy to action, and the story takes breaks at a fine pace. The complete collection’s easy enough to find, and it’s cheap, the DVD quality is fine, and the voice acting has no complaints from me. The few regrets I have (the ending, the uneven character development) are there, but I don’t think anyone would see them as a deal breaker.

A first then; if you like an adventure filled fantasy anime, give Eden’s Bowy a try. It’s unlikely you’ll regret it.