Laurence Olivier (born May 22, 1907, Dorking, Surrey, England—died July 11, 1989, near London, England) was a towering figure of the British stage and screen, acclaimed in his lifetime as the greatest English-speaking actor of the 20th century. He was the first member of his profession to be elevated to a life peerage.

The son of an Anglican minister, Olivier attended All Saints Choir School, where at age nine he made his theatrical debut as Brutus in an abridgement of Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar. Five years later he played the female lead in The Taming of the Shrew at Oxford’s St. Edward’s School, repeating this performance at the Stratford Shakespeare Festival. These early stage appearances did not go unnoticed by the theatrical notables of the era, who encouraged Olivier to consider acting as a profession. At first he dismissed the notion, hoping to follow the example of his older brother by managing an Indian rubber plantation; but his father, who had heretofore been ambivalent on the subject of acting, all but demanded that young Laurence embark upon a stage career.

Britannica Quiz

Oscar-Worthy Movie Trivia

Olivier enrolled at the Central School of Dramatic Art in 1924, then began his professional career with the Birmingham Repertory Theatre Company (1926–28). In 1929 he made his first significant West End appearance, playing the title role in a staging of P.C. Wren’s Beau Geste. Also that year he made his Broadway debut in Murder on the Second Floor. Having acted in British films from 1930, he was briefly signed by Hollywood’s RKO Radio Pictures in 1931, but he failed to make much of an impression at this early date. What could have been his first Hollywood break in Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer’s Queen Christina (1933) was scuttled when star Greta Garbo vetoed Olivier as her leading man in favor of her former lover John Gilbert.

During this period Olivier broadened his acting range by tackling difficult classical roles; he also chose to accept character parts that allowed him to hide what he considered his shortcomings behind heavy makeup and false beards. As he gained confidence in himself and his craft, audiences responded positively to him. The theater critics also liked his work—though their comments were guarded, and they often compared Olivier unfavourably with such contemporaries as John Gielgud and Ralph Richardson. He scored a significant triumph as star of an unabridged 1937 staging of Hamlet. He returned to Hollywood to play the tormented Heathcliff in Samuel Goldwyn’s production of Wuthering Heights (1939). This time around, movie audiences took notice, and Olivier’s subsequent international stardom was a fait accompli.

Exhibiting the same tenacity and dedication that distinguished his theatrical work, Olivier accumulated enough flight hours on his own to qualify for the Royal Navy Fleet Air Arm in World War II. Demobilized in 1944, he launched a new facet of his career by teaming with longtime friend Ralph Richardson to revitalize the fabled Old Vic Theatre. This assignment not only provided him the opportunity to appear in an extensive repertory of choice Shakespearean roles but also allowed him to direct, something he had been doing on a sporadic basis since the 1930s. In 1944 he also returned to film as star and director of Shakespeare’s Henry V (1944), an outstanding blend of old-fashioned theatricality and “pure” cinema that earned him a special Academy Award. He went on to star in three additional Shakespearean film adaptations, two of which he also directed: Hamlet (1948), which won him Academy Awards for both best picture and best actor; Richard III (1955), and Othello (1965), a “filmed theater” version of his earlier stage triumph, directed by Stuart Burge. Olivier’s other movie directorial credits included The Prince and the Showgirl (1957), with Marilyn Monroe; the 1967 television movie version of Uncle Vanya; and Three Sisters (1970).

Ever on the lookout for new challenges, and eager not to be regarded as an anachronism during the British theater’s Angry Young Men period, Olivier asked John Osborne to write a play for him. The result was The Entertainer (play 1957, film 1960), in which the actor astonished even his most ardent admirers with his shattering portrayal of pathetic end-of-pier music hall performer Archie Rice. Olivier’s list of accomplishments was further extended in 1962 when he became producer-director of the National Theatre company. To raise money for this enterprise, he accepted virtually every film role—good or bad—that came his way, and even appeared in a series of American television commercials for Polaroid cameras.

Throughout the 1960s and ’70s, Olivier appeared in more than 30 films; most were forgettable, but memorable exceptions included Sleuth (1972, Oscar nomination for best actor), Marathon Man (1976, Oscar nomination for best supporting actor), the television films Love Among the Ruins (1975) and Cat on a Hot Tin Roof (1976), and the British miniseries Brideshead Revisited (1981). It was also during this period that Olivier was suddenly and inexplicably stricken with a severe case of stage fright. Even after overcoming this debility, he insisted upon “shielding” himself from the audience by retreating further into character roles, donning elaborate makeups, and adopting thick foreign accents as a form of self-protection. In his last two decades he was tormented by illness, including near-fatal bouts with thrombosis and prostate cancer. His frailties added a poignant note to his much-praised performance in the title role of King Lear (1983; made for television), his last major Shakespearean role.