The past came back to haunt former married couple Mario Lopez and Ali Landry at the premiere of Cinderella on Sunday night.

Ali nearly came face to face with Mario just months after he revealed in his memoir Just Between Us that he was not 'in love' with the her the night he became a 'little too friendly' with another woman at his bachelor party.

However, the former flames, who were married for just two weeks in 2004, had clearly put the past to rest as they posed beside their princess daughters at the Hollywood premiere.

Scroll down for video

The 41-year-old actress was dressed to impress her ex in a dramatic midnight blue gown that showcased her slender waistline thanks to a gold belt.

Ali's chestnut hair tumbled over her shoulders as she bent down to kiss her seven-year-old daughter Estela.

Meanwhile, Mario, 41, went casual in a deep blue shirt that was teamed with a pair of slouchy black trousers and coordinating trainers.

His four-year-old girl Gia sported a butterfly patterned white gown and glittering tiara.

At one point, Gia nabbed a red carpet interview with Oscar winner Cate Blanchett, who stars as Cinderella's step-mother Lady Tremaine in the Disney film.

The Extra host revealed in the Instagram caption that Gia 'nailed' the interview.

There was no mention of Ali or her daughter on his Instagram account that night.

His six year relationship with the model and actress ended in an annulment just after two weeks of marriage in 2004 when photos emerged of him with another woman at his bachelor party.

Mario wrote: 'I got inebriated and a little too friendly with a young lady.'

Despite a certain realization about his view on the relationship and the infidelity, the devout Catholic carried on with the wedding.

Years following the split, Mario tied the knot with Courtney Mazza, who he now has two children with: Gia and one-year-old Dominic.

The former Miss USA eventually found love with current husband Alejandro Gomez Monteverde, who she tied the knot with in 2006.

In addition to Estela, the couple are parents to sons Marcelo, three, and Valentin, one.

Mario and Ali shared the red carpet for the premiere of Cinderella, which stars Lily James and Helena Bonham Carter.