Paris 5th district is located on the left bank of the River Seine, close to the 6th and 13th arrondissements. It has four administrative areas:

Saint-Victor

Jardin-des-Plantes

Val-de-Grâce

La Sorbonne

History

The fifth arrondissement is the oldest part of Paris, built by the Romans during the 1st century BC, under the name of Lutèce.

Famous places

Quartier Latin

Shared between the 5th and the 6th arrondissements, the Quartier Latin hosts numerous prestigious higher education establishments. This is the place where the first French University, La Sorbonne, was founded during the medieval period when Latin was still spoken, hence the name of the Quartier Latin district. (Main metro stations: Saint-Michel or Odeon)

Panthéon

The Pantheon was built at the end of the 18th century. It was meant to be a catholic church and became a burial place for the great figures of France. (Metro station: Cardinal Lemoine)

Arènes de Lutèce

Built during the 1st century BC by the Romans, the Arenas of Lutèce are among the most important remains from the Gallo-Roman era in Paris. They are open every day to the public. (Metro station: Jussieu)

Muséum national d’histoire naturelle

Founded in 1793, the national museum of natural history illustrates France’s rich culture in terms of natural history and human sciences. (Metro station: Jussieu or Gare D’Austerlitz or Censier-Daubenton)

Population

In 2009, this arrondissement had 62,236 inhabitants.

Restaurants and cafes

La Tour d’Argent, 15, quai de la Tournelle, 75005 PARIS, Tel : 01 43 54 23 31, > €90

Le Port du Salut, 163, rue Saint-Jacques, 75005 PARIS, Tel: 01 46 33 63 21, €15-€30

Average property price per square meter

€10,580/sqm (Ref. Notaires de Paris)

Useful information

Tourism office in Paris:

www.francetourism.com

Maps of Paris:

www.ign.fr

www.viamichelin.com

Travel from the UK

By air: Easyjet flies from Belfast, Liverpool Newcastle and London Luton to Paris.

Ryanair flies from Shannon, Dublin and Glasgow to Paris.

By rail: Eurostar go from London to Paris in just 2h35.

By car: You can travel by car to Paris by taking the ferries which go from Dover to Calais and then you can take the Motorway to Paris.

You can also cross the channel with the Eurostar and stop at Calais. Then you will travel on the motorway directly to Paris.