May 12, 2009

By Adam Kiefaber

He still gets grief about where he lives and whom he works for.

Xavier men's and women's head tennis coach Eric Toth grew up on the west side of Cincinnati in a family that cheered on the Bearcats at the University of Cincinnati, of which Toth is an alum.

Upon graduation from Xavier's most-hated rival, Toth was working at the Eastern Hills Indoor Tennis Club when he approached Jim Brockoff about joining him as an assistant coach at XU.

Brockoff hesitated because he didn't want to take Toth away from teaching lessons at the tennis club, a place where Brockoff also taught lessons while coaching Xavier's tennis programs.

Then in the fall of 1997, Toth became Brockoff's assistant and the transition began from backing the red and black to supporting the blue and white.

"I wondered what I was getting myself into when coach Jim Brockoff gave me the opportunity to be an assistant 12 years ago, but it has been a smooth transition and I credit that to the whole community at Xavier University," Toth said.

Ironically, Toth never left the tennis club and actually uses it as a practice indoor facility when his teams cannot practice on Xavier's outdoor courts.

He also teaches lessons at the club when he isn't dealing with all the different aspects of college coaching.

"You learn that probably 20 percent of this job is the actual coaching in practice and in matches," said Toth about learning under Brockoff. "You have budgets to balance, recruiting and NCAA compliance; there is so much that goes into coaching.

"Coach Brockoff was a great guy to work for and learn the ins-and-outs of college tennis in the 10 years that I worked under him."

Toth also learned that he would have to juggle other jobs as well as coaching college tennis due to it being only a part-time job. Not only is Toth the head coach of the men's and women's tennis teams at Xavier, he also teaches lessons at the club and is the Director of Tennis at the Ridge Club.

To make it all work and for Xavier to experience so much success in his two years as head coach, Toth credits his assistant coaches.

"For this all to work you have to have good people working with you and I certainly have that," said Toth of assistant Rutger "Rudy" Vilegenberg and volunteer assistant coach Kate Rippe.

In his first year at the helm, the men's team earned its first-ever Atlantic 10 title and automatic berth into the NCAA Tournament. The women's team was the runner-up in the A-10 tournament last season.

This year, Toth's tennis teams performed at a high level once again. The men repeated as A-10 champions and the women advanced to the third-place match in their conference tournament.

With the recent success, Toth definitely doesn't feel bad when he is called a traitor by some of his peers.

"I have been called a traitor from time to time, but I have been at Xavier 12 years now and I knew when I started working here that I was going to put any loyalty to the University of Cincinnati behind me and just serve Xavier as best I can," Toth said.