SIR Michael Stoute will leave Golan in the Budweiser Irish Derby at today's forfeit stage but is prepared to delay "as long as is necessary" a final decision on whether Lord Weinstock's colt faces a rematch with Galileo in Sunday's Classic.

Stoute is concerned about the ground becoming even faster as the week progresses and he will wait for a report from Peter Reynolds, manager of Lord Weinstock's Ballymacoll Stud, before committing Golan to such an important assignment.

"Peter will walk the course tomorrow," Stoute said last night: "I will hear what he has to say and then I will discuss it with Lord Weinstock. As yet, we have not had the opportunity to have a discussion on this matter in any detail."

Stoute believed that the ground at Epsom was too fast for Golan when the colt finished a solid second to Galileo in the Derby. "He just didn't come down the hill," the trainer said.

Of course, an entirely different challenge awaits at The Curragh on Sunday, where long-striding gallopers are better suited than on the fluctuating gradients at Epsom.

Although the 2,000 Guineas form has taken several knocks - Tamburlaine and Minardi both letting it down badly - it is still hard to forget the exhilarating burst of speed Golan produced in the final two furlongs to win at Newmarket, after coming from near-last.

Asked whether Golan would be ready to worry Galileo in a second meeting, should the green light be given, Stoute replied: "Golan galloped on Saturday and he looks in great shape. But having said that, he is an ordinary worker at home."

Golan holds the key to just how competitive Sunday's Classic will be. One Irish bookmaker was quoting Galileo at 1-3 at the weekend, with Golan 11-2 in the market.

James Fanshawe has long had the Irish Derby on the agenda for Grandera and connections have every reason to hope for a change of luck. The colt was jammed up against the running rail at one stage of the Prix du Jockey-Club, in which he finished a brave third to Anabaa Blue .

Jockey Michael Hills, who has remained loyal to Grandera, commented: "They murdered me in the French Derby. Surely, it won't be the same again in Ireland."

Meanwhile, French officials face the embarrassment of staging two race-meetings in Paris today - at tracks situated little more than one mile apart. Longchamp's Grand Prix de Paris fixture, postponed from Sunday, will finally be staged, alongside a scheduled jumping card at nearby Auteuil.

There will be no betting on the Longchamp meeting -on or off the course - after the fixture had to be postponed because of industrial action by Pari-Mutuel Hippodrome (tote) staff and a subsequent protest by punters, who invaded the course at the one-furlong marker and staged a sit-in.

The Grand Prix, one of French racing's more traditional features, still carries a lot of prestige. Hence, red-faced officials are likely to remember this when negotiations are carried out with their Pari-Mutuel staff, who are seeking a pay rise.