Golan, trained in Newmarket by Sir Michael Stoute, got up by a head to win the British leg of the 2002 World Series - the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Diamond Stakes at Ascot on Saturday.

Partnered by Kieren Fallon, Golan got the better of Nayef, ridden by Richard Hills, to post a head victory and earn 12 World Series points.

Godolphin's Grandera, with World Series Champion Frankie Dettori in the saddle, did not to handle the ground or the distance and finished fifth picking up two World Series points.

Grandera, however, remains the leader of the 2002 Series with 16 points.

Goland could now be aimed for the ninth leg of the 2002 World Series - the Prix de l' Arc de Triomphe.

Angus Gold, racing manager to Sheikh Hamdan bin Rashid Al Maktoum, Deputy Ruler of Dubai and Minister of Finance and Industry, the owner of Nayef, said: "It was really good to see him back to his best like that, all the more so after he was so disappointing in the Prince Of Wales's Stakes at the Royal Meeting."

Reacting to the Nayef's improved showing trainer Marcus Tregoning said" "That was a fantastic effort, he is a very, very good horse and it was a wonderful race, it is great to see him back to his best form.

"Now we look forward to the rest of the season and I would love to run him in the Breeders' Cup in Chicago. I think the track there would suit him.

"If he went there I don't know at the moment whether he would run in the Turf or the Classic (both are legs of the World Series) but he handled the dirt very well in Dubai in the winter so maybe we would go for the Classic."

Godolphin's Saeed bin Suroor is a runaway leader of the trainer's champions with a huge 32 points, while Godolphin head the owner's table with 28 points.

The 2002 World Series features 14 top international races.

The next race in the series is the Arlington Million, at Chicago on August17.

2002 WORLD SERIES CURRENT POINTS TABLES

After Round 4 - the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Diamond Stakes

Horse points

Grandera (IRE) 16; Street Cry (IRE) 12; Eishin Preston (USA) 12; Golan (IRE)12; Indigenous (IRE) 8; Agnes Digital (USA) 7; Sei Mi (ARG) 6; Paolini (GER) 6; Nayef (USA) 6; Sakhee (USA) 4; Zindabad (FR) 4.

Jockey points

Frankie Dettori 20; Jerry Bailey 12; Yuichi Fukunaga 12; Kieren Fallon 12; Hirofumi Shii 7; Jose Valez 6; Andreas Suborics 6; Richard Hills 6; Felix Coetzee 4; Olivier Doleuze 4; Kevin Darley 4.

Trainer points

Saeed bin Suroor 32; Shuji Kitahashi 12; Ivan Allan 12; Sir Michael Stoute 12; Jerry Barton 9; Toshiaki Shirai 7; Andreas Wohler 6; Marcus Tregoning 6; Mark Johnston 4.

Owner points

Godolphin 28; Toyomitsu Hirai 12; Exors of the late Lord Weinstock 12; Sheikh Hamdan Al Maktoum10; Prince Sultan Saud Al Kabeer 9; Mr & Mrs Pang Yuen Hing 8; Takao Watanabe 7; Mrs Carde Ostermann- Ritcher 6; Ahmed Buhaleeba 6.