Sir Michael Stoute made a personal tribute to Kieren Fallon, upon news of his ex-stable jockey's retirement from the saddle.

Stoute and Fallon were a feared partnership down the years, one that had bookmakers running for cover and punters eager to follow them in all the big races around Europe.

That was never more evident than in the 2003 Derby, when the Stoute-trained Kris Kin became the subject of a huge public gamble and was the beneficiary of what is regarded as one of the great Epsom rides.

North Light followed up in the blue riband the following year, and there were other Classics for the pair, too, including Russian Rhythm (1000 Guineas, 2003) and King's Best and Golan in the 2000 Guineas of 2000 and 2001 respectively.

Stoute told Press Association Sport: "Kieren had a power that could propel horses to go faster than they thought they could. A very gifted rider and a horse lover.

"I wish him well and thank him for his great contribution to the stable."

Former jockey Bruce Raymond, racing manager for several top Middle Eastern owners, revealed he had suggested Fallon should return to Newmarket when he chatted with him at the Derby meeting at Epsom last month.

Fallon rode Across The Stars, like Kris Kin trained by Stoute and owned by Saeed Suhail.

Though Across The Stars was well beaten in the premier Classic, Fallon was praised for looking after the horse when his chance had gone.

What he did was vindicated when Across The Stars won the King Edward VII Stakes at Royal Ascot under Dettori.

"It's a shame he's had to finish in those circumstances. He's a good man. I know he's got problems, but I liked him as a guy," said Raymond.

"He's been a great jockey and rode lots of winners for us - a Derby and a Guineas winner. It's a pity and I hope he soon feels better. I wish him well

"Kieren rode Kris Kin work before the Derby and he said it would win. He was right.

"He was nicknamed the 'kingslayer' after he won the 2000 Guineas (in 2014) on Night Of Thunder, beating Kingman.

"We didn't think he'd win, but thought he might get placed as we thought Kingman was unbeatable.

"I saw him at Epsom when he rode Across The Stars for us in the Derby this year and I told him to come back here where everyone knows him.

"He looked after Across The Stars that day and we were lucky we had him on.

"Sir Michael recognises those things and was very grateful Kieren rode him and gave him an easy time when he had no chance in the Derby."