The lightly raced colt Golan came from last to first yesterday to land the 2,000 Guineas and give trainer Sir Michael Stoute his fifth win in the opening classic of the British flat racing season.

Golan, who had run just once before when winning a Chepstow maiden as a juvenile, was given a masterly ride by Kieren Fallon who came with a late rattle from a highly unfavourable draw on the wide outside.

The handsome colt, heavily backed down this week from 25-1 to 11-1 on the strength of his home reputation, ran out a comfortable winner by one and a quarter lengths from Tamburlaine, at 12-1.

Frenchman's Bay, at 14-1. was a neck further back in third place. The Irish challenger Minardi plugged on to be fourth.

Stoute said that Golan's next stop - and only the third race of his life - will be next month's Epsom Derby over the unique switchback track. He was promptly installed as 2-1 favourite for the world's most famous flat race.

It was a tremendous training achievement by Stoute who first won the 2,000 Guineas back in 1985 with Shadeed. He and Fallon combined last year to win the classic mile prize with King's Best.

Fallon, delighted with the performance of a real champion in the making, said: "Everything went right for him. When I pulled him out, he accelerated well. But he did get a little bit tired in the dip before they hit the rising ground."

Stoute, overjoyed at training a winner for Lord Weinstock who has been one of the greatest supporters of British racing, told reporters in the unsaddling enclosure, said: "I am so pleased as I have been training for him since the 1980s I am really thrilled for him."

The pair had in the past memorably combined for the globe-trottting triumphs of the mighty Pilsudski.

"This has been a difficult spring for everybody," said the six-times champion trainer, reflecting on the rain-sodden gallops that have made training such a nightmare over the past two months.

The Godolphin stable hoped that the sunny preparation given to their charges in Dubai would give them a vital edge on return to the chilly headquarters of British racing. But the 4-1 favourite Tobougg, was a big disappointment, trailing in ninth of the 18 runners charging up the windswept Rowley Mile.

Golan, from the first crop of Champion Stakes winner Spectrum, was home-bred by Weinstock at his Ballymacoll Stud in Ireland which has produced a string of Group One stars for him over the years.

Stoute said of Golan: "This is an exciting prospect. The plan is now very much to go to Epsom with him and he will not have another race between now and then.

"Some times this horse is so laid-back that he has given us a scare once or twice but going into the race I was very happy with him. He has a marvellous temperament."