Regardless of the fact that Sir Michael Stoute had won 10 trainers' titles, five Epsom Derbys and just about every other major race in the calendar during his 38-year training career, he had never enjoyed much luck at Longchamp.

Pilsudski had twice been runner-up in the Arc for him, Opera House had finished third, and horses as classy as Shahrastani, Ezzoud, Golan and Conduit could finish no closer than fourth. There were also many others who finished out with the washing.

So why would Workforce, who had been annihilated by stablemate Harbinger in Ascot's King George, suddenly become the one to turn it around? But that he did after Prince Khalid followed Stoute's guidance when the colt "had ticked all the boxes" after several bits of serious work and elected to run.

In terms of performance, nothing could ever live with the second Abdulla Arc winner, Dancing Brave, but Workforce would certainly slot in ahead of the owner's other Longchamp stars Rainbow Quest and Rail Link. A seven-length winner of the Derby on lightning-fast ground in summer, and now a gutsy winner of the Arc against older opposition on soft ground in autumn. He is both versatile and top class.

On Sunday, Workforce was able to settle much better, back in the field, smothered up on the inside rail. He had more than half the field in front of him half a mile out, and it is to Ryan Moore's great credit that he was able to secure a direct passage through the pack before it disintegrated into interference that took the stewards nearly 30 minutes to sort out.

Nakayama Festa, who had given a glimpse of his promise when a close second to Duncan in the Prix Foy, emerged from the pack as the main serious challenger to Workforce halfway up the home straight. With victory within his grasp, Moore was never going to let his colt falter, nor was he going to let little-known Masyoshi Ebina from Japan upstage him in Europe's biggest race.

Workforce prevailed by a head for the first truly British win in the Arc in 21 years – Godolphin, who have three Arc wins, are a Dubai stable for record purposes – with Nakayama Festa battling hard for his second, with two and a half lengths back to French Oaks winner Sarafina, who suffered bad interference in running before finishing third. Local favourite Behkabad took fourth.

Stoute was in a state of mild shock after Workforce had fallen apart in the King George. He recalled: "We were totally baffled. Ryan thought he had got the tactics wrong, that he had been too aggressive with him early in the race. I thought that I had trained him too hard for the race.

"He had been outstanding at Epsom, yet he ran an inexplicably bad race at Ascot. But I was satisfied that he was right to run his race in the Arc. We waited until his final gallop because we wanted everything to be right," he added.

Stoute and the Abdulla camp had kept the media waiting until Thursday before confirming Workforce's participation, but he had insisted all along that the decision would be a late one, and that the owner would have the final call after he had reported in.

This was one of the outstanding training performances of our time, yet it seemed in danger of being overshadowed by the mild controversy over the lateness of news regarding the colt's running plans. "The punters knew where they stood," Stoute argued. "It was just a few tetchy journalists who were unhappy."

Nobody would have quibbled had Abdulla ducked the Arc with Workforce, but as mentioned previously in these columns, he deserves high praise for a brave decision. It was an extraordinary comeback from an extraordinary colt.