Adam Brody sees similarities between himself and his on-screen character, lovable nerd Seth Cohen. The actor says even now, 16 years later, he still carries Seth Cohen with him, and he often draws parallels between ‘The O.C.’ character and his real life.

In the show, Seth Cohen marries his on-again, off-again high school sweetheart, Summer Roberts, played by Rachel Bilson, at the end of the show’s fourth and final season, while Brody is married to ‘Gossip Girl’ star, Leighton Meester, in real life.

Adam Brody and Leighton Meester met on the set of 2010′s ‘The Oranges’ and married in 2014. The couple now have a seven-year-old daughter and a three-year-old son.

Adam Brody talks Seth Cohen

During a recent interview with SiriusXM’s ‘The Jess Cagle Show’, Brody mused over the on-screen story versus his real-life one.

The host asked him if he sees similarities between himself and Cohen. Brody said he does see an overlap, and he thinks about the character often.

“I think with the character of Seth, you know, it’s easy to tap into that mindset,” Brody said. “And also, you know, there’s other qualities, too, I think — not just in terms of pure commitment and a relationship, but in terms of aging.”

The actor shared that he even sometimes uses the character of Seth Cohen to help him build up his other acting work.

“Certain things remind me of Seth Cohen,” Brody revealed. “I did a crime drama called ‘StartUp’, it’s very adult and yet there were dynamics in it which reminded me of Seth Cohen — and, I guess just some of that is because he reminds me of me, you know?”

“There’s a lot of overlap.”

On marrying Leighton Meester

Brody said making the decision to get married was an easy one, and the actor, 43, and his wife, 36, tied the knot soon after they started dating.

“My wife and I actually got married very fast after we started dating,” the actor said. “That’s how sort of easy a decision it was for me and us.

“I was never scared of the idea of marriage or kids. It always seemed, you know, like a route I would go eventually.”

“I was excited ... when it came together, when I met the right person.”