Devilman is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Go Nagai which originally started as an anime adaptation of the concept of Nagai's previous manga series, Demon Lord Dante. A 39 episode anime series was developed by Toei in 1972 and Nagai began Devilman as a manga in Kodansha's Weekly Shonen Magazine, barely a month before the anime series started. The series has since spawned numerous OVAs, manga, novels, and films.

Devilman and other characters from the series have shown up in cameo appearances numerous times in Go Nagai's other works. The most notable is Tomoharu Katsumata's 1973 feature film Mazinger Z Vs. Devilman, which features Devilman teaming up with Nagai's titular robot to fight Dr. Hell.

Devilman is about a teenager named Akira Fudo. At first, Akira is very shy, modest and gentle, trying to avoid conflict. When his parents are lost on a business trip in the Arctic, Akira goes to stay with his childhood friend Miki Makimura and her family (mother, father, and bratty kid brother Tare). Both soon form a close relationship. Miki, a tough, smart, self-sufficient girl, loves Akira but wishes that he would stand up for himself when he gets pushed around, and is frustrated by his lack of backbone. She often has to defend herself from bullies even when Akira is with her. In the first OVA, she saves Akira from a gang of bullies who are threatening him.

CHARACTERS:

- Akira fudo: the protagonist, he is Devilman aka the result of Akira + Amon.

- Ryo: friend of akira, his father discovered that the demons where alive.

- Miki Makimura: the girl that lives with Akira and is in love with in

Devil-Man is an action adventure game relased for Bandai for the Playstation One Console based on the anime.

The game start with an invitation of your friend Ryo to explain Akira the danger situation that it's going to happen in the earth becuse the demons actions. Akira puts a mask and can see the creatures from a parallel dimension and your friend Ryo think that the only solution is that Akira becomes a demomn to fight them. Akira afer a series of facts becomes a demon Amon god of war and he transform in Devilman.

One difference from other survival horror games is the walking slowly option to avoid being detected.

Manufacturer's description:

Appeared in the hit anime PS "Devilman" large original Go Nagai has become 3D action adventure. Based on the story of the original part and get the first half of fleeing from pursuers daemon to operate the light immobility, the power of the devil, the second half of the deployment part go hunt daemon becomes Devilman. Experience the overwhelming power of the devil!

Features:

Third person perspective.

3D graphics

Cartoon graphics

Horror, Mystery, Anime & Fantasy themes.