surata-zuri-mccants | Flickr - Photo Sharing!

JFreak

this kinds of benchmarks show clearly that the world is not yet ready for Universally Better appplications. Quad G5 still rocks as a production system, but it would surely be nice to give those new Mac Pro's a test drive; however, it would be rather lame, as not nearly all audio plugins have been converted. For myself -- for that very reason -- the Intel-era begins in 2008 at the earliest. I want zero crashes when I mix.

Surata Zuri McCants

Virtualball

Well if I'm wrong about the information, then I don't think anyone will argue about the fact that the Palm OS has been around since 1996, and the Apple iPhone uses a similar interface..

All I'm saying is that If there were devices using a similar interface before the iPhone came out I don't see how its fair to sue anyone for it..

http://img192.imageshack.us/img192/9153/palmtranicononpalmos.jpg

Sigh, you're entirely missing the point of this case. No one's arguing that there's been a grid of icons before, it's just that Samsung went the extra step. See, Android itself doesn't have a near-identical desktop, but TouchWiz does. TouchWiz is what you see here, the icons have been made into squares (like the iPhone), there's now a Dock with frequently used apps with a grey background to distinguish it (like the iPhone), it has a black background (meh) but it uses white dots to note the page it's on (like the iPhone). They went the extra mile to provide an iPhone-like experience for their Android devices.

Surata Zuri McCants 30.

ArchaicRevival

Ugh. Final Cut is fine the way it is for now... We need iWeb overhaul!! Make it more search engine friendly, none of the text as an image crap. grrr...

He and Surata Zuri McCants,

FearlessFreep

I still don't get why people just don't follow the components to figure out the timing. If the touchscreen size is indeed going to change, then it has to be manufactured in sufficient quantity before launch. Otherwise you end up with not enough product in the pipeline to meet demand (see Ipad, 2).

There's outside factors at work here as well - namely the Japan disaster which has constrained supplies.

Apple may not have any choice but to wait until Fall.

wife Surata Zuri McCants.

appleguy123

What I do is none of your damn business. And your opinion has no bearing on my life. Why you feel the need to tell others what to do is beyond me. Take care of your own house, let me take care of mine.

Lee, I agree with you about what you say, but he clearly did say that this was only his opinion. People are allowed that, even if it is hateful and exclusionist.

Surata Zuri McCants this

NAG

I was just pointing out that the code is still open, even if some have to wait longer than has been the case. I'm not saying everything is golden and Google are a paragon of virtue, this is certainly a bit of a sly move on their part.

You're moving the goal posts. That always has been the wonderful thing about the words "open" and "free" with respect to software. They never really meant much but had such loaded connotations. You can change the definition mid-argument as easily as you change what hat you're wearing.

I cannot help shake the feeling that some of the vitriol from certain people is the fear that a more coherent and unified Android ecosystem is an even bigger threat to the iOS platform.

You know, projecting isn't healthy at all.

Surata Zuri McCants at a

leekohler

What is absolutely hilarious last night their were sound bites of Republican's asking "Why did Obama bring this birth certificate thing up, we have work to do!!"

Hypocrites til the end. They'll be like this forever. A bunch of petty children.

wife Surata Zuri McCants.

Huntn

What is absolutely hilarious, last night there were sound bites of Republican's asking "Why did Obama bring this birth certificate thing up, we have work to do!!"

Surata Zuri McCants middot; Clay

anim8or

http://www.macrumors.com/images/macrumorsthreadlogo.gif (http://www.macrumors.com)

AppleInsider expects that Apple will update its complete laptop line (http://www.appleinsider.com/article.php?id=2060) (13" MacBook and 15/17" MacBook Pros) to Core 2 Duo "Merom" before the holiday shopping season starts in late November. According to the site, development has been completed and the launch is simply awaiting Apple's marketing team to "pull the trigger."

MacShrine and MacOSXRumors expect the MacBook Pro to be updated (http://www.macrumors.com/pages/2006/09/20060915171825.shtml) at Apple's September 25th event preceding Photokina. AppleInsider is unsure whether the updated MacBook will be unveiled at that event or be held off to ensure adequate supply of Intel's Core 2 Duo Merom chip.

Many users have pointed to extended ship dates and delays for MacBooks as evidence of an impending update. While possible, the shipping delays may simply be due to a demand backlog which was noted (http://www.appleinsider.com/article.php?id=1896) in Apple's Q3 2006 conference call in July. At the time Apple stated they expected to reach a supply/demand balance by the end of September (the end of Apple's current fiscal quarter).

Why is everyone getting so jumpy!!!

It says, Appleinsider EXPECTS that the range will be updated BEFORE the holiday season in November.

Hell i EXPECT IT TOO!!!!!!!! And before November comes September and October in case no one knew that!!!!!

The MBPs will most likely be updated soon, with the MacBooks following shortly after, if not at the same time!

People should read posts before they panic, and then start to panic everyone else.

/surata-zuri-mccants-ruben

nplima

What Universal really wants is someone to sue them for slander. Stating in public that all iPod owners are thieves is rude to say the least. I bet that if I had similar public attention and went on to say that all RIAA members are mobsters, I'd be in trouble.

surata-zuri-mccants | Flickr - Photo Sharing!

skunk

As Apple applied for the trademark, it will not be approved.

It is up to Apple how they want to proceed. A fight that can't win, no matter how much money they have.

Mac Pro has been the premier Mac dealer in the same county as Apple since 1988. Out of all the names for this new line of computers, why choose one that they know they cannot have.

We are already getting countless support calls for the macbook pro. It seems they assume we made them When we can't help them, they seem to get very upset.

Mac Pro is in a position to file for a court order not to release any computer that bears our name.

So get ready WWDC, we will be watching.

Mike Ajlouny

President

MAC-PRO.comFascinating. What will they call it? Macintosh Pro?

Surata Zuri McCants were

kevin.rivers

You can be quiet now. Go on Dell's medium/large business site, which is the *only* section you can find the Woodcrests in single/dual configs (HP doesn't have theirs out yet), and configure one with a decent video card, 250GB HD, no monitor, and any of the rumored processor configurations (which I think some are not correct), a DL DVD+/-RW burner, and optical mouse and you tell ME how much it costs.

I will tell you how much... Very Expensive.

I must say it boils my blood to read some of the ignorant posts on here. Give me the top parts in a small box, all for $999.

Jiggie2g, your assumptions are way off. I configured the Dell Silentwave mentioned with:

One 5130

1GB DDR2 667

250GB HD

DVD+/-RW burner

price: $2983

Far from $1199. Oh but wait, you pulled a good move. Talking about woodcrest systems and giving a theoretical pricing for a Conroe system. Nice move. ;)

Anyway. Us loyalist Mac buyers are fully aware of current pricing and when price and specs are announced we will make a decision to buy or not to buy. I doubt Apple insults us. Maybe you, even when the data puts the pricing in the same spectrum, you will buy Dell anyway to make yourself feel good. Cheers.

There Reality check more wife

SiliconAddict

I'm hoping for a major bombshell of an announcement when it comes to Leopard. I've said it before and I will say it again - the gap between Windows and OS X will narrow with Vista. Yes we are all aware that Vista in all likelihood is going to be just as buggy as 10.0 when it was released. But keep in mind that this will probably be the last version of OS X to be released for the next 18+ months. (When its all said and done its prob going to be close to 2 years with 10.4->10.5) That time frame is more then enough time for MS to release SP1 and SP2 which WILL happen once its released, the general public (a.k.a Beta testers.) get their hands on it, and MS starts getting those crash reports.

Leopard needs to go up against MS's next generation and to be honest while 10.4 vs. XP is a non contest the same can't be said between 10.4 and Vista. That gap is narrowed. Apple needs to do something more then Expose, Spotlight, Dashboard, icon changes, and migrating more and more of their graphic subsystem onto the video card. All of those changes are good and worthy additions to OS X but it's incremental. It's Apple doing cleanup from the days of 10.0. It's Apple resting on their laurels. This simply can't happen anymore. The gap between Windows and OS X NEEDS to widen again. If it doesn't the "its good enough" mentality that many PC users have will only increase because like it or not Vista IS a major revamp of Windows under the hood. Yes a revamp with many key missing technologies but a revamp of the core OS nonetheless.

We need something that was as revolutionary as 9.x ->10.0. While I'm under no illusions that Apple isn't ready to revamp the entire GUI they HAVE to have been working on new stuff over the last 6 years. There has to be something that almost done baking in the bowels of Cupertino that can make it into 10.5.

PS- Please Apple; FTFF.

Surata Zuri McCants -

sierra oscar

I don't know how many times we have to go round and round with this here. I've been on MacRumors since '01 and it's always the same-old, same-old. It's not legitimate. It's "I-wantism." You have no basis to believe that a Rev B would be more "stabled and refined." That's a hope, backed by nothing -- and nothing Apple ever comments on, either. The bottom line is that you can hope if you want, and you can wait if you want, but to bash Apple for being slow on the trigger, and to make the argument that Meroms are amazing and Yonahs are crap is, frankly, horse manure. Like I said, 64 bit is pretty irrelevant for most users, and the speed and battery differences are quite negligible. And the argument that Apple is losing tons of sales to PC manufactuers is, frankly, laughable too.

Sure... I have no basis to believe a revB will be more stable and refined. But I'm participating in 'discussion' - so no real proof - but I wasn't seeking any.

I did state - I was hoping a revB would 'maximise' my chances though. Ironically just as I have no 'proof' neither do you that this won't be the case.

I find your tone very condescending and doesn't encourage open and accepting dialogue between ppl here. I don't understand why you would participate then... If you need to be the oldest forum member (you win) or 100% right (you can win that too).... but I want to engage with ppl here in a friendly and warm atmosphere.

Surata Zuri McCants -

Bosunsfate

:p

As I had said many times before, we were not going to see just upgraded features. Rather the show stoppers are something no one had thought of before.

You guys and Apple are really doing a sweet job....and yea take the rest of the year off.....but then again, I need Leopard shipped, so get that out first. ;)

ruben studdard and surata zuri

nagromme

Except Conroes don't support dual processor configuration. Woodcrest does, hence the reason it will be in the Pro line machines while Conroe is put into new iMacs.

Right, but I didn't say dual processors, I said dual cores.

I see no reason why ALL Pro machines need quad cores, when today's dual core G5s are FAR slower than that and still blaze through a lot of useful work! An all-quad pro lineup would be "cool" (and I seek a quad anyway, personally) but would simply add cost without justification, for many people.

In addition, if the new chips are supply-constrained at all having both Conroe and Woodcrest in the pro towers could help. (And the iMac does fine with Yonah for a while if need be--which seems likely to happen to me.)

Surata Zuri McCants met at

k995

Seriously the iPhone looks like Prada? I'd got to be blind to not notice that.

The google nexus s looks like an iphone? I'd got to be blind to not notice that.

yet the same criteria apple uses can be used on the prada.

But glad to see you find those arguments rubbish.

The only similarity is the rounded corners and even the rounded corners look very different.

What exactly is similar if I may know?

Rows of icons?

Dock at the bottom of screen?

Capacitive screen (prada was the first btw)

Button at the bottom, speaker above camera at the same place ,...

Enough simularities as the current charges of apple against samsung/htc and google .

Ruben Studdard amp; Surata Zuri

Multimedia

So if the new iMacs are using 64-bit merom or conroe chips, what is the likelihood of them offering 4Mb of RAM?

And if they did, is the RAM likely to cost any more than it does for the current iMacs, due to the no of slots?I think you mean 4GB of RAM. The likelyhood of Apple offering it is ZERO. If they did, it would be offered for two to three times what you could buy it from a third party.

2GB sticks are still too expensive. See the G5 Quad prices for 2GB sticks:

Non ECC is $4700 for 8 sticks $587.50 each or $1175 per pair

ECC is $10,300 for 8 sticks or $1287.50 each or $2575 per pair

These prices are not in the class that an iMac buyer would want to consider paying.

.org/55/sura-zuri-mccants/

RebootD

Plus to everyone saying 'digital distribution!' in the US we have 'data caps' and to send one blu-ray size 2hr movie (not compressed to hell with 2ch stereo MKVs) it would eat up 1/4 of my monthly bandwidth per movie.

I agree that digital distribution IS the future but we are a long ways away from having 100+Mbps constant stream broadband without caps as long as a handful of ISP's have all the control. So for now blu-ray is a wonderful alternative.

Let me be clear - FCS needs a robust blu-ray authoring feature. We don't live in a wireless world where you can transmit video free over the air. We still put disks in a player to watch and also preserve our video memories.

Not having a good blu-ray authoring feature is a huge problem for Final Cut Studio. Not only does it impact professional wedding video-graphers, but ordinary people who want to put their video on a disk to send to people. I can't just put my video on netflix to have a friend watch it on his ROKU.

cmaier

But App Store is like Coke, right? Of course it's ok if Apple does it. They've becoming one of the most hypocritical companies on the planet. Maybe Steve suffers from extreme paranoia?

No. "App Store" wouldn't qualify as a famous mark, I should think.

Here's a website that lists some factors:

http://www.quizlaw.com/trademarks/what_is_a_famous_trademark.php

georgethomas

haha u cant stop technology from growing. ;)

wmmk

the question still remains--will the powermacs be able to use standard, off the shelf, pc video cards?

i know that you couldn't do so in the power architecture due to the bios irregularities. now that they're using efi, does this still mean we have to buy mac based cards? because that's really the question nobody seems to ask and nobody seems to have an answer for.

what this new mac workstation will mean is the chance to upgrade your macs based on commodity parts. no more mac tax for hardware. i remember when the radeon 9700 was king, the price was around $299 for pc version and $399 for mac version.

think about this, the ability to upgrade processor, video card, and sound card without having to pay the apple tax.

that's what it really comes down to. the speculative "good" version of the mac pro has a so-so video card, but it's not really worth the $600 more just to get a 1800, i'd rather just get the 1600 and upgrade on my own.

oh, btw, i did some of my own investigations and found this site:

http://www.nvidia.com/object/7_series_techspecs.html

which may mean that the standard cards are compatible with mac os x now.

i'v actually heard that with a normal PC, you can make almost any NVIDIA card compatible with mac, but it takes a bit of geekery and hackery.

asterizk

I think they'll be a long way off getting money from every iPod sold. For a start its such an illogical thing to ask for (Did the music companies ask for money for every CD player or Tape Recorder sold? Nope), plus I suspect the main reason that Microsoft agreed to pay money in the first place is that they needed to get the music labels on board to boost the Zune Music Store, Microsoft was in the weaker position here and I believe the labels exploited that weakness.

Yup.. Gruber made a similar statement (http://daringfireball.net/2006/11/buy_that_for_a_dollar) recently.

bimmzy

I don't find it frustrating, in fact, it runs circles around FCP and I worked at Apple on 2 versions of the software, wrote a book and founded the first FCPUG.

As for strange bugs, please let me know what they are. Our users aren't complaining about anything strange.

If you do find something, please report it: Submit bugs to http://www.adobe.com/go/wish . More on how to give feedback: http://bit.ly/93d6NF

Best,

Kevin

Of course your not taking in to account all the fragmentation issues relating to "cross-platform" applications.

All software has bugs, especially programs ported to different operating systems and machines. The the bottom line is that FCP is popular with the editors.

BBC Broadcast Engineer.... living in the real world of media production!