Consulting and audit firm PwC today said that it had completed its acquisition of global management consulting firm PRTM, for an undiscloswed sum.

The addition of PRTM's extensive experience in operations management consulting, including strategy, supply chain, product development, customer value management and business model innovation, will strengthen and support PwC's commitment to deliver consulting services from strategy through execution.

"We are very excited to welcome PRTM's consultants to the PwC team," said Robert Moritz, US chairman and senior partner of PwC. "This is an important transaction for our clients as we continue to invest in the quality of our services across the firm. PRTM's experienced professionals will bring increased high quality services to our clients in areas that are critically important to them and can help them build a competitive advantage."

The acquisition of PRTM brings over 700 experienced consultants to PwC's global Advisory practice, including 124 principals. Over two-thirds of PRTM's professionals are located in the US, with the remainder located in the UK, France, Germany, the Nordics, the UAE, India, China and Japan. PRTM serve several Fortune 1000 clients across industries such as technology, industrial products, retail and consumer, healthcare and public sector.

Dana Mcilwain, PwC Vice Chairman and U.S. Advisory Leader, said, "We are pleased with the successful completion of this transaction, which will significantly increase our ability to serve our clients in the areas of operations management, strategic execution and business model innovation, and will provide our people with new opportunities for career development and growth. We are very excited to welcome our new colleagues to the firm and look forward to serving our clients together."

"The PRTM team is proud to be joining one of the world's leading professional services firms," said Scott Hefter, former Global Managing Director of PRTM and now a Principal at PwC. "Together, we will bring a full continuum of world class consulting services -- from strategy through execution -- to help our clients meet their business challenges."