April 15, 1452

Leonardo da Vinci is born in Anchiano, near Vinci, Republic of Florence [Italy]. He is destined to become one of the leading figures in the fields of arts and science during the period of history known as the Renaissance.

1467–81

At 15 Leonardo apprentices to the famous artist Andrea del Verrocchio in Florence. With Verrocchio, Leonardo learns painting and sculpture primarily. In 1472 Leonardo is accepted into the painters’ guild of Florence, but he remains in his teacher’s workshop for five more years, after which time he works independently in Florence until 1481. Many of his artworks from this period are pencil sketches not only of human figures, but of mechanical designs, too.

1482–99

Leonardo moves to Milan in 1492 to serve in the court of the duke Ludovico Sforza. Leonardo enjoys the prospect of multiple projects suited to his interests and abilities. Altogether, he spends 17 years in Milan. During this period he completes such well-known paintings as Last Supper and The Virgin of the Rocks. His dignified manner and serious approach to his art and life gain him high regard within the duke’s court. Leonardo also frequently consults on the subjects of architecture, engineering, and military matters.

1500-08

Leonardo returns to Florence in 1500 to pursue projects in painting, anatomy, and engineering. In 1503 he is commissioned to paint a mural in Florence’s Palazzo Vecchio; it is to be a grand historical scene intended to glorify the military conquest of the Florentines. The work is never completed, however. Leonardo also begins painting the Mona Lisa about 1503.

1508-13

Leonardo’s scientific explorations proceed. He dedicates himself to an extensive study of human anatomy. In addition, he also pursues mathematical, optical, mechanical, geological, and botanical studies. These investigations teach him that force and motion are primary determinants of the physical world and that they are based on unchanging laws of nature.

1516

Leonardo leaves Italy to serve King Francis I of France. On arriving in France, Leonardo does little in the way of painting. He does, however, continue to pursue the study of anatomy and to sketch drawings depicting powerful natural events.

May 2, 1519