THE SUNSET LIMITED

​BY CORMAC McCARTHY

Coming this November, Attitude Theatre presents The Sunset Limited by Cormac McCarthy.

​In a small apartment in Harlem (or perhaps in Purgatory) a black ex-convict street preacher tries to convince an atheist professor of humanities that life is worth living and God loves him. The professor argues that existence is meaningless, death is desirable, and oblivion the only reasonable goal. The preacher is named Black, the professor White. We don’t know their actual names. Black caught White in his arms just as he tried to jump in front of a subway train (or perhaps just after). Black found faith in God after almost dying in a prison fight. White’s faith in high culture and humanism has dissolved in his contempt for his fellow man. Can they find common ground? Can both be saved?

Directed by Kevin Stinson

​Featuring Willis Taylor and Eric Grace

Produced by Tony Cain and Rasanga Weerasinghe

Venue: Paul Phillips Hall, Fernwood

November 3rd, 4th at 8pm

November 5th at 2pm.

November 10th, 11th at 8pm

November 12th at 2pm

Tickets: $20

Photography and Poster Design byRasanga Weerasinghe

March 2023

​

Bed Among the Lentils featuring Lorene Cammiade

​

​Synopsis: Susan, a vicar's wife, alcoholic troubled with a disappointing life, questions her faith in Christianity and her loveless marriage to Geoffrey, a sanctimonious, self-absorbed cleric preoccupied with his ambition for promotion in the Anglican Church. Susan finds comfort, affection and compassion with an Asian grocer that turns into a love affair with the exquisitely delicate and polite Mr Ramesh. Susan shares with us her perspective on the contrast between Hinduism and Anglicanism. This is the very best of the Talking Heads monologues rich in pathos and comedy. A story of alcoholism, forbidden love and the journey of a tortured soul ending with a terribly moving confession.​

​

A Lady of Letters featuring Elizabeth Whitmarsh

Synopsis: Irene Ruddock is an ordinary middle-aged woman, living alone and devotes her time to letter writing to anyone in the community complaining, criticizing, and sometimes offending people like her local MP, the police and even the Queen. Miss Ruddock as she likes to be addressed is warned by the authorities to cease her disruptive and inflammatory correspondence upsetting the public. The local constabulary has received reports that she caused the nervous breakdown of the lollipop man when she accused him of abusing schoolchildren and called the chemist's wife a prostitute. Two local doctors prescribe antidepressant pills but she flushes them down the toilet because " they are not doing the trick ". Social workers are assigned to help Miss Ruddock find a more positive outlook on life. Eventually, Miss Ruddock launches a new letter-writing campaign that targets the police. The result is a disaster for Irene Ruddock of the worst kind or is it?​

Directed by: Tony Cain

Theatre: Paul Philips Hall Fernwood

BRILLIANT TRACES

OCT 29 - NOV 2 2019

There are some plays that I have seen or read that seem to haunt me like stories that I need to tell.

Cindy Lou Johnson’s Brilliant Traces had been sitting on my shelf nagging me over a decade. It is a rollercoaster of a play about a man and a woman thrown together in the confines of a cabin trapped by a raging snowstorm and having to come to terms with each other’s temperaments. I was drawn to the exploration of two strangers thrown together, both seriously flawed characters, and constantly taunting each other to openly reveal their demons. A compelling journey of conflict, love, and mutual healing between a man and a woman illuminating how we live today.

​I was blessed with a talented cast that always brought energy and innovative creativity to every rehearsal. Ursula Szolak as Rosannah Deluce brought a tenacity and drive that opens the play with such an explosive entrance that the audience never gets time to recover. Brian Quakenbush playing the role of Henry Harry created a tortured lost soul, a sad recluse, living a futile solitary existence desperately trying to cope with the guilt of a tragic loss.

I was helped by my sound designer Mitch Barnes who created a wonderfully haunting dreamlike atmosphere. As always, Michael Gosselin, our co- founder, director/producer and you name it, was present to give support and advice to our actors when I was not available and guide the production crew.

“Brilliant acting. Brilliant direction. Really great theatre.” - Penny Costen Pitcher