NEW YORK (AP) - The New York Knicks traded Zach Randolph and Jamal Crawford in separate deals yesterday, parting with their two top scorers to free up coveted salary-cap space for the summer of 2010.

Crawford was sent to Golden State for forward Al Harrington. Hours later, Randolph was shipped to the Los Angeles Clippers along with reserve guard Mardy Collins for Cuttino Mobley and Tim Thomas.

The Knicks gave up 40 points per game for a chance to cash in on something much bigger.

Knicks President Donnie Walsh has repeatedly said his goal was to get under the cap in time for a potentially sensational free-agent crop that could be headlined by LeBron James, Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh.

"I think that opening up cap space down the road for us is a big plus on our side, and I hope our fans understand that that can give us an opportunity to make the team better according to the plan that I've outlined," Walsh said on a conference call.

Both Randolph and Crawford have deals that extend past 2010. Randolph is scheduled to make $17.3 million and Crawford $10.1 million in 2010-11. None of the players the Knicks brought back is under contract past 2010.

James, Wade and Bosh, all members of the U.S. Olympic team, could become free agents that summer.

New York has had seven straight losing seasons, and yesterday's moves might clinch an eighth, which would tie a franchise record. Though Harrington could flourish in Mike D'Antoni's uptempo system and Thomas played well for him in Phoenix, the Knicks have to replace the 20.5 points and 12.5 rebounds Randolph was averaging, plus Crawford's 19.6 points per game.

"I think this is an unfortunate time to make this kind of trade, because you're introducing three new players into the system, and in addition to that you're taking out the two guys who are our most successful players in the beginning of the season in Zach and in Jamal," Walsh said. "So this will be a difficult time for our coach, but I think we we're all on the same page as far as trying to get this done."

But Walsh and D'Antoni have made it clear they are playing for the future, so the record this season was never the first priority, anyway. With the allure of playing in New York and for D'Antoni, Walsh believes New York could be a player in 2010.

Copyright 2008 Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.