GREENBURGH, N.Y. — New Knicks forward Zach Randolph took a couple of swings with the hockey stick he'd just been handed, then grabbed a spot alongside the Rangers' two new additions for a photo.

It's shopping season in New York, and the Knicks might not be done yet.

Acquired from Portland in a draft-night trade, Randolph was introduced Monday by the Knicks, who will pair him with center Eddy Curry to form what they hope will be a powerful frontcourt.

"I'm not going to have a problem playing team ball and helping this team win, because that's what I want to do," Randolph said. "I started out in Portland when it was good, we made it to the playoffs and I stayed there when it went bad. And I'm just ready to go to a winning team and make the playoffs."

The Knicks haven't done that since 2004, but Randolph's arrival should move them in the right direction. And he might not be New York's last move of the summer.

Coach and team president Isiah Thomas said the Knicks have been "active" since the NBA's free agency period opened Sunday in hopes of landing another star from the Pacific Northwest, Seattle's Rashard Lewis.

"We've had discussions with his agent," Thomas said. "He's a person of interest."

The other Madison Square Garden tenants had a big day Sunday when the Rangers signed free agents Scott Gomez and Chris Drury. Thomas wouldn't say how hopeful he was of landing another big name of his own but plans to try.

"If a player's out there that can make us better and we have an opportunity to get him, I'll try to do that," he said.

ODEN SIGNS: The Portland Trail Blazers have signed No. 1 pick Greg Oden.

According the NBA's collective bargaining agreement, Oden's deal will be for two years, with team options for the third and fourth seasons. Oden will make $3.885 million as a rookie and $4.176 million in Year 2. If they pick up the option in the third year, his salary will be $4.476 million.

Oden, a 7-foot center from Ohio State, signed his contract Sunday and the team announced the deal Monday.

Oden immediately started working out with the other players on Portland's summer league roster, impressing teammates with his powerful dunks and ability to block shots.

REPORT: LAKERS TO RE-SIGN WALTON: Luke Walton appears to be returning to the Los Angeles Lakers.

Several published reports said the forward agreed to a six-year, $30 million deal Sunday on the first day teams were allowed to contact free agents.

IVERSON CRITICAL OF LAWSUIT: Allen Iverson denied taking part in a 2005 Washington nightclub brawl, testifying Monday that two men who sued him for $20 million in connection with the fight want to cash in on his basketball fame.

The plaintiffs say Iverson's bodyguard and other members of his entourage attacked them when they wouldn't immediately make room for the NBA star in the VIP section of the Eyebar.

"I think I'm here because I worked hard all my life to get where I'm at and they want to get rich overnight," Iverson said.

YI MUM ON BUCKS: Bucks top draft pick Yi Jianlian won't talk about the draft or the prospect of playing for Milwaukee.

Yi is in Dallas with the China National Senior Team for two exhibition games. He said Monday that he was looking forward to playing against the Dallas Mavericks Summer Team on Tuesday. But he declined for the second straight day to talk about the NBA.