Location: Bakersfield, CA

Are you a student or parent at Stockdale High School? Want to understand how to get the most out of high school?

We've written the best guide to Stockdale High available. Here we'll cover:

Breakdowns of student ethnicity, gender, and family income

How safe Stockdale High is to attend

SAT/ACT/AP scores earned by Stockdale High students

Which AP/IB classes you can take at Stockdale High

Every sports team you can join at Stockdale High

Let's get started!

Basic Information

Stockdale High School is a public school, supporting grades 9 to 12 . It's located in Bakersfield, CA in Kern County.

Based on its location, Stockdale High is classified as a school in a large city. Here's the location on a map:

Contact Information

Mailing address:

Stockdale High School2800 Buena Vista Rd. Bakersfield, CA 93311-9791

Phone number: 6616652800

Stockdale High School homepage: http://stockdale.kernhigh.org/

Principal: Ramon HendrixEmail the principal: [email protected]

Student Demographics

Student Enrollment

The total enrollment at Stockdale High School is 2058 students, making it a large high school, in the top 25% of all California high schools by size.

Attending Stockdale High will feel like attending a small college. You'll have a few hundred students in your class, enough to provide an interesting set of activities, sports, and classes to try. But compared to the largest high schools in California, the student body size won't be overwhelming.

Growth in Student Body Size

Is Stockdale High School growing or shrinking? This will help you see trends in where the school is headed.

From our calculations, the enrollment at Stockdale High has increased over the past few years. We calculate this by comparing enrollment in grades 9 to 12.

Male Students Female Students All Students 9th grade 263 305 568 10th grade 268 247 515 11th grade 248 214 462 12th grade 260 253 513

As you can see in the table above, the freshman class is 55 students larger than the senior class. This suggests that the school is growing in size and taking on more students.

There are a few reasons this could be happening. The city of Bakersfield could be growing in population, thus sending more students into Stockdale High. Alternatively, Stockdale High could be relaxing its student policies and taking in more students.

Gender Split

Are there more boys or girls at Stockdale High School?

From our statistics, Stockdale High has a 51:49 split between male and female students in the high school grades.

Stockdale High has a balanced male-female ratio that's largely representative of the general population in Kern County. Since the student body is roughly half and half, it should feel like there are equal numbers of boys and girls in your classes.

This usually means that Stockdale High doesn't strongly select for either males or females, unlike other schools that have a large majority of males or females.

Ethnicity Breakdown

What's the racial diversity at Stockdale High School? Does one ethnicity make up most of the student body, or is it fairly balanced?

From our statistics, Stockdale High has a diverse student body. No single ethnicity composes more than 50% of all students, which means you'll be surrounded by a diverse set of students in class. Only a third of California schools show this much diversity.

The most common ethnicity at Stockdale High is Hispanic. In California, 51.5% of all students are Hispanic, making it the most common ethnicity. Even though Stockdale High is relatively diverse, students of Hispanic descent are the most common ethnicity here.

Percentage Number American Indian/Alaska Native 0.6% 14 Asian 16.3% 337 Hispanic 37.2% 767 Black 6.9% 143 White 35.1% 724 Hawaiian Native/Pacific Islander 0.1% 3 Two or more races 3.4% 70

High schools usually reflect the population in the surrounding area, so the ethnicities of students likely resembles those of Bakersfield. If you'd like to see how other nearby schools look in diversity, just google "[name of school] prepscholar" to find our guide to that specific school.

Income Level of Stockdale High Families

What are the family incomes of students at Stockdale High School? To determine this, we look at the number of students who qualify for free or reduced lunches, a classification by the US federal government.

To qualify for a reduced price meal, family income needs to be below 185% of the federal poverty guidelines. For a family of 4, this means an income of around $45,000 or below.

To qualify for a free meal, family income needs to be below 130% of the federal poverty guidelines. For a family of 4, this means an income of around $32,000 or below.

The lower the percentage of students who qualify for free or reduced price meals, the higher the income levels are likely to be.

At Stockdale High, 7.2% of students qualify for reduced-price lunches, and 18.8% qualify for free lunches.

This means Stockdale High has a low poverty level. The overwhelming majority of students at Stockdale High don't qualify for free or reduced price lunches. Bakersfield is thus likely to be an affluent community, with quite high family incomes.

Number Percent Reduced-price lunches 150 7.2% Free lunches 388 18.8% Do not qualify for reduced-price or free lunches 1520 73.8%

As with ethnicity, this likely reflects the surrounding community in Bakersfield and doesn't speak much about the school itself.

Because Stockdale High is in the top quartile of schools by family income, it's likely to be well-funded relative to other high schools in California. This means you'll likely have access to advanced coursework like AP/IB classes and better-funded extracurriculars and sports.

It's still up to you, though, to take advantage of the resources Stockdale High has to offer. If you work hard and spend your time effectively, you'll likely be well positioned to succeed in college and beyond.

School Safety

How safe is Stockdale High School to attend? Can you expect a lot of conflict as a student here?

To study this, we look at disciplinary data for two types of incidents at Stockdale High: referrals to law enforcement (when incidents are reported to police), and arrests.

These are the most serious disciplinary actions available to school administration and are more severe than suspensions or expulsions. Suspensions are often discretionary and can be given just for being disruptive in class. In contrast, law enforcement referrals and arrests often indicate incidents that put the safety of other Stockdale High students at risk.

Compare this school with other high schools in the same school district, using the following table:

Kern Union High School District Safety

School Name Total Referred Total Arrests Enrollment Centennial High 18 4 3151 Arvin High 0 0 2487 Bakersfield High 0 0 2824 Central Valley High (continuation) 0 0 83 East Bakersfield High 0 0 2245 Foothill High 62 6 353

Academic Performance

Now we get to a major aspect of assessing a high school: academic performance. How good of an education will you get at Stockdale High School? Will you be competitive for college? Will you have access to advanced classes?

We've compiled everything we could find about Stockdale High's academics here.

Graduation Rate

To start off, an important benchmark of academic achievement is graduation rate. For all students who start high school at Stockdale High, the state of California wants as many students to graduate as possible, since a high school diploma can mean a big difference in getting a job.

Note: This data comes from a few years back, but the trends are likely to stay the same, since schools don't get significantly better or worse within a short period of time.

Standardized Testing

Next, we'll look at another major piece of high school academics: standardized testing performance for Stockdale High School students. These are tests that are administered to large populations of students for comparison purposes.

Let’s start by taking a look at the data for nationally administered standardized tests.

SAT Scores

As you probably know, the SAT is a critical test used for college admissions. The higher the score you get, the better your academic performance compared to students nationwide, and the easier it is to get into top colleges.

We did in-depth research and found the average Stockdale High School SAT scores.

Here's a breakdown of SAT scores by section:

Average SAT Scores (2013-2014)

Source Critical Reading Math Writing Composite Stockdale High 527 550 518 1590 California 498 510 496 1504 United States 495 511 484 1490

Note that the SAT has since changed to a 1600 scale, but the trends above for your high school are likely to continue. Just use this guide to convert between the old 2400 scale and the new 1600 scale.

To learn more about SAT percentile rankings, read our guide on what SAT percentiles really mean.

How good is 1590 as an SAT score? Find out with our complete 1590 SAT score guide, including which colleges you can get into with a 1590 or any other SAT score!

ACT Scores

In California, the ACT is less popular than the SAT. Fewer students take the ACT, and typically these students are more motivated and academically prepared for college. Therefore, it's harder to compare Stockdale High School ACT scores with the rest of the country.

Here are the average English, Math, Reading, and Science scores for Stockdale High compared to California and the US:

Average ACT Scores

Source English Math Reading Science Stockdale High 24 25 24 24 California 21.8 22.8 22.3 21.7 United States 20.3 20.9 21.3 20.8

Scores provided are for the 2013-14 school year.

Find out more about percentile rankings and the ACT in this article.

Every individual is different. What counts as a good ACT score for you? Learn more with this article!

Advanced Placement (AP)

Advanced Placement (AP) classes are college-level courses that are an additional academic challenge may give Stockdale High School students credit for college.

Here's what we're looking for: high average AP test scores as well as high AP passing rates.

AP Scores

Every year, roughly 362 students in grades 9-12 at Stockdale High take 675 AP exams. It's important to understand how students score on the AP - earning a 3, 4, or 5 on the AP test means passing the test and often earning college credit.

We have specific data on how many students got a 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 (out of 5) on AP exams in the chart below:

To find out the passing rates for specific AP courses at Stockdale High School, you'll have to talk to your guidance counselor (who can then help you find that information). For instance, one AP Calculus teacher may have an above-90% passing rate, while another might only have a 50% passing rate. If you can, you'll want to take the class with the teacher who has more students get a 3 or above on the AP exam.

Find out more about the average score for each AP subject here.

State Tests

As of 2014, eleventh graders attending Stockdale High School must take standardized tests in English/Language Arts and Math as part of the California Assessment of Student Performance and Progress (CAASPP). These align with the new Common Core standards and are called the "Smarter Balanced" tests.

If Stockdale High students meet or exceed state standards, they're academically prepared to graduate high school and go to college. Specifically, we care about the percentage of students who meet or exceed state standards. The larger this number, the higher the preparation of students at Stockdale High.

English/Language Arts

English/Language Arts Test Results (2015)

Read more about what’s measured in each ELA area score here.

Math

The other major test taken for state assessments is Math. Across the state, Math performance is generally lower than English/Language Arts performance, so it's natural for this number to be lower.

Math Test Results (2015)

Read more about what’s measured in each Math area score, go here.

Academic Offerings

In addition to the standard high school curriculum, many high schools like Stockdale High School offer advanced coursework as part of the Advanced Placement (AP) or International Baccalaureate (IB) programs.

Brief Intro to AP/IB

AP and IB courses are designed at the difficulty level of college introductory classes. There are several important benefits to taking advanced coursework at Stockdale High. First, taking more advanced classes shows colleges that you're committed to challenging yourself academically, and that you're one of the more advanced students at Stockdale High. Taking AP/IB classes also raises your weighted GPA and makes you a stronger college applicant.

Furthermore, many colleges will accept your Stockdale High AP/IB coursework as college coursework. In some cases, you'll be able to skip introductory-level classes and move to more advanced classes. In other cases, you'll be able to avoid having to take required courses and might even be able to graduate earlier than the standard 4 years. Often this will require you to pass the AP test, getting a score of 3 or above.

So what advanced courses does Stockdale High School offer?

AP Courses

Stockdale High School offers AP courses in 12 subjects.

This is a reasonable number of AP subjects, putting Stockdale High School in the top 50% of California schools that offer AP courses. You'll likely have access to some of the most popular math and humanities AP subjects, as well as a few others.

The total number of AP subjects is 38, so Stockdale High is missing a large number of subjects, including some popular ones. If there are any AP courses you want to take that aren't being offered at Stockdale High, ask your counselor for ideas on how to cover the gap.

Of course, keep in mind that quality matters even more than quantity - even if Stockdale High doesn't offer every AP course under the sun, the classes might still be taught very well. You can see student performance in the AP score analysis section above.

The following AP courses were offered at Stockdale High during 2015-2016:

Course Title Calculus BC Chemistry English Language and Composition English Literature and Composition Environmental Science European History French Language and Culture Spanish Language and Culture Statistics Studio Art: 2-D Design United States Government and Politics United States History

Sports Teams

Finally, we'll cover which sports teams are available at Stockdale High School. Sports are an integral part of many students' high school experiences. The more sports that are available, and the more levels supported (Frosh, JV, Varsity), the more likely you'll be able to participate in a sport at Stockdale High.

By the way, the Stockdale High mascot is the Mustangs. Go Mustangs!

Stockdale High School fields 20 teams for girls' sports. This is an impressively high number that puts Stockdale High in the top 10% of California schools that offer girls' sports. If you're a female, you'll have plenty of options of sports and levels to try out for. Furthermore, schools that offer more teams typically have a strong sports culture and field competitive teams.

And now for the boys: Stockdale High School fields 22 teams for boys' sports. This puts Stockdale High in the top 25% of California schools that offer boys' sports. Boys will have a large pick of sports to try out for.

Boys Teams Girls Teams Basketball

Var JV Fr

Basketball

Var JV Fr

Golf

Var JV Fr

Golf

Var JV Fr

Tennis

Var JV Fr

Tennis

Var JV Fr

Football

Var JV Fr

Wrestling

Var JV Fr

Volleyball

Var JV Fr

Volleyball

Var JV Fr

Cheer

Var JV Fr

Cheer

Var JV Fr

Baseball

Var JV Fr

Softball

Var JV Fr

Trackfield

Var JV Fr

Trackfield

Var JV Fr

Crosscountry

Var JV Fr

Crosscountry

Var JV Fr

Soccer

Var JV Fr

Soccer

Var JV Fr

What’s Next?

Want to get more useful information about high school classes and preparing for colleges? Our blog has a ton of articles and advice on topics ranging from coursework and GPA to letters of recommendation, extracurriculars, and much more!

Ready to bulk up your schedule and maximize your college preparedness? Read all about the Advanced Placement and International Baccalaureate programs.

Not quite in high school yet, but eager to get started? We've also got information for younger students interested in advanced learning opportunities, both in and out of school.

If You Liked Our Advice...

Visit our blog for free strategy guides on college admissions and test prep.

Our experts have written hundreds of useful articles on improving your SAT score and getting into college. You'll definitely find something useful here.

Visit our blog now.

Subscribe to our newsletter to get FREE strategies and guides sent to your email. Learn how to ace the SAT/ACT and get into college, with exclusive tips and insights that we share with our private newsletter subscribers.

Get Free SAT Tips to Boost Your Score

Get EXCLUSIVE insider tips on how to ACE THE SAT for FREE! 100% Privacy. No spam ever.

You should definitely follow us on social media. You'll get updates on our latest articles right on your feed. Follow us on all of our social networks:

Sources

The data on this page is drawn from a variety of sources, including (but not limited to):