Built in 1977, Stockdale Elementary is one of 25 elementary schools in the Panama-Buena Vista Union School District. We are located in a quiet residential community in southwest Bakersfield. The school currently serves approximately 650 students in TK through sixth grade.

We provide a safe, respectful and responsible learning environment that is student-centered. Stockdale Elementary has high academic and social expectations with a school community that is committed to helping all students realize their potential.

We proudly display our trophies in our entry to give notice that Stockdale Elementary students take academics and sports seriously and with pride. You will see first place finishes in County Oral Language Events, Math Field Day, Bank of America Essay and Speech, Battle of the Books, and County Science Fairs illustrate a tradition of excellence in academic competition. Four SCMAF (Southern California Municipal Athletic Federation) Volleyball championships, success in the National Junior Olympics, and qualifiers for the Nationals in track and field events, establish a tradition that Stockdale Elementary students have a proven record of excellence. Enthusiastic students participate in canned food drives for needy families, gifts for the less fortunate, programs for the homeless center, and environmental projects. These are expressions of the students' concern and awareness of the world in which they live.

Stockdale Elementary is also the recipient of the International Reading Association Exemplary Reading Program Award and the 1997, 2000, 2008, 2014 and 2020 California Distinguished School Awards. Additionally, in 2022 Stockdale Elementary was presented with the California State PBIS Silver level award for our implementation of school-wide positive expectations, acknowledgement and support systems. Thus, creating a safe and welcoming learning environment for all students.

We are proud of our well earned reputation. As one parent stated, "I was told upon moving into the neighborhood that Stockdale School has a good reputation. From the first day I walked in to register my son I could see the teachers and support staff were first rate -- putting the kids' needs first, responding professionally, and working together as a team. I know my son's needs are being met by people who really care."

The supportive partnership between home and school is the foundation to a quality education. While being part of Stockdale Elementary we hope that you see evidence of our purpose statement, “Inspiring hope while ensuring high levels of learning for ALL students” throughout the campus and in every classroom.