Alan Rickman will be remembered for being an incredible acting talent and starring in films such as Love Actually and A Little Chaos.

But his own love story was even more heartwarming than the scripted tales he was given to read.

The Hollywood star, who died aged 69 this week following a battle with cancer, married his life-long partner Rima Horton in a secret ceremony last year after nearly 50 years together.

He met Rima in 1965 when he was 19 and she was 18 and the pair lived in London together from 1977 until his death.

When asked what the secret was to his happy relationship - in April, he dropped the wedding bombshell, telling German newspaper Bild: "We are married, just recently. It was great, because no one was there.

"After the wedding in New York we walked across the Brooklyn Bridge and ate lunch."

He jokingly added that he bought his new wife a $200 dollar ring "that she never wears."

Speaking previously about Rima, Alan also told HELLO! magazine: "I think every relationship should be allowed to have its own rules.

"She's tolerant. She's incredibly tolerant. Unbelievably tolerant. Possibly a candidate for sainthood."

Alan has been involved in several projects in the Big Apple, starring in the Broadway play Seminar from 2011 to 2012 and starring in the film CBGB, about the famed East Village punk-rock club.

Rima was a Labour Party councillor for the Kensington and Chelsea London Borough Council from 1986 until 2006 and also worked at Kingston University as an economics lecturer.

JK Rowling has penned a heartfelt tribute to Alan Rickman following his death aged 69.

Rickman, who was well known for his role as Severus Snape in the Harry Potter films, passed away in hospital this morning aged 69.

He had been battling cancer, his family confirmed in a short statement.

Writing on Twitter, author JK Rowling said: "There are no words to express how shocked and devastated I am to hear of Alan Rickman's death.

"He was a magnificent actor & a wonderful man."

She added her condolences to his family and wife Rima, writing: "My thoughts are with Rima and the rest of Alan's family. We have all lost a great talent. They have lost part of their hearts."