Monthly Archives: November 2012

Moolah Beach

Have you ever sat around wondering what Survivor might be like if instead of adults there were teenagers and instead of Jeff Probst there was a ginger hosting things? Look no further than Moolah Beach. Premiering on September 8, 2001 (no coincidence to the terrorist attacks days later I’m sure) Moolah Beach was a show […]

Eureeka’s Castle

Sometimes I feel like I was the only person in the entire world that watched Eureeka’s Castle. I believe it was aired on Nickelodeon in the early 90’s which once again proves that I only watched one channel for the entirety of my childhood. Eureeka’s Castle was a show consisting of magical creatures that lived […]

The Mighty Ducks

Few film franchises have spawned their own cartoon shows and even fewer have stolen tax dollars to put a new hockey arena in a city. The Mighty Ducks managed to do them both. (Emilio Estevez in a denim shirt, Dockers, and a pose that says “Look what I have to deal with!” I also like you […]

Global Guts and Legends of the Hidden Temple

It’s pretty obvious by now that I’m a Nickelodeon kid. I wasn’t a fan of Cartoon Network, One Saturday Morning, and I didn’t even get Disney Channel until I was 12. Nickelodeon had a lot to offer though. Besides their original cartoons and clever live action shows, they also had plenty of game shows to […]

Recess

For some reason I associate rock-bottom in my life when I was sitting on the couch in 7th grade after school with a family-sized bag of cheese doodles watching the television show Recess. Needless to say, the bag was finished by the time the episode ended. Let’s not talk about food for once. Let’s talk […]

A Poem for Amanda Bynes

Dear Amanda Bynes, I hope this poem crosses no boundaries or lines, I’ve had a thing for you ever since I can remember, Your face in my mind January through December. You began your career on the show All That, Your costar Lori Beth Denberg was incredibly fat. The show never made me laugh much, I […]

Rugrats Part 2: The Parents

If you don’t understand what I mean by “Part 2: The Parents”, this is the part where I talk about the parents. Even as a youngster I thought the parents of the Rugrats were good characters. They were developed and important parts of the show. Didi and Stu Pickles were Tommy’s parents. They were good […]

Rugrats Part 1: The Kids

My brain is on overload right now. Rugrats is a show that I know too much about. Sadly, every person my age has the same plethora of knowledge about the subject. Apparently Rugrats was the longest running Nicktoon with 172 episodes only to be beaten by Spongebob Squarepants this year. The best way to delve […]

Hannah Montana

I should probably wait a little bit and earn your respect before revealing this but I am very impatient and don’t like you much anyway. I will confess I have seen every episode of the first season of Hannah Montana. THE FIRST! Only the first. The second season went real downhill. I mean really, are […]