Tayshaun Prince has watched from afar as the Detroit Pistons rebuilt after trading him, and the Memphis Grizzlies forward said today he likes what he sees in his former team. “I think Detroit’s in a good situation with Chauncey (Billups) to be able to help those younger guys out, with Brandon (Jennings) and Will (Bynum) and (Rodney) Stuckey and those guys,” Prince said after the Grizzlies’ shootaround this morning. “with the addition of Josh (Smith) and the size that they have on that front line, they should do good things. Obviously, a move in the right direction this season.”

The 15-man Memphis roster boasts five lefties: Mike Conley, Tayshaun Prince, Zach Randolph, Ed Davis and Tony Wroten. Head coach Lionel Hollins is a lefty, too. All told, that’s more than the other three teams combined. The Heat have two southpaws (Chris Bosh and Joel Anthony), the Spurs one (Manu Ginobili) and the Pacers none. In this season’s playoffs, lefties have accounted for 46.1% of all minutes played by Memphis players, the second highest percentage in NBA playoff history behind the 46.2% of the 1969 Philadelphia 76ers, according to an analysis by Basketball Reference. During this season’s playoffs, lefties have accounted for 48.5% of all Memphis field goals attempted, second in NBA playoff history only to the 48.8% of the 1968 New York Knicks, according to Basketball Reference.

Georgetown swingman Otto Porter is one of the Pistons’ targets for next month’s NBA draft and Porter compared himself to a player who just left town. “Tayshaun Prince,” said Porter, when asked who he patterns his game after. “He’s long, lanky, can do a lot of things on the floor. He can defend, rebound.”

After being traded to Memphis in February, Prince’s primary focused switched to Durant, who has won three straight scoring titles before this season. Though Game 5 was Durant worst of the series, Prince said nothing changed in his defensive approach. “It wasn’t no different tonight, it was just a matter of trying to be as aggressive as I can,” Prince said. “He’s definitely one of the toughest, hardest guys to guard in the league just by his ability to go in either direction. He’s good both right and left and can pull up from behind the 3-point line. “I just tried to continue to feel out his rhythm, his flow throughout this series. The first couple games it was tough.”