AUBURN HILLS -- Tayshaun Prince has as formidable a backup at his position as at any time in his Detroit Pistons career, but the team's longest-tenured member and only remaining link to the 2004 NBA championship seems to embrace Corey Maggette's presence.

The Pistons' wealth of small forwards, with five signed to guaranteed contracts for 2012-13 and a sixth trying to make the team on a make-good deal, makes it the team's position of greatest intrigue.

If a trade is made to clear up roster space for another guard, or perhaps to bring back Ben Wallace as a mentor to the Pistons' young big men, a small forward figures to be involved.

Until then, Prince and Maggette give the Pistons a pair of proven veterans at the position, with the former the better shooter of the two, and the latter a penetration specialist who is "always in attack mode," Prince said.

Between Maggette and guard Rodney Stuckey, the Pistons have two established basket attackers with enough size and strength to score in traffic and draw contact. Along with Brandon Knight, the Pistons have no shortage of perimeter players who can score in the lane.

"Corey and Stuckey can add that balance where they attack the rim and try to get to the free-throw line as much as possible, shoot a lot of free throws," Prince said. "Hopefully, Corey can bring that aspect to us. If those guys can get to the lane and create some havoc down there, and get us to the foul line, it'll help us with a couple areas we've struggled with the last two years -- one, getting easy baskets, and one being free throws."

Prince is the one Piston who didn't join the team for pre-training camp practices, following his career-long preference to train in California and Las Vegas during the offseason.

During his absence, the Pistons traded away Ben Gordon for Maggette and signed all three rookie draft picks, plus 2011 draft pick Kyle Singler, to guaranteed contracts this season, as well as rookie center Slava Kravtsov.

Singler and Khris Middleton are both first-year small forwards, while fourth-year veteran Austin Daye also plays the position, as does non-guaranteed former lottery pick Terrence Williams.

With youth comes growing pains. The Pistons just hope the growth curve is offset by exuberance after a lockout-stunted training camp under a new coach last year when "everything was just hard offensively," Prince said.

"With the additions we've had, hopefully they'll help us out some," Prince said. "We've got some young guys but hopefully they're young, energetic and hungry. By us being a young team, hopefully we can get up the court some more, get up and down a little quicker, try to get some easy baskets."

Prince said the key for the Pistons is how they start the season. They lost 20 of their first 24 games and effectively were eliminated from realistic playoff contention before the midpoint of 2011-12. This year, they play six of their first seven games on the road against Western Conference teams.

With six newcomers, five rookies and the veteran Maggette, the Pistons' early practices will focus on "a lot of teaching" Prince said, beginning with a three-hour practice today in the team's first day of two-a-days.

"Guys know that practice is going to be a little longer," Prince said. "The difference this year is that all the stuff we're being taught is not being crammed into a short period of time. So, hopefully, we can take advantage of that."