June 5, 2022

Only a few of the lucky players get to be a part of the national sports team and represent their countries internationally. American basketball player Tayshaun Prince is one of those lucky few who shined during commercial as well as national basketball.

Not only does he have an excellent NBA career, but he also has won Olympic gold! Tayshaun was born in California to a religious and sporty family which helped him shape as a disciplined basketball player.

Following a lustrous collegiate career, he was drafted by Detroit Pistons in 2002. He played in the NBA professionally for many years for teams like Detroit Pistons, Memphis Grizzlies, Boston Celtics, and Minnesota Timberwolves.

Tayshaun Prince spent most of his career playing for Detroit Pistons

After retirement in 2016, Prince is still active in the field of basketball. 42 years old Prince is working at the executive level at the Memphis grizzlies club.

In this article, we will revisit his journey from a humble background to one of the most accomplished basketball players in the world.

Tayshaun Prince | Quick Facts

Full Name Tayshaun Durell Prince

Common Name Tayshaun Prince

Nickname Tay

Birthdate February 28, 1980

Zodiac Sign Pisces

Mother’s Name Diane Prince

Father’s Name Thomas Prince

Siblings N/A

Birthplace Compton, California, USA

Home Town Compton, California, USA

Citizenship United States of America

Residence Memphis, USA

Religion Christianity

Ethnicity Black

School Dominguez High School

College University of Kentucky (1998-2002)

Education Bachelor of Arts in Sociology

Height 6’9 (2.06 m)

Weight 98 kgs

Eye Colour Black

Hair Colour Black

Shoe Size N/A

Martial Status Married

Partner Farrah Brown Prince (since 2005)

Children Tahj Prince (son)

Profession Former Professional Basketball Player

Drafted in 2003

Position Small forward (shoots left)

Jersey 22

National Team USA national men’s basketball team

International Achievements Olympic Gold (2008), FIBA World championship Gold (2007)

Status Retired

Current Profession VP of Basketball Affairs, Memphis Grizzles

Favorite Sports Basketball, Bowling

Hobbies Bowling, Pool

Social Media Facebook, Twitter

Merch Basketball Card

Last-Update January 2023

Tayshaun Prince | Childhood and Parents

Tayshaun was born on February 28, 1980, as Tayshaun Durell Prince. He is the son of Diane Prince and Thomas Prince. Diane and Thomas lived in Compton, California, where Tayshaun was also born.

Besides him, his parents have two other kids, a girl, Tisha, and a boy, Tommy. Tommie, his older brother, was a basketball player for Pepperdine University in Los Angeles. So we can say that the family was interested in and supported sports. Tayshaun prince with his mother and sister

Both Diane and Thomas Prince enjoyed playing basketball. Thomas prince even played basketball with his company league. So naturally, kid Prince took it up as well. He was around six when he first played basketball.

Soon, people around him started noticing how good he could be at playing that sport. It was also a matter of self-realization for him. Following that, he started taking it a lot more seriously.

Fortunately for him, he got the right coaching in high school, which prepared him for collegiate athletics and eventually opened the doors to NBA for him.

Along with sports, his family also had a close relationship with God. Prince grew up as an active member of a Crenshaw Christian Center. His mom believes that his faith in god filled high moral values in him.

Prince himself has agreed that he would have been on the street if it was not for basketball. The sport taught him discipline and gave him fame and wealth as well.

Tayshaun Prince | High School and College

After being a member of the varsity basketball team at Dominguez High School in Compton, Tayshaun Prince began to stand out among the mass of basketball players.

During Prince’s three seasons at Dominguez, the squad went 96-9 and won the state championship in his junior year. He was awarded a McDonald’s All-American as a senior in 1998.

After high school, Tayshaun enrolled at the University of Kentucky and instantly became a member of the Wildcats, a college basketball team. He spent four seasons there and was a regular participant in the NCAA Tournament.

Every year, Tayshaun showed improvement in his craft and skill.

Tayshaun Prince is inducted into the UK athletics hall of fame

Price was selected SEC Player of the Year and to the Associated Press All-SEC Teams as a junior. He received the 2001 tournament’s Most Valuable Player title and was a three-time team MVP, as the Wildcats won the SEC Tournament twice — in 1999 and 2001.

Despite his glowing athletic career, the hardworking sportsman never took his studies lightly. He was inspired to study Sociology from his experience with kids in basketball camps.

Tay believed that getting into sociology gave him an opportunity to visualize the kind of role model he wants to be for the next generation. He graduated in 2002.

Tayshaun Prince | Professional Career

After his wonderful collegiate career, he was a high prospect for the 2002 NBA draft. He was the 23rd pick in the first round of the draft by the Detroit Pistons.

He appeared in only 42 out of 82 games in his rookie year. Next season, he was selected to play in NBA Rookie Challenge. Following a memorable defensive play, Prince won the NBA championship in 2004.

After that, Detroit extended his contract for five years. Prince appeared in all 82 games of the next season.

In the 2006-07 season, prince ended with 5.2 rebounds and 14.3 points. Next season, he ended with 13.2 points and 4.9 rebounds. His performance declined the next season with 3.5 rebounds and 3.8 points.

At the start of 2013, he was traded to the Memphis Grizzlies. This trade proved to be a blessing for them as they finished with their best performance ever.

In 2015, he again got traded to Boston Celtics and played a single game there. He ended his career with Minnesota Timberwolves in the 2016 season.

International Career

Prince was among the lucky few players who were chosen to represent Team USA in the 2007 FIBA Americas Championships. The wonderful player went on to help his team reach an undefeated record during the competition. They ended up winning the gold medal.

In addition to that achievement, he was also provided a spot in the 2008 summer Olympics based on his performance.

Tayshaun Prince alongside Kobe Bryant after winning Olympic Gold

Prince and eleven other players went to represent the USA at the 2008 summer Olympics. The power pack won the competition with an unbeaten performance by beating Spain, the 2006 world champion.

Retirement

Prince took retirement from his active professional career in 2016. But there is no staying away from the wonderful sport for someone like him who spent a whole life on basketball.

Prince joined the Memphis Grizzlies as a special assistant to the general manager on August 15, 2017. The Grizzlies promoted the player to Vice President of Basketball Affairs on April 27, 2019.

Tayshaun Prince | Personal Life

Tayshaun met his current wife, Farrah Brown Prince, during his time at the University of Kentucky. Prince even has a funny story to tell about their early days. On the first date, Farrah took him to watch the animated Tarzan movie.

To win the right girl, a cartoon movie was no big challenge. Soon the first date led to many other dates. It led to an engagement and a lovely wedding in 2005.

They gave birth to a son Tahj Prince. The couple is seen together in many games and likes to conduct charity works together.

Other than that, we barely see any news about them. However, with a solid relationship that has lasted more than two decades, this couple is seen as one of the ideal pairs in the NBA.

Net Worth and Charity

Tayshaun Prince has a net worth of around $30 million. Sources say that he has a salary of $1.5 million per annum. The majority of his resources come from his years as an NBA player. He was a highly compensated player at the time.

For example, his contract extension in 2005 was worth a whopping $49 million.

In 2014, the couple bought a waterfront North Palm Beach home for $3.1 million. They remodeled the house based on their preferences in 2015. After a long stay at home, they sold it in 2022 for $7.5 million.

He works in an executive position now, which gives him a steady income. Also, on the side, he has contract deals with many brands. After 14 seasons in the NBA, he collected over $80 million.

Prince prefers to stay indoors more than be outside. He is also a true family guy who likes to spend as much time as he can spare with his family.

Especially during his NBA days, he had to stay away from family for nine to ten months a year. So he never missed any chance to be with them. He has said that he loves bowling and playing pool.

Charities

Despite getting rich and famous, Tayshaun has never forgotten the humble background that he came from. So, he has kept his kind spirit alive and likes doing good work for the people and society.

In 2007, Tay, Farrah, with sponsors and a design team, built a one-of-a-kind “Tay’s Town,” a palace skybox, inside the NBA arena.

Tay’s Town was a unique, kid-friendly suite full of amenities for kids where they welcomed Kids battling cancer. This was a part of the Pistons Community Relation departments support group “Kids Kicking Cancer.”

Tayshaun Prince and Farah Prince in Tays Town

During the Sichuan earthquake of May 2009, Tayshaun, along with other NBA stars, visited the injured children admitted to a Shanghai hospital. They interacted with kids, boosted their morale, and donated money for a good cause.

He has also participated in many charity sports events. He and Farah mostly associate themself with charities that work for the welfare of kids.

In 2012, elk creek, Kentucky’s largest winery, released 21,000 limited edition bottles of its Best selling Kentucky Blue Riesling. The label contained Prince’s likeness and signature, which made it memorable.

It was priced at $21 to honor Prince’s uniform number at university. The proceeds from this sale went to the Kentucky Department of Agriculture’s child nutrition program.

- Where is Tayshaun Prince today?

After the end of his professional career of nearly 14 years, Tayshaun has transitioned into an executive decision-making role. Memphis Grizzles appoint him as Vice President of Basketball Affairs.

- How many Olympic medals does Tayshaun Prince have?

Tayshaun and the US team won gold in the 2008 summer Olympics by defeating Spain. It was the first and only time Tayshaun played in the Olympics.