¡Hola! It’s Brenda Romaniello here today ¿Cómo estás? Welcome to Hola Tuesday, your weekly Spanish lesson!!

Today, I’d like to share with you a little secret. Well, everyone who knows me would know this, but the thing is I have been postponing getting my driver’s license for years and years! I don’t know why, maybe because I’ve always used public transport, people drive on the left here, excuses, excuses. But I have made the decision to get myself a car, learn, practice and sit the driving test before the end of the year, which of course I’m terrified about!

Because of this, I spent the whole weekend practicing and driving around. As you know, my sister Romi and I live in Sydney and our mum is coming over for Christmas to visit us and so, my goal is to pick her up from the airport and drive her around when she’s here. How is that for motivation? What about you? Do you have any dreams or goals you’ve been postponing? Let me know in the comments down below.

So, this whole driving story inspired today’s Hola Tuesday Lesson: How to say ‘Car’ in Spanish. We have different varieties depending on different countries. As you know, we have so many different countries in Latin America and Spain and just like in English for example, we have different ways to say something depending on where you are.

There are 3 main ways to say ‘car’ in Spanish:

Carro. ‘Carro’ is widely used in most Latin American countries.

Coche. ‘Coche’ is used mainly in Spain.

Auto. Short for ‘automóvil’, ‘auto’ is widely used in Argentina and Uruguay.

Now, which variety should you use? Would people in Spain understand if you say ‘carro’? Which one is mode widely used? Even though we have different language varieties and regionalisms depending where you are, we, Spanish speakers, understand each other. So which option you prefer to use depends on your personal preference and objectives. What I do want you to pay attention to is the fact that there are different ways to say ‘car’ in Spanish so you don’t feel frustrated if you’ve been using ‘carro’ and when you travel to Spain you hear people saying ‘coche’. Now you know J

Watch the video explanation for this lesson below: