Operation Safe Driver PSAs

CVSA created these public service announcement (PSAs) videos for public use. We encourage individuals to take these videos and use them to spread the message of safe driving on our roadways.

In this 15-second video, drivers are reminded that their decisions behind the wheel make a difference.

In this 15-second Spanish-language video, drivers are reminded that their decisions behind the wheel make a difference.

In this 15-second video, Duane, a truck driver with 40 years of professional driving experience and CVSA’s 2020 International Drive Excellence Award winner, reminds drivers not to drive aggressively.

This quick, 15-second video shares an alarming statistic about traffic deaths and reminds drivers not to drive aggressively.

In this 30-second video, crash survivor Brooke reminds us that one second can change a life.

In this 30-second video, truck driver and entrepreneur Ashley asks all drivers to help make our roadways a safe space by making safe driver decisions.

In this 30-second Spanish-language video, truck driver and entrepreneur Ashley asks all drivers to help make our roadways a safe space by making safe driver decisions.

In this 30-second video, professional truck driver Duane tells us how dangerous it is to drive aggressively.

In this full-length five minute video, you’ll hear from a crash survivor, a professional truck driver and a member of law enforcement.

Voices of Safety Videos

The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration’s Our Roads, Our Safety Partnership, of which CVSA is a member, produced short informative videos from the perspectives of various road users. Check out these “Voices of Safety.”

Kristyn: Student Driver

Greg: Driver Education Instructor

Tom: Driver Education Instructor and Retired Truck Driver

Josh: Truck Driver

Shannon: Truck Driver

Ingrid: Truck Driver and Independent Owner/Operator

Keith: Professional Motorcoach Operator

Major Dofflemyer: Maryland State Police, Commercial Motor Vehicle Inspector