Formula One (also known as Formula 1 or F1) is the highest class of international racing for open-wheel single-seater formula racing cars sanctioned by the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA).[1]

Many racers from the league have had voice roles since the first Cars film.

History[]

Cars[]

In Cars, Mario Andretti and Michael Schumacher voice their vehicle counter parts in the film. In addition to this: Antonio Lobato voices Bob Cutlass in the Spanish dub of Cars and Giancarlo Fisichella voices Boost in the Italian dub of Cars. Fernando Alonso also voices Mario Andretti in the Spanish version of Cars. In the Finnish version of Cars, The King is voiced by Finnish two-time Formula One World Champion, Mika Häkkinen. In the German dub of the movie he is voiced by Austrian three-time Formula One World Champion, Niki Lauda. In the German dub, Mika Häkkinen (who replaces Mario) was voiced by Mika Häkkinen.

Cars 2[]

In Cars 2, many Formula One drivers make cameo appearances and voice characters in the film in other languages. Lewis Hamilton, Fernando Alonso, Vitaly Petrov, and David Hobbs all voice their animated car counterparts in the movie in their respective language as well. In the French-Canadian and French dub of Cars 2 David Hobbscap is voiced by Jacques Villeneuve. Sebastian Vettel voices Max Schnell in the German dub of the film and Max is called Sebastian instead. Jaun Pablo Montoya also voices Jeff Gorvette in the Latin American version of the film.

Planes[]

In Planes, David Croft voices Colin Cowling, renamed to Lofty Crofty, in the UK release of the film.

Cars 3[]

In Cars 3, Lewis Hamilton, Fernando Alonso and Sebastian Vettel all return to voice Hamilton in various dubs of Cars 3.

Trivia[]

Mario Andretti, Jacques Villeneuve, and Juan Pablo Montoya competed in both NASCAR and Formula One.

In Cars 2, Lewis Hamilton is the only Formula One racer to actually compete in the World Grand Prix as the others are guest cameos.

While Sebastian technically does race in the WGP in the German version of the film, Max was not based off of him.

Lewis Hamilton also did the dubbing for his character in the German, Italian, and Spanish versions of Cars 2.

Fernando Alonso is the only F1 driver to not have his animated counterpart get a die-cast in some form from either Mattel or other companies that produce die-casts.

As a reverse compared to Cars 2, F1 has little involvement in Cars 3 as only Lewis Hamilton, Fernando Alonso and Sebastian Vettel return for the film to do voice work.

Hamilton goes by different names depending on which version of Cars 3 you have. However, he is still called Hamilton in the Latin American Spanish dub of the movie.

In European Spanish, Hamilton is called Fernando.

In German, he is called Sebastian.

In Italian, he is called Vettel.

Francesco's racing league, Formula Racer, is based off of Formula One.

Even the logo shares similarities to the official F1 logo at the time of Cars 2.

The Porto Corsa circuit was based off the Monaco Grand Prix.

Pixar also got Scuderia Ferrari drivers, Charles Leclerc and Carlos Sainz to lend their voices in the Italian and Spanish dubs of their 2022 film, Lightyear.

Planes is the only film to have only F1 involvement as no NASCAR driver, commentator or cameraperson was featured in the movie.

Lewis Hamilton was originally planned to be featured in most versions of Cars 2: The Video Game and more than likely provide his voice for his character, but he was removed from the game before release.

In 2017, Pixar sent the Ayrton Senna Institute a Next-Gen race car model with a paint scheme based on Ayrton Senna's helmet and number when he raced in Formula One.[2]

In 2022, Disney, Pixar and Mattel would produce a special one-of-a-kind die-cast for Mexican F1 driver, Sergio Pérez, for his achievements at the motoring.[3]

See also[]

NASCAR