Learning how to discuss car parts in Spanish is key if you take a road trip in a Spanish-speaking country. You don’t want to take the risk of driving in Latin America or Spain and being unable to ask for help.

Read this article for helpful lists of vocabulary words, as well as verbs related to car parts in Spanish.

¡Aprendamos de las partes de coches en español!

Let’s learn about car parts in Spanish.

Join more than 559 million people on the planet who speak Spanish!

Sign up for a free trial Spanish class today. ➡️

Table of Contents:

Car Part Names

Car-related Verbs in Spanish

Accelerate Your Spanish Skills

Car Part Names

Before diving into the car part names, let’s learn how to say “car” in Spanish. There are many ways of doing so that vary by region.

El auto – throughout Latin America

El carro – Mexico, Central America, and South America

El coche – Mexico and Spain

El vehículo – Latin America and Spain

Car Interior

When it comes to learning car parts in Spanish, it makes sense to start with the inside of a car since they’re the parts people are most familiar with.

If you ever travel to a Hispanic country and decide to rent a car, this car parts list is probably the one you will use the most.

See also: Traffic Signs in Spanish

Car Exterior

These car parts in Spanish include the exterior components that are visible from the outside.

Check out: Conducir vs Manejar: What’s the Difference Between These Two Spanish Verbs?

Under the Hood

These car parts in Spanish are the most technical ones, as they belong to the mechanical system of the vehicle. This information comes in handy when you want to understand or teach how a car works.

Hand-picked for you:

100+ Words and Phrases Related to Transportation in Spanish

9 Coolest Road Trips To Take in South America

Instrument Panel

You’ll find the following car parts in Spanish on the dashboard instrument panel.

Car-related Verbs in Spanish

These verbs related to car parts in Spanish are the most common ones to help you out in a moment of need.

Recommended reading: 8 Most Effective Apps to Learn Spanish While Driving

Accelerate Your Spanish Skills

Learning Spanish is a brilliant idea since it can help you fix your car, earn a higher paycheck, or land a better job. What’s more, it opens the door to connecting to more people since there are 580 million speakers around the world and 41 million in the U.S. alone, according to CNN.

Let Homeschool Spanish Academy help you with this endeavor! Become one of our 24,000+ monthly enrolled students who trust our more than 10 years of experience. We’ll tailor a Spanish package that suits your needs and goals.

Our method helps you speed up your process of learning. It consists of flexible, online, individualized sessions with our certified native-speaking teachers. Check out our affordable pricing and flexible programs. Sign up for a free trial class today!

Join one of the 40,000 classes that we teach each month and you can experience results like these

Ready to learn more Spanish vocabulary? Check these out!