Word Frequency

driver

noun

el/la chofer

He’s a bus driver. Es chofer de bus. ⧫ Es chofer de camión. (Mexico)

She’s an excellent driver. Maneja muy bien.

Collins American Learner’s English-Spanish Dictionary © HarperCollins Publishers. All rights reserved

A1

Word Frequency

driver

noun

1.

[of car, bus] conductor (conductora) m/f ⧫ chofer m or f (Latin America)

[of taxi] taxista m or f

[of lorry] camionero (camionera) m/f

[of carriage] cochero m

(British) [of train] maquinista m or f

he’s a bus driver es conductor de autobús

she’s an excellent driver conduce muy bien

2. (Golf) driver m

= driving seat

Collins English-Spanish Dictionary © by HarperCollins Publishers. All rights reserved.

Examples of 'driver' in a sentence

driver

Example sentences from the Collins Corpus

These examples have been automatically selected and may contain sensitive content that does not reflect the opinions or policies of Collins, or its parent company HarperCollins.

We welcome feedback: report an example sentence to the Collins team. Read more…

The single most important driver of turnout is age.

He said in reality drivers did not have much choice.

The driver also refused to take any money.

It owns no vehicles and none of the drivers are employees.

His comeback began when he stopped using his driver.

This would provide delivery drivers with a one-time code letting them unlock your front door.

About 200 local councils require taxi drivers to sit an assessment.

There are 47 million licensed British drivers.

The taxi driver reported it to the club.

The train driver was forced to split up the two groups.

Example sentences from Collins dictionaries

These examples have been automatically selected and may contain sensitive content that does not reflect the opinions or policies of Collins, or its parent company HarperCollins.

We welcome feedback: report an example sentence to the Collins team. Read more…

The driver kept accelerating and decelerating.

If you feel a taxi driver has overcharged you, say so.

a handsome, debonair, death-defying racing driver

Police blamed the bus driver for the accident.

If the vehicle is going too fast, a synthesised voice tells the driver to slow down.

She's an excellent driver.

Brindley was known as a very, very fast driver.

The driver tried to change gear, then swerved.

The driver was very quiet, unnervingly quiet.

a taxi/bus/lorry driver

© Vassamon Anansukkasem, Shutterstock

You may also like

Trends of

driver

View usage for:

In other languages

driver

British English: driver /ˈdraɪvə/ NOUN

The driver of a vehicle is the person who is driving it.

The driver got out of his van.

American English: driver /ˈdraɪvər/

Arabic: سائِق

Brazilian Portuguese: motorista

Chinese: 驾驶者

Croatian: vozač

Czech: řidič

Danish: chauffør

Dutch: bestuurder

European Spanish: conductor

Finnish: ajaja

French: conducteur

German: Fahrer

Greek: οδηγός

Italian: conducente

Japanese: 運転手

Korean: 운전자

Norwegian: sjåfør

Polish: kierowca

European Portuguese: condutor

Romanian: șofer

Russian: водитель

Latin American Spanish: conductor

Swedish: chaufför

Thai: คนขับ

Turkish: sürücü

Ukrainian: водій

Vietnamese: tài xế