The Iranian species of Lithostege are reviewed and additional species from neighbouring countries (which are also likely to occur in Iran), as a whole twenty-eight taxa, are studied. Adults of all species and male and/or female genitalia for most species are figured. Two new species are described: L. samandooki Rajaei sp. nov. from Iran and L. hreblayi Rajaei & Viidalepp sp. nov. from Pakistan. L. repeteki Tsvetajev and L. griseata gigantea Bytinski-Salz & Brandt are synonymized with L. obliquata Urbahn and L. griseata griseata (Denis & Schiffermüller), respectively. L. amseli Wiltshire is discussed as a possible synonym of L. amoenata Christoph. L. flavicornata (Zeller) is upgraded to species-rank again. Distribution areas of all species discussed are shown by maps. Literature data concerning faunistics, ecology, and biological data are reviewed. Female genitalia of L. obliquata Urbahn, L. turkmenica Tsvetajev, and L. luminosata Christoph, are figured and their morphological charac...

A checklist of 9 species and 4 subspecies of the genus Eugnorisma Boursin, 1946, in Iran, with remarks, is presented based on the literature and our research results. Furthermore 1 species and 4 subspecies are discussed, as formerly erroneously published taxons from Iran, because of misidentification or mislabeling. Two further subspecies, E. insignata leuconeura (Hampson, 1918) and E. insignata pallescensChristoph, 1893, formerly treated as valid taxons, are downgraded to mere form, both of them occurring in Iran. New data on the distribution of some species of this genus in Iran are also given. Four new records of this genus; Eugnorisma cuneiferumVarga & Ronkay, 1994, Eugnorisma (Metagnorisma) pontica desertaRonkay, Varga & Hreblay, 1998, Eugnorisma pontica anis Varga & Ronkay, 1987 and Eugnorisma enargiaris(Draudt, 1936) are reported for the first time for the Iranian noctuid fauna from Khorasan-e-Razavi province in Northeastern Iran and from the Zaghros range, provinces of Korde...

A checklist of the 29 species of Pterophorinae (tribus Oidaematophorini and Pterophorini) of Iran is presented. Calyciphora golestanica sp. n., and the hitherto unknown male of Merrifieldia farsi (Arenberger 1981) and the female of Tabulaephorus djebeli (Arenberger 1981) are described. Emmelina argoteles (Meyrick 1922) and Hellinsia pectodactylus (Staudinger 1859), are reported as new for Iran. The known distribution of each species is given.

The examination of the tineid moths in the Microlepidopera collection of the Iranian research Institute of Plant Protection, Tehran (IRIPP) shows 27 species of Iran, of which seven are recorded from the country for the first time: Morophaga cremnarcha (Meyrick, 1932), Morophaga hyrcanella Zagulajev, 1966, Nemapogon meridionella Zagulajev, 1962, Infurcitinea frustigerella (Walsingham, 1907), Edosa lardatella (Lederer, 1858), Edosa fuscoviolacella (Ragonot, 1895) and Elatobia fuliginosella (Lienig & Zeller, 1846). Hitherto 71 species are known from Iran, they are listed in a checklist. Color pictures show the seven new Iranian tineids.

The Iranian species of the genus Evergestis were reviewed taxonomically and as a result, Evergestis pazukii sp. n. is described as a new species, E. comealis Amsel stat. n. is raised to species level from the subspecies E. caesialis comealis, and four species, namely E. flavifuscalis Rebel, E. limbata (Linnaeus), E. pechi (Bethune-Baker), and E. serratalis Staudinger are newly reported from Iran. Furthermore, the females of Evergestis africalis (Guenée), and E. nomadalis (Lederer), and the male of E. elbursalis Amsel are described and illustrated for the first time. A redescription of the male of E. hyrcanalis Amsel is provided mainly based on the genital structure, and the male and female genitalia of E. boursini Amsel and E. flavifuscalis Rebel are redescribed, respectively due to their poor descriptions. Additional remarks on the previousely reported species and new data on their distribution in Iran are also provided.

This paper deals with the bibliography and the checklist of the Lepidoptera of Afghanistan. Totally 1675 species of 51 families of the Lepidoptera are listed with the chronologically arranged synonyms, and the range of the speciesmentioned in codes. Some taxa are also provided with the original references and vernacular names in English and Turkish. Here 239 butterfly, and 1436 moth species are listed, represented in the Lepidoptera fauna by 14%, and 86%, respectively. Totally 835 publications are listed and evaluated according to their contents, i.e., selected 28 scientific subjects. In a special chapter, some illustrations of the classical works on South West Asia are evaluated with some remarks on the species of Afghanistan. Nomenclatural case of Zygaena afghana Moore,[1860] is discussed.

The geometrid genera Synopsia Hübner, 1825 and Synopsidia Djakonov, 1935 are revised, both being earlier validated at genus rank. Type specimens, original descriptions and additional specimens from different localities were examined. The revision is based on morphological characters, molecular data and distribution records. As a result, Synopsidia syn. nov. is regarded as junior synonym of the genus Synopsia. The synonymies of the species Scodonia tekkearia Christoph, 1883 and Synopsia znojkoi Djakonov, 1935 with Synopsia phasidaria phasidaria (Rogenhofer, 1873) comb. nov. are confirmed. Furthermore, Synopsidia phasidaria alvandi Wiltshire, 1966 syn. nov., Synopsidia phasidaria ardschira Brandt, 1938 syn. nov., Synopsidia phasidaria chiraza Brandt, 1938 syn. nov., Hashtaresia jodes Wehrli, 1936 syn. nov. and Synopsidia phasidaria mirabica Wehrli, 1941 syn. nov. are regarded as synonyms of Synopsia phasidaria phasidaria (Rogenhofer, 1873) comb. nov.. Synopsia phasidaria afghana (Wilt...