All you have to say is the name Mastodon in Atlanta and this would garner some attention if one is familiar with the sludge metal band who hails from the Big Peach. Especially, if you can get Mastodon, Eagles of Death Metal (EODM), and Russian Circles all together on one bill performing at the lovely and one of a kind The Fox Theatre. This would be the first time that the hometown boys would play this historic venue in downtown Atlanta, so this was an honor for this tour to stop here. Fresh off the release of their seventh LP, Emperor of Sand, Mastodon put together another amazing tour by sharing the stage with both EODM & Russian Circles.

Russian Circles would open the night playing to a nice size crowd who actually showed up for the opener. They must have knew that Russian Circles was an incredible post rock/post metal instrumental band that would shred for a solid set of their discography. This was my first time getting to see this band after a few failed attempts in the past, so I was ecstatic to finally get this opportunity.

EODM was originally formed by Jesse Hughes and Josh Homme, of Kyuss/Queens of the Stone Age/Them Crooked Vultures fame, back in 1998 in Palm Desert, California. Over the years, the lineup has changed some but Jesse Hughes a.k.a. Father Bad Ass a.k.a. Boots Electric has always been EODM’s astounding, charismatic and flamboyant front man. If you ever have the chance to see EODM live in concert, make the trip and get your ass in that venue!

Mastodon is a band that I have seen a handful of times over the years at various festivals or hometown shows (including a little benefit show at The Earl a few years back right after the release of their LP, Once More ‘Round the Sun). One would say that I like them just a little bit. And to boot, they are really great dudes when fans meet them and ask for a photo. That speaks volumes when an artist/band can appreciate the fervor shown by their fans when they come across them in public.

Hands down this one of the best tours I have been to in a long time. And also this was quite possibly one of the best performances I have seen Mastodon do over the years. It is not often that a band can take this much success and continue to produce amazing LPs one after another. If you have never seen Mastodon perform live, then I suggest that you do yourself a favor and rectify that if you are a fan of the rock/metal genre. Trust me!

We all like to stay really, busy at Concerthopper.com so check out what is on our upcoming schedule in 2017. ‘Like’ our page on Facebook and follow us on Instagram and stay up to date in 2017 on all music related events/festivals such as: Project Pabst: Atlanta (A lookback), Thievery Corporation: Live at The Tabernacle, Boris: Dear/25th Anniversary Live at The Masquerade, The Motet & Dopapod: Live at the Variety Playhouse, Lords of Acid: Sextreme Fest ’17, and Hulaween by following us on all social media formats: Concerthopper on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. Also, you can follow my personal concert hopping on Facebook and Instagram for even more photos not available on Concerthopper.com.

Remember don’t think about it, just buy the damn ticket! As always, hope to see you at a show or festival soon!