As Rolling Stone put it, “Mastodon are the greatest metal band of their generation- no one else comes close.”

Mastodon will be coming to Pittsburgh in support of new effort, Emperor of Sand, another brutal piece of perfection from what many people call the Pink Floyd of metal. With complex layers, fluid time changes, three vocalists, and musicians of the highest caliber, Mastodon have proved themselves head and shoulders above their counterparts.

If you have never had the pleasure of witnessing Mastodon live, now is the time. The band put on a performance that is hard to match. Pinpoint precision marks every note while retaining the ability to improvise as well. The band is really becoming a fine wine, just getting better with age. The new album has much to do with the handling of tough situations and making something beautiful out of it. For a sweet little taste of their amazing live performance, check out this clip from Jimmy Kimmel Live!

Also, the band has put together a very cool series of the making of Emporer of Sand, Start here for Part One:

An extra special treat will be the inclusion of openers Eagles of Death Metal. Many people have only come to know the band due to the tragic events in Paris’ Bataclan Club, but many others came to discover them being fans of Josh Homme of Queens of the Stone Age. While Homme rarely tours with the band, frontman Jesse Hughes is a show all by himself. If you dig great rock n roll that you can shake your booty to (read bring your chicas!), then this is a must. Check out the documentary Eagles of Death Metal: Nos Amis (Our Friends) on HBO, it is really is an insightful piece and very touching.

Russian Circles have come to Pittsburgh a handful of times and have never disappointed. The band out of Chicago have slowly built a rep since 2006 for dark, introspective, and intense music. Highly underrated and definitely a killer band to those in the know, Russian Circles will put a dent in your consciousness that will not leave easily.

You owe it to yourself to come to this show of three very distinct sounding bands that are truly impressive live. Get tickets here: http://promowestlive.com/events/2056

Related articles