Josh Homme was born May 17, 1973 as Joshua Michael Homme. Homme plays a guitar and is the lead vocalist for Queens. He is the driving force of the band, as he is the only member to appear on every album. Homme is a man of many musical talents often jumps on bass guitar for songs "Long, Slow Goodbye" and "Burn the Witch", while also playing drums in the Eagles of Death Metal (one of his many side projects). Known for collaboration and musical exploration, Homme loves to make music different ways and is constantly tweaking music with the stellar musicians that surround him.

Kyuss is where things started for Josh. Kyuss was a metal band formed in Palm Desert, California. The lifespan of Kyuss was roughly 1989-1995. Though Kyuss was mostly and underground sensation, they have been called one of the most influential "stoner metal" bands of the nineties. It was in Kyuss that Nick Oliveri (future bass guitarist of Queens) and Homme began collaborating. The two had played before Kyuss, but it was where things got serious. Homme's style of using bass amps to maximize sound originated in Kyuss, and element's of his unique guitar licks can be heard in songs like "Freedom Run" and "Gardenia".

After Kyuss disbanded, Homme played guitar with the Screaming Trees. It was a short stint near the the end of the lifespan of the Screaming Trees, but it also marked the beginning of Homme's relationship with Mark Lanegan. Lanegan has appeared on every Queens album except the first one.

From there, Homme formed Queens of the Stone and Age and it's where we are today. Fuck yeah. On the personal side, Homme and his wife, The Distillers front woman Brody Dalle have a daughter together named Camille Harley Homme, born on January 17, 2006. Josh is well known for never giving a straight answer for how his last name is pronounced and is very secretive about the gear he uses. Josh has played or worked with other bands such as Mastodon, Foo Fighters and Mondo Generator. He continues to produce and release a series known as "The Desert Sessions", a compilation of jam sessions with other musicians. Homme is also known as Baby Duck, Carlo Von Sexron and several other fake names. Homme is also known for having a great sense of humor and giving honest, quirky answers to questions from reporters. Some great quotes from Mr. Homme... "If someone asks you what time it is, tell 'em "now". It's the only one that matters." (M) On losing his virginity "Well I lost it, but then I found it, and it was behind the couch with that one sock that's always missing." (P)

On women: "Curves are very good. A Raquel Welch body. When a woman is overly slender I just want to take her out to dinner. I'm like, 'I know you're hungry. Just eat something, girl.'"(P)

Most prized possession? "My slave boy, Ba." (M) On Jack Black "I've known Jack for 3 or 4 years. He's a great guy & he was stopping by to say "hi" & ended up a' stompin' & a' marchin' (on the Lullabies record). He's a bad ass musician/singer/whatever-er. He's also a very sexy man." (M) On the Desert Session series "It's totally new age. It's a totally relaxing, therapeutic massage on the brain." (MM) On Chris Goss and the 5:15ers "Well this one is easy. Both Chris & I are always looking for an excuse to do stuff together that doesn't involve leather shorts." (RR) On Kyuss "It's one of those things where you kind of see the end coming, as opposed to letting it taper and start to go down. Instead it's like, 'Let's blow it up beforehand.' It's better to blow it up while it's going good than it is to watch it start to sink." (TWS) On bad music "I used to do all that, but now I realize I don't have to listen to crap I don't like. I'm not in the music police. 'Do you know why I stopped you? For excessive shittiness.' That's not my job. Now I just throw bad CDs really far away and say, 'Where's Bjork's greatest hits? Where's the new Tomahawk? Where's the good stuff, man?'" (RS) On working with Interscope records "They're alright. I think we came to the label because of their ability to push bands like Primus, which isn't a band I necessarily like, but they're really bizarre. All we're really trying to do is reach people who really dig our shit, and the hard part is finding those people. It just seems like Interscope used to be really good at pushing bands that were bizarre or weren't following this fake rulebook. And now they're not as good at it anymore, but that's cool." (MM)

Sources: (M) - Maton

(MM) - Magnet Magazine

(P) - Playboy Magazine

(RR) - Rekords Rekords

(RS) - Rolling Stone

(TWS) - Transworld Surf

Written by Jim Morrel