PALO ALTO, CA: Hewlett-Packard is celebrating the 10-year anniversary of its online photo service Snapfish, with a PR-driven product launch.

This summer, Snapfish will debut a new initiative called Snapfish Publisher, which will allow its 85 million registered users to choose from card designs, photo booths and the like from designers and other creative-types. The company will open its API to designers and include new crowd-source features for a more interactive feel.

“We want to be the place where people can release their creativity; whatever people want to create, we want to help them with that,” said Ben Nelson, Snapfish GM.

In preparation of the summer lunch, Porter Novelli is providing PR support, by reaching out to the creative community, including photo trades, technology and developer outlets, and design/DIY blogs. Snapfish will also harness Logoworks by HP, a sister division in which graphic designers can target small businesses. “We have a really great model to emulate in terms of outreaching to the designer community,” said Nelson.

Snapfish Publisher will also be promoted through the company's social media channels, including Twitter and Facebook.

Snapfish announced the upcoming launch of the new service as part of its 10th anniversary celebrations. For 10 days until its anniversary on April 10, Snapfish is also offering daily specials and giveaways on its birthday-themed landing page, www.snapfish.com/birthdaybash.

The promotion is being driven through e-mail correspondence, as well as outreach to mommy bloggers. Snapfish also targeted its Facebook fans, offering them a chance to win a Vivienne Tam mini designer laptop if they make a post on April 1 or April 2 about Snapfish's “Birthday Bash” promotion and include the Web site URL. “Social media is our strongest channel right now,” Deanna Dawson, Snapfish marketing manager, told PRWeek. “Through live communications, prizing and encouraging our fans to get involved, we see an immediate benefit in terms of ROI.”

Celebratory promotions will continue over the next six months, culminating in a special offer on October 10, 2010.