High School Musical 2 Directed by Kenny Ortega Produced by Bill Borden

Kenny Ortega Written by Peter Barsocchini Starring Zac Efron

Vanessa Hudgens

Ashley Tisdale

Lucas Grabeel

Corbin Bleu

Monique Coleman Music Composer(s) Randy Peterson

Antonnia Armato

Andy Dodd

Faye Greenberg

Jamie Houston

David Lawrence

Adam Watts

Matthew Gerrard

Kevin Quinn

Robbie Nevil

Shankar Mahadevan[1] Cinematography Gordon Lonsdale Editing by Seth Flaum Distributed by

Disney Channel

Family Release date(s) August 17, 2007 Running time Original cut

104 min.

Extended cut

111 min. Country Language English Budget $7,000,000[2] Preceded by High School Musical Followed by High School Musical 3: Senior Year

High School Musical 2 is the second film in the High School Musical film franchise. The World Premiere took place on August 17, 2007[3] at Disneyland, in Anaheim, California.

The primary cast, including Ashley Tisdale, Zac Efron and Vanessa Hudgens attended the event. The film debuted on TV on August 17, 2007 on Disney Channel in the U.S., and on Family in Canada. The premiere brought in a total of 17.3 million viewers in the United States—almost 10 million more than its predecessor—making it the highest-rated Disney Channel Movie to date.[4] [5]

In this second installment in Disney's High School Musical franchise, student Troy Bolton stresses over getting a job, with the price of college looming on his mind, as well as trying to make sure he and Gabriella Montez are able to stay together all summer.

Plot[]

At East High, the final bell rings, and the students converge in song (What Time Is It). As a symbol of his feelings for her, Troy Bolton (Zac Efron) gives Gabriella Montez (Vanessa Hudgens) a necklace with his initial "T" on it on the last day of school.

Sharpay and Ryan Evans (Ashley Tisdale and Lucas Grabeel) plan to spend the summer at their family's country club, Lava Springs (Fabulous), But Sharpay's summer plans also include pursuing Troy, whom she has hired at Lava Springs. However, Troy convinces the club's manager, Mr. Fulton (Mark L. Taylor), into hiring Gabriella and their close group of friends; this includes Gabriella's best friend, Taylor (Monique Coleman), and Troy's best friend, Chad (Corbin Bleu). Sharpay is especially enraged upon learning that Gabriella has been hired as one of the lifeguards. Mr. Fulton is unable to fire the "extras" at Sharpay's command, since her mother (Jessica Tuck) approved of their hiring, so she orders him to make them want to quit by giving them tough tasks. Fulton attempts to intimidate the group but Troy rebuilds their confidence and convinces them that they can work their hardships out (Work This Out).

While Troy continues to worry about obtaining a college scholarship, Gabriella is happy to be in one place over the summer. Sharpay schemes to win Troy, who has to choose between two worlds: his own with the Wildcats and Gabriella; or another, in which Sharpay's family can offer him an easy way to college and other luxuries he has only dreamed about.

Meanwhile, Kelsi writes a ballad for Troy and Gabriella, and Troy agrees to sing with his friends in the upcoming talent show (You Are the Music in Me), while Sharpay conspires to get Troy to perform with her in the show. In the extended version, she and Ryan trap him as he prepares for a date with Gabriella, and perform their potential show stopper,(Humuhumunukunukuapua'a).

A visit from a local college basketball team, The Red Hawks, causes a rift between Troy and Chad when Troy chooses their company instead of his friends. As Troy grows further away, Ryan realizes he does not mean much to Sharpay anymore. Taylor and Gabriella invite Ryan to the baseball game (who hits a home run), and Chad offers him Troy's place in the game (I Don't Dance). Troy and Gabriella's relationship is strained when Troy sees Ryan with Gabriella, sparking jealousy. Owing to a "promise" from Troy, he and Sharpay practice their song for the Midsummer Night's Talent Show (You Are the Music in Me (Sharpay Version)).

When Sharpay discovers that Ryan and the Wildcats are putting together their own performance in the show, she orders Mr. Fulton to ban all junior staff members from performing in Lava Springs' annual Midsummer Night's Talent Show. Gabriella confronts Sharpay, and makes it clear that she will not play Sharpay's "game", and that she has quit her job at Lava Springs. Troy overhears the exchange, and tries to persuade Gabriella to change her mind, who expresses her loss of trust with Troy (Gotta Go My Own Way). Later, Troy discusses his growing uncertainly with his father, who remains supportive of his son.

Troy returns to work the next day to find that all his friends refuse to talk to him. Kelsi silently shows Troy the notice from Mr. Fulton, causing Troy to question his own motivations (Bet on It). He begins to reconcile with Chad, then confronts Sharpay, informing her that he will not sing with her, causing Sharpay to burst into tears. The Wildcats and Chad forgive Troy for his absence and convince him to sing in the talent show, which he does only under the condition that they are allowed to perform as well.

At Sharpay's supposed instruction, Ryan gives Troy a new song to learn moments before the show. As Troy goes onstage, he asks Sharpay why she switched the song, and Sharpay is shocked to find that her brother tricked her. Troy sings the song (Everyday) alone — until Gabriella is revealed. In the end, Sharpay herself proudly presents her brother, Ryan, with the award for the talent show. After the talent show, the Wildcats (including Ryan and Sharpay) go to the golf course to enjoy the fireworks. Troy and Gabriella finally share their first kiss.

Finally, everyone celebrates the end of the summer with a fantastic pool party (All for One).

Cast[]

Troy Bolton (Zac Efron) is the male protagonist of the movie. He is the most popular male student at East High School, and the captain of the varsity basketball team. For this movie, Efron did all of his own singing, whereas in the first High School Musical, his singing was blended with singer Andrew Seeley's voice.

Gabriella Montez (Vanessa Hudgens) is the female protagonist of the movie.

Sharpay Evans (Ashley Tisdale) is the antagonist of the film.

Ryan Evans (Lucas Grabeel) is Sharpay's fraternal twin brother.

Chad Danforth (Corbin Bleu) is Troy's best friend, and is very good friends with Jason and Zeke.

Taylor McKessie (Monique Coleman) is Gabriella's best friend. She is also friends with Kelsi Nielsen and Martha Cox, and is dating Chad. She is captain of the school Scholastic Decathlon team. She has a summer job at Lava Springs as an Activities Coordinator. She always sees through Sharpay, and tends to be cynical when it comes to boys.

Kelsi Nielsen (Olesya Rulin) is a student at East High. She is a pianist and composer.

Jason Cross (Ryne Sanborn) is friends with Troy, Chad, and Zeke.

Zeke Baylor (Chris Warren Jr.) is friends with Troy and Chad, and plays for the basketball team.

Martha Cox (Kaycee Stroh) is a student at East High. She is a friend with Gabriella, Kelsi, and Taylor.

Mr. Thomas Fulton (Mark L. Taylor) is the manager of Lava Springs.

Jack Bolton (Bart Johnson) is the father of Troy.

Mr. Vance Evans (Robert Curtis Brown) is the father of Ryan and Sharpay.

Mrs. Darby Evans (Jessica Tuck) is the mother of Ryan and Sharpay, and president of the Lava Springs Board.

Ms. Darbus (Alyson Reed) is the stern drama teacher at East High.

Jackie (Tanya Chisholm) is one of Sharpay’s friends (a.k.a The Sharpettes).

Lea (Kelli Baker), another Sharpette.

Emma (McCall Clark), another Sharpette.

Mrs. Lucille Bolton (Leslie Wing Pomeroy) is the mother of Troy and the wife of Mr. Bolton.

Release[]

The premiere of High School Musical 2 aired at 8PM Eastern Time on August 17, 2007, and included a telecast hosted by Kenny Ortega and the movie's cast. On Saturday, August 18, Disney Channel aired "High School Musical 2: Wildcat Chat", in which the stars of the movie answered questions posed by fans. On August 19, Disney aired a sing-along version of the movie.[6] On May 23, DirecTV announced that they would be hosting an exclusive high-definition airing of the movie a few days after the August 17 premiere on its network-only channel, The 101.[7]

Disney Channel aired a weekly program called Road to High School Musical 2, beginning on June 8, 2007, and leading up to the premiere of High School Musical 2 in August. The show offered viewers a behind-the-scenes look into the production of the movie. The world premiere of the opening number "What Time Is It" was on Radio Disney May 25, 2007,[8] while "You Are The Music In Me" premiered on July 13, 2007.[9]

Musical numbers[]

Song Chiefly Sung By Other Singers Scene What Time Is It Troy, Gabriella, Sharpay, Ryan, Chad, Taylor Wildcats East High's Classroom, Hallways, Cafeteria Fabulous Sharpay and Ryan Sharpettes Lava Springs Pool Work This Out Troy, Gabriella, Chad, Taylor, Kelsi, Zeke, Martha, Jason Wildcats and Kitchen Workers Lava Springs Kitchen You Are The Music In Me Troy and Gabriella Kelsi and Wildcats Lava Springs Dining Room Humuhumunukunukuapua'a Sharpay and Ryan Sharpettes Lava Springs Backstage Room I Don't Dance Chad and Ryan Baseball Players and Wildcats Lava Springs Baseball Field You Are The Music In Me (Sharpay Version) Sharpay Troy and Sharpettes Lava Springs Stage Gotta Go My Own Way Troy and Gabriella None Lava Springs Pool, Locker Room, Grounds Bet On It Troy None Lava Springs Golf Course Everyday Troy and Gabriella Wildcats Lava Springs Stage All For One Troy, Gabriella, Sharpay, Ryan, Chad, Taylor Kelsi, Zeke, Martha, Jason, Wildcats Lava Springs Pool

Opening Titles Logo[]

Reception[]

The first broadcast of the film on August 17, 2007 broke records, receiving 17.2 million viewers.[5] This number made it, at the time, the most-watched basic-cable telecast in history (the previous record was held by an edition of ESPN's Monday Night Football between the New York Giants and the Dallas Cowboys on October 23, 2006, which attracted 16 million viewers), the most-watched made-for-cable movie ever (the previous record was held by TNT's January 21, 2001 airing of Crossfire Trail, which brought in 12.5 million viewers), and the largest audience of any program on broadcast or cable in the 2007 summer television season, along with Friday nights for the past five years. Ratings for the second showing of the movie fell to 8.4 million, and the third showing fell to 7.4 million, totaling the premiere weekend to 33.04 million viewers.[10]

In Latin America, the premiere of High School Musical 2 was be seen by 3.3 million viewers in the north region. The film was the most-watched in its schedule, among all cable channels, and produced the highest rating of the channel, surpassing all original films of Disney Channel. Among other records, the premiere in Argentina surpassed the debut of High School Musical the last year, in a 107 percent, while in Brazil the sequel reached 208 percent, and Mexico did so with 61 percent. [11] In the United Kingdom, the movie became Disney Channel UK's most viewed program ever, totaling 1.2 million viewers in its first showing.[12]

The film was generally well-received by critics, gaining a score of 77/100 at Metacritic.[13] USA Today's Robert Bianco awarded the film three stars out of four, saying High School Musical 2 was "sweet, smart, bursting with talent and energy, and awash in innocence".[14] While critics enjoyed the film, they noted that the timing of the movie's premiere seemed odd, premiering just when school was about to start up again, while the movie's plot involved the gang going on summer Vacation.[15] High School Musical 2 won the "So Hot Right Now" award at the Nickelodeon Australian Kids' Choice Awards 2007 in which High School Musical cast mate, Zac Efron hosted with The Veronicas.

High School Musical 2: On Stage![]

Like the original High School Musical, the sequel has been adapted into two different theatrical productions: A one-act, 70-minute version and a two-act full length production. Music Theatre International had originally recruited 7 schools to serve as tests for the new full-length adaptation, but due to complications with multiple drafts of both the script and the score, all but one school were forced to drop out of the pilot program. The Woodlands High School was the first school to produce High School Musical 2 on May 18, 2008. The West Coast premiere production will be staged in January 2009, by Pacific Repertory Theatre's School of the Dramatic Arts. This stage production includes the song "Hummuhummunukunukuapua'a" that was left out of the original movie but included in the DVD as a bonus feature. Through Music Theater International, Disney Theatrical began licensing the theatrical rights in October 2008.

References[]

[]

Disney's High School Musical 2 Official site

Official Asia site

Official Aggregate site

Template:High School Musical franchise