Monique Coleman and Corbin Bleu starred in the three High School Musical franchise films together. Their two characters also were romantically involved in the films. The actors have been in plenty of projects since their HSM days, and now, they’re coming back together for a new film. Coleman and Bleu are returning as co-stars for a new Lifetime movie, A Christmas Dance Reunion.

Monique Coleman and Corbin Bleu starred in ‘High School Musical’

Coleman played Gabriella Montez’s (Vanesssa Hudgens) best friend, Taylor McKessie, while Bleu portrayed Troy Bolton’s (Zac Efron) right-hand man, Chad Danforth.

Their characters came from different cliques at East High School. While Taylor was tight with the nerdy crowd, Chad played basketball with Troy.

The three films showcased their characters going through high school alongside Troy and Gabriella. Taylor helped Gabriella battle her internal struggles of being with Troy or pursuing her academics. While Chad encouraged Troy to play basketball for the Wildcats, even though Troy had musical pursuits.

They were mainly support systems to the main stars, but now, Coleman and Bleu are getting the spotlight fully on them.

Monique Coleman and Corbin Bleu will co-star in a Christmas movie

News dropped that Coleman and Bleu will be starring in Lifetime’s A Christmas Dance Reunion for the network’s 2021 Christmas programming schedule, per Deadline.

The outlet described the movie’s premise as follows: “In A Christmas Dance Reunion, successful attorney Lucy Mortimer (Coleman), along with her mother Virginia (Kim Roberts) return to the Winterleigh Resort to help celebrate the hotel’s final Christmas season before the resort closes its doors permanently.”

“Once there, Lucy is reunited with the owner’s nephew and her childhood Christmas Dance partner, Barrett Brewster (Bleu),” per Deadline. “Though the resort has fallen on hard times and has stopped most holiday events, Lucy leads the charge in recreating the beloved Christmas traditions, including the popular Christmas Dance, to bring together new families and new hope to the resort. Now, Lucy must decide if she’s willing to take a risk on love and partner up once more with Barrett for what could be the last Christmas Dance.”

The photo shared from the film shows Coleman and Bleu’s characters dancing together.

Monique Coleman reacted to the news on Twitter with a meme

Coleman reacted to the news by sharing two pictures on Twitter. She used a meme setup, “How it started” versus “How it’s going.” She shared a picture of her and Bleu in High School Musical on the left picture, comparing to the present-day duo in A Christmas Dance Reunion.

Bleu quote-tweeted Coleman and shared a wink-face emoji in response.

Lifetime has yet to share when the movie will air for fans. But it’s safe to assume it will be sometime in December 2021. We can’t wait to see these two reunite on screen for some major High School Musical nostalgia.