NEW DELHI — Elizabeth Hurley spiced up Indian newspapers Thursday that featured photos of her in the crowd at a cricket match in Bangalore where Australian cricketer Shane Warne was playing in the ongoing season of the Indian Premier League.

Warne, with whom Hurley has been romantically linked since last December, is the captain of the Rajasthan Royals team, whose owners include Bollywood actress Shilpa Shetty.

A regular visitor to India, some of Hurley’s previous trips here have been with her estranged husband, London-based Indian businessman Arun Nayar, whom she married in a much-publicized and lavish ceremony in Rajasthan in 2007. The couple separated following reports of Hurley’s involvement with Australian cricketer Warne.

On Thursday, Warne’s team plays in the northern Indian city of Chandigarh, about five hours’ drive from the capital New Delhi. “As Elizabeth Hurley, dressed in a leather print shirt and white pants, got down from the bus and entered the hotel lobby, the focus of attention suddenly shifted from star cricketers like Shane Watson, Rahul Dravid and Shane Warne himself to the Hollywood star,” reported the Indian Express newspaper adding, “In Chandigarh to support latest flame Shane Warne’s Rajasthan Royals team in Thursday’s match against home team Kings XI Punjab, Hurley’s presence sprang a few surprises among the fans, who weren’t expecting her to fly down from Jaipur to witness the encounter. ”

The 45-year-old Hurley was first spotted at an IPL match Tuesday in Bangalore with Warne’s nine-year-old son but the match was washed out due to rain. In a post on her Twitter account Tuesday, Hurley said, “Pouring with rain…in India! What? Some mistake, surely.”

Meanwhile, reports also indicated that Shilpa Shetty and her husband Raj Kundra were planning a private event to host Hurley and Warne following a bash in Jaipur. The Times of India quoted an unnamed source stating, “There’s likely to be a bash for Liz in Mumbai, too, by Shilpa and Raj. The logistics have to be worked out. The Rajasthan Royals camp is naturally buzzing with the hot model’s presence amidst them. Everyone wants to see how the lovebirds are in public, but Shane is making sure that such personal things are not a distraction for the boys.”

Known for his characteristic humor, Warne posted a message on Hurley’s Twitter account Thursday, “So glad the Estee Lauder Resilience Lift moisturiser is working & everyone thinks you’ve had a face lift…”