It’s apparently all over for the three-year-old marriage of Hollywood actress Elizabeth Hurley and businessman Arun Nayar. Following her dramatic Twitter update, it is learned that Liz had come and personally apologised to Arun’s parents and announced her decision to split from her husband at their Mumbai home a few months back.

“Liz came to Mumbai with her son and stayed at a hotel. She then came and saw Arun’s parents and announced that she intends to separate from Arun. It was a brief meeting that barely lasted for half an hour,” says a family friend of the Nayar’s.

Arun’s father Vinod was particularly hurt by the announcement, which sources say, was apparently made without any emotion. “Liz was very matter-of-fact. She just said that there are certain irreparable differences between her and Arun and that she intends to separate from him. She also said that she has already separated from him and the children are all living with him. She told them that she’s sorry,” says the family friend.

“She never got along with Arun’s mother (Joanne). In fact, after the wedding was over, Vinod was apparently willing to testify against Liz when someone by the name of Vishnu Khandelwal of Jodhpur accused them of breaching Hindu customs and threatened to move court against them. At that time, Vinod apparently revealed to HM Saraswat, the prosecuting lawyer, that Liz didn’t agree to remove her shoes while entering the shaadi ka mandap. The feud between the in-laws and Liz never really took a break,” the family friend added.

When DNA called the Nayar residence in Mumbai, we were told by a member of the family on condition of anonymity that they were prepared for the announcement but what they were not prepared for was the involvement of Shane Warne.

“They (Liz and Arun) have already drawn up the divorce settlement. It will be an amicable settlement with no party giving out large portions of money to anybody. Liz doesn’t want Arun’s money and neither is Arun interested in her wealth. But she never mentioned that she is seeing anybody when she met her in-laws,” said the family member from the Nayar residence. Arun’s father Vinod and his wife Joanne are officially out of the country.

“Liz also wanted to issue a joint statement with Arun but he is not interested in that. Besides, we feel that Arun was never happy when Liz was around. She had some weird demands, for example, she insisted that her former boyfriend (Hugh Grant) accompany her when they went for a beach holiday. Ultimately Liz won and Hugh accompanied the couple to the beach holiday and she spoke about it also later. The family is actually glad that they have separated,” the family member said.