Also known as a community stew, a Mulligan Stew is a tasty way to bring folks together. This beef and potato stew is ideal comfort food on a chilly winter day!

If ever there was a time for a mulligan, it’s now. 2020 was a bit of a hot mess, wouldn’t you agree? The Great Quarantine was nice in some ways in that I got to spend a lot of time with Laura, Robbie and our two new puppies. But trying to work while also edutaining (that’d be educating + entertaining) a 4-year-old is enough to drive anyone mad. Let’s take a mulligan on 2020 and start the new year with a clean slate!

The term mulligan is often used in golf when a player gets to take an extra free shot following a particularly bad shot. You basically get to replay the shot. That’s how I feel about 2020. Let’s just put the ball back on the tee and try that year again. (On a related note, did you know that the opposite of a mulligan is a ‘gilligan?’ That’s when an opponent can request that you make a particularly good shot again. Maybe 2021 can be a gilligan year!)

Mulligan Stew

Despite the use of the term above, Mulligan Stew is actually not related to golf. Like many recipes, the naming origins of Mulligan Stew are a bit murky. However, it is generally accepted that this stew originates from Ireland where ‘mulligan’ is a stand-in term referring to an Irishman. Mulligan Stew is essentially a classic Irish stew, but with the use of beef instead of mutton.

This stew is a popular ‘community stew’ where each member of the community contributes part of the recipe. Someone builds a fire for cooking. Someone else finds the meat. Another person rustles up whatever veggies they can find. The finished stew is essentially a catch-all recipe using whatever ingredients are available. A Mulligan Stew is also called a ‘hobo stew’ as it was a popular meal in hobo camps in the early 1900’s. The stew was often cooked in a large can over an open fire.

Other regional variations of the Mulligan Stew are quite popular, too. In Kentucky, the term ‘burgoo’ refers to a communal stew, although burgoo is often spicier than Mulligan Stew. In fact, a study by the Works Progress Administration noted that the concept of burgoo began when a Confederate army cook put “potatoes, tomatoes, onions, some cabbage, twenty-nine blackbirds, three crows, a goose, several hens, and a young pig” in a powder kettle and let the whole thing simmer. Talk about a stew made from whatever you could find!

Mulligan Stew has certainly evolved over the years. After all, I don’t think hobos would have had ready access to beef and frozen veggies. And this version is cooked on a stovetop and in the oven rather than over an open fire. I’m sure it could still be cooked over an open fire, but I don’t have a lot of experience in that type of cooking. That, and it’s really flippin’ cold outside right now – I think I’ll stay inside. Nevertheless, the point remains that this stew is a great catch-all recipe that uses whatever ingredients you happen to have on hand. (Thus the use of both fresh and frozen veggies in this recipe.)

As we head into the new year, I hope this year is much better than the last! Cheers, and I hope you enjoy a good hot bowl of this Mulligan Stew sometime soon!

Did you make this Mulligan Stew at home? Leave a comment, or snap a photo and tag me on Instagram (@Spicedblog). I’d love to see your version!

Looking for other tasty soup and stew recipes? Check out these other favorites, too:

Cheeseburger Soup

Ribollita (Tuscan White Bean Stew)