The only way to watch The Cossacks is to pretend it's a comedy.

"Keep away from me ---

chewer of sun-flower

seeds!"

I mean, look at Ernest Torrence howling with laughter.

A wooing line:

"The woods are full of

wild lilies---and I know

a brook where a turtle

lives!"

Late 1920s John Gilbert. At the top of his game. Before sound debuted. Untouchable.

Here, he is pestered by his film father Ernest Torrence and everyone to become a man man, not a woman man complete with a flower crown that would make any girl jealous. And so, because this is the 1920s, John Gilbert goes from being a feminine sissy to a bloodthirsty man/hero, in an arc which would never…

Great film if you like cossacks beating up their women!

Renée Adorée is actually punched to the floor by our 'hero?' John Gilbert in what must be one of the most misogynistic silent films I've seen.

Gilbert's Character, Lukashka, starts off by being a pacifist and swiftly turns into a blood thirsty killer of Turks with no sense of motivation or reason. All the while smiling and laughing at everything the film throws up.

He even goes off with a Gypsy dancer right in front of poor Maryana (Adorée) leaving her heartbroken.

I believe Gilbert didn't like this film and I can see why. Certainly, it's big and brash, boasting lots of action and excitment but it doesn't help with…

"Lukashka, the woman man! The man who will not fight!"

John Gilbert is a lot of things (mostly sexy), but he is certainly no woman man. He's actually the only reason I watched this and that's a mistake I won't be making in the future. I didn't quite understand his journey from pacifist to deranged murderer all because the townsfolk mocked him? It's an odd left turn for the film. All of this takes place in a Cossack village in Laurel Canyon as they fight the Turks and then the Turks fight them and then they fight the Turks and, well, you get it, It's very repetitive. It was also impossible to root for any character because they were so…

If John Gilbert offers to show you a stream where he knows a turtle lives, you 👏 go 👏 see 👏 the 👏 turtle!

The Cossacks has some big names attached to it. The stars--John Gilbert, Renée Adorée, and Nils Asther--are backed up by a story from Leo Tolstoy and screenplay from Frances Marion. The story is that unique flavor of Russian drama that is funny, depressing, uplifting, traumatic, noble, and thrilling all at once. I thought the score by Robert Israel was excellent, except for the strangely distracting use of Tchaikovsky. The overture from The Nutcracker plays during a lighthearted scene, and I associate that piece so strongly with Christmas that it seemed out of place in this film.

Watching…

Based (very loosely) on Leo Tolstoy’s short novel “The Cossacks” (1863), this film is essentially about a love triangle between a local Circassian man (John Gilbert), a woman with a certain flair about her (Renée Adorée), and a visiting Moscow nobleman tasked by the Tsar with finding a Cossack bride (Nils Asther). Gilbert is the son of the Ataman (Ernest Torrence), the Cossack chieftain, but is lackadaisical and prefers riding his horse to going off and killing Turks, like a ‘real man’. Adorée looks down on him as a result, that is, until Gilbert ‘sees the light’ after a violent confrontation with his father, in which they both whip each other. He then goes off and kills 10 Turks, but…