Commemorating over a Century of Honor

1921-2022

For over a 100 years, the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier has served as the heart of Arlington National Cemetery. As a sacred memorial site and the grave of three unknown American service members, the Tomb connects visitors with the legacy of the United States armed forces throughout the nation’s history. It stands as a people’s memorial which inspires reflection on service, valor, sacrifice and mourning. Since November 11, 1921, the Tomb has provided a final resting place for one of America’s unidentified World War I service members, and Unknowns from later wars added in 1958 and 1984.

World War I and the Creation of the Tomb

The Tomb of the Unknown Soldier originated in the context of World War I. Technological and industrial progress in the early 20th century made World War I one of the deadliest wars in history. The warring nations utilized deadly new weapons and tactics, rendering the remains of millions of combatants unidentifiable or missing. When the war ended, nations created cemeteries and memorials to honor their dead, known and unknown.

On November 11, 1920, the second anniversary of Armistice Day, Great Britain and France both interred an unknown service member from World War I. The French laid theirs to rest under the Arc de Triomphe in Paris, and the British buried theirs at Westminster Abbey in London. These unidentified remains represented all unknowns and their tombs became shrines where citizens could mourn.

The United States, inspired by its allies, decided to create a similar tomb for an American unknown. Representative Hamilton Fish, a World War I veteran, led the effort in Congress, which passed legislation approving the creation of a Tomb of the Unknown Soldier on March 4, 1921. Although other sites were considered, Congress ultimately chose to locate the Tomb at Arlington National Cemetery, near the new Memorial Amphitheater.

In the fall of 1921, the U.S. Army selected one unknown American service member to inter in the planned Tomb. The Army took detailed precautions to ensure the anonymity of this honored American. The Quartermaster Corps disinterred one set of remains from each of four American military cemeteries in France: the Meuse-Argonne, St. Mihiel, Somme and Aisne-Marne cemeteries. The four caskets of remains were transported to the town of Châlons-sur-Marne, where a formal selection ceremony took place at the city hall on October 24, 1921. In the presence of French and American dignitaries, U.S. Army Sgt. Edward F. Younger, a decorated World War I veteran, selected the Unknown by laying a spray of white roses upon one of the four caskets.

The following day, October 25, 1921, the Unknown Soldier’s casket departed from the port of Le Havre on board the USS Olympia. The Olympia had served as Admiral George Dewey’s flagship during the Spanish-American War (1898), and in recognition of its distinguished service history, the U.S. Navy selected the cruiser to bring the Unknown home to the United States.

Ceremonies to honor the Unknown Soldier began with the Olympia’s arrival at the Washington Navy Yard on November 9, 1921. Each event was open to the American public. On November 10, as the casket lay in state in the U.S. Capitol Rotunda, more than 90,000 mourners came to pay their respects. The Unknown Soldier’s funeral took place on November 11, 1921. Throngs of spectators lined Washington’s streets as a grand military procession escorted the Unknown from the Capitol to Memorial Amphitheater at Arlington National Cemetery. Thousands more attended the funeral ceremony, and telephone lines transmitted President Warren G. Harding’s eulogy to audiences at venues in New York City and San Francisco. Throughout the nation, Americans observed two minutes of silence during the funeral. President Harding presented the Medal of Honor to the Unknown Soldier, and dignitaries from France, Belgium, Great Britain, Italy, Romania, Czechoslovakia and Poland presented their nations’ highest awards as well. Chief Plenty Coups of the Crow Nation represented American Indians at the ceremony and placed his coup stick and war bonnet on the Tomb.

Completing the Tomb

Originally, the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier consisted of a simple, flat marble slab. During its early years, the unfinished site served as a place of mourning for grieving families, many of whom had no other grave to visit. It also began to evolve into a symbolic stage for military and diplomatic ceremonies. In 1926, Congress authorized an open design competition to complete the Tomb. After several phases of review, it awarded the design to architect Lorimer Rich (buried in Section 48) and sculptor Thomas Hudson Jones, both World War I veterans. Their symbolic design featured a flat sarcophagus carved with wreaths and three neoclassical figures representing Peace, Victory and Valor. An inscription on the west side reads, “Here Rests in Honored Glory an American Soldier Known but to God.”

During its early years, the site did not have a guard, and visitors could walk up to and even touch the Tomb. Reports of disrespectful public behavior led to the establishment of a civilian guard in 1925, followed by a military guard in 1926. Twenty-four-seven guard duty began in 1937. In 1948, soldiers from the 3d U.S. Infantry Regiment (The Old Guard) assumed this prestigious duty, which they continue to hold today. Known as Sentinels, these soldiers provide security for the Tomb, lead ceremonies and maintain the sanctity of the space. Most importantly, they honor the Unknowns through the precision and perfection of their rituals.

World War II and Korean War Unknowns

In the aftermath of World War II, Americans wanted to add an unknown from that war to the Tomb, but the U.S. entrance into the Korean War in 1950 delayed the process. When the Korean War concluded, plans expanded to add unknowns from both World War II and Korea. Suitable sets of remains from each of these wars needed to be selected. Because World War II had stretched across the globe, the Army exhumed unidentified bodies from every major combat region. It then selected two to represent the European and Pacific Theaters. Aboard the USS Canberra, an enlisted Navy sailor and Medal of Honor recipient, Hospital Corpsman 1st Class William R. Charette, selected the World War II Unknown by placing a wreath on one of the two identical caskets. The other received a ceremonial burial at sea.

Korean War selection proved more straightforward. Four unidentified bodies from the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific in Hawaii were chosen as candidates, and Army M. Sgt. Ned Lyle selected one to be the Korean War Unknown. On Memorial Day 1958, the nation paused for a dual funeral for the Unknowns from World War II and the Korean War. The ceremony re-created many of the 1921 events.

After lying in state at the Capitol Rotunda, the Unknowns received a ceremonial procession to Memorial Amphitheater. There, a crowd of thousands watched President Dwight D. Eisenhower and Vice President Richard M. Nixon receive folded flags from atop the two caskets, which were then lowered into two crypts to the west of the Tomb.

The Vietnam War Unknown

Before the Vietnam War ended, Arlington National Cemetery began making preparations to add a third crypt to the Tomb. However, many people believed that advances in technology would mean that all remains from Vietnam could eventually be identified. As an interim measure, on November 11, 1978, President Jimmy E. Carter dedicated a plaque at the Tomb to honor Vietnam veterans. Despite this gesture, veterans and others still lobbied Congress to add an unknown Vietnam War service member to the Tomb. On Memorial Day in 1984, an Unknown from the Vietnam War, selected from a very limited group of candidates, received a state funeral and was buried in a third crypt at the Tomb.

In 1998, the Department of Defense decided to disinter the Vietnam War Unknown, due to advances in DNA science and the high likelihood of positive identification. DNA analysis subsequently identified the Vietnam Unknown as U.S. Air Force 1st Lt. Michael J. Blassie. Blassie’s family chose to rebury him at Jefferson Barracks National Cemetery in Missouri. His empty crypt was rededicated in 1999 to honor all missing and unknown Americans who served in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War.

The Tomb Today

In its first century, the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier has evolved into a national place of commemoration connected to all of American history. What began as a single grave now symbolizes service and sacrifice in all U.S. wars. Visitors to the Tomb honor not just the three Unknowns interred here, but also all American unidentified and missing service members who rest in national cemeteries across the United States, in American military cemeteries around the world, and in unknown or unmarked graves. At the Tomb, they are never forgotten.

“Never in the history of the world has anyone sacrificed more

for the freedom and liberty of all”

They Serve

They Sacrifice

and

We Honor Their Commitment

Their Valor

In Gratitude For Our Freedom

Memorial Day 2022

God Bless America

Whether currently or years long past, those serving our country far from home deserve eternal gratitude.

The Battle of the Bulge

There were many battles during WWII and the Battle of the Bulge was another served by our forces valiantly under extreme conditions.

In late 1944, during the wake of the Allied forces’ successful D-Day invasion of Normandy, France, it seemed as if the Second World War was all but over. On Dec. 16, with the onset of winter, the German army launched a counteroffensive that was intended to cut through the Allied forces in a manner that would turn the tide of the war in Hitler’s favor. The battle that ensued is known historically as the Battle of the Bulge. The courage and fortitude of the American Soldier was tested against great adversity. Nevertheless, the quality of his response ultimately meant the victory of freedom over tyranny.

Overview

Early on the misty winter morning of Dec. 16, 1944, more than 200,000 German troops and nearly 1,000 tanks launched Adolf Hitler’s last bid to reverse the ebb in his fortunes that had begun when Allied troops landed in France on D-Day. Seeking to drive to the coast of the English Channel and split the Allied armies as they had done in May 1940, the Germans struck in the Ardennes Forest, a 75-mile stretch of the front characterized by dense woods and few roads, held by four inexperienced and battle-worn American divisions stationed there for rest and seasoning.

After a day of hard fighting, the Germans broke through the American front, surrounding most of an infantry division, seizing key crossroads, and advancing their spearheads toward the Meuse River, creating the projection that gave the battle its name.

Stories spread of the massacre of soldiers and civilians at Malmedy and Stavelot, of paratroopers dropping behind the lines, and of English-speaking German soldiers, disguised as Americans, capturing critical bridges, cutting communications lines, and spreading rumors. For those who had lived through 1940, the picture was all too familiar. Belgian townspeople put away their Allied flags and brought out their swastikas. Police in Paris enforced an all-night curfew. British veterans waited nervously to see how the Americans would react to a full-scale German offensive, and British generals quietly acted to safeguard the Meuse River’s crossings. Even American civilians, who had thought final victory was near were sobered by the Nazi onslaught.

But this was not 1940. The supreme Allied commander, Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower rushed reinforcements to hold the shoulders of the German penetration. Within days, Lt. Gen. George S. Patton Jr. had turned his Third U.S. Army to the north and was counterattacking against the German flank. But the story of the Battle of the Bulge is above all the story of American Soldiers. Often isolated and unaware of the overall picture, they did their part to slow the Nazi advance, whether by delaying armored spearheads with obstinate defenses of vital crossroads, moving or burning critical gasoline stocks to keep them from the fuel-hungry German tanks, or coming up with questions on arcane Americana to stump possible Nazi infiltrators.

At the critical road junctions of St. Vith and Bastogne, American tankers and paratroopers fought off repeated attacks, and when the acting commander of the 101st Airborne Division in Bastogne was summoned by his German adversary to surrender, he simply responded, “Nuts!”

Within days, Patton’s Third Army had relieved Bastogne, and to the north, the 2nd U.S. Armored Division stopped enemy tanks short of the Meuse River on Christmas. Through January, American troops, often wading through deep snow drifts, attacked the sides of the shrinking bulge until they had restored the front and set the stage for the final drive to victory.

Never again would Hitler be able to launch an offensive in the west on such a scale. An admiring British Prime Minister Sir Winston Churchill stated, “This is undoubtedly the greatest American battle of the war and will, I believe, be regarded as an ever-famous American victory.” Indeed, in terms of participation and losses, the Battle of the Bulge is arguably the greatest battle in American military history.

U.S. Army Center of Military History

Soldiers of the U.S. 99th Infantry Division WWII

Attending Christian service on New Year’s Eve 1944 in the Ardennes Forest, during the Battle of the Bulge and worst winter in 60 years. Under cripplingly cold winter conditions, American troops proved their mettle.

Infantrymen of the US First Army

In Belgium’s Ardennes Forest, soldiers advancing to contact German forces at the Battle of the Bulge, December 1944. After the initial confusion and chaos of the Nazi surprise attack, American soldiers regrouped and relied on old-fashioned ingenuity to hold off the German advance until reinforcements could arrive.

In Appreciation of our Past and Present Military

Serving their Country Worldwide in Need

#ForeverVigilant #AmericanMilitary #ProudToServe

New Year’s Eve

24 December 2021

From the man who led the evacuation of the USS Arizona to the fighter pilot taking to the skies in pajamas, there were servicemen and civilians who distinguished themselves on one of the darkest days in American military history. These men are but a few of the extraordinary acts of bravery and service.

Samuel Fuqua

Missouri-born Samuel Fuqua had a front row seat to the devastation at Pearl Harbor from aboard the USS Arizona, a battleship heavily bombed during the first wave of the attack. The 42-year-old Lieutenant Commander was having breakfast when the ship’s air raid sirens first sounded at 7:55 a.m. Immediately rushing to the quarterdeck, he was strafed by enemy fire and incapacitated by a bomb falling mere feet from his position. Though dazed, Fuqua jumped to his feet upon regaining consciousness to begin directing firefighting operations. Moments later, he became the Arizona’s senior surviving officer after another bomb detonated the ship’s ammunition magazine, killing more than 1,000 men. As burned and maimed sailors poured onto the deck, Fuqua ignored gunfire from passing aircraft and calmly led efforts to evacuate his sinking ship.

“I can still see him standing there,” Arizona crewman Edward Wentzlaff later would remember, “ankle deep in water, stub of a cigar in his mouth, cool and efficient, oblivious to the danger about him.”

Fuqua was among the last men to abandon ship. He and two fellow officers then commandeered a boat and braved heavy fire while picking up survivors from the fire-streaked waters. He went on to win the Medal of Honor for his actions at Pearl Harbor, and was later promoted to Rear Admiral upon his retirement from the Navy in 1953.

Peter Tomich

Around the same time the USS Arizona was being bombed, the training and target ship USS Utah was rocked by two torpedo strikes from Japanese aircraft. The aging vessel soon began to list to one side as water flooded its hull. Inside the boiler room, Chief Watertender Peter Tomich ordered his crew to abandon ship.

After ensuring his men had escaped their engineering spaces, the Austro-Hungarian immigrant and World War 1 veteran, returned to his post and single-handedly secured the boilers, preventing a potential explosion that would have claimed many lives. The USS Utah then proceeded to roll over and sank just minutes later. Fifty-eight men—Tomich among them—went down with the ship. The 48-year-old was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor for his life-saving actions but, in an unusual twist, the Navy was unable to locate any family members. His award went unclaimed for nearly 65 years until 2006, when finally presented to a relative during a ceremony in Split, Croatia.

Kenneth Taylor and George Welch

Army Air Corps pilots George Welch and Kenneth Taylor spent the evening before Pearl Harbor’s attack attending a formal dance and playing poker until the wee hours of the morning. Still sleeping, they were awakened at 8 a.m. by the sound of exploding bombs and machine gun fire. Speeding to Haleiwa airfield, they dodged strafing Japanese planes along the way. Just minutes later, they became the first American pilots to get airborne after taking off in their P-40 fighters.

Welch and Taylor went on to wage a lonely battle against hundreds of enemy planes. They would land at Wheeler airfield at one point and had their ammunition replenished before rejoining the fray. By the time the attack ended, the Second Lieutenants had shot down at least six fighters and bombers between them. Both were awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for their high flying exploits, and Taylor was given a Purple Heart for a shrapnel wound received when his P-40 was struck by machine gun fire.

Doris Miller

Doris Miller’s race usually relegated him to the role of cook and laundry attendant aboard the USS West Virginia, but when the ship was struck by multiple bombs and torpedoes on December 7th, he became one of its most vital crewmembers. Miller had rushed to his battle station amidship as soon as the shooting started. Finding it destroyed, the amateur boxer sprinted to the quarterdeck and used his hulking frame to help move the injured. Miller was among the men who carried the ship’s mortally wounded skipper to safety, and then helped pass ammunition to the crews of two .50 caliber machine guns.

Despite having no weapons training, he eventually manned one of the weapons himself and began blasting away at the Japanese fighters swarming around the ship. “It wasn’t hard,” he later remembered. “I just pulled the trigger and she worked fine…”

Miller continued to operate the gun for some 15 minutes until ordered to abandon ship. His actions would earn him the Navy Cross—the first ever presented to an African American—and he was widely hailed as a war hero in the black press. He later toured the country promoting war bonds before being reassigned to the escort carrier Liscome Bay. Sadly, Miller was among the 646 crewmen killed when the ship was torpedoed and sunk in 1943.

John Finn

Chief Petty Officer John Finn was still in bed when Japanese fighter planes descended on his post at the Kaneohe Bay air station, some 15 miles from Pearl Harbor. After throwing on clothes and driving to the base, he commandeered a .30 caliber machine gun and dragged it to an open area with a clear view of the sky. For the next two-and-a-half hours, Finn kept up a near-constant rate of fire against the strafing hordes of Zeroes, and may have been responsible for destroying at least one plane.

“I can’t honestly say I hit any,” he remembered in 2001. “But I shot at every damn plane I could see.” Finn suffered more than 20 wounds from bullets and shrapnel during the battle. One shot left him with a broken foot; another completely incapacitated his left arm. He received medical aid after the attack ended but returned to duty that same day to assist in arming American planes. Finn’s machine gun heroics won him the Medal of Honor—the only one awarded specifically for a combat action during Pearl Harbor. He would go on to survive the war and live to the age of 100.

George Walters

One of the many civilians to win plaudits during the Pearl Harbor attack, George Walters was a dockyard worker who manned a massive rolling crane positioned alongside the dry-docked battleship USS Pennsylvania. When the yard came under fire during the early stages of the raid, he valiantly moved his 50-ton crane back and forth on its track, effectively shielding Pennsylvania from low flying dive-bombers and fighters. Walters even tried to use the crane’s boom to swat the enemy planes out of the sky.

The gunners on the USS Pennsylvania initially considered the dockworker a nuisance, but soon realized his 50-foot-high cab gave him an excellent view of incoming aircraft. Using the movements of the crane arm as a guide, they were able to return fire against the enemy to devastating effect. Walters continued his suicidal maneuvers until a Japanese bomb exploded on the dock and sent him to the hospital with a concussion. His actions may have helped save Pennsylvania from destruction, but his story went largely untold until 1957, when it appeared in author Walter Lord’s famous book Day of Infamy.

George Walters worked for the shipyard for 25 years after Japan’s attack. He died in 1999 and an annual shipyard award bears his name.

Edwin Hill

The USS Nevada was the only ship from Pearl Harbor’s Battleship Row to make a break for the open ocean but its great escape might never have happened, if not for the efforts of 47-year-old Chief Boatswain Edwin Hill. Shortly after the battle began, Hill and a small crew braved heavy fire and strafing to go ashore and cut the moorings holding the Nevada to the quay at Ford Island. He then dove into the oil-stained water and swam back to his ship to continue the fight. As Hill directed an ammunition train, the ship ran a gauntlet of enemy fire and tried to steam out of the harbor. The lone battleship was an obvious target, however, and after taking repeated hits from Japanese dive-bombers, its Captain opted to beach his vessel to avoid bottling up the rest of the fleet.

Chief Hill was soon called into action a final time. He was on the forecastle working to drop anchor when a group Japanese planes rained bombs on the deck, blowing his body off the ship and killing him instantly. Hill was later posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor and the USS Nevada survived Pearl Harbor to participate in the Normandy invasion in 1944.

Phil Rasmussen

Phil Rasmussen was one of the handful of American pilots who managed to take to the skies during the attack on Pearl Harbor. Like many others, the 23-year-old Second Lieutenant was still sleeping when his post at Wheeler Field was bombed. Rushing outside, he found an undamaged P-36 fighter sitting on the runway. Still clad in a pair of purple pajamas, Rasmussen took off and joined three other pilots in a dogfight against 11 Japanese aircraft.

Rasmussen’s plane was slower and less maneuverable than the enemy Zeroes but he quickly managed to shoot one of them down. He then crippled another plane before two Japanese pilots raked his P-36 with machine gun and cannon fire, leaving behind some 500 bullet holes. Another Zero just narrowly missed when it tried to ram him. Rasmussen’s canopy was blown off and he briefly lost control, but he managed to right his damaged plane and make a miraculous landing without brakes, rudders or a tail wheel. The young pilot was later awarded a Silver Star for his bravery and served in the Air Force for another 24 years, retiring as a Colonel.

In Service and Sacrifice

“The very soul of a nation is its heroes”

In Eternal Remembrance

7 December 1941

Four Chaplains and the Sinking of the USAT Dorchester

In the early morning hours of 3 February 1943, First Sergeant Michael Warish nearly gave up hope as he floated helplessly in the freezing waters of the North Atlantic. Just minutes earlier, he and almost 900 others aboard the USAT Dorchester were near safe waters when a German torpedo slammed into the engine room far below. Soon thereafter, the Dorchester began to slip underneath the waves.

Warish accepted his fate, fully aware that life expectancy in these cold waters was about twenty minutes. Surrounded by hundreds of his equally doomed shipmates, the blinking red lights of their life preservers reminded him of Christmas lights. Other than a burning sensation in his throat from swallowing oil-fouled salt water and some minor pain from wounds suffered when the torpedo hit, he mostly felt numb.

Resigned to losing consciousness and shortly freezing to death, his thoughts turned to the courageous and selfless acts of the four Army chaplains he witnessed just before abandoning ship. Those four men, according to Warish and other eyewitnesses, remained calm during the panic following the attack. They spread out among the soldiers, calming the frightened and tending the wounded, while guiding the disoriented toward safety. On deck, they distributed life preservers, including their own, as they assisted others to abandon ship.

As the ship went down, survivors in nearby rafts could see the four chaplains — arms linked and braced against the slanting deck. Their voices could be heard offering prayers and singing hymns.

The story of these four chaplains, a Catholic, a Jew, and two Protestants, stands out among the countless stories of commitment and bravery that make up the pantheon of the U.S. Army, as one of the finest examples of courage to God, man, and country. These men, John P. Washington, Alexander D. Goode, George L. Fox, and Clarke V. Poling, were drawn by the tragedy at Pearl Harbor to serving the armed forces. Each wanted more than anything else to serve God by ministering to men on the battlefield. Each felt great disappointment at being relegated to service in a rear area, in this case the airfields and installations of Greenland. Yet, each, when the moment came, did not hesitate to put others before self, courageously offering a tenuous chance of survival with the full knowledge of the consequences.

One survivor and witness would later say, “It was the finest thing I have seen or hope to see this side of heaven.”

Though the chaplains had vastly different backgrounds, their similar experiences brought them together on the deck of the Dorchester. Each was tested at a young age and came to the realization that his would be a life of service to God and man. John P. Washington, born in Newark, New Jersey, on 18 July 1908, was eldest of seven children. He was the product of tough Irish neighborhoods, where he almost lost his sight to a BB gun accident and nearly died of fever. By the age of seven, John was on the path to priesthood. After attending Catholic elementary and high schools, he entered the seminary in Darlington, New Jersey, and was ordained on 15 June 1935.

Father Washington was initially turned down by the Navy after Pearl Harbor because of his poor eyesight. Disappointed but not defeated, Washington went to the Army. This time, when it came to the eye test, he covered up his bad eye both times when reading the eye chart, correctly assuming that the doctors would be too busy to pay much attention. He hoped that God would forgive his subterfuge.

In May 1942 Father Washington left for training at Fort Benjamin Harrison, Indiana. After a month, he was posted to Fort George G. Meade, Maryland. Eager to serve overseas, he applied for a transfer. In a letter to Army Headquarters dated 23 September 1942, he wrote, “Once more may I ask you to consider my application for overseas duty. The requests finally worked when, in November 1942, he was transferred to Camp Myles Standish in Taunton, Massachusetts, to await overseas deployment. There he met fellow Chaplains Fox, Goode, and Poling.

Alexander D. Goode was born on 10 May 1911, the son of a rabbi. From his earliest days, he planned to follow in his father’s footsteps. He earned his Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of Cincinnati in 1934, followed by a degree from the Hebrew Union College in 1937. Virtually penniless as a college student during the Great Depression, Alexander contemplated quitting school and giving up on his dream to become a rabbi, but he believed it was God’s plan for him to pursue a religious vocation. For much of his youth, he served in the National Guard to help make ends meet.

In January 1941, the Navy turned down Rabbi Goode’s application to become a chaplain but the Army Air Force accepted him after Pearl Harbor. After training at the Harvard Chaplain School, along with classmates Fox and Poling, he was assigned to Seymour Johnson Field in Goldsboro, North Carolina, where he served until October 1942. In November 1942, he was reassigned to Camp Myles Standish.

As with the other chaplains, Pearl Harbor drew George L. Fox back to the military. In July 1942, he was appointed as an Army chaplain and returned to active duty at the age of forty-two on 8 August, 1942, the same day his son Wyatt entered the Marine Corps. After training at Harvard, he joined the 411th Coast Artillery Battalion (Anti-aircraft Gun) at Camp Davis, North Carolina, until

ordered to Camp Myles Standish.

Clark V. Poling was born into a prominent family that had produced six generations of ministers. His father was a well-known radio evangelist and religious newspaper editor. Born on 7 August 1910, Poling was educated in Massachusetts and New York with never any doubt he would become the seventh generation of his family to enter the ministry.

After studying at Hope College in Michigan and Rutgers University in New Jersey, he entered Yale University’s School of Divinity, where he would be ordained a minister in the Reformed Church of America.

When Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, Reverend Poling volunteered as a chaplain. Before departing for the service, his father, Dr. Daniel A. Poling, reminded him of the high casualty rate of chaplains in World War I. The younger Poling downplayed the danger, confident that God’s will was to keep him safe while he served others. He was appointed a U. S. Army Chaplain in 10 June 1942 and reported to the 131st Quartermaster Truck Regiment at Camp Shelby, Mississippi, on 25 June. Later he went on to Harvard and then to Camp Myles Standish. In November 1942, the four chaplains were all together for the first time.

The Dorchester was as austere and dank as any of the tubs ferrying troops to and from the war zone across the North Atlantic—a suitable venue for one to suffer the dreaded anxiety of an uncertain future passing through Torpedo Junction, as the stretch of dangerous waters was known.

With war looming, the U.S. government requisitioned the Dorchester and had the Atlantic, Gulf and West Indies Steamship Company in New York convert her into a troop transport. Stripped of its original cruise ship luxuries, the USAT Dorchester was outfitted to carry 750 troops, with a complement of 130 crew and twenty-three Navy armed guards.

On 29 January 1943, the Dorchester departed St. John’s, Newfoundland, for its fifth north Atlantic voyage, hitting bad weather almost as soon as it entered open water. Its passengers included 597 soldiers and 171 civilians bound for airbases in Greenland. In its holds were one thousand tons of equipment, food, and cargo. Merchant Marine Captain Hans Danielsen skippered the ship while Army Captain Preston S. Krecker, Jr. commanded the troops. First Sergeant Warish was the senior noncommissioned officer aboard.

Despite heavy security, there were few secrets in St. John’s. German authorities had become aware that convoy SG-19 was bound for Greenland, so four U-Boats took up stations along its route. One of those was U-233, on her maiden voyage, commanded by twenty-six-year-old Lieutenant Commander Karl-Jürg Wächter. In the fog and darkness of 3 February, U-233 floated on the surface as Wächter, binoculars raised to his eyes, studied the dark silhouettes of SG-19 passing in the distance.

Earlier, U-233 survived a depth charge attack brought about by the sonar indications of the escorts. When submerged, U-boats could be detected by sonar, but when on the surface, the escorts were blind to their presence because they lacked radar. As a result, Wächter used that advantage, along with the haze and darkness, to keep pace with the convoy.

All that the ships of SG-19 knew was a U-boat was in the area. The evening before Captain Danielsen of the Dorchester announced over the ship’s public address system, “Now here this: This concerns every soldier. Now here this: Every soldier is ordered to sleep in his clothes and life jacket. Repeat, this is an order! We have a submarine following us…If we make it through the night, in the morning we will have air protection from Blue West One, which is the code name for the air base in Greenland, and of course, we will have protection until we reach port.”

With the known presence of a submarine and the rough weather that night, there would be little sleeping on the Dorchester that night. First Sergeant Warish chose to share the hardship of soldiers assigned to lookout positions out on the open deck in the thirty-six-degree weather.

The chaplains bid good night to the men by reminding them of Captain Danielsen’s warning about wearing all their clothes, including boots and gloves, along with life jackets to bed. Three of the chaplains had earlier made the rounds of the ship in an attempt to raise men’s spirits. Meanwhile, Father Washington said mass in the mess area that was attended by men of many faiths.

Earlier that night, Captain Krecker had called his men together in the hold. He repeated Captain Danielsen’s earlier warning. “This will be the most dangerous part of our mission,” he said. “We’re coming through the storm and now we’re in calm waters. And they can really spot us out here.” He finished with the admonition to wear life jackets.

As the clock ticked past midnight, many began to breathe easier with the knowledge that they were near safe waters and would soon be under an umbrella of protection from Greenland-based planes. Warish was making the rounds among the troops. Aboard U-233, torpedo man Erich Pässler prepared to fire three torpedoes. Within minutes, the three deadly fish were in the water heading toward the shadow creeping past at a distance of 1,000 yards.

Warish had just looked at his watch when, at approximately 0055 hours, one of the torpedoes ripped into the Dorchester’s starboard side. The ensuing explosion rent a hole near the engine room from below the waterline to the top deck. The lights went out, steam pipes split, and bunks collapsed like cards one on top of another. The sounds of screaming and the smell of gunpowder and ammonia filled the air. The initial explosion killed dozens outright, and a wave of cold water entering the ship quickly drowned dozens more. Nearly one-third of those aboard died in the first moments of the disaster.

Men, many of whom had disobeyed Captain Danielsen’s orders to wear their clothes and life preservers, wandered through the darkened and mangled passageways searching for their clothes. Warish lay trapped under some bunks that pinned his leg to the deck. Within a minute, the ship listed thirty degrees to starboard. Panicked men rushed topside, but many never made it through blocked passageways. Others were overcome by ammonia fumes. Those who did emerge into the freezing night faced tough choices. Several life boats could not be deployed due to the Dorchester’s dramatic list. Many others were so fouled by ice that they could not be freed before the ship went under.

In the middle of the confusion on deck was Roy Summers, a Navy gunner stationed on the Dorchester. A few months earlier, he had survived the sinking of Dorchester’s sister ship, the Chatham, and he believed he would survive this attack. Resigned to abandoning ship, he ran aft toward the stern, but thought better of it when he realized that jumping there would bring certain death from the still turning propellers, which had already breached the surface and claimed the lives of several who had already jumped. Turning around, he witnessed two of the chaplains handing out life vests and assisting soldiers as they slid down ropes to the sea below. One hysterical soldier grabbed a chaplain as if to choke him. Summers wrestled the soldier away from the chaplain and watched the soldier run down the deck toward the rising water and probably to his death. Summers then climbed over the railing and went down a rope into the ocean.

Elsewhere on the top deck, Father Washington gave absolution to soldiers as they went over the side. Private First Class Charles Macli, a former professional boxer, unsuccessfully urged Washington to go over the side with the men. Instead, Chaplain Washington remained aboard as Macli slid into the cold water. Another soldier, Walter Miller, saw knots of men in seemingly catatonic states bunched against the railings of the listing ship. Too afraid to jump into the sea, they awaited the inevitability of being swallowed by it. Over the din, he heard a terror-filled plaintive voice repeating, “I can’t find my life jacket.” Turning toward that voice, Miller clearly heard Chaplain Fox say, “Here’s one, soldier.” Then Miller witnessed Fox remove his life jacket and put it on the soldier. At the same time, Navy Lieutenant John Mahoney cursed himself for leaving his gloves in his quarters. Chaplain Goode stopped him from returning for the gloves, saying, “Don’t bother Mahoney. I have another pair. You can have these.” Goode then removed the gloves from his hands and gave them to Mahoney. Mahoney later realized that a man preparing to abandon ship probably would not carry a second pair of gloves.

Many of the survivors reported similar encounters with one or more of the chaplains. They seemed to be everywhere on the deck until the very end. Many survivors reported that the four chaplains locked arms and prayed in unison as the ship sank. Whether this part is accurate is unimportant, for the truth is that these four Army chaplains sacrificed themselves for the soldiers and the God they served.

First Sergeant Warish freed himself after a ten-minute struggle. He dragged himself through the passageways and over the side in time to see the Dorchester sink below the waves just twenty-five minutes after being struck by the torpedo. After some confusion, the Coast Guard began rescue operations, saving 230 of the nearly 900 aboard and losing one Coast Guardsman in the process.

In the aftermath of the disaster, the story of the Four Chaplains garnered popular notice. Many thought they should be awarded the Medal of Honor but was blocked by the stringent requirements of heroism performed under fire.. Instead, on 19 December 1944, they were each awarded the Purple Heart and the Distinguished Service Cross. In 1948, the U.S. Post Service issued a commemorative stamp in their honor, and Congress designated 3 February as “Four Chaplains Day.” Twelve years later, Congress created the Four Chaplains’ Medal, which was presented to their survivors by Secretary of the Army Wilber M. Brucker on 18 January 1961 at Fort Myer, Virginia.

Today, one can find memorials to the Four Chaplains all across the nation. Several organizations exist to further their memory, including the Chapel of the Four Chaplains in Philadelphia and the Immortal Chaplains Foundation in Minnesota. Chapels, bridges, memorials, and plaques honoring the Four Chaplains are found in so many locations, including a stained glass window in the Pentagon, making it impossible to list all here.

First Sergeant Warish was rescued. He recovered from his injuries enough to continue serving the Army, although he suffered chronic pain for the rest of his life. He rose to the rank of sergeant major before retiring in 1963. In 2002, he was injured in a car accident and for the remaining year of his life he could only move with the help of a walker. He died in September 2003.

U-233 escaped after firing the fatal torpedo. About a year later, it was sunk by British destroyers with the loss of most of its crew. One survivor, Kurt Rosser, was interned in a Mississippi prisoner of war camp, where he picked cotton and sandbagged levees against flooding. In 2000, the Immortal Chaplains Foundation brought him and the U-233 first officer, Gerhard Buske, to Washington, DC. There they attended memorial ceremonies, toured the Holocaust Museum, and visited with Theresa Goode Kaplan, widow of Chaplain Goode, who reluctantly accepted the visitors’ expressions of respect for her husband and regret for her suffering. Four years later, Buske spoke at the foundation’s sixtieth-anniversary ceremony, saying, “we ought to love when others hate…we can bring faith where doubt threatens; we can awaken hope where despair exists; we can light up a light where darkness reigns; we can bring joy where sorrow dominates.” Those words, as well as any, represent the lessons of the Four Chaplains

Excerpts : Command Sergeant Major James H. Clifford, USA-Ret. and the U.S. Army

In Gratitude for the Service of our Military

Past and Present

GOD BLESS AMERICA

Christmas 1944

December 24th

It was Christmas Eve 1944 and the last desperate German offensive of World War II raged around our tiny cabin. When we heard the sudden knock on our door, neither Mother nor I had the slightest inkling of the quiet miracle which lay in store for us.

I was 12 then and we were living in a small cottage in the Hürtgen Forest, near the German-Belgian border. Father had stayed at the cottage on hunting weekends before the war and when Allied bombers partly destroyed our hometown of Aachen, he sent us to live there. Father had been ordered into the civil-defense fire guard in the border town of Monschau, four miles away. “You’ll be safe in the woods,” he had told me. “Take care of Mother, as you are now the man of the family.”

Nine days before Christmas, Field Marshal von Rundstedt had launched the last, desperate German offensive of the war and now, as I went to the door, the Battle of the Bulge was raging all around us. We heard the incessant booming of field guns, planes soared continuously overhead, and at night, searchlights stabbed through the darkness. Thousands of Allied and German soldiers were fighting and dying nearby.

Mother stood silent, motionless, her hand on my shoulder. As she opened the door, the men outside were armed and could have forced their entrance, yet they stood there and asked for entrance with their eyes. A wounded man with them seemed more dead than alive. “Kommt rein,” Mother said finally. “Come in.” The soldiers carried their comrade inside and stretched him out on my bed.

None of them understood German. Mother tried French, and one of the soldiers could converse in that language. As Mother went to look after the wounded man, she said to me, “The fingers of those two are numb. Take off their jackets and boots, and bring in a bucket of snow.” Soon I was rubbing their blue feet with that snow.

We learned the stocky, dark-haired fellow was Jim; his friend, tall and slender, was Robin. Harry, the wounded one, was now sleeping on my bed, his face as white as the snow outside. They’d lost their battalion and had wandered in the forest for three days, looking for the Americans and hiding from the Germans. They hadn’t shaved, but still, without their heavy coats, they looked merely like big boys. And that was the way Mother began to treat them.

Now Mother said to me, “Go get Hermann and bring six potatoes.” This was a serious departure from our pre-Christmas plans. Hermann was the plump rooster (named after portly Hermann Goering, Hitler’s No. 2 man, for whom Mother had little affection). Rooster had been fattening for weeks in the hope that Father would be home for Christmas. Some hours before, however, when it was obvious Father would not make it, Mother had decided Hermann should live a few more days, in case Father could get home for New Year’s. Now she had changed her mind again. Hermann would serve an immediate, pressing purpose.

While Jim and I helped with the cooking, Robin took care of Harry. He had a bullet through his upper leg and had almost bled to death. Mother tore a bedsheet into long strips for bandages. Soon, the tempting smell of roast chicken permeated our room. I was setting the table when once again there came a knock at the door.

Expecting to find more lost Americans, I opened the door without hesitation. There stood four soldiers, wearing uniforms quite familiar after five years of war. They were German Wehrmacht Armed Forces! I was paralyzed with fear. Although still a child, I knew the harsh law that sheltering enemy soldiers constituted was high treason. We could all be shot! Mother was frightened, too. Her face was white, but she stepped outside and said quietly, “Fröhliche Weihnachten.” The soldiers wished her a Merry Christmas, too.

“We have lost our regiment and would like to wait for daylight,” explained the corporal. “Can we rest here? ” “Of course,” Mother replied with a calmness born of panic. “You can also have a fine, warm meal and eat till the pot is empty.” The Germans smiled as they sniffed the aroma through the half-open door. “But,” Mother added firmly, “we have three other guests, whom you may not consider friends.” Now her voice was suddenly sterner than I’d ever heard it before. “This is Christmas Eve and there will be no shooting here.”

“Who’s inside?” the corporal demanded. “Amerikaner?” Mother looked at each frost-chilled face. “Listen,” she said slowly. “You could be my sons, and so could those in there. A boy with a gunshot wound, fighting for his life. His two friends lost like you and just as hungry and exhausted. This one night,” she turned to the corporal and raised her voice a little, “this Christmas night, let us forget about killing.” The corporal stared at her. There were two or three endless seconds of silence. Then Mother put an end to indecision. “Enough talking!” she ordered and clapped her hands sharply. “Please put your weapons here on the woodpile and hurry up before the others eat the dinner!” Dazedly, the four soldiers placed their arms on the pile of firewood just inside the door: three carbines, a light machine gun and two bazookas. Meanwhile, Mother was speaking French rapidly to Jim. He said something in English, and to my amazement I saw the American boys, too, turn their weapons over to Mother.

Now, as Germans and Americans tensely rubbed elbows in the small room, Mother was really on her mettle. Never losing her smile, she tried to find a seat for everyone. We had only three chairs, but Mother’s bed was big, and on it she placed two of the newcomers side by side with Jim and Robin. Despite the strained atmosphere, Mother went right on preparing dinner. But Hermann wasn’t going to grow any bigger and now there were four more mouths to feed. “Quick,” she whispered to me, “get more potatoes and some oats. These boys are hungry, and a starving man is an angry one.”

While foraging in the storage room, I heard Harry moan. When I returned, one of the Germans had put on his glasses to inspect the American’s wound. “Do you belong to the medical corps?” Mother asked him. “No,” he answered. “But I studied medicine at Heidelberg until a few months ago.” Thanks to the cold, he told the Americans in what sounded like fairly good English, Harry’s wound hadn’t become infected. “He is suffering from a severe loss of blood,” he explained to Mother. “What he needs is rest and nourishment.”

Relaxation was now beginning to replace suspicion. Even to me, all the soldiers looked very young as we sat there together. Heinz and Willi, both from Cologne, were 16. The German corporal, at 23, was the oldest of them all. From his food bag he drew out a bottle of red wine and Heinz managed to find a loaf of rye bread. Mother cut that in small pieces to be served with the dinner. Half the wine, however, she put away for the wounded boy.”

Then Mother said grace and I noticed there were tears in her eyes as she said the old, familiar words, “Komm, Herr Jesus. Be our guest.” As I looked around the table, I saw tears, too, in the eyes of the battle-weary soldiers, boys again, some from America, some from Germany, all far from home.

Just before midnight, Mother went to the doorstep and asked us to join her to look up at the Star of Bethlehem. We all stood beside her except Harry, who was sleeping. For all of us during that moment of silence, looking at the brightest star in the heavens, the war was a distant, almost-forgotten thing.

Our private armistice continued next morning. Harry woke in the early hours, and swallowed some broth that Mother fed him. With the dawn, it was apparent he was becoming stronger. Mother now made him an invigorating drink from our one egg, the rest of the corporal’s wine and some sugar. Everyone else had oatmeal. Afterward, two poles and Mother’s best tablecloth were fashioned into a stretcher for Harry. The corporal then advised the Americans how to find their way back to their lines. Looking over Jim’s map, the corporal pointed out a stream. “Continue along this creek,” he said, “and you will find the 1st Army rebuilding its forces on its upper course.” The medical student relayed the information in English. Then the Corporal provided them with a compass.

“Why don’t we head for Monschau?” Jim had the student ask. “Nein!” the corporal exclaimed. “We’ve retaken Monschau.” Now Mother gave them all back their weapons. “Be careful, boys,” she said. “I want you to get home someday where you belong. God bless you all!” The German and American soldiers shook hands, and we watched them disappear in opposite directions.

When I returned inside, Mother had brought out the old family Bible. I glanced over her shoulder. The book was open to the Christmas story, the Birth in the Manger, and how the Wise Men came from afar bearing their gifts. Her finger was tracing the last line from Matthew 2:12: “…they departed into their own country another way.”

This story really helped me to know why we should be kind to everyone, whether in war or not… My mom was a hero whom I admired for asking both enemies to not hate but to give love and peace.

“Truce In the Forest” by Fritz Vincken, Readers Digest 1973

———————–

What more profound compassion at Christmas,

than to enemies in the midst of war, treating each other with humanity

———————–

Fritz and his parents survived the war. His mother and father passed away in the Sixties and by then he had married and moved to Hawaii. For years he tried to locate any of the German or American soldiers without luck, hoping to corroborate the story and see how they had fared. President Reagan heard of his story and referenced it in a 1985 speech he gave in Germany as an example of peace and reconciliation. But it wasn’t until the television program Unsolved Mysteries broadcast the story in 1995, that it was discovered that a man living in a Frederick, Maryland nursing home had been telling the same story for years. Fritz flew to Frederick in January 1996 and met with Ralph Blank, one of the American soldiers who still had the German compass and map. Ralph told Fritz “Your mother saved my life.” Fritz said the reunion was the high point of his life.

Fritz Vincken also managed to later contact one of the other Americans, but none of the Germans. He died on December 8, 2002, almost 58 years to the day of the Christmas truce. He was forever grateful that his mother got the recognition she deserved.

Christmas 2020

In Gratitude for the Service of our Military

Past and Present

——————————-

GOD BLESS AMERICA

Commonly known as Piper Bill, Private William Millin was personal piper to Simon Fraser, 15th Lord Lovat and Commander of 1 Special Service Brigade at D-Day. A commando brigade of the British Army, it was formed during the Second World War and consisted of elements of the British Army and Royal Marines. The brigade’s component units saw action individually in Norway and the Dieppe Raid (in France), before being combined under one commander for service in Normandy during Operation Overload. On 6 December 1944, the Brigade was redesignated as 1st Commando Brigade, removing the hated title Special Service and its association with the German SS.

Early life

Millin was born in Saskatchewan, Canada on 14 July 1922 to a father of Scottish origin, who had moved the family to Canada but returned to Glasgow when William was three to attend his school years. He would later join the Territorial Army in Fort William and played in the pipe bands of the Highland Light Infantry and the Queen’s Own Cameron Highlanders. Volunteering as a commando, he trained with Lord Lovat at Achnacarry along with French, Dutch, Belgian, Polish, Norwegian, and Czechoslovak troops.

Second World War

Operation Overlord – the Normandy landings on D-Day

The British 2nd Army, Commandos of the 1st Special Service Brigade, landed from an LCI(S) (Landing Craft Infantry Small) on ‘Queen Red’ Beach, the Sword Area, approximately 8.40 am on 6 June 1944. The brigade commander, Brigadier Lord Lovat DSO MC, can be seen striding through the water to the right of the column of men. The figure nearest the camera is the brigade’s bagpiper, Piper Bill Millin.

Millin is best remembered for playing the pipes while under fire during the D-Day landing in Normandy. Pipers had traditionally been used in battle by Scottish and Irish soldiers. However, the use of bagpipes was restricted to rear areas by the time of the Second World War by the British Army. Lovat, nevertheless, ignored these orders and ordered Millin, then aged 21, to play. When Private Millin demurred, citing the regulations, Lord Lovat replied: “Ah, but that’s the English War Office. You and I are both Scottish, and that doesn’t apply.” Piper Millin then proceeded to play as his comrades fell around him on Sword beach. In later conversation with captured German snipers, they stated he was not shot, as they thought he had simply gone mad.

Private Millin, whom Lovat had appointed his personal piper during commando training in Scotland, was the only man during the landing who wore a kilt – the same Cameron tartan kilt his father had worn in Flanders during World War 1 – and armed only with his pipes and the “black knife,” sheathed inside his kilt-hose on the right side.

Lovat and Millin advanced from Sword to Pegasus Bridge, which had been defiantly defended by men of the 2nd Batallion, the Ox & Bucks Light Infantry (6th Airborne Division) who had landed in the early hours by glider. Lovat’s commandos arrived at a little past one p.m. at Pegasus Bridge although the rendezvous time in the plan was noon. To the sound of Millin’s bagpipes, the commandos proceeded to march across Pegasus Bridge. During the march, twelve men died, most shot through their berets. Later detachments of the commandos rushed across in small groups with helmets on.

Later life

Private Millin saw further action with 1 SSB in the Netherlands and Germany before being demobilized in 1946 and going to work on Lord Lovat’s highland estate. He made regular trips back to Normandy for commemoration ceremonies and France awarded him a Legion of Honor for gallantry in June 2009.

Millin played the pipes at Lord Lovat’s funeral in 1995 and following his own stroke in 2003, died in a Torbay hospital on 17 August 2010 at the age of 88.

Popular culture and legacy

Millin’s action on D-Day was portrayed in the 1962 film The Longest Day. He was portrayed by Pipe Major Leslie de Laspee, the official piper to the Queen Mother in 1961.

One set of Millin’s bagpipes are exhibited at the Memorial Museum of Pegasus Bridge in Ranville, France. His original set of bagpipes are now displayed at Dawlish Museum where he presented his pipes in 2004, prior to the 60th anniversary of the D-Day Landing, along with his kilt, bonnet, and dirk. These items are still shown at the museum library with photographic archives and looped video telling of Millin’s exploits.

Dawlish Museum officials have written testimony from Millin that the bagpipe set on display in Dawlish is the genuine set which he played during the D-Day landings at Sword. The ones on show at the Pegasus Bridge Museum are a second set that were used by him later in the campaign, after the capture of Pegasus Bridge.

With the help of son John Millin and the Dawlish Royal British Legion, a bronze life-size statue of Piper Bill Millin was unveiled on 8 June 2013 at Colleville-Montgomery, near Sword in France.

On 7 August 2013, the BBC featured a film of Bill’s son John Millin playing the bagpipes in memory of his father at the statue’s unveiling at Colleville-Montgomery in Normandy. Broadcast live, from Weston-super-Mare, the film also showed scenes of more than 500 pipers from 21 countries taking part in the unveiling of the £50,000 statue by French sculptor Gaetan Ader, which took more than four years of fund raising by the D-Day Piper Bill Millin Association to complete.

In Appreciation for our British Allies

At Normandy During WWII

Throughout U.S. involvement overseas, military officials did their best to provide a traditional, hot holiday meal for our soldiers. In 1943, the American people sent two liberty ships fully stocked with Thanksgiving supplies for those serving abroad. Included were turkeys, trimmings, cranberry sauce, and even various pies, all sent throughout the European and Pacific theaters and even to the frontlines. Those lucky enough to be stationed on board one of the Navy’s vessels received excellent food at all times, but Thanksgiving was particularly scrumptious and appreciated by the servicemen on the ground and in the air. Despite the good intentions of the higher ranks, every man missed their families, especially during the holidays and no Thanksgiving could quite compare to the ones held at home, although the soldiers had each other through the hardest time of their lives.

U.S. military Thanksgiving dinners were a far cry above the usual canned and precooked C- or K-rations. In fact, one British soldier who crash landed at an American airbase in Italy on Thanksgiving Day, later would remember with his first taste of an American military Thanksgiving that “the Americans were looked after slightly better [than the British were], so the lunch I was offered consisted of roast turkey, fresh vegetables and fresh white bread, the like of which we hadn’t seen since the war started. Similarly, a young British boy who happened to be visiting an American airfield in England on Thanksgiving observed, “I was invited into the dining room and was amazed at the food that was there. It was Thanksgiving and I thought Christmas had come early. I’d never seen so much food, as we were all living on rations. I was even lucky enough to taste some.”

After receiving permission from a farm owner, these men, attached to an airbase at Norfolk, England, invade a turkey pen to choose their annual turkey day repast. The turkeys were given to the men for their Thanksgiving dinners, 6 November 1943.

On 25 November 1943, a long line of men formed outside the mess hall on Alexai Point Airbase, each waiting for his turn to be served the traditional Thanksgiving dinner–the first Thanksgiving celebrated by military personnel on former American territory recaptured from the Japanese. The men were members of the 28th Bomb Group and the 54th Fighter Group, stationed on Attu, Aleutian Islands.

At Alexai Point, Attu, Aleutian Islands, officers of the 77th Bomb Group and the 54th Fighter Group also enjoyed their traditional Thanksgiving dinner on 25 November 1943 on former American territory recaptured from the Japanese.

Mess hall personnel readied to serve Thanksgiving dinner to the men of the 13th Air Force who formed a long chow line outside on Espiritu Santo, New Hebrides, 25 November 1943.

GI’s, holding plates heaped with food, grin broadly as they pass thru the chow line in the mess hall at Poltava Airbase, a shuttle bombing base in Russia. The Thanksgiving dinner, served by Russian girls, was the first meal prepared in the newly-opened mess hall, November 1944.

GI’s did justice to their Thanksgiving dinner, the first meal served in the newly-opened mess hall at Poltava Airbase, a shuttle mission base in Russia. November 1944.

President Roosevelt’s 1943 Thanksgiving speech to the nation began “God’s help to us has been great in this year of our march towards world-wide liberty. In brotherhood with warriors of other United Nations, our gallant men have won victories, have freed our homes from fear, have made tyranny tremble, and have laid the foundation for freedom of life in a world which will be free.”

He continued, “May we on Thanksgiving Day and on every day express our gratitude and zealously devote ourselves to our duties as individuals and as a nation. May each of us dedicate his utmost efforts to speeding the victory which will bring new opportunities for peace and brotherhood among men.”

In Appreciation of our Troops Who Serve

Thanksgiving Day

2020

God Bless America

September 1, 1939 – September 2, 1945

World War II, also known as the Second World War, was a global war lasting from 1939 to 1945. It involved the vast majority of the world’s countries—including all the great powers—forming two opposing military alliances: the Allies and the Axis.

The chief Allied powers were Great Britain, France (except during the German occupation, 1940–44), the Soviet Union (after its entry in June 1941), the United States (after its entry on December 8, 1941), and China.

The three principal partners in the Axis alliance were Germany, Italy, and Japan. These three countries recognized German domination over most of continental Europe; Italian domination over the Mediterranean Sea; and Japanese domination over East Asia and the Pacific.

The Start of World War II in Europe

Lead by Nazi leader Adolf Hitler, over one million German troops invaded Poland on September 1, 1939. Just two days later, Britain and France declared war on Germany—and the world was once again at war.

World War II was the deadliest military conflict in history. An estimated total of 70–85 million people perished, about 3% of the 1940 world population (est. 2.3 billion).

The End of World War II in Europe

REIMS, France — World War II ended in a French schoolhouse 75 years ago on May 7, 1945 when German commanders signed their surrender to Allied forces.

Germany surrendered unconditionally to the Western Allies and the Soviet Union at 2:41 a.m. French time. It took place in the headquarters of Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower and was signed for Germany by Col. Gen. Alfred Jodl, new Chief of Staff of the German Army. The surrender was signed for the Supreme Allied Command by Lt. Gen. Walter Beddel Smith, Chief of Staff for Gen. Eisenhower. Also participants in the signings were Gen. Ivan Susloparov of the Soviet Union and Gen. Francois Sevez for France.

Gen. Eisenhower was not present at the signing, but immediately afterward Gen. Jodl and his fellow delegate Gen. Adm. Hans Georg Friedeburg were received by the supreme commander. Asked sternly if they understood the surrender terms imposed upon Germany, and whether they intended to carry them out, their response was confirmed. Elation at the news was tempered by the realization that the war against Japan remained unresolved.

The end of the European warfare, the greatest, bloodiest, and costliest war in human history — claiming at least 40 million casualties on both sides of killed, wounded and captured — resulted after five years, eight months and six days of conflict which circled the globe.

Japan Surrenders – 2 Sept 1945

Although the unconditional surrender of Imperial Japan to the Allies was announced on August 15, 1945, the hostilities of World War II ended with the formal signing aboard the USS Missouri on September 2nd which effectively ended World War II.

With the jubilation of V-E Day and Germany’s unconditional surrender on May 8, 1945, followed by Japan’s on August 15th and the formal Instrument of Surrender on September 2nd, the United States and its Allies celebrated the end of World War II.

Since the European Axis Powers had surrendered three months earlier (V-E Day) on May 8, 1945, V-J Day was the effective end of World War II, although a peace treaty between Japan and most of the Allies was not signed until 1952 and between Japan and the Soviet Union in 1956.

Americans Rejoice

Following news of the Japanese acceptance and before Truman’s announcement, Americans began celebrating “as if joy had been rationed and saved for the three years, eight months and seven days since Sunday, Dec. 7, 1941’s attack on Pearl Harbor by the Japanese.”

The largest crowd in the history of New York City’s Times Square gathered to celebrate. The victory itself was announced by a headline on the “zipper” news ticker at One Times Square, which read “OFFICIAL *** TRUMAN ANNOUNCES JAPANESE SURRENDER. ***” The six asterisks represented the branches of the U.S. Armed Forces. In the Garment District, workers threw out cloth scraps and ticker tape, leaving a pile five inches deep on the streets. The news of the war’s end sparked a “coast-to-coast frenzy.”

The Voices of our Heroes

In considering the sacrifice and endurance of our military forces during WWII, we continue to remember their extraordinary service, as exemplified by a few for the many. These veterans are no longer with us but their “Voices From the Front Lines” continue.

Japanese POW Fiske Hanley II endured his harrowing 5 months of brutal captivity and torture as a special prisoner before his release on August 29, 1945. Hanley described the most beautiful sight of the war was that of American planes flying overhead in mass in coming to his rescue.

Honolulu, Hawaii and Pearl Harbor on December 7th, 1941, James Hardwick was there, survived, and earned 5 Battle Stars. He would later witness General MacArthur’s “I Shall Return Speech” while serving in the Philippines as the Japanese invaded.

Santiago Diaz, a Mexican immigrant, joined the US Army as a Medic. As one of the most targeted military personnel by the Japanese, he requested and served in this dangerous position. During one of the bloodiest battles in the jungles of Guadalcanal, Santiago earned his greatest wish and became a US Citizen.

James Reid, 4th Marine Division, served on Saipan in the battle between the Japanese and Americans for strategic possession. While there, Reid would coax Japanese women and children not to commit suicide by jumping off a ridge. Suffering a head wound from a Japanese soldier, Reid was sent to Maui to recover, and later served on Iwo Jima.

Those who survived the battle of Iwo Jima and its immense casualties, were training at Hilo, Hawaii for the Invasion of Japan. Don Graves, of the Marines 5th Division, was attending an event August 15, 1945, when at 9:00 p.m. six photographers burst into the room, yelling “the war is over!”

Graves recalled, “is this true? We could not believe it. We returned to our bunks; there was not a dry eye! The long war was behind us. We immediately stopped training for invasion and were to be the first troops to occupy Japan.

In Reverence and Gratitude

For Your Service

God Bless America

Almighty God: Our sons and the pride of our Nation this day have set upon a mighty endeavor, a struggle to preserve our Republic, our religion, and our civilization, and to set free a suffering humanity. Lead them straight and true; give strength to their arms, stoutness to their hearts, steadfastness in their faith.

And let our hearts be stout, to wait out the long travail, to bear sorrows that may come, to impart our courage unto our sons wheresoever they may be.

President Franklin D. Roosevelt

Address to the Nation

June 6, 1944

———————————

At 10:00 pm on 5 June 1944, Allied troops would begin departing from British shores on the English Channel to launch a successful invasion of German-occupied western Europe. Five assault groups set sail under darkness in an armada of nearly 7,000 vessels with 156,000 American, British and Canadian forces landing at Normandy on June 6, 1944, along a 50-mile stretch of heavily fortified coast. Five beaches in northern France code-named Omaha, Utah, Juno, Sword and Gold were the main targets for the landing of this great magnitude of troops by sea.

After anchoring off the coast of France for a couple of hours, US troops landed on Omaha and Utah beaches at about 6:30 am. About an hour later, Canadian forces landed at Juno, and British troops at Gold and Sword.

U.S. troops faced stiff German resistance at Omaha beach in particular and were pinned down for several hours, suffering heavy losses.

Despite involving a large number of troops, keeping D-day secret was vital to the success of the operation. A disinformation campaign had led the Germans to believe that Operation Fortitude was the main plan for the allies to invade the continent, via a two-pronged attack involving Norway and Calais. Even once the D-Day landings began, German commanders were convinced they were just a diversionary tactic before the real invasion.

Just after midnight on 6 June, aerial bombardment of enemy positions on the Normandy coast had begun. That night, more than 5,300 tons of bombs were dropped. Special operations troops were parachuted into the country to attack bridges and secure vital infrastructure targets before the landings. Information was also transmitted about German positions via carrier pigeons.

The public had also been kept in the dark until the operation had begun. On D-Day, at 9:00 am, Gen Dwight Eisenhower issued a communique announcing the invasion had begun. Winston Churchill addressed the House of Commons in London at noon: “So far the commanders who are engaged report that everything is proceeding according to plan. And what a plan!”

At 9:00 pm, King George VI addressed the British public in a broadcast, describing the operation as a “fight to win the final victory for the good cause.” By midnight the allied forces had full control of the beaches, and the push into occupied France was under way.

13,100 American paratroopers of the 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions made night parachute drops early on D-Day, June 6, followed by 3,937 glider troops flown in by day.

By the end of the day, the allies had disembarked more than 135,000 men and 10,000 vehicles on the beaches, and established bridgeheads of varying depths along the Normandy coastline. This came at a cost of 4,400 allied troops killed, with thousands more injured or missing.

NORMANDY

——————–

For Those Recognized To All

And Those Only Known To One

“Lord, where did we get such men?”

In Eternal Reverence and Gratitude

For Your Sacrifice on Behalf of Freedom

—————————

“Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, to assure the survival and success of liberty.”

John F. Kennedy

—————————-

75th Anniversary of D-Day

June 6, 2019

In a desperate bid to retrieve a missing part of history from June 6, 1944, a campaign was launched to mark the 75th Anniversary of D-Day and the veterans who served and were likely saved by it. A top secret security device used by British and American paratroopers in evading German forces behind enemy lines, an original “clicker” had not been seen since WWII. Upon parachuting into Normandy in 1944, paratroopers were ordered to use the device only for the initial 24 hour period and discard thereafter to prevent falling into German hands.

—————————

ACME Whistles News, Military (UK)

How We Found The Lost ACME Clicker

Earlier this month we launched a campaign to find the “Lost D-Day Clickers” produced by ACME Whistles for use by the 101st American Airborne Division in June 1944. Their purpose at the time of manufacture was kept top secret but later became evident that these clickers, which we produced in complete secrecy, were a vital piece of survival equipment for the heroic paratroopers involved in the famous D-Day Landings during World War II.

We have been delighted with the incredible coverage that the “Search For The Lost Clickers” campaign has had and we’d like to take a moment here to say a very sincere Thank You to everyone who helped to spread the word about the campaign. We even had the opportunity to appear on BBC News.

As a result of the campaign’s coverage, we are overjoyed to be able to reveal that we have been successful in our attempts to locate one of these lost pieces of significant military history. To our amazement, we found a clicker located in Birmingham, just a short drive from the ACME Whistles factory!

The clicker was found by Diarmid and Liz who discovered it amongst the collection of military items kept by Liz’s father, Captain Geoffrey Kemp Bond (1906 -1997). Speaking about the significant find, they said: “Whilst sorting through Liz’s father’s collections, we came across the clicker and realised what it was. However, until we read the news about ACME’s ‘Search for the Lost Clickers’ – we hadn’t realised how rare they were,” said Diarmid. “It’s great to help save this little part of history for others to enjoy.”

After investigation of other items from the same period in Geoffrey’s collections, Liz and her family were able to place their father in the Normandy region at the time of the D-Day Landings – thanks to notes and memoirs he wrote during the war. Although there is no direct reference to the clicker within his writings, or any indication of how it came into his possession, it clearly indicates Geoffrey arrived in Normandy and was working on the vehicle staging areas during that time.

Our objective at the start of this campaign was to honor the memories of all the brave heroes who fought in World War II as part of the D-Day 75 commemorations by attempting to preserve an extremely rare piece of D-Day history. Thanks to Diarmid and Liz reading about our campaign and reaching out to us, we are now extremely proud to be able to say that one of the few remaining original clickers has found its way back to its factory birthplace and is now part of an ACME Whistles display at our headquarters in Birmingham.

“During the war, the order to produce 7000 clickers would have been Top Secret, so we wouldn’t have been allowed to keep a clicker even if we had wanted to. Therefore, to commemorate the 75th anniversary of D-Day, we put out a search around the world from Europe to America to try and find an original clicker to ensure this part of D-Day history could be kept. Little did we know that we’d find one so close to the factory in Birmingham!”

Simon Topman, Managing Director of ACME Whistles

“My father was an avid collector and interested in history. Stamps were his thing but keeping these military items would have appealed with the view of saving a piece of history. I think the clicker now being displayed back at the factory where it was made would have really put a smile on his face.”

Liz, Daughter of Captain Geoffrey Kemp Bond (1906 – 1997)

Story of Captain Geoffrey Kemp Bond (1906-1997)

Geoffrey Kemp Bond was a schoolmaster at the Royal Masonic Junior School, Bushey, Watford, Hertfordshire prior to being called up for service and went into the Royal Army Ordnance Corps and reported to the Hillsea Barracks, Portsmouth as Private 10583753 in the Spring of 1942. He was originally due to be called up in 1941 but unfortunately broke his ankle very badly playing football with the schoolboys and when call-up did come, which would have been for the North Africa campaign, he was deferred for another year. When he did join up he was amongst the oldest of the recruits and from March to May went to various companies and training camps including Woollaton Park, Nottingham.

In July 1942 he was sent to Chilwell where the job he was given was “chasing” i.e. finding spares and items needed urgently by Military Transport. This is where he gained a wide-ranging knowledge of all the vehicles being built and developed. He then applied for a commission and was transferred to Bicester. There he was trained in all aspects of ordnance procedures – organisation – branches – paperwork and weapons and mock attacks and so on. He passed and was sent to Officer Training School at Repton where he received his commission as a Lieutenant.

He was allocated to Armoured Fighting Vehicle Park divided into A tracked vehicles and B wheeled vehicles – he went into A at this stage and in particular Troop Carriers. It became clear that they were being prepared for the long awaited ‘Second Front’. During this period, he went to Chilwell, Handforth (Cheshire), Craven Arms (waterproofing course – BOSTIK and high steel plates fitted to the sides of vehicles) and a mock battle practice in North Wales.

The unit had all its carriers they expected instinctively to move South, but went to Walton-on-the-Naze for a week (possibly to back up the false rumours of the invasion being in Norway). They were still there when the invasion in Normandy began. After this they were embarked onto a tramp ship at Tilbury to go down the Thames Estuary, through the Dover Straits, and across to the landing beaches. They arrived on about D+8 and he described what he saw as “the biggest jungle of shipping you can imagine”.

They were kept lying at anchor for 2 days before being ordered ashore and told to contact 17 Vehicle Park. It was late in the day when the company of 6 carriers started the slow crawl up the beach where they lined up and stripped off the BOSTIK to stop the engines overheating. He had to wait overnight as he had no instructions where the Vehicle Park was, and the Beach Master had gone off for the night. The next morning they were instructed to go to Bayeux and then turn back to the village of Vaux-sur-Aure where 4 Vehicle Park was to be set up in fields with high hedges and wide dry ditches around them. They could hear the battle for Tilly a few miles away. The REME mechanics prepared the carriers immediately and sent them off loaded with infantrymen to the front.

The Vehicle Park was set up in this field with vehicles as they arrived from the beaches parked down one side and the cookhouse and sleeping tents – set up in the wide ditch – down the other side. They could hear the battle for Tilly getting louder and quieter as it raged on.

Lt Bond’s routine was to go in a Utility vehicle (Tilly for short) and a couple of 3 tonners with drivers to fields near the sea each morning where carriers had been landed and the men drove the carriers back. He observed the Mulberry Harbour being built day by day until the vehicles were able to be driven over pontoon roadways to shore. He described the traffic as being enormous and that a bypass was being built round Bayeux to move the traffic through quickly. He remembers seeing Monty in the main street in Bayeux driving past in an open Staff Car, acknowledging everyone’s salutes with a grin!

Bond was then transferred to B Vehicle Park on the other side of Vaux-sur-Aure and found himself in charge of older men who had been called up from driving lorries and trucks to do the same in France. He was there through to October.

Geoffrey was later sent on behind the army to a vehicle park in Woluwe, Brussels. By the time of the surrender to mark the end of the war, Bond was a Captain and in charge of a MT depot in Twistringen. This involved searching out the dumps of German equipment all over the countryside and storing them together in the MT depot. After demobilisation in 1946, Geoffrey returned to teaching and eventually became a headmaster.

———————–

The small metal life-saving tool was used by troops at Normandy in attempt to determine whether among friend or foe in pitch black conditions. Every paratrooper was issued a clicker and, upon being dropped into darkness on the eve of D-Day, were told to utilize if suspecting someone was near. (On the night of the invasion, only approximately 15% of paratroopers landed in the right location and clearly at a disadvantage.) They were instructed to click once and, if heard two clicks in reply, that meant friend. No response meant something else, Simon Topman noted.

General Maxwell D. Taylor, commander of the American 101st Airborne Division at Normandy, introduced the use of the “cricket” in 1944 for the 101st and would soon discover first hand its value.

“I had my pistol in one hand, my ‘cricket’ in the other… I crept along the hedgerow looking for a gate. Just as I found it, I heard a stir on the other side. I drew my pistol and got all set. Then I heard the click. That was the most pleasant sound I ever heard in the entire war.” ~ General Maxwell D. Taylor, Commander of the 101st Airborne Division.

The “crickets” have since become iconic symbols of the U.S. airborne brotherhood and indeed D-Day itself.

The Managing Director at ACME Whistles said the quiet noise created by the clickers was the “original sound of D-Day” and was a hugely important tool for soldiers to find allies in unfamiliar conditions. The ACME Whistles Birmingham-based factory was given the “top secret” task of making 7,000 clickers, six months prior to D-Day.

————————

This British History once again Marks its Valued Contribution to Allies

in Honoring the 75th Anniversary of D-Day

————————

July 17, 1944

Peggy and 1st Lt. Billie D. Harris (USAF) were married six weeks prior to his deployment in WWII. Billie, a fighter pilot, would fly his last mission on July 17, 1944 over Nazi-occupied northern France. With his plane shot down, he crashed into the woods near a small town in Normandy and did not survive.

Peggy, however, would receive no telegram or a knock on the door, nothing definitive to explain what had happened to her husband during his WWII service. Initially he was reported missing, then alive and coming home, followed by a letter stating he was killed and buried in one cemetery, and then buried in another. “Perhaps those weren’t his remains at all” would soon follow.

For Peggy, it was extremely frustrating and painful as she continued to wait for answers. Months turned into years and years into decades. She wrote repeatedly to her Congressman for answers and the last response in 2005, from the Vice-Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, stated Billie was still listed as “missing in action according to the National Archives,” although their records actually reflect “KIA.”

In the repeated absence of answers denied for decades, Billie’s cousin, Alton Harvey, felt closure was owed Peggy at long last and requested Billie’s service records. In those would be revealed the long awaited history regarding the events and resting place of 1st Lt Billie Harris. He was buried at Colleville-sur-Mer, Normandy, France, in the WWII Cemetery and Memorial honoring American troops who died in Europe. That, however, is not how they first discovered their long-awaited answers and not where the story ends.

After requesting Billie’s service records in 2005, they were told a woman in France had also placed a request. Puzzled, Peggy and Alton contacted her and were informed, by a French citizen 61 years following the death of her husband, that 1st Lt. Harris was buried in Normandy.

Peggy was told the small Normandy town of Les Ventes had named their main road “Place Billie D. Harris” where townspeople have marched every year since 1944 to honor in part his sacrifice. It had been witnessed on that fateful day of Billie’s last mission that he had veered his downed plane into the woods and avoided crashing into the town itself. Out of great respect and gratitude, he was initially buried in their cemetery with honor, prior to his later removal to the American cemetery in Normandy.

Overwhelmed by this news, Peggy was invited to attend a commemoration in honor of her husband by the townspeople. Welcomed with open arms and gratitude, Peggy finally received details forever sought and needed, and the opportunity to at long last view her husband’s grave.

Villagers march along the Place Billie D. Harris 3 times a year, in part for commemoration for Billie’s sacrifice, and still place flowers on his grave to this day. The admiration for her husband is now extended to Peggy and she makes an annual pilgrimage, even visiting the forest of her husband’s crash with the sole remaining witness of that day.

——————————————–

Peggy and Billie’s love story began in 1942. Peggy Harris, a native of Vernon, Texas, was working as an electrical instrument mechanic at Altus Air Force Base. She loved poetry and the opera and would initially hear from 1st Lt. Billie D. Harris, a native of Altus, Oklahoma, via letters sent through his father (her boss and apparent matchmaker). Although she tried to discourage Billie, their letter campaign commenced and continued until finally meeting at a hanger at Altus AFB, they quickly became inseparable.

Although their life together was brief, Peggy would remain forever devoted to her husband and a life-long widow. “Billie was married to me all of his life, and I choose to be married to him for all of mine.”

Since learning of her husband’s burial at Normandy, Peggy sends flowers to adorn his grave ten times a year which includes anniversaries, his birthday, Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day, Veterans Day and Christmas, among others. The staff at the American Cemetery believe she is the last surviving WWII widow visiting her husband’s grave, which has been a comfort denied her for a lifetime.

——————————–

With Deep Respect and Gratitude

For Your Service and Sacrifice

MEMORIAL DAY

2019

——————————–

Like Loading...

Lt Col. Richard E. Cole

1915 – 2019

The last surviving member of the WWII Doolittle Tokyo Raiders has passed away at 103. 2nd Lt Richard Cole was one of 80 airmen volunteering for the highly classified and dangerous operation, April 18, 1942, in retaliation for the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor. Lt Col James H. Doolittle, mission leader, would give the airmen every option to withdraw. All remained steadfast in accepting the inherent danger.

Richard Eugene Cole was born on September 7, 1915, in Dayton, Ohio. Enlisting in the Aviation Cadet Program of the U.S. Army Air Corps on November 22, 1940, he was commissioned a 2nd Lt and awarded his pilot wings at Randolph Field, Texas on July 12, 1941. His first assignment was as a B-25 Mitchell pilot with the 34th Bomb Squadron, 17th Bomb Group at Pendleton, Oregon from July 1941 until selection for the Doolittle mission in February 1942. Lt. Cole would serve as co-pilot to Lt Col Jimmy Doolittle in the lead crew of 16 modified B-25 medium bombers.

Recruited from the Army Air Force, 17th Bombardment Group, the airmen were among the first to receive B-25 medium bombers, integral for the mission, and some of the finest pilots from 35 states. Lt. Col. James H. Doolittle, aviation legend and attack group leader, would oversee the operation and a maneuver never previously attempted – the unprecedented launching of B-25 bombers from a carrier deck, the USS Hornet, off the coast of Japan. Following a mere three weeks of simulated practice, the mission moved forward. Highly cloaked in secrecy, the destination remained unknown to the airmen until briefed at sea.

Passing beneath the Golden Gate on the carrier USS Hornet, as the waves of thousands cheered their departure, the hearts and hopes of a nation sailed for those sacrificed at Pearl Harbor. 10,000 Navy personnel and a task force of ships would deliver 16 B-25 bombers and 80 crewmen within striking distance of Japan. In a high-risk launching of bombers in the western Pacific, they were all prime targets for Japanese forces.

Ultimately detected by the Japanese, hours prior to takeoff and 200 miles further out to sea than dictated, immediate departure in rough seas was required of the airmen. What was always a dangerous mission was now possibly suicidal, as it was doubtful they had sufficient fuel to reach China following their raid. Led by Lt Col James H. Doolittle, 16 B-25 bombers were swiftly launched from the carrier deck of the USS Hornet, weighed down with extra gas and stripped of unnecessary equipment, flying 200 feet above the waves toward the Japanese coast. Their targets were industrial and military installations in Japan with escape to safe-landing destinations in China. With fuel consumption a major concern, as well as threat of anti-aircraft fire and enemy interception, it was a risky endeavor for safe passage of these men.

The raid would claim a sacrifice in return. Although most of the 80 valiant men would survive, one would lose his life in parachuting over China and two by ditching off the China coast. Three of eight airmen, captured by the Japanese, would die by execution. A fourth perished in a Japanese prison as the others endured harsh and extreme confinement. Essentially all 16 bombers inevitably were lost. Of the 15 reaching China, 11 were destroyed during bail-outs and 1 crash-landing, while 3 were ditched at sea. The remaining, seriously low on fuel, was confiscated on landing in Russia and the crew incarcerated.

Following their raid over Tokyo, without incident, the Doolittle crew’s navigator calculated their fuel would land them 180 miles short of the Chinese coast and their safe landing. Their savior was a powerful developing storm with winds from east to west which would propel them over China. They endured the subsequent flying at night in stormy weather until forced to parachute from the plane when their fuel was depleted. Lt. Cole’s ultimate destination was a tree where he spent the night, hanging twelve feet from the ground, until connecting with his safely landed crew members the following morning. Spared from detection and capture by the Japanese, they were rescued by Chinese nationalist forces which ultimately connected them with their remaining Raider crews.

In the aftermath of the raid, the Japanese Army were conducting a massive sweep through the eastern coastal provinces of China. In effort to prevent this part of China from being used again for an attack on Japan. they were searching for surviving American airmen and inflicting retribution on the Chinese who aided them.

Despite the minimal effect of the bombing, the mission proved a definitive success in its reciprocal lesson of vulnerability which took a toll on Imperial Japan and its military strategy. The undertaking by these Raiders, 131 days following the attack on Pearl Harbor, greatly boosted American and Allied morale and would generate strategic benefits for the U.S. in the Battle of Midway with subsequent disaster for the Japanese in the number of ships and pilots lost.

—————–

In long overdue recognition, Doolittle Tokyo Raiders of WWII were honored with a Congressional Gold Medal in 2014. Bestowed for their tremendous valor and sacrifice at a pivotal point in our military history, it is one of our nation’s highest awards. Lt. Richard Cole (below) was the only one of 4 surviving Doolittle Raiders able to witness the legislative signing in an Oval Office ceremony on May 23, 2014.

In full circle of Lt Col Richard Cole’s Air Force career, his memorial was held at Randolph Air Base-San Antonio, the site of earning his wings on July 12, 1941, prior to his February, 1942 acceptance in the raid.

—————

Final Doolittle Raider’s Tradition of Honor

and Legacy of Valor Celebrated at Memorial

Dan Hawkins | Air Education and Training Command Public Affairs | April 19, 2019

The tradition of honor and legacy of valor that defined the life of retired U.S. Air Force Lt. Col. Richard “Dick” E. Cole were celebrated during a memorial service at Joint Base San Antonio-Randolph April 18.

On the day marking the 77th anniversary of the storied World War II Doolittle Tokyo raid and in a hangar surrounded by vintage aircraft linked to the Doolittle Raider’s career, Cole’s family and friends, Air Force senior leaders, and Airmen of all ranks gathered to recognize the accomplishments of the humble warrior from Ohio who answered his nation’s call in America’s darkest days.

Rich Cole, Lt. Col. Cole’s son and a retired U.S. Air Force Lt. Col. like his father, spoke passionately about his father and his willingness to be a wingman and leader, defending his country with his life. “All the (Doolittle Raiders) considered they were doing their job and didn’t expect the adoration they received upon returning home,” Rich Cole said. “One of the greatest lessons my dad imparted on us was that being willing to do something impossible and die for your country was an honorable thing.”

Secretary of the Air Force Heather Wilson talked to those gathered about the strategic importance of the Doolittle Raiders and their risky mission to fly, fight, and win in retaliation against Japan for their surprise attack on Pearl Harbor just months earlier.

“(The Raiders) planned the unthinkable,” Wilson said. “To strike Tokyo from an aircraft carrier…with a land-based bomber. If the 16-ship package had been discovered by Japanese subs, it could have ended what was left of the U.S. fleet in the Pacific.”

Wilson recounted how Cole once described heroes as those “who took risks that brought about important consequences,” but never counted himself among them.

“When America was at its lowest point, it needed a hero,” Wilson said. “(America) found 80 of them who put the country on their back and flew straight into the heart of the enemy. For this, we will never forget.”

U.S. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. David Goldfein told the audience several stories centered on Cole and how unassuming he was about his career, which included becoming one of the first air commandos in the U.S. special operations community, viewing his own place in history simply as someone doing their job as part of the big picture.

“(Cole) and the Doolittle Raiders made the impossible possible since 1942 as pioneers of global strike,” Goldfein said. “On that fateful day, Lt Cole and his fellow wingmen cemented the very notion of joint airpower with the clear statement that America’s Air Force can hold any target at risk anywhere, anytime.”

Acknowledging the Cole family’s loss, the chief of staff spoke to Cole’s significant contributions to our nation’s defense and lifetime place in the Air Force family as “one of the rare giants of the Greatest Generation.”

“(Cole’s) legacy will endure because as long as there is a United States Air Force, Airmen will toast him and his fellow Doolittle Raiders,” Goldfein said. “We are better prepared today to defend our great nation because of him…and because of you.”

American Career Officer

U.S. Army (USAAC, USAAF) 1940-1947

U.S. Air Force 1947-1966

World War II 1941-1945

Cold War 1945-1966

Korean War Theater 1952-1953

Bronze Star

Distinguished Flying Cross (3)

Air Medal (2)

His 1st (of 3) Distinguished Flying Cross Citations reads:

For extraordinary achievement while participating in a highly destructive raid on the Japanese mainland on April 18, 1942. Captain Cole volunteered for this mission, knowing full well that the chances of survival were extremely remote and executed his part in it with great skill and daring. This achievement reflects high credit on Captain Cole and the military services.

—————————–

Lt Col Richard Cole will be buried at Arlington National Cemetery

In Profound Gratitude for your Service

Like Loading...

Capt. John H. “Lucky” Luckadoo

John Luckadoo was born March 16, 1922 in Chattanooga, Tennessee. For John, the climate made it a depressing area to be raised as a boy and he longed to leave one day. Set on the bend of the Tennessee River and surrounded by mountains, the weather would frequently include clouds, rain, and fog. Little did Luckadoo realize, years later, he would experience the same weather in England while in combat as a B-17 pilot.

A sophomore in college when Pearl Harbor was attacked, John yearned to be a pilot and joined the Army Air Corp after acceptance as an Aviation Cadet. Initially on a two-month furlough with so many others in the pipeline, he was finally called early in 1942 to Montgomery, Alabama for six-weeks of pre-flight training and selected as wing adjutant of 4,000 cadets. From there, they were transferred to the base in Avon Park, FL for primary training where he flew the old Steerman Yellow Peril, a PT-17 built by Boeing.

During initial flight training in Florida, Luckadoo was Captain of his Cadet class through Primary, as well as Basic and Advanced. Sent to Shaw Field, SC for Basic training, they received a much more powerful low-wing airplane, the Vultee BT-13, with 450 horsepower in which they learned both night and formation flying.

Luckadoo and his fellow advanced graduate students, less than 30 days out from flight school, were to be assigned as Co-Pilots in the new B-17s for overseas duty. The aircraft was an enormous plane and a quantum leap from the small twin-engine AT-10s flown during advanced training, so it was a pretty rude awakening The huge 4-engine plane with a 10-man crew was mounted with thirteen 50-caliber machine guns and described as a war machine. The flying fortress would protect itself very adequately at high altitude and particularly in mass formation. Nevertheless, it was an overwhelming experience with no prior introduction to the aircraft at all.

At the behest of his pilot who became his instructor, John more quickly learned the operation of the plane and was extremely impressed with the B-17’s capability of flight and its handling characteristics.

2nd Lt. Luckadoo was with the original 100th Bomb Group cadre to arrive in England and the 351st Bomb Squadron based at Thorpe Abbotts. He initially flew 21 missions with the 351st and the Lt. Glenn Dye Crew aboard the “SUNNY,” which was later lost on Sept 03, 1943 when shot down with the crew of Lt Richard King.

Following his 21 missions, Luckadoo was then checked out as a First Pilot and became Operations Officer first for the 351st Squadron and later for the 350th, as well. He would then complete his tour as Captain with Bill DeSanders on 13 February, 1944.

Losses had begun to mount in groups already operational with the newly commissioned Eighth Air Force in England. As the urgency for bomber crews escalated and, with scarcely 80 days in the B-17s, these newly integrated co-pilots of the 100th BG were released and found themselves spanning the North Atlantic, combat bound. With many having precious little time at the controls of the aircraft and sorely lacking in vital information techniques and emergency procedures, formidable risks were inherent. As a consequence, of the nearly 40 members of the class of 43-B who replaced the original co-pilots of the 100th, only 4 completed their combat tours.

In all, this class of pilots actually sustained approximately a 90% loss factor within the first four months the group was operational.

This B-17 F “Sunny II” of the 100th Bomb Group and 351st Bomb Squadron, with its full crew led by Capt. Glenn Dye, presented its freshly painted nose-art. The photo was taken at Thorpe Abbotts, England, in October 1943. The plane would later be lost in crash landing safely with another crew on 30th December, 1943.

In serving as operations officer for both the 351st and later 350th Bomb Squadrons, Luckadoo would become the only Operati