Sarah Clarke

On 16-2-1972 Sarah Clarke (nickname: Sarah) was born in St. Louis, Missouri, United States. She made her 2 million dollar fortune with Twilight, The Signal, Nikita. The actress is married to Xander Berkeley, her starsign is Aquarius and she is now 52 years of age.

Sarah Clarke Facts & Wiki

Where does Sarah Clarke live? And how much money does Sarah Clarke earn?

Birth Date 16-2-1972 Heritage/origin American Ethnicity White Religion - believes in God? Christian Residence She lives together in a house in St. Louis, Missouri, United States.

Sarah Clarke Net Worth, Salary, Cars & Houses

Estimated Net Worth 2 million Dollar Celebrity Net Worth Revealed: The 60 Richest Actresses in 2024 Yearly Salary N/A These Are The 10 Best-Paid Television Stars In The World Colleagues Sarah Wynter & Dennis Haysbert

Houses

Cars

RELATED:These 10 Whopping Homes & Cars Of Celebrities Look Amazing!

Sarah Clarke: Husband, Dating, Family & Friends

Who is Sarah Clarke dating in 2024?

Relationship status Married (Since 2001) Sexuality Straight Current Husband of Sarah Clarke Xander Berkeley Ex-boyfriends or ex-husbands Expecting a baby? She is not pregnant Has any kids? Yes, mother of: Olwyn Harper, Rowan

Will the marriage of American actress Sarah Clarke and current Husband, Xander Berkeley survive 2024?

These Are The 15 Hottest Wives And Girlfriends Of Hollywood!

Family

Names of father, mother, kids, brothers & sisters:

Olwyn Harper Berkeley (Daughter) Rowan Berkeley (Daughter) Carolyn Clarke (Mother) Ernest Clarke (Father)

Height, Weight, Body Measurements, Tattoos, Skin, Hair & Eye Color

This beautiful enigmatic talented intelligent actress originating from St. Louis, Missouri, United States has a athletic body & square face type.

Hair color Regular brown Eye Color Green Height 163 cm Weight 52 kilo Bra-size 34B Feet size N/A Does Sarah Clarke smoke? No, never Caught Smoking: These Are The 60 Most Shocking Celebrity Smokers Does Sarah Clarke have a tattoo? No

These 50 Celebrity Tattoos Went Horribly Wrong

50 Celebrities That Were Caught On Tape Without Makeup On!

Does Sarah Clarke have official Social Media profiles?

Follow this page to stay up to date about the latest gossip and rumors (plastic surgery, scandals, new photos or videos and so on) of Sarah Clarke!

Trending

Lo and behold, this is our Top 60 of celebrities that have been caught smoking or

Celebrities don’t always wear makeup anymore. In fact, many of them lately like to show off

40/ 40Cardi B’s dream mansion in Atlanta rap-up.com After two years of house hunting Cardi B

55/ 55Sean Penn – $70,000,000 via bz-berlin.de Sean is a dinosaur in Hollywood, but he manages

A lot of celebrities do not know what to do with their money anymore in 2022.