In lieu of an abstract, here is a brief excerpt of the content:

554 Book Reviews TECHNOLOGY AND CULTURE Militar und Technik: Schwedmfestungen des 17. Jahrhunderts in den Herzogtiimern Bremen und Verden. By Henning Eichberg. Diisseldorf: Padagogischer Verlag Schwann, 1976. Pp. 331. If necessity is the mother of invention, then military exigencies certainly have contributed to the fertility of this particular mother. The title of Henning Eichberg’s book indicates the relationship be­ tween the military and technology, and the name of the series of which this volume is a part, “Geschichte und Gesellschaft,” provides the framework within which this relationship is to be seen. The author chose both the time and place of his study advisedly. In 1648, as a result of the Treaty of Westphalia, Sweden received Wismar , western Pomerania, the archbishopric of Bremen (without the city of Bremen), and the bishopric of Verden, which enabled the Swedes to control the Oder, the Weser, and the Elbe, the three major rivers in northern Germany. The heyday of Swedish power, which saw the attempt to turn the Baltic Sea into a Swedish lake, lasted until the end of the Great Northern War in 1719-20 when the bishop­ rics passed into the hands of the elector of Hanover, signaling the end of Sweden’s status as a great power. Sweden’s hold was not un­ contested, however, and in order to ward off the Danes and the Hanoverians, the Swedes found themselves compelled to devote a considerable amount of money and effort to erecting, maintaining, and expanding fortifications in their territory. At this time, the Swedes possessed an army which many considered the best in Europe. It was the first national army, boasted the first artillery regiment as a separate unit, and commanded a highly devel­ oped system of fortifications with a well-organized engineer corps which was the equal of the Netherlands and France. Simultaneously, the Swedes had a well-run state bureaucracy which kept extensive and accurate records. These hies, consisting of correspondence, mem­ orandums, inventories, collections of plans, and account books, con­ stitute the foundation of Eichberg’s treatise, supported by an exhaus­ tive secondary bibliography. In addition to the text, Eichberg’s mono­ graph contains over thirty plates of plans and fortifications; tables of expenditures, weights, measures, and currencies; a glossary of mili­ tary technical terms; and a list of all persons mentioned in the text. Several short chapters are devoted to a description of the strategic importance of several smaller towns and the corresponding attempts to fortify them. The fortifications fall into four basic categories: the castle, fortifications around small towns, the fortified city, and the entrenchment. The castles with towers and keeps soon revealed them­ selves inadequate against more modern means of attack, and after 1680 they were allowed to fall into disrepair or were razed. The same fate befell the small towns as their utility became increasingly ques­ tionable. Generally the small systems succeeded in no more than minor delays of enemy forces. While their sum total absorbed a dis­ TECHNOLOGY AND CULTURE Book Reviews 555 proportionate number of enemy troops, this was also true for the forces of the defenders, thereby preventing the formation ofeffective field armies. This fragmentation of forces was responsible for the peculiar strategy of avoiding battle in the 17th century. In France the defect of the system of small forts was recognized by Vauban, who in 1678 called for the razing of numerous fortified places with the ar­ gument that ten fewer forts would result in 30,000 more men for the king. Additionally there was the risk which such forts posed for the erstwhile defenders once they fell into enemy hands. In contrast to these two categories, the entrenchments or fieldworks came into existence less in connection with existing settlements than for strategic reasons of territorial defense. They were thus situated primarily along the river fronts of the Elbe and, to a lesser degree, of the Weser. Often they incorporated the dikes, thereby endangering the safety of the inhabitants behind them. The inside of the fieldworks contained barracks for the soldiers, ranging from ten to twenty men in peacetime in the smaller fortifications to 300 to 400 men in wartime in the larger ones. The men serviced between two...