Best Buddies International, a renowned 501(c)(3) organization, is on a mission to establish a global volunteer movement that fosters one-to-one friendships, integrated employment opportunities, and leadership development for individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities. This nonprofit organization, founded at Georgetown University in 1989, has grown exponentially, with over 3,387 chapters worldwide, including in elementary schools and active in 48 countries. Best Buddies had nearly 122,000 members participating in their programs in 2022, marking a significant increase from the previous year.

Through their unique programs, Middle Schools, High Schools, Colleges, Citizens, and e-Buddies, Best Buddies International creates opportunities for meaningful connections between individuals with and without disabilities. Their Citizens program, in particular, engages adults in one-to-one friendships and group activities that foster a sense of belonging within their communities. With a combination of in-person activities and virtual events, the organization has provided ongoing connections and social opportunities for those facing isolation. Virtual events have allowed for cross-country friendships and collaborations between state offices.

Best Buddies' College program partners with colleges and universities to offer support and expertise in engaging individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities. These partnerships provide valuable opportunities for members to explore career opportunities within the disability services field. Their College program model relies on strong partnerships, allowing for a well-rounded college experience for all students.

The High School program remains the largest Best Buddies school program with 1,535 chapters and 56,855 members worldwide. Student leaders play a more prominent role in the planning and execution of activities, gaining valuable skills in collaboration and delegation. Despite challenges presented by staffing shortages and turnover, Best Buddies High School chapters have continued to thrive and expand, creating life-changing social connections at a crucial time in young people's lives.

Best Buddies Middle School program has maintained growth and positively benefited from expansion efforts at the elementary school level. Every school club is led by two students, one with a disability and one without, and all members are invited to participate in planning and executing events. Staff and chapter advisors continue to use creative, engaging methods to increase engagements and opportunities for chapter members.