Nashville, TN, May 6, 2024 – Best Buddies International, a nonprofit founded in 1989 to establish a global volunteer movement that creates opportunities for one-to-one friendships, integrated employment, leadership development, inclusive living, and family support for people with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD), hosted its 7th Annual Best Buddies’ Celebration of Mothers this past Saturday, May 4, in Nashville, TN. The event celebrated mothers all around the world, with a special focus on the remarkable mothers of Best Buddies participants, paying homage to the gifts of love and friendship they give to their children.

This year held special significance as Best Buddies officially launched its newest mission pillar, Family Support. This initiative offered families the support and resources needed to navigate the journey of raising a child with IDD through the Eunie’s Buddies program, named affectionately in honor of Eunice Kennedy Shriver, founder of Special Olympics and a true hero who advocated tirelessly for positive change in the lives of individuals with IDD.

“Mothers serve as pillars of love, friendship, and strength within their families,” said Anthony Kennedy Shriver, Founder, Chairman & CEO of Best Buddies International. “My mother, Eunice Kennedy Shriver, will always be my hero, and I am thankful for her enduring spirit which guides me in the work I do today on behalf of individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities. Her unending love and guidance inspired our Eunie’s Buddies program. With this initiative, we’re committed to ensuring that families and individuals with IDD receive the support and resources needed to thrive and pursue their dreams just like everyone else.”

The 7th Annual Best Buddies Celebrating Mothers honored Best Buddies’ Mother of the Year — Ellen Boyer. Ellen, founder and president of the Nashville-based Brett Boyer Foundation, showed incredible resilience and compassion. Following the loss of her firstborn, Sadie Brett Boyer, to congenital heart disease, Ellen and her husband Bo turned their grief into action, focusing on funding CHD research, supporting affected families, and promoting inclusion within the Down syndrome community. Their partnership with Best Buddies since 2018 had enriched lives and spread hope through their generous contributions and unwavering support.

Guests enjoyed delectable cocktails, a gourmet lunch, and special live musical performances by country singer-songwriter Sarahbeth Taite, and Grammy-winning and Emmy-nominated songwriter Desmond Child, who performed with Best Buddies Ambassador Marlana VanHoose, an acclaimed singer who captivates audiences with her powerful and soulful voice, while Buddy Ambassadors Fran Sheinberg and Olivia DeCaria moved the crowd with inspirational speeches. Guests also enjoyed beautiful floral arrangements from bouquet box, an ice cream mixing station provided by Cold Stone Creamery, and other fun family fun and activities such as axe throwing, and a build-a- bear station. Philanthropists and Best Buddies celebrity supporters alike joined Best Buddies’ Founder,

Anthony Kennedy Shriver, to generate even greater awareness of the organization’s mission of inclusion for people with intellectual and developmental disabilities.