Waterford FC is delighted to welcome Clonmel Town FC to our Club Partnership Programme. Clonmel Town FC are one of Munster’s most successful clubs winning the Munster Youth Cup, Munster Junior Cup and the FAI Junior Cup along with many schoolboy, youth and junior league titles in the TSDL League and the TSSDL League.

Historically, there has been many players from Clonmel Town who have played with Waterford down through the years and with other League of Ireland clubs. Sean Kiely, Billy Lambe, Billy Byrne, Maurice Slater, Tommy Hewitt, Martin Quinlivan, Glen Conway, Tony Scully, Paul Scully, Aaron Moroney, and Kevin Waters have all donned the Clonmel Town and Waterford shirt. Other famous Clonmel Town/League of Ireland players include Stephen Napier and Ollie Cahill.

Many famous Waterford FC players have also been involved in coaching and management at Clonmel Town FC over the years including the late Shay Brennan (RIP) and Al Casey (RIP), Peter Bryan and Dave Kirby. Clonmel Town have a thriving underage academy with teams running from Under-7 up to mens at the Dr Pat O’Callaghan Sports Complex.

Welcoming Clonmel Town FC into the Club Partnership Programme, Waterford FC Director of Football Pat Fenlon commented:

“We are delighted to welcome Clonmel Town FC on board to our Club Partnership Programme. Clonmel Town FC are one of the strongest clubs in Munster and cater for a big population and are always producing really talented young players. There has always been a big connection between Waterford and Clonmel over the years and it’s great to formally have Clonmel Town FC on board with us as one of our partner clubs. This year we have Jack O’Donnell who joined our 17s from Clonmel Town.

“Clonmel is a real sports mad town with football very popular and we see this as a great opportunity to help Clonmel Town FC and Waterford FC through this club partnership. It is a fantastic opportunity to promote League of Ireland football in Clonmel and hopefully start to get more people from Clonmel and the surrounding areas to come down and watch League of Ireland football at Waterford FC.”

Gary Power, Waterford FC’s Head of Youth Development also added:

“We are delighted to welcome Clonmel Town to our new Club Partnership Programme and we will be adding more clubs from across the region over the next few days and weeks ahead so it is a real exciting initiative and one we think will be very positive for all.”

Some benefits include: