By Marcus Cavaroli

SHELBOURNE’S Ollie Cahill could become a Drogheda United player tomorrow when he returns from holidays in the United States.

The 31-year-old Clonmel-born winger has already passed a medical and looks certain to link up with former team-mate Stuart Byrne as Drogheda strengthen their squad for a serious assault on the league title next season.

Yesterday, however, manager Paul Doolin was still adopting a wait-and-see approach.

‘I never like to say anything until I have someone signed,’ he said.

‘I spoke to Ollie before he went, he has been checked over and we are happy enough, but anything could happen.

‘If there’s something funny in the American air, it might do something to his head and he could go somewhere else.’

Byrne believes former Cork City and Northampton Town player Cahill would be a great addition to the panel, saying: ‘He was fantastic at Shels.

‘We were there the exact same length of time and there’s a very good understanding between the two of us on and off the pitch.’

Doolin is bemused about speculation linking him with a move for experienced Sligo Rovers centre-half Liam Burns.

The Drogs look well covered in that area, with Jason Gavin and Graham Gartland the favoured partnership and Steven Gray and Brian Shelley both well capable of occupying one of the central positions, although squad member Derek Tyrrell recently left the club to seek regular first-team football with Bray Wanderers.

Doolin said: ‘I didn’t see that story. We’re okay for centre-halves and maybe he is just trying to up the ante with Bohemians. We wouldn’t be interested.

‘I am still looking for a left-sided player and one other who can maybe play in two positions, but I don’t want to buy anyone for the sake of it.’

Doolin said details of pre-season friendlies and a possible pre-season trip abroad would be finalised in the next couple of weeks.

However, Dundalk said yesterday that the annual Jim Malone Cup match against Drogheda would go ahead at Oriel Park on Tuesday February 20, the week before the Drogs welcome Linfield to United Park in their Setanta Sports Cup opener.