Ollie Cahill is poised to sign for Shelbourne this week according to a report in The Star this morning.

The Cork City winger has been linked with a move to Tolka Park for several weeks and, after Cork's disappointing season, he may feel that the time is right to leave Turner's Cross.

Cahill signed for the Leesiders in 1996 from English side Northampton Town and he is considered by many to be the best left-winger in the eircom League.

Who will manage at Tolka Park is another matter. After Dermot Keely's resignation, a possible return of Roddy Collins to the National League has not been ruled out.

The former Bohemians boss was sacked as Carlisle United manager at the weekend when he made comments that upset the English club's board. It seems Collins has not learned from his experiences at Dalymount Park.

However, if John Courtenay takes over at Carlisle, Collins will return. But current owner Micheal Knighton was expressed doubt that the Irish businessman can realise his aim.

Knighton's solicitor said: "Mr Courtenay has still to confirm that his funds are available to complete the deal."

If Collins should take over at Shels, he could well be joined by Trevor Molloy and possibly Brian Shelley, both of whom will leave Bohs this summer.

EL.net

Shelbourne are all set to complete the signing of Cork City winger Ollie Cahill on Friday.

Mike Scully confirmed in The Mirror yesterday that the Clonmel man had already passed a medical and he will become one of a growing band of full-time players at Tolka Park.

Cork had been hoping that Cahill would stay. The winger admitted in February, however, that he was considering leaving. "The next contract I sign will be the most important and I want to see what my options are before I make up my mind," he said.

Cahill signed for the Leesiders in 1996 from English side Northampton Town and he is considered by many to be the best left-winger in the eircom League.

This will be a huge blow to City, and in particular the club's new owner, Brian Lennox. The Munster club is not entitled to a fee as Cahill's contract has expired.

This could be a devastating blow to city. Obviously I would love Ollie to stay with city but had he gone to Hibs or Kilmarnock I would have shook his hand and wished him all the best. However, if he goes to $hel$ I dont think I will ever be able to forgive him. Still lets hope he has a last minute change of heart and stays in Cork.