``We've sold our allocation of tickets and I think it's going to be like a home game for us. It should be a great occasion.''

Clonmel-born Cahill is now in his second season at Turner's Cross after coming home from Northampton in 1996.

He went to The Cobblers after starring for Clonmel Town in their FAI Junior Cup win over New Ross in 1994.

``I was over there on trial for two-and-half-weeks and they signed me on. John Barnwall was the manager at the time and during the first six months I played 12 games.

``But then John was let go and Ian Atkins came in as manager and things changed a lot for me. I played just two games in 18 months and, needless to say, I wasn't happy with that. So I came home.''

After talking to Dundalk and Galway United he accepted an invitation to sample life at Cork City and has thoroughly enjoyed it.

``I have absolutely no regrets. I have settled in really well with Cork City.

``Dave Barry has been very good to me and he likes to play the game the way I think it should be played.''

Barry admits to being a big fan of the Tipperary flyer.

``Ollie has been outstanding for us, not only this year but last season as well.

``He is one of the few really exciting players in the National League at present. Every time he gets on the ball the crowd starts buzzing.''

Cahill was a deserving winner of the Soccer Writers' Opel Player of the Month Award in December and has been one of the driving forces behind Cork City's run to this season's Harp Lager FAI Cup semi-finals.

Cork have had a tough path to the last four. In the first round they beat Bohemians in Dalymount Park and then, after drawing in Cork, went to the Brandywell and beat Derry City.

Those two games were won courtesy of own goals from Bohs Donal Broughan and Derry's Robbie Brunton and Cahill admits that he began thinking about Cork's name being on the cup after those incidents.

``It does cross your mind. Donal Broughan's was a crazy own goal but we did deserve to win both games.''

In the quarter-final they ended Sligo Rovers 16 match unbeaten run at Turner's Cross and while Athlone will be the first non-Premier Division side Cork will face, Cahill is treating them with respect.

``Some of the lads who played with Cobh have come up against them, so we know they are a decent team.

``I understand the pitch is very tight but we'll have plenty of support with us.

``We will definitely be treating them with respect. They've already beaten Shamrock Rovers and last year Galway United beat us in the League Cup final over two legs so we definitely won't be taking them for granted.

``Losing Colin O'Brien and Johnny Glynn is a big blow to us. Colin has been one of our best players this season while Johnny did really well when he came in, scoring two goals in two games and holding the ball up really well.

Cahill has already scored seven goals, two more than last season, but is still looking for his first Cup goal.

``Saturday night would be a nice time to get it, but I'll take a Cork win,'' he said.

Meanwhile, the FAI could be facing a major problem with the venue for this year's Cup final.

AS it stands, the May 10 final will take place at Tolka Park if Finn Harps win Saturday night's semi-final against Shelbourne. If Shels win, the final will be played at Dalymount Park.

The FAI's Cup Committee are scheduled to meet next week following this weekend's semi-finals and a rethink may be on the cards.

Sources in Donegal maintain that Harps will bring in excess of 10,000 supporters to the Cup final if they qualify.

With the capacity of Tolka Park being only 9,100, a major headache is on the cards for the Cup Committee.

While Dalymount Park is the obvious alternative, it is understood that Lansdowne Road is not yet out of the equation.