1900

Clonmel played Cork County ( now Cork Con ) in the Munster Senior Cup, on that team were the Two famous Cashel Brothers Mick and Jack Ryan ( who were on the Irish triple crown winning team of 1899 ), also Roger Nugent father of Dolphie and Grand father of our current treasurer Ned Nugent, Stephen Keating from Marlfield and John Scully of Fethard also Charlie Dillon whose grandson Andy is still very much to the fore in the Club as are Andy's two sons Eddie and John.

1912

Rugby became dormant

1924

Revival of Club by Frank Murphy and Denis Burke, Rodger Cleary, Micky Ryan, ( Uncle of Jack ) and they played at Kane's Field now Esso and Telcom.

1929

Saw two of Clonmel's most dynamic members in the persons of Bill McEntyre ( Mgr. Of B.O.I. ) and Edward Ryan ( Mgr. Of National Bank ) who had an unbroken run as President for 20 years

1933

Clonmel won first Garryowen Cup under Captain Jackie Lonergan also on team were Joe Fennessy, David Lonergan and Christy Heffernan

1937

They played in the Show grounds

They had their best period in the years of 1937 to 1940 when they won 6 cups the Manseragh and Garryowen Cups .

In the years 1937 and 1939 they won the double with David Lonergan Captain in '37 and John Smyth '39.

On that squad you had Davy Lonergan, Joe Fennessy, John and Davy Smyth, Jim Byrne, Denis Lowry , Pat O 'Shea, Rodger Coffey, D. Lalor, J, Fogarty, Usna Treacy, T. Harnick , T. Leonard, K. Keoghane, Vinny Healy

1942

They won both again and Squill Cahill was on that team and he is still hale and harty I had a pint with him in Eldons on Sunday last .

The Club had a lean period for a few years after this .

1948

A second team was formed in the late forty's by Barry O'Donovan and David Lonergan

1951

The Tipperary Branch started a Second's Cup called the Evans Cup for Second teams only.

1954

Clonmel's second team won the Evans Cup for the first time

On that team were Con O'Connell , D. Burke , Eddie Dillon and Frank Kent Captain

1961

The Garryowen and the Manseragh Cups were won again in 1961 and on that squad was Eldon Morris, Chris McGrath, Alan Normile, Michael Carey, Jack Ryan, Andy Dillon, Cyril Burke, J.Kennedy, J. White, George Mossop, Steve Bradshaw, John O'Donoghue , T. Kearns, S. McGuinness, W. Burke, Frank Waldron, D. Moloughney.

1962

The Club was disbanded for a few years after this

1968

The Club was reformed

The driving force at that time was the late Tom Reilly, also on that committee was Barry O 'Donovan, Mick Kelly, Tom Fennessy, Paul Lonergan, Michael Reilly and Cyril Burke.

The games were played in the back of Tom Reillys house in Marlifield for a number of years

Players who started were Michael Reilly, Peter Reilly, Tom Fennessy, Paul Lonergan, Tony Leo, Michael O'Brien, Terry Sullivan, Bill Good

1969

Clonmel won first match ( A discussion was heard at the bar of Hearns Hotel between Tom Reilly and Mick Kelly as follows ' Mick when Clonmel win their first match I'll bring you out to dinner and the reply , Tom when Clonmel score their first TRY I'll bring you ' )

Clonmel played Carrick on the lawn in Marlifield on 4 - 10 - 69 and recorded their first win since they reformed by 22 points to 6

Scorers for Clonmel were Paul Lonergan, Tom Fennessy, Adrian Logue, Phil Carroll, Bill Good and Michael O' Brien, John Carey converted one of the trys.

1970

Squad of players that year were Terry O' Sullivan, Tony Sheahan, Peter Collins, J, Griffin, Adrian Logue, Tony Leo, Paul Lonergan, John Kirwan, Brendan Cleary, Bill Good, Peter Reilly, Michael Reilly, Noel Fanning, Michael O'Brien, Joe O' Sullivan

1972

History was made with the purchase of the Clubs first field from Gerald Nugent up in Ardgeeha

1973

Squad of players that year were Peter Collins, Alex Casey, Paul Lonergan, Adrian Logue, Tony Leo, Brendan Ryan, Frank Dorgan, Paul Morris, Tom Fahey, John Kennedy, Jimmy Harney, Willie Kennedy, Matt Forrest, Edwan Bradshaw, Ollie Fitzpatrick, Billy Shoer.

1976

Club House was built and dressing rooms

Tom Fahey was seriously injured playing for the first team Tom died three years later as a result of his injuries

1980

Won Ballyrandle cup with Phil Corby captain

1985

Won Casey Cup with Alex Casey as captain

Our under 14's won the Tipperary Cup with Timmy Normile as captain also on that squad was Conor Morris, Brian Hanley, Conor Sweetman, Chris McGrath, John Dillon, Bobbie Boland, John Hannifan, Brian Keating, Stephen Kellegher, Martin Carey, Neil Bourke

1986

Won Gleeson Cup and Ballyrandle Cup with John Joy as Captain and the 3rd team won the A.I.B. Cup with Billy Shoer as Captain.

1990

Opened New Club House with the visit on the first ever Soviet Rugby team to Ireland.

Won the Curran Cup with Billy Burke as Captain

1991

Won the Manseragh Cup after a period of 30 years with Billy Burke as Captain also on that squad were John Dillon, Kevin Cronin, Stephen Kellegher, David Cantwell, Michael Brigges, Paul Garreth, Eddie Dillon, Billy Dwyer, Niel Bourke, Bill Bradley, Michael Fitzgerald, Tommy Bowles, Maurice Maloney, Paul McGrath, Steve McEvoy, Paddy Ryan, Timmy Normile, Anthony Wall, Sean O'Loughlin

1992

Centenary year

Brought over London Irish to play Shannon in a game played in Clonmel

Won promotion to second division

2000

Manseragh Cup winners with David Slayttery at Captain