The Black Crowes Booking Profile

The Black Crowes are an American rock band formed in 1989. Their discography includes nine studio albums, four live albums and several charting singles. The band was signed to Def American Recordings in 1989 by producer George Drakoulias and released their debut album, Shake Your Money Maker, the following year. The follow-up, The Southern Harmony and Musical Companion, reached the top of the Billboard 200 in 1992. After a hiatus between 2002 and 2005, the band released Warpaint, which hit number 5 on the Billboard chart. After the release of a double album, the greatest hits-like and mostly acoustic Croweology in August 2010, the band started a 20th anniversary tour. The band has opened for various rock including Heart, Robert Plant, Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, the Dave Matthews Band, the Grateful Dead, Aerosmith and ZZ Top. The band has sold over 30 million albums, and is listed at number 92 on VH1’s “100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock”. Among their top hits include songs, “Hard to Handle”, “She Talks to Angels”, “Twice as Hard”, “Thorn in My Pride”, and “Wiser Time”.

SME Entertainment Group (a Live Nation Company) is your leading source for booking entertainment and booking keynote speakers

SME Entertainment Group (“SME”) is an event producer working with corporations and leading associations around the world to provide musical acts, comedians, and all types of keynote speakers for talent booking services for corporate events and private events. With SME book The Black Crowes for live and virtual events and special engagements. SME Entertainment Group specializes in booking keynote speakers and booking entertainment for special engagements and corporate events, private events, virtual events, charity events, advertising agencies, and production companies. SME is a leading producer that works in a non-exclusive manner coordinating with talent agencies for corporate events and private events. The profiles on the site represent talent SME can book for your next event. SME works on behalf of event coordinators and event planners for booking talent and booking keynote speakers. Please contact an SME sales representative to book talent for your next event.