In the border city of Carlisle, one landmark stands out above all others, sat on a hill in the city centre. The Cathedral Church of the Holy & Undivided Trinity is a stunning building in the middle of the historic city centre, and there is plenty to discover inside…

Holy & Undivided Trinity:

Location: Carlisle, City of Carlisle District, Cumbria (historically Cumberland), England

Status: Cathedral

Faith: Church of England

Constructed: circa 1122

Architect: Various

Our story begins back in 1122 as it was around this time that the building was founded as an Augustinian Priory, built out of Red Sandstone. Incidentally this is quite interesting, as it is one of only four such buildings that would be upgraded to Cathedrals. The building was begun by a man named Aethelwold (died 1156), and after the Church was upgraded to Cathedral status a decade later, he became the first Bishop of Carlisle, from 1133 to 1153.

100 years later the Cathedral was surrounded by two friaries, a Dominican Friary and a Franciscan Friary, which were both founded slightly further out in what would become the City Centre, near the West Coast Main Line station today. During 1307 Edward I (1239 – 1307) visited the Cathedral, and because of this the building received a refurbishment over the next century. Whilst the Cathedral has survived the main centuries from its conception to the modern day, the friaries were not so lucky, and after King Henry VIII pursued the Dissolution of the Monasteries from around 1536, the friaries ceased to have any function, and the Cathedral stood alone. As I said the Cathedral survived through many centuries, but it lost an important section of itself when the English Civil War hit Carlisle between 1642 and 1651. The Castle and City Walls were in need of repair, and the easiest way to do this was to remove stone from the Cathedral to patch up the other defences. The original Nave of the building, shown at the back of this picture, was once much longer, but a large portion of it was demolished for the stone by the Scottish Presbyterian Army. If you look at the stone work on the side of the surviving Nave as well you can tell that it has been patched up with new materials, presumably where extra stonework was taken.

Various restorations of the Cathedral have followed, including between 1853 and 1870 when Ewan Christian (1814 – 1895, British Architect, who also designed the National Portrait Gallery in London) helped to restore the building.

The main entrance to the Cathedral is at the end of the South Transept, and as you walk in the shop/information office is directly to your right. Moving straight ahead you will enter the space between the Transepts, with the Tower high above. Supposedly the tower once had a spire, which blew down at some point before 1420. If you turn to the left, this is the view that greets you. The Nave is a stunning area of the Cathedral, and the place where I shall start our virtual tour.

It contains a font in the centre, and the beautiful West Window behind it. This is one of a number of windows around the Cathedral designed by John Hardman, a manufacturer of Stained Glass from Birmingham, which also includes the East Window which we shall get to in a minute.

A chandelier hangs from the ceiling, and this area happens to be the shortest Nave of any Cathedral in England. Usually the Nave is the main portion of the Church, but as noted above this was demolished for other uses, leaving the Chancel as the more prominent part of the building. Within the Nave there is a Chapel of the Border Regiment, set into one of the two bays that remain, one on either side.

Moving towards the Chancel, this is the view you see as you enter the Cathedral, looking from the South Transept into the North. It’s most notable feature is the Tait Memorial Window , which features 5 of the 7 daughters of Dean Archibald Campbell Tait. Sadly they all died within 33 days from March to April in 1856, all aged under 11, of an infection. The 2 other children survived and moved with their parents to London when the Dean became the Bishop of London. They are actually buried in Stanwix Graveyard elsewhere in Carlisle, where a memorial also sits.

Beneath the window is the Bishops Court, which was a miniature courtroom, with the central panels behind the Altar and the pews on either side for people attending the session. The main panels are called the Brougham Triptych, which was built in 1520, in the Belgian city of Antwerp, and it contains the mark of the Antwerp Guild of Woodcarvers. It is called the Brougham Triptych as it previously inhabited St Wilfred’s Chapel in Brougham, after it was bought by Baron Brougham from a church in Cologne in the 1840’s. At some point it moved to Carlisle. A Triptych is made up of three carved panels together, as shown above.

These types of Court are also known as a “Consistory Court” and were established by King William I (1028 – 1087, AKA William the Conqueror) and this is a great example of the court. Others exists in the other Diocese’s around the country, with the most complete example being in Chester Cathedral, in the city of Chester. Whilst today these courts mainly discuss matters relating to the buildings themselves and facilities contained within, they can take members of the Church below the rank of Bishop to court for misconduct.

The Chancel is by far the most impressive part of the Cathedral, and the largest. It stretches all the way up to the East Window at the far end, which sits above the main altar. A fire badly damaged the building in 1292, and the window dates to the rebuild afterwards, from around 1350. It is a staggering 50 feet tall, and you can tell by the size of the people stood below how large it looks. As it happens, it is the largest such window in the whole of England, and sits 26 feet wide. There are two main sections of Glass, with the top half being original glass, showing the Last Judgement of Christ, with the lower portion showing the Lift of Christ. This portion was built Hardman & Co (John Hardman), around 1861, in memory of Bishop Hugh Percy (1784 – 1856, Bishop of Rochester and Carlisle).

The area at the front of the picture is the Choir, which was installed before at least 1545, with space for six chorus boys. This has been expanded to include space for 16 male and 16 female choristers, along with 6 clerks. The beautiful wooden sections are from the aforementioned 1545, but the actual choir of singers dates back to 1133, when there were 4 laymen and 6 male choristers. A laymen is a “non-ordained member of a Church”.

The Choir area was built in the 13th century, and damaged by the subsequent fire leading to a rebuild from 1322 until 1350. On the back of the wooden stalls are a series of painted panels, depicting various religious scenes. The Labours of the Months, 12 scenes depicting different labours from the 12 months of the years, are carved into the capitals of 12/14 pillars in the Choir area. A capital is a carved section at the top of the pillar. You can see a slideshow of the 12 pictures here.

Turning to look back at the far end of the Choir, the stunning wooden spires above the 46 seats are visible, beneath the impressive Cathedral Organ. Whilst the earliest records for a physical Organ date back to 1571, an actual Organist wasn’t employed until 1650 when a man named Thomas Southick was hired.

The current Organ was built in 1856, by Henry Willis (1821 – 1901, British Organ builder from London) and it was a revolutionary design at the time. It was later enlarged in 1875, and again in 1906. I am unsure of it’s original position within the building, but it was moved here in 1930. It has been rebuilt twice since then, first in 1962 by J. W. Walker & Sons Ltd, a British firm from 1828 established by Joseph William Walker, and again in 1997 when David Wells gave it a more Victorian tone.

Our favourite part of the Cathedral is the ceiling, above the Chancel, Choir, East Window and main Altar. It’s a masterpiece and one of the most colourful ceilings we have seen inside a religious building, which are usually just wood or stone.

The structure of timbers was erected around 1400, after the fire that destroyed many of the previous wooden timbers. The patterns on it are much newer however, and were only added between 1853 and 1856, by an artist called Owen Jones (1809 – 1874). It was repainted in 1970, and it looks stunning, and it really stands out so that you can see every detail. Its amazing how much detail has gone into each panel, and although they all look the same they come together to create a fantastic pattern.

This is a close up view of the Chancel, with the chairs on either side. Just behind where I am standing is the Bishops Throne, with a golden Eagle Lectern in front of it. The sun shines brilliantly through the East Window, illuminating this whole section of the building. Its humbling entering the Chancel, as although Carlisle Cathedral is the 2nd smallest of the ancient Cathedrals around England (after Christ Church in Oxford) it has one of the most amazing views entering this area of the Cathedral.

Located in the North and South Aisles of the Choir, behind the wooden stalls, are a number of tombs, with perfectly sculpted figures adorning the tops of them. This particular one is for Francis Close (1797 – 1882), who was the Dean of the Cathedral for 25 years between 1856 and 1881. The statue on top is made out of Marble, and looks almost saintly, and it was glowing slightly earlier in the sunlight.