Kate Classic Film:

LOVE AFFAIR

Tuesday, October 18, 2pm & 7pm

Kate’s last film role, this 1994 remake of the original 1939 movie of the same name was directed by Glenn Gordon Caron. Although they are each engaged to other people, Mike (Warren Beatty) and Terry (Annette Bening) fall for each other. They agree to meet in NYC three months later, but tragedy strikes on the day of their reunion, resulting in Terry's hospitalization, and unknown to Mike. Can the star-crossed lovers finally find each other?

Shown on the Kate's BIG Screen!

JONATHAN EDWARDS

Friday, October 21, 8pm

Warm as summer sunshine, real as the truth, intimate as a long overdue visit between old friends ... such is a Jonathan Edwards concert. Four decades into a stellar career of uncompromising musical integrity, the man simply delivers, night after night - songs of passion, songs of insight, songs of humor, all rendered in that pure and powerful tenor which, like fine wine, has only grown sweeter with age.

Met in HD:

DON GIOVANNI

Saturday, October 22, 12:55pm

Three charismatic singers, Simon Keenlyside, Ildar Abdrazakov, and Mariusz Kwiecien, share the role of the title hero, who goes to hell in a dazzling coup de théâtre. The ensemble of great Mozartean singers includes Isabel Leonard, Angela Meade, Matthew Polenzani, Marina Rebeka, Erwin Schrott, Ramón Vargas, and RolandoVillazón. Fabio Luisi and Plácido Domingo conduct.

Shown on the Kate's BIG Screen!

Runtime 3h45m

TOMMY FLEMING

Saturday, October 22, 8pm

BUY 1 GET 1 FREE*!

*Use discount code TOMMY at checkout

Tommy Fleming has many times been described as the “Voice of Ireland” and is one of Ireland’s top entertainers with over 5 million Youtube hits and over 3 million album sales worldwide. Tommy is famous for his own arrangement of “Danny Boy”, “Isle of Inisfree” and “Hard Times” all songs that you know and love but you have never heard them until you hear Tommy Fleming’s versions.

Bolshoi Ballet in HD:

THE GOLDEN AGE

Sunday, October 23, 12:55pm

In a seaside town where business and mafia are flourishing, The Golden Age cabaret is the favorite nightly haunt of dancers, bandits and young revelers, where the young fisherman Boris falls in love with Rita, a beautiful dancer, but also the friend of a local gangster…

Shown on the Kate's BIG Screen!

Runtime 2h20m

Ann Nyberg REMEMBERING KATHARINE HEPBURN Book Launch

Sunday, October 23, 4:30pm

The Katharine Hepburn Cultural Arts Center is thrilled to welcome Ann for the launch of her new book, with proceeds to benefit the Kate’s diverse programming and community arts engagement. A ticket to the event will include a signed copy of Remembering Katharine Hepburn, a welcoming reception with light snacks and wine, a reading with Ann and conversations about the book, and will conclude with a book signing with Ann. Come meet Ann and celebrate her new book with us at the Kate!

See all of our upcoming shows and buy tickets on our website: www.thekate.org

You can also call the Kate Box Office at 860.510.0453 and order your tickets over the phone

Our box office is open from 10am - 4pm, Tuesday - Friday AND 1 hour prior to every performance.