Love Affair (dir. Glenn Gordon Caron, 1994)

Crowdcast, Saturday 21 November 2020, 2pm GMT

Running time: 1hr 48

Rating: 12

Tickets: Pay what you feel

THIS EVENT HAS ALREADY HAPPENED

Join us for this watch-along of Love Affair (1994) introduced by festival director Charlotte Crofts joined by Ross Wilcock and Fern Dunne.

English Captions made with the help of UWE Filmmaking student Charlotte Butler Blondel. Timed transcript available here.

Warren Beatty (Mike Gambrill, the Nickie Ferrante character) stars and produces this third iteration of the Love Affairs to Remember films, opposite Annette Bening (Terry McKay) and Katharine Hepburn (Ginny/Ginou), in her last screen performance, and an amazing, underrated score by the late Ennio Moriccone.

Part of the Love Affairs to Remember Marathon

You can also catch-up or watch again on our Crowdcast Channel where you can see the full live chat.

What is a “watch-along screening”?

Sadly we can’t actually stream films due to distribution rights, but we aim to create a sense of togetherness in isolation through sharing our love of Cary Grant. Before the start of the screening you need to source your own copy of the film and cue it up ready to play. After a brief 5-10 minute introduction on CrowdCast we will count down and all press play at the same time. The CrowdCast will end and we’ll watch-along together using the #CaryStaysHome hashtag on Twitter and Instagram @carycomeshome.

Viewing options:

Amazon Prime UK £3.49

Amazon Prime USA $3.99

What is “Pay what you feel”?

We want to make our events accessible whatever your budget, but for those that can afford it, we’d really appreciate it if you can give generously to keep the festival afloat in these difficult times.

We rely on ticket sales as our main source of income, but Covid-19 has made this impossible this year, creating a huge shortfall in our finances. We’re a biennial festival so we’re hoping by 2022 we’ll be able to return to live events, but in the meantime we’re determined to celebrate Cary Grant as best we can virtually. If you’ve enjoyed watching this event, please consider donating.

You might also be interested in….

Celebrating Bristol’s status as a UNESCO City of Film, in recognition of the city’s vibrant screen heritage, of which Cary Grant is one of our brightest stars.