About This Episode:

Bjørn Andreas Bull-Hansen is a Best Selling Norwegian Novelist. He has written in many genres, but is now working on his ongoing Jomsviking series. It was an overnight success in Norway and was almost instantly sold to several countries.

Bull-Hansen was born in Oslo, Norway, in 1972, and grew up in a suburb that was, at the time, quite rural. And here comes a big cliché: it was not a very happy childhood. He spent most of his youthful years excluded from social interaction with other kids his age. However, growing up in isolation makes one a good observer. Spending the majority of his time alone, Bull-Hansen began building imaginative worlds and learning about Norse mythology at a very early age. He knew he wanted to be an explorer, an actor, or a novelist.

Then came the game changer. Bull-Hansen started lifting weights when he was 13 years old, and after never being very good at sports, he discovered he could do things very few 13-year-olds could! It gave Bull-Hansen the confidence to lift his head and to start pursuing his dreams. Unfortunately, while nearing the completion of his economics studies, Bull-Hansen was in a car accident. Bull-Hansen was back in the gym only 7 days after the accident. However, due to neurological trauma, parts of his neck and shoulders were numb and Bull-Hansen lost his place on the Norwegian Junior Powerlifting team. He was 23.

Unwilling to accept defeat, Bull-Hansen turned to his other passion – writing. Already having been writing for 6 years, he submitted his first manuscript to a publisher, and his first book was published after only a few months.

Several years later, Bull-Hansen experiences a major breakthrough as an international author with the critically acclaimed Jomsviking. Still, Bull-Hansen chooses to live his life with a steadfast conviction to his own virtues, all of which are grounded in Viking culture. Now a father and living on a fjord once ripe with vicious and deadly battles, with the history of his people at his feet, Bull-Hansen’s connection with his past is awoken each time he steps outside his home or is on the water in his sailing yacht.

Find out more about Bjørn at:

Interview with Edwin Dearborn

Bjørn’s Website

What Really Happened in Wuhan A Virus Like No Other, Countless Infections, Millions of Deaths

Bjørn’s Youtube Channel

???? READ FULL TRANSCRIPT⬇ [spp-transcript]

Check out our YouTube Channel:

Jeremyryanslatebiz

See the Show Notes:

https://jeremyryanslate.com/921

Watch the FULL Video Episode:

Sponsors:

Gusto: This episode is sponsored by Gusto. Run your payroll the easy way, the same way we do at Command Your Brand. You’ll get a $100 Amazon Gift Card just for running your first payroll! https://jeremyryanslate.com/gusto

MyPillow: Use the promo code: CYOL to get up to 60% off https://www.mypillow.com/

Audible: Get a free 30 day free trial and 1 free audiobook from thousands of available books. Right now I’m reading “What Really Happened in Wuhan: A Virus Like No Other, Countless Infections, Millions of Deaths” by Sharri Markson https://jeremyryanslate.com/book