"Our story tells of the men of the Los Angeles police department, whose job it is to keep us from killing ourselves." From the director of the better part of the Lassie series, Fred M. Wilcox, comes a gritty police procedural noir about a group of white men trained to kill us and then make us believe it was our fault and/or for our own good. I'd rather a Rough Collie was patrolling my neighbourhood than a rough Ralph Meeker, he of the sleaze around ready-to-hand women and the sneer around institutional accountability. The ending is downright chilling, all the more so because it wasn't intended that way.

Code Two, a movie that I was completely unfamiliar with prior to purchasing it on DVD a few days before watching it, is actually two movies in one. The first, which goes on far too long, is a completely inoffensive, if occasionally dull, semi-documentary film about three recruits at the Los Angeles Police Academy. The story follows the three men as they transition from civilians to motorcycle cops working in the Traffic Division. There’s really nothing particularly wrong with this portion of the movie. But there’s no compelling reason for it to exist, either. That is, unless you are really – and I mean really – interested in police motorcycles.

Now on to the second movie, so to speak. This…

Fred M. Wilcox (best known for FORBIDDEN PLANET and LASSIE COME HOME) directed this MGM B-picture intended to cash in on the success of Jack Webb’s first DRAGNET TV series—but probably disappointed ready-for-action 1953 viewers by spending too much of the 69-minute running time as a recruitment tool for the Los Angeles Police Academy. With Ralph Meeker enlivening the cliched role of the brash rule-bender who matures into a ready-for-LAPD cop by the finale. Plus Elaine Stewart’s destined-for-Meeker character given lines famous from other movies.

SECOND HALF IS WORTH THE WAIT

Motorcycle Cops and Motorcycles are the Main Thing in this Mainstream Movie of the Docu-Types that were Prolific in the Early Fifties.

This one has the Whole First Half Devoted to a Behind the Scenes Look at the Police Academy Training.

Intriguing to Some it is quite a Boring Affair unless Ogling the Vintage Bikes is Your Thing.

It Zeroes in on Three Recruits and Their Initiation with some Youthful Playfulness and getting the Babes is Forefront.

In the Second Half it is a much Better Movie as these Rookies are Thrust into a Crime Investigation and in the Third Act it Becomes a real Barn Burner.

Containing some Hard-Edged Violence and Believable Danger.

Ralph Meeker Melts the Screen with His Macho Egomania and Foolish Behavior.

But in the Space of the Film's Short Running Time Matures into a Full Blown Police Officer.

However, Never Losing Sight of the Ladies.