Zanuck finally conceded that Preminger’s talents lay in another direction, and the director’s next two releases were the sort of inventive thrillers that would become his trademark. In the noir Whirlpool (1949), a scheming hypnotist (José Ferrer) frames a kleptomaniac (Tierney) for a murder he committed. Tierney then reunited with her Laura costar Andrews on Where the Sidewalk Ends (1950), in which a violent policeman accidentally kills a suspect during an interrogation. Both pictures received lukewarm receptions, though they grew in reputation in the ensuing years. The 13th Letter (1951) served up more suspense, with several residents (Charles Boyer, Michael Rennie, and Darnell, among others) in a small Canadian town receiving poison-pen letters.

After his contract with Fox expired, Preminger struck out on his own, working for various studios. He also continued to occasionally act, and in 1953 he appeared as a sadistic Nazi commandant in Billy Wilder’s Stalag 17. His directorial credits from that period included the underrated thriller Angel Face (1953), with Jean Simmons as a murderous psychotic and Robert Mitchum as a chauffeur she pursues. Preminger then acquired the rights to F. Hugh Herbert’s stage success The Moon Is Blue. The 1953 romantic comedy centres on a womanizing architect (William Holden) and an aging rake (David Niven) who both try to seduce a chaste actress (Maggie McNamara). Although the film was mildly entertaining, its lasting significance was its challenge to the Production Code. With a script that included such words as virgin and mistress, it ran afoul of the Code, and the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) would not approve it. Refusing to make changes, Preminger released the film with the objectionable material, and the controversy helped make it a box-office hit. The attention also brought scrutiny to the Code, and its guidelines were later relaxed, though not until 1966.

Preminger returned to Fox in 1954 to make River of No Return, a lively if conventional western that teamed Mitchum and Marilyn Monroe. Next was Carmen Jones (1954), a well-mounted modernizing of the Georges Bizet opera, now set in the U.S. South with an all-black cast that featured Pearl Bailey, Harry Belafonte, and Dorothy Dandridge, who became the first African American to receive an Academy Award nomination for best actress.

In 1955 Preminger directed The Man with the Golden Arm, an unflinching portrayal of drug addiction, with Frank Sinatra as a heroin user. As with The Moon Is Blue, the film failed to adhere to the Production Code, and it was released without the MPAA’s approval. The drama, which was adapted from a Nelson Algren novel, was a critical and commercial success, and Sinatra received his first and only Oscar nomination in the best actor category. Preminger then made The Court-Martial of Billy Mitchell (1955), a fact-based courtroom drama about the U.S. Army officer who advocated for the creation of a separate air force and was publicly critical of the army; it starred Gary Cooper, Ralph Bellamy, and Rod Steiger.

Preminger followed that success with Saint Joan (1957), a biopic about Joan of Arc. Newcomer Jean Seberg was unable to carry the ambitious adaptation of George Bernard Shaw’s play, and the film was a critical and commercial disappointment. However, Preminger and Seberg reteamed on Bonjour Tristesse (1958), an adaptation of Françoise Sagan’s best-selling novel about a teenage girl (Seberg) whose efforts to end the engagement of her playboy father (David Niven) lead to tragedy; Deborah Kerr appeared as the fiancée. The film, a better showcase for the charismatic Seberg, nevertheless earned mixed reviews.

Preminger had more success with Porgy and Bess (1959), which was based on the George Gershwin opera. Preminger, who again replaced a fired Mamoulian, directed the black-cast production that boasted notable actors (Dandridge, Bailey, Sammy Davis, Jr., and Sidney Poitier) and Gershwin standards (“I Got Plenty o’ Nuttin’” and “Summertime”). Although the musical was better received than Preminger’s previous efforts, Mamoulian, who directed it on Broadway, might have served up the drama with a lighter hand. Preminger again challenged the Production Code with Anatomy of a Murder (1959), a potent courtroom drama with sexually explicit subject matter that made it controversial at the time; the frank dialogue included such terms as intercourse, slut, and semen, none of which had been heard on-screen before. Ben Gazzara gave an acclaimed performance as a husband who kills a man for allegedly having raped his wife (Lee Remick), and James Stewart received an Oscar nomination for his portrayal of the defense attorney who reluctantly defends him from a crafty prosecutor (George C. Scott). Also notable was the score by Duke Ellington. The film, which ranks among the best trial movies, received seven Academy Award nominations, including a nod for best picture.

Later films

Preminger began the 1960s with Exodus (1960), a 208-minute epic about the struggle to found Israel; it was adapted by Dalton Trumbo from Leon Uris’s best seller. The film was a box-office success, despite its length and claims that Paul Newman, who played a member of the Haganah, and Eva Marie Saint were miscast. Advise & Consent (1962) was a popular adaptation of the Allen Drury novel about political gamesmanship in Washington, D.C. The film, which centred on the Senate confirmation for a secretary of state nominee, boasted a fine cast that included Fonda, Charles Laughton, Lew Ayres, Burgess Meredith, and Franchot Tone. Ever the provocateur, Preminger included a story line about a senator whose homosexuality is used as blackmail.

What Advise &Consent did for politics, The Cardinal (1963) tried to do for religion. The film followed a young Roman Catholic priest (Tom Tryon) over several decades as he endures a number of challenges to his religious convictions before he is elevated to cardinal. Dorothy Gish, John Huston, and Ossie Davis were among those who appeared in cameos. For the drama, Preminger received his second and last Oscar nomination for best director. In Harm’s Way (1965) was a World War II epic that starred John Wayne and Kirk Douglas, with a supporting cast that included Fonda, Meredith, Tryon, Andrews, and Patricia Neal. Although some objected to its length (165 minutes), audiences largely found the story lines compelling.

Preminger eschewed big-budget epics for the thriller Bunny Lake Is Missing (1965). Carol Lynley played a mother whose young daughter is kidnapped, and Laurence Olivier was cast as a police inspector who suspects that the child is imaginary. Reviled by many at the time of its release, it later developed a cult following. In 1966 Preminger took a break from directing to appear as the villainous Mr. Freeze in the TV series Batman.

Preminger returned to the big screen with the forgettable Hurry Sundown (1967), a drama with Michael Caine as a greedy Southern landowner trying to buy property owned by an African American family; Jane Fonda played his wife. Preminger’s films continued to decline with Skidoo (1968), a gangster comedy with a notable cast that included Groucho Marx, Jackie Gleason, Frankie Avalon, Mickey Rooney, Carol Channing, and George Raft. Universally panned, it was widely considered the worst film Preminger ever made.

Those failures were followed by the offbeat Tell Me That You Love Me, Junie Moon (1970), a fable about love and friendship. Liza Minnelli gave one of her most acclaimed nonmusical performances as a young woman who is disfigured by her boyfriend; at the hospital she meets several patients, and they move in together. Although not a commercial success, the film earned back some respect for Preminger. Such Good Friends (1971) was a witty black comedy scripted by Elaine May, but Rosebud (1975), about a yacht seized by terrorists, was another critical and commercial failure. Preminger’s last picture was The Human Factor (1979), an adaptation of Graham Greene’s espionage novel starring Derek Jacobi and Nicol Williamson.

Michael Barson