Reasons for separation and divorce in Hollywood:

Barbara Stanwyck ended her marriage to Frank Fay, because he was a hopeless drunk. Some sources suggest their ill-fated union was the basis for A STAR IS BORN.

Meanwhile, Cary Grant was divorced by wife Virginia Cherrill, because he was moody and wanted to quarrel too much with her. I guess he wasn’t as fun-loving as his screen persona would lead us to believe.

Also from the files of the not-so-fun: Buster Keaton wasn’t laughing when his second wife sued for divorce. She felt she should be granted her decree from the legendary comedian because he was not very funny.

Lana Turner claimed that Artie Shaw jeopardized her well-being. Imagine what she thought about Johnny Stompanato, a boyfriend that her daughter later stabbed to death to protect her.

We need a translator for the next case. Nils Asther såg hans äktenskap samman , eftersom hans fru Vivian rider tala till sin mor på svenska. Vivian Asther divorced Nils Asther because she objected to his speaking to his mother in Swedish.

Betty Grable divorced Jackie Coogan because he auctioned off their wedding gifts. I wonder how much he sold that cake knife for…?

Tarzan’s Johnny Weissmuller and his wife Bobbe (not Jane) saw their marriage hit a snag because his brother moved in with them. She may have agreed to vine swinging, but she didn’t sign up for in-laws.

Bette Davis saw her marriage to Harmon Nelson fall apart. He had many complaints against her, the most shocking one being that she read in bed. I guess they reached the page that said ‘the end.’

Down the hall in a nearby courtroom, Stepin Fetchit faced allegations from his wife Dorothy. She sued for divorce on grounds that he regularly beat her. Not sure if he beat her at cribbage or poker.

A long-lasting marriage was not in the cards for Kay Francis. She came into the courtroom in the best Orry Kelly gown she could find to speak her mind about husband Kenneth McKenna. Apparently Mr. McKenna (are you getting that closeup) apparently Mr. McKenna did not appreciate Ms. Francis’ acting skills (make sure you get the tears streaming down her cheeks), and he did not approve of her friends (pull back to get the emerald necklace and the gown). The scars would last a long time, longer than any dramatic award-winning testimony.

Also appearing before the court was Carole Lombard. She had grown tired of being married to a control freak. She insisted that William Powell was cruel and that he never stopped acting at home, even in his pajamas! To be or not to be married, sweet Ophelia, that was the question!

Meanwhile, Ruth Chatterton claimed George Brent had been unkind to her friends. He especially disliked her previous husband showing up for breakfast. The nerve!

Finally, your honor, there was a case that will just burn you up. It seemed marriage took a sinister turn for Sylvia Sidney. She accused her husband of devising a plan to destroy their marriage by berating her in front of others. I think he may have said she kept the roast in the oven too long.