DEBORAH KAPULE

KAUAI'S LAST QUEEN

As found on Kauai History Makers, and all stories offered for download are copyright 2003, 2004, and 2006 by Hank Soboleski.

An Alii, Kekaihaakulou (Deborah Kapule's Hawaiian name) was born about 1798 on Kauai, likely at Waimea, her parents being the high chief, Haupu, and the chiefess, Haea.

As a young woman she was a great beauty, very attractive to men, and bright and dynamic to match, and sometime between 1815 and 1820, she'd married the handsome and dignified King Kaumualii, the last king of Kauai, and she became his queen and favorite wife.

In 1820, Deborah was living with Kaumualii at their home next to the Russian Fort, when Brothers Whitney and Ruggles of the "First Company" of American missionaries arrived in Waimea Bay aboard the Thaddeus, along with Humehume, the King's son, who'd been away for several years in the United States.

A 21-gun salute was fired from the fort to honor the King's returning son, throngs of people gathered on the beach, and Kaumualii and Deborah were sitting on a sofa when Humehume and the missionaries entered their house.

The King, overjoyed at the return of his son, embraced him, and the royal couple invited the missionaries to found a mission on Kauai. Later, Deborah made them presents of kapa cloth, mats, shells, spears, and calabashes.

Deborah's reign as Queen was short-lived, however, for in 1821, Liholiho, (Kamehameha II) invited Kaumualii aboard his ship, the Pride of Hawaii, anchored in Waimea Bay, and spirited him off to Honolulu, where he became a prisoner of state.

It would have been bad enough for Deborah if Liholiho's act of treachery had only taken her husband from her, but Kaahumanu, the kuhina nui, added to her misery by marrying Kaumualii later in the year, thus severing Deborah's ties with him.

Deborah then lived with Kealiiahonui, Kaumualii's son by another of his wives, but he, too, was soon taken from her by Kaahumanu, who wanted him for her husband, also.

Despite her heartaches and humiliations, Deborah carried on, living in a neat, white cottage in Waimea, where she kept close ties with the missionaries and became a Christian (although she did not officially enter the church until 1825).

Being one of the first of her people to be taught reading and writing by the missionaries, she also maintained a school with two teachers and fifty students.

In 1824, she married Simeon Kaiu, a half-brother of Kaumualii and a devout Christian and teacher of the Gospel, and they were a happy couple.

(A description of them visiting Hanalei that year portrays Simeon dressed neatly and Deborah wearing a light, fashionable, chintz dress, lace cap, and a crepe shawl.)

Also in 1824, after Humehume led a band of insurgents in an attack on government forces occupying the Russian Fort, Deborah, carrying a drawn sword, marched into the fort with others in support of the government. A few days later, Humehume's forces were defeated in a battle above Hanapepe Valley, but there is no record of Deborah having participated.

Eleven years later, in 1835, Deborah, Simeon, and sixteen members of the Waimea congregation moved to Wailua to build a new branch church on land where Coco Palms Hotel now stands. Simeon then died suddenly, and Deborah's interest in the church waned.

Her misfortunes grew even worse about a year afterwards, when Governor Kaikioewa, who'd been jealous of the allegiance Kauai's people held for her, arrested her, took her property, and banished her to Honolulu, where she lived in poverty.

But, by 1838, she was back on Kauai, the Reverend William Richards having secured her release from Oahu and restored her property with the assistance of King Kamehameha Ill.

More trouble entered her life about that time, however, when her affair with Oliver Chapin, a young married man, caused Deborah's excommunication from church fellowship. (Happily, she was reinstated in the early 1840s.)

During the late 1830s, and at least until the end of 1840, Deborah lived with Oliver in a great thatched house, enclosed by stake fence, which was situated on the north side of the Wailua River not far upriver from its mouth.

For many years, well into the 1840s, this house was a natural stopping place for travelers. If travelers were heading north, they'd stop at the southern shore of the river and call across for a canoe, and one of Deborah's men would ferry them across, while horses swam behind or walked over the sandbar. A fleet of canoes at the river's edge was available for upriver travel, also.

Behind her house lay taro patches, walled fish ponds, and pastures.

Across the river, the Malae heiau had been converted into cattle-pens.

Once ashore, travelers would walk to Deborah's house, where they were welcomed with much aloha by Deborah, whose stature had, by then, become chiefly indeed -- she weighed at least three hundred pounds.

The guests' beds were said to be twelve feet square and covered with mats and kapa. Tea and sugar (luxuries at that time on Kauai) were served.

Knives and forks, also rarely seen on Kauai, were used at meals, and butter, milk, and wild duck made up part of the menu, as well as fish from Deborah's fishponds.

A number of fishponds were maintained on her property. Fish caught in the ocean were placed in a saltwater pond. Later, they were removed to a less salty pond and, finally, they were transferred to a freshwater pond for fattening.

Deborah is also remembered for helping build the historic coral-block church in Waimea in the 1850s, which still stands. She brought a pair of oxen over from Wailua to pull a drag upon which great blocks of coral were placed to be hauled to the church. Deborah supervised the work, riding her horse beside the drag and urging the men on.