In the context of the increased interest on integrating the complex spatial and temporal response of fluvial systems to human impacts into the process of assessing the ecological state of the rivers and in promoting a sustainable river management European countries have developed a multi–scalar, hierarchical, process based hydro–morphological framework focused on understanding the river functioning and evolution as a basis for interpreting current conditions. In this context, the goal of this paper is to demonstrate the usefulness of systematic historic and present day geomorphic analysis along channel reaches with distinct typologies in order to generate a better image of river morphology as a background for assessing its present morphological state. The historical geomorphic analysis of Someșul Mic River’s channel dynamics during the past 250 years has shown that the main controlling factor is climate through its centennial – decadal scale variations in magnitudes and amplitudes o...

Representing a direct response of hydrologic, hydrogeologic, geomorphologic, and anthropic factors, the dynamic of river channels has a useful scientific and practical importance, especially for the regions where the rivers play the role of state border. This article presents a detailed analysis of the dynamic of the Prut River channel for the last 125 years, concerning a 26 km sector of the river, which correspond to Prisacani territorial (local) administrative unit (LAU 2 nd order), Iaşi County. This segment can be considered as a representative natural border between Romania and Republic of Moldavia along the middle Prut River course, downstream the Stânca-Costeşti anthropic lake. The work consisted in digitization of a large series topographic maps (1893-1894 edition at 1:50,000 scale, 1940 edition at 1:20,000 scale, the 1949, 1960 and 1985 editions at 1:25,000 scale), various remote sensing images: LANDSAT images for the 1990 and 2000 decades, SENTINEL 1A and 2A images for the year 2015 and 2016, LiDAR DEM (acquired in 2012), and Google Earth® high resolution optical satellite images collection. For the last two years, the channel dynamic was validated and completed using GPS measurements.

Strating with Mio-Pliocene of Moldavian Plateau rising, the old tracks of Carpathian rivers was oriented to South-East direction, following the decreasing and shoreline oscilation. In the same way, but from North direction, the evolution of Prut river was marked. The other valleys was generated later by transformations and re-traking, often visible in landscapes and in hydrographical basin configuration. Stream action, powered by rising of entire area in late Pliocene and Quaternare pariod, was united with versants and interfluves evolution process, so that the old marine acumulation plane was destroyed (the South part of Moldavia was excepted, where interfluves still keep some sections of Romanian-Pleistocene Plain), also replace with derived landforms, mostly sculptural, with hilly aspect, where litologycal and structural particularities of geologycal base was strongly underlined

This study aims to analyze the hydrological regime of the Danube using data registered at the Giurgiu station and identify the spatio-temporal adjustments of the riverbed between Giurgiu and Oltenița along a 151 years interval (1864- 2015), as inferred from cartographic documents and satellite imagery. The results show major changes in the hydrological regime of the Danube, and also in the shape of the river channel.

The boost in the national and international research on the centennial and multicentennial-scale changes in the configuration of river channels has led to a need for standardization of database acquisition methods, so that the final results may be accurately compared regardless of the size of the analyzed river and its physical environment. This paper introduces: the working materials needed for such studies (sources available in Romania and their preparation); landmarks necessary for the delimitation of the study area, typological classification of the channels, delineation of the representative channel sectors; methods for acquiring morphometric data (planform). The literature (with illustrative case studies cited in this paper) provides examples on how the results can be processed and interpreted in order to obtain valuable indicators of the trends in channel changes and the stages in the evolution of their configuration. Moreover, they may also indirectly deliver information on ...

The Surduc reservoir was projected to ensure more water when water is scarce and to thus provide especially the city Timisoara, downstream of it with water.The accumulation is placed on the main affluent of the Bega river, Gladna in the upper part of its watercourse.The dam behind which this accumulation was created is of a frontal type made of enrochements with a masque made of armed concrete on the upstream part and protected/sustained by grass on the downstream. The dam is 130m long on its coping and a constructed height of 34 m. It is also endowed with spillway for high water and two bottom outlets formed of two conduits, at the end of which is the microplant. The second part of my paper deals with the hydrometric analysis of the Accumulation Surduc and its impact upon the flow, especially the maximum run-off. This influence is exemplified through the high flood from the 29th of July 1980, the most significant flood recorded in the basin with an apparition probability of 0.002%.

The morphology of river channels results from the genetic and dynamic characteristics imposed by internal and external morphogenetic forcings. We studied reaches of river courses cutting across the contact area between the Romanian Plain (Carpathians foredeep) and the Curvature Subcarpathians, where active faults are located. In this area a wide monocline of tilted foredeep deposits generated a glacis-like macro-landform at the mountain front that connects the Subcarpathians with the Romanian Plain. The headwaters of studied rivers are located in the Subcarpathians (Cricovul Dulce River) and in the Carpathians (Prahova, Buzău and Milcov rivers). More in detail, we investigated river channels in plan view by morphometric and multi-temporal air-photo analysis to define the general trends of channel evolution. The results of this study indicate a spatial and temporal variability in the intensity of fluvial dynamic processes. The braided courses crossing the Subcarpathians and the piedm...