A series of three courses from MIT on the theory and practice of quantum computation starts next week on the edX platform. One of the two instructors for the courses, which comprise videos of live lectures in the chalk and talk tradition, is Peter Shor, known for Shor's algorithm.

The aim of this course on quantum information science is to further advance knowledge and understanding in quantum information and quantum computing. It to will help participants to establish a foundation of knowledge for understanding what quantum computers can do, how they work, and how you can contribute to discovering new things and solving problems in quantum information science and engineering.

Peter Shor is Morse Professor of Applied Mathematics and Chair of the Applied Mathematics Committee at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology where he is also affiliated with CSAIL, MIT's Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab. In 1994 he formulated the eponymous algorithm for integer factorization that runs on a quantum computer in polynomial time which is one of the topics covered in this course

The other instructor, Isaac Chuang, is Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and Professor of Physics at MIT. and previously presented an advanced course Quantum Information Science II which was described in a review by a graduate student as "hard".

The new series of three courses Quantum Information Science I is at intermediate level can be seen as a prequel to the advanced course. The first one, 8.370.1x, is categorized as Computer Science the pre-requisites are calculus and linear algebra. The second course in the series which starts at the end of February, 8.370.2x, is categorized as Physics and you really need to have a background maths, physics and computing to make the most of the complete series which comprises:

8.370.1x Starts Jan 15, 2018, 5 weeks, 11-13 hours per week

Foundations of quantum and classical computing

Quantum mechanics

Reversible computation

Quantum measurement

8.370.2x Starts Feb 26, 2018, 5 weeks, 11-13 hours per week Simple quantum protocols and algorithms

Quantum teleportation and superdense coding

The Deutsch-Jozsa and Simon's algorithms

Grover's quantum search algorithm

Shor's quantum factoring algorithm

8.370.3x Starts t.b.a. 7 weeks, 11-13 hours per week

Foundations of quantum communication

Models of quantum noise and quantum channels

Quantum error correction

Quantum key distribution

Distributed quantum protocols

While the course has been authored by MIT faculty, support has been provided by IBM Research. As we recently reported IBM has announced prizes for Quantum Computing, an area it seems keen to promote.

More Information

Quantum Information Science I

Related Articles

IBM Announces Quantum Computing Prizes

Quantum Physics Is Undecidable

Solve The Riemann Hypothesis With A Quantum Computer

A Quantum Computer Finds Factors

$100,000 Prize For Proving Quantum Computers Are Impossible

To be informed about new articles on I Programmer, sign up for our weekly newsletter, subscribe to the RSS feed and follow us on Twitter, Facebook or Linkedin.

GitHub Reveals Regional Variation In AI Usage

Almost all software developers in a survey covering the USA, India, Brazil and Germany have used AI tools, but company support varies by region. While the US companies shows strong support, with 88% o [ ... ]

DeepMind Plays Table Tennis

Not content with winning at Go and Chess, competing successfully in the Math Olympiad and making advances in Quantum Chemistry, DNA folding and weather forecasting, DeepMind has turned its hand, or ra [ ... ]

Puppeteer Library Improves Firefox Support

Learners Using Coding Assistants - A False Promise?

LZ Compression Now Eight Times Faster

Pico 2 Faster With More Memory And RISCier

Google's Machine Learning Engineer Learning Path

JetBrains Improves AI Assistant

Visual Studio Premium Subscribers Get New Benefits

Go 1.23 Improves Tools

Google Launches Spanner Graph

Rust Project Goals Ahead of RustConf

IBM Announces Watsonx Hackathon

Visual Studio 2022 v17.12 Preview 1 With .NET 9

Amazon Bedrock Adds Support For Jamba-Instruct

Comments