“You have to fight to achieve your dreams. You have to sacrifice and work hard for it”.

Lionel Messi was born on 24th June 1987 in Rosario, Santa Fe. Lionel Messi was the third child of Jorge Messi and Celia Cuccittini. Jorge Messi worked as a steel factory manager and Celia Cuccittini worked in a magnet manufacturing workshop. Messi started playing football at the age of 5. Messi played for Newell’s Old Boys at the age of 12 and scored 500 goals. Lionel Messi’s professional life was at risk when he was diagnosed with a growth hormone deficiency. Lionel Messi’s father’s health insurance only covered 2 years of his treatment which was $1000 per month. Newell’s Old Boys agreed to pay for his medical treatment but then reneged on their promise. River Plate wanted Lionel Messi to be on their team but then they declined to pay for Lionel Messi’s treatment. Messi’s family then relocated to Spain, Barcelona. Messi played a trial against Barcelona. Charly Rexach got interested in Messi’s talent and wanted to sign him, but the board directors were not in Rexach’s side in signing Messi on December 14th, an ultimatum was issued for Barcelona to prove their commitment. Rexach had no option and offered a contract on a paper napkin. During the 2003-2004 season, Messi rapidly progressed through the club’s ranks, debuting for a record five youth teams in a single campaign. At the age of 16, Messi made his first team debut when he came on the pitch at the 75th minute of a friendly match. Ronaldinho also recognized his talent and said that Messi will become a great player than himself, Messi was a playmaker, he started playing RW (Right Wing) in the starting XI, Messi was unstoppable. Messi destroyed the Prime Real Madrid defense like it was nothing. The world was introduced to one of the G. O. A. Ts of football in 2009, when Messi won his first Ballon D’or by beating his rival Cristiano Ronaldo. Messi was having incredible seasons with Barcelona.

Messi has won the Ballon D’or four times in a row. The great rivalry started between Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo. Messi has won every single individual and club trophy that a footballer can ever achieve. Messi was struggling to win at least one trophy for his national team. Later, he shut the haters mouth by winning the Copa America, which was held in 2021, Finalissima which was held in 2022 and the World Cup which was held in 2022 as well. The fans were speechless. The G. O. A.T debate was over. Cristiano Ronaldo was missing only the World Cup trophy. Everybody says Lionel Messi has completed football by achieving his dream.

This is a quote said by Lionel Messi on tough years of experience he had in his life – “I started early, and I stay late, day after day, year after year. It took me 17 years and 114 days to become an overnight success”. We all have infinite potential in us to achieve anything we just need to work hard for it.

-K.Rithik Reddy of 7th grade