Job Description

Job Description

POSITION: IGNITION SOFTWARE ENGINEER

COMPANY: Hoffman Building Technologies

Job Purpose: The Ignition Software Engineer is responsible for developing resources for Ignition applications.

Employment at Will: Nothing herein is intended to create a contract of employment or to guarantee employment for a definite duration.

What you will do:

Working with customer business stakeholders to define the scope and requirements of the Ignition solution based upon identified process improvement scenarios.

Technical solution design and documentation

Implementation of the Ignition solution, including the following aspects:

Industrial and HVAC applications including BACnet, Modbus and Ethernet IP integrations

Perspective and Vision user interface configuration

Report creation

Alarm configuration

Interaction with SQL data sources (potentially requiring SQL database and query/stored procedure development)

Python-based scripting

Testing, deployment, and associated application support

Will have the opportunity to apply this experience across various industries and manufacturing processes, working as part of a project team.

Expected to provide guidance and leadership to less experienced team members

Will be required to travel to customer sites to perform requirement gathering, deployment, and post-deployment support activities

What you will bring to the role:

Experience with Inductive Automation Ignition SCADA (Ignition Core or Gold Certification preferred) Required

3+ years of experience with Tridium or other BAS controls system or systems.

Understanding of PLC, Modbus, and Bacnet integrations.

Experience integrating Ignition with PLCs for the purpose of control and reporting.

Experience in Python development.

Expert understanding of BAS controls or expert understanding Process Plant controls in different environments.

Must be able to set up a project from scratch and perform most required duties to deliver to customer.

Must have the ability to read and electrical and process control drawings, AutoCad skills are a plus.

Must have functional understanding of mechanical systems.

Good understanding of SQL databases.

Good understanding of IT networks and how it relates to setting up controllers and the Ignition Gateway.

Good understanding of how to set up an Active Directory Database Hybrid Connection is a plus.

Bachelor’s degree in Systems, Controls, or Software Engineering a plus, but not required

Benefits of working at the Hoffman Family of Companies:

We are 100% employee-owned through an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP). This is a retirement benefit for our employees that is wholly paid for by the company in addition to 401(k) options for employee contributions. There are approximately 7,000 ESOPs in the United States governed by the IRS and the U.S. Department of Labor. Research indicates that ESOP companies tend to grow faster in sales and employment. ESOP employees tend to have 2.2 times as much in retirement savings as employees in traditional companies. In addition to the ESOP, we offer medical, dental, vision, and life insurance and PTO!

__

__

“This job description is intended to provide information regarding the essential functions and basic duties of this position. It is not intended to be construed as an exhaustive list of all functions, responsibilities, skills, and duties that could be assigned. Additional functions and requirements may be assigned by management as it deems appropriate. This document does not constitute a contract and is subject to change at the discretion of Hoffman Building Technologies, Inc.”

EEO Employer/Vets/Disabled