Careers Advice and Information

The Marlborough Science Academy is committed to providing all students in Years 7 – 13 a high quality programme of careers education, information, advice and guidance (CEIAG). This is provided through an extensive range of careers activities designed to ensure that students are fully informed of the opportunities available to them and are prepared and able to make informed choices regarding their next steps and future careers.

OUR TEAM

Careers: Mrs Nikki Golds

Careers email: careers@marlborough.herts.sch.uk

Services for Young People: Miss Faye-Suzanne Bowman/ Mrs Emma Turner

Link Governor: Ms S.Roberts

THE Gatsby Benchmarks

Our careers provision is designed to ensure that the government’s required Gatsby Benchmarks are in place and implemented through our extensive careers programme including PSHCEE lessons and special events.

The eight Gatsby Benchmarks of Good Career Guidance are as follows:

A stable careers programme

Learning from career and labour market information

Addressing the needs of each student

Linking curriculum learning to careers

Encounters with employers and employees

Experiences of workplaces

Encounters with further and higher education

Personal guidance

The school is currently working towards the Investors in Careers Quality Standard.

THE CAREERS COORDINATOR

The Careers Coordinator is available to speak to students by appointment. The Careers Coordinator also arranges trips and activities throughout the school year to support the Careers programme.

We are proud to announce that this year we are taking part in the Quality in Careers Award. We are passionate about providing our students with the training, knowledge and skills learning to enable them to choose their future career path, employment or further study in an ever-changing world. The Quality in Careers Award programme is an exciting opportunity for our school to showcase the extensive range of our provision and outstanding careers opportunities for our students.

SERVICES FOR YOUNG PEOPLE - HERTFORDSHIRE

We have Personal Advisers who are in school twice a week to offer specialist careers guidance. Students across all year groups are offered interviews on request, these can be arranged with the Career’s Coordinator; in addition, all Year 11 students will have a one-to-one careers interview. The Personal Adviser also attends the Key Stage 4 and 5 options evenings. Additional interviews are provided to Year 12 students to support their decisions and options for their next steps after Post 16.

THE CAREERS LIBRARY

The Careers Library is located in the LRC and has a wealth of information including that on all the latest apprenticeships, university prospectuses as well as books and leaflets on many different types of future career roles.

It is continually updated, and students are able to easily access all the information they require.

Apprenticeship Information

If you would like any information on Apprenticeships please speak to the Careers Coordinator in the first instance. You could also have a look on Unifrog or the National Apprenticeship website.

WORK RELATED LEARNING – Our Current programme for Parents, Students, Teachers and Employers

Students also take part in the following career-based activities throughout their time at school:

Year Group Careers Programme Year 7

Year 7 students are given the opportunity to experience the world of work first-hand by taking part in a variety of work based activities:

Unifrog sessions delivered in PSCHEE lessons focusing on understanding different types of jobs, careers and employment, and the types of skills and knowledge required to be successful in these

Completion of the Unifrog personality quiz and recording of their experiences and achievements

Introduction into the World of Work - Work related learning day.

Year 8

Year 8 students take part in a Work Shadowing Day which they organise themselves by going to work with a parent or relative. The day enables them to gain experience of the workplace and understand the skills, tasks and requirements of a specific job role. Students complete a Work Shadowing Booklet enabling them to record their planning and outcomes following their experience.

Students will also use Unifrog to gain knowledge of Labour Market Information (LMI) and the skills needed for a variety of jobs including soft skills.

Apprenticeship, Careers and Higher Education Fair - students have an opportunity to meet with and discuss careers options with up to 30 companies, organisations and apprenticeship providers as well as universities.

During PSCHEE lessons Year 8 students take part in a short psychometric questionnaire which provides interest based careers guidance on the Fast Tomato Careers Programme.

Students are also provided with guidance and information regarding the subjects on offer at GCSE so that they are able to make informed choices about these in preparation for the start of the courses in Year 9. Students will attend the Options Evening and have follow-up interviews to support their decisions. The YC personal advisor is also available to support students and there is an opportunity for students to talk to further education providers e.g. Oaklands College.

Visiting speakers from various companies and organisations provide a number of assemblies over the year.

Year 9

Year 9 students take part in a two day Insight into Industry Conference, in the past sessions have been delivered by a number of different providers e.g. the Army, Police, Fire & Rescue, Deloitte and Services for Young People. The conference enables students to meet employers and learn important employability skills including communication skills, teamwork, leadership, and adaptability they also learn about the skills and aptitudes needed for particular professions.

Apprenticeship, Careers and Higher Education Fair - students have an opportunity to meet with and discuss careers options with up to 30 companies, organisations and apprenticeship providers as well as universities.

Students will have the opportunity to take part in an aspirational university visit to Cambridge or Oxford University to experience first hand the requirements and style of learning at a prestigious UK University.

Visiting speakers from various companies and organisations provide a number of assemblies over the year.

Year 10

Year 10 students will take part in a series of Life Skills lessons in PSCHEE including CV writing and job applications.

All students will take part in a Careers Day including a number of workshops delivered by a variety of organisations for example in the past these have included the NHS, AECOM, Morgan Sindall and Hertfordshire University.

Apprenticeship, Careers and Higher Education Fair - students have an opportunity to meet with and discuss careers options with up to 30 companies, organisations and apprenticeship providers as well as universities.

Visiting speakers from various companies, organisations and ex-students provide a number of assemblies over the year.

Year 11

Year 11 students take part in a one-to-one meeting with a Services for Young People Careers Advisor interview resulting in an action plan saved and monitored on Unifrog.

Year 11 will have an interview with a member of the Senior Management Team to discuss future plans for Post 16.

Students will have the opportunity to attend College Taster Days for vocational courses as appropriate.

Support in applying for their Post 16 destination via the careers coordinator or Services for Young People Personal Adviser.

Assemblies with guest speakers from the World of Work, Oakland's College, NCS and ex-students.

Apprenticeship, Careers and Higher Education Fair - students have an opportunity to meet with and discuss careers options with up to 30 companies, organisations and apprenticeship providers as well as universities.

Year 12/13

All Post 16 students participate in our careers and enrichment programme which means they regularly meet captains of industry, company directors and entrepreneurs in school to encourage, motivate and inspire achievement at the highest levels. There is also an ongoing commitment to equipping our students with the skills needed to support independent living including financial advice, health and well-being or living on a budget.

Careers activities include:

UCAS Workshops (including support with personal statements)

Hertfordshire and Cambridge or Oxford University visits

Various workshops with external speakers from the world of work

Introduction to LinkedIn

Bedfordshire University UCAS Fair Event

Volunteering opportunities for example at a Residential Care Home, helping in Accelerated Reading LRC sessions, classroom volunteering, helping in Primary and Nursery Schools

Information, advice and guidance on career choices

Year 13 work experience placements

NCS programme – National Citizen Service Programme – social interaction project.

Services for Young People – one to one career interviews for next steps after Post 16

TEFL – students have an opportunity to train how to teach English as a foreign language when travelling abroad or working in the UK.

Training to work with and support younger students who are hearing impaired at Heathlands School.

Apprenticeship, Careers and Higher Education Fair - students have an opportunity to meet with and discuss careers options with up to 30 companies, organisations and apprenticeship providers as well as universities.

Unifrog

This is an online Careers programme for students to record careers experience and training. It also provides up-to-date current information about Apprenticeship opportunities and UCAS information.

Assessment

Assessment is carried out in a variety of ways including:

Self and Peer assessment

Assessment of strengths with action points and now tasks

Verbal feedback

Use of Unifrog to collate and record experiences and information

Services for Young Peopleone to one interview’s with Year 11 and Year 12 students recorded on Unifrog, with an action plan evidencing plans for next steps

Assessment of learning in PSCHEE lessons

School newsletter – careers information

Our school newsletter is sent out regularly and there is a section on careers news and appointments as well as information regarding universities and colleges.

Local labour Market Information

Please click here to access the Local Labour Market Widget. This can be used to explore and compare key information about occupations and identify potential careers:

Please click below to access our Apprenticeship, Careers and Higher Education webpage:

Apprenticeship, Careers and Higher Education Fair

Review

Our Careers programme is regularly reviewed but should you need any information, please contact careers@marlborough.herts.sch.uk