Stand for something

and get paid for it

Ignition helps agencies and other professional service firms develop focused business strategies and transformative revenue models.

Stand for something

Can you describe your firm in an interesting, relevant, and differentiating way in 30 seconds? If not, you haven’t devoted the necessary time and energy to defining your firm’s positioning strategy.

A clear, differentiating positioning strategy is the foundation of success, because it answers the critical questions of what you do (the answer can’t be “everything”) and whom you do it for (the answer can’t be “everybody.”)

Remember, standing for everything is the same as standing for nothing.

Ignition can help your firm learn:

How to go deep to uniquely define what you really sell and what your clients really buy

How to accentuate the things that already differentiate your firm

How to give prospects a reason to travel a thousand miles or more to do business with you

How to align your firm’s brand positioning throughout all functions and disciplines of your organization

Get paid for it

To improve your firm’s bottom line, there is no single action you can take that is as powerful as improving your pricing. Most agencies operate under the assumption that the key to increased profit is increased revenue – or decreased expenses – but better pricing is a vastly more effective way to reach your financial goals.

Most leaders of professional firms accept the idea that clients don’t really buy their “time,” but struggle with how to charge in any other way. When you set the hourly billing model aside and apply creative thinking to the question of agency compensation, a whole host of innovative pricing solutions come to light.

Ignition can help your firm understand:

How to charge for the value of outputs vs. the cost of inputs

The importance of separating the value of ideation and implementation

How to provide more creative, effective pricing proposals in new business

How to create new revenue streams and diversify your remuneration portfolio

What people are saying

"I can't say enough positive things about how Ignition’s Tim Williams has helped WPP agencies address their positioning and pricing challenges. Tim's presentations inspire our creative leaders, strategists, agency management and finance people to adopt better business practices. He finds the perfect balance between presenting the frameworks that can make our agencies better and the practical change-management workshops that help agencies make the cultural changes required to do a better job of both creating and capturing value.”

— Rick Brook Executive Vice President, Global Client Operations , WPP

“With Ignition’s guidance and deep expertise, you’ll move beyond the theory of pricing and revenue transformation with practical ongoing support that will deliver substantial and enduring change to your business model. What’s more it is not generic- - but built on your unique brand platform and position – enhancing competitive advantage and driving significant growth in revenue and margin.”

— Bryan Crawford, Global Vice Chairman, FCB