Job Description

Job Description

Accelerate your Sales Career and unlock uncapped commissions from the comfort and convenience of your home.

The Ignition CX, US is actively seeking highly motivated individuals to embark on a Sales Career journey with a company that has consistently achieved Silver Status in the Deloitte Best Company to Work for Survey since 2016 - a testament to our exceptional business and dedicated workforce.

Who We Are

Join the Ignition Group, a globally recognized Acquisition, Sales, Performance Marketing, and Distribution company founded in 2002 by visionary brothers Sean and Donovan Bergsma. Our unwavering commitment to our People and our Partners drives us towards excellence.

With over 21 years of expertise, we excel in contact center services and cutting-edge technology. As leaders in revolutionizing customer engagement, we proudly serve diverse clients in the telecom, finance, retail, and tech industries.

When you join our dynamic sales team, you become part of a movement that is reshaping the customer experience landscape. We offer limitless opportunities for personal and professional growth, ensuring that you can learn, develop, and thrive in your career. Whether you're just starting out or looking to take your sales skills to the next level, we provide world-class training and development programs at every stage to support your journey. And the best part? You can enjoy all of this from the comfort and convenience of your own home.

Join us today and become an Ignitioner! Together, we will redefine what's possible and shape the future of sales. Are you ready to ignite your potential?

What You Will Do:

As part of our dynamic team, you will have the opportunity to work in a remote call center environment, where you will handle inbound calls. Your role will involve selling a range of home services, including TV/Internet, Phone, and Security products, on behalf of our esteemed brand partners. These calls will be transferred to you by our trusted Utility Partners, who connect you with customers who have recently moved or are preparing to relocate.

What We Offer:

Base pay of $10/hr. plus uncapped commissions- top performers make over $65k annually

Weekly and monthly contests in addition to bonuses (Gift cards, prizes & more)

Guarantee commissions of at least $500 per month, for your first 6 months

100% Paid Virtual training to maximize your earning potential for 4 weeks

Consistent weekly schedule- 4 weekday & 1-weekend shift working no later than 11-8 pm EST

Great Comprehensive Medical, Emotional, Dental, and Vision coverage and 401(k) match

Company- paid Life Insurance and Employee Assistance Program (EAP)

Supportive Coaches to help you reach your commission and career goals

Opportunity for career advancement in a variety of areas including Leadership, Compliance & Recruiting

Company-provided equipment

A diverse and inclusive culture. We believe everyone can bring something unique to the table

What You'll Bring:

Adaptability - you excel under pressure and embrace change

Coachable- you welcome constructive feedback and readily implement it

Grit- you can deal with rejection, pushing through to success

Honesty- you sell with integrity and impeccable ethics

Sense of humor- you work hard, but don't take yourself too seriously

Goal Oriented – you thrive on achieving objectives and enjoy healthy competition with top salespeople

What We Look For:

Strong computer skills and the ability to use multiple systems at the same time, while answering calls

Motivated by earning potential in an uncapped commission environment

Demonstrate regular attendance and adherence to the schedule

Willingness to learn and be coached to sell- no sales experience necessary

Persuasive communication skills with professional vocabulary

Ability to work in a goal and performance-based environment

Must pass a pre-employment background check and drug screening

Must have reliable internet and be able to connect directly to the modem

Must be able to work in a distraction-free and quiet environment

Eligible States - While this is a remote position, you must live in one of the following states to be considered for this position: Alabama, Georgia, Indiana, North Carolina, South Carolina, West Virginia, and Wyoming.

We are committed to providing equal employment opportunities to qualified individuals with disabilities. This includes providing reasonable accommodation where appropriate. Should you require a reasonable accommodation to apply or participate in the job application or interview process, please contact us.