Distrobird — Free Sales Engagement Platform

Sequences, cloud call center, shared inbox, form tracking and more — on a single platform. Double your sales team's output with fewer tools.

Create a sequence — it's free

Position Ignition

position ignition is one of the uk's leading career consulting and career management organisations founded in 2009 by simon north and nisa chitakasem. position ignition offers career advice and support to individuals, institutions and to organisations. they provide workshops, webinars, one-on-one support and offer ongoing support through their career ignition club. they have developed their own tried-and-tested approach to career transitions, predicated on over 30 years of experience and use this across all of their work. they work with brand leaders such as capgemini, channel 4, bodens and motorola, and with well-known institutions such as warwick business school, durham university, henley business school and ashridge business school.

Headquarters:

United Kingdom

Industry:

Consumer Services

Founded:

2009

Employees:

2

Annual Revenue:

-

Type: Private

Ticker: -

United Kingdom 2

Career PlanningCareer GuidanceCareer SupportCareer AdviceCareer ConsultingCareers DevelopmentCareer WebinarsCareer Transition

SIC Code: 4899Major Group: CommunicationsIndustry Group: Communications Services, Not ElsewhereIndustry Sector: Communications Services, Not Elsewhere Classified

NAICS Code: 81299Sector: Other Services (Except Public Administration)Sub Sector: Personal and Laundry ServicesIndustry Group: Other Personal ServicesNAICS Industry: All Other Personal ServicesNational Industry:

Frequently asked questions about Position Ignition

Let us help answer the most common questions you might have.

Where is Position Ignition located?

Position Ignition's headquarters is located at United Kingdom

What is Position Ignition's official website?

Position Ignition's official website is positionignition.com

What is Position Ignition's SIC code?

SIC Code: 4899Major Group: CommunicationsIndustry Group: Communications Services, Not ElsewhereIndustry Sector: Communications Services, Not Elsewhere Classified

What is Position Ignition's NAICS code?

NAICS Code: 81299Sector: Other Services (Except Public Administration)Sub Sector: Personal and Laundry ServicesIndustry Group: Other Personal ServicesNAICS Industry: All Other Personal ServicesNational Industry:

How many employees does Position Ignition have?

Position Ignition has 2 employees

What industry does Position Ignition belong to?

Position Ignition is in the industry of: Consumer Services

What are Position Ignition's social media links?

Position Ignition Linkedin page

Browse other Companies

Distrobird — Free Sales Engagement Platform

Sequences, cloud call center, shared inbox, form tracking and more — on a single platform. Double your sales team's output with fewer tools.

Create a sequence — it's free

You’ll be in good company

Calling Distrobird an all-in-one tool is an oversimplification of the value it delivers. All the workflows we need to acquire and support our SMB users across all channels are deeply integrated. I couldn’t be happier with our choice.

Jody Schnarr

CEO of Fibernetics

The #1 reason why we chose Distrobird is because it provides all the building blocks we need to engage our customers in a unified way — From email, texting, telephony and collaboration. This is probably the last tool you’ll buy for lead and customer outreach.

Laurel Palmer

Director, College Fund, Kalamazoo College

Stitching together a bunch of integrations and add-ons across multiple vendors is not my idea of productivity or efficiency. Thats why we chose Distrobird — each module is as full featured as any standalone competition.

Paul Marai

VP Digital Marketing

From Our Blog

13 Best Tools & Software for B2B Sales Prospecting in 2024

Find the 13 best B2B sales prospecting tools and software in 2024. Boost lead generation and streamline sales ...

How To Account For Offline Sales In Your Attribution Model

Clicks only tell half the story, Track offline sales for a complete customer journey & optimize marketing impa...

Lead Routing: Sending Qualified Leads to the Right Reps

Optimize your sales process with effective lead routing strategies and tools.