Meline’s paternal grandmother, Mariam Eghigian Haroutounian, was born in Karhad in April 1906 to Zadig Eghigian (the son of Hagop and Marta Eghigian) and Tourvanda Soultanian Eghigian (the daughter of Garabed Soultanian and Narik Malkasian Soultanian).

By the time she was two years old, both of Mariam’s parents had died and she was placed in the Swiss Orphanage in Sivas. That orphanage was founded by Swiss Protestant missionaries in 1897 initially to give refuge to the Armenian children of Sivas orphaned by the 1895 massacres.

Although the murders and deportations of the Armenians from Sivas began in July 1915, Mariam and the other Armenian orphans in the Swiss orphanage were somehow spared harm and allowed to remain in Sivas for a few more years. Several historic accounts mention that Mary Louise Graffam, an American missionary who was in Sivas before, during, and after the Genocide, likely was responsible for keeping the Armenian girls at the Swiss Orphanage safe. At the outset of the Genocide, Miss Graffam personally accompanied the first wave of the Armenian population from Sivas on their deportation in an effort to protect them; the Ottoman gendarmes eventually detained her in Malatya for several weeks and forced the Sivas Armenians to continue without her. [1] On the day of Miss Graffam’s return to Sivas, she learned that the Armenian girls from the Swiss Orphanage were to be deported the following day and she immediately negotiated an arrangement with the Ottoman Vali/Governor of Sivas that those girls would be protected from harm so long as Miss Graffam remained with them and took over the orphanage. [2] It was widely known among the Turks that Miss Graffam was in regular and direct contact with U.S. Ambassador Henry Morgenthau, which may have been an additional reason those Armenian orphans initially remained safe. [3]

According to historical sources, there were eighty Armenian orphans at the Swiss Orphanage who were permitted to stay behind in Sivas when the Genocide began. [4] In May 1916, the Ottoman Government ordered all of the remaining foreign missionaries in Sivas to leave, except for Miss Graffam who was assigned small quarters in the city compound with the orphans crowded in a house nearby and left unmolested under her guardianship. [5] In the years that followed, the orphans were forced to move within Sivas four more times, [6] and after the end of World War I, they came under the administration of Near East Relief.

The entries in the Swiss Orphanage notebook demonstrate that, as of 1916 (when Mariam was ten years old), she and other Armenian orphan girls were still in Sivas and still being instructed in Armenian on Armenian subjects; this seems remarkable given the ethnic cleansing that was occurring around them at that time and probably was achieved through the courage and contacts of Mary Louise Graffam.

It is unclear exactly when Mariam and the other Armenian girls in her orphanage ultimately left Sivas. The Swiss Orphanage was still intact in Sivas as of 1917. [7] The Swiss Orphanage notebook ends in 1918 (when Mariam was twelve years old), which potentially could correspond to the end of her time in Sivas. For their safety, the Armenian orphans certainly would have all left Sivas by the early 1920s after Miss Graffam died in 1921 [8] and Near East Relief had transported their remaining Armenian orphans in Turkey to Greece, Lebanon, and other countries when the Kemalists came to power.

When Mariam left the Swiss Orphanage in Sivas, she went to an orphanage somewhere in northern Greece.

Mariam Haroutounian (nee Eghigian) also left behind a journal, filled with entries covering her stay in the orphanage of Sivas/Sepasdia. The journal is currently in the possession of her granddaughter Meline.

At first sight, the journal seems to be relatively commonplace. Many of the pages contain poems or verse, evidently copied or transcribed into the journal. However, many of the personal notes in the journal were recorded at a crucial time in history. These entries provide valuable information of great importance, and motivated us to delve deeper into the journal’s pages.

The cover of the journal reads “Eliza Donigian – November 2, 1916.” Therefore, the journal did not originally belong to Mariam, and Eliza was probably another orphan living in the Sivas orphanage. We do not know how the journal eventually passed into the possession of Mariam, but we do know that after the onset of the First World War she began writing in it. The entries include personal notes, as well as copies of poems and transcriptions of songs. On one of the pages, there’s a vertical note written in the margin – “The words of my beautiful sister are my keepsake of her.” The note is in Mariam’s handwriting, and was probably added in later years. The note seems to refer to Eliza and the journal. Unfortunately, we do not know much more about Eliza, nor do we know what fate befell her.

There is an assortment of poems and verse in the journal, mostly from popular contemporary writers – Bedros Tourian, Siamanto, Taniel Varujan, Avedis Aharonian. The works include Bedros Tourian’s poems Sev! Sev! [Black! Black!] and Ights Ar Hayasdan [A Yearning for Armenia]; Avedis Aharonian’s Harkank Kez [Respect to Thee], Ashoughe [The Minstrel], and Oror [Lullaby]; Siamanto’s poems Govgas [Caucasus] and Yes Yerkelov Gouzem Mernil [I Want to Die Singing]; and Taniel Varoujan’s Badkamavorners [My Delegates].

Other works copied or transcribed into the journal include Dikran Cheogurian’s Haverjanal [To Become Eternal]; Smpad Pyurad’s Hayasdani Vakhjane [The Demise of Armenia]; Hranoush Arshagian’s (1887-1905) Mahvan Mod [Near Death]; Shahan Natali’s Hatsi Asdvadze [The God of Bread]; Kamar Katiba’s Im Yerke [My Song]; and A. G. Bedigian’s Kritches Im Anoushig [My Beautiful Pen]. Some of the poems and verse have unknown authors, including Hin Darin [The Past Year]; Barignerou Takouhin [The Queen of Fairies] (play); Darakin Oughin [Darak’s Path]; Aghchig Chenk Ouzer [We Don’t Want a Girl] (play); Vorpn ar Sokhag [The Orphan to the Nightingale]; and Pnoutyan Latse – Sihoun [The Cry of Nature – Sihoun].

Notably, many of the authors whose works appear in the pages of the journal were killed during the Armenian Genocide (Siamanto, Dikran Cheogurian, and Taniel Varoujan). The orphans at the Sivas' Girls’ Orphanage, in their rooms, were making copies of patriotic, rebellious, and inspired lines of authors who, at that very same time, were being deported and murdered by the Ottoman authorities. This was a daring act of rebellion in and of itself, as we know that during the years of the genocide, many people (including adults, as well as school-aged boys and girls) were accused of keeping journals, diaries, or notebooks that contained nationalist literature. Naturally, the fact that they were in an establishment run by Swiss missionaries must have inspired the orphans with some courage, but in all likelihood, had the authorities laid hands on the notebook, the Swiss missionaries would have been unable to protect the girls.

Presumably, the girls did not copy the poems and verse from actually printed works of the above-mentioned writers. The orphanage, by then, had probably either destroyed those works, or had decided to store them, in order to preempt any searches by the government, and to avoid any accusations that would result. However, the orphans had clearly memorized these works. This assertion is reinforced by the fact that the orphans’ transcriptions of these works contain many grammatical and spelling errors.

The journal also contains several proverbs.

As we have already mentioned, the journal originally belonged to Eliza Donigian. However, it also contains entries written by some of her friends, presumably also orphans at the same institution. Differences in handwriting are easily detected. Making entries in the journal seems to have been customary within the orphanage, each entry being addressed to the journal’s owner. Often, entries are appended by the first and last name of the author, followed by a heartfelt note to the journal’s owner.

For example, the author of the entry titled Vorpn Ar Sokhag [The Orphan to the Nightingale] is unknown, although a postscript appended to the entry reads “December 22, 1922, Sivas – Azkanoush Iskhanian.” This postscript probably reveals the name of the author, as well as the date of the entry. However, Azkanoush Iskhanian can’t possibly be the original author of the entry’s content, as the entry also provides the date of the work’s creation as 1886. Underneath Tanial Varoujan’s poem is inscribed the following note – “Always remember your true friend. Remember the joyful and miserable days we shared. Remember, and don’t forget!” The note is signed H. Karayan, and was most probably written for Eliza by one of her friends. Underneath the poem Pnoutyan Latse [The Cry of Nature] is the note “Your friend and roommate, Vergine Koharian, forget me not” [forget me not in English in the original note]. One of Siamanto’s poems in the journal was transcribed by Melanoush Chitbashian, who also added the following notes – “A smile can cure the scars left by frowns” and “True, deep love is always silent (October 1922).”

Mariam probably began adding entries to the journal as soon as she came to have possession of it. Her handwriting can easily be discerned from the others. The majority of the entries in the latter pages of the journal seem to have been written by her. Among these entries are the inscription of Avedis Aharonian’s Oror [Lullaby] and Gamavoragan Kaylerk [The Volunteer’s Anthem], more commonly known as Harach Nahadag. Both of these works were written after the First World War, and presumably Mariam transcribed them into the journal after leaving Sivas. Aside from these transcriptions, Mariam also wrote short entries concerning her personal life. These notes were sometimes written on previously used pages with some remaining blank space. As a result, some of the journal’s pages contain material transcribed in Sivas, in addition to entries made by Mariam later in the 1920s.

She writes – “June 15, 1924 was the first day of my misery. The day when I took my first step into life, and began my many struggles. Remember that dark day after my death. On July 10, 1924, I arrived at this house, where I sometimes feel happy, sometimes miserable, and sometimes abandoned. On September 1 I heard that the orphans are in a terrible state, and cried all day. Oh God! When will you exercise your righteous judgment, and when will we have the right to call ourselves human beings?”

This entry must have been written after Mariam’s departure from the orphanage in Greece. At the time, when female orphans were released from orphanages, arrangements were made to provide them with a relatively secure future. Some girls were married immediately upon leaving, others made living arrangements with relatives, or were employed by trusted families as maids. In Mariam’s case, we presume that no living relatives were found (only later would two of her uncles, who lived in the United States, discover that she had survived the genocide). She was employed as a maid by a family. It is unclear whether the above-mentioned words were written while Mariam was still in Greece, but we do know that by December 4, 1925, she had settled down in the “English people’s home” in Egypt (presumably a trusted English family).

“A dark and terrible day (March 7, 1925, Tanta [Egypt]). I will never forget, until the day I die, the flames of love that entwined the two of us together. Alas, death has ruthlessly separated us forever.” It is unclear to whom Mariam was referring with these words. Had she just received a confirmation of her brother’s death? Or was she speaking of some other man she loved? We know that before the genocide, Mariam had entered the orphanage alongside her brother, and that the siblings were very close. He was released from the orphanage on the eve of the deportations, in order to work in his family’s fields. Thereupon, all trace of him was lost, and he was probably killed like so many others. Mariam’s family later attested that she mourned her brother’s loss until the day she died.

Eventually, Mariam’s uncles, who had settled in the United States, were able to locate her and invited her to join them. Mariam immediately began making her preparations for the trip, but her entries show that she saw it as a journey into the unknown. “The autumn of 1926 leads me into a year of loneliness . . . The Christmas table is set. But I have nobody in this foreign place who can console me. I go to surrender myself to our Maker, who has promised to be a father to us all.”

Later in the journal we find another entry, probably the last made in the journal – “April 12, 1926. I am in New York with my uncles.”