STUART ROSENBERG'S “WUSA,” which are the call letters of a New Orleans radio station in the service of the radical right, is not a good movie, but it does, at least, prompt one to want to talk back to it— and, recently, there naven't been too many movies to do even that. I mean. what in heaven's name would one have to say to “Song of N rway”? Watching such a movie is roughly comparable to peing stalled on a scenic railway with nothing to read.

“WUSA,” now at the Penthouse and Plaza Theaters, apparently pretends to be an apocalyptic vision of contem porary America. It was adapted by Robert Stone from his highly regarded first novel, “A Hall of Mirrors,” and no less an authority than Paul Newman has called it Paul Newman's most im portant film. It is the work of liberals who—as I understand them—are con cerned about the consequences of apathy, about the manipulation of poli tical engagement, and about the silent conspiracy that must always exist be tween the exploiters and those who are exploited. Although these are not nec essarily revolutionary concerns, they are valid ones. They are so valid, in fact, that only a work of such self‐ conscious pretensions, such obvious re verse bias and such narrative incoher ence could, if not discredit them, at least render them peculiarly irrelevant.

*

From the movie's first, post‐opening‐ credit image (a garbage‐littered street swimming slowly into focus) to its last scene, which is set in Potter's Field, “WUSA” resolutely refuses to allow its audience the option to make its own discoveries. Like Mr. Rosenberg's camera, which at the start of every scene, persists in drawing our attention to some object (a face, a poster) that sets the theme of the scene, the movie never gives us credit for being able to make up our own minds. One immediate effect of this nice‐nanny staging is to force the eye to rebel, to send it off in pursuit of all the wrong people and things.

I'm told that Mr. Stone's novel, which I have not read, slipped almost imper ceptibly back and forth between quite literal reality and nightmare fantasy, the levels, I assume, being differentiated by the style of the prose. Because there are no different “prose” styles in the film, no truly cinematic flights of imagi nation, one must accept the whole film as being as realistic as it looks, even when it is sounding painfully literary.

Rheinhardt (Mr. Newman), a most literary hero who likes to say things like “I'm part of the pattern in some body's head,” is an itinerant disk jockey and an unusually healthy‐looking alcoho lic without much of a past, except, the screenplay tells us, that he has a wife somewhere and that he once was a great cornet player.

Arriving in New Orleans the day after Mardi Gras, Rheinhardt enters a world populated entirely by rather wan cousins of the vulnerable, the maimed and the corrupt souls who once in habited Nathaniel West's Los Angeles.

Among others, there are Geraldine (Joanne Woodward), a whore with a pure soul and a face scarred by an oyster knife in Texas (don't we all carry the scars of Texas?); Rainey (Anthony Perkins), a wild‐eyed social worker whose love of humanity des troys him (one of the conventions of this sort of literature); and Bingamon (Pat Hingle), the millionaire‐owner of station WUSA, which, we are told, is about to effect some kind of right‐wing, white‐power take‐over of the United States by slanting its news and making up dishonest editorials about crime, the decline in patriotism and welfare chiseling.

Although he falls in love with the mopey Geraldine, Rheinhardt remains vulnerable only to booze. He joins WUSA and, seemingly overnight, be comes the station's star, accepting its corruption by aspiring to a state of uninvolved, existential grace. It's at this level that the movie, which has been pretty mixed up any way, becomes hopelessly muddled, for WUSA comes to stand for everything that is to the right of the liberal Democratic line. In a night mare, one might accept this foreshortening of political perspective, but in a pon derously realistic movie, the effect is like that of a map of the United States from which the entire middle west has been removed.

I don't know how Mr. Stone handled it in his novel, but his screenplay not only ignores the mechanics but also the immediate goals of the WUSA which has to do with a giant WUSA‐ sponsored. Americanism rally that is apparently planned to be WUSA's Reichstag fire. I'm not sure whether the complete confusion in this climactic sequence is a result of the directing, the editing, or of the writing, but I did notice that several things that are in the official synop sis of this sequence are not in the movie itself. It looks as if the movie was not edited on a movieola, but with a lawnmower.

All of the film's prejudices and simplistic assumptions erupt here in the kind of movie‐making that is enough to make a liberal Democrat want to join the Agnew team. Who else is going to defend nicely dressed little old ladies, with hair of gray, white and blue, whose lips are as thin and taut as piano wire and whose eyes look mean, probably because they are far‐sighted? The rally, which has begun with a pious, WASPy benediction and featured the personal ap pearance of an old Holly wood cowboy star, as well as a quick‐draw shooting demonstration, collapses when the mad social worker makes an unsuccessful as sassination attempt on Bin gamon, the bigot.

In the ensuing chaos, which is, incidentally, the worst staged riot I've seen in a movie all year, Rhein hardt moves to the micro phone to deliver a completely unbelievable but marvelously purple, literary attack on everyone in the hall, exhort ing the audience to take heart in the fact that in every bomb we drop on “the slants” there is “a fat little old lady on her way to the world's fair.…”

*

You suddenly realize why the movie was made, and why it seems to think itself important.

Movies about politics, as much as movies about bank robberies, have, I think, an obligation to define method ology. What was WUSA up to, and how did it hope to accomplish its goals? At the same time, the political atti tudes expressed or at least their importance within the world of the film, should have some relation to a recognizable world. Distor tions, even small ones, have a way of making everything seem counterfeit, which is why movies and novels and plays about fictional Presi dents never seem very com pelling. They can only approximate real‐life char acters, events and issues, and once they approximate, they abandon their hold on our belief. This, curiously, is just the reverse of the effect of every other kind of fic tion, which has the freedom to speculate, simplify, rear range, and even to distort, all in the interests of liberating our imaginations for some greater truth.

There is no greater truth in “WUSA.” Neither is there cinema art.