HOT SHOT: Wagner Rebeiro celbrates his hat-trick against Saudi Arabia’s Al Shabab in Doha yesterday.

Agencies/Doha/Dubai

Brazilian striker Wagner Rebeiro scored a hat-trick as El Jaish booked their place in the knockout phase of the AFC Champions League with a 3-0 win over Saudi Arabia’s Al Shabab in Doha yesterday.

The Saudi side had already secured their spot in the next phase thanks to their 1-0 win over Tractorsazi on Matchday 4 while El Jaish’s win coupled with Tractorsazi’s defeat at the hands of Al Jazira from the UAE means the Qatari club cannot be overtaken.

That leaves both clubs fighting it out for top spot with one round of matches to go, with Al Shabab still in pole position in Group A, two points ahead of El Jaish, who travel to meet Tractorsazi in Iran on Matchday 6 while Al Shabab host Al Jazira.

Wagner Rebeiro opened the scoring just three minutes into the game when he lashed the ball into the roof of the net from close range after Karim Ziani’s run through the heart of the Al Shabab midfield.The home side were good value for the lead in a first half in which they had the majority of the play. Abdulqadir Adam shinned the ball wide in the 19th minute when he had the goal at his mercy while Anderson (Anderson Vieira Martins) header over the bar just three minutes later.

Al Shabab’s performance was lacklustre, with the Saudis rarely threatening. El Jaish’s Ivanildo Rodrigues was called into action nine minutes before the break when Marcelo Camacho’s free kick was missed by everyone and the Brazil-born naturalised Qatar keeper had to claw the ball to safety.

With El Jaish rarely threatened throughout the second half, the Qataris were in control and they put the result beyond any doubt with seven minutes remaining when Rebeiro netted again.

This time the Brazilian was left to apply the finishing touch from close range after Magid Mohamed picked the pocket of Walid Jahdali as he brought the ball out of defence before feeding Mohamed Methani on the right and his cross was rolled over the line by Rebeiro.

With the game three minutes into added time, Rebeiro completed his hat-trick, controlling Magid Mohamed’s ball forward with his first touch and sweeping his shot beyond Waleed Abdullah with his second.

Meanwhile, Al Shabab Al Arabi of the United Arab Emirates kept alive their hopes of qualifying for the last 16 of the AFC Champions League after they came from a goal down to beat Group B leaders Lekhwiya 3-1 in Dubai.

Lekhwiya could have advanced to the knockout stage with a win at the Maktoum Bin Rashid Al Maktoum Stadium and they took the lead with a fine effort by Youssef Msakni late in the first half.

But Essa Obaid levelled the score just seconds after the half-time interval before substitute Ciel (Jociel Ferreira da Silva) put the home side ahead with a tap-in in the 77th minute.

Lekhwiya were reduced to 10 men when Sebastian Soria was dismissed for an elbowing incident and Edgar (Edgar Bruno da Silva) rubbed salt into their wounds by adding a third goal in stoppage time. With the win, Al Shabab moved up to six points, two behind Lekhwiya in a tight Group B, which will go down to the final round of games.

Lekhwiya should have been ahead as early as the third minute as Msakni came in from the left flank and played a delightful through ball to Nam Tae-hee who shot wide from 15 metres with the goal at his mercy.

Lekhwiya had failed to win any of their previous away matches in the AFC Champions League but the Qatari side were the dominant attacking force in the opening half as Soria fired just over the crossbar and Nam saw his free-kick from the left edge of the Al Shabab box tipped over by goalkeeper Ismail Rabee.

However, the visitors would break the deadlock in the 37th minute with a fine individual effort by Msakni. The Tunisian received the ball from Nam on the right flank and played a quick one-two with Soria before accelerating into the box and slotting past Rabee.

The home side offered little threat in the opening period but they got back on level terms after an explosive start to the second half. Just 20 seconds after the resumption, the Lekhwiya defence were caught cold as a long pass found Obaid, who stepped past a static Madjid Bougherra and ran unchallenged into the box before sliding the ball past goalkeeper Amine Lecomte.

Lekhwiya could have regained the lead almost immediately as a shot by Nam deflected off a defender and hit the base of the Al Shabab post.

Soria squandered a great opening for Lekhwiya when he fired over from the left while at the other end, Ismail Abdulla went close to giving Al Shabab the lead when his effort from 25 metres rocked the crossbar.

But with 13 minutes to go, the UAE side would take the lead after Rashed Hassan sent in a low cross from the left which was deflected by a defender past Lecomte to an unattended Ciel who tapped home easily.