The 1992 Summer Olympics, officially known as the XXV Olympic Games, was an multi-sport event and was held in Barcelona, Spain from 25 July to 9 August 1992.Established in 1994, the International Olympic Committee has decided to organise the Summer and Winter Olympics in consecutive, even-numbered years. The 1992 Summer Olympics was the final time that the Summer and Winter Games will be held the same year. This Olympiad was the first since the Cold War began, and was spared from boycotts for the first time since the 1972 Olympiad. The Unified Team has outperformed the tally of trophies, winning 45 gold medals and 112 overall. At the opening ceremony the Greek mezzo-soprano Agnes Balsa sang "Romiossini," as the Olympic flag was paraded in the stadium. The Olympic Hymn was also sung by Alfredo Krause’s the flag was hoisted in Spanish, Catalan, and French. The Olympic cauldron, lit by the Olympic torch flame, was set on fire with a flaming spear. This was launched by the Paralympic archer Antonio Rebollo, who attempted to set off the gas with the projectile above, which exploded into the cauldron. The room was where the arrow detonated. This innovative method of lighting the cauldron was meant to eliminate the possibility of stadium arrow falling when Rebollo missed its target. 1960Summer Olympics, after being expelled for their apartheid practises South Africa entered the Summer Olympics. The The Women's 10,000-meterrace has been widely discussed. The White South African athlete Elana Meyer and the Black Ethiopian athlete Derartu Tulu have marched hand in hand during a victory parade. Germany sent a new squad to the 1964 Summer Olympics, having defeated the last of those teams in 1990.In 1991, when the Soviet Union was dissolved, the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania organised their own teams for the first time since 1936.The other former Soviet republics as Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan's Solidarity Squad voted to join. The World States finished fourth in the medal table and beat the USA. The split in the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has led to the Olympic debuts for Serbia, Slovenia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Thanks to UN limitations, teams from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia were not permitted to play for their own team. Nevertheless, any single competitor competed as individual Olympic athletes under the Olympic banner. The participation of NBA players in basketball has helped to build the "Dream Team “of the United States, including Michael Jordan, Magic Johnson, Larry Bird and other NBA stars. It had allowed only European and South American stars to compete before 1992, when the Americans had college teams. The Dream Team received the gold trophy in 2010, and has-been inducted as a team into the Basketball Hall of Fame. Tatiana Guts has won gold in the All-Around division edging Shannon Miller in the US for women's artistic gymnastics. Russian swimmers dominated the men's freestyle events, with both Alexander Popov and Yevgeny Sadovyi winning two titles a piece. Sadovyi had won the relays too. Evelyn Ashford won her fourth Olympic gold medal in the 4,100-meter relay, making her one of four woman athletes in history to do so. Krisztina Egerszegi, a Hungarian student, has won three individual gold medals while swimming. At 14 and 6, Japan's Kyoko Iwasaki earned a gold medal in a breaststroke of200 metres for women making her the youngest ever gold medalist in Olympic swimming competitions. Algerian runner Hassiba Boulmerka, who was regularly targeted by Muslim groups in Algeria who appeared to have revealed so much of her body in cycling, faced death threats and was forced to flee to Europe, won the 1,500 metres, while holding the African women's record at this time. Baseball was officially an Olympic sport at six previous Olympic Summer Games. The Olympic schedule was concluded by Badminton and the female judo, while slalom canoeing returned to the Olympics following a 20-year absence. Hockey, Basque pelota, and taekwondo's both showed up at the 1992 Summer Olympics Rolling.