In 1992 Mike Burrows, who has died age 79 of cancer, watched Chris Boardman win the 4,000-metre individual bicycle pursuit final at the Barcelona Olympics. Boardman was riding the Lotus 108 model that Mike had developed with Lotus Engineering, and the combination won Britain its first Olympic gold medal in the sport for 72 years.

Mike’s background as an engineer lay in running his own company in Norwich in the 1970s, producing packaging machines. When his car broke down he took to cycling, devising his own recumbent bicycles and tricycles, with the rider lying back for optimal aerodynamics and having the pedals in front, rather than below.

He considered that the bicycle’s established form was too widely taken as given, to the detriment of innovation. The increasing interest in a wide range of human-powered vehicles in the 1980s liberated his imagination to the point that he could joke: “I’m not the best bicycle designer in the world, I’m the only bicycle designer in the world.”

His breakthrough came from looking beyond the metal – usually steel – tubes that bicycles were conventionally made of. A friend’s father in the aviation industry supplied him with some off-cuts of carbon fibre.

Impregnated with resin, this could be moulded into a strong aerodynamic shape, ideal for track racing. The term monocoque is used for a structure whose loads and forces are held together within a single skin, and Mike said that the imaginative leap needed for his novel vehicle came from seeing a sculpture by Barbara Hepworth.

When, in 1985, the British Cycling Federation put Mike’s monocoque bicycle to the sport’s governing body, the Union Cycliste Internationale (UCI), based in Switzerland, it was rejected. But Mike’s friend Rudy Thomann, who worked for Lotus, got the car manufacturer interested, and in 1990 approval was secured from the UCI.

Unlike most people in the bicycle industry at the time, Mike paid constant attention to aerodynamics. The wind-tunnel testing of the Lotus bicycle indicated time advantages against a regular bicycle similar to those by which Boardman went on to victory over the German pursuit world champion, Jens Lehmann.

The 1992 triumph was not celebrated by the UCI. Mike appreciated concerns that expensive bikes built for rich-world athletes gave unfair advantage, but was convinced that if an event such as the Tour de France could use his faster machines, built on monocoques and aerodynamics, for even its prologue or a time trial, it would showcase the bicycle as a cutting-edge vehicle of the future, rather than of the past. Boardman rode the Lotus to a time-trial victory at the Tour in Lille in 1994, setting a record average speed that stood for more than two decades, convincing both Mike and the UCI that each was right.

That year Mike was recruited by the bicycle manufacturer Giant in Taiwan, from where he oversaw a quieter design revolution, creating the Giant TCR (Total Compact Road) model that has influenced every road bicycle since, perfecting geometries so that the same frame could be made to fit riders of different heights. The development allowed greater standardisation and thus commercialisation of road bicycles, with no compromise in frame rigidity and power. He also worked on mountain bikes and the Giant Halfway folding bike.

In 1996, the UCI produced the Lugano Charter, in effect a formal response to the success and controversy engendered by Mike’s radical designs. It ordained that the sport of cycling should be one of athletes, rather than engineers, and so put down rigid engineering limitations that were the antithesis of Mike’s quest for greater efficiency and speed. As he put it: “I left Giant in 2000 because the UCI was stopping me building better bikes. In the pro scene they are now all production-only.”

After returning from Taiwan, Mike focused on recumbent bicycles and tricycles, seeking further aerodynamic gains. He was a stalwart of the British Human Power Club, organising race track days for club championships, and took pleasure in getting faster each year by virtue of engineering gains that could outstrip his own ageing.

For all that he loved going fast, a pursuit of efficiency motivated him more than speed, and convenience was central to his affection for the engineering opportunities the bicycle afforded. I came to know him through efforts to commercialise the 8Freight, his cargo bicycle named after an old British Rail engine and designed with a relaxed position and steering intended to ensure that everyone – couriers, parents on school runs, gardeners carrying tools and earth – could take easily to it. He believed that bicycles offered the possibility of a better, more efficient society.

Mike was born in St Albans, Hertfordshire, where his father was a cabinet maker who later opened a toy shop, enabling Mike to play with model planes. After leaving school at 15, Mike worked as a machine engineer, married his wife, Tuula, and in 1969 moved to Norwich to work on boats used on the Norfolk Broads. His first engineering success was a machine that packed individual bags of crisps into multipacks, and he set up his own business. An engineering perspective that came from outside bicycle design was often credited for his future willingness to slay its sacred cows, a mission that became a defining feature of his life’s work.

All this was realised in a workshop that was a place of easels and heavy machine tools used if Mike needed to make or modify a part. He always wore overalls and wooden clogs, classical music played, and an archive of newspaper clippings, memorabilia and the bikes themselves gave the air of a living museum. When out birdwatching in the Norfolk countryside he was still open to engineering inspiration.

His book Bicycle Design: Towards the Perfect Machine (2000), went through a number of editions, its title encapsulating his commitment to the vehicle he loved.

He is survived by Tuula and their son, Paul.

Mike Burrows, bicycle designer, born 17 April 1943; died 15 August 2022