The Washington Nationals are a professional baseball team that plays in the National League (NL). For the first 36 years of its existence, the team was based in Montreal, Quebec, and known as the Expos. The team was moved to Washington, D.C., in 2005 and renamed the Nationals. The Nationals have won one World Series title (2019).

Founded in 1969, the Montreal Expos were one of four teams to join Major League Baseball (MLB) that year. Montreal finished at the bottom of the NL East in its first season and continued to finish in the lower half of its division throughout its first decade. In 1979, under the guidance of future Hall of Fame manager Dick Williams, the Expos posted their first winning season and finished only two games out of a division title. Behind star players such as catcher Gary Carter and outfielders Andre Dawson and Tim Raines, the Expos advanced to their first postseason appearance in 1981. They won their first-round series against the Philadelphia Phillies before losing to the eventual world champion Los Angeles Dodgers in the NL Championship Series.

In the early 1990s the Expos assembled a roster filled with young talent—such as outfielders Moises Alou, Marquis Grissom, and Larry Walker, as well as pitcher Pedro Martínez—that again made the team a play-off contender. After finishing the 1993 season three games out of first place, Montreal posted a league-best 74–40 record in 1994 only to see the remainder of the season canceled over a labor dispute, cutting short the team’s best chance to win a division title. By the time MLB resumed play in 1995, Montreal had lost much of its young talent through free agency or trades, and the Expos ended the year at the bottom of the NL East standings. The team finished second in the division in 1996 but then began a long period of subpar play that coincided with a decrease in home-game attendance and complaints by team ownership about the Expos’ home stadium. Questions began to arise about the team’s future in Montreal.

In 2001 the Expos were one of two teams (with the Minnesota Twins) that MLB commissioner Bud Selig proposed for elimination in an effort to raise revenue throughout the sport. The team was then sold to MLB in 2002. A Minnesota court order effectively ended the threat of contraction in the major leagues, so MLB sought to relocate the franchise. The Expos played a handful of their “home” games in San Juan, Puerto Rico, in 2003 and 2004 while MLB decided on a new home for the team. In 2005 the Expos moved to Washington, D.C., and became known as the Nationals. The Nationals routinely fielded some of the worst teams in the NL during their initial seasons in Washington, including ones that lost 102 and 103 games in 2008 and 2009, respectively. However, by finishing with the worst records in the major leagues in those particular years, the Nationals were entitled to the first pick of consecutive drafts. They selected two of the most-prized prospects in decades: pitcher Stephen Strasburg and outfielder Bryce Harper.

In 2012 the Nationals finished with the best record in the majors (98–64) and won the franchise’s first division title. Nevertheless, the team was eliminated in its opening postseason series by the St. Louis Cardinals. Washington returned to the postseason in 2014, but the team was again eliminated in its first playoff series.

Although the Nationals entered the 2015 season as the oddsmakers’ favorite to win the World Series, the team finished the regular season with a disappointing 83–79 record and missed the playoffs. Washington rebounded the following season to win another division title but again lost the opening playoff series. The franchise repeated this result in 2017.

Washington won only 82 games in 2018. Harper left the team in free agency during the off-season. The Nationals’ strong starting pitching, led by Strasburg and Max Scherzer, helped propel the team back to the postseason in 2019. Washington defeated the Los Angeles Dodgers in the division series for the franchise’s first postseason series victory. The Nationals then swept the Cardinals in the NL Championship Series to advance to the team’s first appearance in the World Series.