Nationals Park is a ballpark the in the Navy Yard neighborhood of Washington, D.C. and is the home of the Washington Nationals of Major League Baseball (MLB). When the Montreal Expos franchise relocated to Washington, D.C. and became the Nationals in 2005, they temporarily played at RFK Stadium until Nationals Park was completed in 2008. It is the first LEED-certified green major professional sports stadium in the United States. The stadium currently has a capacity of 41,339 and features 79 suites on three levels, all around the infield. The Washington Monument and the Capitol building are visible from the upper decks on the first base side of the field. Another feature, The Budweiser Brew House, is a full service sit-down restaurant located in center field. It offers some amenities unusual in a ballpark such as salads, along with regular ballpark fare such as burgers and hot dogs.

Finding out where the Washington Nationals is important when planning your sports trip. Depending on the time of the year and what other Washington sports teams are in town, you might be able to see multiple sports events when planning your vacation. Elite Sports Tours can not only help you figure out where the Washington Nationals, but where the other teams in Washington play also.

If you're a sports fan that enjoys history, Washington D.C is the place for you! From the Capitol, Lincoln Memorial, Washington Monument and the White house there's no shortage of sights and sounds to check out when you're not in your seats at the big game!

The US Capital is the home of four major sports teams with the Washington Nationals, Washington Capitals, Washington Wizards and Washington Redskins. The 2019 Washington Nationals play at Nationals Park located in southeast Washington while the Washington Capitals and Washington Wizards play at Capital One Arena in Chinatown. The Washington Redskins are the lone team that play outside of D.C. at FedExField in Landover, Maryland.

Plan your baseball road trip to Washington today. Elite Sports Tours has hotel partners close to Nationals Park in Washington. Our team can help you plan the perfect baseball trip to Washington to see the Washington Nationals play live. Our team will help provide all the best recommendations on where to stay in Washington for a baseball game, where to sit at Nationals Park and some local restaurants worth checking out. Explore Washington and cross Nationals Park off the bucket list.

Work with our sports travel experts for the best Washington Nationals Vacation Packages.