Chapter 1

1830 LiverpooL & Manchester: the first wideLy-pubLicised tragedy

It isalong-held tradition, undoubtedly promoted by ill-advised schoolteachers, that the first death on the railways was that of William Huskisson MP, who at the age of 60 was run over by Stephenson’s Rocket on the opening day of the Liverpool & Manchester Railway in 1830. However, the earliest-known railway fatality came in 1650, when two boys in Whickham, County Durham, were run down by a waggon on a wooden coal tramway. The railway concept itself, if only in the crude form of wheeled objects being guided by grooves cut in stone blocks, dates back to ancient Greece. Primitive tramways, or waggonways, became common in the north-east of England at the dawn of the industrial revolution, with coal waggons being hauled by horses or pushed by men out of mines and to the nearest transhipment point. Back in those days, fatalities in industrial concerns were often regarded as par for the course, and with newspapers still a comparative scarcity, probably many if not most of them went unreported. Such accidents on private tramways are not generally listed by historians as railway accidents, and so it is likely that there would have been many more. Fast forward to Philadelphia, also in County Durham, in 1815, when on July 31, an early experimental railway locomotive, Brunton’s Mechanical Traveller, otherwise known as the Steam Horse, suffered a boiler explosion. This type of locomotive, which was not adopted in general usage, ran on four wheels, but was pushed by mechanical feet, on a private industrial waggonway. The incident was the first railway accident causing major loss of life, as between 13 and 16 people, depending on which source you believe, were killed. It was also the first boiler explosion, a problem that would dog the early railways for decades. Brunton’s locomotive was surrounded at the time by a crowd of curious sightseers, who formed the majority of the victims; although in most similar cases, only the footplate crew suffered. At the time, steam locomotive technology was still very much in its infancy. It was only 11 years since Cornishman Richard Trevithick had given his first public demonstration of a steam railway locomotive on the Pen-ydarren Tramroad near Merthyr Tydfil, and even though the concept had visibly proved itself, there was no rush of takers, most industrialists believing that it was just a novelty and that the future of motive power still lay with the horse. Consequently, when mine owners in the North-East began to show a greater interest in the steam locomotive, after horses were in short supply after military demands for them during the Napoleonic Wars, safety risks were by no means fully assessed. In 1821, carpenter David Brook was walking home from Leeds along the private Middleton Railway in a sleet storm, when he was run over by a steam locomotive pulling a coal train. It was the first recorded case of someone being killed in a railway collision. In 1828, an unnamed woman – said to have beenablind beggar –from Eaglescliffe in County Durham was run over by a steam locomotive on the Stockton & Darlington Railway; the first recorded case of a female fatality on a railway. However, she has been overlooked by popular history. Clearly by no stretch of the imagination did this

early victim have the public stature of a Member of Parliament, let alone one who was also president of the Board of Trade and treasurer of the Navy, and so her death would scarcely have warrantedamention in the national media of the day, if at all. There were more to follow on what was the world’s first public steam-operated railway. On March 19, 1828, the boiler of Stockton & Darlington Railway locomotive Diligence exploded at Simpasture Junction, where the line met the Clarence Railway at Newton Aycliffe. John Gillespie, a novice fireman, was taking his first journey aboard Diligence, driven by James Stephenson, elder brother of George Stephenson, ‘father of the railways’. It was Gillespie’s first day on the job, and he was under the watchful eye of the retiring fireman, Edward Corner, who was making his last journey. They stopped to pump fresh water into the tender. There was a strong wind blowing in the direction of the furnace, and this caused the fire to burn more brightly. Such early locomotives were often poor at maintaining steam pressure when they were in motion. However, when stationary and no longer using steam, the pressure built up, and the function of the safety valve was to vent the excess steam when it reached a certain pressure, usually about 50psi. However, some drivers routinely held the safety valve down when the engine was stationary, to build up an extra head of steam, though they were expressly banned from doing so by the company. While there is no official record as to who was responsible, it must have been James Stephenson because he was the driver. Holding down Diligence’s safety valve would have been dangerous enough under normal circumstances, but with a strong wind fanning the furnace it was lethal. The steam pressure rapidly built up until the boiler was no longer able to withstand the mounting stresses, and there was an enormous explosion. The blast threw Corner 16 yards, breaking his thigh. After the accident, George Stephenson’s friend, mathematician and inventor Thomas Brandreth, presented Corner with half a sovereign in compensation. Gillespie received one whole sovereign, but he died from his wounds before he hadachance to spend it. James Stephenson escaped uninjured, and because there was no inquiry, no blame was ever attached to him. Apparently no lessons were learned, either by the company or by the drivers, for July 1 that year saw another boiler explosion on the line, this time involving near-sister engine Locomotion No.1, which in 1825 had become the first steam locomotive to haul a passenger train on a public railway, and had been built by Robert Stephenson & Co. in 1824. The boiler exploded at Aycliffe Lane station, killing driver John Cree, after the safety valves had been left fixed down while the engine was stationary. It was rebuilt and remained in service until 1841 when it was turned into a stationary engine. It is now preserved asastatic exhibit in Head of Steam, the museum at Darlington’s North Road station.

The seminal day ThaT Turned sour In 1829, the Liverpool & Manchester Railway held the Rainhill Trials, not only to see which of the entrants’ steam locomotives was the best –Rocket won the day – but to establish a more fundamental principle –was the steam locomotive, as opposed to the horse or cable haulage – the future of motive power? By the time the railway opened, on September 6, 1830, that principle had been effectively cast in stone. Now, for the first time, two major cities were to be linked byasteam railway. Britain and the world would never be the same again. It was not only a watershed in the development of transport, but a major landmark in world history. On the day of the official opening, enormous crowds flocked to Liverpool to watch the trains depart, at Sankey Valley to watch them pass over the viaduct, and to Manchester to watch them arrive. Near Sankey Viaduct, a grandstand

had been erected for 1,000 people, and a ticket to enter cost 10s 6d; a fortune in those days. The roads approaching Liverpool had for several days beforehand been packed with visitors pouring into the port to attend the event, while others arrived by ship from Scotland and Ireland. Every hotel room and lodging-house in Liverpool was full the night before. From 9am onwards the area around the station was filled with onlookers. City-centre streets were packed to capacity, as everyone made their way to their chosen vantage point. At Edge Hill locomotive depot, several men climbed up the inside of the chimneys to get a better view from the top, while others climbed up a nearby windmill. One group of men each paid two shillings for access to the best vantage point of all; the top of the air shaft of the tunnel leading to Crown Street station. They were hoisted up by a rope and board shortly after dawn for their private grandstand view. The chief guest was the Tory Prime Minister, Arthur Wellesley, the first Duke of Wellington, who had agreed to open the railway. Three special carriages had been built for the occasion, with the most magnificent of them for the Duke. Just before 10am as the Duke arrived, a band played See, the Conquering Hero Comes in praise of his victory over Napoleon at Waterloo. The rendition started a tradition of the song being played at almost every British railway station opening from then on. The Duke’s party boarded their carriage before a gun was then fired to mark the official opening of the railway. The carriages of the Duke’s train had their brakes released and were allowed to roll down the incline under the force of gravity to be coupled to the waiting locomotive at the bottom. Soldiers cleared onlookers from the tracks before a procession of trains left Crown Street station at 11am, all on time and without any technical problems. The Duke’s special train ran on one track, with the other seven trains operating on a parallel track, sometimes running ahead and sometimes behind the Duke’s train. Northumbrian, the last of the Rocket-style 0-2-2s, hauled the Duke’s train, driven by George Stephenson. The others were led by No. 6Phoenix, driven by George’s son Robert. The first mishap of the day occurred 13 miles out of Liverpool. One of the trains derailed and the train behind collided with it. The concept of train paths and leaving sufficient distance between them was still very much in an embryonic stage. Thankfully, this time there were no injuries or damage. Phoenix, the derailed locomotive, was rerailed and continued its journey. Again, history, albeit unwanted, was made on the day – the first collision between two passenger trains. The locomotives stopped at the midway point of Parkside station, half a mile east of Newton-le-Willows and 17 miles from Liverpool, to take on water, 55 minutes after departure. Railway officials told passengers to stay on board while the engines’ tanks were replenished, but this instruction was quickly forgotten when the special train carrying the Duke ofWellington also stopped, and about 50 of the VIPs alighted. Huskisson, who had done so much over several years to make the Liverpool & Manchester Railway a reality, had felt it was his duty to attend the opening day, despite still recovering from serious illness. A highly influential figure in the creation of the British Empire and an architect of the doctrine of free trade, Huskisson had fallen out with Wellington in 1828 over the issue of parliamentary reform and resigned from the cabinet. However, he hoped on the day that the pair might become friends again. He approached wealthy Liverpool corn merchant Joseph Sandars, one of the original promoters of the railway. After congratulating Sandars on the realisation of his vision, saying that he, “must be one of the happiest men in the world,” William Holmes, the Tory Chief Whip, called Huskisson to one side. Holmes said that the Duke was in a particularly good mood thanks to the cheering crowds lining the route, and it might be an opportune moment for him to attempt reconciliation. Newspapers of the day were reporting rumours that Huskisson and his supporters were

to be invited back into the government. Accordingly, Huskisson approached the Duke’s carriage and shook his hand. Huskisson was so elated at his positive reception by the Prime Minister that he did not notice that Rocket was approaching on the parallel track. Bystanders shouted to alert those standing on the tracks. “An engine is approaching, take care gentlemen,” they yelled. Engineer Joseph Locke, who was driving Rocket, saw that there were people on the line ahead. He could not slam on the brakes – because there weren’t any. Rocket was an engineering prototype, and had not been equipped with brakes. So, Locke threw the engine into reverse gear,aprocess that took 10 seconds. Huskisson and Holmes realised the danger too late and panicked. Holmes clung to the side of the Duke’s carriage, but after making two vain attempts to run across the tracks to safety, Huskisson found himself pressed against the side of the carriage. The Duke is said to have told Huskisson: “We seem to be going on – you had better step in!” Huskisson tried to clamber into the carriage, but the passengers inside failed to reach him to pull him in. Holmes was still outside the carriage and was said to have shouted: “For God’s sake, Mr Huskisson, be firm.” The Duke’s carriage had not been fitted with fixed steps, and relied on a portable set fixed to the rear. Huskisson misjudged the distance and grabbed the handle of the carriage door, but it swung open leaving him hanging directly in the path of the oncoming locomotive. Rocket collided with the door and Huskisson fell on to the tracks in front of the oncoming train, suffering extremely serious leg injuries. It was reported that he exclaimed: “I have met my death – God forgive me!” Tory diarist Harriet Arbuthnot, a friend of the Duke who was riding in his carriage, wrote that the MP, “was caught by it, thrown down and the engine passed over his leg and thigh, crushing it in a most frightful way.” It is impossible to give an idea of the scene that followed, of the horror of everyone present or of the piercing shrieks of his unfortunate wife, who was in the car. He said scarcely more than: “It’s all over with me. Bring me my wife and let me die.” Had Huskisson stayed where he was when he saw Rocket approaching, he would have been safe, but it was his panic that led to his death. Men raced along the track in both directions to warn the other trains not to proceed and amid the scenes of panic, it was first thought that the Duke had been assassinated.

The world’s firsT ambulance Train Northumbrian was hastily detached from the special to take Huskisson to hospital, in doing so, forming the world’s first ambulance train, which reached a speed of 35mph. The dying MP was carried to the vicarage at Eccles and placed in the care of the wife of the vicar, Rev. Thomas Blackburne, while George Stephenson drove Northumbrian on to Manchester with Lord Wilton, after uncoupling the trailing musicians’ carriage, and collecting four surgeons – who returned to Eccles riding on the tender. Sadly, despite the best efforts that could be made on the spot, the MP died in the vicarage at 8.45pm after changing his will in favour of his wife Emily, who witnessed much of the tragedy. The Duke and Home Secretary, Sir Robert Peel, took the view that the remainder of the day’s events should be cancelled out of respect to Huskisson, and proposed to return to Liverpool. Yet by then alarge crowd had gathered in Manchester to see the trains arrive, and was beginning to become unruly. They clearly would have had none of it. To appease them and prevent disturbances, Wellington was persuaded to continue to Manchester. The compromise reached was to cancel the festivities and send the military bands home, while carrying on with the train journeys as best they could. However, by the time the trains reached the outskirts of Manchester, the crowd had become hostile as the Duke was becoming unpopular as Prime Minister, particularly in the industrial North

West, for persistently blocking reforms. There were those in the crowd who had set out to make the celebrations aday of political protest, with the tricolour flag of revolution draped from several bridges. There were shouts in protest against the lack of secret ballots for voting, and the Corn Laws. The authorities found themselves to be powerless to clear the line, and so the trains had to proceed at very low speed into the crowd. They relied on their own momentum to push people out of the way. It was reported that a mob from Oldham was on the warpath. Around 50 special constables were gathered and armed with staves and clubs to guard the railway. Another rumour about a mob riot, which proved baseless, led to a troop of dragoons being despatched from Manchester. Eventually, the trains reached the Liverpool Road terminus. An even more hostile crowd was waiting there. They waved banners and flags in protest against the Duke and pelted his train with vegetables. Wellington refused to disembark, but shook hands through the windows with Tory supporters who had turned out to see him, and were not among those protesting. After 90 minutes, the head of the local police urged that the trains return to Liverpool before the crowds reached the point where there would be no way through them. An inability to turn the locomotives and a failure of one that had already returned to Liverpool meant that most of the trains were unable to leave Manchester. While Wellington’s train left successfully, only three of the remaining seven locomotives were usable. These three locomotives slowly hauled a single long train of 24 carriages back to Liverpool, eventually arriving 6½ hours late after having been pelted with objects thrown from bridges by the drunken crowds lining the track. When the train reached Liverpool, people who had just heard about the fate of their MP surrounded it. The crowds dispersed after the Duke left, while the train was still on its way. While ascending the Sutton incline, the train stopped and fell back under its own weight as the five locomotives were not powerful enough to stop it.

Around 400 men alighted and walked up the incline to reduce the load. After the train restarted from the top of the incline, it came to a halt after locomotive Comet collided with a wheelbarrow that had been placed across the tracks. Passing through Rainhill, more miscreants, who had been drinking all day, pelted it with missiles. Finally, it arrived at Wapping at 10.30pm.

Celebrations turned to grief In view of Huskisson’s death, the engineers’ banquet that night and the celebratory ball the following evening were cancelled. The company held a dinner for 219 guests at the Wellington Rooms, but only 47 turned up, and left after drinking to the late MP. A VIP party including the Duke were given aguided tour through the Edge Hill tunnel the following day. However, earlier that day, he had written to the city mayor turning down the Freedom of the City, which he had been due to receive, out of respect to Huskisson. The next day, a coroner’s jury was hastily assembled in the Grapes pub in Eccles. Lord Granville, the half-brother of the Marquess of Stafford, told the hearing that Huskisson had been suffering from numbness in his leg fromaprevious operation, and that this may have caused problems with movement when he tried to dodge Rocket. No witnesses remembered seeing any signal flags raised from any of the locomotives involved during the day, including Rocket, although a system of warning flags was supposed to have been in place. Some eyewitnesses said that Locke had been at fault. However, after the coroner addressed the jury,averdict of accidental death was returned, and the railway officials were absolved of any blame. Nonetheless, the following year George Stephenson insisted that any new locomotives bought by the railway were to be

fitted with handbrakes. Emily Huskisson found two speeches in her husband’s jacket pocket, the first being a brief tribute to James Watt, the inventor of the condensing steam engine. The second talked about the benefits of railways: “…the principle of a Railway is that of commerce itself –it multiplies the enjoyment of Mankind by increasing the facilities and diminishing the labour by which [goods] are produced and distributed throughout the world.” Huskisson’s funeral was held on Friday, September 24, 1830. Around 1,100 citizens of Liverpool formed a procession in front of road carriages carrying aristocrats and other VIPs. Behind the city mayor’s state carriage walked another 900 Liverpudlians and a further nine coaches. Every pub in Liverpool was closed. It was estimated that around 69,000, about half the city’s population, lined the route of the funeral procession. Ecstasy had turned to grief. One diarist wrote: “Can it be that these terrible Monsters will ever come into general use?” Yes, it could, and certainly would, within days. Two months after the opening of the railway, the Duke lost a vote of no confidence and was replaced as Prime Minister a week later by Earl Grey, who brought in electoral reforms that had been supported by Huskisson, leading to the 1832 Reform Act. The Duke remained opposed to railways for the rest of his life because they would, “encourage the lower classes to travel about.” However, in 1843 he accompanied Queen Victoria on a trip on the London & South Western Railway – which had been designed by Locke. Emily Huskisson died in 1856, never again having travelled by train. The death and funeral ofWilliam Huskisson was understandably a cause of great mourning, yet inadvertently boosted the railway’s publicity. It served to reinforce the fact to people across the world that cheap and rapid long-distance transport was now possible. There’s no such thing as bad publicity.

On the afternoon of September 15, the day after the official opening, the railway started a regular scheduled service. The monument beneath which Huskisson is buried is the centrepiece of St James Cemetery in Liverpool. A marble statue of him was housed in a specially built mausoleum there until 1968, when it was transferred to the Walker Art Gallery in Liverpool. Emily also commissioned a second marble statue for the Custom House in Liverpool. This statue now stands in Pimlico Gardens in London. Using the second marble sculpture as a master,abronze version was cast and unveiled in October 1847. Its original location was in front of the Customs House in Canning Place, Liverpool, but was destroyed during Second World War air raids. In 1954 the sculpture was moved to a new home on the Princes Road/ Princes Avenue boulevard. However, it was pulled from its plinth in the Toxteth Riots of 1981 because people wrongly thought that Huskisson had been a slave trader. From 1982 onwards the bronze sculpture was housed in the Oratory in St James Mount Gardens. In 2004 it was taken into the sculpture studios at the National Conservation Centre for conservation and is now located in Duke Street Terrace, a housing development off Duke Street in the city centre. There is a monument of him by Carew in Chichester Cathedral (he was elected as MP for Chichester in 1830). In 1800 Huskisson bought Eartham House in West Sussex from his friend William Hayley, and is commemorated in the parish church by a long carved eulogy from Emily on the south wall.

Others whO shOuld have knOwn better Following Huskisson’s death, brakes were added to steam locomotives. Huskisson may be regarded by many as the first fatal railway victim by walking on the lines of a public railway, but he would never be the last. Maybe he should have known better, having done so much to help promote the railway and having seen locomotives in action. Yet from

then until now, trespassing by members of the public on railways is a perennial problem. That is one reason why all railways must be fenced off by law. On February 25, 2016, the world’s most famous steam locomotive, A3 Pacific No. 60103 (LNER 4472) Flying Scotsman, made its long-awaited comeback following a 10- year overhaul that cost owner the National Railway Museum upwards of £4 million. With tickets priced at £450 a seat, the locomotive headed its comeback trip from King’s Cross to York in the glare of global media. Tens of thousands of people turned out along the route to glimpse and photograph this great celebrity locomotive as it sped past in glorious sunshine. Bridges, fields, tops of embankments, station platforms, were all packed with sightseers. One lady was even seen standing on top of a farmyard manure heap to get the best view possible. On two occasions, one south of Peterborough and the other when the train was brought to a halt by the presence of spectators who had disregarded fences and strayed on to the lineside, people were regardless or oblivious to the colossal danger. Their actions caused several regular main line services also to be delayed. Exactly the same happened on July 4, 1999, Flying Scotsman’s previous return to service after it was rebuilt by then owner, the late pharmaceuticals entrepreneur Dr. Tony Marchington. I witnessed at various points people standing next to the ballast at several points on the line, including one father with a toddler perched on his shoulders. We now live in a celebrity culture, and it seems when you have the chance to glimpse a celebrity, normally human but in this case mechanical, cares can be cast to the wind. Many of those bystanders probably have neither any railway knowledge nor awareness of safety hazards, or even the slightest interest in steam railways normally, but simply turned out to see something famous. You can arrest and fine people for railway trespass. You can go into schools and preach about the dangers to life and limb about walking on railways. You can show advertisements on TV. You can sound warnings on station tannoys and add warning notices ad infinitum. But still they come. Arguably the most glaring example of a man who should have known better is Great Western Railway Chief Mechanical Engineer, George Jackson Churchward, widely regarded as the finest and arguably the most influential of all British locomotive engineers. His GWR designs set the pace for many of those that followed in the 20th century, right up to the last days of steam under British Railways. Through his efforts, the GWR became regarded as a symbol of excellence, a railway that was the envy of the world, which many others tried to follow. His first design, the 20-strong City class of 4-4-0s, has become the stuff of legend. On May 9, 1904, No. 3440 City ofTruro laid its unofficial claim to being the first steam locomotive to break the 100mph barrier, while descending Wellington Bank in Somerset with the ‘Ocean Mails Special’ from Plymouth to Paddington. Churchward retired in 1922, handing over the reins to Charles B. Collett. Churchward, who never married, died on December 19, 1933, at the age of 75 – after being run over by a GWR steam locomotive. In his retirement he still visited Swindon Works, and was walking there from his home in thick fog when he stepped across the tracks. He was inspecting a defective sleeper when he was hit by a Paddington to Fishguard express, hauled by Collett 4-6-0 No. 4085 Berkeley Castle, the Castle class being his successor’s innovated derivative of Churchward’s Stars.