Where can you find the origins of the modern railway? In County Durham, where The Architecture the Railways Built is heading in its new series.

County Durham is rich in railway heritage – so much that it dates back further than most of our Victorian railway, to the Georgian era. Join historian and presenter Tim Dunn in episode four on Yesterday at a wooded gorge near Stanley for striking views of the world’s oldest surviving single-span railway arch.

This practice over the arch declined after 1739, when a fire destroyed Tanfield Colliery. Today, The nearby cliffs are a popular destination for climbers and the Tanfield Railway runs as a heritage railway, meaning it’s the world’s oldest working railway.

A new era – George Stephenson’s Stockton and Darlington Railway

So where did the modern passenger railway come from? The Stockton and Darlington Railway in County Durham is widely considered to be the first railway to use passenger locomotives. Its design came from ‘the father of the railways’, George Stephenson, who outlined his ground-breaking plans in a notebook that has become one of the world’s most historically important railway artefects.

Incredibly, we rediscovered it in 2018 after more than 50 years. The notebook, dated 1822, was found by John Page, a records assistant at our archive in York. It sets out Stephenson’s redesign of and budget for the Stockton and Darlington Railway, and became the blueprint for the railways that followed.

The notebook shows Stephenson’s survey of fellow engineer George Overton’s original 1821 line and the amendments he recommended to it.

There were significant changes to the Overton design. Overton’s plan had sharp inclines, steep curves and tunnels whereas Stephenson favoured gradual inclines and eased curves. Stephenson also proposed the use of spoil excavated from the cuttings to create the embankments, avoiding the need for a tunnel Overton had recommended. This would shorten the Darlington branch by three miles.

Click here to find out more about the notebook.

Read more:

Incredible Stephenson railway history rediscovered

Read the George Stephenson notebook online

An overview of our history

Working with railway heritage

The Architecture the Railways Built – Royal Albert Bridge

The Architecture the Railways Built – Wemyss Bay

The Architecture the Railways Built: Severn Bridge Junction

The Architecture the Railways Built – Ribblehead Viaduct