If the thunderous bassline that kicks off Monaco’s debut is

unmistakably familiar, it’s because the world was first introduced

to it in 1979, when Joy Division surfaced with “Unknown Pleasures”

on England’s cutting-edge Factory Records. A year later, just

before the influential post-punk band released the landmark album

“Closer,” frontman Ian Curtis hanged himself in the basement of his

Macclesfield, England, home. Surviving Curtis were guitarist

Bernard Sumner, drummer Stephen Morris and the man behind that

familiar bassline, Peter Hook.

With Sumner on vocals, the remaining members of Joy Division,

plus Morris’ girlfriend, Gillian Gilbert, went on to record as New Order, bridging the gap between punk and synth-heavy New Wave, and in the process becoming one of the most successful and critically acclaimed proto-alternative acts. With

New Order currently in a holding pattern (they haven’t released a

record since 1993’s “Republic”), Hook enlisted former Revenge

bassist David Potts for Monaco, whose New Order-aping sound has

sparked a mid-life career revival for Hook. Potts’ voice sounds as

familiar as Hook’s bass, although it hasn’t been heard on record

before.

“I think the only time I’ve sung before Monaco is karaoke,” Potts says, sitting in

A&M Records’ midtown Manhattan offices with Hook and Hook’s

girlfriend (who can’t keep their hands off of each other). “I was

an altar boy once, but I didn’t have to sing.”

His voice is recognizable from New Order, a group,

incidentally, that he was never even in. In fact, Potts sounds so

much like Sumner on Monaco’s “Music For Pleasure” that it could

easily be mistaken for a factory-fresh New Order album, although

the band, unsurprisingly, doesn’t see it that way.

“When you got a [bass] style like Peter’s, you can play it to

any old record and say it sounds like New Order,” Potts adds. “And

with my range, people say it sounds more like New Order too but

what am I going to do, start rapping?”

Editor’s picks

New Order comparisons aside, the two have formed a unique

musical partnership after some time together in Revenge, Hook’s

early-’90s side project. At 26, Potts is the fresh, virginal

younger half of Monaco, while Hook, at a very healthy looking 41,

provides parental guidance.

“The age difference doesn’t mean a thing really,” Potts says.

“But he’s got the experience — 20 years worth of experience that

doesn’t count for s—!”

“But you still don’t listen to me, do ya?” Hook retorts,

laughing.

For Hook, things have never been better. New Order never

racked up as many record sales as glowing reviews, and Monaco’s

major label deal represents quite a change from folding his own CD

sleeves at an English indie label.

“This is one of the only records I’ve ever made that I can

actually sit and listen to,” Hook says. “Usually, the New Order

records were so bloody angst-ridden, and there was such a black

cloud over it with Factory Records and the amount of work you had

to do, that you could never actually put the record on. I mean, on

our first record [Joy Division‘s “Unknown Pleasures” – 1979] I

had to sit there folding the sleeves for three days and putting the

records in and loading up 10,000 friggin’ LPs into the back of a

van. Now all of the sudden I make a record and someone just says,

‘That’s a great record, would you like some coffee?'”

Potts, who grew up listening to New Order, first joined up

with Hook as a sound engineer for Revenge and then became the

group’s touring bassist during a 1991 tour of America.

“When I first started working with Peter in the studio with

Revenge, I was working *for* him and I didn’t necessarily know who

he was,” he recalls. “Afterwards, we were just working together as

friends.”

“The iconic part of it doesn’t come into it when he’s trying

to get me out of bed in the morning or trying to make something

work in the studio,” Hook adds. “I was working with David Bowie, thinking, ‘Oh God, David Bowie,

he’s a God.’ But then in the studio, I’d say, ‘Dave, are you going

to run the bleeding tape or are we just sitting here wasting our

time?’ That superstar bit doesn’t really matter when it comes down

to working.”

Trending

The work that went into “Music for Pleasure” has already won

the band two Top 20 hits in the U.K., and Monaco’s first single,

“What Do You Want From Me,” is currently sha-la-la-la-la-la-la-ing

all over American radio. As for the fate of New Order, Hook is less

than optimistic.