The Holy Roman Empire is one of the 42 factions of the Medieval Conquest. It located on the center and top of Europe. Holy Roman Empire was ruled by Kaiser Richard of Cornwall. The capital of the Holy Roman Empire is Frankfurt. The claimant to the throne was Emperor Ferry of Upper Lorraine. Its bordered the Kingdom of France in the west, the Kingdom of Denmark in the north, the Polish Principalities and the Kingdom of Bohemia in the east, and the territories of Guelphs and Ghibellines. And in the southeast is the Kingdom of Hungary.

At the start of the game, the Holy Roman Empire is at peace, and soon in the near future, the Holy Roman Empire declared war random factions in Italy, and it's neighbors.

History[]

After the deposition of Frederick II by Pope Innocent IV in 1245, Henry Raspe, Landgrave of Thuringia was set up as anti-king to Frederick's son Conrad IV (d. 1254). Henry was killed in 1247 and succeeded as anti-king by William of Holland (died 1256). After 1257, the crown was contested between Richard of Cornwall, who was supported by the Guelph party, and Alfonso X of Castile, who was recognized by the Hohenstaufen party but never set foot on German soil.

While the Holy Roman Empire is height of the interregnum, however during the term Great Interregnum is occasionally used for the period between 1250 (death of Frederick II) and 1273 (accession of Rudolf I).

Rulers[]

Kaiser Richard of Cornwall Initial ruler

Emperor Ferry of Upper Lorraine Claimant

Vassals[]

Baron Heinrich III the Illustrious Baron Rudolf I Count Ulrich Von Lichtenstein Count Ludwig II the Stern Count Albrecht I Count Heinrich XIII Count Johann I Count Walram V Count Konrad von Hochstaden Count Gerhard I von Dhaun Count Arnold II von Isenburg Count Ulrich III von Spanheim Count Friedrich III Count Barnim I Count Rudolf IV Duke Berthold II Pfirt Duke Gerhard II zur Lippe Duke Heinrich III the Kind Duke Konrad I the Pious Duke Otto III the Pious

Territories[]

The territory of the Holy Roman Empire contains the following towns, castles, and villages:

Note that over the course of the game, other kingdoms may besiege and take over these lands, and the Holy Roman Empire may gain more. However, these places are the only ones from which you can recruit European. There are European recruits in European villages, and also mercenaries in taverns.

Notes[]

Trivia[]

The Holy Roman Empire had no official capitals, Kingdom of Germany's capital was Aachen during the reign of Charlemagne or Charles I as the first Holy Roman Emperor as Emperor of the Germans. The capitals were both Frankfurt and Nürnberg until 1254, when Conrad III established Frankfurt as the official capital.

The largest territory of the empire after 962 was the Kingdom of Germany, though it also came to include the Kingdom of Bohemia, the Kingdom of Burgundy, the Kingdom of Italy, and numerous other territories.

There's a possibility that Holy Roman Empire and the Kingdom of France might declaration of war (in reality, Emperor Conrad III made a brotherly relationship with French King Louis IX.)

Wikipedia has an article on this subject at:

Holy Roman Empire