NEGRENSE basketball star James Yap is not interested with the wealth of his estranged wife, TV star Kris Aquino, because if he is, he would have separated from her long ago.

Emmanuel "Em-em" Yap, James's uncle and basketball mentor, said that James has enough money from his salary, which prompted him to decline some suggestions of his lawyers to file a court claim on their conjugal properties.

James and Kris were married twice and they have not reportedly signed any pre-nuptial agreement, as what has been the tradition in the country because all properties of the spouses after the marriage are deemed by society to be conjugal.

James's uncle said that their relatives avoid putting Kris in a bad light, even though they already knew the real score about the couple's separation which took place long before Kris's best friend Boy Abunda publicly announced the separation.

He added they were saddened by petty reports regarding James taking bars of soap and bottles of shampoo from their condominium. The fact is that, aside from taking James's car, Kris also did not allow James to get inside their condominium. James was forced to stay at a hotel even before he left for the US.

"It was actually Kris who had the advantage on their marriage (because of the celebrity status of James). James has become a star because of his being the number one basketball player in the country. According to internet reports, the ratings for Kris's program plummeted after the separation," Yap said.

It was Kris who took James's car when she separated from him. James just opted to buy a new car. She even did so many things against James that his family do not want to divulge anymore, said the elder Yap.

James will be back from his US vacation along with some of his teammates on September 5.

"He was happy before he left for the vacation because he was allowed to visit his son, Baby James. He loves Baby James so much," Yap said.

Yap also said that Kris somehow showed some indication of reconciling with James. She even held James hand when they had a closed-door conference with the judge during the hearing on James's petition for visitation rights, Yap disclosed.

He attested to his nephew's love for Kris and cited as the proof the public admission made by James that it is not easy having a separation. Yap also said that Kris was good to them adding Kris is somehow not that close to them, perhaps because of her busy schedule, he said.