Who Is Kris Aquino Husband? Illness Update: Kris Aquino has opened up about her illness and health problems on her Instagram page. Her newest images show that she has lost a lot of weight. What may be the cause?

Kris Aquino is going to another country for all of the therapies and procedures she needs to deal with her massive weight loss. Her recent separation and weight loss have kept her in the spotlight.

Aquino, a Filipina television presenter, is currently unwell. She is unwell, and as a result, she is losing weight. Her fans were concerned about her health after seeing photographs and videos of her on social media.

Her fans and well-wishers are hoping for her rapid recovery and good health. Kristina Bernadette Cojuangco Aquino is Kris Aquino’s birth name.

Who Is Kris Aquino Husband?

Kris Aquino started a live-in relationship with actor Phillip Salvador, with whom she has a son, in 1994.

Following their breakup in 2003, her relationship with comedian Joey Marquez was widely publicized, with Aquino accusing Marquez of infecting her with an STD.

She married PBA professional player James Yap in a civil ceremony on July 10, 2005, following a disagreement over Yap’s adultery in 2006, and announced her pregnancy the following year.

James Carlos “Bimby” Aquino Yap, Jr., Aquino’s second son, was born in Makati in April 2007. Aquino announced in 2010 that she and Yap were no longer together.

Aquino confirmed her engagement to former lawmaker Mel Senen Sarmiento in October 2021.

Kris Aquino Latest News: What Illness Does She Have? Health Problems Update

Kris Aquino’s illness and health problems were announced on her verified Instagram account, @krisaquino.

She revealed her breakup rumors and physical state on January 3. Kris stated that she would journey abroad to further diagnose her health in that message.

Aquino hasn’t figured out why she’s losing so much weight. She is currently 88 pounds (40 kilograms).

Kris had a condition called Chronic Spontaneous Urticaria. It is a symptom of urticaria that lasts at least six weeks. Kris revealed her health status in 2018, revealing that she had been diagnosed with an autoimmune disorder.

Kris Aquino Salary In 2022

Kris Aquino’s accurate salary as of 2022 has not been revealed yet.

Aquino is estimated to be worth around $10 million in terms of net worth.

Her earnings were derived from a variety of jobs in the entertainment industry. Aquino, too, has a business from which she could earn a lot of money.

Kris Aquino Wikipedia Details

According to Wikipedia, Kris Aquino was born in the Philippines. She is a Filipina businesswoman, socialite, producer, actor, and TV host.

Aquino earned a high school diploma from Colegio San Agustin-Makati. In 1992, she graduated from Ateneo de Manila University with a Bachelor of Arts in English Literature.

Kris’ parents are Corazon Cojuangco-Aquino and Beinigo Aquino Jr. Her ancestors are of Chinese and Kapampangan descent. She made her feature film debut in Regal Films’ Piso Dida: Sabay Tayo.

ncG1vNJzZmhqZGy7psPSmqmorZ6Zwamx1qippZxemLyue8Keo56aXZy2tMCOsJ%2BoZZmoeqy%2ByKxkmqmlnruweceuqpuZnpl8