After the Alma and Primo solutions are implemented at the National Library, they will be rolled out to early adopters consisting of academic, regional, and county libraries. These institutions will transfer their data to a common cataloging service and begin working collaboratively with Alma and Primo. The experience they gain will benefit all the libraries in Poland as the OMNIS e-service project is rolled out across the country.

Director General of the National Library of Poland Mr. Tomasz Makowski said, “Alma and Primo will help us continue to carry out the National Library’s longstanding policy of providing innovative, high-quality library e‑services that meet modern standards and needs. Alma and Primo will assist us in building a foundation for long-term national cooperation and unified library and information services.”

Ofer Mosseri, corporate vice president and general manager of Ex Libris EMEA, said, “The National Library of Poland joins an illustrious list of state and national institutions that use Alma and Primo solutions as the platform to deliver library services. We are looking forward to working closely with the National Library as it brings this exciting national project to Polish libraries of all types and sizes.”

About the National Library of Poland

The National Library of Poland is the central Polish library, under the direction of the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage of the Republic of Poland. A legal deposit library, it also collects books, journals, and electronic and audiovisual publications published in the territory of Poland, as well as Polish-language materials published abroad. As an important humanities research library, the National Library contains the main archive of Polish writing and serves as the state center of bibliographic information about books. In addition, the library plays a significant role as a research facility and exerts influence on the practice of librarianship across Poland.

For more information, visit https://www.bn.org.pl/en/.

About Ex Libris