The touring exhibition highlighting Poland’s heritage project by The National Library of Poland and entitled, A Commonwealth of Diverse Cultures: Poland’s Heritage, is on show at St James Cavalier Centre for Creativity until 20 July. Celebrating the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue, the exhibition consists of 10 panels featuring a different theme of Poland’s history on film. Jerzy Chmielewski, Ambassador of the Republic of Poland to Malta and based in Rome discusses the cultural context of the exhibition with The Malta Independent.

How did the concept of this project originate? Can you explain why it was called Commonwealth?

It was an idea of Tomasz Makowski, Head of the National Library of Poland in Warsaw, an eminent historian who had worked for many years at the manuscript department.

He thought it very important to popularise the great collections of the National Library. These reflect the rich traditions of multiculturalism and religious and ethnic tolerance in Poland, where the state was understood as the common wealth of all citizens.

The Polish Foreign Affairs Ministry considered this multimedia exhibition showing this aspect of Polish history to be a perfect medium to present the Polish contribution to the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue.

The exhibition showcases 10 different presentations. Can you elaborate about each presentation?

The first, and probably the most important, is a short lecture by Professor Norman Davies on the history of Poland, among others about the international position of the first Republic of Poland, the Commonwealth, tolerance and democratic principles that shaped its political system.

The next one presents, in a nutshell, the history of the National Library in Warsaw, and the remaining ones are dedicated to various cultural circles and their impact on the general image of Polish culture. Collections of the National Library such as the Lithuanian, Italian, French, Ruthenian, Armenian, Jewish, Islamic, German and the Polish Eastern Borderlands collections are a reflection of this impact.

The panels are very well laid out. Is there an order or sequence in this display for the visitor to follow or it is left to the visitor’s discretion?

It is absolutely the choice of the visitor. Each film is like a jewel box full of great treasures: beautiful manuscripts, printed books, and – which is the most important – interesting pieces of information that very often complement each other. That is why it is worth watching and listening to all spots.

What does Poland want to convey to the Maltese community through this exhibition?

Actually, it is an invitation to visit our beautiful country and to study its rich and quite unusual, when compared to other countries, history and culture.

Also, it seems that the Maltese people are very well positioned to understand this message, as they will see the exhibition from the angle of their own history and uniqueness of a country which, being in a very central position, has always remained in the area of influences of several civilisation areas.

This, I believe, is a common denominator of our experience.

The presentations altogether show a marvellous collection of manuscripts. Is the real collection of manuscripts at The National Library of Poland available for public viewing?

Not yet, but the National Library intends to open a permanent exhibition at the Special Collections Division so as to allow any interested persons to view exhibits such as the first edition of Copernicus’ De Revolutionibus or the original of Potocki’s Manuscript found in Saragossa. The exhibition will be presented at the Palace of the Commonwealth in Warsaw, the interiors of which one may admire in the exhibition spots being presented at the Atrium of St James Cavalier in Valletta.

Since the Maltese in general may not be so acquainted with Poland and its major places of interest, what does Warsaw have to offer to the tourist?

I think that Warsaw can be a very interesting place to visit for Maltese visitors, because apart from its tourist attractions and cultural offerings, the city is an example of different architectural styles from the ones you have in Valletta.

As many Maltese people know, Warsaw was the city which was completely destroyed during the second world war. It happened by the special order of Hitler after the Warsaw uprising in 1944. This part of the history of the city is to be known by visiting the Museum of Warsaw Uprising, which was established a few years ago and presents the story of this event in a very evocative manner by using multimedia presentations and IT solutions.

After the war only the part of the old town was reconstructed in the original architectural style. The other parts of the city were rebuilt in a modern architectural key.

Among the main tourist attractions I would suggest to visit the Royal Castle in Warsaw and the summer residence of Polish Kings in Wilanow. Places connected with the famous Polish composer Fryderyk Chopin (Ostrogski Castle where he lived and Zelazowa Wola where he was born, which is located very close to Warsaw).

For fans of the different kind of music I would like to suggest the many places where they can listen to Polish jazz, which has its special national flavour and has fans and followers in many countries. Of course, apart from Warsaw, there are other Polish cities to be discovered, such as Gdañsk where the peaceful revolution in Central and Eastern Europe started in the 1980s, or Krakow, which is a city of huge cultural and historical heritage in Poland.

We read that Malta is the second place after Rome where this exhibition is being put on show. What has inspired your Embassy to choose our island before other European countries?

For us, Malta is a very important political partner with whom we share the membership in the European Union. Malta is also the country which plays a particular role because of its geopolitical position.

Yours is the country which was always perceived as “a bridge” between western and eastern cultures on the South of Europe. That is why we could not avoid the possibility to present the part of the historical heritage of Poland in Malta, where the key message of intercultural dialogue can be very well understood.

Coming to your role as an Ambassador, how can bilateral relations between Malta and Poland be strengthened?

Although there is a lot going on in the Polish-Maltese bilateral relations, I am strongly convinced that there is still some space to deepen them tenderly.

This will be my task as the Ambassador accredited in Malta and I am very honoured I can represent my country there.

We look to Malta with great admiration and growing interest. Malta is our important partner within the European Union and the country we are always eager to coordinate our foreign policy with. We are working on President Fenech Adami’s visit in Poland, Prime Minister Tusk’s visit to Malta, and on some bilateral consultations. I am sure other contacts will follow.

Is this the first Polish cultural activity in Malta?

This is the first cultural activity in Malta during my short period of being the Ambassador of Poland to Malta, as I presented my credentials in April 2008.

I wish Poland was often present in the schedule of the cultural agenda of Malta and will do my best to meet this challenge. Our nations have a lot to show to each other in terms of cultural exchanges and the common knowledge about our countries.

This will always create the added value in political and economic relations.

Considering that both Poland and Malta are EU countries, and connections between the two countries will be on the increase from now on, are there any plans to have a Polish Embassy in Malta? If yes, by when?

There is a strong will in Poland to have the Polish permanent mission to Malta, because up to now we have an Honorary Consulate. I do believe that the Embassy will be a very useful instrument to enhance our bilateral cooperation and strengthen the Polish-Maltese relations in all fields. This issue is on the desk in Warsaw for the last year and the delay is only due to the economical requirements, but I am convinced that we will soon overcome this obstacle.

Malta and Poland: what do you consider to be the main similarities between these two peoples apart from both joining the EU on the same day?

Most of all, our nations have a very important common link which is the fact that the majority of our citizens are Roman Catholic. This is a very positive factor which I think plays a positive role in our bilateral relations.

Furthermore our countries have long and strong democratic traditions which influence the present internal policies as well as the position of our countries on the international arena.

Moreover, there is one very important similarity between our countries which is the geopolitical significance of our localisations. As I mentioned before, Poland – like Malta – has always been perceived as the bridge between western and eastern cultures. The only difference is that we are positioned in the northern part of Europe and you in the southern part. This fact influenced the histories of our nations and poses us in the kind of particular experience and capabilities that we can share with other European Union member countries.