Outstanding contributions

Named in honour of Ireland’s Nobel laureate poet, Seamus Heaney, the prize is awarded by the Japan branch of the International Association for the Study of Irish Literatures (IASIL) in collaboration with the Embassy of Ireland, Tokyo, to recognise outstanding contributions to literary relations between Ireland and Japan.

Professor Morrissey, who has won both the Forward and TS Eliot poetry prizes and was Belfast’s Poet Laurate, has previously lived in Japan and written about her experiences there.

Sinéad, who is Professor of Creative Writing in Newcastle University’s School of English Literature, Language and Linguistics, says: “This award came as a total surprise. I’m very honoured for my work to be recognised in this way, and for the surprising synergies between Irish and Japanese poetry to be marked and celebrated.”

Enduring literary bond

The Seamus Heaney Award jury members acknowledged Professor Morrissey's significance within contemporary Irish poetry, praising her "poetic reach and impact on other poets and the discursive community at large."

Ambassador of Ireland Damien Cole expressed his support of the nomination for this year, saying "This award celebrates the enduring literary bond between Ireland and Japan, characterized by mutual affection and esteem."

Sinéad Morrissey's distinguished career spans six collections of poetry and numerous prestigious awards, including the T.S. Eliot Prize and the Forward Prize for Best Collection. Her deep exploration of historical and personal themes has solidified her reputation as a leading voice in contemporary poetry.

Her contribution to poetry extends beyond borders, encompassing historical and personal realms with precision and imagination. Her work reflects a profound philosophical inquiry, coupled with a Zen-like awareness of everyday life, earning her admiration and acclaim worldwide.

Professor Morrissey will receive her award at a ceremony in 2025.

Press release adapted with thanks to the Embassy of Ireland, Tokyo.