X-treme Measures is the thirty-sixth (twenty-third in the English dub) episode of Medabots. It first aired in COUNTRY on BROADCASTER on DATE.

Content[]

Summary[]

Ikki and Metabee need only one more victory to qualify to the World Robattle Cup, and in a last-ditch effort, they decided to challenge Space Medafighter X. Despite being rivals, Koji and Rintaro lended Medaparts for Ikki, and he also receives a special gift from Erika...?! With everyone's support, the Robattle starts.

Plot[]

Ikki and Metabee need only one more victory to qualify to the World Robattle Cup, but as time running out, they decided to challenge Space Medafighter X. Everyone thinks it is a bad idea to challenge Japan's best Medafighter, specially due to Metabee being tired after his Robattles with the Rubberobo Gang, and Karin calls Rintaro, suggesting Ikki to face him instead as the chance of winning against him will be better. However, Ikki and Metabee have decided to face Space Medafighter X, as if they can't defeat Japan's best, what chance they will have against the best Medafighters from around the world in the tournament? Erika asks Space Medafighter X to give Ikki a handicap due to Metabee's condition, but Space Medafighter X says he will use his full power, saying that if Ikki won in that condition, others would attribute his victory to the handicap instead of his skills. However, the Screws appear and Spyke lends Metabee Krosserdog's left arm to improve his chances. Koji and Rintaro also lend some of their parts (Sumilidon's legs and Kantaroth's right arm), and Erika also gives a good luck gift for Ikki. After those preparations, Ikki and Metabee start the decisive Robattle against Space Medafighter X and Arcbeetle.

Meanwhile, the Rubberobo Gang is watching their Robattle and decide to wait for Space Medafighter X to defeat Metabee so they can take his Rare Medal, but they ask what would they do if Space Medafighter X lost, with Seaslug doubting that Japan's best would lose to a kid. Shrimplips then has an idea. Instead of attacking the Medabot, why not attack the Medafighter directly to take the Medawatch that controls the Medabot? Seaslug thinks they have no other choice and prepares Whitesword for a surprise attack.

Despite all the preparations, Arcbeetle is too much for Metabee. Arcbeetle is able to dodge and defend against all of Metabee's attacks, even effortlessly taking his missiles with one hand and throwing them aside. Metabee, still exhausted from his previous Robattles and despondent, almost goes down, but Ikki lifted his spirit. With his willpower back, Metabee was able to damage Arcbeetle, surprising everyone. However, Whitesword appears and attacks Ikki during the heat of the battle, but Space Medafighter X noticed the Medabot and jumped in front of Ikki to defend him. Mr. Referee asks what they are doing, and the Rubberobo Gang tries to excuse it as only an accident, but the blatant lies do not work. Seaslug then challenges Ikki using his real name, but Metabee, enraged with the interruption of the Robattle and their coward attack against his partner, is able to use the Medaforce again, defeating Whitesword in an instant.

Everyone checks if Space Medafighter X is alright, and as Whitesword's attack broke his mask, they are surprised to see that he is the Phantom Renegade. The Phantom Renegade reveals that he planned to steal Metabee's Rare Medal to protect it from evil, but then he saw the friendship between Ikki and Metabee grow, and decided to bet on their friendship. Then, a helicopter appears and drops Mega-Emperor near them, the Rubberobo Gang's most powerful Medabot, which attacks everything in sight. Shrimplips warns them of what they will be up against and the four Rubberobo Gang members run away. The Phantom Renegade suggests everyone to do the same while he stays behind to face the war machine, but Ikki and Koji decided to stay to help. However, Mega-Emperor is too powerful even for Arcbeetle, and the Phantom Renegade decided to risk getting close to forcefully eject his Medal. He is successful, but as soon as Mega-Emperor stopped moving, the cliff they were standing on collapsed and they fell on the ocean. Before falling, the Phantom Renegade requested Ikki to protect Metabee's Rare Medal against evil forces like the Rubberobo Gang. Ikki and Koji wonder if he could have survived that fall, but before they can do anything, they are surrounded by several members of the Rubberobo Gang.

Trivia[]

In the episode[]

Background[]

English dub changes[]

The scenes of the cave collapsing removed in the previous episode were also removed in the recap.

The full view of the cliff was cut, only showing the top in the dub.

Rintaro rubbing Karin like a pet was cut.

While talking about a handicap, in the dub Erika says that everyone whispers about her, and Space Medafighter X apologizes to Erika as he did not knew about that. In the original, Erika says that she would be happy with the victory conditions regardless of what others would say, and Space Medafighter X apologizes for Chidori, who said that he was being too serious with the kids.

A fadeout was added before Erika's gift, and a scene was repeated after it. The "gan" onomatopoeia from the scene was cut.

Squidguts's reaction to Shrimplips's suggestion of attacking a Medafighter was cut.

In the original, Gillgirl says that Shrimplips's idea is too evil, even for them, and Seaslug says that was not the time to be afraid. In the dub, Gillgirl finds Shrimplips's idea brilliant, and Seaslug agrees, saying he was glad that he had that idea.

A Medawatch screen was added in the dub. It is the same screen from For Better, For Worse - Part II, but with the lower text replaced by "Left arm & head damaged" and "80% damage". However, it is inconsistent with the Medawatch's voice, which says "Warning: Right arm damaged. 100% damage. Function ceased. Left arm damaged. Head damaged. 80% damage.", while the screen shows that the left arm's function ceased and the right arm's damage is less than 50%. The Medawatch's voice is similar in the original, but provided additional info: "Left arm's shooting mechanism damaged. Unable to attack.". Also, except for the head, Metabee was not using his usual parts, which was not depicted in this screen.

When Metabee went down, he started talking as if he was going to die in the dub. In the original, he said he reached his limit and wondered if he would have a chance even if he was in best condition, but is glad that he did his best.

A fadeout was added after Metabee started collapsing, and a scene was repeated afterwards.

Samantha punching Sloan was cut.

As a fadeout was added for the commercial break when Metabee went down, the scenes before and after the Japanese eyecatches were modified, with some scenes changing positions and some duplicated scenes being removed. The full view of Whitesword attacking Ikki before the commercial break was also removed.

A fadeout was added after Space Medafighter X was revealed to be the Phantom Renegade, and a scene was repeated afterwards.

The scene with the Phantom Renegade talking about Metabee's Rare Medal was shortened a bit. As the Phantom Renegade is injured, he talked a bit slower in the original, but he talks normally in the dub. The duration of the next scene with the helicopter was also shortened.

The Screws wondering what the helicopter dropped was cut, and Shrimplips gives his warning sooner in the dub.

Arcbeetle and Mega-Emperor are silent in the original. They gained some lines in the dub, such as "tri cannon" and "target locked".

Koji called his steward Robinson in the dub. His name is unknown in the original.

A few of the scenes after near everyone leaves in the jeep were shortened a bit, such as the scenes where the Phantom Renegade says "Guess you're right" and "I have to stop him".

In the original, the Phantom Renegade commented that Mega-Emperor is stronger than Robo-Emperor. Robo-Emperor was not mentioned in the dub.

Characters[]

Note: All characters are listed in order of their first appearances in the episode. The list does not consider the recap from the previous episode in the beginning, so Seagaru, Spiritus, Gokudo and Gobanko are not included.

Image Name Note Space Medafighter X Revealed to be the Phantom Renegade. Arcbeetle Ikki Tenryou Metabee Erika Amazake Karin Junmai Koji Karakuchi Chidori Tenryou Jouzou Tenryou Rintaro Namishima Fossilkat First appearance. Silhouette only. Piraskull Pirastar Monoklar Warbandit Silhouette only. Samantha The Screws. Spyke Sloan Mr. Referee Gillgirl Seaslug Shrimplips Squidguts Whitesword Mega-Emperor Leader With his cat. Rubberobo Gang members Robinson Sumilidon

Gallery[]

Title screens[]

Title Cards[]

Title Sequences[]

Other[]

Pictures[]

Episode[]

Preview[]

Sequences[]

Episode[]

Preview[]

Videos[]

Episode[]

Note: This section should only contain full episode uploads made by the right holders. We do not wish to endorse any unauthorized uploads of full episodes on this wiki, as it would violate FANDOM's Terms of Use and further laws against piracy.

Preview[]

[]

References[]