See other formats

The Himalayan Gazetteer or The Himalayan Districts of the North Western Province of India In 3 Vols. (6 Parts) Edwin T Atkinson Vol. 3 in 2 parts Part - / COSMO PUBLICATIONS New Delhi CONTENTS VOL.III PART I i. AdMii AgUr Agupnr Aalir Ajmer AlekneD^le Alnom AmUri Amiofe Annfield Amii AMrori Aai Aikot tf elli Aekot TallA Aewibyon Attaigttli Athbui Kalla Athbiii Talk Athgaon Ayirpatlia B. Backhansjua Bailalpnr BadbAn Badrinkth Bigeanar Ba^li Baijina Baijnath baiiagana Balokba Ditto Bakhha Ubit Baawa Band Bandarpocbb BoaeUyun Banganyun Bangarhayua Banjbagr Bina B&rahmandal Barab^dn Binbin Birab&t Banon Baxmdco Banntpnr Bau Bal Belkbet Bbibar Bbadrij BhaiDakhet Pabi. Pace. aei 1 2 tb. •d. 8 tb. 5 12 tb. tb. ib. tb tb. 13 tb. 17 18 ib. 19 ib. 20 20 tb. 21 23 27 81 tb. tb. 82 33 85 tb. 36 tb. tb. 38 89 tb. lb. 40 tb. 42 48 44 45 tb. 48 ib. ib. 49 so 74 75 Bhainn Bhairon-XlbaU Bhatirbra Bhikal Til Bbeiang Bbiftiya Bhilang Bbim Tal Bbotiya Kabila Darraa Bidolaynn Bidyiikoti Bijlot Wnlla Bijlot Palk Binrar Bimhi Diaand Biaaiid Kalla BiajyuU Bogaarh Boiaran Bo-udiyor ‘Bndhi Bungi Byana Byanaghbt i Gbaebaka Chakrita Cbaknaynn Chalai Cbanoli Champiwat Cband^ Ghandpur Cbandpor Sili Ghandpur Tuili Ghandpur Fort Chandpar-ke'Manda Gbong^ GhBmiiaon Ghiral Malla Chbiil lUla Cbaubhainai Cbandbna Changadh Chaugaon Ghangarkhi Chaukot Malla Cbnukot Bicbhk Cbaukot Talk Channdkot I Gbanrini Chantbin ... 76 ... 76 ... 78 ... tb. ... 70 ... tb. ... tb. ... 80 ... 83 ... 98 ... 152 ... «b. ... tb. 163 tb ... ib. ... 154 ... 163 >b. tb. ... 156 tb. ... 167 ib- ... 158 ... tb. .. 189 .. tb. .. 161 .. tb. .. 162 .. ib- .. 163 .. 165 .. 166 .. 167 .. tb. .. 1G8 .. tb. .. 169 .. ib. . 170 »b. . 171 ib. 172 tb. .. 174 ,. 175 tb. ib. 176 177 Fagi. G. Fasb. Chaathin • •• 177 Cigar • •• 225 Chawalthura • • • 178 Gagia ata 226 Clihabm- Duiuaula « ea %b. Gagwir^dn • ■t 227 Chhakbita tb. Gala ■ •• lA. Chliirha • as 180 Gamalli a ■ • ib. Cbobta a ■ a %b. Gan&i ata 228 Cboprakob va« 181 Gangoli aaa 229 Gangol ■ aa 232 JJa Ganguli-Hat ••• ib. D(ba ata 181 Gangotri t«a 234 Dabka • •• %b. Garra • a* 238 PalmiBoin 182 GarbwAI ■ aa lA. Dkiipur aaa tfr. Garhwal BhAbar t.a 32o Danpur Malla • as 184 Gar-tob ■ ■ a 321 Dknpur Birhbla aaa 185 Gaula a • t 322 Dinpur Talla • •• t5. Gbnrdunyan aaa 323 Dorma a»a 186 Girgaon lA. Dkrma Vankti ••• t6. Girtbi •at lb. Dirfin ■ • • 187 Giritar Talla aaa 824 Caaoli Main aa J ib. Girwar Walla • v a 325 Dasoli Talli 188 Girivar Folia aaa lA. Debra •aa 189 Golom-La it* 326 Debra D(an • •a 199 Gopeawar ib. Deoprajag • •• tb. Gi >*1 aaa 327 Devi Db<ira aaa SOI Goripblk aaa 328 Dewalgarb a • a 208 Guin-Fani aaa lA. Dbitjvuli aaa 204 Gujara aaa 329 Dbaiigu Valla aaa 205 Gumdea aaa lA. Dhaugu Talla a a • tb. Gnmti aaa lA. Dbaniyakot tb. GAii 330 Ditto 206 Ouokha aaa 331 Sbakuri a aa 207 Garirayfia ata 332 Dbaiipur aaa 208 Gwtlkun ib. Dhauiidyal^uii • •• ib. Gyuulad ib. Dharon a aa ib. Ha Dhauh (Wratern) at a 209 Dhaiili (EtUtern) 210 Baldwkni at* 333 Dhikuli 211 llastioga 1 aa 334 Dhugsurulbti aaa 212 ITanal^g ■ a* 335 Dburapbkb aaa i6. Hiuaal • ta lA. Db}'aniniu aat lb. DinJiliat. a aa 213 I. Diun Tkl aaa 214 IdiralejAn aa* 336 Diuili aaa tb. Inyakot t ta lA. Dol ■ aa ,215 Domnila at • ib. J. Dora Malla • a» 216 Jidliganga •a* 336 Dora Talla ib. JaintoUy un • aa 338 Dora Dicbbla •aa 217 Jallath aaa 339 Doti Malh aat i5. Jaapur aaa ib. Dug aat lb. Jauns&r-Biirar •aa ib. D^i^li aaa 218 Jolabngr • aa 371 Dung aaa 219 JosliimaUi ■ ta 372 Duiigari ■ aa lA. Jubir aaa 373 Ditto • al 220 Jumna • ta 374 Dwaimhat aaa iA. Daaiaaau • ■a 2?5 F. Fatehpnr Talla a*» 223 THE HIMALAYAN DISTRICTS or THB NORTH-WESTEHN PROVINCES. VOL. III. Adb&dri, a halting-place between Lohba and Karnprayag, is situate in patti Sili Ohandpiir of parganuh Ghandpur in British Garhw&l in latitude 30^-9' and longitude 79*’-16'10^ : distant 10 miles 7 furlongs and 2 poles from Lohba and 10 miles 5 furlongs from Karnprayig. !Kiere is an encainping-gronnd and dharnudla (rest-house) here. The road from Lohba or Gairsen gives off a branch there to Ndr&yanbugar on the Pindar river and itself crosses the Diw&li range (7,963 feet) by the Diw&li-kh&l at an elevoF* tion of 7,010 feet above the level of the sea. Near the pass are the remains of a fort and the ridge forms the waterparting between the llainganga and the Pindar. The road thence follows the right bank of the Bhiirarig&r by the villages of Af&lsi and Kheti to Adbadii The road is good and passes through beautiful scenery. On the right are the Randal (6,553 feet), Suilidknda (8,936) and BinttU (8,300) peaks, and on the left the Diwdli. (7,963 feet) and Beri (5,479) peaks. Just above Adbadri is the small lake of Beni TtU, where there is a tea*factory.* At Adbadri are the remains of sixteen temples similar to those found at Dw&rah&t with the usual Turk’s cap ornament. One dedicated to Badriniriyan is still used for worship, end the people say tnat in a few years' time the road by Joshimath to Badrin5th will be closed by the meeting of the oppo¬ site hills near the temple, and that then this temple will be the object of pilgrimage. Tho other temples, too, are used in a lesser degree for worship. They are all crowded together in a space of about 42 by 85 feet and vary in height trom 6 to 20 feet The principal temple is distinguished by a raised platform or cha- butn in front, roofed in and leading to the imall square enclosure > 5m Gm.. XI., TM. 1 2 AOLAR. of the usual pyramidal form, within which is the idol itself. The solitary occupant of the temple at my visit was a Brahmach&ri fakir from Midnapur in Bengal who had taken up his residence there for some five years. Local tradition here assigns the building of the temples to Sankara Acharya, tlic celebrated reformer and Hindu philosopher, while in Kumaon the same style of building bearing traces of similar antiquity is attributed to the piety of the Katyi&ra Bujas. Aglar, a patti of parganah B&mgar in Kumaon, is bounded on the north by pattis Mabryuri Bichhli and Kotauli Talli; on the east by Malirydri Bichhli; on the west by pattis B&mgar MollA and Tall& and on the south by JSlahryuri Talli. This patti comprises nineteen villages having an area of 1.825 bitisy of which 574 are culturable and 1,251 aro cultivated (only three irrigated). The assessment in 1815 was Rs. 1,309 ; in 1820 was Bs. 1,148, and in 1843 was Its. 1,122. The present assessment amounts to Rs. 1,522, which falls on the total area at 13 annas 4 pies per acre and on the cultivated area at Rs. 1-3-5. The population at the time of last settle¬ ment numbered 2,995 souls, of whom 1,550 were males. It is chiefly inhabited by the Agari caste of miners who give their name to it Agaspur, a village and halting-place on the route by M4si from Paori to Almora, is situate in patti Ghaukot Bichhla of parganah P41i in Kumaon in latitude 29°-52'-13^ and longitude 79**-ld'-18'' ; distant 12 miles 1 furlong 22 poles from Kfinjoli and 12 miles 3 furlongs 33 poles from Mdsi. The road from Kiinjoli on the left bank of the Pachrar-g4dh, a tributary of the Eastern Nyar on the right bank, passes to Baijirau on the road from Kainiir to Rkmnagar, and here crosses the Nylir by a bridge of 62 feet span, thence a short level, rise and fall leads to the ascent to Chydrkot-kbdl or pass and thence to Sardikhet-khdl on the borders of Kumaon and Garhwal 7 miles 7 furlongs 33 poles. Several streams are passed on the way to Jkmuri-khal, whence a level road leads to Agaspnr Dya, 4 miles 1 furlong 29 poles. The road is a good one thronghouk and is much used by all the inhabitants of southern Gafhwdl. Aglar, a small river which rises on the northern declivity of the Surkanda peak in ladtudr 30°-25'-25^ and longitude 78^-20' at au elevation of 7,130 feet above the level of the sea in patti Dasjydla of parganah Jaunpur b Native Garhwil, and thonoe flows ALARKANDA 3 rapidly to the westward through a deep and narrow valley, and arter a coarse of about twenty-three miles falls into the Jumna on the left bonk, near the Jaunpnr fort, in latitude 30**-d0'-55^ and longi¬ tude 78®-2'-5(r. ^mer, a patti of parganah Gaiiga Saldn, is bounded on the east by patti Talld Slid of parganah Talld Saldn, on the south by the Kotri Dun and the Bijnor district, on the west by the Udepur pattis and on the north by the same pattis and Dhdngu. A road from Eotdwdra to Srinagar runs just within its eastern boundary, passing by Charekha, Duni and Malnlya, at the first of which there is a rained bungalow. Other villages are Mathdna, Kanda, Buli and Utdreha, connected with the Kotdwdra road by a cross path; Kaphaldi, Juda-R&waly&l and Manjydri to the north and Mawakot to the south, also connected by a path with Kotdwdra. Simalna lies to the south-west : there is a school at Gdm. In 1864 six villages were received from Karaundu. The patwdri of Ajmer usually resides in Ghota of patti Sfid Talld and collects tlie land-revenue of that patti also; in 1864 the revenue of both aggregated Bs. 2,146. Charekha travellers' bungalow lies in longitude 7S°~37' and lati¬ tude 29®-49'. Alaknanda, a river in British C .rhwul, formed by the junction of the Dfaauli (western) and Vishnuganga at Vishnupraydg in par¬ ganah Fainkhanda.^ At the confluence, the Dhauli has a breadth of about thirty-fire or forty yards with a rapid current, and the Vish- nuganga a breadth of £wenty-five or forty yards also with a rapid current. The elevation of the confluence above the sea is 4,743 feet. The united stream flows south-west to Ohamoli, receiving the Budr, Ghirdr and Pdtal Ganges and the Birhi or Birahi-ganga at Birhi. Thence, in a southerly direction, to Nandpraydg, where the Nanddkini joins it from the east in latitude 30^-19^-56^ and longitude 79”-21'-29,''' at an elevation of 2,805 feet above the level of the sea. Again it turns south-west to Karapray4g, 45 miles from Vishnupraytg, where the Pindar joins it on the left bank in lati¬ tude 30''-15'-45'' and longitude 79*-15'-29,''' with an elevation of i',600 feei Thence nearly due west to Budrpraydg, 19 miles, where it receives the Mandakini from the north on the right bank in latitude > See Gss. XL, £92.307, 321, 347. 4 ALARNAMDA. and longitude at an elevation of 1,980 feet. Turning again now south-west it flows by Srinagar to Deopray4g, 37 miles, w'lien it is joined by the Bhigirathi from Tihri in latitude 30®-8'-45'' and longitude 78®-38'-56,'‘' with an elevation of 1,953 feet, after which it is styled the Ganges. At one place called the K&kar’s leap from the tradition of a kdkar or barking deer having jumped across it, the river narrows to about 25 feet and rushes through a cut in the rocks which rise at least 500 feet perpendicularly on either side, opening out into an immense and deep pooL From this point, which is a'oout four miles above Budrpraydg, the fall is not so great and the general appearance is long reaches with short rapids until it reaches Deopray&g. At this place a huge mass of rock appears to have fallen into the stream, narrowing it to half its proper breadth just before it is joined by the Bh&giratbi. On the top of tliis rock some fifty feet above the river is a rope bridge leading from British Garhwal to DeoprayAg, which is in Native Garh> wal or Tihri, and so much does the river rise in the hot weather and rains that this bridge is frequently swept away. At the eonfluence the Bhagirathi rashes with great force and rapidity down a steep declivity, roaring and foaming over large rocks scattered over its hed. Its breadth is 112 feet and it rises 40 feet during the melting of the snows. The Alaknanda flowing with a smooth nnmffled surface gently winds round the point of confluence. It is 142 feet in breadth and rises 46 feet at the same period. The breadth of the united stream is 240 feet. The Alaknanda abounds with fish, some of which are four or five feet in length. The mah4ser {tohetf shahur) is found weighing up to 80 pounds, and the dog-fish or aahidla nnd kdldbantf a species of barbel. Gold in small quantities has been obtained by searching the sands of this river, but the remuneration resulting (about four annas a day) has been so scanty that the search is nearly discor tinned. There are four iron bridges over the Alaknanda, a tie-bridge at Chamoli, and iron suspension-bridges at Chhatwoi-pipal Budrpraydg and Jdkhni, one and a half miles below Srinagar on the Almora and Tihri load. The last named is 301 feet span from saddle to saddle. From Joshimath downwards the stream is used for the rafting of timber. There are several fine forests of Stnilheanaj Webbiana and exceUa firs on its eastern bank from Rudr- prayfig to Pipalkoti. Below this ehir pines occur up the Nighanl ALMORA. 5 valley opposite Nandpray&g, on the slopes of the Ndgpur hills op¬ posite Chhatwa-pi|)a] at Pokhri and as far as Dhari near Srinagar. Almora') the head-quarters of the Kumaon Division in paid Khaspurja of parganah Bnraliinandal of the Kumaon district, is situate in latitude 29°-37'-3'’' and longitude 79®-40-'2(y‘', by die lower road 30 miles from Naini Tal, 46 miles from Kdl^hungi; it is 19 miles from Binikhct. The town and the civil and military station are built on a bare saddle-shaped ridge running north-west to south-east for about two miles with an elevation varying from 5,200 to 5,500 feet. The jail stands at about 5,439 feet and the church at 5,495 feet above the level of the sea. The station is con¬ nected with the higher ridges of Simtola and Kalmatiya to the west by a eol called Mount Brown or Hiradhunga, so called from its micaceous rock which shines like a diamond (Afra) in the morning sun. Kalmatiya has an elevation of 6,414 feet above the level of the sea, and Simtola an elevation of 6,066 feet. The building known as Simtola house lies in latitude 29°-37'-3^ and longi¬ tude 79'’-43'-21," with an elevation of 6,200 feet. A lateral ridge called Sitoli runs w'estwards from Hiradhunga towards the Kosi river and exactly faces Almora to the north. The intermediate space is crowded with houses and cultivated terraces and possesses a small stream which rises in a spring under Hiradliunga, called by the natives Bani-dhara and by the Europeans St Ronan's Well. On the east and south the Almora hill is bounded by the Suw&l river and on the west by the Kosi, so that it is almost a peninsula con¬ nected with the other hills by the Kalmatiya ridge. To the south¬ west the ridge after attaining its highest point of elevation at Charalekh dips down in a bold and rugged series of masses to the point of jnnetion between these two rivers. The ascent from the bridge crossing theSaw41 and the Sukuni (Gorari)near their junction on the Naini TM road is exceedingly steep and trying, especially in the hot-weather, when the heat reflected from the bare gneiss rocks and the white dust from the road alternately roast and blind the traveller. After passing the leper asylum and the Charalekh bon* galows a very pretty Gothic church is reached, erected under the snperintendenee of Captain Weller and now under the ministration > Th« BUM ia Mid to te dorirod fnm tbo itZmora or wild aorrol (Rmmim AaMtata), wlucA grawa ia aboadaBM oa tfco UlL Tho Cbaad Raju alwan it Bajopar ia oOcial doeBBaaata: aao Gaa, Zl., 6M, 889, 860^ 87(V 887'. r> ALMORA. of ilio Naini THi chaplain, who visits Almorn once a month. Close by and around are the residences of the European community and Fort Moira, otherwise called lAl Mandi, and the parade-ground. The Knmaon battalion was formerly posted at Hawalbag in the valley of the Kosi about five miles north of the present cantonments, but that has long been abandoned as a military station and the Knmaon battalion is now represented by the Srd Gorkha regiment, who garrison the fort and supply a strong detachment to Pithoragarh under the command of a Native officer and guards to Naini T&l and B4nikhet. The sepoys’ lines dip down from the fort on the north-east and the officers’ houses lie to the west and north. Between these and the town is the small Mission chapel with a Grecian portico and inscrip- tions in raised letters in Hindi. Then commences the town. The prin¬ cipal street is paved with stone flags and is about 30 to.50 feet in width and about three-quarters of a mile in length, divided into two bazars by the old fort and new Mission school. The slope from east to west is broken by flights of stone steps which render the street not easily passable for ponies. The houses are from two to four stories high and are substantially built of mica-slato and roofed with thin slabs of the same material. The upper stories are, how¬ ever, nsnally constructed of wood quaintly and profusely carved and some bear decorative lamp-rests of deer’s antlers. The windows are mere apertures for the most part resembling pigeon-holes cut in the wooden panel and closed by a slide. The general appear¬ ance of the town is compact and olean and the conservancy arrange¬ ments seem to be well carried out Beyond where the north-eastern gate was, rises the old fort Almora, in the enclosure of which are (utnated the treasnry and civil courts. An engraving of this is given by Tieflbnthaler in his travels undertaken daring the middle of the last oentniy. Beyond this the top of the ridge is somewhat hollow¬ ed ont and the space is ooenpied by a bazar, tbe office of the snb-coUector of revenue and the Lala Bazar. Here also, on the site of the former residence of the Bajas of' Kumaon, is tbe new Mission school. This school, opened in 1^71, is a fine building in tbe Tuscan stylo, with a central hall 60 feet by 34 feet and a wing on each side containing four spadons class-rooms. The lofty roof of the hall ends in a portico supported by massive stone pUlars. ALHORA. 7 The entire building is of solid masonry and the pediment and frieze have carved inscriptions in English and .Hindi. The plan is due to Oaptsdn Birney, R.E., who also supervised the erection of the building. The dispensary is close at hand and then the road ascends towards the site of the Marchkilah or St Mark’s tower, a building long since palled down. On both sides of the town on the north¬ western and eastern slopes, the hill side is adorned with very fino substantial isolated native houses and also villages embosomed in orchards of tUn, walnut, cherry, Australian jack and apricot The eastern side is less wooded owing to the greater steepness of the mountain face. There are several Hindu temples in Almora, but noue with any pretensions to architectural merit; and there is only one mosque. For a distance of about four miles around Almora on every side the hills are absolutely bare, but beyond that distance the mountains are as well timbered as any in the central parts of the district. Tradition has it that deodar trees were once plentiful on the north-west face of the hill, but from the nature of the soil it is improbable that these forests were ever extensive. The tradition regarding the transfer of the Chand capital here also points to Almora as being then covered with timber. The oaks on Kalmatiya are of a stunted growth, and the pines only attain a respectable size on the northern aspect of the range. Deodars grow well when planted and many of the old houses are built of the wood of this tree, which would so for bear out the tradition. Sixty degrees is about the annual average temperature of the air. In the hot weather, from May to Ist July, the climate of Almora, though at that season from 15 to 20 degrees cooler thnn in the neighbouring plains, approaches to Climate. ^ tropical type. Pankhas and tattis, how¬ ever, are not required, and the thermometer (except for n few hours on some hot days before rain) can be kept down in n closed house to 74**. Whenever it exceeds Sli*’ in an outside shaded verandah, rain or a thunder-storm may bo ox|iected, w’dch sometimes at onco reduces the tomperaturo to G2°. In the rains 72" msy be consi¬ dered the average temperature, and at that season, which is very pleasant at Almora, though nut cuM and requiring fires as at Simla and Mussoorie, the range of the temperature is rarely 2". 8 ALUORA. Midnighi and middaj in a cool room show the thermometor, in Jaljr and August, often for dajs together, at 72" or 73". Outside in the shade the range rarely exceeds 10". In winter, snow falls occasionally, but rarely lies beyond a few hours on the ground. Different years display differeut phenomena in regard to this matter: for instance, on December 11th, 1841, snow covered the ground at the level of the Kosi and Suw41 rivers (3,7fM) feet); on December Slst, 1842, rain fell for hours, yet the 64gar range at 7,500 feet abovr the sea was without a particle of snow. Snow is most frequent in February, taking a number of years October and November are beautiful clear cold months, and most of the fruit trees then lose their leaves. March and April are generally mark¬ ed by thunder-storms, but in all the summer months, till the regu¬ lar monsoon rain falls, a thick atmospherical haze prevaUa which obscures all the view. This haze, however, is common to the whole hills and is as dense near the snows as at Almora. The townS'people of Almora are for the most part very healthy, and the state of health in the cantonment^ where, sometimes, the sepoys suffer considerably, especially during their first seasoning to the climate, is no criterion of that of the town. Fever and dysentery seem to be the prevailing fatal diseases among the natives; and colic is often rapidly fetal, especially in the fruit and vegetable season. The bad fever of the typhoid form (maAdman) has not ooeuned at Almmra. At Almora in the rains, wild hemps, netties, thistles, wonoH wood, Miradilii jalapa (marvel of Peru), mint, dkaddatf and wild balsam, Ac., spring up and produce a rank vegetation, but it is leas grown over than most other hills, owing to the dryness and dial- lownoss of the soil above the solid rock. Madden’ has given n fell account of the botany of Almora which has been inoorporated in a previous volume^. Micaceous schists of four different kinds ao- oording to their degrees of hardness and crystalline character, and according to the greater or less proportion of quarts, is the rock at Almora. On the descending ridge to the 8ow41 and Kosi <m the south-east and south-west points, a great ous-burstof granite prevails, which is connected with theemptionaof the same rock in on assterly and westerly direction at Kaindr, Dwira, Dol, DevHDhdm and Champ&wat, always ata distance of about 40 mUes from the pUlHb •j. A.aBta.,is48. •y<iiJL,aiwkiw. ALMORA. 9 The decomposition of the feldspar causes the characteristic boulder- looking masses on the hills. Some of the granite however is compact and beantiful, especially near the gneiss strata out of which it is erupted, and the graphic variety is singularly so. Some of the mica slate strata and quartz veins show signs of great disturbance, as the Almora ridge approaches these granitic developments—and the hill sides in this direction (tho south-west and the south-east) are un¬ commonly barren, rugged, and, to a fastidious eye, ugly. Almora is peculiarly fitted as a resort for consumptive patients, but for other invalids the temperature is too high daring May and June and does not give sufficient coolness to those who seek an invigorating climate after exposure to the heat of the,plains ; this, too, is enhanced by the almost total absence of shade. The supply of water is of an unusually good quality; springs abound on either side of the ridge within 800 feet of the crest and most of them within 150 feet of the top. That near the tank is directly on the crest of the ridge. In tho hotter months some of tho springs dry up or give a scanty supply, but taking the whole hill and putting aside the conventional distribution of the wells among the different castes, the general supply of water is nearly al\va 3 's sufficient for all purposes. A covered reservoir with a spout is the form usually given to these wells. All the springs rise in mica slate or qua rizose veins which are numerous, and although on tho Kalmatiya ridge traces of iron and graphite arc observable, ferruginous matter has not hitherto been detected in the Almora waters. They are always cool and refreshing to the taste In addition to the springs a never-failing supply of water is obtained by two aqueducts from Simtola. Almora is connected with Banikhet by a new cart-road constructed in 1872-73 and a bridle-road by Haw&lb^ up the valley of the N4n4 Kosi, and thepce by Talla Byuni to the eastern spar of the Banikhet ridge, whence it ia again nearly level to the dtik bungalow, 19 miles from Almora. The road by Dw&rah&t to Garhw&l follows the same route to within nine miles of B&nikfaet, then on to Bfaainskhet, where there is abnngalow (see Bhainskhet). The Boijnith and Nand- prayftg road follows the Kosi valley from Hawfilbig to Someswar, where there is a bungalow, 18 miles from Almora. The BAgeswar road proceeds by Takula, where there is an encamping-ground 12 2 10 ALMOBA. miles from Almoro ; tho road is winding and high, lying along dio upper ridge of the hills with one steep descent to T&kula. A second road passes by Binsar to B&geswnr. To the east roads load by Pannwa Naula bungalow, 16 miles from Almora to Pithoragarh, and by Devi Dhdra to LobnghAt. Naini T41 is reached by Piura on the upper road 8 miles from Almora and thence Rdmg6r bungalow 10 miles and Naini Tdl 13 miles ; by the lower road, which is ex¬ ceedingly hot and feverish, daring and after the nuns the Khairna bungalow is 18 ijiiles from Almora and Naini Tdl, 12 miles from Khairna. The latter half of the lower route consists of a steep ascent along the western slopes of the Lariya Eunta ridge to the St. Loo gorge overlooking the lake. In 1872, tho total native population numbered 6,884 souls dis¬ tributed as follows Christians, 35: Hin- Popttlfttioiii du8, 3,972 : Muhammadans, 755, and Dorns, 1,121. The ironsmiths (114), carpenters (251), masons (255), pot^ ters (111), luocbis (73) and telis or oilmen (20) are all Dorns, a low caste of Hindds. There were 745 Joshis, 195 Pants, and 1,404 other Brahmans. The Baniyos numbering 797, and the Son&rs 264, represented the trading classea These figures include women and children and represented 170 castes and trades. Of the above, 4,811 souls lived within municipal limits. The population of the iiiunicii^ality in 1881 was 4,813, of whom 2,264 were females, and at the same time the population of cantonments was 920, of whom 264 were females. The population of the town during ue same year, including Municipality, Cantonments, and Clivil Station, was 7,390 (2,8G7 females), comprising 6,323 (2,451 females) Hindus; 866 (317 females) Mnsalmdns, and 209 (103 females) Chrutians and others. In Septembei, 1880, the total fignro was 7,124. Tho muhallas or wards of the town are Lachhmeswar, Karuriya-khola, Kupina, Galli, Chauns&r, Qaroui-khola, Champanaula, Kbolta, Deuripokhar, Chhipaltharha, Thapaliya, Chaugdnpdtha, Joshi-khola, Sela-khola, Cliaudhri-khola, Siumeikot, Paniya-ndiydr, Pokhiir- khdli, Jliijhiyar, Jyur, Makirhi, Chinakdn, Dharananla, Tiuuera, Kliasiya-kliola, Ddniya, Ndl>khola, Dabkiya, Kngar, Dhagal-khola, Dointola, Lalabazar, Kdrkhdnah, Na'karchitola,, Salimgarh, Sondr- (lalli, Banskigalli, Chhukdla, Tirana-kliola, Tamtenra and Dhobi- khola. The word 'khoUi' in the termination of tho names of the ALMORA. 11 wards is equivalent to the ^ tola and ‘jrnra' of the towns of the plains. The names sufficiently explain their origin and are derived from the caste or trade of the occupiers or founders or from some remarkable person or object. There are several good shops at which European supplies can 1>e procured, but no large market, and but little trade since the Bhiibar marts at E&ladhungi, Bamnagar, Barmdeo, and Haldw&ni and the bazars at BAnikhet and Naini T41 have come into existence. The municipality was formed in 1864, but the income is only about Bs. 5,600 per annum. The receipts of the Alniora Cantonment fund amounted to Bs. 308 during 1882-83 and the expenditure to about the same. The greater portion of the grain used is brought on ponies from the Bb5bar, whilst the produce of the upper parganahs is disposed of to the Bliotiyas. Wood fur local consumption is brought in from distances varying from six to eight mile.s chiefly by women, who here,, as at Naini Tdl, form the chief portion of the cooly population. Amongst the loral institutions are a station librarj', reading-room and racquet-court, and a native debating society and library establish¬ ed in 1870 by former pupils of the Mission School, who have a library, printing press, and a fortnightly new<«paper of their own. There is also a branch of the London Mission here and at Bdni- khet, and of the American Mission at Nait^ Tal and Pdori in Oarhwdl. Sciiools hare been ojicned at Pitliq^agar'h, Champdwat, and Gangoli Hat, and the cbaractor of the instruction given is shown by the success of the pupils at the usual examinations and their appointment to posts of considerable value in the public service. The leper a.syluin is another of the charitable orgiinisa- tions of Almora well worthy of extended support In 1884 it contained 114 inmates, of whom 69 wore Christians. These come from all parts of the hills, inoliiding Nep&l. The asylum pos¬ sesses a neat row of barracks and a pretty little church, at which divine service is performed every day. The history of Almora has already been told in the history of Kbmaon. The real reason for the abandonment of Cbampdwat was doubtless its distance from the recently conquered and far more valuable possessions to the west Madden notices the legend that Kulyuu Chand was huuting in the forest which then covered the site of Almora when a hare chased into a thicket became a tiger, which was considered so good an omen that the B&ja forth¬ with selected the spot as the site of his future residence and pro¬ mised that whoever dared to hunt any of his race should soon discover that he had tigers to deal with. At Sitoli close by Almora was fought the decisive battle which ended in the cession of the whole division to the British in 1815. Since then Almora has more than regained its former prestige as the bead-quarters of ihe Civil administration. Ambari, a village in the western Dun, on the road from Sahd- ranpur to Chakrata, close to the Jumna 20 miles from Dchra. It is the site of a tea-plantation and ha-> a Public Works bungalow. Amsot, a village in the Dehra Dun district, lies in latitude .80°-22'-45^, and longitude 77®-43'-42'^, at an elevation of 3,139'8 feet above the level of the sea. The upper markstone of the Great Trigonometrical Survey station is situated on the highest point of the same range as Dhoiw&la. Timli is the nearest village, b.eing about three miles to the north-east. This height was deduced trigonometrically. Annfleld, a village in the western Dun, two miles from the Jumna. It is the site of a tea-plantation and an agricultural colony of Native Christians established by the Bevd. T. Woodside in 1859 and now a flourishing settlement, seU-sbpporting and cen^ tining a church and school. Asan, a river of the western Duu, rises in the ravines near Uar- bansw&la to the west of the Mohand and Debra road at an eleva¬ tion of over 2,000 feet and after a north-westerly course of about 26’mUcs falls into the Jumna below Bajgliat. This stream receives no tributaries except monntain torrents from the Him&laya on the north and the Siwdliks on the south, and is only noticeable as being the main drainage channel of the western Diin, Asarori, a police out-post in the western Diin at the northern foot of the Mohand pass on the Dchra and Mohand road. Asi, a patti of parganab Kdli Knmaon in Kumaon, is bounded on the north by patti Chdlsi; on the east by Pharka and Sipti; on the south by Tallu T'&lbclon and on tbe west by Malli and Talli Ran. ASKOT. 13 This paiti wns separated from Asi-Gh&lsi or Clmlisi at the recent settlement. The principal villages are Gum, Garhsdri, Hauli, Jau- Idrhi and Pati. Tlie assessable area comprises 2,695 Inns, of which 1,002 are cnlturable and 1,693 are cnltivated (156 irrigated). The land- revenne gave Rs. 484 in 1815, Rs. 785 in 1820, Bs. 1,148 in 1843, arid now is assessed at Bs, 2,091, which falls on the whole area at He. 0-12-5 and on the cultivation at Be. 1-3-9 per acre. The population at settlement numbered 1,947 males and 1,638 females. Three villages were received from Palbelon and one from Sipti at the recent settlement. The villages are numerous and highly cultivated and on the higher ranges produce good crops of hemp. Askot Malla, the upper patti of parganah Askot in Kumaon, is bounded on the north by pattis Goriphat and Tulld Ddrnid ; on the west by paid Dindilidt of parganah Sira ; on the east and south-east by the Kuli river, which separates it from Nepal, and on the south by Talld Askot. This patti was separated from Askot at the recent settlement For its statistics see Askot TallX. In connection with this patti, however, mention may be made of the Rdjis the ban-manua or wild men of the woods as they have been called, who inhabit the forests of Chhipula. Askot is said to have had originally eighty forts, and hence the name. The first of these was Obamp4chal or Lakhanpur Kot, near which are the remains of the old town of Bngrih&t. The Bdjbars are Katyuris and held sway over the fihotiya valleys from Juhar to Bydns, subject to the Baika Rajas of Doti. On Ghampdchal there is a temple to filahddeo where ofl^erings are made to the sylvan deities by the Hajbar, and on Chhipula or Najurkot there is a great care at which a fair is held every year, also a dry pond held sacred to the deity of the hill. Hie gh&t here is the only direct communication with lower Knmaon for Dh&rchdla, Kela, Chauddns, Ddrind and Bydns.' Askot Talla, a patti of parganah Askot in Kumaon, is bounded QU the north by the Malld patti of the same parganah ; oh the west by the Athbisi Malld and B&rabisi pattis of parganah Sira; on the south by the Khardyat and Kharkdes pattis of Shor, and • See farther Qu., XI., 866, 449, 466, 494, 687, 631. 14 ABKOT. on tho oaxt by the Kali river, wliicii sejMirnles it from Nep&l. The Bnirriluit, Charnia and Shangli gun or siren ins flow eastwards into tlio Kiili nearly |jnrallol to each other. Dnoda is situated at the confluence of tiie Inst with the Kali ; Dhnwalisera at the mouth of the Chnrma and Bngrihat on its own stream. The road from Lohughat tt'd Shot to D4rma passes through the western corner of the patti and has the villages of Mith41a, Malahu, Ulrna and Jctbgaon on it. To the south-east of Uhnn, Larilekh rises to a height of 6,031 feet, and between it and Bagrihat the country slopes down and is more open and occupied with villages like Shtinkot. The valleys of both the Channa and Shangli are highly cultivated. Tho Mall& and Tall& pattis w'ere separs-ted at the last settlement and together comprise the tract on the right bank of the Kali south of Cliaud&ns and north of the Dhvaj peak. The junction of the Gori with the K&li takes place immediately beiow the flne ridge on which Askot itself is built The portion along the river is very low .and marked by a highly tropical vegetation. The slo[jes stretching down from the high southern hills and the Askot ridge itself are open and healthy and the po.sition of the tract is favourable for the sale of its products to the Bhotiyas, large parties of whom winter within its borders. In a military point of view the ridge of Askot may be considered the key to the Darma and By&ns passes, for the only practicable way to them is- along the bed of the KAli. Mall6 Askot comprises one waste and 18 inhabited villages and Talli Askot three waste and 124 inhabited villages ; the statistics of both may be shown thus ;— * Abes IN bfm. Assessusnt in ropebs PoFi;i.aTiON. Total. 1 Cultivated. Cultura- ble. lO 00 o et 00 i 0 1 ff O a FeauJe. » AAot Mails ... 1.216 173 739 302 166 1 ^ 614 614 1,069 931 Askot Tall i 2,972 516 1,404 1,052 644 1 736 2.070 Total 4,188 C89 2,143 1,354 709 996 3,189 2,740 The assessment falls at four annas nine pie per acre on the total area and at seven annas one pie per acre on the cnltivated area. The patwtiii usually resides at Bdrakot and there is a school at Duwal. ASKOT. 15 The tenure of land in Askot is unique in Knraaon, it bring tho Talaka Aekot. only parganah where the form o right in laud known as zaniind&ri exists in these hills. This has been held for many generations by a family con¬ nected with the old Katy6ri Rajas and who bear the affix Pula to their names and have the title Bfijb&r. Some account of them has already been given in the history of Kuinaon,' and here wo have only to deal with the fiscal history of the estate. The Rujbar had enjoyed the revennes of Askot for many generations until at length they fell under the rule of the Chtinds, who, however, left the Bajbdr in possession, merely exacting an annual nazanina or fine in token of supremacy. Tho total of this due at tho period of the Qorkhali conquest amounted to Rs, 400 per annum and Was gradually increased by them to Rs. 2,000, at which sum it stood at tho British occupation.* This sum, though it probably equalled tho full amount which could have been demanded from the whole parganah on a regular assessment, was never settled as such, but continued to be fixed in one item under tho name tankuy a term equivalent to nazardna, and at our earliest settlement a fixed sum was accepted at a reduced rate. With a view to the pennanenco of the rdj, it had been an invariably family custom that only the eldest son should succeed to the inberitaoce, whilst the junior members of the family merged in the body of landholders. Dur¬ ing the Gorkhali occujfatioii this rule was infringed upon and dissensions arising on tho death of tho Bajbdr led to the suc¬ cessive appointments of Rndrapnl and Muliendrapdl, tho brotlicr and son of tho deccaacd Rdjbar, according as each outbid the other for tho favour of the local Gorkhali commander. At the first settlement made by the British Government both these persons were admitted in tho engagement and lease for the parganah. This lease differed from the forme** engagements in that it specified the villages by name and distributed the lump assessment amongst tliein. This apportionment of tho State demand was, however, .drawn out wholly on the judgment of the Rdjbars themselves, without any reference to the opinions of tho village landholders. The same system was pursued at the second settlement, and at the third tho only difierence was that tho name of Rudra|)6l was » Uu., XI., 365, 455, 404, 631, Ac. * Tnull, June SOUi,-* 821. 16 A8K0T. omitted from the engagement paper with his own oonsent, in pursnance of some private arrangement between him and Mahen- drap&l. This circumstance led to subsequent divisions between these persons and terminated in a suit in court instituted by Rudrapdl; the result of this was a decree in favour of the plaintiff for the BAjbdri of one-third of the porganah asitstoodatthe formation of the first triennial settlement Accordingly this division was carried into effect by arbitration and three leases were granted; the first to Mahendrapdl, for his share or two-thirds, the second to Budrapdl for one-third, and the last to Mahendrapdl for the newly- cultivated villages reclaimed through his means within the preced¬ ing three years and which were not included by the court in the adjudged divbion. Claims were at the same time preferred by other members of the family to spec.fic shares in the Rajb&ri, but as none of these claimants appeared to have ever been admitted daring the former or last Government to the engagement for any of the rights or privileges of the Bajb&ri, their demands on the ground of local usage were dismissed. The smaller share came down by regular succession to three brothers—Pirthi, Sarabjit, and Mohkam. In 1832, Mr. Traill allowed a separate engagement for the land-revenue of Helpiya and its twenty-four hamlets to Mohkam Singh, while Dewal and its eighty-three hamlets remained in the lease of the R^jhAri. Re¬ ceiving a sanction never before accorded by custom or local law, these new landlords as distinguished from landholders tried their new rights by getting deeply into debt, with the result that they fell into the hands of the Almora nsnrers and weie brought into the civil courts. They resisted in their own stupid way. Mohkam Singh fled for refuge to his relatives in Doti, but Pirthi Singh was seized and remained for some time in the civil jail at Almora. The upshot of this litigation was that their estate was sold in satisfaction of decrees of the civil dourt in l84/t, and the principal creditor, one Krishna Saydl, became the pnrchaser. The elder brother of the purchaser, Hira Lai Suyal, had, previously in the course of the litigation, mysteriously disappeared and foul play on the part of the debtors and their friends was suspected. The new settiement was then made with Krishna Sayil at the former revenue, Rs. 273, bat it fared as badly with him as with Ins brother, ABWAIiSTUN. 17 for on proceeding to tnke possc^ision he was innrdered by the sons of Pirthi Singh and Mohkoui Singh, who again fled for protection to their relatives in Doti. The heir of Krishna Saydl was a minor, and with the consent of the Commissioner the estate was for some time managed by tho Rajbar, who acconnted for the pro¬ ceeds. Daring this time opportunity was taken to examine into the resources of each village and the condition of the cultivators, and it was found that a great portion of the actual tillers of the soil were immigrants from Doti. The estimated value of tho out¬ turn was Bs. 364 with Hr land and customary dues called §dgi~pdt or dola-dhek and extraordinary dues known as tika-hhet^ snoh as personal service in carrying loads and litters. The right to the Rajhari has always been held to depend upon the will of the paramount power and immemorial usage has sanctioned the rule that so long as tho Rajbdr provides in a suitable manner for the dependants of his own house, he is entitled to all the profits of the estate and is unfettered in the mode and amount of distribution. In 1847 the property was again sold in satisfaction of a decree of court, and this time the purchaser was Tulardm S4h, the treasurer of the Almora collectorate. He found means to obtain possession in the following year, but lUjbar Pushkar Pal repurchased his rights in 1855 and is now the zaminddr of all Asko^ which he holds on the same terms, i.e,, he may increase the cultivation to his own profit and make such arrangements as he may think advantageous for the ialukoy but he cannot interfere with tho permanent tenants' posses¬ sions recorded in the village papers. Aswalsynil, a patti of parganah Bdrahsyun, lies in the south¬ east corner of that parganah between tho right bank of the western Ny&r and the united Nydrs. The soil is rich and the population is industrious but very litigious. The principal villages, most of which are good, are Nngar, where there is a s^ool, Bhatgaon, Saraon, Suralgaon, Chami Sakuoli, Mirchwara, Sula and Kdgsa. The name is derived from the Aswdl caste, who inhabit the patti. Nagar lies in longitude 78^-39' and latitude 29®-59', In 1864, seven villages were transferred to Manyfirsyun. The patwdri osoally resides at Ddngi in Jllanydrsyun and collects the land-revenue of both paitis, which in 1864 from all sooroSB amounted to Rs. 8,431. 3 IB ATHBISI UALLA. Athaj^i, a patii of parganah Barahmandal in EumaoDj is divided into two, the Walla and Palla pattis. The former occapiea the left bank of the Gagfis river in that portion of its conrse where it is crossed by the ll4nikhet and Dwira road and extends from Ranikhot to the river. The latter occnpies the corresponding portion of the right bank. The principal places in the Walla patti arc:—lldnikhct, Badhan, Bngdna, Chaak6ni, Daganrha, Jhalorhi and Walna, and in the Palla patti are Airdri, Bdnsula-sera, Bhet, Bhandargaon, Chy&li, Dhunkhalgaon and Ubhydri and Aror, in both of which last there aro schools. The patwdri nsnally resides at Bagwttli'Pokhar. The statistics of the two pattis may be shown thus:— Athugfili. Abea in bfsis AssEssABia. 1 A iSEssMEirr in rcpkrs. Population. Total 1 Cultivated. Guitar- able. 1815. 1820. 1843. Cunent. ■ •3 a Femalea. Irriga¬ ted. Dry. Fnlla ... Walla ... 2,030 2,675 152 39 2,427 2,040 351 495 911 608 1,638 021 1,814 9CC 3,423 2,108 2.175 1,825 1,880 1,618 The assessment per acre on the total assessable area in the first amounted to Be. 1-2-8 and in the second to Bo. 0-13-1; and on cnlti- vation in the first to Be. 1-5-3 and in the second to Re. 1-0-3. About 116 bisis aro held as gtintli and mudji worth nearly a rupee per Uti. Athbisi Malla, a patti of parganah Sira in Eiimaon, is bounded on the north by Dlndlbat; on the soutli by patti Bdrabisi; on tho west by Talla Athbisi and on the east by Talla Askot. The upper valley of the Cliarm-gdr| a tributary of the K&li, drains the imtti. The principal villages aro Durlekh, Hanchila and Ujorha. The statistics of tho Malla and Talla pattis may be shown thus:— AtLriai. AbIA IK M-tW AaSESSABLB. AbBUBIIKNT in BUPBIB. PoPOIiATlOH. •3 1 Cultivaled. \ i-s o •* 4 lO OD e! ss • 2 .4 5 o 8 *3 ft Em • fijTS a Malla . . Talla ... 327 500 170 131 85 192 71 185 282 22G 867 303 420 342 646 555 428 421 349 343 ATHOAOH. 19 Some 43 Ufit aro held free of land-tax. The rovenne fulls at Re. 1-10-8 per aero on the total assessable area in tho Malia patti and at Re. 1-1-5 per acre in the Talla patti: tho rate on cultiva¬ tion is Rs. 2-2-9 and Re. 1-11-5 per acre respectively. Tho pat- vr&ri usually resides at Rankuri. Athbisi Talla, a patti of the Sira parganah in Kumaon, is bounded on the west by Mali; on the east by Athbisi Malla ; on the south by Bdrabisi and on the north by pattis Mali and Dindihdt of the same pargnnah. The t>oathern portion of the patti is drained by a tributary of tho Rdinganga, crossed near its confluence with the Raingangs by tho Thai road at the village of Mohdni. The other principal villages are Bunga-Bora, Lima-Bhat and Sera-Saunali At the extreme south-eastern boundary of this patti the Lori peak rises to a height of 7,763 feet. One village vras transferred to Dindihit and three to Mdli at the rocent settle¬ ment The separate or private holding of the Rdni regnant of the former Malla dynasty here was known as Athbisi, whilst Bdrabisi formed tho military assignment. Atbgaon, a patti of parganah Gangoli in Kumaon, is bounded on the north by the Bhadrapati-gar, which separates it from Kam- sydr; on the west and south-west by the Sarju river; on the south and south-east by patti Bel and on the east by ))atti Bardun of the same parganah. The principal villages are Ohak-Bora, Chaubda, Nadoli, Pokhri and Bankaul on tho Bhadrapati. The road from Almora to Askot passes through the nerthorn part of the patti and that to Pithocagorh just below its southern boundary. In the north-west the peaks of Vdsuki-Nag and Gauri-dovi atiain a height of 6,889 and 5,889 feet respectively, yet are clothed with cultivation to the summit To tho cast there is less cnltivable ground and here the peaks average about 5,400 feet. The assess¬ able area comprises 3,492 6wu, of which 1,708 aro cuUurable and 1,783 are cultivated (480 irrigated). The land-tax at the conquest amouuted to Rs. 237; in 1820 to Rs. 319; in 1843 to Rs. 516, and is now Rs. 2,101^ which falls on the whole assessable area at Re. 0-9-8 per acre and on the cultivation at Re. 1-2-10 per aero. The revenne-free area amounts to 242 Mtis and 1,285 lisisnro held in feo-simple. The population at the time of settlement numbered ■^256 souls, of whom 1,740 were males, Twenty-one villsges were so EADALPUR. received from Bnrdon and 37 from Del, whilst five were transferred to Kamsyar at the recent settlement. The patwari nsnally resides at Chamtola and there is a school at Qau&l Ayarpatha, a mountain rising to the south of the Naini Tdl lake, in latitude 29°-23'-2" and longitude 7h°-29'-20,'' of which the northern peak has an elevation of 7,639 feet above the level of the sea. This mountain derives its name from the presence of the ‘ aydr or Andromeda ovalijolia, a tree giving a email white flower in the rains resembling a Mily of the valley.’ Tho young leaves are poisonous’ for sheep and gouts, who seem however to bo very fund of it. Ayarpatha is also mentioned in tho notice of Kaiui Tul. B. Bachhansyun, a patti of parganu.i Dew.ulgarh in British Qarli- wul, is bounded on the north by the Ganges, which separates it from Tihri on the south by patti Kandiusvun ; on the east by tho saino patti, and on llio wtbl by patti Ch:d:iii.syun. This p.'itti was formed from Drvvalgarh in 1864. Thepulwuii usually resident in NawjVsri, c<»llects tho revenue ol Patti Chulansj un :iJ.so; both aggregating Its. 2,147 from revenue and sadabart and Its. 42 from revenue-free grants, with a total population in 1864 of 4,105 souls. Thia patti comprises the valley of the Bachhan-gadh, in which arc aitnatod tho villages of B&uisu, Nawdsu, Burauri, Dhankot and Dungara. where there is an iron mine. Uuworked copper miiu’S e.MSt at Pipali, Dungara and Tiini Taunn, Badalpnri n patti of pargun.ah Talla Sulan, was divided into two pattis at the settlement in 1864 known respectively as the hlalla or upper and tho Tulla or lower. Thev . together to the South of the Bustorn Nytir river and are bounded on the west by Dattis Kauriya .and Silu ; on the east by pattis Kohigar, Iriyakot and Painiia, and on the south by tho Tatli Dun. Tlje ro.*ul from l*aori to Kotdwara runs through a small poitiou of the north-west corner of tlio Mails Patti. The chief villages are Sinaia with iron mines, Kharkholi, Kota, Toil, whero there is a school, and Bydii. In tlie Talla Patti are Mathiydii, Asankhet, Bdmdkcsera and Moranra. The drainage of the northern portion flowa into the Nydr ; and of the Talla Patti into the Bdmganga. The Handhdl atroata rises in the latter tract near i*aiuwdlgaon. In badbXh. 21 1864 the villages to the north of the Ny/tr were transferred to tlie neiglibouring patiis, Gaw&na Tuila to Kolag&r, Haldni to Qar&rsyun, and twelve villages to Mauddrsydn, while Kandui was added to the Malta patti from Khatali and Ncgiydna from Bijlot to the Talla patti. The census statistics are as follows for both Pattis: in 1841, 3,457 sonIa; 1853, 0,927; and 1858, 7,099. The patw6ri of Badalpiir Malla usually resides in Toli and collects the land-revenue of Kauriya Walla also, which in 1864 aggregated Ils. 2,507; the ])atw4ri of Sila Mails collects the revenue of Badalpur Talla. Badiin lies in longitude 78‘*•49'-40*'^ and latitude 29°-5l'. Badhan, a pargnnah of the Garhw'al district, contains six pattis or sub-divisions, each of which is separately noticed, eiz..*—Khansar, Kapiri, Karnkut, Nanduk, Pindarudr and Pindarp&n Badliin is bounded on the north by Fainkhanda and Dasoli; on the east and south by Kumaon, and on tho west by Cbandpur and NAgpur. The assessment of the land-revenue has been as follows :— ISIS. ISIS. 1817. 1810. 1893. 1S9S 1833. 1840, Carreut. Ra. Rh. Rb. R«. Ks. Ra. Da. Ra. Ra. 3,S7I 4,!260 4,357 6,781 8,492 e,89i 6,948 6,78S 7,ISS The records of the current settlement show that there were then (1864) 225 estates comprising 374 villages and containing a total assessable area amounting to 8,875 acres, of which 7,361 were cultivated. The mill-rent yielded Rs. 665 and the latid-iaa Hs. 7,360, of which Rs. 303 wero alienated in guntk and mudji^ the whole fall¬ ing nt Re. 0-13-3 per acre on the total assessable area and at Re. 1-1-0 per acre on tho cultivation. Tho population in 1841 numbered 9,824 souls, of whom 4,310 were females; in 1853, 15,541 (7,631 females); in 1858, 16,880 (8,131 females); in 1872, 21,454 (10,606 females) and in 1881,25,692 (12,839 females). Mr. Batten has the following remarks on tins parganab :— Farganah Badbdn or Badhungarh is divided into two portions by the Pindar river. Palii Findarp&r reaches to the very base of tlio snowy range and has some 6' e villages within a short horizontal dis¬ tance of some of the highest peaks near the sources of the Kailganga and Nanddkini rivers. The best villages are not found in the valley of the Pindar; and consideriug the facilities for irrigation afITorded by nature, it is remarkable how very little iulaon or lowland occurs 22 BADHill. underUie head of irrigated. The fiDest villagea are those either sitoaied, like Kob, on high upland near the forests, hut possessing a large* share of flat or easily sloping land or placed, like W an, very near the regions of eternal snow, but surrounded by good pastures enjoying a bracing climate, and inhabited by an enterprising and Bhotiya- like race of trafficking people. There are not many ihotddrs in DadhAn, but those that exist are chiefly descendants of persons to whom military assignments of land were gi von under the former Qov- erumonts. Occupant somtnddrs* are generally the descendants of those whom the tkokddra induced to settle on their grants of land : on this account the latter are sometimes found recorded by the villagers them¬ selves as proprintors of the soil, even where not the slightest p o eBca- sion, or i<r cultivation on the part of the thoiddrSf exists ; but in most instances the occupants claim the nominal proprietorship, although they are willing to pay the customary dues called by them some¬ times malikdnaf sometimes nazardnOf sometimes Iiak taminddri and sometimes, indeed generally, hak thnJcdiri to the aaydna or Utokddr. As, however, these dues are very small, and os no rent in addition to their quotas of revenue is taken from the occupants, it is really a matter of little consequence whether from ignorance, or fear, or from a hope of throwing the responsibility of revenue payment on the more powerful members of the community in case of any future hardship, the people have recorded the ihokddra and their brethren os shareholders ; or whether under a suspioion of probable usurpoi- tion or exaction, or a knowledge of their own rights, the people have insisted on their own proprietary tenure. The Badhan Rajpdt or Khasiya, is, in general, a plain, simple- minded character : and though in this parganah there have been two or three instances of excessive litigation among the brethren of the ihokd^ri families, and on the sabject of some of the larger padb&nships, still the people on the whole are more acquainted with the barter price of salt at Nfti and of the money price of wheat and rice at Almora, than with the theoretical tenures of their land—on which subject they, as well as the Bhotiyos no^ unfre- quently referred the settlement officer to their wives for infor¬ mation. Sheep and goats are extensively kept for the Bhotiya 'Hm aiidelf^berf.anlessexprcwlv aeDtloaed in eonaeetion with Ih* teniiie callfd tamtndartf the word semkdSr, in eecarJanee with bill ■■■— «- nmi t» wpKKnl the actiwl occnpnnt of the land or idholdcr. badbimXtb. 23 traders of Nfti end Mine. The rocks in this perganah are similar to tiiose in Painkhandoi except that there is a greater proportion of lime-stone, which formation characterises some of the high-peaked mountains south of the Pindar river. Iron ore is not unfrequent and is here and there worked for local wants. Badrlnath, a peak in parganah Malla Paiokhanda of British Garhw&l| also a villagCi temple and collection of rest-houses on the route from Srinagar to the M&na pass, 25 miles south of the latter and 55 north-east of the former. The village is situate on the right bank of the Vishnnganga, a feeder of the Alaknanda, in the middle of a valley about four miles long and one broad and is equidistant from two lofty mountains, the Nar and N&r&yana Parbat, one rising to the east and the other to the west. The bank on which it stands is sloping, that opposite is bolder, its brow being on a level with the top of the temple of Badrin&th or BadrtnkrAysn, an incarnation of Vishnu, situate in the highest part of the village and rising be¬ tween forty and fifty feet from the gronud The temple lies in north latitude and east longitude 79”-32'l^, at an elevation of 10,284 feet above the level of the sea. The name is said to be derived from the sacred * badarV or jujube, which however, does not grow here. Madden suggests the spiny Hippophat nalieifolia or a derivation from *bh<tdro* * fortunate,* * auspicious’: but there is little doubt that the derivation from the jujube is correct. The building said to have been erected some 800 years ago by Sankara Achirya is of conical form with a small cupola covered with plates of copper and surmounted by a gilded ball and spire. Tlie original establishment is reported to be of very great antiquity; the pre¬ sent temple has however a modern appearance, several former ones having been overwhelmed by avalanches and an earthquake hav¬ ing shaken the present erection so seriously as to render necessary an almost entire restoration. The body of it is constructed of flat stones, over which is a coat of fine plaster which, while adding to its neataess, detracts from the appearance of antiquity. A short dis¬ tance below the temple is the Tapta kund, a tank about thirty feet square and covered with a roof of planks sup¬ ported on wooden posts. It is supplied from a thermal spring by means of a subterraneous communication ier- ainatad by a spout in the form of a dragon’s bead, A thick smoke Botiprlois. 14 BADRINiTH. or steam of a strong sulphurous smell is sent forth by the watery which is so hot as to bo scarcely endurable to the touch nutil the temperature is reduced by the admixture of cold water from an¬ other spring. In this manner a bath is formed in which the sexes bathe indiscriminately. The ablution accompanied by dne adora¬ tion of the idol and liberal fees to the attendant Brahmans is con¬ sidered so efficacious in cleansing from past offences that in ordi¬ nary years some five to ten thousand pilgrims visit the shrine and every twelfth year at the kumhh-meld the number is increased four-fold. The pilgrims assemble at llardw4r and as soon as the fair there is closed towards the middle of April, proceed on their round of pilgrimage in the mountains by Deopray4g, Rndrpray4g, Kod^rnith, Uadrinath and home by Kandiirayeg and Karnprayig. The entire tract he lo is known as Vaishnava-kslietra, which is sub¬ divided into twelve subordinate kahetras or tracts. Besides Tapta- kund, in which Agni resides by permission of Vishnu, there is a recess in the bed of the river forming a pool called Ii4rada-kund. This is sheltered by a baro rock whose projecting angle breaks the force of the current and renders the place fit for bathing. A littio tfi the left is the Suryya-kund, another thermal spring proceeding from a fissnre in the bank. There is no reservoir hero and the pilgrims catch the water in their hands sod throw it over their bodies. Besides this there are the Brahro-kap41i and other reser¬ voirs which are reported to possess various virtues and form part of the twelve kshetraa visited by pilgrims. The principal temple is called Bdj-badri and with four others connected with it is well known as the Panch-badri, via.: —Yog-badri, Pdndukeswar, Brid- dbbadri at Animath and Kapil-badri or Bha- vishya-bodri at Subhai, whore there are also thermal springs. The idol in the prinoipal temple is formed of black stone or marble about three feet high. It is usually clothed with rich gold brocade and above its head is a small mirror which refiecta the objects from the outside. In front are several lamps always burning and a table also covered with brocade, To the right are (he images of Nar and Ndriyana and on the left those of Kuvera and Narada. The idol is adorned with one jewel, a dia^ mond of moderate sise, in the middle of its forehead, whilst the whole of the properties, inclnding dresses, eating yessels and other BADBIHATE. 25 paropliernalia, arc not worth inoro than five thousand rupees. The idol Nar-sinha at Joshiinath is said to have one arm which daily grows thinner, and when it falls off the road to Badrin&th will be closed by a landslip and a new temple erected at Bhavishya-badri near Tapuban, also known as Ddkhtupan, or, as some say, at Ad- badri in Chaodpur. A good deal of ostentatious attention is paid to the personal comforts of the idol at Badari. It is daily provided with meals which arc placed before it, and the doors of the sanc¬ tuary are then closed and the idol is left to consume its meals in quietness. The doors are not opened again until after sunset, and at a late hour, its bed being prepared by the attendants, the doors are again closed until morning. The vessels in which tbei, idol is served are of gold and silver and a large establishment of servants is kept up both male and female, the latter as dancing-girls and mistresses of the celibate priests. The only persons who have ac¬ cess to tho inner apartments are the servants and no ono bnt the Ibtwal himself is allowed to touch the idol. The temple is closed in Noromber and the treasure and valu¬ able utensils are shut up iu a vault beneath Eodownients. i i • i i « the shrine and every person descends to Pandukeswar and Joshimath. As a rule from November until the end of May the temple is covered by snow. Once some plunder¬ ing Qarhwalis made their way across the snows in winter and re¬ moved some 901h. weight of gold and silver vessels, but they were seized and pnnisbed by the Garhw&l Qovernmout, The Rajas frequently made use of the temple property, giving villages in mortgage in exchange which were never redeemed. At tho Gorkbali invasion, the R&ja borrowed Rs. 50,000 as a loan, and from this and other aonrees the temple possesses an endowment of 226 villages in Kumaon and Garhwdl which as early as 1824 yielded a revenue of over Rs. 2,U00a}'ear. Attheaainc time many of these villages are large and populous and could yield a far greater rent; but the routs were fixed at the time of the grant cither in money or iu kind in perpetuity, and as many of the onlti'* vatora were Brahmans, the outturn is small compared with the area. In 1864, the Garhwul endowments alone comprised 4,372 5ttu of assessable land yielding a land-tax of Rs. 8,943 distributed over 262 villages, and in Kumaon some 1,674 bitU in plots of 10 bitis or more distributed over 69 rillages. 26 badrinXth. As the annual expenditure sonieiimes exceeds the income of the year from oflferings and endowments, recourse is liad to loans to be repaid from tho surplus of favourable years. Tlio offerings consist iiibhel or offering to the idol, bUoy or fur the expenses of his food and clothing and nazardna or gift to the Bawal. Of late years the affairs of tho temple have been so badly managed that it is always in debt, though if properly controlled tho revenues are sufficient for all proper ex< penditure. The ceremonies to bo performed by pilgrims arc simple in the oxtreir.e, consisting of a short service with a iitauy and bathing and in tho case of orphans and widows in shaving the head. Tbo principal priests arc Namburi Brahmans from Malabar and the head'priest is called Bawal. In order to provide for the succession, in ease of tho illness or doith of the Rnwal, a dtxla of his caste is always in attendance at Josbimath, so that there is al¬ ways a Bawal elect present to take possession of the office. Tho Bawal bus a regular establishment to manage the temporal con¬ cerns of the iastitution and under the former Rajas exorcised su¬ preme and uncontrolled aiitliority in the villages attached to the temple. Formerly the priests were supposed to live in perfect celibacy, but now they excuse themselves that they have broken with all homo ties. A teacher is employed who con¬ ducts the school for the children of tcmplo employees, and in 1873 a dispensary was established the cost of which is borne from tho taJdbart funds, and it rcinaiiis open as long as pilgrims attend. In ordinary years the pilgrims are cliiofly Jugis and Bairdgis and the offerings amount to about > Its. 5,000, but at tho kumbh and adh'kumbh, or every twelfth aud sixth year, the ni)inber.s of pil¬ grim's and receipts are greatly increased. West of the templo about twelve miles is tho group of snowy peaks called Cliau- khamba or Badrin&th, six in number, three of which have an elevation above the sea respectively of 22,395, 22,619 and 22,901 feet. Six miles to the south-west is a summit called Balikanta having an elevation of 21,713 feet. See MaKa; Buotiya Mahals. On the way to the Satu|>ant lake and glacier there is a water-fall called Basodbdra, to which is attached the legend that when seen by an impure person it ceases to flow. The Bhoiiyns say that when Knmaon was invaded by the British, the Raja proceeded to invoke the aid of Dadriiiath, but when he BitGISWAS. 27 came to Basodhira, the water-fall ceased to flow and they then knew that the Baja would cease to reign. The lake near the Satopant glacier has three comers each with a different name and is to the Bnotiyas a Ganges into which the ashes of their people collected at the funeral*pyre are thrown. It| too, has its legend that it is fathomless and that no bird can fly across it. The Bhotiyas present offerings to the spirit of the lake to keep the passes open and aid them in their dangerous Jonmeys, and as they themselves are denied entrance into the Badrinith templ^ it has for them all the virtues of Badrinath itself. Bageswar* a village in Patti Talla Eatyur, and parganah Dkn- pnr of Kumaon, is situate at the junction of the SarjuAnd Oomati rivers some 27 miles north of Alinora. The namo^ is derived from the temple which is dedicated to * Vdi-is7ear\ * the lord of Speech*, or according to others * Vydj^hreswar^f * the tiger-lord*. The population numbers about 500 occupying a few streets of substan¬ tially built bouses on the right bank of the Sarju. Bkgeswar is the great mart for the exchange of Tibetan produce between tho Bhotiyas. and the Almora merchants and entirely owes its pros¬ perity to British influence. It is only occupied for trade from tho middle of November until the end of April. Throe fairs of a Semi-religious character take place; the principal, known as the UttarAyird or Utrainif is held about tbe twelfth of January, when goods to the extent of three lakhs of rupees change hands. The present temple was erected by B&ja Lacbhmi Cband* about 1450 A.D.; but inscriptions noticed elsewhere show a far earlier found¬ ation’. Certdn tombs constructed of large tiles’ discovered in the neighbourhood and at Dw&ra Hkt have been assigned to Mughal colonies and attest, perhaps, tbe presence of a non-JEIindii race. Traill writes :—“ These tombs differ both in form and appear¬ ance from the graves of Jogis, the only class of Hindus which adopts aepnlture. It is therefore to T4tsrs or Mufaamniadaua only that these graves can bo ascribed. The extreme sanctity of BAgea- wsr, a prindpal * praydya^ or confluence and plaoo of pilgrimage, produdes the aappontion that either of these sects would have been > Gss.ZI.,ai7. »/Wrf.,S8S. 'iM., 611 BN Bbotiia Msiialb. 28 BlQBSWAB. suffered as subjects of a Hindu Governmont, to pollute that place with their dead, while the Muhammadans, aa is well known, were never able to effect any conqueata within these hills. By the natives these tombs are called Mnghali. The D&nna Bhotiyas, who are also said to be descendonts of a colony left by Tlmdr from the association of tho Muhammadan creed with the name of Mughal, repel as an insult the extraction attributed to them. Tho Sarju is crossed by a new iron wiro suspension bridge of 147 foot span and the Gomsti by a similar one of 60 feet span ; both tho old bridges were washed away in 1871, but have since been replaced. Elevation above the sea 3,143 feet: latitude 29*’>50'-15" ; lon^- Inde 79‘’-48'-.52*. Beads. from Almota. Bdgeswar is approached from Almora by two roads, one passing through TdkuU aud the other by Binsar. Ronds connect it also with Someswar on the Kauadni road, Baijn&th on the road to Karnprayftg, Eb&ti on the road to the Pindar glacier and Milam and Thai on the road to Askot. The road from Tdkula starts from the village of that name 12 miles from Almora and 14 miles from Bageswar, from an en¬ camping ground near tho clump of deodirt surrounding its old temples, and ascends to a pass leading across tho Jammarkhet ridge, the peak of which rises on the right to a height of 6,837 feet, thenco descending the road winds along a narrow thickly wooded valley to the ascent to the outlying spur from Ganan&th (6,947 feet^ near which there is a temple and a road made of steps of flag stone from the neighbonr- ing quarries which leads almost'in a straight lino up the bill. This was constructed by the piety of an Almora trader, but is little used as the new road js mneh more easy and even shorter. Thence an ascent is again made to the west of the Jarauli peak (6,200 feet high) and thence into tho valley of the Sarjn, where the road from T4kula is joined by tho Binsar road and ixissing by Khafilikhet, Bkgeswar is reached. This march is fairly diversified by hill aud valley, beat aud shade, and afibrds some pretty bits of scenery. The road from Binsar keeps to the eastern side of Jammarkhet, pawing by Panchdeo, Ukh&li and other villages lying near the Gat'gadh stream and eventually joining the Tokola road, where it enters iho Barju valley. BXUBSWAn. 29 To Thai. The road from Someswar passes np llic valley of a small feeder of the Kosi by tlio villages of Maliargaoii, Fron Someswar. Baisargaon, Nukot and the Karkeswar tem¬ ple in the Pdpi ridge forming the watershed between the Sarju and the Kosi, whence the road is undulating to Btigcswar. Someswar is about twelve miles from Bageswar and the FApi ridge lies about half wuy. The road from Baljnath to Bageswar lies along the loft bank of the Gomati river from Baijn&th to the con¬ fluence with the Sarjuy a distance of twelve miles and is very low and hot tho entire way. There are however a few pretty reaches in the river known locally as tdh or lakes which abound with fish of all the common kinds. Tho road to Askot by Thai runs nearly dne east by llalkana and Dhupaulti Sera to Siinudiyari whore there is a tea-planter’s bungalow. Another sheep track leading oast follows up the valley of the Fangor-gaJh, in addition to which most of these roads are connected with each other by tracks across country passable for men but not for ponies. The main roads aro excellent and are open at all times of tho year for men and ani¬ mals. During the winter months all these roads are crowded with flocks of goats and sheep conveying borax and salt from Bbot and grain and rice in return, while numerous parties of lowlaiiders are seen carrying kiltas of oil which they exchange in Bliot for wool. The trade returns arc noticed under * trade' in tho article Kuuaon. From Bageswar upwards the bed of the Sarju narrows and forms more a gigantic ravine than a valley, the entire floor being „ . frequently occupied by its bed. This cb.m- ^*®P"®** * • 1* t 1 net 18 exceedingly deep and in many places forms dark pools abounding in flsh. In places the iiiouiilains rise precipitously on cither side, so that the rotad to avoid the cliffs has sometimes to make a considerable rise where it cannot be carried along (he face of the cliff. On tho right bauk large torrent-feeders of the Barjn are crossed : one (tho Labor) about three miles, a second called the Kanfilgadh at about seven miles and on the left bank the considerable stream of.the Pungor-g&dh. Within two CH* three miles of Kapkot the valley opens considerably and gives plsce to several stony and uncultivated dcUs covered with dwarf 30 BjrOBSWAB. ZiiyplittS {badarij. The ^lea around Kapkol itself is highly cul¬ tivated, yielding fair crops of rice and manduioa {Eleumie coro- ana . It is about onn and a half to two miles long and about half as wide, with an elevation of from 4,000 to 4,500 feet above tho level of the sea, enclosed by a belt of gently swelling and diversi- fiod mountains covered with a beautiful vegetation, the ehir pine {Hhus Umgifolia) feathering tlie summits. The village Is on iti western edge close under the slopes of Dioli (5,471 feet) about 150 feet above the river and half a mile from it. Several smaller ham¬ lets arc scattered over tho valley, each with its grove of trees, among which tho plantain attains a fair size and produces largo and excel¬ lent fruit. On the right bank the Chirpatkot peak (6,637 feet) appears and up the glen the snowy range, conspicuons oinongst which is the peak of Nandakot (22,53d feet) with its summit white as a now p41 or servant's tent, to w'hicli it bears a strong resemb¬ lance. The picturosquoDCSs of tho scenery is no doubt in a mea¬ sure due lo the limestone which from B&goswar to Kapkot forms the most important rock. Here a gradual change in the character of the vegetation may be seen. The Origanum and Cratagus pyvacantJui (yinydru), or white thorn, replacing tho dwarf date palm found near Bugeswar. The Ujpdt {Cinnamomnm Tamala), called kirkiriya^ abounds in the sliady glens. The Didymocarpus maerophyllutj Loxotic chliqua^ cover the dripping rocks, a flesh-coloured Argyrna^ and tho Cueu- mia Uardivickii, (airdht) climb over tho bushes with TricoaantheS palmala {iadrdyan) and its brilliant red but fetid fruit. Coi» lac^ tyma {lucfniaha) or Job's tears grows by every stream and in seve¬ ral places yEgineiia indica. Oabeckia anguali/olia is abundant in the grass and CUn'odendron serrafum, and aiphonanlhum and Ikehmeria tenaeiasima {poi) amongst the thickets. Abelmoachua pungens, {liffUf kapaaya) grows in abundance on tho damp ahadod slopes. The more common trees are the Pliotinia duhia Qturcua unnuhta, Kydiacalycina (pnia), EhretiaaerraJta {pikniya)^ Ougeiniadalbargioidea (sonan), Terminalia belUrica (iat/ui^’o), Woodfonlia ftoribunda (dhdt), Flamingia aemialatOf Wendlandia emeraa, Callicarpa tnaerophylla {gaiwali)t Sauravja nepaienaia {goganda), Engilhardlia CoUbrooti^ ana (tnawd). Danhinia variegata {hoairdl) and Bauhimia rHuaa, Roxb. (*«iidte),;aud a species of Sapium pamed pMtHya (Madden) DAUNJfTH. 31 There Ua fine grove of et/on^ trees {Olea fragrans) here i^hich flowor in September. Bagoliy a halting-pldeo and village on the road from Karn- pny&g to Bdgeswar in Kumaon in Patti Sili Chandpiir of par* ganab Chandpur in Garbwiily lies in latitude 30°-li'-50^ and longitude 79°-2L'-l^: distant 8 miles 6 furlongs 11 polos from Karnpray&g and 10 miles 4 furlongs 35 polos from Pantbi, the next station before Jolabagr. The road to Bagoli from Karnpray6g winds along the loft bank of the Pindar river with precipit¬ ous hills on either side. At Bimli (4m. 2f. 23p.)y whore it meets the road from Almoro, by Lobha it crosses the Bha- rfirig&r, which here joins the Pindar. Thence by Chalakoi Ba- ihora and Kulsaiin to Bagoli (4in. 3f. 18p.) From Bagoli to Paothi the road continues along the same side of the river, crossing to the right bank near Nalgaon and recrossing at the Nir&yanbngr bridge, somewhat undulating. Thence to Pantiii Bhagwfin the road is fairly level. The Pindar valley scenery all through from its source to its confluence with the Alaknanda at Karnpmy&g is most picturesque and almost in every mile has some beautiful bits whore wood, water, forest, hill and rocks vie with each other in contributing to the general abatidon of nature here visible. Bauiran, a halung>plaoo on the route between Kainur and Bamnagar, is situated in Patti Sdbali of parganah Mall& Salfia in Qarhwal in latitude %d°~55'(y' and longitude 79*’-4-41'^ : distant 10 miles 7 furlongs 21 poles from Kuimir and 9 miles 7 furlongs 28 poles from Bhatwdra, tlio next stage. Tlie road hence to Bhatwdra crosses the Eastern Nyar by a bridge of 62 feet span to Lacbhi, crossing a tributary of the Njdr by a bridge of 57 feet span and thence to Kundi, 2 miles 0 furlongs 20 poles. Hence to Kakrora, Uikhar and the Biudyuk-khdl at Doinaila, 4 miles 3 furlongs 3 poles. From Domaila the road crosses the Kbutali-gadb by a bridge of 72 feet span, descending for a mile and a half and again ascending to Bhatwara encamping-gronnd in large open fields 3 miles 4 furlongs. Bai^Xiath, a village in patti Malhi Katyfir and parganah D&npur of the Kumaon district, lies in north latitode 29"-5t'-24^ and east longitnde 79^-39^-23^, at an elevation of 3.545 feet above the level of the sea (temple). The river Gumti (Goniali) lluwe close to the 32 BAIRAQUVA. village*, which id 12^ miles from Sumeswar, 12 miles from Bagcswsr and abouk 12j^ miles from Jolahagr on tlio Nandpray&g road, with each of which it is connected by a good rood. Baijn&th in 1881 had a popnlatiou of 117 souls. Tlicre is a large Hindu temple here sacred to Kdli situate in the old llanchula fort, of which the altar is said to be constantly moist with the blood of kids and buffalo calves sacrificed to the dread goddess of destruction, still, however, called * mat’ or mother. There aro several old temples of the Turk’s cap style, moat of which aro in ruins and are used as corn lofts and store¬ rooms as in Dwdrahnt. A colony of Gosdins are established here, who observe the custom of burying their dead in small temple-like tombs around the building in which they worship. Along its walls arc old sculptures collected from different places, most of which are of modern Hindu origin; but one is rloarly a representation of Bnddha and must have belonged to a temple of that creed which flourished hero in the eighth century of our era according to Hwen Thsang. Baijniitii is interesting as being in the centre of the Katyflr valley, the homo of the ancient Katy uris. Or all sides the valley is studded with tea-plantations where tw'euty years ago were only the haunts of tigers and bears. Bairagnna (or Bhairongana), a halting-place on the route between ilardwur and Srinagar by the Lachhman-jbdia bridge, dis¬ tant eight miles 11 poles from the former stage and 12 miles 32 poles Iroin Ghandpur-ke-iiianda, is situate in the Hinwal or Hiu- nal valley in Patti Udopnr Talla of parganah Ganga-Salkn in Qarh- w61 in latitude and longitude 78^-2 5'>30.^ 'ilie road from Hardwkr passes by R&nipokliri and Lacbhman-jhdla in the Dchra Dun district into Garhw&l and thence along the left bank of the Ganges to its confluence with the Hinwal river at Phal&ri. Hence it follows the left bank of the latter river to Bairagnna, a little over eight miles, slightly undulating the entire way. Hence to Chandpur-ke-manda the road continnes up the valley for a short distance to a ford across the Hinwal and ascends by Bijni to the Saindnli-khdl, (6tn. 3f. 7p.) Thence a descent of half a mile leads to Bsndarbel dharros&la and a level march of (me mile and ascent of half a mile to Dhangugarh (3m. ‘5f. 18p.) The road descends from here for about quarter of a mile and is level along the Ganges to Ubandpor, 2 miles 7 poles from Db&ngugarh. BA'IXRIIA. 33 BiJchha, a pRss in^o Hundes or Tibet, is sitnatod ia Maila Fainkhanda of Garhwal in latitude 30“-47'-2(y’' and lon^ritndo Tbe Baicblia pass is reached from the Untadhiirapass to the north of Milam in parganah Juhar of Kumaon and was crossed by Messrs. Winterbottom and Strachey in tlieir expedition to Tibet and lalso by Captain Weller, an account of whoso journey is ;;ii'en here. Weller crossed the Unta-dhura and went on to the Balciiha pass (29th May). He descended the norihern slope of Uuta-dhura for half an hunr over one unbroken bed of snow. Thence a inodorato descent of one hour, over sttow-be<ls cut into most tronblosonio ridges by the wind, to the Lanka stream, continued for an hoar along its bank over snow-beds and bare hills, then tornod to tho west and after a bad descent in snow and slush reached Topi-dunga. At the turn, the I.anka also bends westw.ards and is joined by tho Dolduiikhar stream from tho east. Topi-dunga is a small level spot on the loft bank of the Lanka, which here has a depth of about 3 feet and a width of about 20 feet. A shepherd and his flock are said to have been snowed up here for a whole winter. Tbero is a little herbage <at Topi-dtinga and further west, grass and low brushwood (on the opposite side) are tolerably plentiful. Tiio Dol rises in the Jaudi glacier on tho western face of the Kingri- hingri ridge, which here separates GarliwAl from Tibet and flows westwards to its confluence with the Lanka. The united streams flicD rcccii'c on the left bank the Torgar coming down from Uie south-east by south. The junction is curious as the two flow nearly parallel for some hundred yards ; tho Torg&r along the top and the Lanka along tbe base of a precipice which may be 450 feet high at tho highest part and diminishes to nothing at the junc¬ tion. Thus reinforced the Lanka becomes tlio Girthi stream of ilic maps (q.v.) The encamping ground at Topi-diinga has an elevation of 14,830 feet and one on the left bank of tlin Lanka near its confluence with the Doldnnkhar an elevation of 14,640 feet above tbe level of tbe sea. From tliis descended to tho river and passed along it to the ea.st and crossed tho Lanka, above its junction with tho Dol, stream rapid, but not above knec-deep and some 20.fuet wide, wind and snow. Continued up tho Dol, chiefly flowing under snow between precipitous banks of rock. Then turned north across tho Kdlinut- 6 3i BALCBHA. iiya ascent, very sleep and covered with loose stones over a black crumbling slate. 'Jhe latter part of the aseent less steep. This is the Kinngar pass by the Einogar peak (17,680 feet). The crest is composed of small loose stones ri.sing in a sweep to tlie top of the hills on either side ; beyond a good extent of valley and low hills covered with brush-wood rises the Balchha ridge. Hence to Chid&mQ enoamping-gronnd (13,520 feet) by a descent due north over alter¬ nate snow-beds and loose stones from the ridge on the east. The track is here bounded east and west by bare ranges with a smtdl stream flowing north in the hollow between them chiefly under snow beds. The hills on either side are perpetually crumbling away, accumulating immense heaps of looso stone along their bases. Chiddmu is a small level spot on the right or oast bank of the stream above noted, which is here joined by another stream from the cast. The streams unite near Laphkhol to from the Kiogadb, a tributary cf the Oirthi..^ Just north of Cbidnmu, across the stream, a succes¬ sion of low hills commence, extending northwards to Lapbkhel. These are covered with the goat-thorn or damd (C. Pyijmaa) and the hollows afford good pasturage. Looking from the south the southern faco of hills and ravines hardly bear a trace of snow, whilst the northern aspect of those of similar elevation are thickly covered with snow. From Ohidiintt the track passes along a snccession of low hillocks to the Eiogadh, on the right bank of which is tho Lapkliel or Lapiel encamping ground (13,990 feet). Hence a track leads Qp tho Kiogodh by tho ChalJu pass (17,440 feet) and also by tho Chirchun pass (17,960 feet) into Tibet, meeting tho track from TJnta-dht&ra by the Kingri-biugri pass (18,300 feet) at tho Chir- chun (Chitichan) encamping ground in Tibet (16,130 feet). AVlioro crossed near Laphklicl tho Ktogadh was a rapid torrent thirty to forty yards wide, but usually passable by laden sheep. The encamping ground is a few hundred feet above the river shut in by an amphitheatre of low hills which form the base of the low ridgo crossed on passing into Tibet. Tbn goat-thorn is tolerably abun¬ dant and in early June the hollows are covorad with young grass, forming a favourite pasturage ground. The iolagrdm stones abound here. Hence ono track leads to tho Bhelshel pass on tho west (16,390 feet) and another to the Balchha paos (17|500 feet). The BAICBBA GBXT. 35 first stage is to Sangcba encamping ground (14,110 feel); first northwards up a gentle ascent or two and then west over undulat¬ ing ground, sometimes bare and somci imes covered with ddma and rills of water giving nourishment to grass in all the hollows. The breadth of this tract is about two to three miles and it cuds in the ascent to Balchha. From Sangcha the track leads north-east to the bank of a northern affluent of the Kiogadh. This is joined by uumerous streams on either side and is divided near Talk Sangcha into two streams, one coming from the north and the other from the north-cast, up which lies the route to the pass. The hjlls on either side are of incouniderable height, bare, precipitous and crumbling, but towards the fool of the pass they open out a little and have a few thorn bushes on the sloj^cs and where the surface is abraded it is of a brick-dust colour. On the summit is a small he.ap of stones with sticks and rags attached to them, to which the natives add a stone or two as they pass. The view northward from the summit of the pass is thus described;—“Instead of a plain which I had expected to see, Uio country of Tibet is formed of alternate low bills and tabic-lands with a range of higher hills well sprinkled with snow in the distance running north-west to south-east." Though at the time of his visit (the second of June) the weather was mild, this was represented to be unusual and the wind and cold were stated to be for the most part dreadful. The J banka stream rises from the nortliern slo]>e of the pass and has a direction north and a little w'est. This is joined by a fitrenm coming from past Chirchun and the two united form the Trisum, a good-sized river flowing to the north-west. The view from the pass was contracted by the slope of the hill east and west just in front and by the distant haze, no vegetation was visible. Balcbba, U pass on the frontier separating Tibri from Bis&br, lies over a crest of the ridge separating the valleys of the Tons and Fabar or Pfibbara in Patti Bangarh aud pnrganah Baw&in. The pass has on elevation of 8,898 feet above the level of the sea and (he ridges on each side are thickly clothed with deodar. Bftlchba Ohati a ferry across the Kfili river in parganah Shor of the Kumaon district, is situated 12 miles east of Cliamp6\vat and 19 miles south-east of Pithorogarh. Latitude 29°-l 7'-40^, longitude 36 HAN'I)Alt]>[JCHH Bamsn^ a patii of par^anah Na^'piir in British GarbwAt, ia boundetl on the north and east by Kaliphdt Malli; on the south by Kuliphal TalU ; and on the west by Tihri. The road from Rudrpruyag to Kedv^rnath proceeds northwards along the left bank of the Maiidalvini river. The patwari of Malli Kaliphal, usually resident in Guplkashi, collects the land-revenue of this Patti, Maikhanda and Parkandi siKo. The principal villages arc Bhairgaon, Dewali, Lamgauudib and Seniaii. The entire Patti is held as saihibart and its revenues aie administered by a local com¬ mittee. Band or Bund, a patti of parganah Uasoli in British Giiiln\al, comprises a small triangular p.iicii of mountain land on the left bank of the Al.-iknanda river near Pipaikoti. It is held in saffalxirt .iiul is administered by the local committee. It was formed from DusoH in 18G4 and the Patwari of Dasoli Talli, usually resident in Nand- prayag, still collects its revenue. The princi]>al village is Batragna, where there is a school. There arc copper mines at Bautuli in ihis Patti, but they are not now worked. Bandarpuchh (or Band.srpunchh, ‘ tlic monkey’.s tail’), .a moun¬ tain mass forming a collection of pe.ak.s known aa ilio J.itniiotri peaks in tbo rccord.s of tlu: Great Trigonometrical Survey. Three peaks are laid down in the maps as Siikanta, 5J0,130 foot; Bandar- punchh, 2U,75^ feet ; and Jamnotri, 20,038 feet, Fraser writes:—'* As seen from the soutli-west two lofty and iras- frive peaks ri.so high above the rest, deep in snow, from which dl the other inferior ridges seem to have their origin. These peaks arc connected by a sharp neck, coihsidorably lower tliau tleonsclvcs. Thu south and south-east exposure is the least .steep, and hears a great depth of pure unbroken snow. Little or no rock is seen, except a few points at the ridge of the conecting neck, where it is too sharp and steep for snow to lie; and there it appears of a rod colour. Hero and there lofty precipices are seen in the snow itself, where the lower parts havu incited, and masses have given way and sliddeii down to the ravines below, leaving a face several buD> dred feet high, that show s the depth of snow w liich has accumulated for ages. The name of Baiulai puiichh properly applies only to the highest peaks of this mountain: all the subordinate peak> and ridges have their own peculiar UH(ne». Jamnotri hufr reference BANDAnPCcnn. 37 only to the sacred spot, where wor'.hip is paid to ilse goddess and ablution is performed. According lo native accounts there are said to be our peaks which form the top of Haudarpunchh, only two of which are seen from the south-west and in tho cavity or hollow con- taiued between th'un tradition places a Jake or tank of very pecu¬ liar sanctity. No one has ever seen this pool, for no one has ever even attempted to ascend any of these peaks. Besides the phj’sicul dithcuitics the goddess has opceially proliibited any moxt.il fioin passing that spot appointed lor her worship." The landholders aver that every year, in the month ofPhiTgun, a single monkey comes from tin; plains, by w'ay of JIardwar, and siscends the highest peak of thi.s mountain, where hu remains twelve months, and returns to give room to another; but his entertain¬ ment must be very indifferent .ind inhospitable, as may bo inferred from the nature of the place ; lor he return^ in very sad plight, being not only reduced almost to a skeleton, but having lost his hair and a great part of his st in ” The group of hot springs known as Jamnotri is only ahoiit .'>00 Jaoiuutri. yaids l»elow the place where the various small stream- that unite to form the first waters of the Jumna fall into a basin below. lienee they shoot over the brow of a roek projecting from the snow and pass down where the rocks again close over the stream, and thmigh not so lofty as those below interpose a bar to progrcAS upw-ards in the bed of the stream. At the place where it i'- customary to perfurin ablution the north-east side of the liver is very steep and the rocks about hero “ aeem to bo qiiartzose, and chiefly white, but oxhihiting difleront shades and colours. The structure is laminous, and from between these lamina; run several small stream-^ of warm water, form¬ ing together a considerable (pinutit}. There are several other sources in which the water bursts up with great eJuiIhtion, and one in particular, from whicli springs a cnlunm ot verv rouaideraldo size, is situate in the bed of the river hctireen two large ttune^, and over it falls a stream of the river water. This water lias a temperature of 194'7°, nearly that of boiling water, at un elovaiion of 10,849 feet above the level of the sea. niivl emits much vapour. The water is exceedingly pure, transparent, tasteless, and devoid of smell. A great quantity of red crust, apparently deposited by 38 banelsyiJk. the water, which aecmrdi to ho formed of an iron oxide, and some gritty earth, covoi 3 nil the stones around and under the stream. This, on exposure to the air, hardens into a perfect but very porous stone, whilst below the water it is frequently mixed with a slimy substance of a very peculiar character, of a dull yellowish colour, somewlmt like isinglass, certainly a production of the water as well as the above crust, for it covers the stones over which tho stream runs, and is very nhundant” Tho violence and inequality of the stream frequently changes the bed of the river. Formerly it lay on the side opposite to this rock, and the numerous sources of this warm water were then very perceptible, many of them springing from the rock and gravel to some height in the tur, but several of these ase now lost in the present courae of the stream. These warm springs are of great sanctity, and thu spot for bathing is at that point before mentioned, where one of a considerable size rises in a pool of the cold river water and renders it milk warm. This jet is both heard and seen, as it plays far under tho surface of the pool. Tho.so springs have all particular names, such as Gaiirikuiid, Taptaknnd, &c., and, as usual, a superstitious tale is related concerning their Origin. Thus it is said that tho spirits of the Rishls, or twelve holy men who followed Mahadco from Lanka (after the usurpa¬ tion of Hdwan) to tho Himdlnya uihabit this rock and continu¬ ally worship him. (J. B. Frasnr’s Journal, pp. 418—'tSO; As. Kes.. XIV., 395 ; IbiJ., 324. .‘127.) Banelsyun, a patti of psrgaqsh Barnh-syiin of British Garbwal, is bounded on tho north by pattis Kandwnlsytltn and Sitonsyuii; on the south by the Nyar liver, Si parating it from parganah Ganga Salan; on the oast by p-aitis Manyarsyun and GangwdrsyAn .vid on the west by the river Ganges. In 1SG4 three vilh gos w'cre reoeiveJ from Kandwalsydn and five from Manyarsyun. Tho patwuri of this Patti, usually resident in Maklori, colhets the Jr.nd-rcvonue of Patti Kandwolivun also , bo^h, in Idol, aggregated Ks, 2,300 for land-revenue aiid saJiibfiri and Hs. 158 for gu‘%th paid by 51,82 souls. There is a school at Koola. The patti comprises the lands Ivinv between the N\ur river on the south and the Randi river on m ^ * the »'orth, both afCucnls o.' the Ganges. The pilnoiyal villages era ByAusghat. Neaguon, Tar:, Mekiori, Khola, and Bajyungaou, B^JBUGR. 39 Boogarsy^ a patu of parganah Malla Saltfn in British Garhwfil, is boiindod on tho north by Clioprakot and Dlianndydl- sydn; on the east by the latter petti and Bfeldhar; on the south by Sibali, and on the west by Tallin. Tho principal villages are Sukhai and Joi on the Kainnr road ; Baijiran, where the roads from Bdmnagar to Kaindr and Almora to P&ori cross the eastern Nydr by a bridge; Siloli and Hainsa. In 1864, Rmnuliya was trans¬ ferred to Dhaundydbydn. The patwdri of Choprakot, usually resi¬ dent in Konydr, collects tho land* revenue of this patti also. Tho eastern Ny&r mns from north to south through the patti, which is sparsely inhabited and of little importance. BaogarhByiin, a patti in pargaoah Bdrshsyuu in British GarhwdI, is bounded on the south by pattis Kandwalsydn and Sitonsydn; on the north and west by tbe Ganges, and on the east by pattis R&wataydn and Idwdlsydn. The patwari of Rawatsyun, resident at Marguna, collects the revenue with that of Patti Situns* yun. This patti comprises a small strip of land lying along the* left bank of the Alaknanda and travorsed by tho Hardwdr and Srinagar road. It contains the villages of Kdndi Bidyakoti, and Koldsd. Banjbngr, a resting-place on the rente from Nandpraydg on the Alaknanda to Baijn&th on the Oumti, is situated in patti Nanddk and parganali Dasoli of British Garhwdl, distant 14 miles fruin Nandprayag; 12 miles from Nardyanbugr, where the Pindar is crossed by a bridge, and 11 miles from Dungari on the right bauk of a tributary of tbe Pindar. Ihe journey from Nandprayag is often broken at Ghdt, 10 miles from Naudpraydg; and here too tbe road to Bdinni branches off. From Nandpraydg the road to Bdnj- bugr follows the left bank of the Nanddkini river and b bridged thronghout where necessary. It is gently undulating without any steep or diffionlt ascents. Ghimtoii village lies half way and besides this the villages of Alahar Bagti, Rdj Bagti, Gandtsu, and Ndgbngr lie on the right bank of the river. Tliirpao and Ghimtoii are the only villages on the left bank. Tho scenery in parte ia very picturesque and the hills well covered with forest. From Gbdt to Bdnjbugr the valley eontuins some bits of tbe prettiest ■oeneiy in Garhwal. At Bdnjbngr the road to Ndr&yanbugr turn& off to the right oad that to JDungari to the left. 40 B/RAHMANDAL. Bods, b halting-place with bungalow on the road from A)- mora to Pithoragarh, iies in north Utitado 29^-36'-44^ and east longitode 80^-1in Patti Seti Tails of parganah Shor in Kumaon, distant 48^ miles from Almora and 7^ miles from Pithora¬ garh. The traveller's bnngalow is in charge of a watchman and there is also a baniy^'s shop. The road from Shor ascends the hill to the north-west of the Shor valley by an easy ascent of abont 1,500 feet and enters a remarkably wide and open valley thickly studded with villages, amongst which Cbhiina and Bhunmtina are notod for their omngi's. The stream draining this valley flows into the eastern Rdmganga on its left bank, where it is crossed by the iron suspension bridge. On the north the peaks of Iriarikoi (6,884), Asur-chula (6,990), and Bhunmuni (5,728 feet) run from east to west to the Bumganga ; on the east th j ridge dividing it from the Shor valley attains a height of 6,898 feet, and on the south the water-shed above Pubhe has an elevation of 5,775 feet above the level of the soa. Barahtnandal, a parganah in Kumaon, contains seventeen Pattis, each of which is .separately noticed, viz. :—Bisaud Malla, Bichhla ond Talla; Bon irau Pallaand W.'illa ; Dwdrsaun, Kairarau, Kaligdr, Khaspurja, Urbyiir, Ryuoi, SyCtnara Malla and Talla, Tikhi'ui Malla and Talla and Athdguli Palla and Walla. These comprise 519 mahals or estates containing 601 villages. The land ta.x has been assessed thus:-- 1815. ISIS. 1*17. ISSV. ISaa. ISSS. ISSS. 184S. Curmfti, Rs. Ka. Ha. Ra. Ra. Rs. Ks. Rs. hn. 9.241 10,147 11,073 14,767 16.99C 16,996 17,328 18,075 36,985 The current assessment falls at Rs. 1-1-0 per acre on the as.sessable area and at Rs. 1-6-3 per acre on the assessed cultivation. The assessable area comprises 34,724 buit, of which 8,208 are culturable and 26,516 are cultivated (2,840 irrigated). The population at the time of settlement numbered 31,740 mules and 28,434 females ; in 1872, 67,425 (31,395 females) and in 1881, 60,848 (29,683 females). Tho exemptions from the land-tax for the support of temples and in- dniduals amount to 1,678 bisis assessable oi Rs. 3,^308 per annum,. Besides these 2,948 bitia are held in fee simple. ThU is the central parganah of the, district and contains the capital Almora. It occupies tho whole upper basin of the Rosi l!ic great lurtai of that river to the Wislward below Alinora) BIBABVAKDAL. 41 and also the upper portion of the basin of the Gagdi, a tributary of tlie west Rimgnnga. Mr. Batten’s description of the parganah hold? good to the present day The whole tract is richly voted and thickly peopled, with the exoeption of the highest moira* tains and these are by no means difficult of access, nor do they present any stupendons features in the landscape. The climate of the parganah is for the most part very fair, the height of the villages above the sea varying from 6,000 feet to 3,500 feet, tlie main valleys however rarely falling to the latter leveL Perhaps in no part of the hills can anything more beautiful bo seen than the valley of the Kosila in Borarau, especially near Someswar. The mixture of the natural scenery of wood and water, the care-di&playing fertility of innumerable fields, and the sprinkled human habitations remarkaUe for their pretty architecture, make up a picture which it would he difficult to equal in any part of Asia. The cheerfulness and abun¬ dance, too visible in the neighbourhood of Almora itself and Hawil- big, are well known and make up for the absence of grander natural features. It is hardly an exaggeration to say that on the north-west face of the Almora hill from ridgo to base there is not a yard of land uncultivated. The cereal grains from the chief productions of the soil, and in Bor4ran,Kairai*au and Atb&guli, sugar¬ cane, cotton and linseed are also frequently seen. The two former, however, are not grown as profitable staples, but for home use, nor is there any manufacture of 