See other formats

The Himalayan Gazetteer or The Himalayan Districts of the North Western Province of India In 3 Vols . (6 Parts) Edwin T Atkinson Vol. 3 in 2 parts Part - / COSMO PUBLICATIONS New Delhi PREFACE. Tub present volume concludes the historical, geo* graphical and statistical account of the Himalayan dis- tricts of the North-Western Provinces in accordance with the instructions conveyed in Government Resolution, North-Western Provinces, No. 724 A., dated 21st April, 1875, which will be found in the preface to the second volume of the Gazetteer. It was there laid down 'that the work should aim at a position differing from and somewhat higher than that of an ordinary Gazetteer, should be complete in itself and contain an account of all matters of interest connected with each district, or a reference to them where a detailed description was con- sidered unnecessary. It was further directed that a description and history of each fiscal sub-division should be given, sufficient to place officers new to the district charge in possession of such general knowledge of the physical capabilities of the tract, its fiscal history and its inhabi- tants, as may enable them at once to exercise an intelligent control over its administration. This extended scheme was adopted in view of the failure of the District Memoirs, and was intended to supply their place, merely omitting in settlement notices details of a purely executive cha- racter, such as the reasons for adopting certain classifica- tions of soils in particular localities, the details of the survey demarcation of boundaries, preparation of records, the adjustment of circle rates and such similar matters. The firettwo volumes contain all matters affecting the entire Himalayan tract in the North-Western Provinces as a whole. The present volume gives the topographical, statistical and other IocaI information for each fiscal sub-division and important tract, town or place, in the Kumaon, G&rhwdl, Tardi, Dehra Dun and Jaunsar-Bdwar districts. The sections under each notice compress within a reasonable compass everything of interest not only in the local official records, but in papers that have been printed at any time besides the results of much original inquiry. The notice of each of the numerous fiscal sub- divisions, most of which were recently created and had to be carefully defined, contains all that it is necessary to know for good administration regarding its fiscal history past and present, its physical peculiarities and the popula- tion recorded at settlement. Under Kumaon will be found abrief and accurate account of every settlement, and the results given are in accord with the statistics recorded in the last report on the current settlement. The Jaunsdr- Bawar notice also gives the result of the recent settlement. The Dehra Dun final settlement report has not been received, so that Mr. Williams’ Memoir must be referred to for its fiscal history. I have to thank Sir Henry Bamsay for assistance and advice throughout the work, and especially for the mate- rials for the notice of the Bhdbar, the administration of which has been especially his own work. Mr. Macdonald and Mr. Kilvert have aided in the notice of the Tarai, and the former has examined the proofs. Mr. F. Fisher, C.S., supplied in great part the notices of Mussoorie and Dehra, and Major Reade examined the proofs of the por- tions relating to Gathwdl whilst passing through the press. I would especially here record my obligations to Colonel Garstin for his considerable aid in correcting notices of portions of the hills towards and beyond the snoWs which 1 was unable to visit and for examining the proofs of the entire Kumaon portion of the volume. No trouble has been spared, therefore, to make these volumes complete and accurate, and this the last with which I shall have any connection now passes out for the judg- ment of my brother officers, who will best be able to state whether it fulfils the conditions above referred to or not. Calcutta i February 19, 1886. J E. T. ATKINSON. PHOTOS RHTM tXl Faor AO CONTENTS VOL.III PART I Adtadri Aglar Agupar Almom Ambiri Amaot Annfield Ann Aaarori Aii Askot If ill* Aikot TallA Aiwilayon Athfguli Athbtsi Malta Athbih Talk Athgaon Ayirpitha BacbbnnByun Budalpnr Badban Badrin&tb Blgeawar Bagoli Baijiraa Baijnith bairn guna Balobba Ditto Balchha Gbit Banian Band Bandarpncbb BonaUyun Banganyun Bangarhayun Banjbngr Bin* Birahmandal Birahayun Birabiai Birabit Baraun B&rmdco Baaantpur Baon Bel Belkbet Bbibar Bbadrij Bbainakbet Pam. 3 ... ib. 5 ... 12 ... ib. ... tb. ... i6. ... ib ... tb. ... 13 ... tb- ... 17 ... 18 ... ib. ... 19 ... ib. ... 20 20 tb. 21 28 27 31 tb. tb. 82 33 35 ib. 36 tb. tb. 38 89 ib. ib. 40 ib. 42 43 44 45 ib. 48 ib. ib. 49 50 74 75 Bhaintn Bhairon-Ohati B hat trim Bhikal Til Bherang Bhiltiya Bhilang Bbim Til Bhotiya Mahiln Darina Bidolaynn Bidynkoti Bijlot Walla Bijlot Palla Bmrax Birubi Bisuud Bisaud Malta Biajyula fiogsarh Borurma Bo-ndiyar 'Bndhi Bungi Byans Byanaghit I Cbacbaka Chakrita Chal&tiayun Chain Cbamoli Champiwat Cbandi Chandpur Chandpar Sili Chandpur Tuili Chandpur Fort C handpur-ke- Manda Cbangail Chamnaon Chiral Malla Chiril Talla Cbaubbainri Chaudina Cbaugadh Chaugaon Chaugarkbi Chaukot Malla Cbnukot Bicbhla Cbaukot Talla Cbaundkot Cbanrini Chauthin Pace. 76 76 78 tb. 79 tb. tb. 80 83 98 152 tb. tb. 163 tb tb. 154 165 tb. tb. 156 tb. 157 •b. 158 tb. 159 tb. 161 tb. 162 ib. 163 1C5 166 107 tb. 1C8 tb. 169 tb. 170 tb. 171 ib. 172 tb, 174 175 tb. tb. 176 177 Chauthin Pag*. ... 177 Chawalthura ... 178 Chhabis-Diiuiaula ... t b. Chhakbita ... tb. Cblnrha ... 160 Cbobta ... tb. Choprakot ... 181 D. Dlba ... 181 Dabka ... tb. Dalmisain ... 182 Ddnpur tb. Danpur Malta 184 Dinpur fiichhla ... 185 Danpur Talla ... tb. Dorma 186 Dirma Yankti tb. Dirfin 187 Daaoli Malli ib. Da soli Talli ... 188 Dehra 189 Debra Dun ... 199 Deoprayag ... tb. Devi Dbura 201 Dewalgarb ... 208 Dhiij> uli 204 Dhangu Valla ... 205 Dhaugu Talk tb. Dbaniyakot ib. Ditto 206 Dhakuri ... 207 Dhaupur 208 Dhauiidyalsyun ib. Dhuron ... ib. Dh&uli ( Western) ... 209 Dhauli (Eastern) 210 Dhikuli 211 Dhuqsuiulbai ... 212 Dkuraphit ib. Dbyammu ... ib. Duuiiliat. ... 213 Diun Til 214 Duvall ... lb. Dol ,215 Domnila ... ib. Dora Malla ... 216 Dora Talk ... ib. Dorn Dichbla 217 Doti Malli tb. Dug ifr. Dn^li ... 218 Dun; 219 Duiii'ari ... ib. Ditto 220 Dwirahat ib. Dniraauu ... 225 F. Fat eh pur Talk 225 G. Page. Gigar ... 225 Gagia ... 228 Gagwarsydn ... 227 Gila ... tb. Gatnaili ... tb. Ganii ... 228 Gangoli ... 229 Gangol ... 232 Gangoli-Hat ... ib. Gangotri ... 234 Garra ... 238 Garbwil ... tb. Garhwal Bhibar ... 32q Gar-toh ... 321 Gaula ... 322 Ghurdursyun ... 323 Girgaon ... ib. Girtbi ib. Girwar Talk ... 824 Girwar Walla ... 325 Girwar Polk ... ib. Golam-La ... 326 Gopeawar ib. Gi .i ... 327 Goripbit ... 328 Guin-Pani ... i». Gujnrn ... 329 Gumdea ... ib. Gumti ... ib. Gin ... 330 Gunkha ... 331 Gurirayin ... 332 Gwilkura ... ib. Gyuukd ... tb. H. Haldwini ... 333 Hastings ... 334 Hunalbag ... 335 Hiiural ... ib. I. Idwalsyun ... 336 Inyakot ... tb. J. Jidliganga ... 336 Jamtoltu un ... 338 Jallnth ... 339 Jaspur ... ib. Jaunsir-Bawar ... ib. Jokbugr ... 371 Josliimath ... 872 Juhir ... 373 Jumna ... 374 THE HIMALAYAN DISTRICTS or TUB NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. VOL III. Adb&dri, a halting- place between Lohba and Karnprayag, is situate in patti Sili Chandpur of parganuh Chandpur in British Garhw&l in latitude 30°-9' and longitude 79°-16'lO' 5r : distant 10 miles 7 furlongs and 2 poles from Lohba and 10 miles* 5 furlongs from Karnpray&g. There is an encuinping-ground and dharm&dla (rest-house) here. The road from Lohba or Gairsen gives off a branch there to N6r&yanbugur on the Pindar river and itself crosses the Diw&li range (7,963 feet) by the Diw&Ii-khkl at an eleva- tion of 7 f 010 feet above the level of the sea. Near the pass are the remains of a fort and the ridge forms the waterparting between the llimganga and the Pindar. The road thence follows the right bank of the Bhararig&r by the villages of Af&lsi and Kheti to Adbadri. The road is good and passes through beautiful scenery. On the right are the Randal (8,553 feet), Suilidknda (8,936) and Binttl (8,300) peaks, and on the left the DiwAli. (7,963 feet) and Beri (5,479) peaks. Just above Adbadri is the small lake of Beni T41, where there is a tea-factory. 1 At Adbadri are the remains of sixteen temples similar to those found at Dw&rah&t with the usual Turk’s cap ornament. One dedicated to Uadrin&rAyan is still used for worship, and the people say tnat m a few years' time the road by Joshimath to BadrinAth will be closed by the meeting of the oppo- site hills near the temple, and that then this temple will be the object of pilgrimage. The other temples, too, are used in a lesser degree for worship. They are all crowded together in a space of about 42 by 85 feet and vary in height trozn 6 to 20 feet The principal temple is distinguished by a raised platform or cha- butra in front, roofed in and leading to the small square enclosure > 8m Gm.. XI., 784. 1 AGLAR. of the usual pyramidal form, within which is the idol itself. The solitary occupant of the temple at my visit was a Brahmach&ri fakir from Midnapur in Bengal who had taken up his residence there for some five years. Local tradition here assigns the building of the temples to Sankara Acharya, the celebrated reformer and Hindu philosopher, while in Kumaon the same style of building bearing traces of similar antiquity is attributed to the piety of the Katyura Rajas. Aglar, a patti of parganah RAmgar in Kumaon, is bounded on the north by pattis Mahryuri Bichhli and Kotauli Talli ; on the east by Mahrydri Bichhli ; on the west by pattis RAmgir Mai 14 and Tall4 and on the south by Mahryuri Talli. This patti comprises nineteen villages having an area of 1 825 bisisy of which 574 are culturable and 1,251 aro cultivated (only three irrigated). The assessment in 1815 was Rs. 1,309 ; in 1820 was Rs. 1,148, and in 1843 was Its. 1,122. The present assessment amounts to Rs. 1,522, which falls on the total area at 13 annas 4 pies per acre and on the cultivated area at Rs. 1-3-5. The population at the time of last settle- ment numbered 2,995 souls, of whom 1,550 were males. It is chiefly inhabited by the Agari caste of miners who give their name to it Agaspur, a village and haltiug-pl&ce on the route by M4si from Paori to Almora, is situate in patti Chaukot Bichhla of parganah P41i in Kumaon in latitude 29°-52'-15" and longitude 79°- lS'-lS* : distant 12 miles 1 furlong 22 poles from Kdnjoli and 12 miles 3 furlongs 33 poles from M4si. The road from Kiinjoli on the left bank of the PachrAr-gAdh, a tributary of the Eastern NyAr on the right bank, passes to Boijir&u on the road from Kainur to RAmn&gar, and here crosses the NyAr by a bridge of 62 feet span, thence a short level, rise and fall leads to the ascent to Chydrkot-kbAl or pass and thence to Sardikhet-khAl on the borders of Kumaon and GarhwAl 7 miles 7 furlongs 33 poles. Several streams are passed on the way to J&muri-khal, whence a level road leads to Agaspur Dya, 4 miles 1 furlong 29 poles. The road is a good one throughout and is much used by all the inhabitants of southern GarhwAl. Aglar, a small river which rises on the northern declivity of the Surkanda peak in latitudr 30°-25'-25 /f and longitude 78°-20' at an elevation of 7,130 feet above the level of the sea In patti Dosjydla of parganah Jaunpur in Native GarhwAl, and thenoe flows ALAKNANDA 3 rapidly to tbe westward through a deep and narrow valley, and alter a course of about twenty-three miles falls into the Jumna on the left bank, near the Jaunpur fort, in latitude 30°-30'-55* and longi- tude 78°-2'-5<r. Ajmer, a patti of parganah Ganga Salon, is bounded on the east by patti TallA Silt of parganah Tallt Sal&n, on the south by the Kotri Dun and the Bijnor district, on the west by the Udepur pattis and on the north by the same p&ttis and Dhtngu. A road from Kotdw&ra to Srinagar runs just within its eastern boundary, passing by Charekha, Duni and Malniya, at the first of which there is a ruined bungalow. Other villages are Math&na, Kanda, Buli and Uttircha, connected with the Kotdwdra road by a cross path ; Kaphaldi, Juda-Rawalydl and Manjy&ri to the north and Mawakot to the south, also connected by a path with Kotdwdra. Simalna lies to the south-west : there is a school at Gtim. In 1864 six villages were received from Karaundu. The patwari of Ajmer usually resides in Ghota of patti Slid Talld and collects the land-revenue of that patti also; in 1864 the revenue of both aggregated Bs. 2,146. Charekha travellers’ bungalow lies in longitude 78°-37' and lati- tude 29°-49'. Alaknanda, a river in British C» xhwul, formed by the junction of the Dhauli (western) and Vishnuganga at Vishnupraydg in par- ganah Painkhanda. 1 At the confluence, the Dhauli has a breadth of about thirty-five or forty yards with a rapid current, and the Vish- nuganga a breadth of twenty-five or forty yards also with a rapid current. The elevation of the confluence above the sea is 4,743 feet. The united stream flows south-west to Chamoli, receiving the Budr, Garur and Pdtal Gangas and the Birhi or Birahi-ganga at Birhi. Thence, in a southerly direction, to Nandpraydg, where the Nanddkini joins it from the east in latitude 30 °-l 9 '-56^ and longitude 79°-21'-29/ r at an elevation of 2,805 feet above the level of the sea. Again it turns south-west to Karnpraydg, 45 miles from Viahnupray&g, where the Pindar joins it on the left bank in lati- tude 30 d -l 5 / -45" r and longitude 79°-15'-29/ T with an elevation of i',600 feet Thence nearly due west to Budrprayig, 19 miles, where it receives the Mandakini from the north on the right bank in latitude > See Gas. XI., 292, 307, 321, 347. 4 ALAKNANDA. SOMT'-HP and longitude 79°-l'-32* at an elevation of 1,980 feet. Turning again now south-west it flows by Srinagar to Deopray&g, 37 miles, when it is joined by the BhAgirathi from Tihri in latitude 30 o -8'-45" and longitude 78°-38'-56/ if with an elevation of 1,953 feet, after which it is styled the Ganges. At one place called the KAkar’s leap from the tradition of a kdkar or barking deer having jumped across it, the river narrows to about 25 feet aud rushes through a cut in the rocks which rise at least 500 feet perpendicularly on either side, opening out into an immense and deep pooh From this point, which is a’oout four miles above Rudrprayag, the fall is not so great and the general appearance is long reaches with short rapids until it reaches Deopray&g. At this place a huge mass of rock appears to have fallen into the stream, narrowing it to half its proper breadth just before it is joined by the Bh&girathi. On the top of this rock some fifty feet above the river is a rope bridge leading from British Garhwal to Deopray&g, which is in Native Garh- wal or Tihri, and so much does the river rise in the hot weather and rains that this bridge is frequently swept away. At the confluence the Bhagirathi rushes with great force and rapidity down a steep declivity, roaring and foaming over large rocks scattered over its bed. Its breadth is 112 feet and it rises 40 feet during the melting of the snows. The Alaknanda flowing with a smooth unruffled surface gently winds round the point of confluence. It is 142 feet in breadth and rises 46 feet at the same period. The breadth of the united stream is 240 feet. The Alaknanda abounds with fish, some of which are four or five feet in length. The mah&ser {sober, shahur ) is found weighing up to 80 pounds, and the dog-fish or ashxdla and kdldbans , a species of barbel. Gold in small quantities has been obtained by searching the sands of this river, but the remuneration resulting (about four annas a day) has been so scanty that the search is nearly discontinued. There are four iron bridges over the Alaknanda, a tie-bridge at Chnmoli, and iron suspension-bridges at Chhatwarpipal Rudrprayag and Jdkhni, one and a half miles below Srinagar on the Almora and Tihri load. The lest named is 301 feet span from saddle to saddle. From J oshimath downwards the stream is used for the rafting of timber. There are several fine forests of Smilheana, Webbiana and excelsa firs on its eastern bank from Rudr- pray&g to Pipalkoti. Below this ehir pines occur up the Nighaul ALMORA. 5 valley opposite Nandpraykg, on the slopes of the Nigpur hills op- posite Chhatwa-pipal at Pokhri and aB far as Dhari near Srinagar. Alrnora 1 , the head-quarters of the Komaon Division in patti Khaspurja of parganah Bnrahinandal of the Kumaou district, is situate in latitude 29°-37'-3" and longitude 79°-40-'20' ir , by the lower road 30 miles from Naini Tal, 46 miles from Kdladhnngi; it is 19 miles from Ranikhct. The town and the civil and military station are built on a bare saddle-shaped ridge running north-west to south-east for about two miles with an elevation varying from 5,200 to 5,500 feet. The jail stands at about 5,439 feet and the church at 5,495 feet above the level of the sea. The station is con- nected with the higher ridges of Sim tola and Kalmatiya to the west by a col called Mount Brown or Hiradhunga, so called from its micaceous rock which shines like a diamond (Afra) in the morning sun. Kalmatiya has an elevation of 6,414 feet above the level of the sea, and Simtola an elevation of 6,066 feet. The building known as Simtola house lies in latitude 29 0 -37'-3" and longi- tude 79°-43'-21 with an elevation of 6,200 feet. A lateral ridge called Sitoli runs westwards from Hiradhunga towards the Kosi river and exactly faces Alrnora to the north. The intermediate space is crowded with houses and cultivated terraces and possesses a small stream which rises in a spring under Hiradhunga, called by the natives RAni-dhara and by the Europeans St Ronan’s Well. On the east and south the Alrnora hill is bounded by the Suw&l river and on the west by the Kosi, so that it is almost a peninsula con- nected with the other hills by the Kalmatiya ridge. To the south- west the ridge after attaining its highest point of elevation at Charalekh dips down in a bold and rugged series of masses to the point of junction between these two rivers. The ascent from the bridge crossing the Suw41 and the Sukuni (Gorari) near their junction on the Naini Tfcl road is exceedingly steep and trying, especially in the hot-weather, when the heat reflected from the bare gneiss rocks and the white dust from the road alternately roast and blind the traveller. After passing the leper asylum and the Charalekh bun- galows a very pretty Gothic church is reached, erected under the superintendence of Captain Weller and now under the ministration > The hum is Mid to to domed from the Ah nem or wild eorrel (Rentes Acetate), which grant in abandonee os the hill The Clued Rojos olwoje colled it Rejapur in offldol documents: see Goo., 11., 884, 889, MO, 870, 887. ALMORA. r, of tlio Naini Till chaplain, who visits Almora once a month. Close by and around are the residences of the European community and Fort Moira, otherwise called Ldl Mandi , and the parade-ground. The Knmaon battalion was formerly posted at Hawalbag in the valley of the Kosi about five miles north of the presont cantonments, but that has long been abandoned as a military station and the Kumaon battalion is now represented by the 3rd Gorkha regiment, who garrison the fort and supply a strong detachment to Fithoragarh under the command of a Native officer and guards to Naini T&l and R&nikhet. The sepoys’ lines dip down from the fort on the north-east and the officers’ houses lie to the west and north. Between these and the town is the small Mission chapel with a Grecian portico and inscrip- tions in raised letters in Hindi. Then commences the town. The prin- cipal street is paved with stone flags and is about 30 to. 50 feet in width and about three-quarters of a mile in length, divided into two bazars by the old fort and new Mission school. The slope from east to west is broken by flights of stone steps which render the street not easily passable for ponies. The houses are from two to four stories high and are substantially built of mica-slato and roofed with thin slabs of the same material. The upper stories are, how- ever, usually constructed of wood quaintly and profusely carved and some bear decorative lamp-rests of deer’s antlers. The windows are mere apertures for the most part resembling pigeon-holes cut in the wooden panel and closed by a slide. The general appear- ance of the town is compact and clean and the conservancy arrange- ments seem to be well carried out. Beyoud where the north-eastern gate was, rises the old fort Almora, in the enclosure of which are situated the treasury and civil coarts. An engraving of this is given by Tieffenthaler in his travels undertaken daring the middle of the last oentury. Beyond this the top of the ridge is somewhat hollow- ed ont and the space is occupied by a bazar, the office of the anh-collector of revenue and the Lala Bazar. Here also, on the site of the former residence of the Rajas of' Kumaon, is the new Mission school. This school, opened in 1&71, is a fine building in the Tuscan stylo, with a central hall 60 feet by 34 feet and a wing on each side containing four spacious class-rooms. The lofty roof of the hall ends in a portico supported by massive stone pillars. AJLMORA. 7 Hie entire building is of solid masonry and the pediment and frieze have carved inscriptions in English and .Hindi. The plan is due to Captain Birney, R.E., who also supervised the erection of the building. The dispensary is close at hand and theu the road ascends towards the site of the Marchkilah or St Mark’s tower, a building long since pulled down. On both sides of the town on the north- western and eastern slopes, the hill side is adorned with very fino substantial isolated native houses and also villages embosomed in orchards of tiin, walnut, cherry, Australian jack and apricot The eastern side is less wooded owing to the greater steepness of the mountain face. There are several Hind u temples in Altnora, but none with any pretensions to architectural merit ; and there is only one mosque. For a distance of about fonr miles around Alinora on every side the hills are absolutely bare, but beyond that distance the mountains are as well timbered as any in the central parts of the district. Tradition has it that deodar trees were once plentiful on the north-west face of the hill, but from the nature of the soil it is improbable that these forests were ever extensive. The tradition regarding the transfer of the Chand capital here also points to Almora as being then covered with timber. The oaks on Kalmatiya are of a stunted growth, mid the pines only attain a respectable size on the northern aspect of the range. Deodars grow well when planted and many of the old houses are built of the wood of this tree, which would so far bear out the tradition. Sixty degrees is about the annual average temperature of the air. In the hot weather, from May to 1st July, the climate of Almora, though at that season from 15 to 80 degrees cooler th an in the neighbouring plains, approaches to Chwato * a tropical type. Pankhas and tattis, how- ever, are not required, and the thermometer (except for n few hours on some hot days before rain) can be kept down in n closed house to 74°. Whenever it exceeds 80° in nil outside shaded verandah, rain or a thunder-storm may bo expected, wMch sometimes at onco reduces the temperature to G2°. In the rains 72° may be consi- dered the nverago temperature, and at that season, which is very pleasant at Almora, though not cold and requiring fires as at Simla and Mussoorie, the range of the temperature is rarely 2°. 8 ALMORA. Midnight and midday in a cool room show the thermometer, in July and August, often for days together, at 72° or 73°. Outside in the shade the range rarely exceeds 10°. In winter, snow falls occasionally, hut rarely lies beyond a few honrs on the ground. Different years display different phenomena in regard to this matter: for instance, on December 11th, 1841, snow covered the ground at the level of the Kosi and Suw&l rivers (3,700 feet) ; on December 31st, 1842, rain fell for hours, yet the G6gar range at 7,500 feet abovr the sea was without a particle of snow. Snow is most frequent in February, taking a number of years October and November are beautiful clear cold months, and most of the fruit trees then lose their leaves. March and April are generally mark- ed by thunder-storms, but in all the summer months, till the regu- lar monsoon rain falls, a thick atmospherical haze prevails which obscures all the view. This haze, however, is common to the whole hills and is as dense near the snows as at Almora. The towns-people of Almora are for the most part very healthy, and the state of health in the cantonments, where, sometimes, the sepoys suffer considerably, especially during their first seasoning to the climate, is no criterion of that of the town. Fever and dysentery seem to be the prevailing fatal diseases among the natives; and colic is often rapidly fatal, especially in the fruit and vegetable season. The bad fever of the typhoid form (mahdmarx) has not occurred at Almora. At Almora in the rains, wild hemps, nettles, thistles, worm- wood, Mirabilia jalapa (marvel of Peru), mint, dhattira, and wild balsam, Ac., spring np and produce a rank vegetation, bnt it is less grown over than most other hills, owing to the dryness and shal- lowness of the soil above the solid rock. Madden 1 has given a fall account of the botany of Almora which has been incorporated in a previous volume 1 . Micaceous schists of four different kinds ac- cording to their degrees of hardness and crystalline character, and according to the greater or less proportion of quarts, is the rock at Almora. On the descending ridge to the Suwtl and Kosi on the south-east and south-west points, a greet oat-burst of granite prsvaHsi which is connected with the eruptions of the same rook in an easterly and westerly direction at Kaintir, Dwira, Dol, Devi-Dhdra and Champa wat, always at a distance of about 40 miles from the plafaa. •J. A.&Bsa,2Ml ’ YoL X* Ornate*. ALMORA. 9 The decomposition of the feldspar causes the characteristic boulder- looking masses on the hills. Some of the granite however is compact and beautiful, especially near the gneiss strata out of which it is erupted, and the graphic variety is singularly so. Some of the mica slate strata and quartz veins show signs of great disturbance, as the Almora ridge approaches these granitic developments — and the hill sides in this direction (tho south-west and the south-east) are un- commonly barren, rugged, and, to a fastidious eye, ugly. Almora is peculiarly fitted as a resort for consumptive patients, but for other invalids the temperature is too high during May and June and does not give sufficient coolness to those who seek an invigorating climate after exposure to the heat of the.plains ; this, too, is enhanced by the almost total absence of shade. The supply of water is of an unusually good quality; springs abound on either side of the ridge within 300 feet of the crest and most of them within 150 feet of the top. That near the tank is directly on the crest of the ridge. In the hotter months some of tho springs dry up or give a scanty supply, but takiug the whole hill and putting aside the conventional distribution of the wells among the different castes, the general supply of water is nearly al\va} r s sufficient for all purposes. A covered reservoir with a spout is the form usually given to these wells. All the springs rise in mica slate or qua rtzose veins which are numerous, and although on tho Kalmatiya ridge traces of iron and graphite arc observable, ferruginous matter has not hitherto been detected in the Almora waters. They are always cool and refreshing to the taste In addition to the springs a never-failing supply of water is obtuined by two aqueducts from Simtola. Almora is connected with Ranikhet by a new cart-road constructed in 1872-73 and a bridle-road by Haw&lbig up the valley of the N6n& Kosi, and thence by Talla Ryuni to the eastern spur of the Ranikhet ridge, whence it i» again nearly level to tho d&k bungalow, 19 miles from Almora. The road by Dw&rah&t to Garhw&l follows the same route to within nine miles of R&nikbet, then on to Bhainskhet, where there is a bungalow (see Bhainskhet) . The Baijn&th and Nand- prayftg road follows the Kosi valley from Haw61b&g to Someswar, where there is a bungalow, 18 miles from Almora. The B&geswnr road proceeds by Takula, where there is an encamping-ground 12 10 ALMOBA. miles from Almora ; tho road is winding and high, lying along the upper ridge of the hills with one steep descent to Tdkula. A second road passes by Binsar to Bdge swar. To the east roads lead by Panuwa N&ula bungalow, 16 miles from Almora to Pithoragarh, and by Devi Dktira to Lohnghdt. Naini Tdl is reached by Piura on the upper road 8 miles from Almora and thence Itdmgdr bungalow 10 miles and Naini Tdl 13 miles ; by the lower road, which is ex- ceedingly hot and feverish, dnring and after the rains the Khairna bungalow is 18 iiiiles from Almora and Naini Tdl, 12 miles from Khairna. The latter half of the lower route consists of a steep ascent along the western slopes of the Lariya Kunta ridge to the St. Loo gorge overlooking the lake. In 1872, tho total native population numbered 5,884 souls dis- tributed as follows Christians, 35 : Hin- & >C ' dus, 3,972 : Muhammadans, 755, and Dorns, 1,121. The ironsmiths (114), carpenters (251), masons (255), pot^ ters (111), inochis (73) and telis or oilmen (20) are all Dorns, a low caste of Hindtis. There were 745 Joshis, 195 Pants, and 1,404 other Brahmans. The Baniyos numbering 797, and the Sondrs 264, represented the trading classes. These figures include women and children and represented 170 castes and trades. Of the above, 4,811 souls lived within municipal limits. The population of the municipality in 1881 was 4,813, of whom 2,264 were females, and at the same time the population of cantonments was 920, of whom 264 were females. The population of the town during tae same year, including Municipality, Cantonmonts, and Civil Station, was 7,390 (2,8G7 females), comprising 6,323 (2,451 females) Hindus ; 866 (317 females) Musalmdns, and 209 (103 females) Christians and others. In Septembei, 1880, the total figuro was 7,124. Tho muhallas or wards of the town are Lachhmeswar, Karuriya-khola, Kupina, Galli, Chaunsdr, Gnrani-khola, Ckampanaula, Kbolta, Deuripokliar, Chhipultharha, Thapaliyn, Chaugdnpdtha, Joshi-khola, Sela-khola, Chaudhri-khola, Siumeikot, Paniya-udiydr, Poklmr- khdli, Jhijhiydr, Jyur, Makirhi, Chfnakdn, Dharananla, Tiunera, Khasiya-khola, Daniya, Ndl-khola, Dabkiyn, Kugar, Dhagal-khola, Domtola, Lalabazar, Kdrkhdnah, Nakarchitola, Salimgarh, Sondr- patti, Banskigalli, Chhakula, Tirana-khola, Tamteura and Dhobi- khola. The word • k/ivlu ' in the termination of tho names of tho ALlfOIU. 11 wards is equivalent to the 1 tola and 1 pur a' of the towns of the plains. The names sufficiently explain their origin and are derived from the caste or trade of the occupiers or founders or from some remarkable person or object. There are several good shops at which European supplies can be procured, but no large market, and but little trade since the BhAbar marts at K&ladhungi, Ramnagar, Barmdeo, and HaldwAni and the bazars at R&nikhet and Naini TA1 have come into existence. The municipnlity was formed in 1864, but the income is only about Rs. 5,600 per annum. The receipts of the Almora Cantonment fund amounted to Rs. 308 during 1882-83 and the expenditure to about the same. The greater portion of the grain used is brought on ponies from the Bbabar, whilst the produce of the upper parganahs is disposed of to the Bhotiyas. Wood for local consumption is brought in from distances varying from six to eight miles chiefly by women, who here r as at Naini Tal, form the chief portion of the cooly population. Amongst the local institutions are a station library, reading-room and racquet-court, and a native debating society and library establish- ed in 1870 by former pupils of the Mission School, who have a library, printing press, and a fortnightly newspaper of their own. There is also a branch of ll.e London Mission here and at Rani- kliet, and of the American Mission at Ninfljt Tal and Paori in Oarhwdl. Schools have been opened at Pithqjagafh, ChampAwat, aud Gangoli Hat, and the charactor of the instruction given is shown by the success of the pupils at the usual examinations and their appointment to posts of considerable value iu the public service. The leper asylum is another of the charitable organisa- tions of Almora well worthy of extended support. In 1884 it contained 114 inmates, of whom 69 wore Christians. These come from all parts of the hills, including Nep&l. The asylum pos- sesses a neat row of barracks and a pretty little church, at which divine service is performed every day. The history of Almora has already been told in the history of Kumaon. The real reason for the abandonment of CbampAwat was doubtless its distance from the recently conqacred and far more valuable possessions to the wast Madden notices the legend 12 AST. that Kttlyuu Chand was huuting in the forest which then covered the site of Almora when a hare chased into a thicket became a tiger, which was considered so good an omen that the RAja forth- with selected the spot as the site of his future residence and pro- mised that whoever dared to hunt any of his race should soou discover that he had tigers to deal with. At Sitoli close by Almora was fought the decisive battle which ended in the cession of the whole division to the British in 1815. Since then Almora has more than regained its former prestige as the bead-quarters of the Civil administration. Ambari, a village iu the western Dun, on the road from Saha- ranpur to Cliakrata, close to the Jumna 20 miles from Dchra. It is the site of a tea-plantation and ha^ a Public Works bungalow. Amsot, a village in the Dehra Dun district, lies in latitude 30°-22'-45", and longitude 77°-43'-42", at an elevation of 3,139 8 feet above the level of the sea. The upper markstone of the Great Trigonometrical Survey station is situ at ed on the highest point of the same range as Dhoiw&la. Timli is the nearest village, being about three miles to the north-east. This height was deduced trigonometrically. Annfleld, a village in the western Dun, two miles from the Jumna. It is the site of a tea-plantation and an agricultural colony of Native Christians established by the Revd. T.. Woodside in 1859 mid now a flourishing settlement, self- supporting and ccnKining a church and school. Asan, a river of the Western Dun, rises in the ravines near Har- bansw&la to the west of the Mohand and Dehra road at an eleva- tion of over 2,000 feet and after a north-westerly course of about 26’mUes falls into the Jumna below Rajghat. This stream receives no tributaries except mountain torrents from the HimAlaya on the north and the Siw&liks on the south, and is only noticeable as being the maiu drainage channel of the western Dun. Asarori, a police out-post in the western Dun at the northern foot of the Mohand pass on the Dehra and Mohand road. ABi, a patti of parganah Kali Kumaon in Kumaon, is bounded on tbc north by patti ChAlsi j on the east by Pharka and Sipti ; on the south by Tallu PAlbelon and on the west by Malli and Talli Rau. ASKOT. 13 This patti was separated from Asi-ChAlsi or Clmlisi at the recent settlement. The principal villages are Gum, Garhsdri, Hauli, Jau- ldrhi and Pati. The assessable area comprises 2,695 Iritis, of which 1,002 are culturable and 1,693 are cultivated (156 irrigated). The land- revenue gave Rs. 484 in 1815, Rs. 785 in 1820, Rs. 1,148 in 1843, and now is assessed at Rs. 2,091, which falls on the whole area at He. 0-12-5 and on the cultivation at Re. 1-3-9 per acre. The population at settlement numbered 1,947 males and 1,638 females. Three villages were received from Palbelon and one from Sipti at the recent settlement. The villages are numerous and highly cultivated and on the higher ranges produco good crops of hemp. Askot M&lla, the upper patti of parganah Askot in Kumaon, is bounded on the north by pattis Goriphat and Tall4 D4rni4 ; on the west by patu Dindiiiat of parganah Sira ; on the east and south-east by the Kuli river, which separates it from Nepal, and on the south by Tall4 Askot. This patti was separated from Askot at the recent settlement. For its statistics see Askot TallX. In connection with this patti, however, mention may be made of the R4jia the ban-manua or wild men of the woods as they have been called, who inhabit the forests of Chhipula. Askot is said to have had originally eighty forts, and hence the name. The first of these waB Cbampachal or Lakhanpur Kot, near which are the remains of the old town of Bngrih&t. The Rojbars are Katyuris and held sway over the Bhotiya valleys from Juhar to Bylins, subject to the Raika Rajas of I)oti. On Champdchal there is r temple to Mah&deo where offerings are made to the sylvan deities by the Jlaj bar, and on Chhipula or Najurkot there is a great cave at which a fair is held every year, also a dry pond held sacred to the deity of the hill. The gh&t here is the only direct communication with lower Kumaon for Dh&rchula, Kela, Chandins, D4rm4 and By 4ns. 1 Askot Talla, a patti of parganah Askot in Kumaon, is bounded pn the north by the Mall4 patti of the same parganah ; oti the west by the Athbisi Mall 4 and B4rabisi pattis of parganah Sira ; on the sonth by the Khar4yat and Kharkdes pattis of Shor, and * See farther G&r, XI., 805, 449, 455, 494, 527, 631. 14 ABKOT. on tho oa“t by the Kali river, which separates it from Nep&I. The Bngrilmt, Charma and Sliangli gun or streams flow eastwards into the Kali nearly parallel to each other. Daoda is situated at the confluence of the last with the Kali ; Dhawalisera at the mouth of the Charma and Bagrihat on its own stream. The road from Lohughat r id Shor to D&rma passes through the western corner of the patti and has th^ villages of Mithdla, Malaliu, Ulma and Jcthgaon on it. To the south-east of Ulma, Larilekh rises to a height of 6,031 feet, and between it and Bugrihat the country slopes down and is more open and occupied with villages like Shfinkot. The valleys of both the Charma and Shangli are highly cultivated. The Mall& and Tall& pattis were separated at the last settlement and together comprise the tract on the Tight bank of the Kali south of Chaudans and north of the Dhvaj peak. The junction of the Gori with the Kfili takes place immediately beiow the fine ridgo on which Askot itself is built The portion along the river is very low and marked by a highly tropical vegetation. The slopes stretching down from the high southern hills and the Askot ridge itself are open and healthy and the position of the tract is favourable for the sale of its products to the Bhotiyas, large parties of whom winter within its borders. In a military point of view the ridge of Askot may be considered the key to the Darma and B) r &ns passes, for the only practicable way to them is along the bed of the K&li. MallA Askot comprises one waste and 1 8 inhabited villages and TalI4 Askot three waste and 124 inhabited villages ; the statistics of both may be shown thus : — * Area in blsis. Assessment in rupees Population. Total. Cultivated. Cultura- ble. 1815. 1820. 1 ^4 Current. Hale. H4 '^3 Female. hH fc* ft Askot Mails ... Askot Talli ... Total El m us m 739 1,404 302 1,052 165 544 i 514 660 514 736 1.069 2.070 4,168 G89 2,143 1,354 709 g 1,174 3,189 2,740 The assessment falls at four annas nine pie per acre on the total area and at seven annas one pie per acre on the cultivated area. The patw&ii usually resides at Barakot and there is a school at Duwal. ASKOT. 15 The tenure of land in Askot is unique in Kumaon, it bring tho only parganah where the form o right in Tnlaka Aakot. J ® b land known as zamiud&ri exists in these hills. This has been held for many generations by a family con- nected with the old Katytiri Rajas and who bear the affix Pula to their names and have the title RAjb&r. Some account of them has already been given in the history of Kumaon, 1 and here wo have only to deal with the fiscal history of the estate. The Raj bar had enjoyed the revenues of Askot for many generations until at length they fell under the rule of the Chunds, who, however, left the Rajbdr iu possession, merely exacting an annual nazardna or fine in token of supremacy. The total of this due at the period of the Gorkhali conquest amounted to Rs. 400 per annum and Was gradually increused by them to Rs. 2,000, at which sum it stood at tho British occupation. 1 This sum, though it probably equalled tho full amount which could have been demanded from the whole parganah on a regular assessment, was never settled as such, but continued to be fixed in one item under tho name tanka , a term equivalent to nazardnay and at our earliest settlement a fixed sum was accepted at a reduced rate. With a view to the permanence of the raj, it had been an invariably family custom that only the eldest son should succeed to the inheritance, whilst the junior members of the family merged in the body of landholders. Dur- ing tho Gorkhali occupation this rule was infringed upon and dissensions arising oil tho death of tho Rajbdr led to the suc- cessive appointments of Rudrapal and Maliendrapdl, tho brother and son of tho deceased Rdjbar, according as each outbid the other for tho favour of the local Gorkhali commander. At the first settlement made by the British Government both these persons were admitted in tho engagement and lease for the parganah. This lease differed from the forme** engagements in that it specified the villages by name and distributed the lump assessment amongst them. This apportionment of the State demand was, however, .drawn out wholly on the judgment of the Riijburs themselves, without any reference to the opinions of tho village landholders. The same system was pursued at the second settlement, and at the third tho only difference was that tho name of RudrajAl was 1 Uu, XL, 305, 455, 404, 531, &c. * Traill, June 30 Ui, pH 821. 16 A8K0T. omitted from the engagement paper with his own oonsent, in pursuance of some private arrangement between him and Mahen- drap&l. This circumstance led to subsequent divisions between these persons and terminated in a suit in court instituted by Kudrapal ; the result of this was a decree in favour of the plaintiff for the R&jb&ri of one-third of the parganah as it stood at the formation of the first triennial settlement Accordingly this division was carried into effect by arbitration and three leases were granted ; the first to Mahendrap&l, for his share or two-thirds, the second to Rudrap&l for one-third, and the last to Mahendrap&l for the newly- cultivated villages reclaimed through his means within the preced- ing three years and which were not included by the court in the adjudged division. Claims were at the same time preferred by other members of the family to specific shares in the Rajb&ri, but as none of these claimants appeared to have ever been admitted daring the former or last Government to the engagement for any of the rights or privileges of the Rajb&ri, their demands on the ground of local usage were dismissed. The smaller share came down by regular succession to three brothers— Pirthi, Sarabjit, and Mohkarn. In 1832, Mr. Traill allowed a separate engagement for the land-revenue of Helpiya and its twenty-four hamlets to Mohkarn Singh, while Dewal and its eighty-three hamlets remained in the lease of the Rdjb&ri. Re- ceiving a sanction never before accorded by custom or local law, these new landlords as distinguished from landholders tried their new rights by getting deeply into debt, with the resalt that they fell into the hands of the Almora usurers and weie brought into the civil courts. They resisted in their own stupid way. Mohkarn Singh fled for refuge to his relatives in Doti, bat Pirthi Singh was seized and remained for some time in the civil jail at Almora. The upshot of this litigation was that their estate was sold in satisfaction of decrees of the civil dourt in 1843, and the principal creditor, one Krishna Saydl, became the pnrehaser. The elder brother of the pnrehaser, Hira Lai Suyal, had, previously in the course of the litigation, mysteriously disappeared and foul play on the part of the debtors and their friends was suspected. The new settlement was then made with Krishna Saydl at the former revenue, Rs. 273, but it fared as badly with him as with his brother, ASWALSYUN. 17 for on proceeding to take possession he was murdered by the sons of Pirthi Singh and Mohkam Singh, who again fled for protection to their relatives in Doti. The heir of Krishna SayAl was a minor, and with the consent of the Commissioner tho estate waa for some time managed by tho Rajbar, who accounted for the pro- ceeds. During this time opportunity was taken to examine into the resources of each village and the condition of the cultivators, and it was fonnd that a great portion of the actnal tillers of the soil were immigrants from Doti. The estimated value of tho oat- turn was Rs. 364 with sir land and customary dues called sdg-pdt or dola-dhek and extraordinary dues known as lika-bhet , suoh as personal servico in carrying loads and litters. The right to the RAjbari has always beon held to depend upon the will of the paramount power and immemorial usage has sanctioned the rale that so long as tho Raj bar provides in a suitable manner for the dependants of his own house, he is entitlod to all the profits of the estate and is unfettered in the mode and amount of distribution. In 1847 the property was again sold in satisfaction of a decree of court, and this tirao the purchaser was Tulardra SAh, the treasurer of the Almora col lecto rate. He fonnd means to obtain possession in the following year, but RAjbar Pushkar Pal repurchased his rights in 1855 and is now the zaminddr of all Askot, which he holds on the same terms, i.e. t he may increase the cultivation to his own profTt and make such arrangements os he may think advantageous for the talnkay bnt he cannot interfere with the permanent tenants’ posses- sions recorded in the village papers. Aswalsyun, a patti of parganah Burahsyun, lies in the south- east corner of that parganah between tho right bank of the western NyAr and the nnited Ny6rs. The soil is rich and the population is industrious but very litigious. The principal villages, most of which are good, are Nagar, where there is a school, Bhatgaon, Saraon, Suralgaon, Chami Saknoli, Mirchwara, Sula and Kdg6a. The name is derived from the AswAl caste, who inhabit the patti. Nagar lies in longitude 78°-39' and latitude 29°-59 / . In 1864, seven villages were transferred to Manyfirsyun. The patwAri usually resides at DAngi in ManyArsyun and collects the land-revenue of both pattis, which in 1864 from all sources amounted to Ra. 2,431. 3 18 ATHBISI MAIL A. Ath&g£li, a patti of parganah Barohmandal in Kamaon, is divided into two, the Walla and Palla pattis. The former occupies the left bank of the Gagfis river in that portion of its course where it is crossed by the Rauikhet and Dwfira road and extends from Runikhct to the river. The latter occupies the corresponding portion of tho right bank. The principal places in the Walla patti arc:— -Rdnikhct, Badhnn, Buguna, Chaukuni, Dugaurha, Jhalorhi and Wain a, and in the Palla patti are Airdri, Bdnsula-sera, Bhet, Bhandargaon, Chytili, Dhunkhalgaon and Ubhy&ri and Aror, in both of which last there are schools. The patwfiri usually resides at Bagwttti-Pokhar. The statistics of the two pattis may be shown thus:— AthugGli. AREA IN bis is ASSESSABLE. A JSESSMENT IN RUPEES. Population. Total | Cultivated. | Cultiv- able. 1815. 1820. 1843. Current. Males. Females. &* Talla ... Walla ... 2,030 2,575 152 30 2,427 2,040 351 405 911 508 1,638 921 1,814 9GG 3,423 2,108 2,175 1,825 1,880 1,618 The assessment per acre on the total assessable area in the first amounted to Rc. 1-2-8 and in the second to Re. 0-13-1; and on culti- vation in tho first to Re. 1-5-3 and in the second to Re. 1-0-3. About 116 llsti are held as gunth and mudji worth nearly a rupee per l&*\. Athbisi Malla, a patti of parganah Sira in Kumoon, is bounded on the north by Dindibat; on the south by patti BArabisi; on tho west by Talla Athbisi and on the east by Talla Askot. The upper valley of the Charm-gdr, a tributary of the K&li, drains the patti. The principal villages are Durlekh, Ilanchila and Ujcrba. The statistics of tho Malla and Talla pattis may be shown thns: — Atlimi. Abba in Him assessable Assessment in rupees. Population. Total. | Cultivated. | Cultnr. able. 1815. s 1843. jj O Males. Females. Irriga- ted. P Malla . . Talla ... 327 500 170 131 85 192 1 71 | 185 282 226 367 303 420 342 646 555 428 421 349 342 ATHGAOH. 19 Some 43 litis arc held free of land-tax. Tito revenue fulls at Bo. 1-10-8 per aero on the total assessable area in tho Malla putt! and at Ro. 1-1-5 per acre in the Talla patti : tho rate on cultiva- tion is Rs. 2-2-9 and Re. 1-11-5 per acre respectively. Tho pat- wdri usually resides at Nankuri. Athbisi Talla, a patti of the Sira parganah in Kuinaon, is bounded on the west by Mali ; on the east by Athbisi Malla ; on the south by Bdrabisi and on the north by pattis Mali and Dindihdt of the same parganah. The southern portion of the patti is drained by a tributary of tho Rdmganga, crossed near its confluence with the Rum gangs by tho Thai road at the village of Mohani. The other principal villages are Bunga-Boro, Lima-Bhat and Sera-Saundli At the extreme south-eastern boundary of this patti the Lori peak rises to a height of 7,763 feet. One villago was transferred to Dindihdt and three to Mdli at the recent settle- ment The separate Hr or private holding of the Rdni regnant of the former Malla dynasty here was known as Athbisi, whilst Bdrabisi formed tho military assignment. Atbgaon, a patti of parganah Gangoli in Kuinaon, is hounded on the north by the Bhadrapati-gdr, which separates it from Kain- sydr; on the west and south-west by the Sarju river; on the south and sonth-cast by patti Bel and on the east by patti Bardun of the same parganah. Tho principal villages are Chak-Bora, Chauhda, Nadoli, Pokhri and Bankaul on tho Bhadrapati. The road from Alniora to Askot passes through the nerthorn part of the patti and that to Pithoragorh just below its southern boundary. In the north-west the peaks of Vdsuki-Nag and Gauri-devi attain a height of 6,889 and 5,889 feet respectively, yet are clothed with cultivation to the summit To tho cast there is less cultivable ground and here the peaks average about 5,400 feet. The assess- able area comprises 3,492 litis, of which 1,708 aro culturable and 1,783 are cultivated (480 irrigated). The land-tax at the conquest amounted to Rs. 237; in 1820 to Rs. 319; in 1843 to Rs. 516, and is now Rs. 2,101} which falls on the whole assessable area at Re. 0-9-8 per acre and on the cultivation at Re. 1-2-10 per acre. The revenue-free area amounts to 242 Litis and 1,285 Visit are held in fee-simple. The population at the time of settlement numbered 3,256 souls, of whom 1,740 were males. Twenty-one villages were 20 BADALPUR. received from Bar don and 37 from Del, whilst five were transferred to Kainsyar at the recent settlement. The patwari usually resides at Chamtola and (.here is a school at Gau&i. Ayarpatha, a mountain rising to the south of the Naini TA1 Jake, in latitudo 29°-23'-2 // and longitude 79 o -29 / -20/ ,r of which the northern peak has an elevation of 7,639 feet above the level of the sea. This mountain derives its name from the presence of the 1 ayar or Andromeda ovalijolia, a tree giving a small white flower in the rains resembling a ‘lily of the valley.’ Tho young leaves are poisonous' for sheep and gouts, who seem however to be very fond of it. Ayarpatha is also mentioned in tho notice of Naini Til. B. Bachhansyun, a patti of pargana.i Dewalgarh in British Garh- wul,is bounded on the north by the Ganges, which separates it from Tihri on the south by patti Kundaisjan ; on the east by the same patti, and on tho wist by patti Chalansyun. This patti was formed from Dewalgarh in 1864. The palwaii usually resident in Nawasw, collects tho revenue oi Patti C'halansj uti also; both aggregating Its. 2,147 from revenue and sudaOart and Ns. 42 from revenut-freo grants, with a total population in 1864 of 4,195 souls. This patti comprises tho valley of tho Bachhan-gadh, in which are siluatod tho villages of Bfiinsu, Nawasu, Bursuri, Dhankot and Dungara, where there is an iron mine. Uuworkcd copper mines e.\ist at Pipali, Duugara and Tilni Taunn, Badalpur, a patti of pargunah Talla Solan, was divided into two pattis at the settlement iu 1864 known respectively as the Alalia or upper and tho Talla or lower. Tlicv . together to the South of the Eastern Nyur river and are bounded on the west by Dattis Kauriya and Si la ; on tho east by pattis Kolagar, lriyakot and Painiio, and on the south by tbo Palli Dun. The road from l’auri to Kotdwara runs through a small poition of the north-west corner of tho Mai la Patti. The chief villages are Sinaia with iron mines, Kbarkholi, Kota, To li, where there is a school, and By&li. In the Talla Patti are Mutiny £li, A sank he t, RAmftkcsera and Mnraura. The drainage of the northern portion flows into the Ny6r ; and of the Talla Patti into the Bumgango. The Mandh&l stream rises in the latter tract near Baiuwalgaon. la badhXk. ai 1864 the villages to the north of the Nyrfr were transferred to the neighbouring patiis, Gaw&na Talk to Kolagdr, Haltini to Gur&rsyun, and twelve villages to Mauddrsydn, while Kandni was added to the Mails p&tti from Kliatali and Negiy&na from Bijlot to tho Talla patti. The census statistics are as follows for both Pattis: in 1841, 3,457 sonls; 1853, 6,927; and 1858, 7,099. The patw&ri of Badalpur Malta usually resides in Toli and collects the land-revenue of Kauriya Walla also, which in 1864 aggregated 11s. 2,507 ; the patw&ri of Sila Mai la collects the revenue of Badulpur Talla. Baduu lies in longitude 78°-49'-4tK and latitude 29°-51'. Badhan, a parganah of the Garhwnl district, contains six patftis or sub-divisions, each of wLichia separately nollccd, ris..* — Khansar, Kapiri, Karakul, Nanduk, PindaruAr and Pindarpftr. BadbAn is bounded on the north by Fainkhanda and Dasoli ; on the east and south by Kumaon, and on the west by Cbandpur and NAgpur. The assessment of the land-revenue has been as follows : — 1816. ISIS. 1817. 1810. 1813. 1898 1833. 1840. Curreut. Its. ItH. n s . R*. Rs. Rs. Ba. Rs. Its. 3,671 4,260 4,357 6,781 6,422 6,831 6,948 6,788 7,166 The records of the current settlement show that there were thon (1864) 225 estates comprising 374 villages and containing a total assessable area amounting to 8,875 acres, of which 7,361 were cultivated. The mill-rent yielded Rs. 665 and the land-tax Rs. 7,360, of which Rs. 303 were alienated in gunth and mudjiy the whole fall- ing at lie. 0-13-3 per acre on the total assessable area and at lie. 1-1-0 per acre on the cultivation. The population in 1841 numbered 0,824 souls, of whom 4,310 were females; in 1853, 15,541 (7,631 females); in 1858, 16,880 (8,131 females) ; in 1872, 21,454 (10,606 females) and in 1881, 25,692 (12,839 females). Mr. Batten has the following remarks on this parganah : — Parganab Badbdn or Badhungarh is divided into two portions by the Pindar river. Patti Pindarp&r reaches to the very base of tho snowy range and has Borne 6' e villages within a short horizontal dis- tance of some of the highest peaks near the sources of the Kailganga and NandAkini rivers. The best villages are not found in the valley of the Piudar; and considering the facilities for irrigation aftYordcd by nature, it is remarkable how very little taken or lowland occurs 22 BADBAJf. under the head of irrigated. The finest villages are those either situated, like Kob, on high upland near the forests, but possessing a large share of flat or easily sloping land or placed, like W an, very near the regions of eternal snow, but surrounded by good pastures enjoying a bracing climate, and inhabited by an enterprising and Bhotiya- like race of trafficking people. There are not many thokddra in Bad L An, bat those that exist are chiefly descendants of persons to whom military assignments of land were given under the former Gov- ernments. Occupant aominddra 1 are generally the descendants of those whom the thokddra induced to settle on their grants of land : on this account the latter are sometimes found recorded by the villagers them- selves as proprietors of the soil, even where not the slightest posses- sion, or air cultivation on the part of the thokddra , exists ; but in most instances the occupants claim the nominal proprietorship, although they ace willing to pay the customary dues called by them some- times malikdna , sometimes ntuardna, sometimes hate taminddri and sometimes, indeed generally, hak thokdiri to the naydna or thokddr . As, however, these dues are very small, and os no rent in addition to their qtiotas of revenue is taken from the occupants, it is really a matter of little consequence whether from ignorance, or fear, or from a hope of throwing the responsibility of revenue payment on the more powerful members of the community in case of any future hardship, the people have recorded the thokddra and their brethren as shareholders ; or whether under a suspioion of probable usurpa- tion or exaction, or a knowledge of their own rights, the people have insisted on their own proprietary tenure. The Badhan Rajpdt or Khasiya, is, in general, a plain, simple- minded character : and though in this pargonah there have been two or three instances of excessive litigation among the brethren of the thokddri families, and on the subject of some of the larger padb&nships, still the people on the whole ore more acquainted with the barter price of salt at Nfti and of the money price of wheat and rice at Almora, than with the theoretical tenures of their land— on which subject they, as well as the Bhotiyas not, unfre- quently referred the settlement officer to their wives for infor- mation. Sheep and goats are extensively kept for the Bhotiya >Here udclsewber«,anlcHfxprcHlj mentioned in connection with the tenme called taminddri, the word $ amt* dir, in acrordanee with bill iuaca.ii uS to represent the actual occupant of the laad or '■» ldholder. BADBINlTH. 23 traders of Niti and Man The rocks in this parganah are similar to those in P&inkh&nda, except that there is a greater proportion of lime-stone, which formotion characterises some of the high-peaked mountains south of the Pindar river. Iron ore is not unfrequent and is here and there worked for local wants. B&drinatb, a peak in parganah Malla Painkhanda of British Garhw&l, also a village, temple and collection of rest-houses on the ronte from Srinagar to the M&na pass, 25 miles south of the latter and 55 north-east of the former. The village is situate on the right bank of the Vishnnganga, a feeder of the Alaknanda, in the middle of a valley about four miles long and one broad and is equidistant from two lofty mountains, the Nor and N&r&yana Parbat, one rising to the east and the other to the west. The bank on which it stands is sloping, that opposite is bolder, its brow being on a level with the top of the temple of Badrin&th or BadrindrAyan, an incarnation of Vishnu, situate in the highest part of the village and rising be- tween forty and fifty feet from the ground The temple lies in north latitude BOMd'-SD* and east longitude at an elevation of 10,284 feet above the level of the sea. The name is said to be derived from the sacred ‘ badarV or jujube, which however, does not grow hore. Madden suggests the spiny Hippophae salicifolia or a derivation from * bhadra / ‘ fortunate/ 'auspicious*: but there is little doubt that the derivation from the jujube is correct The building said to have been erected some 800 years ago by Sankara Acharya is of conical form with a small cupola covered with plates of copper and surmounted by a gilded ball and spire. The original establishment is reported to be of very great antiquity ; the pre- sent temple has however a modern appearance, several former ones having been overwhelmed by avalanches and an earthquake hav- ing shaken the present erection so seriously os to render necessary an almost entire restoration. The body of it is constructed of flat stones, over which is a coat of fine plaster which, while adding to its neatness, detracts from the appearance of antiquity. A short dis- tance below the temple is the Tspta kund, a tank about thirty feet Hofc springs. square and covered with a roof of planks sup- ported on wooden posts. It is supplied from ■ thermal spring by means of a subterraneous communication ter- minated by a spout in the form of a dragon’s bead, A thick smoke 24 BADBINiTH. or steam of a strong sulphurous smell is sent forth by the water, which is so hot as to bo scarcely endurable to the touch until the temperature is reduced by the admixture of cold water from an- other spring. In this manner a bath is formed in which the sexes bathe indiscriminately. The ablution accompanied by dne adora- tion of the idol and liberal fees to the attendant Brahmans is con- sidered so efficacious in cleansing from past offences that in ordi- nary years Borne five to ten thousand pilgrims visit the shrine and every twelfth year at the Jcumbh-meld the number is increased four-fold. The pilgrims assemble at Hardwar and as soon as the fair there is closed towards the middle of April, proceed on their round of pilgrimage in the mountains by Deopray&g, Rudrprayig, Kod&rn&th, Badrinath and home by Nano |. ray ag and Karnpray&g. The entire tract hue is known as Vaishnava-kshetra, which is sub- divided into twelve subordinate ka/ietras or tracts. Besides Tapta- kund, in which Agni resides by permission of Vishnu, there is a recess in the bed of the river forming a pool called Nfirada-kund. This is sheltcrod by a bare rock whose projecting angle breaks the force of the current and renders the place fit for bathing. A little in the left is the Suryya-kund, another thorraal spring proceeding from a fissure in the bank. There is no reservoir hero and the pilgrims catch the water in their hands and throw it over their bodies. Besides this there are the Brahm-kapAli and other reser- voirs which are reported to possess various virtues and form part of the twelve kshetras visited by pilgrims. The principal temple is called R&j-badri and with four others connected with it is well known as the Panch-badri, vit. : — Yog- bad ri, Pindukeswar, Brid- dhbadri at Animath and Kap&l-badri or Bha- Thc iJo1 ' vishya-badri at Sukhai, where there are also thermal springs. The idol in the principal temple is formed of black stone or marble abont three feet high. It is nsnaUy clothed with rich gold brocade and above its head is a small mirror which reflects tho objects from the outside. In front are several lamps always burning and a table also covered with brocade, To the right are the images of Nar and N£r6yana and on the left those of Kuvcra and Narada. The idol is adorned with one jewel, a dia- mond of moderate size, in the middle of its forehead, whilst tho whole of the properties, including dresses, eating yessels and other. BADRINATff. 25 paraphernalia, arc not worth moro than five thousand rnpees. The idol Nar-sinha at Joshimatb is said to have one arm which daily grows thinner, and when it falls off the road to Badrin&th will be closed by a landslip and a new temple erected at Bhavishya-badri near Tapuban, also known as Ddkhtupan, or, as some say, at Ad- badri in Chandpnr. A good deal of ostentatious attention is paid to the personal comforts of the idol at Budari. It is daily provided with meals which arc placed before it, and the doors of the sanc- tuary are then closed and the idol is left to consume its meals in quietness. Tho doors are not opened again until after sunset, and at a late hour, its bed being prepared by the attendants, tho doors are again closed nntil morning. The vessels in which thei idol is served are of gold and silver and a large establishment of servants is kept up both male and female, the latter as d%ncing>girls and mistresses of the celibate priests. The only persons who have ac- cess to tho inner apartments are the servants and no ono but the RAwal himself is allowed to touch the idul. The temple is closed in Norcmber and the treasure and valu- ^ ^ ^ able utensils aro shut up iu a vault beneath the shrine and every person descends to Pdndukeswar and Joshimath. As a rule from November until the end of May the temple is coverod by snow. Once some plunder- ing Qarhwalis made their way across the snows in winter and re- moved some 90ft. weight of gold and silver vessels, but they were seized and punished by the Garhw&l Government. Tho Rajas frequently made use of the temple property, giving villages in mortgage in exchange which were never redeemed. At tho Gorkbali invasion, the R&ja borrowed Rs. 50,000 as a loan, and from this and other sources the temple possesses an endowment of 226 villages in Kumaon and Garhwdl which as early as 1824 yielded a revenue of over Rs. 2,000 a year. At tho same time many of these villages are large and populous and could yield a far greater rent; but the rents were fixed at the time of the grant either in money or in kind in perpetuity, and as many of the culti- vators were Brahmans, the outturn is small compared with the area* In 1864, the Garhwul endowments alone comprised 4,372 bitis of assessable land yielding a land-tax of Rs. 8,943 distributed over 262 villages, and in Kumaon some 1,674 bitU in plots of 10 4trif or more distributed over 69 villages. 26 badmnXth. As the annual expenditure sometimes exceeds the income of the year from offerings and endowments, rccourso is had to loans to be repaid from tho surplus of favourable years. Tho offerings consist of hhil or offering to the idol, bkoy or for the expenses of his food and clothing aud nazaruna or gift to 1 the Rdwal. Of late years the affairs of tho temple have been so badly managed that it is always in debt, though if properly controlled tho revenues are sufficient for all proper ex- penditure. The ceremonies to be performed by pilgrims arc simple in the extreme, consisting of a short service with a iitauy and bathing and in tho case of orphans and widows in shuving tho bead. Tho principal priests aro Namburi Brahmans from Malabar and the head-priest is called Rawal. In order to provide for the succession, in case of tho illness or death of the Rdwal, a chela of liis caste is always in attendance at Joshimath, so that there is al- ways a Rawal elect present to take possession of the office. Tho Rdwal lias a regular establishment to manage the temporal con- cerns of the institution and under tho former Rajas exorcised su- preme and unconlrolled authority in the villages attached to the temple. Formerly the priests were supposed to live in perfect celibacy, but now they excuse themselves that they have broken with all homo ties. A teacher is employed who con- ducts the school for the children of temple employees, and in 1873 a dispensary was established the cost of which is borne from tho taddbart funds, and it remains open as long as pilgrims attend. In ordinary years the pilgrims are chiefly Jogi's and Bairdgis and the offerings amount to about > Rs. 5 , 000 , but at tho kumbh and adh-kumbh , or every twelfth aud sixth year, the numbers of pil- grim's aud receipts are greatly increased. West of the temple about twelve miles is tho group of snowy peaks called Chau- khaniba or BadrinAth, six in number, three of which have ail elevation above the sea respectively of 22,395, 22,619 and 22,901 feet. Six miles to the south-west is a summit called Nalikanta having an elevation of 21,713 feet. See Mana; Buotiya Mahals. On the way to the Satopant lake and glacier there is a water-fall called Basodhdra, to which is attached the legend that when seen by an impure person it ceases to How. The Bhoiiyas say that when Kumaon was invaded by the British, the Raja proceeded to invoke the aid of Badrindtli, but when he bXgsswab. 27 came to BasodhAra, the water-fall coosed to flow and they then knew that the Baja wonld cease to reign. The lake near the Satopant glacier baa three corners each with a different name and is to the Bnotiyas a Ganges into which the ashes of tbcir people collected at the funeral-pyre are thrown. It, too, has its legend that it is fathomless and that no bird can fly across it. The Bhotiyas present offerings to the spirit of the lake to keep the passos open and aid them in their dangerous journeys, and as they themselves are denied entrance into the Badrinkth temple, it has for them all the virtues of Badrinath itself. Bageswar, a village in Patti Talla Katyur, and parganab DAn- pur of Kumaon, is situate at the junction of the Sarjujuid Gomati rivers some 27 miles north of Alinora. The name 1 is derived from the temple which is dedicated to * Vdk~iarear\ 1 the lord of Speech*, or according to others ( Vydghresioor\ * the tiger-lord*. The population numbers about 500 occupying a few streets of substan- tially built houses on the right bank of the Sarju, B Ages war is the great mart for tbo exchange of Tibetan produce bntween tho Bhotiyas. and the Almora merchants aud entirely owes its pros- perity to British influence. It is only occupied for trade from tho middle of November until the end of April. Threo fairs of a Semi-religious character take place : the principal, known as the Ultardyini or Utraini , is held about the twelfth of January, when goods to the extent of three lakhs of rupees change hands. The present temple was erected by BAja Lachhmi Chand* about 1450 A.D. ; hut inscriptions noticed elsewhere show a far earlier found- ation 9 . Certain tombB constructed of large tiles 4 discovered in the neighbourhood and at Dw&ra HAt have been assigned to Mughal colonies and attest, perhaps, the presence of a non-Hindu race. Traill writes ' “ These tombs differ both in form and appear- ance from the graves of Jogis, the only class of Hindus which adopts sepulture. It is therefore to TAtars or Mubammadaus only that these graves can bo ascribed. The extreme sanctity of BAges- wa r, a principal * praydga' or confluence and place of pilgrimage, precludes the supposition that either of these sects would have been * Gas , XI., 817. * /to*, 680. * toid , «». •/*•*, 8 If ms Bsotita Mahals. 28 bAqeswar. suffered as subjects of a Hindu Govcrnmont, to pollute that place 'with their dead, while the Muhammadans, as is well known, were never able to effect any conquests within these hills. By the natives these tombs are called Mnghali. The D&rma Bhotiyas, who are also said to he descendants of a colony left by Timtir from the association of tho Muhammadan creed with the name of Mughal, repel a 9 an insult the extraction attributed to them. Tho Sarju is crossed by a new iron wiro suspension bridge of 147 foot span and the Gomati by a similar one of 60 feet span ; both tho old bridges were washed away in 187 1, but have since been replaced. £levatiou above the sea 3,143 feet : latitude 29 o -50 / -15 / ‘ r ; longi- tude 79°-48'-52\ Bfigeswar is approached from Almora by two roads, one passing through T&kuU and the other by Binsar. Hoads connect it also with Someswar on the Kaus&ni road, Baijn&th on the road to Karnprayig, Kb&ti on the road to the Pindar glacier and Milam and Thai on the road to Askot. The road from T&kula starts from the village of that name 12 miles from Almora and 14 miles from Bageswar, from an en- camping ground near tho clump of deoddra surrounding its old temples, and ascends to a pass leading across tho Jammarkhet ridge, the peak of which rises on the right to a height of 6,837 feet, thenco »rom Almora descending the road winds along a narrow thickly wooded valley to the ascent to the outlying spur from Ganau&th (6,947 feet;, near which there is a temple and a road made of steps of dag stone from the neighbour- ing quarries which leads almost in a straight lino up the bill. This was constructed by the piety of an Almora trader, but is little used as the new road is much more easy and even shorter. Thence an ascent is again made to the west of the Jarauli peak (6,200 feet high) and thence into tho valley of the Snrja, where the road from TAkula is joined by tho Binsar road and passing by Kbafilikhet, B&geswar is reached. This march is fairly diversified by hill and valley, beat aud shade, and affords some pretty bits of scenery. The road from Binsar keeps to the eastern side of Jammarkhet, passing by Psnchdeo, Ukliili and other villages lying near the Gat-gadh stream and eventually joining the Takiila road, where it enters tho Sarju valley. dXoeswar. 29 To Thai. The road from Someswar passes up the valley of a small feeder of tbe Kosi by iho villages of Miihargaon, Front Someswar. Baisargaon, Ntikot and tho Karkeswar tem- ple to tho PApi ridge forming the watershed between the Sarju and the Kosi, wheucc tlic road is undulating to Biigeswnr. Someswar is about twelve miles from Bilges war and the Fdpi ridge lies about half way. Tho road from Bnljndth to Bdgeswar lies along tho loft bank of tho Gomati river from Bnijn&th to the con* fluenco with the Sarju, a distance of twelve miles and is very low and hot tho entiro way. There are however a few pretty reaches in the river known locally as tdh or lakes which abound with fish of all the common kinds. Tho road to Askot by Thai runs nearly duo east by llalkdua and Dhupauld Sera to Sunudiyar, whore there is a tea-planter’s bungalow. Another sheep track leading oast follows up the valley of the Pungor-gadh, in addition to which most of theso roads are connected with each other by tracks across country passable for men but not for ponies. The main roads aro excellent and are open at all times of tho year for men and ani- mals. During the winter months all these roads are crowded with flocks of goats and sheep conveying borax and salt from Bhot and grain and rice in return, while numerous parties of lowlandcrs are seen carrying kiltaa of oil which they exchange iu Bhot for wool. The trade returns arc noticod under ‘ trade ’ in tho articlo Kuuaon. From Bageewnr upwards the bed of tho Sarju narrows and forms more a gigantic ravine than a valley, the entire floor being frequently occupied by its bed. This chan- nel is exceedingly deep and in many places forms dark pools abounding in fish. In places the mountains riso precipitously on cither side, so that the road to avoid the cliffs has sometimes to make a considerable rise where it cannot be carried along the face of the cliff. On tho right bank large torront-feedor9 of the Sarju are crossed : one (tho Labor) about three miles, a second called the Kanftlgadh at about seveu miles and on the left bank the considerable stream of. the Pungor-g&db. Within two or three miles of Kapkot the valley opens considerably and gives place to several stony and uncultivated dells covered with dwarf To Kapkot. 30 BlGBSWAB. Ziiyplms ( badari ). The glen around Kapkot itself ia highly cul- tivated, yielding fair crops of rice and manduioa ( EUurine coro- ana . It is abont one and a half to two miles long and about half as wide, with an elevation of from 4,000 to 4,500 feet above the level of the sea, enclosed by a belt of gently swelling and diversi- fied mountains covered with a beautiful vegetation, the chir pine (Pinus longifolia) feathering the summits. The village is on its western edge close under the slopes of Dioli (5,471 feet) about 150 feet above the river and half a mile from it. Several smaller ham- lets arc scattered over the valley, each with its grove of trees, among which the plantain attains a fair sizo and produces largo and excel- lent fruit. On the right bank the Chirpatkot peak (6,637 feet) appears and up the glen the snowy range, conspicuous amongst which is the peak of Nandakot (22,533 feet) with its Bummit whito as a now p£l or servant’s tent, to which it bears a strong resemb- lance. The picturosquoncss of the scenery is no doubt in a mea- sure due lo the limestone which from B Ages war to Kapkot forms the most important rock. Here a gradual change in the character of the vegetation may be seen. The Origanum and Cratcegus pyracantha [gingdru ), or white thorn, replacing tho dwarf date palm found near BAgeswar. The tfjpdt ( Cinnamomum Tamala), called kirkiriya , abounds in the shady glens. The Didymocarpus macrophyllut, Loxotis obligua, Sfc. t cover the dripping rocks, a flesh-coloured Argyreia, and tho Cueu- mia Uardioickii, (airdlu) climb over tho bushes with TricosantheS palmata ( indr dy an ) and its brilliant red but fetid fruit. Coi* lac- tyma ( lucfiusha) or Job's tears gTows by every stream and in seve- ral places sEginetia indica. Osbeckia anguHifolia is abundant in the grass and Clerodendron serratum, and aiphonanthum and Bcehmeria tenaeiesima ( poi ) amongst the thickets. Abelnioschus pungena . (Aou, kapasya) grows in abundance on tho damp shaded slopes. The more common trees are the Photinia dubia Quorate annulaia, Kydia calycina (putu), Ehrctia terrain (puniya), Ougeinia daUxrgwidee (senan), Terminals bellerica {bathara), Woodfordia floribunda (dhdi), Flcmingia semialata, IVendlandia cinerea, Oallicarpa macrophylla ( gaiwali), Sauravja ntpaiensis {goganda ), Engclhardtia Colobrooki- ona [mana\ Dauhinia variegata [kioairdl ) and Bauhwia return, Roxb. (*«Md/a),>ud a species of Sapium named phdtkiya (Madden) DAMN 4TH. 31 There U a fine grove of tilang trees {Oita fragrant) here which flower in September. Bagoli, a halting-placo and village on tho road from Kara- pray&g to Bdgeswar in Kumaon in Patti Sfli Cbandpur of par- ganah Chandpur in Garhwdl, lice in latitade 30°-li'-50* and longitude 79°-2 1 '-1^ : distant 8 miles G furlongs 11 polos from Karnpraydg aud 10 miles 4 furlongs 35 polos from Pantbi f the next station before Jolabagr. The road to Bagoli from Karnprayftg winds along the loft bank of the Pindar river with precipit- ous hills on either side. At Simli (4m. 2f. 23p.), whore it meets the road from Almora, by Lobhn it crosses the Bha- rdrig&r, which here joins the Findar. Thenco by Chalakot Ba- thora and Kulsaun to Bagoli (4m. 3f. 18p.) From Bagoli to Panthi the road continues along the same sido of the river, crossiug to the right bank near Nalgnon and recrossing at the Ndr&yanbugr bridge, somewhat undulating. Thence to Panthi Bhagw&n the road is fairly level. The Pindar valley scenery all through from its source to its confluence with the Alaknanda at Karnpraydg is most picturesque and almost in every mile has some boautiful bits whoro wood, water, forest, hill and rocks rio with each other in contributing to the general abandon of nature here visible. Ba\jirau, a halting-plaoc on the ronte betwoon Kainur and Bdmnagar, is situated in Patti Sdbali of pargnnah Malld Saida in Garhwdl in latitude 29°-55'0* aud longitude 79 0 -4-41 flr : distant 10 miles 7 furlongs 2 1 poles from Kuiniir and 9 miles 7 furlongs 28 poles from Bhatwdra, tho next stage. The road hence to Bhatwdra crosses the Eastern Nyar by a bridge of 62 feet span to Lachhi, crossing a tributary of tho Nydr by a bridge of 57 feet span and thence to Kundi, 2 miles 0 furlongs 20 poles. Hence to Kskrora, ltiklidr aud the Biu&yuk-khdl at Dom&ila,4 miles 3 furlongs 8 poles. From Domaila tho road crosses tho Khdtuli-gadh by a bridge of 72 feet span, descending for a mile and a half and again ascending to Bhatwdra encamping-ground in large open fields 3 miles 4 furlongs. Baynath, a village m patti Mai la Katytir and parganab Ddnpur of the Kumaon district, lies in north latitude 29°-5l'-24* and east longitude 79°-39'-28 /) \ at an elevation of 3.545 feet above the level of tho sea (temple). The river Gurnti (Gornati) flows close to the 32 BAIRAQUNA. village, which is 12| miles from Somes war, 12 miles from Bagcswar and about 12£ miles from Jolabagr on tho Nandpray&g road, with each of which it is connected by a good rood. Baijn&th in 1881 had a population of 117 souls. There is a large Hindu temple here sacred to Kali situate in the old Iianchula fort, of which the altar is said to bo constantly moist with the blood of kids and buffalo calves sacrificed to tho dread goddess of destruction, still, however, called * mat* or mother. There are several old temples of the Turk’s cap style, most of which are in ruins and are used as com lofts and store- rooms as in Dw&rabat. A colony of Gos&ins are established here, who observe the custom of burying their dead in small temple-like tombs around tho building in whioh they worship. Along its walls arc old sculptures collected from different places, moBt of which are of modern Hindu origin ; but one is (dearly a representation of Bnddba and must have belonged to a temple of that creed which flourished hero in the eighth century of our era according to Hwen Thsang. Baijnatli is interesting as being in the centre of the Katyfir valley, the homo of tho ancient Katyuris. Or all sides the valley is studded with tea-plantations where twenty years ago were only the haunts of tigers and bears. Bairaguna (or Bhairongana), & halting-place on tho route between iiardwur and Srinagar by tbe Lachhn'.an-jbfila bridge, dis- tant eight miles 11 poles from the former stage and 12 miles 32 poles from Chandpur-ke-manda, is situate in the Hinwal or Hiu- nal valley in Patti Udopnr Talla of parganah Ganga-Sal&n in Garh- wAl in latitude 30°-3'-4(T and longitude 78°-25'-30/ r The road from Hardwkr passes by Rknfpokhri and Lachhman-jhdla in the Debra Dun district into G&rhw&l and thenco along the left bank of the Ganges to its confluence with the Hinwal river at Phal&ri. Hence it follows tho left bank of the latter river to Bairaguna, a little over eight milos, slightly undulating tho entire way. Hence to Chandpur-ke-manda tbe road continues np the valley for a short distance to a ford across the Hinwal and ascends by Bijni to the Bainduli-khdl, (6m. 3f. 7p.) Thence a descent of half a mile leads to Bandarbel dharmsila and a level march of one mile and ascent of half a mile to Dhangug&rh (3m. ‘5f. 18p.) The road descends from here for about quarter of a mile and is level along the Ganges to Cbandpur, 2 miles 7 poles from Dhungugarh. BA'IXIIIIA. 33 Balchha, a pRSS into Hundes or Tibet, is situated in Malla Painkhanda of Garhwal in latitude 30 o -47'-20^ and longitude 80°-l2'-45" The Balchha pass is reached from the Untadhura pass to the north of Milam in pargannh Julmr of Kumaon and was crossed by Messrs. Wintcrboltom and Strachey in their expedition to Tibet and also by Captain Weller, an account of whoso journey is given here. Weller crossed the Unta-dhura and went on to the Balchha pass (29th May). He descended the northern slope of Unta-dhura for half an hour over one unbroken bed of snow. Thence a moderate descent of one hoar, over snow-beds cat into most troublesome ridges by the wind, to the Lanka stream, continued for an hoar along its bank over snow-beds and bure hills, then tnrnod to the west and after a bad descent in snow and slush reached Topi-dunga. At the turn, the I.anka also bcnd3 westwards and is joinod by tho Doldunkhar stream from the east. Topi-dunga is a small level spot on tho left bank of the Lanka, which here has a depth of about 3 feet, and a width of about 20 feet. A shepherd and his flock are said to have been snowed up here for a whole winter. There is a little herbage at Topi-dunga and further west, grass and low brushwood (on the opposite side) are tolerably plentiful. Tho Dol rises in the Jamli glacier on tho western face of the Kingri- bingri ridge, which here separates GarhwtU from Tibet and flows westwards to its confluence with the Lanka. The united streams then receive on the left bank the Torgar coining down from the south-east by south. The junction is curious as the two flow nearly parallel for some hundred yards ; tho Torg&r along the top and the Lanka along the base of a precipice wbiah may be 450 feet high at the highest part and diminishes to nothing at the junc- tion. Thus reinforced the Lanka becomes tho Girthi stream of the maps ( q.v .) The encamping ground at Topi-dunga has an elevation of 14,830 feet aud ono on the loft bank of the Lanka noar its confluence with the Doldunkhar an elevation of 14,640 fee t above the level of the sea. From this descended to the river and passed along it to the east and crossed tho Lanka, above its junction with the Dol, stream rapid, but not above knee-deep and some 20. feet wide, wind and snow. Continued up the Do], chiefly flowing under snow between precipitous banks of rock. Then turned north across tho Kulimat- 5 BALCEHA. tiya ascent, vory sleep and covered with loose stones over a black crumbling slate. 'J be latter part of the ascent less steep. This is the Kiungar pass by the Kiaogar peak (17,680 feet). The creBt is composed of small loose stones rising in a sweep to the top of the hills on either side ; beyond a good extent of valley and low hills covered with brush-wood rises tho Balchha ridge. Hence to Chid&nan enoam ping-ground (13,520 feet) by a descent due north over alter- nate snow-beds and loose stones from the ridgo on the cast. The track is here bounded east and west by bare ranges with a small stream flowing north in the hollow between them chiefly under snow beds. The hills on either side are perpetually crumbling away, accumulating immense heaps of looso stone along their bases. Chidfimu is a small level spot on the right or oast bank of the stream above noted, which is here joined by another stream from the cast. The streams unite near Laphkhel to from the Kiogadb, a tributary of the Girthi.^ Just north of Chidamu, across the stream, a succes- sion of low hills commence, extending northwards to Laphkhel. These are covered with the goat-thorn or damd (C. Pyymcea) and the hollowB afford good pasturage. Looking from the south the southern faco of hills and ravines hardly bear a trace of snow, whilst the northern aspect of those of similar elevation are Lhickly covered with snow. From Chiddran the track passes along a succession of low hillocks to the Kiogadh, on the right bank of which is the Lapkhel or Loptel encamping ground (13,990 feet). Hence a track leads up tho Kiogadh by the Chaldu pass (17,440 feet) and also by the Chirchun pass (17,960 feet) into Tibet, meeting tho track from TJnta-dhdra by the Kingri-bingri pass (18,300 feet) at tho Chir- chun (ChiUchun) encamping ground in Tibet (16,130 feet). Whore crossed near Laphkhel tho Kiogadh was a rapid torrent thirty to forty yards wide, bat usually passable by laden sheep. The encamping ground is a few hundred feet above the river shot in by an amphitheatre of low hills which form the base of the low ridgo crossed on passing into Tibet. The goat-thorn is tolerably abun- dant and in early June the hollows are covered with young grass, forming a favourite pasturage ground. The talagram stones abound here. Hence ono track leads to tho Shelshel pass on tho west ( 16,390 feet) aud another to the Balchha pads ( 17,500 feet). The BALCHHA GUXT. 35 first stage is to Sangcba encamping ground (14,110 feet); first northwards up a gentle ascent or two and then west over undulat- ing ground, sometimes bare and some! imes covered with ddma and rills of water giving nourishment to grass in all the hollows. The breadth of this traot is about two to three miles and it ends in the ascent to Balchha. From Sangcha the track leads north-east to the bank of a northern affluent of the Kiogadh. This is joined by (lumerous streams on either side and is divided near Talla Sangcha into two streams, one comiug from the north and the other from the north-east, up which lies the route to the pass. The hilts ou either side are of incousiderable height, bare, precipitous and crumbling, but towards the foot of the pass they open out a little and have a few thorn bushes ou the slopes and where tho surface is abraded it is of a brick-dust colour. On the summit is a small heap of stones with sticks and rags attached to them, to which the natives add a stone or two as they pass. The view northward from the summit of the pass is thus described : — 11 Instead of a plain which I had expected to see, tho country of Tibet is formed of alternate low hills and tabic-lands with a range of higher hills well sprinkled with snow in the distance running north-west to south-east." Though at the time of his visit (the second of June) the weather was mild, this was represented to be unusual and the wind and cold were stated to be for the most part dreadful. The Jhanka stream rises from the northern slope of the pas9 and has a direction north and a little west. This is joined by a stream coming from past Chirchun and the two united form the Trisum, a good-sized river flowing to the north-west. The view from the pass was contracted by the slope of tho hill east and west just in front and by the distant haze, no vegetation was visible. Balchha, u pass on the frontier separating Tihri from Bis&hr, lies over a crest of the ridge separating the valleys of the Tons and Fabar or PAbhara in Patti Bangarh aud pnrganah Bawdin. The pass has an elevation of 8,898 feet above the level of the sea and the ridges on each side are thickly clothed with deodar. Balchha Ghat, a ferry across the Kdli river in parganah Shor of the Kumaon district, is situated 12 miles east of Champdwat and 19 miles south-east of Pitboragarh. Latitude 29°-17'-40' r / longitude 60°-2G'-55 * 36 HANDAlHT'CHH Bamsu, a pntti of parganah Nagpur in British GarhwAI, is bounded on the north and east by Kaliphdt Mulli ; on the south by Kuliphut Talli ; and on the west by Tihri. The road from Rudrpruyag to KedArnath proceeds northwards along the left bank of the Maudakini river. The patwari of Malli Kiilipbat, usually resident in Guptkashi, collects the land-revenue of this Patti, Maikhanda and Parkandi al*>o. The principal villages are Bhairgaon, Dewali, Lamgaondih and Semali. The entiro Patti is held as saiL'ibart and its revenues sue administered by a local com- mittee. Band or Bund, a patti of parganah Dasoli in British G;uhw:il, comprises a small triangular patch of mountain hind oil the left bank of tlio Alaknanda river near Pipnlkoti. It is held in sad altar t and is administered by the local committee. It was formed from l)a soli in 18G4 and the Patwari of Dasoli Talli, usually resident in Nand- pniyag, still collects its revenue. The principal village is Bairagna, where there is a school. There arc copper mines at Bauloli in this Patti, but they arc not now worked. Bandarpuchh (or Bandnrpunchh, ‘ the monkey’s tail’), a moun- tain mass forming a collection of peaks known as tlio Jamnotri peaks in the records of the Great Trigonometrical Survey. Throe peaks are laid down in the maps as Siikanta, 20,130 loot ; Bandar- punchh, 20,753 feet ; and Jamnotri, 20,038 feet, Fraser writes : — * 4 As seen from the south-west two lofty and mas- sive peaks rise high above the rest, deep in snow, from which dl the other inferior ridges seem to have their origin. These peaks are connected by a sharp neck, considerably lower than themselves. The south and south-east exposure is the least steep, and bears a great depth of pure unbroken snow. Little or no rock is seen, except a few points at the ridge of the conccting neck, where it is too sharp and steep for snow to lie ; and there it appears of a red colour. Here and there lofty precipices are seen in the snow itself, where the lower parts have incited, and musses have given way and slidden down to the ravines below, leaving a face several hun- dred feet high, that shows the depth of snow which has accumulated for ages. The name of Bandaipuuchh properly applies only to the highest peaks of this mountain: all the subordinate peak* and ridges have their own peculiar names. Jamnotri ha* reference BANDA RPtOTIH. 37 only to the sacred spot, where worship is paid to the goddess and ablution is performed. According to native accounts there are said to be our peaks which form the top of Itaudarpunclih, only two of which are seen front the south-west and in the cavity or hollow con- tained between them tradition places a Jake or tank of very pecu- liar sanctity. No one has ever seen this pool, for no one has ever even attempted to ascend any of these peaks. Besides the physical difficulties the goddess has especially prohibited any mortal fioin passing that spot appointed for her worship.” The landholders aver that, every year, in the month ofPhiTgun, a single monkey comes from the plains, by way of -Hard war, and ascends the highest peak of this mountain, where ho remains twelve months, and returns to give room to another; but bis entertain- ment must be very indifferent and inhospitable, as may bo inferred from the nature of the place ; for he returns in very sad plight, being not only reduced almost to a skeleton, but having lost his hair and a great part of his skin ” The group of hot springs known as Jamnotri is only about . r >0 0 vm ds below the place where the various Jaoiuutri. " . small stream** that mute to form the first waters of the Jumna fall iuto a basin below. Hence they shoot over the brow of a rock projecting from the snow and pa-'S down where the rocks again close over the stream, and though not so lofty as those below interpose a bar to progress upwards in the bed of the stream. At the place whore it i'* customary to perform ablution the north-cast side of the liver is very steep and the rocks about hero “seem to be quartzose, and chiefly white, but exhibiting different shades and colours. The structure is laminous, and from between these lamina! run several small stream', of warm water, form- ing together a considerable quantity. There are several other sources in which the water bursts up with great ebullition, and one in particular, from which springs a column ot verv considerable size, is situate in the bud ol' tho river between two large ttone«, and over it falls a stream of the river water. This water lias a temperature of 194'7°, nearly that of boiling water, at an elevation of 10,849 feet above the level of the sea. unu emits much vapour. Tbe water is exceedingly pure, transparent, tasteless, and devoid of smell. A great quantity of red crust, apparently deposited by 38 BANELSYtftf. the water, which 3«cmcd to ho formed of an iron oxide, and some gritty earth, covets all the stones around and under the stream. This, on exposure to the air, hardens into a perfect but very porous stone, whilst below the water it is frequently mixed with a slimy substance of a very peculiar character, of a dull yellowish colour, somewhat like isinglass, certainly a production of the water as well as the above crust, for it covers the stones over which tho stream runs, and is very abundant** Tho violence and inequality of the stream frequently changes the bed of the river. Formerly it lay on tho side opposite to this rock, and the numerous sources of this warm wator were thon very perceptible, many of them springing from the rock and gravel to some height iu the air, but several of these are now lost in the present course of the stream. These warm springs are of great sanctity, and tho spot for bathing is at that point before mentioned, where one of a considerable size rises in a pool of the cold river water and renders it milk warm. This jet is both heard and seen, as it plays far under tho surface of the pool. These springs have all particular names, such ss Gaurikund, Taptakund, Ac., and, as usnal, a superstitious tale is related concerning their origin. Thus it is said that the spirits of the Rishis, or twelve holy men who followed Mahadco from Lanka (after tho usurpa- tion of lldwan) to tho Himalaya inhabit this rock and continu- ally worship him. (J. B. Fraser’s Journal, pp. 418 — ^30; As. Res., XIV., 393 ; IbiJ., 324, 327.) Banelsyun, a patti of pargaijab Barahsyun of British Garhwal, is bounded on tho north by pat.tis Kandvvnlsytin and Sitonsyiin ; on the south by the Nyar liver, s. panting it from parganah Ganga Salan ; on the cast bv pattis Manyarsvun and Gangwdrsyun and on the west by the river Ganges. In 1SG4 three vilh ges were reoeivod from Kaud walsy tin and five from Manyarsyun. Tho patwuri of this Patti, usually resident in Maklori, collects the land-revenue of Patti KandwuUy uli also , bojji, in 1861, aggregated Rs. 2,300 for land-revenue and tadtibart and Rs. 158 for gu^xtb paid by 51,82 souls. There ia a school at KhoJa. The palti comprises the lands Jving between the N\»r river on the south and tho Randi river on tho T 'orth, both affluents o»‘ the Ganges. Tho ptineipnl villages are Bv*usghat, Rang* on, Tars, Makiori, Khola, and Bcjyung&on. B^NJBUGR. 39 BftBgftrfytfn, ft paid of parganah Malla Satin in Britich Garhw&l, is bounded on the north by Choprakot and Dhaundy&l- syiin; on the east by the latter patti and Meldhar ; on the south by Sibali, and on the west by Tallin. The principal villages are Sukhoi and Joi on the Kainur road ; Baijiran, whero the roads from Ramnagar to Kaindr and Almora to P&ori cross the eastern NyAr by a bridge; Siloli and Hainsa. In 1864, Kuinuliya was trans- ferred to Dhaundy&lsydn. The patw&ri of Choprakot, usually resi- dent in Konydr, collects the land- revenue of this patti also. The eastern Ny&r runs from north to south through tbo patti, which is sparsely inhabited and of little importance. Bangarhsyun, a patti in parganah B&rahsyun in British Garhw&l, is bounded on the south by pattiB Kandwalsydn and Sitonsyiin ; on the north and west by the GaDges, and on the cast by pattis R&wataydn and Idw&lsyun. The pstwari of Rawatsyun, resident at Marguna, collects the revenue with that of Patti Sitons- yun. This patti comprises a small strip of land lying along the- left bank of the Alaknanda and traversed by the Hardw&r and Srinagar rood. It contains the villages of Kandi Bidyakoti, and Koldsu. Banjbagr, a resting-place on the ronie from Nandprayag on the Alaknanda to Baijndth on the Gumti, is situated in patti Nandak and parganah Dasoli of British Garhw&l, distant 14 miles from Nandprayag ; 12 miles from Nar&yanbugr, whero the Pindar is crossed by a bridge, and 1 1 miles from Dungari on the right bank of a tributary of the Pindar. Ihe journey from Nandprayag is often broken at Gli&t, 10 miles from Naudprayag; and here too the rood to R&mni branches off. From Nandpraydg the road to BAnj- bugr follows the left bank of the Nand&kini river and if bridged throughout where necessary. It is gently undulating without any steep or difficult ascents. Chimtoli village lies half way and besides this the villages of Mahar Bagti, lUj Bagti, Gand&su, and N&gbugr lie on the right bank of the river. Thirpao and Chimtoli are the only villages on the left bank. The scenery in parts is very picturesque and the hills well covered with forest. From Ghat to B&njbugr the valley contains some bits of the prettiest Bcenery in Garhwul. At B&njbugr the road to N&rAyanbugr turns off to tho right and that to Dungari to the lelt. 40 B/AAHMANDAL. Bans, a halting-place with bungalow on the road from AI- mora to Pithoragarh, lies in north latitude 29°-36'-44* and east longitude 80°-ir-5*; in Patti Seti Tails of parganah Shor in Kumao