Sylvia Anderson (née Thomas; 25th March, 1927 – 15th March 2016) was a British television writer, producer, costume designer, and voice actress who worked with Gerry Anderson on many of his productions during their marriage before it ended acrimoniously.

She is best known for her character development and voice work on many of Gerry's productions as well as co-writing with him the premier instalment in each programme.

Known career[]

Sylvia is believed to have begun working with Gerry Anderson as early as his first known science fiction-oriented Super-marionation programme, Supercar. Since then she has provided character developments, costume design and her voicework contributed significantly to Fireball XL5 and Stingray.

Perhaps her best-known involvement with Anderson's productions consisted of her providing the character voice of Lady Penelope Creighton-Ward in Thunderbirds, in which she also co-wrote and co-produced with Gerry.

Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons[]

It was her contributions of Spectrum uniform designs, and her joint writing with Gerry of "The Mysterons", wherein she created the majority of the characters and jointly developed--again with Gerry--the core format of, Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons, that is of particular noteworthiness. As far as character-voice provision went, she provided the voice of Melody Angel, for which she affected a Southern-American accent, in that programme as well as voicing various female guest characters including those of Gabrielle, Linda Nolan, and Judith Chapman.

After Captain Scarlet[]

Sylvia continued working with Gerry on his other programmes. She gave her character development and voice work for two other super-marionation programmes Joe 90 and The Secret Service. She also designed the costumes for characters in UFO, her and her then husband's first fully live-action television programme.

Autobiography[]

In her last years, by which time she was all but in retirement, Sylvia published her autobiography, titled Yes, M'Lady.

Sylvia died at the age of 86, leaving behind a legacy in the same way as her former husband.