Born in 1986, Jessica Buchanan was kidnapped as a baby and switched at birth with a twin who her mother didn't even know she had! Once returned safe and sound, she went on to grow up as a Buchanan. Jessica was known as a bright child and would grow up to be a teenager who always did the right thing.

When Jessica met Cristian Vega it was love at first sight. However, when Cris's childhood friend, Roseanne Delgado, came to town, Cris and Jessica's relationship took a turn for the worse. Out of jealousy for Roseanne, Jess threw herself into the arms of Will Rappaport and later became pregnant with his child.

Amazingly, Cris eventually forgave Jessica and asked her to marry him, expressing his desire to help her raise Will's baby. At their engagement party, Cris and Will got in an argument and Jessica ran out into the path of Dorian Lord's headlights. The injuries from the accident caused Jessica to lose her baby and put her in a coma for months. When she finally came around, she couldn't remember Cris and once again grew closer to Will. In the end, Will didn't turn out to be the right guy for Jess.

It wasn't until much later that Jessica learned that Mitch Laurence raped her mother and in turn was her biological father. After Natalie, her long lost twin sister, Viki and Clint's real daughter, came to town, Jessica's life spun wildly out of control. Her deranged father, Mitch Lawrence, kidnapped Jessica and held her captive until Antonio Vega came to her rescue! From there, Jessica and Antonio fell in love but had their fair share of bumps along the way.

Although she's faced many demons in her life, most recently, Jessica was diagnosed with the same illness as her mother, Dissociative Identity Disorder (DID). Her alter personality, Tess, led Jessica down some pretty rough paths, but, in the end, she was able to fully integrate. However, Jessica still finds parts of Tess reemerging from time to time. Although she found happiness and married Antonio Vega, Tess's lingering feelings for Nash Brennan - the father of her child, the man who loved 'Tess' when no one else did - have drawn Jessica into Nash's arms. Torn between two men, Jessica was faced with a decision to stay with her husband or to give in to the passion and newly found love for Nash, which she did. Nash and Jess married and set out on their dream for a vineyard.

After Nash found himself in too deep with a business associate, he was forced to accept an offer from Jared Banks, one that would allow the Buchanan money to save his vineyard. However, after it was revealed that Jared wasn't really a Buchanan, Nash was informed that he'd lost the vineyard, which in turn caused a fight between Nash and Jared - that landed Nash over an edge and through a skylight at The Palace, leading to his death.

Sadly, Tess reemerged, locked Natalie and Jared in a secret room in Llanfair, then ended up losing her baby! Then came Bess, Jessica's latest personality, who vowed to clean up all of the mess... However, now that it's become apparent that Bess switched Jessica's dead baby with Starr's, Bess has reemerged and is on the run Chloe, trying to save Jessica from finding out the awful truth.

Jessica indeed found out the truth and with the help of Brody Lovett, who she fell in love with, returned 'Hope' to Starr Manning. Jessica worked hard to overcome what she did to those closest to her. Her and Brody were working toward a future together until Mitch Laurence returned, kidnapped and brainwashed Jessica. Jessica was rescued before Mitch could rape her and for month her mind reverted back to her high school years.

After unsuccessfully trying to win back her high school sweetheart, Cris Vega, Jessica went to bed with Robert Ford on 'prom night'. The act brought back all of the memories of Mitch trying to rape her. Jessica went to Brody and though she told him her memories had returned she never let on that she had been with Ford.

A few months later, Jessica found out she was pregnant. Though Ford assured her they never slept together he later admitted they did, leaving Jessica unsure of who her baby's father was, Ford or Brody's. DNA tests proved that her son, who they named Ryder, was Brody's.

On the day Jessica and Brody were to share a double wedding with John and Natalie, Vimal stepped forward and admitted Clint had him rig Jessica's baby's paternity test. Ford was Ryder's father. After Jessica also found out about Brody and Natalie's one night stand, as well as the fact that Liam was Brody's son, Tess returned.