We first saw Nash Brennan in July of 2005 when Tess Buchanan took a trip to New York City and stole his car. After getting his car back, Nash once again ran into Tess at a party at Bruce Bartlet's house and saved her from being drugged and raped by Bruce! Through a series of wild and crazy events, Nash became drawn to Tess and eventually the two fell in love.

Wanting to know more about this mysterious woman who literally fell into his lap, Nash ran a background check on Tess and found out that she was really Jessica Buchanan! Months went by before Tess confided in Nash that she was an alter of Jessica's who suffered from Disassociative Identity Disorder (DID). By this time, Tess had become pregnant with Nash's child and had broken his heart when she left New York to head back to Llanview.

After arriving in Llanview, Nash found out that it hadn't been Tess who had left him, but rather Jessica after she'd resurfaced. However, when Nash approached Jessica, the 'Tess' in her came back out and right into Nash's arms. Although Nash and Tess tried to remain strong against Jessica's family and friends, in the end Jessica won out over Tess and delivered Nash and Tess's healthy baby girl Brennan.

With Jessica's integration complete, Tess was gone for good. However, Nash still saw traits of Tess shining through in Jessica and continued to find himself drawn to his Tess look-a-like with hopes that he can put his family back together and experience a love again with the only part of Tess he had left!

Finally married and in love with Jessica, and all that he knew as Tess, Nash was consumed with making his winery a success, with the help of his new business partners!

After finding himself in too deep with a business associate, Nash was forced to accept an offer from Jared Banks, one that would allow the Buchanan money to save his vineyard. However, after it was revealed that Jared wasn't really a Buchanan, Nash was informed that he'd lost the vineyard, which in turn caused a fight between Nash and Jared - that landed Nash over an edge and through a skylight at The Palace, leading to his death.