THE car-lover is best known by petrol-heads as the Wheeler Dealers presenter.

But who is Mike Brewer, and what’s his net worth? Here’s what we know.

Who is Mike Brewer?

Mark Brewer is a British television presenter and car enthusiast.

He was born in Lambeth, London, on August 28, 1964.

Brewer is best known as the host of Wheeler Dealers, the Discovery Channel’s car programme, which he has presented since 2003.

The premise of the show is that Brewer and the other presenters have a mission to save old vehicles, fix up old cars on a budget, and sell them to a new owner.

Brewer’s co-presenter has changed over the years: Edd China was his first co-host, followed by Ant Anstead, and most recently, Marc “Elvis” Priestley.

But Brewer is not only a presenter — alongside his television work, he is still active in the motor industry, and opened Mike Brewer Motors in 2012, a dealership in Sheffield.

He also launched the annual Used Car Award for used car dealers in the UK, a black-tie event in London.

What is Mike Brewer's net worth?

Brewer has an estimated net worth between $1.5 million and $4 million (£1.2 million to £3.2 million), owing to his long presenting career, and other business ventures.

Some sources also indicate that his annual salary is $250,000.

Despite his motor industry fame, Brewer is famously down-to-earth.

Is Mike Brewer married?

Brewer is married to Michelle Brewer, whom he married in 1992.

Michelle was born on June 9, 1962.

The pair are thought to live in Warwickshire and have one daughter together.

In a 2023 interview, Brewer opened up about the impact his career has had on his marriage, saying: "I've literally dedicated my life - 26 years actually - dedicated to this craft.

"And I feel like it's given me an amazing life but it's also come at the cost of my marriage."

"But there comes a time when I look and I think, maybe I should spend more time with my wife? She drives me mad but I love being with her," he added.

Brewer often posts photos of Michelle with his Twitter followers, with captions such as:

“Happy Birthday to my beautiful wife .. life with Michelle is wonderful, I’m so lucky. I love you tons”.

Michelle, meanwhile, posts on Twitter under the username @MrsMBrewer.

In her Twitter bio, she describes herself as “The driving force behind #WheelerDealer”, so it appears the pair work as a team, and Michelle has a lot of involvement in the car industry.

What other shows has Mike Brewer presented?

Brewer started his television career in 1997, on Channel 4’s Deals on Wheels, and ITV’s Pulling Power.

In 1999, he presented Driven on Channel 4 for one year.

Then in 2003, Wheeler Dealers started, on the Discovery Channel, which Brewer has presented ever since.

In 2009, Brewer presented another show on the Discovery Channel — Auto Trader.

Since 2020, Brewer has also hosted the Wheeler Dealers spin-off show on the Discovery Channel, Wheeler Dealers: Dream Car.

For the Discovery Channel, Brewer has also presented Deals on Wheels, Wrecks to Riches, and Frontline Battle Machines.

In 2020, Brewer took a turn co-hosting a show called The World’s Greatest Cars, on Quest.

Alongside television presenting, Brewer launched the Wheeler Dealer Podcast in February 2023, which has so far run for two series.

What cars has Mike Brewer owned?

It comes as no surprise that Brewer has a significant collection of classic cars.

Brewer’s first car was a beige Mini 850cc, but he has driven a wide range of cars in the interim period.

In 2021, Brewer announced that despite ridiculing electric cars, he’d taken the plunge and bought himself a Porsche Taycan.

That same year, Brewer decided to auction off a selection of his own cars, many of which he’s restored and maintained himself, at the Silverstone Auctions at NEC Classic Motor Show.

In the lot were a 1972 Citroen SM 2.7 four-seat coupé, a 1967 Mini Cooper 1275 S, a 1961 Austin Seven Mini 1961, a 1966 Ford Cortina Lotus Mk1, and a 2002 Ferrari 360 Spider F1.

Despite his love for his collection of cars, Brewer’s schedule didn’t allow him the time to drive and car for all of them.

Brewer has previously said he believes classic cars “are there to be driven. I know that first hand because I’ve got a collection.”

He said: "Buy something you love, buy something you’re interested in because when you love the car you’re much more likely to be willing to spend time on it, to look after it, to drive it.”

Brewer also revealed that his Ford Fiesta Mk1 was stolen in June 2023, a car that had been restored by Brewer and Priestly to mark the 20th anniversary of Wheeler Dealers.

Despite offering a £5000 reward for the card, as of November 2023, it has not been recovered.