Kelly Clarkson (Born April 24th 1982) is an American singer and songwriter. She is best known for her debut single, "A Moment Like This" which topped the US Billboard Hot 100.

Net Worth: $28 million, according to Celebrity Net Worth.

Career: She declined contract offers with Jive Records and Interscope Records, because she believed they wouldn't support her in the way she wanted.

In May 2002, Clarkson's friends encouraged her to audition for American Idol which she subsequently won and later signed to RCA Records.

Her debut AA-side single, "Before Your Love"/"A Moment Like This", was released, eventually become number 1 on the Billboard Hot 100, breaking the record that had been set by The Beatles, for the largest leap to number 1.

On April 15th, 2003, Clarkson's album 'Thankful' was released, and debuted at number 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 with multi-Platinum status.

"Miss Independent" was the album's lead single.

Her second studio album, 'Breakaway' was released on November 30th, 2004.

She co-wrote most of the songs with the band members of Evanescence, and the title track with Avril Lavigne.

It became her most successful album to date, becoming the world's 7th best selling album of 2005, and the most successful selling album in history of an American Idol contestant.

Every song on the album became international hits, including 'Breakaway' which was featured on the 2004 film, The Princess Diaries 2: Royal Engagement and was Clarkson's longest running Number 1 song, lasting 28 weeks.

The most successful track was 'Since U Been Gone', which peaked at number 2 on the Billboard Hot 100.

'My December' was Clarkson's third studio album, and was released on June 22nd, 2007.

Clarkson co-wrote all of the songs, but due to the album's lack of professional production input, Clarkson was asked to re-record all the tracks, but she refused.

The album peaked at number 2 on the Billboard 200.

Her tour had to be cancelled due to her lack of promotion because of her unwillingness to redo the album.

She participated at the Papal Youth Rally in New York in 2008, performing Ave Maria to the Pope after his speech.

"All I Ever Wanted" was Clarkson's fourth album, and was released on March 10th, 2009, staying at number 1 on the Billboard 200 for 2 weeks.

She went on tour from 2009-2010 in support of the album.

The album's first single, 'My Life Would Suck Without You' became an international hit, entering the Billboard Hot 100 at number 97, and rising to number 1 in a week.

This broke the record for the biggest leap to number one, her second time doing so.

In November 2009, she also became a guest mentor on the X Factor.

Pairing with Jason Aldean, she recorded "Don't You Wanna Stay" with him for his album, 'My Kinda Party', in November 2010.

Together, they performed it on the tenth season of American Idol, at the 2010 CMA Awards and at the 54th Grammy Awards.

'Stronger' was Clarkson's 5th studio album, and was released on October 21st, 2011.

It debuted at number 2 on the Billboard 200 and featured singles "Mr. Know It All" and "Stronger (What Doesn't Kill You)".

Clarkson performed "My Country, 'Tis Of Thee" at the second inauguration of United States President Barack Obama, on January 21st, 2013.

Clarkson's first Christmas album, "Wrapped In Red", was released on October 29th, 2013.

It was certified platinum by the RIAA, and became the best selling Christmas album of the year, making her the first American female to do so.

Clarkson has won three Grammy awards in her career, alongside a further seven nominations.

Personal Life: Kelly Clarkson was born in Fort Worth, Texas.

Her parents were Jeanne Ann (descendant of Republican state senator Isaiah Rose), who was a first grade English teacher, and Stephen Michael Clarkson, who was a former engineer. They divorced when she was 5.

Kelly was raises Southern Baptist, and often spoke of her closeness with the Church and God.

She originally wanted to be a Marine Biologist, but after seeing 'Jaws', she changed her mind.

She attended Pauline Hughes Middle School, and after being overheard singing, the schools choir teacher asked her to audition. After school, she continued to sing, receiving classical training.

The University of Texas at Austin, University of North Texas, and Berklee College of Music, all offered Clarkson full scholarships, but she declined due to her desire to go into music.

On October 30th, 2013, Clarkson married talent manager Brandon Blackstock. The couple also had a baby girl in June 2014.

Biography by Contactmusic.com