Kelly Clarkson is a famous American musician, songwriter, actress, and artist. Most commonly recognized for her winning the first season of American Idol, she has since claimed her stance on the red carpet and continues to create music and embrace her music career.

In the Beginning

Born to Jeanne Anne, a 1st-grade elementary school teacher, and Steven Michael Clarkson, an engineer, Kelly Clarkson was born in Ft. Worth Texas. She has two older siblings, her brother Jason and sister Alyssa. Kelly Clarkson’s parents divorced when she was five years old, where Kelly also has two half-siblings, from her father’s second marriage. In interviews she has noted her initial goal of becoming a marine biologist, however she changed her mind soon after seeing the movie Jaws. Throughout high school, Kelly performed in her school musicals, such as Seven Brides for Seven Brothers, and more. She also sang in her school talent shows and was eventually offered a full scholarship to The University of Texas at Austin, University of North Texas, and Berklee College of Music, among others. Instead of attending college, Kelly Clarkson declined their offers and decided to focus on her career, understanding that she could always go to college at a later time. She began recording her demos and was offered a few contracts from Jive Records and Interscope Records, which she later declined. Later, Kelly Clarkson auditioned for American Idol: The Search for a Superstar in May of 2002. This audition was the opportunity of a lifetime.

Career Accomplishments

Kelly Clarkson won the American Idol competition in 2002 and was signed to RCA Records, 19 Recordings, and S Records, with the help of Simon Fuller. Most recognized for her A Moment Like This song, which was the son that she sang to win the competition, this was on her first single and immediately appeared on the Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 60 in September 0f 2002. This single made its way up the rankings, eventually landing at the number one spot. This went on the be the number one best-selling single of 2002. Other popular albums were later released and are as follows: Thankful (2003-2004), Breakaway (2004-2006), My December (2006-2008), All I ever Wanted (2008-2010), Stronger (2011-2012), Greatest Hits- Chapter One and Wrapped in Red (2012-2014), Piece by Piece (2014-present).

Most Known For

The tabloids seem to make not of Kelly Clarkson’s ever-changing weight. Featured in numerous magazines, for example, the Life & Style Weekly on April 3, 2015, by Allison Cacich titled “People Continue to Comment on Kelly Clarkson’s Weight and She Continues to Not Give a Damn.” Aside from her changing weight, she is also commonly referenced for her association with ProActive, the acne medication. Yet, at the end of the day, she is always recognized as a performer and an artist first and foremost.

Where Is She Now?