Gerald R. Ford served in the U.S. Navy, as a member of the U.S. House of Representatives, as the 40th U.S. Vice President and as the 38th U.S. President. For his years of dedication and commitment to his country, several organizations have honored his legacy by bestowing his name, and the name of his wife Betty Ford, onto such places as an airport, postage stamp, an aircraft carrier and numerous buildings. Several awards are also named after him. President Gerald R. Ford will be remembered through:

Buildings and Locale:

Gerald R. Ford Presidential Museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan

Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library in Ann Arbor, Michigan

Gerald R. Ford International Airport in Grand Rapids, Michigan – airport aerial view and airport mural Flickr photos

Gerald R. Ford Park in Alexandria, Virginia – southwest arbor, sign elevation and east path Flickr photos

Gerald R. Ford Hall at Park Hyatt Resort in Beaver Creek, Colorado

Gerald R. Ford Amphitheater in Vail, Colorado

Gerald R. Ford Post Office in Vail, Colorado – Flickr photo

Gerald R. Ford Birth Site & Gardens in Omaha, Nebraska

Gerald R. Ford Federal Building & U.S. Courthouse in Grand Rapids, Michigan

Gerald R. Ford House Office Building at the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C.

Gerald R. Ford Job Corps Center in Grand Rapids, Michigan

Gerald R. Ford Conservation Center in Omaha, Nebraska

Plaque at the Colonade Hotel honoring President Gerald R. Ford’s visit to Boston to launch the nation’s Bicentennial Celebration on April 18-19, 1975

Fraternal Order of Police, Gerald R. Ford Metro Lodge No. 97

Shant Building in Ann Arbor, Delta Kappa Epsilon University of Michigan fraternity house and international headquarters for the fraternity, Gerald R. Ford pledged DKE in 1932

Gerald R. Ford House in Alexandria, VA

National Historic Landmark Plaque at the Ohio Theatre in downtown Columbus, Ohio was unveiled on October 21, 1978 by Gerald R. Ford during the theatre’s 50th anniversary gala – The Columbus Dispatch Ohio Theatre Jubilee articles Part 1 and Part 2

Statue of President Gerald R. Ford at the terminal entrance of the Gerald R. Ford International Airport (Grand Rapids, MI)

Awards:

Gerald R. Ford Medal for Distinguished Public Service

Gerald R. Ford Journalism Prizes for Reporting on the Presidency and on National Defense

NCAA President’s Gerald R. Ford Award

Gerald R. Ford Scholar Award in Honor of Robert M. Teeter

Davenport University’s Gerald R. Ford Scholarship

Gerald R. Ford, Lifetime Membership Plaque, Fraternal Order of Police – Flickr photo

Gerald R. Ford, Lifetime Membership Card, Fraternal Order of Police – Flickr photo

Thanks-Giving Foundation 2009 Spirit of Thanks-Giving Award

Gerald R. Ford Legends Award for former collegiate or professional centers who, in addition to standout football careers, have also made significant contributions to the football and/or business communities, or through philanthropic endeavors

Michigan Wolverines Football Gerald R. Ford Lifetime Impact Award, presented to a distinguished and uncommon ‘Michigan Man’ and football alum for living a courageous and meaningful life – See announcement of inaugural recipient

Academia and Organizations:

President Gerald R. Ford Field Service Council, Boy Scouts of America

USS Gerald R. Ford CVN 78 Aircraft Carrier and Gerald R. Ford Class of Super Carriers, US Navy – Christening platform, ceremony event and Ford Family Flickr photos

Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy at University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Michigan

Gerald R. Ford Institute for Leadership in Public Policy and Service at Albion College in Albion, Michigan

Gerald R. Ford Fieldhouse on the Campus of Grand Rapids Community College

2007 Gerald R. Ford US Postal Service Commemorative Postage Stamp – Stamp Unveiling Flickr photos

Gerald R. Ford Elementary School in Indian Wells, California

Betty Ford:

The Betty Ford Center in Rancho Mirage, California

Betty Ford Alpine Gardens in Vail, Colorado

Betty Ford Breast Care Services at Spectrum Health

Roadways:

Gerald R. Ford Street NW in Knoxville, Tennessee 37919

West and East Gerald R. Ford Drive in Codova, Tennessee 38016

Gerald R. Ford Drive in Rancho Mirage, California 92270

Gerald R. Ford Drive in Palm Desert, California 92211

Gerald R. Ford Drive in Cathedral City, California 92234

Gerald R. Ford Street in Manor, Texas 78653

Gerald R. Ford Freeway (I-480) in Omaha, Nebraska