Talking about many romantic figures in the Republic of China, Xu Zhimo will definitely be able to do his part and not let him top the list. After all, his story is well known to the world. He abandoned his wife Zhang Youyi , and his request with Lin Huiyin failed, and turned to Lu Xiaoman . Even if he died, it was because he wanted to participate in Lin Huiyin's speech. The original intention and added a bit of love between children.

But behind such a romantic relationship, it has to be said that this is also the mistreatment of several women. What Xu Zhimo left to Zhang Youyi was just a lonely back and endless harm. However, we have to say that Zhang Youyi lived out his true self and lived out a perfect appearance. From being abandoned, to self-improvement, and finally to having true love, she made her life shine brightly.

Unjust marriage

Zhang Youyi was born in Baoshan County, Jiangsu Province in 1900. Because of her superior family conditions, she and her siblings have read books and received a good education since childhood, but when she was fifteen years old , his four Zhang Jia'ao have helped her find her future husband, and she will be married soon.Although her family was interested in the education of her children, she still could not get rid of the shackles of the times, so Zhang Youyi, who didn't know what love was at that time, married Xu Zhimo like this, so how did Zhang Jiaao know Xu Zhimo, and she was so sure to let her Will he be his brother-in-law?

At that time, Zhang Jia'ao was already the secretary of the governor of Zhejiang . On that day, he accidentally saw an article by Xu Zhimo. Since Zhang Jia'ao is also a scholar, from the article, Xu Zhimo must be a young man who will develop in the future. So Zhang Jiaao wrote a letter to Xu's father that night, and in the letter proposed to marry his sister to Xu Zhimo. At that time, Zhang's family was definitely a big family. After all, there were many government officials in his family. Cai, if the two marry, then the Xu family's family business will be guaranteed, so Xu Zhimo's father also agreed to the marriage of the two.

But this is absolutely unacceptable to the young Xu Zhimo. As a progressive young man in the new era, Xu Zhimo naturally cannot bear to marry a woman who has never been masked, so he began to work hard for this marriage that his parents ordered. Resisted, but the resistance was ineffective, so she could only resign Zhang Youyi into the family .

On the other hand, Zhang Youyi is very calm. After all, Zhang's family is a traditional family. Although Zhang Youyi has also received new education, she is still a female student who has not finished junior high school, and the trend of women's independence has not yet emerged at that time, so Zhang Youyi also He willingly obeyed the arrangement of 's parents and 's elder brother . After seeing a photo of Xu Zhimo, Zhang Youyi said, "No objection." In this way, Zhang Youyi entered the Xu family's door, but waited for her It's not the husband and wife that treat each other like guests, but the coldness of the husband.

divorce

1915 December, they two people got married, Xu Zhimo, who was supposed to have a wedding room, actually went to sleep in his grandma's room, never touched Zhang Youyi at all, Xu Zhimo's quarrel with his parents did not work , So he wanted to make Zhang Youyi retreat despite the difficulties, but Zhang Youyi was born in a traditional family and has been working hard as a wife and daughter-in-law, so Xu Zhimo began to think of a way, He began to instill new ideas into his wife. Thought, so that she would fight against the arranged marriage with herself, and the two could be freed together, but he did not expect that Zhang Youyi was only sixteen years old at that time, and he entered the Xu family's house before graduating from junior high school, although The literary skills are good, but Zhang Youyi doesn't understand those profound thoughts at all, so even if Xu Zhimo speaks spittle, Zhang Youyi just stares at him blankly.

Although Xu Zhimo had a better idea and wanted to be the number one in China, but his conditions did not meet the requirements of divorce, so Xu Zhimo chose to escape. He proposed to family to go out on the grounds of wanting a better development Learning , the family saw that it was a good thing, and there was no reason to object, so Xu Zhimo arrived in Tianjin to study law, but the more he studied, the more hostile Xu Zhimo was to his marriage, and the more he wanted to break the shackles .

Xu Zhimo felt that this trick of going out to study was very useful, so he told his family that if he wanted to learn more knowledge, he needed to study abroad, so he wanted to study abroad, but his family was not a fool, he knew that this was what Xu Zhimo escaped As a means, he began to talk to Xu Zhimo about conditions, "If you want to go abroad, you can, but we must first let us hold our grandson." In this way, Xu Zhimo began to have the same room with Zhang Youyi in order to go abroad, and finally in 1918, their eldest son Xu Jikai was born. As a father, Xu Zhimo just glanced at the items that and his son were ready to go abroad. After four months later, Xu Zhimo, who met the conditions, left his wife, children and parents, and got on a cruise ship to the West. He wrote the first poem in his life at Cambridge University . This is what we know because he met Lin Huiyin.

After Xu Zhimo went abroad, Zhang Youyi has also been reflecting on the reasons why she is not accepted by Xu Zhimo. Xu Zhimo couldn't see it. Just two years later, Xu Zhimo actually mentioned Zhang Youyi in the letter and wanted Zhang Youyi to come and read with him, which made Zhang Youyi overjoyed. He finally remembered himself, the mother of the child, So Zhang Youyi packed her bags and prepared to go to Marseille, France, where they made an appointment that Xu Zhimo would pick her up.It's just that Zhang Youyi couldn't think of what happened behind this incident. How could Xu Zhimo let his wife from the countryside come to accompany him? Xu Zhimo wrote a letter to ask his sister to come to accompany him. Although Xu Zhimo was influenced by Western ideas, he could still see the pros and cons. This time he brought Zhang Youyi over to meet the requirements of the second uncle. Divorce Zhang Youyi in the West so that you can be free from family interference.

When Zhang Youyi got off the boat, Xu Zhimo didn't look good when she saw Zhang Youyi. The first thing was not to ask her if she was uncomfortable on the journey, but to take Zhang Youyi directly to the store and change all her clothes. That leaves the only photo of the two of them together. In the photo, Xu Zhimo is calm, while Zhang Youyi is very cautious, but Xu Zhimo's only purpose is to send this photo back to his hometown and tell his parents, and also tell Zhang Youyi's relatives, "We are fine, don't worry about it." , Although this photo can put down their worries for the family, but for Zhang Youyi, it is just a photo, and the bedside person Xu Zhimo is no longer his own.

Although Zhang Youyi was already with Xu Zhimo, Xu Zhimo still did not introduce her to his friends. After all, Zhang Youyi was just a "soil/bun" in his eyes, although Zhang Youyi read books day and night just to reduce her relationship with Xu. The gap between Zhimo allows them to have a chat, but Xu Zhimo, who is proud of himself, doesn't want to chat with Zhang Youyi at all, that's not love.So Zhang Youyi only did housework at home every day. Although she knew that Xu Zhimo must have a woman outside, she still had nothing to do. At this time, Zhang Youyi was already disappointed with their relationship, especially when Xu Zhimo wanted her regardless of Zhang Youyi's safety. Zhang Youyi was completely disappointed when she killed the child in her belly.

Zhang Youyi is still a pregnant woman, Xu Zhimo and Lin Huiyin fell in love with vigor and vitality, just after the child was born, Zhang Youyi saw that the child still failed to restore Xu Zhimo's heart, and the two of them also signed a divorce in Berlin. So far, Zhang Youyi and Xu Zhimo The arranged marriage finally came to an end.

My style

Although the two are divorced, Xu's father has always treated this daughter-in-law very well, and even treats Zhang Youyi as his daughter. Zhang Youyi in Berlin began to study children with the help of his second brother Zhang Junmai Education, so that she can survive independently in a foreign country, but fate played a big joke on her. The child died of illness in 1925. At this time, Zhang Youyi began to think about her future path, returning to Xuzhou. Home, after all, there is still her own son there, so she still returned to her parents' home to live, but she chose to be independent, and she has been teaching in Shanghai since then, becoming a woman in the new era, no longer the "soil/bun" in Xu Zhimo's mouth.

In addition to teaching, Zhang Youyi also entered the business with the help of 's fourth brother . No matter what business is, Zhang Youyi has been prosperous, and has accumulated a lot of wealth. She finally stood up on her own, In addition, she has also been involved in stocks, securities, etc., and has gained a lot, as if she was a natural wealth manager.

Zhang Youyi's brilliance is very good to set off Xu Zhimo's bad luck.Xu Zhimo and Zhang Youyi divorced in order to pursue Lin Huiyin, but Lin Huiyin married the famous architectural genius Liang Sicheng . For Xu Zhimo, it was just lost. He soon fell in love with Lu Xiaoman. After the two got married, they returned to their hometown to live. , Xu's father and Xu's mother are conservative people, they can't see Lu Xiaoman's frivolous style at all, so in a fit of anger, Xu's father and Xu's mother went to Shanghai to live with their grandson and Zhang Youyi. Originally, Lu Xiaoman was a person with a luxurious life, and Xu Zhimo gradually became shy, Zhang Youyi often gave him enough money in the name of Xu's father and Xu's mother, but he did not expect Xu Zhimo to die in a plane crash.

Gained True Love

In 1949, Zhang Youyi left Shanghai for , Hong Kong , but unexpectedly she met true love in Hong Kong.

Zhang Youyi has a neighbor in Hong Kong named Su Jizhi. Su Jizhi is a doctor. She was accustomed to the life of a widow and was flattered by Su Jizhi's proposal. She did not agree to Su Jizhi's proposal, but did so after she wrote to her brother and eldest son. In this way, Zhang Youyi and Su Jizhi held a grand wedding in Japan. Because the two of them really love each other, their married life has always been very happy. The two have been with each other for nearly 20 years. Until Su Jizhi died, Zhang Youyi returned to his son in the United States.

Summary

In fact, marriage is like a besieged city. People inside want to come out and people outside want to enter, but whether you want to come out or enter, you need to take the initiative in your own hands, and you need to eliminate your inner anger, so that you can get better life.In his later years, someone asked Zhang Youyi if he loved Xu Zhimo? However, Zhang Youyi said calmly: I have always been told that I have done a lot for Xu Zhimo, and I must love him, but I never said "I love you" to anyone. Of course, if taking care of me is love, I probably Is to love him. From her words, there is no trace of resentment, no resentment, and some are peaceful and calm.