VINCENNES, Ind. -- The campus of Vincennes University certainly has changed over the past 22 years since Shawn Marion last sported one of the school's jerseys.

But as it turns out, some things remain the same.

"This is the health class still, right?," Marion said upon walking into Classroom BO22 in the P.E. Complex building. "See, I learned how to do CPR right here (laughs). I was even certified, I could give you the Heimlich Maneuver."

While Marion had to knock out a few jokes at his alma mater on Wednesday, the evening was mostly filled with memories and recognition. The four-time NBA All-Star and 2011 champion was honored with a special halftime ceremony cementing him as one of Vincennes' men's basketball all-time legends.

Marion played at Vincennes from 1996-1998 before going to Division I UNLV. During his 72 career games with the Trailblazers, he scored 1,685 points (second all-time) and also notched 923 rebounds (second all-time).

He was drafted ninth overall by the Phoenix Suns in 1999 and also played for the Toronto Raptors, Dallas Mavericks and Cleveland Cavaliers during his NBA career. He won an NBA title with the Mavericks in 2011 and also helped lead Team USA to a bronze medal in the 2004 Summer Olympics.

"This is where the foundation of my career began," Marion said. "When you set off on a career path, you never know exactly where it's going to lead you. I was fortunate enough to start that foundation here and build a strong base that allowed me to have a long career in basketball. It's been an amazing process."

There was a packed crowd on hand to see Marion's special ceremony on Wednesday night as the No. 1 ranked Trailblazers defeated Lake Land, 70-64. While Marion's jersey already hangs from the rafters alongside other notable names such as Bob McAdoo and Carl Landry, he received a special plaque and a commemorative framed warmup jacket with his No. 31 on it.

In addition to plenty of fans and alumni coming out to see the celebration, several former players and coaches -- including Hall of Famer Dan Sparks, Marion's coach -- were also in attendance. Seeing how crowded the gymnasium was reminded him of his playing days.

"When I was here, there were a lot of people in those stands coming to watch us play," Marion said. "I look around this gym and I see so many familiar faces, all these guys who came out to show me love. It tells you what kind of family you have when you go to VU -- this is our house, we built this."

After playing his high school basketball in Clarksville, Tennessee, Marion had to make a decision about his collegiate future -- start out at the junior college route or try to play right away at a Division I school?

For Marion, the decision to come play for Sparks and his team at Vincennes was rather simple. He knew the Trailblazer program had the potential to increase his skills immensely and prepare him for what may come next.

"Most of the things they did here prepared me for the next level (of basketball), next two levels actually," Marion said, referring to Division I ball and the NBA. "I grew as a player here - I came in as a high school kid and left as a young man."

While playing at Vincennes obviously sharpened his basketball skills, Marion believes that his two years spent with the program helped to grow him as a person.

Going away for college can be difficult for anybody but he feels that once he got adjusted to life at Vincennes, he was prepared to enter the real world.

"When you're in college and away from home, you almost have to fend for yourself to a certain degree," Marion said. "But when you're on a team, you start to find that continuity and family atmosphere. Everybody tries to help one another because (the situation) is new for everyone. We all wanted to make it a smooth transition for each other."

While the junior college route isn't always necessarily the most popular, it's become a very successful route for many guys who are looking for bigger college opportunities and potentially even a chance to play the game professionally.

In fact, Marion says one key piece of advice he would give to younger players is to give the JUCO route a shot.

"A lot of people frown on junior college because they feel like they have to go to Division I. But then they have to sit out a year and redshirt, that's your loss," Marion said. "To me, Vincennes has always felt like a Division I campus, even 22 years ago when I was here. Looking at (the campus) now, it's crazy."

Even though he only spent a few years in Vincennes, the program will always hold a special place in his heart. In fact, he said he routinely keeps up with the basketball program and watched the team's national championship victory in 2019.

Of all the places to begin your career path, Marion is glad that journey began in Vincennes.

"To see what Vincennes has turned into and the legacy that continues to build here is amazing," Marion said. "To have the fun I had here all while getting an education, you can't put a price on it."

Contact Courier & Press sports reporter Hendrix Magley via email at hendrix.magley@courierpress.com or via Twitter @TweetsOfHendrix.