Once the capital of the medieval kingdom of Asturias, Oviedo today is the capital of the autonomous community of Asturias and an attractive Spanish destination that appeals to both Spaniards and international visitors alike.

The city is nestled in the heart of "Green Spain", which includes the four rainy and therefore stunningly verdant regions - Galicia, Asturias, Cantabria and País Vasco - that hug Spain's northern coast. The city's history dates back to Roman times, though it was allegedly founded by a pair of monks in the year 761. It went on to become the capital of the small but proud medieval kingdom of Asturias, which was one of the few parts of Spain not to succumb to the Muslim Empire.

Completely isolated from the rest of Christian Europe - Italy, France, etc. - Asturias was left to create its own unique style of artwork and architecture, and Oviedo boasts many of the best examples of this pre-Romanesque architecture. Highlights, among other, include the Santa María del Naranco Church (9th century), the San Miguel de Lillo Church (9th century), the Foncalada fountain (9th century) and the San Vicente Monastery (8th century).

Oviedo's atmospheric Casco Antiguo (Old Quarter) is almost entirely pedestrianized, packed with historic monuments and a non-stop hub of activity. Along with colorful houses, architecture spanning the centuries and inviting squares, here you'll also find the greatest concentration of Oviedo's famous sidrerías, rowdy bars serving up cider.

When you sign up for a Spanish course in Oviedo, you can discover all of this and plenty more! In the meantime, take a look at our helpful Oviedo Guide

Spanish Courses in Oviedo

At the moment we do not have any Spanish courses in Oviedo, though we do offer diverse Spanish programs in numerous destinations throughout both Spain and Latin America. Just click on the link below and take a peak at all of the fantastic Spanish-speaking countries and cities where you can take Spanish courses with Enforex: