Since its opening in 1793, Paris's National Museum of Natural History has served as a vital hub for academic exploration. The museum is a must-see because it blends antiquity and modernity, displaying things like a rhino skeleton that belonged to Louis XV alongside interactive displays and VR goggles. The structures themselves are a reflection of this blending of old and new, with the towering 19th-century structure now topped by a soaring glass roof.

There are several displays in the National Museum of Natural History that are designed to draw the attention of children of all ages in the field of natural history. There are virtual magnifying glasses, activities, cuddly animals, and surprise creepy-crawlies in the Children's Gallery to help families learn more about the natural world. The Geology and Mineralogy Gallery is where you may go to gawk at the precious stones and find out how they were formed and how their brilliant colors were achieved. The museum has an impressive collection of ancient jewelry, meteorites from Mars, and unpolished gemstones in addition to its Brazilian gigantic crystals.

Also Checkout: Eiffel Tower Skip the Line Tickets

Designed by architect Louis-Jules André, the "Gallery of Zoology" at the American Museum of Natural History first opened to the public in 1889. The gigantic structure consists of four stories and a glass ceiling measuring one thousand square meters. As you ascend the stairs to the third floor, you'll find balconies that look out over the main exhibit area below. There are more than 9500 exhibits at the museum, including taxidermied animals, blue whale skeletons, and a parade of African animals that demonstrate their feeding habits on the first level. The huge elephant is in the lead, and its many enemies are close behind. There are marine mammals and species from different continents on show.

As a section of the French National Museum of Natural History in the Jardin des plantes, the Gallery of Mineralogy and Geology showcases the city of Paris's geological and mineral collections. The gallery/museum houses and displays an extensive collection of rare and historically significant crystals, jewels, and minerals. Les Trésors de la Terre is the title of the permanent display at the Paris Gallery of Mineralogy and Geology, which concentrates on crystallography and the categorisation of minerals. Of the overall collection of about 770,000 specimens, it comprises about 600 that are specifically related to minerals.

Between the Mineralogy and Paleontology Galleries, on the Allée the Buffon side of the garden's center, you'll find the Botany Gallery. The black locust, or Robinia pseudoacacia, that stands at the corner was propagated from a tree brought to France from the New World in 1601 by Vespasien Robin, the imperial gardener and botanist, and was planted there in 1635. Its age is comparable to that of a similar tree planted about the same time in Saint-Julien-le-central Pauvre's square. From 1930 to 1935, the Rockefeller Foundation funded the construction of the Gallery. Immediately in front of you is an 1889 statue by J.L.D. Schroeder titled "Science and Mystery." However, the Herbier National collection, which includes 7.5 million plants amassed since the museum's inception, is the main attraction here. Among the displays is a piece of a gigantic Sequoia tree that was 2200 years old when it fell in 1917.

The Gallery of Paleontology and Comparative Anatomy's enormous collection of recreated animal skeletons has fascinated and frightened visitors for more than a century. Created in 1898 to house a plethora of previously dispersed scientific collections, the museum's fossil and skeletal displays now comprise one of the world's most extensive and thorough displays of their kind. The museum's collections are split between two impressive exhibit halls. The Gallery of Paleontology features many magnificent fossils, including some colossal dinosaur skeletons that stand out against the building's beautiful glass and iron exterior. The museum's Gallery of Comparative Anatomy, however, is its crowning achievement. Over a thousand skeletons of various animals fill this huge gallery at the museum.

The Jardin des Plantes is the principal botanical garden in Paris which was constructed in the 17th century at the request of King Louis XIII's personal physician. You may find it at the 5th arrondissement, right across the street from the Gare d'Austerlitz train station. This well-known Parisian park is a popular destination for tourists of all ages thanks to its historic flower gardens, exotic plant greenhouses, mini zoo (the sole one in the city), and a handful of modest scientific museums. The 28-hectare garden was constructed adjacent to the Seine and the literary Left Bank of Paris, and it is perfect for a stroll or a day of exploration of the several little museums dedicated to different elements of development.

As the zoo of the Jardin des Plantes, the Ménagerie is a large woodland area spanning several hectares where nature is present in all its manifestations. On their trip around, guests will pass by many structures and cages that house the zoo's various animal residents. A total of 600 animals call the zoo home, and you'll get to know them here. Arabian oryx, snow leopards, orangutans, Aldabra Giant Tortoises, flamingos, pythons,tree-kangaroos, Red pandas, and rhinoceros hornbills are just a few of the endangered species in the world. The about 150 species that call the Ménagerie home are a fantastically varied representation of the wide variety of vertebrate life on land. In the middle of the Jardin des Plantes, there are winding paths through the woods where visitors can catch sight of the park's inhabitants. Small log houses called fabriques are used to shelter these animals.

Among the world's largest natural history museums, France's National Museum of Natural History dates back to the time of the French Revolution, when it was founded. The museum dates back to the early 17th century, when King Louis XIII created a royal garden of medicinal herbs for scientific and medical research. In 1793, during the French Revolution, the garden was transformed into a public museum of natural history. Many eminent scientists, including Georges-Louis Leclerc de Buffon, Georges Cuvier, Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck, and Henri Becquerel, have contributed to the institution's scientific endeavors while working at the museum. The ancient buildings and structures that make up the Jardin des Plantes complex are situated on either side of a magnificent parterre (called the Esplanade) that is 2000 feet in length. The museum formerly occupied the 1699–1700 Hôtel de Magny, which was constructed according to a plan by Pierre Bullet.

By Metro

To reach the National Museum of Natural History, take either the M7 or M10 to the Jussieu stop and then walk south along Rue Linne to the gate in the southeast corner; alternatively take the M5 to the Quai de la Rapée stop and turn right through the plaza and right again across the Pont d'Austerlitz (Bridge). The gardens can then be reached by strolling past the traffic circle.

By Bus

Bus RATP services between Paris and the National Museum of Natural History depart at the Maubert - Mutualité station. The trip on line 47 from Maubert - Mutualité to Monge takes a total of 3 minutes, including transfers, and buses leave every 10 minutes.

By Car/Bike

The National Museum of Natural History may be reached in only three minutes either by cab or bicycle because it is only 2 kilometers away from Paris city.