Hi

does anyone know how to make uk garage/2step drum patterns and what fx are used mostly …

And can someone tell me the drum pattern & fx used for uk garage/2step and these 2 tracks -

reply back …

thank you.

The drum patterns are straight 4/4 with a lot of shuffle. Obviously the chocolate track has a busy kick drum and Dollaly has a busy rimshot/extra snare working around the snare on 2 and 4.

Effects would be reverb, compression and sidechain.

Can you show me some screen shot of the pattern in sequencer like fl studio or ableton.

I actually made a garage beat sort of on accident while jamming the other day, it really is exactly as described above by @anon64972012 . Rather than following formulas it will really help your production to just visualise it and jam, it won’t take you long to get there. just place kicks where you think they should be and then move onto the next track, tweak swing

that is no good. does not sound nothing like the above track drums…

screen shots please …

People will probably not put the work in for you.

If you want to copy those two patterns, loop the track up and copy the beat tick by tick, sound by sound.

The above tutorials beat is a very good example, might not be the exact same thing, but it’s close enough, and it’s up to you to express yourself.

Take tevtrack you like and find a section with just the drums. Put into Ableton and convert it to a midi track - it is pretty decent at picking out the kick, snare, and hihats.

Sorry I don’t have Ableton,

Only FL Studio.

Any chance you can do it and show me some print screens (images).

you want us to make the track for you too ?

lol …?

That will be great if you can please do it and YouTube the video url to me.

No problem, here you go

lmao

Can you please stop spamming …

Serious post only.

Thank you.

Google magic alakaxam!!!

We are nice, dropping links and guiding you in the right direction, perhaps you should work on your production skills. Learn how to copy a basic drum pattern like the one in sweet like a chocolate.

Bottom line, you gotta put in yer own work.

Wether you’re ripping it off or learning.

Use a drum machine with swing.

Homesss…check attackmagazine…there is a section BEAT DISSECTED …all you need!

cheers