Ludwig Wittgenstein in Skjolden: The sociocultural ecology of a way of doing philosophy

As I will argue in the following, even while Klagge’s exile theory contains some interesting new ways of looking at Wittgenstein and his philosophy, his life and his thinking, it also has some decisive shortcomings or even deficits when it comes to comprehending the full complexity of the Wittgenstein phenomenon.

«In this period (that is, 1926 and later) Wittgenstein contemplated entering a monastery.

The same thought occurred to him at other times in his life too. That it never came true was, partly at least, because for him the inner conditions of monastic life were not satisfied.» (Georg Henrik von Wright; The Philosophical Review, Vol. 64, No. 4, 1955)

This is my starting point; as far as I can see, no one has tried to explore this connection between Wittgenstein and what can be called ‘monasticism’ in a sufficient way. I am for sure no specialist in monasticism or on Wittgenstein, but because of this neglect I will try to develop this argument further; that there seems to be important commonalities between defining elements of the monastic intellectual tradition and life form and Wittgensteins socalled ‘antiphilosophical’ and intensively personal way of doing philosophy.

As Wittgenstein himself once said to his friend Drury:

«I am not a religious man but I cannot help seeing every problem from a religious point of view.»

From this it seems reasonable that Wittgenstein’s philosophy should not be conceived of as a type of philosophical ‘theory’ or configuration of interesting academic or intellectual ideas about language and language use, concepts, logic or religion. Wittgensteins practice of philosophy and discussion of concepts and language puzzels is at the same time a kind of continous work on ideas and on himself, it has therefore been regarded as a kind of therapy for our intellectual and even human fallacies. There seems to be an important connection between Wittgensteins ‘therapeutic’ conception of philosophy and the place that the concepts of sin, virtues and confessions has in christian and especially catholic theology and anthropology.

The human being is evidently a social animal. One could even say, in many ways an ‘oversocial’ animal because our relations to other people, groups and society also is a manysided challenge and can be problematic. Our behavior and thinking is too easily disturbed and distorted by what Francis Bacon spoke about as ‘idolas’ or ‘social fallacies’. For Wittgenstein it is more our use of words and language that distorts our perspective and thinking. One could also point to Daniel Boorstin’s (1961/1987) more cultural approach in his concept of illusory ‘images’ and ‘pseudoevents’ as part of something of the same challenge for individuals influenced by living in a modern society. Both Wittgensteins thinking and his way of life seems to be a continous attempt to come to grip with this challenge to decency, correctness and being and living in a honest and truthful way. To be able to experience, think, speak and behave or live in a decent way and correctly, one has so to speak continually to restructure and reeducate one’s thinking and and speaking one’s personal life through a type of ‘desocialization’. This effort is an important part of what Wittgenstein tried to do in his ‘monastic style’ of thinking and living through most of his life course.

One could even say that Wittgenstein is illustrating a ‘deep pattern’ in human existence:

The eminent british historian Arnold Toynbee in his famous book ‘A study of history’ sees a similar patterned movement as a basic principle behind the creative process:

Wittgenstein was through his life often preoccupied with his environment and often commented on how he was influenced by where he dwelled;

«When I was in Norway during the year 1913–1914 I had some thoughts of my own, or so at least it seems to me now. I mean I have the impression that at the time I brought to life new movements in thinking (but perhaps I am mistaken). Whereas now I seem just to apply old ones.» (Wittgenstein, 1980, Culture and Value)

In 1948, Wittgenstein himself wrote in a letter from Kilpatrick house in Ireland:

«I am well. The winter has been very mild so far, even if fairly wet. I would not find the district here very attractive, if the colors were not often so beautiful. I think it must be because of the atmosphere, because not only the grass, but also everything brown, the sky and the sea, are lovely. I feel much better here than in Cambridge.»

The result of all those efforts is that there is now a new and growing recognition of possible connections between Wittgensteins person and ‘work on himself’, his separating himself from ordinary life and professional philosophers by going to Skjolden, and different aspects of his philosophical thinking. There is a growing consensus among researchers that place and placement in one or another way seems to be relevant for how Wittgenstein was thinking.

It is possible that there could be other interesting views on the reasons behind Wittgensteins philosophical and lifeform withdrawal to a secluded and simplified life situation in the village of Skjolden. All the different views seem to represent some part of the total picture of what we know about Wittgenstein and the facts of his life and works. The ways of understanding why it came to happen that Wittgenstein could do some of his most important philosophical and personal-related writing in the relative isolation in Skjolden is also reflecting how one understands his contribution to and place in modern thinking and philosophy.

This article is still under development and represents a comprehensive attempt to take a closer look at all the different well elaborated ways to understand Wittgensteins relation to Skjolden.

So; why did Wittgenstein choose the norwegian withdrawal and how was it involved in his way of thinking?

‘But where shall wisdom be found? And where is the place of understanding?’ (Job 28:12)

“One of the most difficult undertakings (-) is to make some sense of Wittgenstein’s claim that his philosophy is opposed to “the darkness” of his time, to cultural decline. After all, Wittgenstein, in the Investigations, never so much as mentions the nature of his civilization or cultural decline. How then is this opposition manifested in the work?” (William J. Deangelis, Ludwig Wittgenstein – a Cultural Point of View: Philosophy in the Darkness of This Time, 2012)

What happened to Wittgenstein and in his thinking when he was staying in his Skjolden house?

He comments in another much later note from 1936:

» – work on philosophy- like work in architecture in many respects- is really more work on oneself. On one’s own conception. On how one sees things. (And what one expects of them») (CV)

«My own impression is that at some moment in his life – perhaps a moment of great difficulty and even despair – Wittgenstein may have made a resolution to live the rest of his life in a certain way and with a certain aim, and not to let himself be deflected by anything from this resolution. The aim might be described as that of doing his utmost to help others to think correctly about the important problems of life. To do this required that he should devote every bit of his time and energies with complete seriousness to the task and not allow himself to be distracted by lesser considerations of any nature.» (McGuinness, 2002, p. 6)

The dark ages are coming again: Wittgenstein’s monasticism or his monastic approach to life and philosophy

«Was there a single model exemplified in his life and thought or were there conflicting elements in his views as in his personality?» (Brian McGuinness, 2002, s.17)

In his remote place in Skjolden Wittgenstein had found the most perfect place for doing philosophy. This distant place had early in his philosophical development provided Wittgenstein with the almost hermetic conditions he needed both to work on his work ‘Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.’, but also for broader and deeper reasons that is the argument in this text.

Wittgenstein has left the ordinary academic surroundings behind; he is spending his days mostly alone in his secluded hut. Wittgenstein scholars are still trying to understand the reasons and the background for Wittgenstein’s withdrawal from what most people regard as the normal life. For Wittgenstein this normal life represented a problem, both in a personal way but also in a philosophical way. It took Wittgenstein days and weeks and maybe months to finally decide where to stay when he was working and writing on philosophical matters. Is it pure coincidence that he in the end should decided that the best place for him to work for so many of his years was the distant little village of Skjolden in the deep end of the Sognefjord?

To human beings, with a vast inner memory and imagination, places can never be neutral and objective. We create the places we think we are finding or discovering. The Danish author Karen Blixen wrote these words about finding her place, for her it was Africa:

Tolstoy’s writings were without any doubt very important to Wittgenstein. His co-soldiers talked about his as ‘the man with the gospel’ because he always carried Tolstoy’s ‘The Gospel in Brief’ with him during his participation in the war, he even told that it ‘virtually kept [him] alive’.

In the piece ‘Wittgenstein, Tolstoy and the Meaning of Life’ (2002) Caleb Thompson is going further and extends Tolstoy’s influence also to Wittgenstein’s philosophy. He argues that there are important parallels in structure and content between Tolstoy’s ‘Confession’ and Wittgenstein’s ‘Tractatus’ which help us to understand the ‘Tractatus’. Thompson finds by comparing these two works that the idea that the solution to philosophical problems lies in their disappearance are a result of Tolstoy’s influence.

Kjell Johannesen on his side points out to the more direct similarities between Tolstoy’s conversion to a simple and ethical based life style and Wittgenstein’s withdrawal to Skjolden. The people living in the village by the fjord are Wittgenstein’s parallel to Tolstoy’s idealized simple and honest peasants. To live surrounded by such authentic people represented for Wittgenstein a chance to live the solitary and more honest life the was looking for. There is of course no good reasons to deny the Tolstoyan influence both on Wittgenstein’s philosophical thinking and his life choices. At the same time it seems that this could be a unecessary superficial understanding of the complex of reason behind Wittgenstein’s escape to Skjolden.

But the main problem with Johannesens Tolstoy-theory is simple as this: Wittgenstein went to Skjolden already in 1913, and the construction of his hut started in 1914. Later that the same year Wittgenstein volunteered to join the Austrian army on the eastern front, where he happened to find Tolstoy’s version of the Gospel. Maybe reading Tolstoy worked to confirm ideas that Wittgenstein was developing long before he went to the war front.

This is confirmed by the following fact. On their trip to Norway in september 1913, David Pinsent, Wittgenstein’s close friend from Cambridge, wrote on the 24. in his diary:

From this it’s as easy as that to see that we need something better than Johannesens Tolstoy theory to understand what motivated or drove Wittgenstein away from people. Why he should decide to stay in distant Skjolden and other similar places like some small villages in Austria in the twenties and also in Ireland from 1934 and throughout the rest of his life.

Out of touch with his time or ‘I have to swim so strongly against the tide’

It has been said that Wittgenstein felt like a stranger, all his life. He was never fully comfortable with anyone and never felt fully at home anywhere in this world. What from the outside looks like geographical rootlessness and personal restlessness in Wittgenstein, could in reality be more about his personal attitudes and values and feeling incompatible and out of touch with his times. Wittgenstein often complained that he was living with people to whom he could not make himself understood, most of his life he seems to have felt alien in company with normal people and especially academic philosophers.

In a warning letter to his friend Drury before he left for Skjolden he had written that:

«the dark ages are coming again….(-) I wouldn’t be surprised if you and I were to live to see such horrors as people being burnt alive as witches.»

The austrian thinker did not go on well with most people; his attitudes and values was not easily assimilable into the social milieu he normally lived in.

Human life and the living human mind is embedded in a complicated structure of contexts; some of them directly experiential, others not – not only the close immediate and visible situation. Often, the mind is recursively constructing and making up imaginary contexts for itself to relate to and live in. So, there is also a broader context for Wittgenstein’s scenery message; the context of the philosopher’s life in Austria and England and Europe between the wars; a context that gives even more meaning to these few words about himself and a wonderful scenery.

Wittgenstein was all his life extremely conscious about the distance between himself and the time he was living in:

‘My type of thinking is not wanted in this present age; I have to swim so strongly against the tide.’

In 1945 his is repeating this theme:

«….I have no sympathy for the current of European civilization and do not understand its goals, if it has any. So I am really writing for friends who are scattered throughout the corners of the globe.» (CV, 6)

Wittgenstein’s critical attitude towards his own times and western civilization which he regarded as an optimistic fraud is seldom regarded as an inportant part of his thinking. It is not therefore surprising when it is said by E. Toynton:

«since his death Wittgenstein seems to have become the victim of everything he hated most.»

So; what did he hate in modern culture and social life – «in the darkness of this time», and why is this dark views on modern human living connected closely to his philosophical thinking ? How does his relationship to the world, to others and to himself influence his articulation of views in philosophy?

In the book ‘On the trail to Wittgenstein’s hut (2010) the norwegian author Ivar Oxaal has a different and more positive view of some of the reasons behind Wittgenstein’s decision about going to Norway. Oxaal tells that Wittgenstein’s interest in going to Norway arose during the period following Scott’s and Amundsen’s explorations. It was hen further stimulated by the Titanic disaster in 1912.

Wittgenstein as exile-theory

Klagge (2011) has formulated the exile theory about Wittgenstein; he writes about this idea –

«But his sense of exile is as much temporal as it is geographical: Wittgenstein thought of himself as at home in an earlier era.» (p.2)

Both Peters (2008: Wittgenstein as Exile: A philosophical topography) and Klagge (2011: Wittgenstein in exile) are trying to discuss Wittgenstein’s philosophy from a topographic or geographic perspective.

Peters argues that Wittgenstein’s was a self-imposed exile from Vienna and from Cambridge and that this condition of exile is decisive for our understanding of both the man and his philosophy. In Peters view Wittgenstein in his insisting on not being understood is practicing a sort of ‘exhilic thought’; he argues that we have to more fully see the significance of location and place for Wittgenstein’s life and thought. It is easy to find support for Peters view in Wittgensteins work and notes: Peters are giving us two examples –

«The philosopher is not a member of any community of ideas.» Wittgenstein (Z § 455)/»I felt strange/a stranger/in the world. When you are bound neither to men nor to God, then you are a stranger.»( Wittgenstein (cited in Nedo et al, 2005, p. 11)

Peters version of the ‘exhilic view’ contains two elements, an outlining of –

“the notion of exhilic thought as a central trope for understanding writing in philosophy and for understanding Wittgenstein’s thinking and the intimate connection between the geography of Wittgenstein’s movements and his experience of other cultures, and his philosophy, his style of doing philosophy.”

The other element is more general and is discussing: