O RAPPA is a musical band influenced by the Pop Rock, Reggae and Dub. It was distinguished because of the singular sonority and the ability to reflect critically the everyday living of the urban citizens. The group became so important that its lyrics are studied at schools and universities.

BEGINNING: The band O Rappa was created in Rio de Janeiro, in the beginning of 90’s. The drummer Marcelo Yuka and Nelson Meirelles (producer of the famous band Cidade Negra), organized a Reggae band to play with Papa Winnie in his tourney in Brazil.

When the tourney finished, they needed a new singer. Yuka wrote an article in the famous newspaper, O GLOBO, and after a long day with many candidates and no decision, the last one unanimously, fit the bill. Marcelo Falcão was chosen with the best evaluation, but with a recommendation to stop smoking.

With the last member selected, O Rappa finally was composed by:

The drummer, composer, producer and leader, Yuka;

the bassist Lauro Farias;

the guitarist, Xandão;

the keyboardist Lobato;

and the singer, Falcão.

SUCCESS: The 1st CD was not popular. The success just came in the 2nd one, called Rappa Mundi.

Rappa Mundi left the Reggae emphasis and bet on a pop proposal, appropriating the different backgrounds of the members. This album was full of hits like A Feira, Miséria S.A., Vapor Barato, Hey Joe, Pescador de Ilusões, Eu Quero Ver Gol, O Homem Bomba and others.

​

DISTINCTIONS: Yuka and Lauro Farias had a good knowledge about Dub, Reggae and Remix;

The maestro and producer, Lobato, was versatile and had an important job with African musicians;

Xandão was more focused on the Rock and the Jazz,

and Falcão had a great knowledge of Reggae, Dub, Raga and Hip Hop.

​

The association of different experiences created a singular sonority, incomparable with any other band. Focused on urban chronicles about life in big cities, the lyrics also had the differential in expressing the urban violence, the poverty, and subjects connected to the majority of the population.

Differently of others musicians who focused on love stories, O Rappa treated the difficult reality, very intelligently, bringing sociological thoughts with a mild vocabulary. The most important member was Yuka, who became nationally admired because of his musical poetry, and a reference like musician, composer, producer and political activist. At the same time, Yuka was also responsible for many social projects to help poor people, in Rio de Janeiro.

The 3rd CD, called Lado B Lado A, was even more successful, and won a position among one of the best albums of the Brazilian Music history.

They kept on the emphasis to join urban questions with a pop sonority. Highlights for the tracks Minha Alma, Me Deixa and O que Sobrou do Céu. The track Minha Alma became a hymn and its clip won many awards.

YUKA, FIRED: Yuka was, however, victim of the violence He always protested. In 2000, during the best professional phase of his life, gangster shot his spine and He became paraplegic.

He never was a criminal, neither took drugs, but because of the political activism, He had contact with people who lived in the Favelas. Marcinho VP, one of the worse drug dealers in Brazil, became one of his best friends. Ironically, Yuka was safe close to the worse criminal, but shot in a normal day, in a not so dangerous place.

Despite being admired by all the members like "the greatest intellectuals of the 90’s", He always had relationship troubles with them. By being the composer, earned more than 50% of the copyrights, while the others members who participated in all the songs, divided the rest.

After the accident their relationship became worse. The members needed money and could not wait so long for the next album. But Yuka, who became paraplegic, had many health problems and needed the comprehension of the group. Another accusation was that since his political works demanded more time, they were becoming more important than the band.

The tragic end was in 2002, when Yuka was fired. In his book Não Se Preocupe Comigo (Sextante, 2014), and the movie Marcelo Yuka no Caminho das Setas (Video Forum Filmes, 2012), He shares details about this dramatic situation.

From 2004 on, He almost did not compose popular songs anymore. Did diverse jobs: like political activist (left wing), politician, lecturer, wrote books and presented some TV shows.

A.Y (AFTER YUKA): Now, destabilized, they had to work harder. From this moment on, all of them divided the protagonism: compositions, interviews and anything must be shared equally with all the members of the band.

The success kept on. The albums O Silêncio que Precede o Esporro (Warner, 2003) and Acústico MTV Ao Vivo (Warner, 2005) were very successful! On CD/DVD MTV Ao Vivo, Falcão has an excellent performance, contrary to the typical intimacy of acoustics albums.

For sure a historic recording !

The members Marcelo Lobato, Xandão, Falcão and Lauro, continued learning new instruments and presenting new sonorities to the fans.

They also have others musical projects: Lobato with Afrika Gumbe (influences from Guinea-Bissau), Falcão with Os Loucomotivos, Xandão like musical producer and Lauro with political projects.

During an interview, Falcão said O Rappa is among the best bands of the history. The Brazilian Music Guide agree with him.