Tag: Wendy James

Waiting On Wednesday: A Little Bird by Wendy James

Waiting on Wednesday is a weekly event hosted at Breaking the Spine. The purpose is to spotlight upcoming releases that we are excited for. Expected Publication: 30th November 2021 Published by: Lake Union Publishing A homecoming snares a young woman in a dangerous tangle of lies, secrets, and bad blood in this gripping novel by the … Continue reading Waiting On Wednesday: A Little Bird by Wendy James

Waiting On Wednesday: The Accusation by Wendy James

Waiting on Wednesday is a weekly event hosted at Breaking the Spine. The purpose is to spotlight upcoming releases that we are excited for. Published by: Harper Collins Australia Expected Publication: 20th May 2019 A bizarre abduction. A body of damning evidence. A world of betrayal. Eighteen-year-old Ellie Canning is found shivering and barely conscious … Continue reading Waiting On Wednesday: The Accusation by Wendy James

REVIEW: The Golden Child by Wendy James

Published: 1st February 2017 Publisher: Harper Collins Australia Pages: 348 Format: paperback courtesy of the publisher RRP: $32.99 5/5 Stars Can bad children happen to good mothers? A totally absorbing novel, for readers of Liane Moriarty, Lionel Shriver and Christos Tsiolkas. Blogger Lizzy's life is buzzing, happy, normal. Two gorgeous children, a handsome husband, destiny … Continue reading REVIEW: The Golden Child by Wendy James

Australian Women Writers Challenge 2014 Complete

It's the last day of 2014 (this year has flown by) so I thought I should let you know how I went with the challenge. As it stands today, I have six more half finished reviews for this list that I will hopefully get to in the new year, but I read and reviewed more … Continue reading Australian Women Writers Challenge 2014 Complete

Helene Young, Jenn J Mcleod and Wendy James Are Talking Books Tomorrow!

Hey everyone, just letting everyone know that if you happen to be in the greater Newcastle/Lake Macquarie area you should head on over to CARDIFF library tomorrow at 2pm to listen to three of Australia's very talent authors speaking about their books. Having personally heard two of the three (Helene Young and Wendy James) speak … Continue reading Helene Young, Jenn J Mcleod and Wendy James Are Talking Books Tomorrow!

Australian Women Writers Challenge 2014 Update

So I haven't update my progress on this for a while and thought it was about time I did. Below are the following books I've read so far that meet the requirements of this challenge (aka are written by Australian Women). To date I have read 33 in total and reviewed 15 of them so … Continue reading Australian Women Writers Challenge 2014 Update

Drum Roll Please….

I apologise for the delay in posting this announcement, life got in the way and time got away from me, but I did draw the winner of the signed Lost Girls paperback on the first and somehow forgot to post. And the winner is..... Monique from WriteNot Reviews Congratulations to Monique who won the signed … Continue reading Drum Roll Please….

REVIEW: The Lost Girls by Wendy James

Published: March 1, 2014 Publisher: Penguin Books Australia Format: Ebook (Courtesy of the Publisher and Netgalley) Pages: 270 RRP: $29.99 (Paperback) From the bestselling author of The Mistake comes a hauntingly powerful story about families and secrets and the dark shadows cast by the past. Curl Curl, Sydney, January 1978. Angie's a looker. Or she's … Continue reading REVIEW: The Lost Girls by Wendy James

Teaser Tuesday: The Lost Girls by Wendy James

Teaser Tuesdays is a weekly bookish meme, hosted by MizB of Should Be Reading. Anyone can play along! Just do the following: • Grab your current read • Open to a random page • Share two (2) “teaser” sentences from somewhere on that page. No Spoilers! • Share the title & author, too, so that other TT participants can add the … Continue reading Teaser Tuesday: The Lost Girls by Wendy James