Ray (2004) was directed by Taylor Hackford and stars Jamie Foxx, CJ Sanders, Sharon Warren, Kerry Washington and Larenz Tate. Certificate 12; running time: 152 minutes.

Having to convince Ray Charles that you were the right actor to play him in a biopic must have been one of Hollywood's tougher auditions but Jamie Foxx passed the test with flying colours and went on to win a Best Actor Oscar for his performance.

Foxx is simply magnificent as the blind musician who helped change the course of 20th-century music. Foxx did the movie with prosthetic eyelids over his eyes, rendering him blind. Film crew members had to lead him on and off the set.

Foxx had started playing piano at age three and gone on to earn a university piano scholarship. He auditioned with Charles at side-by-side pianos, which included having to play some tricky jazz by Thelonious Monk. Charles, who had been pretty tough on him, said: "This is it. This kid can do it, see? He’s the one."

The independently produced movie Ray came out in 2004, the year Charles died. It was directed with skill by Taylor Hackford and utilises some of Charles's finest music: from the R&B hits of the mid-Fifties to the groundbreaking country of the early Sixties. In this story, Hit the Road Jack results from a hotel-room lovers' quarrel between Charles and Margie Hendricks (Regina King), one of his backup singers. The story may be exaggerated but it's part of the charm of a vibrant account of the singer's tumultuous life. Sensibly, they use Charles's own vocals for the soundtrack.

Ray takes in the singer's childhood in Florida, and the traumas of his younger brother's death and his own blindness (the result of glaucoma), but does not skirt over his drug problems and womanising.

But the triumph of the film is Foxx, who gives a supremely deft and convincing performance as Charles. The musician planned to attend an opening of the completed film, but he died of liver disease several months before its premiere. He would have been proud of Foxx's starring role.