Ray (2004) is an independent American musical biographical film chronicling the storied life and career of legendary blues musician Ray Charles. Written, produced and directed by Taylor Hackford, "Ray" stars Jamie Foxx in the title role, along with Kerry Washington, Clifton Powell, Harry Lennix, Terrence Howard, Larenz Tate, Richard Schiff, and Regina King.

Charles himself had planned to attend an opening of the completed film, but died of liver disease in June, several months before its premiere.

Plot[]

The story of the life and career of the legendary rhythm and blues musician Ray Charles, from his humble beginnings in the South, where he went blind at age seven, to his meteoric rise to stardom during the 1950s and 1960s. The film touches on his brother's drowning death at a young age, and how it haunted him throughout his life, as well as his struggles with drugs, alcohol, racial issues in the civil rights era, and love interests.

Cast[]

Jamie Foxx as Ray Charles

C. J. Sanders as Young Ray Robinson

Sharon Warren as Ray Charles' mother, Aretha Robinson

Kerry Washington as Della Bea Robinson

Regina King as Margie Hendricks

Renee Wilson as Pat Lyle

Larenz Tate as Quincy Jones

Harry Lennix as Joe Adams

Clifton Powell as Jeff Brown

Curtis Armstrong as Ahmet Ertegun

Richard Schiff as Jerry Wexler

Kurt Fuller as Sam Clark

Richard A. Smith as Til

Patrick Bauchau as Dr. Hacker

Terrence Dashon Howard as Gossie McKee

Chris Thomas King as Lowell Fulson

Wendell Pierce as Wilbur Brassfield

Tequan Richmond as Ray Charles, Jr

Bokeem Woodbine as David "Fathead" Newman

Aunjanue Ellis as Mary Ann Fisher

Denise Dowse as Marlene Andres

Warwick Davis as Oberon

David Krumholtz as Milt Shaw

Johnny O'Neal as Art Tatum

Rick Gomez as Tom Dowd

Awards[]

Foxx received an Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance as well as the Golden Globe, BAFTA, Screen Actors Guild and Critics' Choice awards, becoming the second actor to win all five major lead actor awards for the same performance, and the only one to win the Golden Globe in the Musical or Comedy (rather than the Drama) category.

Images[]