Larenz Tate, best known for his roles in the hit STARZ seriesPower, and films such asMenace II Society, Dead Presidents, and Love Jones. discusses the launch of his newest movie Business Ethics, a dark comedy that follows the story of Zachery Cranston (Larenz Tate), an ambitious and unethical financial tycoon who will stop at nothing to climb the ladder of success.

The movie, scheduled to launch this fall straight to stream October 23rd, is the latest project released independently by TateMen Entertainment, a production company Tate owns alongside his two brothers. TATEMEN ENTERTAINMENT is a Los Angeles-based multi-media production company founded by Larenz Tate, Lahmard Tate,andLarron Tate. Their latest two films, Back To The Goode Life, is currently airing on Showtime, and Deuces is streaming on Netflix. Their hit audio series Bronzeville is available on iTunes and has had over 20 Million downloads. The company presently has several projects in development.

Our conversation was one that covered not just the new movie but how and why he and his brothers decided to take the Audience Choice Film Award winner from the 2019 Newark International Film Festival direct to stream. Key among the points made by Tate had to do with controlling one’s product and creative space rather than leaving it to chance that outside influences could affect when and even if the product would hit the market at all; an inspiring part of the discussion to say the least!

We also got to get a peek at Larenz Tate from the outside looking in as he sees himself; quite an interesting opportunity to let him have the floor and give us an unique perspective. Brilliant and entertaining would be the words I use. Lastly for this particular piece of text, we reminisce as to how we first met some 19 years ago on a week-long tour to South Korea in support of the USO and our troops…Tune In!

Tweet

About the Author

Dr. Jerry Doby Editor-in-Chief of The Hype Magazine, Media and SEO Consultant, Journalist, Ph.D. and retired combat vet. 2023 recipient of The President's Lifetime Achievement Award. Partner at THM Media Group. Member of the U.S. Department of Arts and Culture, the United States Press Agency and ForbesBLK.