Tracie Manke Frame passed away at home surrounded by family on July 31, 2024, after an eight-year battle with Erdheim Chester Disease. Tracie was a beautiful, beloved person in constant service to others. Above all, she held her dear friends and family at the center of her world.

Tracie was born in Bellevue on April 8, 1963, to James and Bonnie Manke. She was the oldest of three children, with younger brothers Mike and Eric.

At the age of two, Tracie's family moved to Lakewood, where she was educated in the Clover Park School District, graduating from Clover Park High School in 1981. Tracie was an outstanding athlete: an accomplished tennis player, star member of the track team, and excellent skier. She also became a ski instructor at Crystal Mountain where her young students loved her gentle approach.

Tracie was a Clover Park cheerleader and as a senior was selected as a Daffodil Princess where she participated in many community service events.

Tracie went on to attend the University of Washington and earn a degree in Speech and Hearing Sciences. Her freshman year she pledged Tri Delta sorority. Tracie loved her years as a Tri-Delt and made many friendships she maintained for the rest of her life.

Upon graduation Tracie became a flight attendant for Western and then Delta Airlines based in Salt Lake City. She enjoyed her years traveling the globe and making her passengers feel special - one of Tracie's many gifts.

In 1989 Tracie met the love of her life, Bill Frame. Within five minutes Bill knew he wanted to marry her. They married on August 17, 1991, and settled in Tacoma. A year later they welcomed their first child, Will. Shortly thereafter Tracie retired from the airline to devote all her time to her family. Two years later twins Kate and Drew were born, and their family was complete. Bill and Tracie were best friends and supported each other unconditionally during their 35-year relationship. Together they loved playing tennis, traveling, skiing, spending time at their White Pass cabin, going on walks, and relaxing in Sun Valley. Most of all they treasured being surrounded by their children, extended family and many friends.

Tracie was a devoted and selfless mother who spent hours volunteering in the kids' classrooms, raising money for the schools, and coaching soccer teams. She never missed her kids' sporting events: baseball and soccer games, swim and track meets and tennis matches. But Tracie always went one step further - she wouldn't dream of showing up without cookies, scones or treat bags. She made every child feel important.

While the kids were in school Tracie could often be seen on a pickleball or tennis court. She was a competitive tennis player on many USTA teams. Coaching tennis at Gig Harbor High School became an important part of her life. She made it a point to know the kids on and off the court. She never came to a practice or a match without her signature treats.

Tracie was a member of Tacoma Junior League, Tacoma Lawn and Tennis Club, and Tacoma Country and Golf Club.

In 2005 the family built a home on Fox Island. Tracie's grace, generosity and welcoming spirit created the heart of their home. Summers were filled with packs of children gathering at the Frames. The door was always open. Tracie loved every minute of it: driving the kids in the boat, serving up meals, and making sure everyone felt special.

Tracie was the ultimate hostess with an elegant attention to detail. Baking and cooking were her specialties, but she excelled at all things beautiful: flowers, candles, and creating the perfect setting for dozens of memorable family birthdays, holiday celebrations and dinner parties for friends. Tracie had a beautiful smile and great sense of humor, usually accompanied by a wink and funny aside.

Tracie's passing leaves a hole in the lives of many. Her husband Bill will keep her in his heart for eternity. She will be dearly missed and fondly remembered for her unwavering kindness, boundless love, and the indelible mark she left on all who knew her.

Tracie is preceded in death by her father-in-law Bill Frame of Yakima.

Tracie is survived by her husband Bill Frame of Fox Island, children Will Frame (fiancé Dr. Channi Silence) of Seattle, Kate Frame of Seattle and Drew Frame of Gig Harbor, parents Jim and Bonnie Manke of Lakewood, brothers Mike Manke (Claire) of Lakewood, Eric Manke (Dana) of Tacoma, mother-in-law Nancy Frame of Yakima, sisters-in-law Carolyn Frame of University Place, Susannah Frame (Stefen Swedin) of Seattle, brother-in-law Frank Frame (Courtney) of Yakima, nieces Susannah Frame, Taylor Frame, Jane Manke, Megan Manke, and Brynn Manke, nephews Scott Mills, Brett Manke, Max Frame, Lee Swedin, RJ Manke, Reid Manke, Kyle Manke, Tommy Frame, and Nicky Swedin and special friends Santana Andrade of Gig Harbor, Zach Hinz of Fox Island, and numerous cousins, aunts and uncles.

The family gives heartfelt thanks to Tracie's physicians Dr. Frank Senecal and Dr. Eli Diamond, and her caregivers Tabitha, Caroline, Josie, and Lucy. The family is also grateful for the many friends and family members who donated in Tracie's honor in 2017 to the Frame Family Fund at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.

A Celebration of Life will be held August 11 from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. at Tacoma Country and Golf Club in Lakewood. Memorials may be made to South Sound Care Foundation or the charity of your choice.