VANCOUVER — Risking it all for the ball: Vancouver Whitecaps’ Pedro Vite, left, kicks Sporting Kansas City’s Erik Thommy between his legs as they vie for the ball during the second half of an MLS soccer match in Vancouver, British Columbia, Wednesday, July 17, 2024. The Whitecaps won the game 2-1, with substitutes proving key, according to The Province online edition.

The Whitecaps wound up kicking in an own goal (causing the opposing team to score) in the 34th minute but were able to clinch the game.

BEIJING — Hopefully, China’s high-tech vision of the future includes clean air: An early morning view of the skyline is seen in Beijing, China, Thursday, July 18, 2024, where a meeting focused on China’s slowing economy and its shift in manufacturing from toys to become a top producer of high-tech goods, such as aircraft, electronics and advanced computer chips, according to a report from the state-run Xinhua News Agency that the Associated Press covered.

However, China’s double-digit production growth in technology that could help the environment is overpowering foreign markets with items that aren’t selling domestically. These include electric vehicles and solar panels.

GERMANY — Nature’s revenge — one home on the brink of a climate catastrophe: An abandoned house stands near the eroding bank of Brodten near Travemunde at the Baltic Sea, Germany, Thursday, July 18, 2024. The house that hosted young people during vacations was closed down due to safety reasons.

Traditionally a relaxed Baltic Sea resort and port for ferries between the northern German coast and Scandinavia, Travemünde Beach looks over the Bay of Lübeck and is about 26 minutes by car from the town of Lübeck.

BRAZIL — Large-scale sugar production’s latest taste sensation: fish marinated in sugar and ethanol byproducts … Thousands of dead fish lie on the banks of the Piracicaba River in a rural area of Piracicaba, Sao Paulo state, Brazil, Wednesday, July 17, 2024. The state’s environmental agency alleges that the cause of their death is irregular dumping of industrial waste into the river.

Prosecutors have requested a full report into the conditions of the water and are waiting for further technical information before taking the next steps regarding civil and criminal liability.

The Piracicaba River crosses a protected area named Tanqua, so it is possible the company committed an environmental crime, Sao Paulo’s public security secretary told the Associated Press and the United States’ National Public Radio.

MILWAUKEE — A controversial statement considering the life that was actually lost: A man takes a selfie of a poster of Thomas Matthew Crooks, the man who attempted to assassinate former President Donald Trump, standing on Water Street during the third day of the 2024 Republican National Convention near the Fiserv Forum, Wednesday, July 17, 2024, in Milwaukee. The FBI is still trying to ascertain Crooks’ motive and whether he used his father’s AR-style rifle without his father’s consent or knowledge.

However, the Associated Press reported on Thursday, July 18, that the now-deceased gunman’s phone contained photos of Trump and President Biden, other federal officials and information on both major parties’ convention locations.

PENNSYLVANIA — Casualties of political violence mourned while Trump amps up his campaign: People embrace during a vigil for Corey Comperatore, the former fire chief shot and killed at a weekend rally for former President Donald Trump, Wednesday, July 17, 2024, at Lernerville Speedway in Sarver, Pa.

Comperatore, who, after retiring as fire chief for his town, worked as a project and tooling engineer, had just turned 50 the month before, on June 14, according to an obituary. His funeral was held in private on Thursday, July 18.

MILWAUKEE — Trump’s selection for vice hillbilly: Republican vice presidential candidate Sen. J.D. Vance, R-Ohio, stands on stage with family members after speaking at the third day of the Republican National Convention at the Fiserv Forum, Wednesday, July 17, 2024, in Milwaukee.

Vance, who is the first millennial to be on a major party presidential ticket, will turn 40 on August 2.

MILWAUKEE — The Republican party is allegedly not a cult; for Trumpism, that’s still debatable: Delegates put a bandage on their right ear during the Republican National Convention on Wednesday, July 17, 2024, in Milwaukee. Trump, who will officially accept his party’s nomination Thursday night, will be speaking publicly for the first time since a would-be assassin’s gunfire disrupted a rally in Pennsylvania last weekend.

The failed attempt galvanized Trump, who acknowledged changing his acceptance speech to focus on national unity rather on the incumbent President, whose close allies are pressuring him to end his re-election campaign before the Democrats hold their convention.

PARIS — It doesn’t get more romantic than this: Alejandro Machuca, left, proposes to his girlfriend, Aura Guizar, both of Guadalajara, Mexico, in front of the Eiffel Tower decorated with the Olympic rings, Wednesday, July 17, 2024, while on vacation in Paris. She said yes.

Perhaps the International Olympic Committee will grant the newly minted couple complimentary tickets to some of the athletic events.

LAS VEGAS — COVID’s on the rise again; wash your hands! President Joe Biden and Maritza Rodriguez, Biden for President Latina adviser, greet patrons at Lindo Michoacan Mexican Restaurant during a stop in Las Vegas, on Wednesday, July 17, 2024.