PINE BLUFF, Ark. – The University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff (UAPB) Vesper Choir will be performing at the Grand Prairie Center Festival of Arts with musical phenom Ethan Bortnick. In conjunction with the pre-celebration week of the 58th Annual Grand Prairie Festival of Arts, the second concert of the Grand Prairie Center 2014-2015 Performance Series funded by the Phillips Community College Foundation is set for Sunday, September 21st at 3 p.m. in the Riceland Auditorium.

Ethan Bortnick in Concert with special guest Damian McGinty will perform. Thirteen-year-old Ethan Bortnick has moved audiences nationally and internationally as a pianist, composer, singer, entertainer, and a driven humanitarian dedicated to combining his musical pursuits with his charity work. At three years of age, the Hollywood, Florida, native begged his parents for piano lessons and discovered an uncanny ability to hear a song once and play it back note for note – the musical equivalent of a photographic memory. Ethan has toured the world, connecting with diverse audiences in countries such as South Africa, Brazil, Canada and Australia. In 2011, he made history as the youngest entertainer to headline a show in Las Vegas. Ethan was recently certified by the Guinness World Records as The World’s Youngest Solo Musician to Headline His Own Tour. He has also earned the distinction of being named the youngest musician to be endorsed by a premier instrument manufacturer through his Gibson Guitar/Baldwin Piano sponsorship. His deep musical knowledge, broad tastes, and staggering talents make his performances a treat for the whole family. McGinty will join Ethan onstage during the September 21st performance in Riceland Auditorium. Damian is 21 years old and comes from Derry in Northern Ireland. He has been singing and performing for over a decade and won his first music competition when he was six. His musical influences are big band and swing classic artists such as Dean Martin and Frank Sinatra. Damian is also a huge Michael Buble fan. Damian’s public profile was significantly boosted in 2006 when he won a singing competition and was invited to make appearances at various concerts in Northern Ireland including the Millennium Forum for the Derry City football team. After winning “The Glee Project,” Damian landed a guest star role in Fox’s Hit Television Series “Glee” as foreign exchange student Rory Flanagan from Ireland who arrives as a sophomore at McKinley High in the third season episode “Pot o’ Gold” – first broadcast on November 1, 2011. Damian has sung four solo covers on the show and appeared in many group performances.