Joe Scalissi is an internationally recognized entertainer, best known for his tribute to Dean Martin. Mr. Scalissi has garnered praise from countless audiences, talent scouts and agents across the country as perhaps the most authentic and accurate portrayal of Dean Martin known today: “Joe Scalissi as Dean Martin was simply put, the best we have seen so far. As soon as he stepped on stage, he became Dean Martin. The voice is rich and smooth. The look is Dean to a T.” (Las Vegas Review-Journal, August 2006)

After taking top prize at a Wisconsin impersonator contest in 1996, Mr. Scalissi continued to perform at local venues until capturing the attention of Neil Daniels, current president of the Dean Martin Fan Center. He was asked to perform at the annual Dean Martin celebration in Steubenville, Ohio in 1998 and asked to headline the festival for several years. His reputation for stellar performances grew steadily, culminating in his current in-demand status for audiences across the country.

Since 1998, Mr.Scalissi has entertained audiences as Dean Martin in the Rio Hotel and Casino (Las Vegas), Greek Isles (Las Vegas), Disneyland Theatre (Anaheim, CA), Rio Del Mar (San Juan, Puerto Rico), Hotel Del Coronado (San Diego, CA), Grand Sierra Resort- formerly MGM Grand (Reno, NV), Raffles (Dubai-United Arab Emirates) as well as countless other performances throughout the United States and Canada.

Past clients include: St. Jude Childrens’ Hospital, Susan G. Komen Foundation, Government of Puerto Rico, Andy North Golf Classic, and Singer Sewing Corporation. A partial list of of Mr. Scalissi’s performance credits can be found on the Credits page.

Mr. Scalissi’s travels in 2011 and 2012 include performances in Dubai (United Arab Emirates), Las Vegas, Palm Springs (CA), Reno (NV), Long Island (NY) and Ontario, Canada. His voice (as Dean Martin) was featured in a 2012 McDonald’s TV commercial airing in Europe.

In 2013 Mr. Scalissi was chosen by World Wrestling Entertainment to record the song The Midas Touch to honor Donald Trump as the new owner of Monday Night Raw.