The Hollywood Rotary Foundation has been raising funds for college scholarships for Hollywood high school seniors and supporting local youth organizations at its annual auction since 1958. It is one of the oldest, continuous charity fundraising events in South Florida and is an annual Hollywood favorite.

The event features a plethora of gifts and merchandise to choose from, including gift certificates for hotel stays, vacation rentals, cruises, airline tickets, restaurants, and tickets for performances & sporting events. Merchandise will include art, decorative items, appliances, tools, electronics, jewelry, toys, wine & spirits, and an African Safari Adventure. We sat down with the 67th Annual Auction Chair and Hollywood Rotary Club President-elect 2024/2025, Anthony Gambone to learn more.

Tell us about the Hollywood Rotary Foundation Auction

There is so much! It goes back to 1958 when the Hollywood Rotary Club held its first “Rotary Radio Auction”! The five-day event was broadcast from the Rotary clubhouse, and listeners would phone in their bids. The auction is the oldest continuous charity fundraising event in Hollywood.

The BULL CLUB raffle is a fun item that is still a big part of the event. During the early years of the auction, a living, breathing bull was caged on our clubhouse lawn and the winner was delivered steaks. The live bull and meat prize gave way in the 1990’s to CASH. But the name stuck! Today, kids might ride a rubber inflatable bull on the clubhouse lawn. But make no mistake about it: a $10 raffle ticket is a chance to win a cash prize of $1,000! And, that’s no BULL!

In addition to lots of fun from celebrity auctioneers, there’s the incredible food. From the best seafood paella from Buleria Catering to several Hollywood restaurants like China Hollywood, Capone’s Italian, Miramar Bakery, and more. The event kicks off on Thursday evening with an old-fashioned backyard BBQ.

That sounds amazing! What programs do the proceeds support?

The event supports college and vocational school scholarships awarded annually to McArthur HS, South Broward HS, Chaminade-Madonna, and Hollywood Hills HS. The Rotary Foundation is a longtime advocate and proud supporter of Joe DiMaggio Children’s Hospital, The YMCA of South Florida, The Boys and Girls Club of Broward County, and The Hollywood Police Athletic League (PAL).

The Auction also supports many other local charities such as “Food for Thought” (formerly Pack-A-Sack), feeding elementary and middle school kids, and The Community Enhancement Collaboration (CEC) Hollywood’s family food pantry.

The Auction lasts for multiple days. It must be huge! Is it a good event for the kids?

It is a huge auction! The auction is a family-friendly FUN event with several generations of Hollywood residents attending each year. Kids are the “floorwalkers,” having fun walking and showing bidders auction items around the room. Lotsy-Dotsy from Joe DiMaggio Children’s Hospital is scheduled to make a special guest appearance this year, and an autographed Lotsy-Dotsy Doll will be auctioned this year.

Tell us about the Hollywood Rotary Foundation

The Hollywood Rotary Foundation is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization that promotes “Service Above Self” and goodwill throughout our community. Since its inception, the Rotary Foundation has donated more than three million dollars to youth projects in our community. And the Club has put back in our community over $5,000,000 in the past 99 years, with $50,000 each year in scholarships to the Hollywood’s four High Schools.

Our goal is always to raise as much money as possible with the community’s help and donations for the many youth service organizations and nonprofit initiatives we support.

Sounds incredible! How can our readers participate?

We hope you can attend and enjoy the Friends, Food, and FUNraising!

And if not, perhaps you will donate a unique item to be auctioned* or buy a BULL CLUB raffle ticket for a chance to win $1,000!

Over the years, the Rotary Club of Hollywood wishes to THANK YOU for making the Auction a huge success! Proceeds are now empowering our community through scholarships for deserving students, and supporting many other community youth service organizations. Your support fuels our mission. A special shoutout to you for your invaluable contribution. Together, we’re shaping future leaders!

All Proceeds from the Rotary Club of Hollywood Foundation** Auction and BULL CLUB Raffle donations are used to fund youth organizations, non-profit group initiatives, scholarships and vocational education in our community.

*Your donated items can be dropped off at the Rotary Club of Hollywood Clubhouse located 2349 Taylor St., Hollywood, FL 33020. Please phone ahead to arrange a drop off time: (954) 921-4500 or call to arrange pickup of your donations.

**The Hollywood Rotary Foundation is a 501(c) 3 organization Tax ID# 59-1926198 Florida Dept. of

Agriculture #CH1038.