When a 26-foot-tall statue of Marilyn Monroe first came to Palm Springs in 2012 for a two-year stay, some saw a tasteless tourist attraction. They criticized the public art — depicting the blonde actress posing over a blustery New York subway gate — as a magnet for photos of people peeking under Monroe's upturned skirt.

Many, however, embraced "Forever Marilyn."

Beloved by locals and tourists alike, it captured Monroe's beauty, they said, and celebrated the city's history as a desert playground for Hollywood elite like Frank Sinatra, Dean Martin and, of course, Monroe.

The statue became a sort of downtown community gathering point, with the city and partners hosting a "Forever Marilyn" look-alike contest and a "Forever Marilyn" film series. The Knitting Guild of the Desert even stitched leg warmers for the statue.

Now city officials and business leaders are preparing to bring "Forever Marilyn" back to Palm Springs permanently.

'Everybody knew': Palm Springs women expose 'the casting couch' as sexual abuse territory in Hollywood

But much has changed in the national zeitgeist since her first stay. The #MeToo era has shaken the foundation of Hollywood — and the nation — exposing the widespread prevalence of sexual harassment and abuse in the film industry and beyond.

The movement has brought new awareness to the legacies of movie insiders and actors like Monroe, who was open about being sexually abused as a child and hounded by men in Hollywood, and also used sex to advance her career.

It has also cast a new light on Palm Springs' love for vintage Hollywood, from the city's Walk of Stars — which immortalizes more than 400 celebrities on the downtown drag, including Sinatra and Elvis Presley, who had checkered pasts — to the statue of Monroe.

City leaders, area residents and culture experts are now debating the meaning of "Forever Marilyn," sparking deeper questions about whether Palm Springs should continue celebrating its ties to the Golden Age of Hollywood, even if it means glossing over the industry's dark history of sexual harassment and abuse.

Should Marilyn's past be celebrated in the present?

Whether people view the statue as a feel-good piece of public art or a monument to objectification depends, in part, on how they interpret the memory of Monroe and the film that inspired the artwork.

Monroe, who was born Norma Jeane Mortenson in 1926, grew up in foster homes and an orphanage, and was married for the first time at age 16. She became a popular pin-up model during the Korean War and ultimately a Hollywood star, who also struggled with substance abuse, depression and anxiety.

"She always wanted to be a great actress," said Lois Banner, a retired professor of history and gender studies at the University of Southern California, and author of "Marilyn: The Passion and the Paradox." "She never wanted to be a blonde bombshell. She did that to become famous."

Monroe founded her own film production company in 1954; her first independent production, "The Prince and the Showgirl," debuted in 1957. She achieved box office success with the 1955 movie "The Seven Year Itch," which inspired the "Forever Marilyn" statue. She won a Golden Globe for Best Actress for her role in "Some Like it Hot" in 1959.

Banner said Monroe's career was driven not only by her talent and training, but also sex.

"She knew men were abusing her," Banner said. "At the same time, she was sleeping with them to get to the top. She did anything possible to get to the top."

After her first marriage ended, Monroe married baseball star Joe DiMaggio and, later, playwright Arthur Miller. She died of a barbiturate overdose in 1962 at age 36.

Two years after the #MeToo movement swept the nation, Banner views the actress as "both a victim and a survivor."

Monroe talked openly about her history of sexual abuse, at a time when people believed that women were responsible for any abuse inflicted upon them, Banner said.

Monroe also spoke out about the "wolves" she had met in Hollywood decades before other women opened up about their experiences with former film producer Harvey Weinstein and other powerful men.

"If you are born with what the world calls sex appeal, you can either let it wreck you or use it to your advantage in the tough show business struggle and it isn't always easy to pick the right route," Monroe wrote in a January 1953 article in Motion Picture and Television Magazine.

Monroe described many of the "predatory men" she had encountered, from a Hollywood composer who cornered her at a party, to a married screenwriter who tried to wine and dine her, to a policeman she caught prowling outside her window.

“The Seven Year Itch” capitalized on the sway she held over men.

"The statue happens to represent an iconic moment from a film in which Marilyn was brilliant," said Michael Musto, a former columnist for The Village Voice. "In 'The Seven Year Itch,' she is witty and fun and her beauty mainly serves to show the lascivious mind of the married male lead character.

"If we're going to act ashamed of it, then I think political correctness has gone way too far," he said.

But for Micol Hebron, an associate professor in Chapman University's art department, the "Forever Marilyn" statue represents another wolf stalking Monroe.

“This statue of Marilyn as an object of desire is catering exclusively to the patriarchy and the cis-hetero male gaze,” Hebron said. “Is this the primary gaze of the community in Palm Springs?”

Locals split over statue's symbolism

City officials have said "Forever Marilyn" belongs in the desert because the actress has a rich history in Palm Springs.

Bruno "Bernard of Hollywood" Bernard photographed Monroe at the historic Racquet Club in 1949 and introduced her to talent agent Johnny Hyde, who was dazzled by her at the swimming pool, The Desert Sun previously reported.

Four years later, as Monroe was shooting "The Seven Year Itch," Bernard took the iconic photo of the actress, holding her skirt between her legs. Artist Seward Johnson later transformed that image into "Forever Marilyn."

Deep dive: Did Marilyn Monroe live in Palm Springs? Depends who you ask

Some area residents say the statue celebrates Monroe's beauty and legacy, as well as her connection to Palm Springs' storied past.

"Marilyn, in some way, is kind of a sister to us here — and in our industry," Leanna Bonamici, founder and president of the nonprofit Palm Springs Women in Film & Television, said in an email to The Desert Sun. "I think it is a positive move to bring her home."

Palm Springs City Council member Christy Holstege said the statue doesn't promote objectification of women. She said it is a positive addition to the city.

"I think Marilyn, the statue, makes a lot of people happy and I don't think that's what people are thinking of when they see the statue," said Holstege, who describes herself as a victim of sexual assault who has dedicated her legal career to fighting for victims of sexual assault and domestic abuse. "I remember when it was there in 2014 and the joy it brought people visiting Palm Springs."

City officials have yet to finalize details on when they expect the statue back or where it may go, but they have said both a new downtown park or the Town and Country Center are options. PS Resorts Chairman Aftab Dada said he has had informal discussions with the city about a loan for his nonprofit — which aims to boost tourism in Palm Springs — to purchase the "seven-figure" piece.

February return? Plan floated to borrow city funds

Palm Springs icon: 'Forever Marilyn' statue to return to Palm Springs

Palm Springs Mayor Robert Moon said the council has not had any formal discussions about a loan. He said he does not yet have enough information to weigh in on the possibility of a loan, but is "100% supportive" of the effort to bring the statue home.

"I think the statue is totally appropriate for Palm Springs," Moon said.

"This political correctness is running amok," he added. "We have to do a little reality check on this."

But Palm Springs-based political activist Ellen Lockert, 72, said the statue sends the wrong message to women.

"I spent most of my life fighting objectification and bias," Lockert said. "I created a successful life for myself but I had to spend a lot of time overcoming people looking at me as a sexual being instead of somebody who was intelligent, capable and accomplished.

"I'm wary of all of that and I'm hoping the next generation of women can be seen as full three-dimensional people," she added. "Having this giant, over-sized statue in this town, focusing on that objectification, is disturbing to me."

Banner, the Monroe biographer, said the "Forever Marilyn" statue is "totally inappropriate in the #MeToo era."

"It gives people the wrong impression of her," Banner said.

If Palm Springs erects the statue depicting Monroe as a sexual goddess, Banner explained, the city should also install an additional piece of art that celebrates her as an intellectual actress.

Hebron, meanwhile, called the statue a “missed opportunity.”

She pointed to Palm Springs’ rich history of modernism, its art museum and the Desert X contemporary art biennial, and said the city in recent years has “been really upping its game with regard to contemporary art.”

By installing the statue, she said, the city is overlooking the chance to showcase the work of diverse, up-and-coming Southern California artists.

“It is so anathema and anachronistic to bring a piece like this sculpture into this conversation,” Hebron said.

Other Seward Johnson statues debated

Before "Forever Marilyn" first arrived in Palm Springs, she was displayed along the Magnificent Mile in Chicago. There, she was widely panned by the local media as "creepy and sexist" and "ultimately forgettable."

The statue was vandalized at least three times there, according to the Chicago Tribune.

It's not the only statue by Johnson to whip up controversy.

In February, police officers in Sarasota, Fla., found Johnson's approximately 30-foot-tall statue of a World War II veteran kissing a woman — known as "Unconditional Surrender" — with "#MeToo" painted in red on the left leg of the woman, according to the Sarasota Herald Tribune.

The statue is based on an iconic photograph of a sailor embracing a woman in Times Square in August 1945, when Japan announced its surrender, effectively ending the war. Following the graffiti, however, local and national media reports questioned whether the artwork actually represents an act of sexual assault.

Public funds were not used to acquire the statue, said City of Sarasota spokesperson Jan Thornburg. It was gifted to the city and accepted by the city commission more than nine years ago, under the condition that it be owned and maintained by a foundation, she explained.

Thornburg said the statue remains popular.

“Not a day goes by that we don’t see at least one couple by the statue, reenacting the photo,” she said.

There’s a similar "Unconditional Surrender" statue outside the U.S.S. Midway Museum in San Diego.

Alexis Ortega, the director of community engagement at the LGBT Community Center of the Desert in Palm Springs, said conversations about "Forever Marilyn" and other works of art are constructive, as the community navigates the #MeToo era.

"At the end of the day, there are pieces of art and cultural significance that don't get enough space or attention," Ortega said. "Being critical about what we bring attention to doesn't hurt anything, and that's part of what this whole conversation and (what) #MeToo is about — being more critical about who we uplift and how we're uplifting that."

Desert Sun reporter Brian Blueskye covers arts and entertainment. He can be reached at brian.blueskye@desertsun.com or (760)778-4617. Desert Sun reporter Rebecca Plevin contributed to this story.