Beasley Broadcast Group, owner and operator of 43 stations (27 FM and 16 AM) in 11 large- and mid-size markets in the United States, announced the winners of its annual Company Operating Awards.

At its annual gathering of general managers, Beasley recognizes achievements and operating success from individual employees and radio stations. The 2012 honorees include:

Radio Station of the Year — WKXC(FM), Augusta,Ga.

General Manager of the Year — Kent Dunn, Augusta, Ga.

Program Director of the Year — Shelly Easton, WXTU(FM), Philadelphia

Sales Manager of the Year — John Jaras, WPOW(FM), Miami

Engineer of the Year — Lamar Smith, Las Vegas

Business Manager of the Year — Jesus Novo, Las Vegas

CEO Award of Excellence — Danny Highsmith, Regional Vice President, Fayetteville, N.C.

“The lady and gentlemen we honor in 2012 exemplify the very best qualities in radio management. They are dedicated and talented leaders and it truly brings me pleasure to salute them and acknowledge their efforts,” Founder, Chairman and CEO George G. Beasley said.

WKXC(FM) was selected as Beasley’s Radio Station of the Year based on overall ratings and revenue as well as its community service, according to a release. Kicks 99 is one of the highest-rated country music stations in America and the number one station in the Augusta market. Most recently, WKXC was named one of five 2012Country Music Association Radio Station of the Year finalists in the small market category.

Kent Dunn was named General Manager of the Year for his work on the Augusta cluster. Dunn joined Beasley in 1991, working in as general manager and/or market manager since 1993. Dunn oversees WKXC(FM), WHHD(FM), WGAC(AM/FM), WDRR(FM), WGUS(AM/FM), WCHZ(FM) and WRDW(AM).

Beasley gave its Program Director of the Year award to Shelly Easton at WXTU(FM) in Philadelphia for keeping the station consistently at the top of the market.

John Jaras, from WPOW(FM) in Miami was named General Sales Manager of the Year. Power 96 continues to deliver solid results for their clients under Jaras’ leadership, a release explained. Jaras has been in this role since 1988.

Engineer of the Year Lamar Smith, handles five radio stations in the Las Vegas market. Smith took on the role of director of engineering for the Las Vegas cluster in 2011. Under his guidance, Beasley debuted HD Radio Advertiser Experience on KCYE(FM) during the 2012 NAB show this past spring.

Beasley’s Business Manager of the Year was also located in the Las Vegas market. Jesus Novo became the business manager for the cluster in 2009. According to a release he was recognized for demonstrating excellence in all areas of the stations’ business operations including financial reporting, accounts receivable and payable management, payroll and human resources.

Beasley gave its “CEO Award of Excellence” to Regional Vice President Danny Highsmith. He joined Beasley in 1971 and was named Fayetteville’s general manager in 1974. Highsmith is the current past-president of the North Carolina Association of Broadcasters and was named this year’s recipient of NCAB’s prestigious Wade Hargrove Community Leadership Award.