Despite being tied for third place, model-actress Elisabetta Canalis and her partner, Val Chmerkovskiy, were voted off Dancing With the Stars Tuesday night.

Immediately after, they stopped by Jimmy Kimmel Live!, where Kimmel introduced them by joking that, “Americans hate beautiful women.”

Canalis — who is perhaps best known in the U.S. for dating George Clooney — told Kimmel that it was disappointing she was kicked off.

PHOTOS: ‘Dancing With the Stars’ Season 13: Rehearsals

When asked if they like each other given the fight between Canalis and Chmerkovskiy shown this season, she said, “We get along. But of course we had a little fight and they showed it.”

“We kept it real from the beginning,” added Chmerkovskiy, who is brother to longtime Dancing With the Stars pro Maksim Chmerkovskiy. “There was a lot of laughter they didn’t show. Anyone smiling on camera… is lying. I’m not a great actor. I just behaved naturally.”

“I’m not easy to teach how to dance, trust me,” added Canalis.

PHOTOS: ‘Dancing With the Stars’ Season 13 Cast Official Photos

“We got along very well. She’s amazing and beautiful and kind,” said Chmerkovskiy.

The partners received 21 points — putting them ahead of David Arquette, Chaz Bono, Hope Solo and Carson Kressley going into the results show. They were, however, the second couple kicked off after Ron Artest (aka Metta World Peace), who went home last week.

“The public saved us, and today they penalized us,” said Canalis.

When Kimmel asked if that’s because they’re foreigners (Canalis is Italian, Chmerkovskiy is Ukrainian), Canalis said, “I hope not… We don’t have a big fan base as everybody has because I’m not American. I’m not a celebrity here. This was [Chmerkovskiy’s] first season.”

“And no one likes Val!” joked Kimmel.

“He is a lot of fun actually, more fun than me actually,” said Canalis.

Kimmel asked if Chmerkovskiy’s brother Maks was happy he joined the ABC series.

“He was ecstatic. We’re very supportive of one another. He’s very upset I’m gone.” he replied.

Ten contestants remain in competition for the mirror-ball trophy: Arquette, Bono, Solo, Kressley, Nancy Grace, Ricki Lake, Rob Kardashian, Kristin Cavallari, J.R. Martinez and Chynna Phillips.

RELATED:

‘Dancing With the Stars’ Results: Another Contestant Eliminated

PHOTOS: ‘Dancing With the Stars’ Season 13 Cast

‘Dancing With the Stars” Nancy Grace Denies Wardrobe Malfunction

TV REVIEW: ‘Dancing With the Stars’ Season 13 Premiere

‘Dancing With the Stars” Nancy Grace Denies Wardrobe Malfunction

Nancy Grace Suffers ‘Dancing With the Stars’ Wardrobe Malfunction (Video)