Maks Chmerkovskiy has an exciting new gig! The professional dancer starred on ABC’s Dancing With the Stars for 17 seasons before he exited the show in 2017. Now, he will be moving over to Fox’s rival series So You Think You Can Dance and trying his hand at judging. Ahead of his SYTYCD debut, fans might be wondering why Maks Chmerkovskiy left Dancing With the Stars in the first place. We have all the details below.

The Ukrainian-born dancer and Latin ballroom champion first joined DWTS during its second season. He starred on the show on and off for 17 seasons, eventually winning his first and only Mirrorball Trophy during Season 18 with olympic ice skater Meryl Davis. DWTS also introduced him to his now-wife, pro dancer Peta Murgatroyd. The couple got married in 2017 and are currently expecting their third child together. Chmerkovskiy last competed on the show in Season 25 with actress Vanessa Lachey. He exited shortly after and has made it clear that he will likely never return to the series, despite his wife, brother Val Chmerkovskiy and sister-in-law Jenna Johnson all still serving as pros. Instead, he is moving networks and will serve as a judge on the upcoming Season 18 of So You Think You Can Dance. Joining him on the judging panel is returning judge JoJo Siwa and former SYTYCD contestant Allison Holker.

So, why did Maks Chmerkovskiy leave Dancing With the Stars? Keep reading to find out.

Why did Maks Chmerkovskiy leave Dancing With the Stars?

Why did Maks Chmerkovskiy leave Dancing With the Stars? Maks Chmerkovskiy left Dancing With the Stars after 17 season in 2017. Shortly after his departure, the dancer told MassLive that he had “other interests at the moment.” He added that he would have loved to have been made a judge, but noted: “It’s not my call. It’s not up to me.” He continued, “Everything that is up to me, I do at 100 percent and then give it my all. I just don’t think I can do the show as a professional dancer at 100 percent and give it my all anymore. I am at a different point in my life.”

At the time, he and Murgatroyd had just welcomed their oldest son, Shai. While appearing on The Real in 2018, Chmerkovskiy revealed that his family was another reason why he left the show. “I’m a dad, I’m a husband,” he said, adding that “your chemistry changes when you have a child, things look different, they seem different.”

In September 2023, Chmerkovskiy told The Blast that he is still a fan of the show, but has no plans to ever return. “The reality is that we just grew up,” he told the outlet, adding that he felt it was time to “move on” because the show was “going through some changes and some transformations.”

“Today, the show is kind of like full circle, and back to the format that I’m more fond of … The components like Alfonso [Ribeiro] taking over of what Tom Bergeron used to be. It was a huge moment in the show’s progression,” he continued. “I believe the cast of dancers is great, and I strongly feel like fan and I want the show to stay on and I want to continue to help promote it and I am doing that because I am still a dancer, I am still dancing, I just am not dancing on television.”

Now, seven years after his departure, Chmerkovskiy has finally transitioned into judging and will be taking his seat in the judge’s chair on So You Think You Can Dance. Ahead of the Season 18 premiere, the former “bad boy” of DWTS told USA Today that he is excited for viewers to see a different side of him. “I feel like there was one Maks that was always being portrayed, badly or not,” he said. “This was all me; I take responsibility for all the portrayal. But people will see a Maks that no one ever really got to see before.”

Chmerkovskiy is also taking inspiration from late DWTS judge Len Goodman as he steps into his new role. “Len Goodman is a big influence; I’ve never said it before,” he said. “As an adjudicator on a televised show, the way he presented himself consistently, I’m definitely looking at him and learning. I want to establish myself as someone who has that kind of longevity and expertise.”