Picking a cooking fat used to be easy: You only had vegetable oil, Crisco, and olive oil. Now there’s grass-fed beef tallow, organic duck fat, and artisanal ghee. Here’s how to sort out the bull and improve your diet.

Rachel Meltzer Warren

DON’T FALL FOR FAKE “Extra-virgin” olive oil undergoes minimal processing. But a report from UC Davis found that 73 percent of imported extra-virgin olive oils in the U. S. from top brands failed “extra-virgin” standards tests. Look for certification like NAOOA or COOC on the label for trusted oils tested regularly for purity, quality, and nutrients. TURN OUT THE “LIGHT” “‘Light’ does not mean better for you,” says Angel Planells, a Seattle-based dietitian. The term indicates the oil has been further refined to remove flavor. Light olive oil tastes flavorless, similar to vegetable oil. Looking to save calories? Cut back on how much oil you use. All cooking fats contain about 100 to 130 calories per tablespoon. That’s usually about the amount you need for cooking. DOWNSIZE YOUR JUG Fats are sensitive to light, temperature,…

You're reading a preview of

Men's Health (Digital) - 1 Issue, September 2018

DiscountMags is a licensed distributor (not a publisher) of the above content and Publication through Zinio LLC. Accordingly, we have no editorial control over the Publications. Any opinions, advice, statements, services, offers or other information or content expressed or made available by third parties, including those made in Publications offered on our website, are those of the respective author(s) or publisher(s) and not of DiscountMags. DiscountMags does not guarantee the accuracy, completeness, truthfulness, or usefulness of all or any portion of any publication or any services or offers made by third parties, nor will we be liable for any loss or damage caused by your reliance on information contained in any Publication, or your use of services offered, or your acceptance of any offers made through the Service or the Publications. For content removal requests, please contact Zinio.