It’s easy to forget how much we depend on our bones, but if you’ve ever fractured one, you know better than to take them for granted.

Bone is living tissue, constantly breaking down and rebuilding. If the rate of breakdown exceeds the rate of formation, then bones weaken over time, leading to osteoporosis.

While genetics contributes to osteoporosis risk, physical activity and good nutrition are preventive, says Angel Planells, RDN, a dietitian in Seattle and a spokesperson for the American Academy of Dietetics.

“It’s never too late to improve our bone health, no matter what age we’re at in life,” Planells says.

Whole Foods Are Best for Bone Health

Nutrition over the life span plays a key role in building and maintaining strong bones.

“It’s very important because, if you don’t have certain adequate nutrients, you are going to lose bone, which sets you up for having fractures,” says Joan Lappe, PhD, RN, a professor at the College of Nursing at Creighton University in Omaha, Nebraska.

Both Planells and Dr. Lappe recommend trying to meet your nutrient needs through diet, adding supplements only if necessary and under the guidance of your doctor.

Indeed, while it’s well-established that calcium and vitamin D are important nutrients for bone health, the efficacy of supplementing your diet with these nutrients to prevent fractures is controversial. A 2018 report concluded there wasn’t enough evidence to recommend calcium and vitamin D supplements for fracture prevention in healthy adults, though this doesn’t apply to people diagnosed with osteoporosis or vitamin D deficiency. Vitamin D and calcium supplements can also increase the risk of kidney stones, the report says, so it’s best to discuss your individual risks and benefits with a healthcare provider. (1)

On the other hand, getting these nutrients from foods means that they come packaged with other vitamins and minerals that may also be important for bone health, and emerging research is finding that your overall diet pattern may be important. (2)

For example, a study published in 2017 concluded that better bone health is associated with eating more vegetables, fruits, whole grains, beans and nuts, poultry and fish, and low-fat dairy products. (3)

Beyond filling your plate with a variety of foods, it’s worth ensuring that you eat good sources of the most important nutrients for bones: calcium, vitamin D, protein, and flavonols.

Calcium Makes Bones Hard

“Calcium is critical for bone [health], because it maintains their strength,” says Lappe. It is recommended that adults get about 1,000 milligrams (mg) of calcium per day, increasing to 1,200 mg for women over age 50 and men over age 70.

These are the best food sources of calcium:

Dairy Products A single serving of milk, yogurt, or cheese provides about 300 mg of calcium.

Calcium-Fortified Juice and Plant-Based Milks These include soy and plant-based milks, which can contain as much calcium as cow’s milk. (Just be sure to shake the carton well before every pour, Lappe says, because the added calcium can settle to the bottom.)

Tofu It’s often made with calcium (about 250 mg per ½ cup), but check the label.

Canned Sardines and Salmon The calcium is in their soft bones (180 to 325 mg for 3 ounces).

Dark Green Vegetables Collards, kale, turnip greens, and cabbage can provide 100 to 250 mg of calcium per 1 cup of cooked vegetable. Lappe cautions that calcium is poorly absorbed from vegetables with high levels of oxalates, like spinach and rhubarb.

Tally up your total calcium intake using this calcium calculator from the International Osteoporosis Foundation.

How to Cut It: Kale

Packed with antioxidants and nutrients such as vitamins C and K, kale is a superfood that will benefit anyone’s health. Everyday Health staff nutritionist Kelly Kennedy, RDN, shows you how to chop and simply dress this nutritious leafy green.

Vitamin D Promotes Calcium Absorption

Vitamin D helps with calcium absorption and the function of bone cells, and we can synthesize much of what we need in our skin, assuming we get a little sun exposure. But during the winter months in the northern half of the United States and in Canada, the sun is too low in the sky to provide enough ultraviolet rays, so we need to look to food sources and supplements, says Lappe.

The Institute of Medicine recommends that adults with minimal sun exposure get 600 international units (IU) of vitamin D per day, increasing to 800 IU for those age 70 and up.

There are only a few good food sources of vitamin D:

Fatty Fish Three ounces of salmon or swordfish can provide about 500 IU, with lower amounts in sardines and canned tuna.

Vitamin D-Fortified Beverages Cow’s milk, plant-based milks, and juice have about 100 IU per serving, but check the label for exact amounts. Some breakfast cereals and yogurts are also fortified.

Egg Yolks, Beef Liver, Pork, and Cheese These foods provide small amounts of vitamin D (20 to 40 IU per serving) but can contribute to your total intake over the day.

If you’re worried that you don’t get enough vitamin D from sun exposure and foods, you can talk with your doctor about taking a supplement.

Protein Gives Bones Structure

Minerals like calcium give bones their hardness, but it’s protein that forms their underlying structural matrix.

For many years, researchers thought that high-protein diets could deplete the bones of calcium, but a major review published in 2017 concluded that there is little evidence for this. (4)

Just how much protein is optimal for bone health is still being debated, says Lappe: “I usually just stick with recommended levels, and I don’t think people need protein supplements.”

Most Americans get enough protein, but Planells says that as people get older, it’s common for their protein intake to decrease.

“Your goal is to get at least 15 grams of protein every time you eat,” he says. Meat, poultry, fish, eggs, and dairy products are obvious sources. But he also points to affordable and convenient plant sources, like beans, nuts, peanut butter, almond butter, and sunflower seeds.

Are There Foods You Should Avoid?

There are a few nutrients and products that can interfere with bone health. (5)

Salt Eating too much salt can cause you to excrete more calcium in your urine, perhaps leading to bone loss in the long term.

Alcohol Limit intake to no more than one drink per day for women and two drinks per day for men.

Caffeine Too much caffeine can increase calcium excretion, but a review published in 2017 concluded that there’s little risk to bone health as long as you don’t exceed 400 mg of caffeine per day, or about 4 cups of coffee. (6)

Colas Some studies have found that people who drink more soda have poorer bone mineral density, but this effect seems to be limited to colas, which contain both caffeine and phosphoric acid. (7)

Of course, there are other health reasons to watch your salt intake and avoid excessive alcohol, soda, and caffeine. It comes back to looking at the big picture and working toward a diet rich in a variety of whole foods to provide bone-building nutrients.

“It’s just kind of a common-sense approach,” says Lappe. “You don’t need to snarf up all kinds of pills or eat a whole bunch of a certain type of food, and you don’t have to give up some of the things you like. Just consume in moderation, and you’ll be fine.”

Editorial Sources and Fact-Checking

Everyday Health follows strict sourcing guidelines to ensure the accuracy of its content, outlined in our editorial policy. We use only trustworthy sources, including peer-reviewed studies, board-certified medical experts, patients with lived experience, and information from top institutions.

Resources

Vitamin D, Calcium, or Combined Supplementation for the Primary Prevention of Fractures in Community-Dwelling Adults. JAMA. April 17, 2018.

Martiniakova M, Babikova M, Mondockova V, et al. The Role of Macronutrients, Micronutrients and Flavonoid Polyphenols in the Prevention and Treatment of Osteoporosis. Nutrients. February 2022.

Movassagh EZ, Vatanparast H. Current Evidence on the Association of Dietary Patterns and Bone Health: A Scoping Review. Advances in Nutrition. January 2017.

Shams-White MM, Chung M, Du M, et al. Dietary Protein and Bone Health: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis From the National Osteoporosis Foundation. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. June 2017.

Nutrition. Bone Health & Osteoporosis Foundation.

Wikoff D, Welsh BT, Henderson R, et al. Systematic Review of the Potential Adverse Effects of Caffeine Consumption in Healthy Adults, Pregnant Women, Adolescents, and Children. Food and Chemical Toxicology. November 2017.

Kim Y-A, Yoo J-H. Associations Between Cola Consumption and Bone Mineral Density in Korean Adolescents and Young Adults: A Cross-Sectional Study Using Data from the Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2008–2011. Journal of Nutritional Science. November 26, 2020.

Additional Sources

Osteoporosis Overview. NIH Osteoporosis and Related Bone Diseases National Resource Center. October 2019.

FoodData Central. U.S. Department of Agriculture.

Muñoz-Garach A, Garcia-Fontana B, Muñoz-Torres M. Nutrients and Dietary Patterns Related to Osteoporosis. Nutrients. July 3, 2020.

Calcium: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals. National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements. October 6, 2022.

Are You Getting Enough Calcium? International Osteoporosis Foundation.

Vitamin D: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals. National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements. August 12, 2022.

Dietary Guidelines for Alcohol. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. April 19, 2022.

Show Less