This movie stars Will’s Myth. He is a great actor and Black Smith of comedy. He plays an LA ghoul and spooks all the residents of Sunset Boulevard. He spooked me several times through the film and even the behind the scenes featurette that came along with the triple disc DVD boxset and one VHS spooked me because Ghoul Smith wears a mask and spooks you up close and personal. The use of threedee glasses is utilized throughout the featurette but not the main feature which isn’t a good mode.

Carlton stars in this film as Carlton and makes goofs about how he is a little white.

The soundtrack is written by Will’s band ‘The Myths’ which also has his son, Willard, and daughter, Javier, in the band and they sing songs about eggs, spaghetti and gelato. They like gelato but I do to so I’m glad to hear that they share that with me.

Sisco gave this movie 6 Blarts up, I give it 9 and one quarter. Don’t forget to bring some popcorn and soda if you want to full enjoy this movie.

I like milk and this movie. Enjoy the show.

I recently watched Red Dawn and my favourite part was when Paul Blart had a cameo as the sun, he voiced the sun and said funny jokes like ‘Oops, I blarted.’ My favourite part was when in Red Dawn the protagonist’s dad told him he was grounded and that wasn’t allowed to be a police officer anymore.

‘But, Dad!’ said officer Red.

‘No, son. You’re not going to police the streets anymore. You have a boy to raise,’ said dad who was played by Thomas Sellache.

I have an emotional attachment with this scene because I have found myself in similar situations several times in my life.

This is a great comedy with great emotional moments. It’s a rip-off of a 1980 film starring Patrick Swayze. It even uses the same title but I think this film did what Patrick Swayze couldn’t.

Overall, Red Dawn is a great film and stars Kevin James so gets nine Blarts out of a possible ten Blarts which is a good score. IT’s a good movie to take your dad or your favourite son.

Adam is a child doctor and he fixes children. He has a nice sports jacket and a good haircut. His friends and family really like him. His jacket is stolen by Lieutenant Beef Drangle who is rude and hasn’t had a shower in two days.

This is Sergeant Dr. Adams’ tale.

I love movies and I love this movie. I love how Robert Williams plays the character of Sergeant Gomez Adams and his jacket is really cool. I think a good thing the producers could do is to release the jacket so people like you and me could by them and wear them and pretend to be Junior Adams at Halloween parties and during Christmas seasons throughout the year.

On my Birthday my dad took me to see Casper but I wanted to see Paul Blart: Mall Cop or Adam Patch.

I think what makes this movie good is the Paul Blart cross over. A time portal opens and Mr. Kevin James himself enters the room.

‘Nanoo, nanoo,’ says Robin Williams.

‘Haha, Robert Wilsons is cute.’ Says the narrator. Paul Blart enters through the portal.

‘Hi, I’m Paul Blart,’ a strange sound is heard, Paul’s face goes red. ‘Oops, I blarted.’

‘Haha, Paul Blart blarted,’ said the narrator.

Two cups.

Trivia:

Bruce Williams (Die Hard 2 and The Jack All) is Robertin Williams’ son.This movie received 10/10 blart reviews from every trustworthy film publication.

Quotes:

‘I’m parched.’ – Parched Adam

‘Your reputation proceeds you.’ – Will Smith

The end.

This film was a real treat. Again, we get Vincent Diseal, Paul Walker and this time the inclusion of David’s Spade which lead me to believe that director, Justin Lin, was going for a Joe Dirt atmosphere. There was a funny cameo with Jackie Chan, during the goofer-blooper reel Jackie received several phone calls during shooting and everyone had a good laugh about it. This movie starred a cameo from Twilite’s Robin Pattinson (son of international super star Robin Williams) who played the gangs leader. He drove the fastest car and it was yellow.

The story goes as follows. David’s spade was missing and Robin Patterson had to go find it. He bumped into Paul (Paul Walker) who couldn’t stop walking because his friend Vincent (Vincent Diseal) ran out of petrol for his really fast car and Paul had to go to the petrol house to get more petrol and some oil and some donuts and two drinks. The twist is that Paul Walker has a disability.

I rate this movie before Joe Dirt but just after international superstar Robert William’s family rom-comedy RV.

This is the last film in the ten film series that is the Gerry Butter franchise, based on the two novels written by Patricia Cornwall. This film is the conclusion to the story, where the Dark Wizards rise to power and Jude Law plays a Russian soldier who must assassinate a German dark wizard who keeps hanging around at the gates. Colin Farrel is not in this film and neither is Colin Firth, but you can see some extras in the background in a hogsmead scene who look a little bit like the Two Colins.

Daniel Ratcliffs is getting worse as an anchtor in this last film due to a gradual depreciation in market value after the GFC hit in 1997, leaving many investors high and dry like cheech and chong without anything to drink.

If your a fan of the Barry Nutter franchise then this film is for you, but I wouldn’t watch it unless you have seen all the other films because this film was made with an entirely new cast playing the roles that we know and love. Why did the film makers replace the cast I wonder? I did some research and it was something to do with the age difference from the previous film. The actors all looked too old because ten years have passed in the real world and only one in the film, or it might be the other way around.

The highlights of the film for me are the scene where Rupert Grunt crashes his dad’s car into a lake and the grindyloins come up and drag him to hell where he has to fight the German wizard who looks like Adolf Hitler with gattling guns strapped to his arms like in Wolfenstein. Paul Blart makes a cameo appearance as malt cop.

Two Blarts (out of ten possible blarts.)