When life gets stressful, what better way to relax than with a big bowl of Italian comfort food?

I don’t know about you guys, but I’m a self-proclaimed pasta addict. There’s just something about all the culinary possibilities! I love experimenting with different flavors and ingredients to create inspiring dishes – and I rarely make the same dish twice!

But, despite all the interesting combinations I come up with, sometimes I just want to relax with a comfortable classic. There is one recipe that holds this place in my heart as my go-to pasta dish: Pasta alla Norma. It’s rich, comforting, and never fails to disappoint. Plus, it’s super easy to prepare thanks to our Anna Maria’s Torino Tomato sauce!

Here, I’m sharing this family favorite with you. Read on to learn why Pasta Alla Norma is so special, and how you can make it for yourself. Enjoy!

A Sicilian Vegetarian Delight: The Delicious History of Pasta alla Norma

Some dishes get their names from the region they were developed in. Some get their names from the famous chef who invented them. Others, like this one, get their name from the opera!

Pasta alla Norma was named after Vincenzo Bellini’s opera, Norma. The opera’s heroine, Norma, was so well-liked that people in the region began saying that something was “Norma” if it was perfect, a la mode, or impeccable.

Sicily’s simple regional pasta made from sautéed eggplant tossed with tomato sauce and cheese became known as Pasta alla Norma: the perfect pasta.

What’s in Pasta alla Norma?

Pasta all Norma is a timeless Catanian favorite that packs a delicious punch despite its simplicity. It is traditionally made with 4 key ingredients:

Pasta: Choose a short and thick pasta, like rigatoni, penne, or our favorite, cavatelli. Spaghetti also works well with this recipe.

Eggplant: In Catania, the favorite eggplant to use for this recipe is black aubergine, Sita, or Turkish eggplant. But, any eggplant variety that you can find will do. Try to avoid gigantic ones and opt for smaller medium-sized ones to get the best flavor.

Tomatoes: Fresh, firm, full-sized mature tomatoes are best for this recipe. Or, take the efficient route like us and use a high-quality Italian tomato sauce like our Torino Tomato!

Ricotta Salata: A hard, salty cheese. Depending on where you look, you may find different variations of this traditional recipe with other cheeses. I’ve tried a few options and found that my cheese of choice is fresh mozzarella. It has a less salty flavor than the ricotta salata but adds a great textural element due to its ability to melt. You can also try this recipe with regular ricotta cheese, but I find it tends to mix a bit too well with the sauce, dulling down the flavor.

Regardless of your cheese choice, this recipe is sure to be a winner, and it can be thrown together in under an hour!

Ready to get cooking?