Spaghetti all’assassina ( killer spaghetti ), is a signature dish from Bari, Puglia.

It becomes à la mode during the 70s.

This dish is so popular that in Bari even exists a “Spaghetti all’assassina Accademy”, with members that respect religiously the way this pasta is made.

The technique behind is called “risottatura“, so the pasta is not boiled but is cooked directly in the pan, like a risotto, adding the liquid (in this case the tomato sauce) little by little, until it is absorbed and the pasta is cooked.

The pasta cooks high heat, until it caramelizes and scorches: spaghetti must be crunchy but not burnt! And they are really spicy to, with a lot of peperoncino.

So try the recipe that follows here and become an honorary barese.

Flavia SpaghettiABC

Enjoy this Spaghetti dish with a glass of Nero di Troia Masseria Supreno Red Wine. You will be conquered by the intense ruby red color, the intense berry fruit aroma and the well balanced structure.

*Nero di Troia Masseria Supreno is imported to Denmark by Vinimondo.dk. Drop by the new Vinimondo.dk showroom to taste or buy it.

RECIPE:

SPAGHETTI ALL’ ASSASSINA

INGREDIENTS

320 g (11.2 oz) Spaghetti

200 g (7 oz) tomato puree

EVO oil

2 garlic cloves, without core

fresh chilli peppers, to taste

a pinch of sugar

INSTRUCTIONS

Place a saucepan on a medium heat. Pour 3 tbsp of oil in, add the tomato puree and let cook for about 20 min. Adjust with salt. When it is ready add 4 ladles of hot water (add more hot water in case this amount isn’t enough to cook completely the pasta), a pinch of sugar and keep boiling on low-medium heat.

Place a non-stick large frying pan (large enough to contain uncooked spaghetti) on medium-high heat. Add 3-4 tbsp of oil, garlic and chilli peppers and let sauté for a few minutes. Then put the pasta in the pan, remove garlic and let the pasta toast for a few seconds.

Pour a ladle of tomato sauce, and gently keep moving the spaghetti with a wooden scoop. Let them cook at high heat until the sauce has been totally absorbed and the pasta is getting crispy. Then open the Spaghetti slightly in the middle and pour another ladle of tomato sauce. The Spaghetti will begin to get softer. Continue this procedure until the Spaghetti are cooked al dente. Then let them toast well on the pan until they get a dark crust. At the end the Spaghetti will be almost scorched and crispy. Serve immediately.

Related