As we remember the premiere of Gershwin’s Rhapsody in Blue 100 years ago today (2/12/24) at the Aeolian Hall in Manhattan, let’s start with an almost-forgotten Gershwin song.

Written for Lady, Be Good by George and Ira Gershwin in 1924, the song was cut from the show and was known as “Gershwin Melody #91,” as it sat unused in the Library of Congress’ Gershwin Collection. Then in 2010, Brian Wilson used the song as inspiration for his “The Like in I Love You,” and in 2012, it was incorporated into the “new” Gershwin musical Nice Work If You Can Get It with Matthew Broderick and Kelli O’Hara singing the song.

The song sounds deceptively simple, though an examination of the chords reveals many flatted fifth passing chords as well as plenty of diminished and minor sixth chords. I transposed the song from E-flat major to C major for ease of play (and ease of figuring out the chords). Multiple Gershwin experts have failed to see any influence in Gershwin’s music stemming from his years studying with Charles Hambitzer from 1913-1918, but the first two measures of Gershwin’s chorus share a common Hambitzer style of using the I – ii/I – Imaj7 – ii/I progression (in this case, a C note as a pedal point with the chords C, Dm, Em, Dm).

Remembering the Aeolian Hall Concert from 2/12/1924

Situated across from Bryant Park and the New York Public Library in New York City, the French Renaissance-designed Aeolian Hall officially opened at 29-33 42nd Street on November 8, 1912 with a concert by the New York Symphony Orchestra with Walter Damrosch conducting. From 1912 until Woolworths took over in 1927, the Aeolian Concert Hall hosted over 5,000 artists at 4,500 events.

The concert hall was a prestigious component of the Aeolian Company’s operations in the first four floors of the 18-story building, but as one of the top producers of pianos, player-pianos, sheet music, and phonographs, the Aeolian Hall building served many functions for the company. Here is the basic rundown of what it contained:

A 1,362-seat concert hall (according to The Architectural Record of Dec. 1912)

A spacious green room for performers in the basement, with four dressing rooms and bathrooms

The Aeolian Company had the first four floors.

The sales and demonstrations of phonographs, in sound-proof rooms, were in the basement.

Above those demonstration rooms were stored records and piano rolls.

The 42nd Street entrance led to the main showroom foyer.

The second-story foyer was an intermission lounge and promenade area with an unobstructed view of Bryant Park and the New York Public Library.

The third floor was a player-piano showroom with 13 sound-proof piano demonstration rooms.

A large room devoted to piano manufacturing experimentation and invention was on the mezzanine between the third and fourth floors.

A clubroom for musicians and sales of used pianos was on the fourth floor.

Of the “nymphs and shepherds” mural at the double-flare marble staircase landing, one critic commented, “Perhaps one would prefer a mural painting by Maxfield Parrish to the canvas now occupying the wall.”

The bronze Apollo bust over one of the doorways was created by Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney, sculptor, women’s art advocate, art patron, and founder of the Whitney Museum of American Art.

The organ pipes that lined the back of the stage numbered 5,079 in total and the organ was considered “the finest concert organ in the world.”

The concert entrance was on 43rd Street.

Though the 42nd Street facade was changed in 1927 and a five-and-dime store moved in, the Aeolian Company would keep some offices there until 1938.

Gershwin in 1924

As if the success of Rhapsody in Blue weren’t enough, Gershwin’s plate was extremely full for the entire year of 1924. Here are some highlights with a special thanks to Susan Neimoyer for providing some of this information: