UPDATE: The mystery of this song’s title has been solved! See the bottom of this page for the story.

George Gershwin’s song “52nd Floor” never had that title while George was alive. Ira Gershwin and Kay Swift organized George’s unpublished manuscripts from 1939 through 1946, and they gave it its title along with the identifier “Gershwin Melody #24” during that time.

There is no indication of why it is called that, and Ira never wrote lyrics to it. I can wildly speculate that the phrase “Meet me on the 52nd floor” fits the first melody line of the song, but that is just a theory from my own imagination, not based on any facts.

New York City during the 1930s, unlike most cities, had several buildings that had a 52nd floor, and that is probably the city that Ira and/or Kay were imagining this song would be about. George loved New York City, but another major city captured his imagination as well. In a July 27, 1928 letter to Nadia Boulanger, Gershwin wrote:

“It is nice to think back through all the terrific heat and noise and rush over here, to the month of May – ages ago – in Paris where for the first time in my life I was in a real musical atmosphere and where I met you.

One month in America has converted me one again into a hard working, busy, ambitious American. It “gets” one over here. Just as Paris with its beauty “gets” one over there.

I should like to spend the rest of my life working mornings in New York and spending evenings in Paris. That may come eventually – who can tell?”

Download the PDF of the simplified sheet music to “52nd Floor” here: 52nd Floor

UPDATE: Thanks to a clever reader (who happens to be Katharine Weber, Kay Swift’s granddaughter and co-trustee of The Kay Swift Memorial Trust), we now know that the title “52nd Floor” refers to the location of Kay Swift’s office in the Empire State Building where she and Ira would occasionally meet and prepare George’s song sketches for posterity’s sake and also to be used as the theme song of the 1939 New York World’s Fair.

Swift was in charge of programming the light music for the fair, and the resulting theme song was George and Ira’s “Dawn of a New Day.” Presumably, “52nd Floor” was arranged by Kay Swift while she was working on the 52nd floor of the Empire State Building between August 1937 and late 1939.

We even have the 1937 letter that Kay wrote to Ira inviting him up to work on compiling George’s song fragments. She starts,

“I am getting together as much as I can remember of George’s for you. However, I can only look through the tune books, (but) with you I can certainly do twice as much for there are many fragments I can recall on sight and harmonize as George did.”

(See below for more of this letter.)