Home to one of Broadway’s longest-running — and most well-loved — shows, The Gershwin Theater is where a most popular type of magic happens on stage. As the largest theater on Broadway, you’ll find not just the enchanting performances of Wicked within its walls, but also the American Theater Hall of Fame in its lobby.

The theater opened in 1972 with the original name of the Uris Theater, but was renamed in honor of two names even the non-theatergoers will recognize: George and Ira Gershwin. Many a famous show has graced its stage since, and most recently, the theater has been defying gravity for over two decades with the spellbinding tale of Wicked.

The Gershwin Theatre box office is located (along with the theater) at 222 W 51st St. in Manhattan’s Theater District, and is open Monday through Saturday from 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. and Sunday from 12:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.

What Events Are Coming Up at Gershwin Theatre?

See upcoming events and buy tickets for Wicked right here on Ticketmaster.

Gershwin Theatre History

The Gershwin Theatre opened in 1972 after being designed by Broadway mainstay Ralph Alswang. Originally named the Uris Theatre, the venue is located on the second floor of Paramount Plaza (what used to be the Uris Building, hence its original name), with the American Theater Hall of Fame placed in the lobby and rotundas.

As the Uris, the venue’s first production was 1972’s Via Galactica starring Raul Julia. During its early days, the theater hosted concerts by the likes of Sammy Davis Jr.; the trio of Frank Sinatra, Ella Fitzgerald and Count Basie; Barry Manilow and Paul Anka, as well as the 1975 Grammy Awards. It also staged the 1977 revival of The King and I and the original Broadway production of Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street.

The theater was renamed in honor of George and Ira Gershwin in 1983, the same year it hosted the Tony Awards for the first time. The venue’s first production under its new moniker was 1984’s Mame starring Angela Lansbury. Major Broadway shows in the ensuing years included the original productions of Singin’ in the Rain (1985), Starlight Express (1986), Meet Me in St. Louis (1989), a 1993 revival of Camelot and more.

In 2003, the Gershwin welcomed audiences to the Emerald City for Wicked, the untold story of the Witches of Oz. The Broadway smash has been delighting fans of all ages for more than 20 years and has broken records at the theater numerous times.

Parking and Admission at Gershwin Theatre

There is no designated on-site parking at the Gershwin Theatre. However, there are numerous parking options in the Broadway Theater District. Various parking options in the Times Square area can be viewed via SpotHero. Taxis can also stop outside the theater for dropoff and pickup.

Items prohibited inside the Gershwin Theatre include weapons of any kind (such as firearms, ammunition, knives, swords, scissors, mace, etc.), illegal substances of any kind, outside food and/or beverages, large professional cameras and/or video recording equipment, flashlights or laser pointers and more. For a complete list of prohibited items, please review the Gershwin Theatre’s official Rules ahead of your visit.

As for the age limit, Broadway theaters (including the Gershwin) do not permit children under the age of 4.

Gershwin Theatre Bag Policy

All bags and purses will be subject to inspection upon arrival at the Gershwin Theatre. Luggage, shopping bags and other large packages that will not fit comfortably beneath your seat will not be allowed inside the theater and cannot be checked.

Gershwin Theatre Dress Code

There is no specific dress code at the Gershwin Theatre.

Gershwin Theatre Capacity & Seating Options

The Gershwin Theatre has a capacity of 1,933 divided between an Orchestra and a Balcony, making it the largest theater on Broadway.

What Are the Best Seats at Gershwin Theatre?

The best seats at Gershwin Theatre vary depending on the event and personal preferences. A Gershwin Theatre seating chart can be viewed on SeatPlan.

Things to Do Near Gershwin Theatre

There’s nowhere that the hustle and bustle of New York City comes alive more than in the Theater District, and there’s so much to see and do before or after your show at the Gershwin Theatre.

Walk a few blocks downtown to Times Square or go uptown for shopping at The Shops at Columbus Circle; check out popular destinations like Rockefeller Center, Top of the Rock and Radio City Music Hall; see a movie at the AMC Empire 25 or be entertained by the vendors, buskers and other performers in Midtown Manhattan.

Hotels Near Gershwin Theatre

New York City’s Theater District has dozens of hotels for visitors to choose from. Below are a number of options within just a few blocks of the Gershwin Theatre:

citizenM, 218 W 50th St, New York, NY 10019

The Michelangelo New York, 152 W 51st St, New York, NY 10019

Romer Hell’s Kitchen, 851 8th Ave, New York, NY 10019

Sheraton New York Times Square, 811 7th Ave, New York, NY 10019

The Pearl Hotel, 233 W 49th St, New York, NY 10019

Mayfair Hotel NYC, 240-242 W 49th St, 10019

Hilton Garden Inn New York/Central Park South-Midtown West, 237 W 54th St, New York, NY 10019

Crowne Plaza Times Square Manhattan, 1605 Broadway, New York, NY 10019

Restaurants Near Gershwin Theatre

New York City is home to cuisine from all across the globe and options for a great meal near Gershwin Theatre are nearly endless — from a quick bite on the go to a nice, sit-down meal before or after the show.

Below are a number of dining options in Midtown Manhattan within walking distance from Gershwin Theatre: