Saturday Night Shorts: Film 43

After almost tripping over her husband's Ventriloquist dummy, she threatens to throw it in the trash only to be met with condemnation. He's had it since he was five years old and won't tolerate it being discarded. When he leaves the house the Dummy comes to life an seeks revenge her.

As a kid my favorite book was a Goosebumps book titled Night of the Living Dummy and my favorite classic Twilight Zone episode was The Dummy so needless to say I always wanted a real Ventriloquist dummy of my own. Unfortunately my family never had much money and those things can be expensive, as well as hard to find in the pre-internet days. I…

These exact Ventriloquist Dummy Dolls used to freak me out as a kid. Two of my older cousins lived in a huge house deep in the woods. As a kid I used to stay the night with them from time to time. Hide and seek would always break out. I wonder in this “digital age” we now live in where kids want phones and YouTube all day if they still play hide and seek. Man I hope so, the good old days.

Anyway, the lowest level of their house had like 3 spare bedrooms and a bathroom along with a huge family room and a Den. Right off the Den was an area that wasn’t completely finished and this was a…

THE DUMMY (1982)

"A woman is trapped in her apartment alone with a murderous ventriloquist dummy."

Ever since the British horror collection Dead Of Night (1945) debuted an evil living ventriloquist dummy as an antagonist, the realms of cinema and television have seen a plethora of copycat stories featuring a killer dummy or doll or other inanimate object brought to life. The Dummy, a short film clocking at around seven minutes in length, contains all the trappings of familiar ventriloquist dummy horror and makes it a fun, dialogue-free escapade where a woman runs around her apartment attempting to survive a murderous dummy's wrath. The influence for Child's Play (1988) is plainly obvious.

As scary as the idea is and the…

HoopTober 4.0 Bonus #2

I couldn't find a place for this film on my official HoopTober list this year, but I wanted to watch and log it anyway. So I'm considering it a bonus offering.

No joke, I have been thinking about The Dummy for probably almost 30 years.

In the 80s, HBO and USA would randomly show this, presumably as filler, as a bumper in between horror movies. I didn't know at the time that it was a student film, but I must have seen this a dozen times as a kid. I'd actually looked forward to it, even though it scared the hell out of me. It's probably not an exaggeration to say that this goofy, poorly made,…