— In the town where I'm from, a ventriloquist dummy is a bad omen. It's kind of a local legend, and some people believe that the dummy brings death to those around them.

Dead Silence, movie

I'm not sure why it is THE dummy and what THEM refers to.

1. I think it's 'the dummy' because it's a particular dummy that occurs somewhere, say, in a family/house. But then, I think "a dummy" would work in the OP too.

2. Logically, "them" must mean "dummies", right? I don't think it refers to "some people".

Am I right as to the both points?

Thanks.

Hi VicNicSor

I agree that "a" could be used instead of "the" here, and I guess they just mean the dummy that happens to be there at that particular time.

For me, "them" refers to "some people"; firstly because grammatically it's the only plural antecedent, and secondly because it's a small town and so the residents and the dummy are all in the same area; therefore it makes little difference whether the deaths are said to be around the people who believe the legend or the dummy itself.

It's kind of a local legend, and some people believe that the dummy brings death to those around them (= it/him)

Why would the superstition be that only those around local people were in danger? That's what's implied if "them" means "some [local] people", but it makes no sense. It's much more likely that "them" refers — albeit ungrammatically — to "the dummy". Presumably it's a confusion with the modern usage of they and them in place of he/she and him/her.

It means the speaker feels the dummy should not be referred to as "it": with such powers the dummy is more than "personified" - (the gender-neutral singular use of they/them has bee around for a long time - it predates PCness by some centuries ).

Why would the superstition be that only those around local people were in danger? That's what's implied if "them" means "some [local] people", but it makes no sense. It's much more likely that "them" refers — albeit ungrammatically — to "the dummy".

Good point! Unless of course these are the people who, if they are speaking from experience, have seen people around them die when a dummy was found to be in the town; and they are the survivors!

That said, I'm now inclined to agree with you and JulianStuart.

It's funny, but I actually agree with Iceream's interpretation in post #2 that "them" relates to "some people". The dummy brings death to those around the people who believe in it.

It means that if a person sees the dummy, and tells others, those people who believe the legend think that others around them, such as neighbours, will start dying.

The dummy is simply the agent of death. Those (some) people who believe in the legend are those who think that people will start dying around them.

It's a classic idea within legends. Someone sees a sign or portent, such as a huge black dog, and those who believe in such things will think that a least one person (a friend/neighbour/relative/themselves) will imminently die.

Black dog (ghost) - Wikipedia

I'm sure none of us disagree that, syntactically, "them" appears to refer to "some people". But I still don't quite buy it.

There must be someone out there who's familiar with the movie and so could explain the "local legend"……

Some believe that the lion brings death to those around it.

Post #4 and I say that, syntactically, "them" is the gender neutral singular pronoun for a human-like object which is always either male or female, not an it.