Published at: July 25, 2001, 4:50 a.m. CST by staff

HEY THERE! I just got off the phone with some people close to the project on KILL BILL and right now, noone is in Uma's place, and Lucy Liu has not yet been signed, and could not be confirmed one way or another. Apparently nothing has been finalized with whomever may be taking the role. And it does look like Lucy will be taking ECKS VS SEVER as Variety had reported. Just clearing this up.

OLDER STORY LAYS BELOW..........

Hey folks, Harry here... I'm going to attempt to confirm this today with some sources, but this morning I received the following report via THE MONTREAL GAZETTE about Quentin Tarantino's KILL BILL. The word has it that Lucy Liu has replaced Uma Thurman in the film. Now, warning flags that I see being raised is the fact that it was just announced in The Hollywood Reporter on Monday that Lucy Liu was in negotiations to team up with Antonio Banderas in Kaos' American Directing debut, "ECKS VS SEVER" which is scheduled to begin shooting this Fall - same as KILL BILL, she can't do both. Now does this mean she is going to pull out of ECKS VS SEVER? Does it mean that Quentin has delayed his shoot? Or does it mean that the Montreal Gazette's reporter Doug Camilli doesn't know what he's talking about? Well he does write, "And of course "noir" is Hollywood code for "plot makes no sense" so this picture has two strikes against it from the git-go. " So, I would take that as a definite possibility in the, doesn't know what he's talking about category. A few calls in a few hours should clear this right on up.

Hey Harry, Damn Dirty Irishman from Montreal here... I don't know if you'll use this or not, but the Montreal Gazette reported this morning that Lucy Liu has taken the role Uma Thurman was supposed to play but, as we all know, droppped out because of her pregnancy.

Here's a link, scroll to the bottom: CLICK HERE TO READ THE MONTREAL GAZETTE ARTICLE THAT STARTED THE RUMOR!

Take it easy, and keep up the good work!