DAMASCUS, Syria, April 14 — Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa today described as "baseless" a series of accusations leveled by the United States about covert Syrian assistance to Iraq, and criticized the American military for failing to establish order in Iraq.

The foreign minister, making his country's first response to an almost daily chorus of Bush administration charges, said that the United States seemed to be trying to start another conflict even before stabilizing either Iraq or Afghanistan.

"Afghanistan, Iraq — too many problems for the United States — and they want to move to a third problem," Mr. Sharaa said during a joint news conference with his French counterpart, Dominique de Villepin. Earlier today Mr. de Villepin visited Cairo to begin a campaign to try to redirect the Bush administration's attention to resolving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. He called for urgent action on the long-awaited "road map" leading to the creation of a Palestinian state in 2005.

Among the American accusations are that Syria is harboring senior Iraqi officials or that it has helped them to move to other countries, that it helped provide military equipment to Iraq and that it is stowing Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.

Similar accusations were made today by Foreign Minister Jack Straw of Britain.

"There is much evidence of considerable cooperation between the Syrian government and the Saddam regime in recent months," Mr. Straw said at a news conference in Kuwait, the second stop of a tour that will also take in Qatar and Saudi Arabia.

He said "there are questions which the Syrians need to answer" on their activities, and called for undertakings from Damascus not to assist fugitives from Mr. Hussein's government, a claim Syria denies.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.