Mr. Ahmet Davutoğlu, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Turkey addressed the members of the EU-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee at the 71th meeting of the committee hold at the Grand National Assembly of Turkey on 15 February 2013.

Quoting the message “I am ready to negotiate with people uninfected with the blood hand as Farouk Shara, Deputy of Bashar al-Assad” of Mr. Muaz el Hatip, the Head of Syrian National Coalition, Foreign Minister Davutoğlu pointed out that Syrian regime did not give a positive response to this message.

“UN Security Council has lost its credibility” said Foreign Minister Davutoğlu and criticized the inactiveness of the UN Security Council in view of the death of 70 thousand people in Syria, desperation of the millions of Syrians in hard winter conditions.

Foreign Minister Davutoğlu calling international community to take measures with a view to providing humanitarian aid to Syrians, emphasized that the UN Security Council should adopt a resolution on humanitarian access. He underlined that in an effort to provide humanitarian assistance to those in need, the said resolution should be implemented in all places under the control of both the opposition and the regime and should apply sanctions to the side which prevent humanitarian access.

Foreign Minister Davutoğlu reminded that the Syrian regime fired Scud missiles on its own people and said “We should respond to the ones who commit war crimes in the framework of universal norms of the UN”. Foreign Minister Davutoğlu mentioned that the Syrian people headed towards Turkey like the ones who had arrived Turkey as the international community had failed to give an adequate respond back in 1990s. “Turkey is expected to take full responsibility. We take the humanitarian responsibility. However, it should be known that the UN which is not able to reach an agreement like in the case of Bosnia-Herzegovina has the political responsibility in the face of the death of 70 thousand Syrians. Because of the consequences of its inaction, I am sure that one day, any other UN Secretary-General will walk on the streets of Homs and apologize from the people of Syria” said Foreign Minister Davutoğlu.

Underlining that the greatest danger would be to freeze the crisis in Syria, Foreign Minister Davutoğlu said that it was of the importance that frozen conflicts should not be allowed during the transition in the Middle East and reforms should be implemented without diffusing political structures and destroying political boundaries.