Embarrassment is a character and one of the four new emotions in Inside Out 2. He is Riley Andersen's embarrassment.

History[]

Inside Out 2[]

Embarrassment first appeared shortly after Riley started puberty. His first action was to make Riley flush when she nearly touched Val Ortiz's hair and then suggested dyeing her hair if she made the team. After hitting the console, Embarrassment pulled his hood more tightly around himself. Joy tried to welcome him, but he shrunk away from her, hiding himself.

Embarrassment stepped in again when Riley got caught goofing off when Coach Roberts called for them to settle down. He also lay across the console when Riley overheard some other girls speaking negatively about her.

After some fighting between the old emotions and the new ones, Anxiety had Embarrassment pick up all the old emotions and put them in a jar. Anxiety then shared and started to implement her plan to develop a new Sense of Self for Riley, based on anxious memories.

Riley started to hang out with the older girls, activating Embarrassment every time she said something uncool.

While Anxiety kept working on her plan, Embarrassment discovered Sadness hiding in Headquarters. Instead of turning her in, he helped her hide. He later betrayed Anxiety again by secretly sending Riley a happy projection of her scoring goal and everyone hugging her, instead of all the anxious projections Anxiety had crafted.

As Riley stepped on the ice for her scrimmage, with Anxiety planning for her to score three goals no matter what it took, Embarrassment freed Sadness from the bucket in which Anxiety had put her. Then he opened the Riley Protection System so Sadness could bring the other emotions back to Headquarters, but Anxiety noticed and destroyed it.

As Anxiety's actions led to Riley having a panic attack, Embarrassment worked with all the other emotions to remove Riley's new anxious Sense of Self, but they were unable to until Anxiety gave up control of the console. They pulled it off and Joy replaced it with Riley's previous Sense of Self, but they soon realized that was only keeping her new, complex Sense of Self from developing, so Joy removed it and allowed her new Sense of Self to emerge.

Later, while Riley waited to learn if she'd made the FireHawks, Joy said Riley would be okay. Embarrassment agreed, saying she had them. When Joy cheered him on, he hid.

Personality[]

Embarrassment is extremely shy, easily embarrassed, and prone to blushing.

Throughout the movie, he's shown to be against Anxiety's principles, acting out upon it by turning off Anxiety's laptop and releasing Sadness. Although he never stands up to Anxiety due to his low self esteem.

Notes and Trivia[]

He was originally going to be one of the scrapped 27 (or 25) emotions.[source?]

Gallery[]

Quotes[]

"And she's got us! Ooh! Yeah! Right? Cause she's... heheh- maybe?" - Embarrassment trying to be cool.

References[]