Livingston departed the following season and played a key role in what was then considered the Clippers’ best season in franchise history. They made it through the regular season with 47 wins and 35 losses and reached the Western Conference semifinals, where they lost to the Phoenix Suns in seven games. Personally, Livingston managed 61 regular season appearances and 12 in the postseason due to injuries.

In the 2006-07 season, Livingston started on average more minutes, points, assists and rebounds per game. In a game against the Golden State Warriors on February 23, 2007, he had a career-high 14 assists. However, the injury struck just three days later in a game against the Charlotte Bobcats where he sustained a debilitating knee injury after a missed touchdown. He dislocated his left kneecap and snapped his leg sideways.

Livingston was warned by medical professionals that he could have his leg amputated due to the extent of the injury. More than a year later, in June 2008, after undergoing rigorous and extensive physical therapy, he was allowed to resume his basketball activities. At that point, his contract with the Clippers had expired and he signed with the Miami Heat. He spent a few months with the side before being traded to the Memphis Grizzlies, who relinquished him on the same day.

In March 2007, a few months after his waiver from the Grizzlies, he joined an NBA D-League affiliate of the Oklahoma City Thunder. Livingston spent three weeks with the site before penning a multi-year deal with the Thunder, which was canceled in December this year. A brief stint with the Washington Wizards followed before moving to the Charlotte Bobcats for a year and then the Milwaukee Bucks before being abandoned in Houston where he was traded. He returned to the Wizards but was released from the team after a month, prompting him to travel to Cleveland, where he spent the remainder of the 2012-13 season.

Shaun Livingston signed for the 2013/14 season with the Brooklyn Nets, for the first time in several years he was able to achieve consistent playing time. He played 76 games in his career and started 54 games in his career. In July 2014, he agreed to a three-year deal with the Golden State Warriors, during which he rose to become a key player off the bench in their championship runs. He has won two NBA titles to date and is on track to win a third with the franchise.

Shaun Livingston Net Worth

After a career as a journeyman in the NBA, ShaunLivingston has finally found a home with the Warriors, where he recently signed a three-year, $24 million contract in July 2017. With that, he will take home about $7.6 million every year. His total net worth is then estimated at around $16 million.

Family – wife or girlfriend?

Shaun Livingston is reportedly married to his longtime girlfriend Joanna Williams. Joanna, affectionately referred to as Joey by her close friends, is a model of Puerto Rican, Italian, and African descent. It’s not clear exactly when the couple became lovers, but they exchanged vows at a low-key wedding ceremony in August 2017. Together they share a daughter named Tyler Marie, who was born in February 2017, a few months before their wedding.

parents

As mentioned above, Shaun Livingston’s parents are Reggie Livingston, his father and Ann Wyman, his mother. The couple, who married two years after they met, almost had Shaun shortly after their wedding before divorcing when he was just 15 months old. His mother took him for the early stages of his life before his father later gained custody.

Height, weight and other facts

Birth name: Shaun Patrick Livingston

Date of Birth: September 11, 1985

Place of Birth: Peoria, Illinois, USA

Nationality: American

Height: 6 ft 7 in (2.01 m)