More Rumors in this Storyline

Does it feel weird not to be playing basketball this time of year? “It does, because I’ve been doing it so long,” he said. “It’s definitely a change of pace. But it’s something I’m embracing. Change is good sometimes. I’m really enjoying the moment and being present doing small things, spending time with my girls and traveling. I’m taking a sabbatical, reflecting on my next direction and putting a plan into place.”

Livingston found as much value in being a good teammate as he did in unleashing his own game. That was his game, too. It does make you wonder what is happening to the league. The fact he is just announcing this suggests, as the behind-the-scenes chatter said, he was trying to keep playing. It seems he couldn’t find a home. If so, what does that say about the league?

Steve Kerr: It’s hard to express how thankful I am to have coached this man the past 5 years. What an amazing combination of talent, grace, & character. I will miss his calm leadership,his presence, his passing & his turnaround jumpers in the post. Nothing but great things ahead!

“Dot’s a legend,” David West said via text. Livingston’s teammates called him Dot, a spinoff of S-Dot, as in S. Livingston. Jay-Z, whose government name is Sean Carter, made it a popular nickname for “S” names with his 1999 song “S. Carter.” “He came back from an injury that would have sealed the fate of most players,” West said. “He had a determination that should be admired for years to come. Great teammate and even better person. Proud to call him a friend.”

He really appreciated winning. He really liked being around the guys. He really liked good conversation. I’ve seen him pull a reporter aside and compliment a piece. I’ve also seen him politely chastise a reporter about a piece in defense of his teammates. I’ve heard him be critical about himself and I’ve heard him break down what a teammate needs to work on. I’ve seen him give that look-you-in-the-eye thank you to the workers most others overlook.

Shaun Livingston announces retirement

Shaun Livingston: After 15 years in the NBA, I’m excited, sad, fortunate and grateful all in one breath. Hard to put into a caption all of the emotions it takes to try and accomplish your dreams. I wasn’t supposed to be here. Anybody that has beat the odds understands the mental and emotional strain it takes to inspire yourself on an uphill war, let alone inspire others. “The injury” gave me a chance to find and prove to myself (and the world) that I wouldn’t be defined by my circumstances. With my time in the League what I will be most proud of is the fact that my character, values and faith were tested, and I persevered.

Shaun Livingston: To my pops that told me to “go get the big ball” I THANK YOU. To my Grandpa that always showed me there was more to life than basketball I THANK YOU. To my Uncles that helped raise me like I was one of their own, THANK YOU. To my wife and kids…the future IS BRIGHTER than our past, and I couldn’t see myself taking on this chapter without you. To all of my teammates, coaches, TRAINERS, staff, my journey is a collection of experiences, and those of you that helped me along the way, THANK YOU! To all the fans and anybody else that inspired me, supported me, cheered for me, or even said good words about me, THANK YOU. “The greatest gift we can give is service to others”

Shaun Livingston looking for another NBA opportunity

Livingston acknowledged that retirement is certainly an option. But his preference is to play one more year with a desirable NBA team. “At this point, it’s more about finishing my career the right way,” he said. “Going to where the fit is right as far as what I can bring to the table. Coming in and helping a team from a leadership standpoint, helping mentor the young guys and playing spot minutes … I’m at the stage of my career where those are the things where I add the most value.”

Shaun Livingston, meanwhile, is openly contemplating retirement at 33. Andrew Bogut, 34, is headed back to the Sydney Kings of Australia’s National Basketball League. DeMarcus Cousins is headed for free agency, too, but is widely considered unlikely to return.

Shaun Livingston considering retirement

That contract reality is wrapped in a real-life reality, which has Livingston — caring for a young family rooted in the Bay Area, doing more maintenance than ever on his aching left knee — thinking this could be the final season of his NBA playing career. It’s not decided officially. He’s not announcing anything. As the playoffs near and the chance for a fourth Warriors title in five years creeps closer, the focus is on the task at hand. But during the 82-game, seven-month journey, it’s hard not to let a mind wander, to see a guy like Dwyane Wade soaking in all his final moments in every arena so nostalgically and publicly and wonder if, even just privately, you should take more time to smell the basketball roses.

Have you legitimately sat there and thought that this could be it? Shaun Livingston: Yeah. For sure. Absolutely. It’s just all the signs on the wall. And just more so from a physical standpoint. If I’m healthy and having fun, then I want to play. But physically, if I’m not … Like, I put so much work in my body just to get back to playing basketball, let alone get to this point where I’m at. So now that it’s getting harder. Like this year, I’ve struggled with injuries more than any other year I’ve been on the Warriors.

Was there a moment this year when it struck you? When maybe the grind was particularly frustrating and you really started to think it could be your last season? Shaun Livingston: Uhhh … training camp. Really? Shaun Livingston: Yeah, bro. Because it’s all the young dudes coming in, trying to make the team, grinding. Horses, fresh out of college. I’ve never been, like, Russell Westbrook or something, but you’re just getting back from the summer, trying to warm things up.