When Shaun Livingston was waived by the Golden State Warriors this summer, it was one of the many signs of an end of an era for the dominant Warriors franchise.

Little did we know that it would also be an end to Livingston’s career. In a surprise move, the 6-9 point guard that suffered several injuries early in his career to carve out a respectable NBA career, decided to retire after 15 years playing in the league.

In a grateful Instagram post, Livingston posted a big THANK YOU (several times) to the fans, his family, trainers

After 15 years in the NBA, I’m excited, sad, fortunate and grateful all in one breath. Hard to put into a caption all of the emotions it takes to try and accomplish your dreams. I wasn’t supposed to be here. Anybody that has beat the odds understands the mental and emotional strain it takes to inspire yourself on an uphill war, let alone inspire others. “The injury” gave me a chance to find and prove to myself (and the world) that I wouldn’t be defined by my circumstances. With my time in the League what I will be most proud of is the fact that my character, values and faith were tested, and I persevered.

To my pops that told me to “go get the big ball” I THANK YOU. To my Grandpa that always showed me there was more to life than basketball I THANK YOU. To my Uncles that helped raise me like I was one of their own, THANK YOU. To my wife and kids…the future IS BRIGHTER than our past, and I couldn’t see myself taking on this chapter without you. To all of my teammates, coaches, TRAINERS, staff, my journey is a collection of experiences, and those of you that helped me along the way, THANK YOU! To all the fans and anybody else that inspired me, supported me, cheered for me, or even said good words about me, THANK YOU. “The greatest gift we can give is service to others”

#Raiseaglass 🍷

Here’s the original Instagram post:

Overall, Livingston played for ten NBA teams with a stint in the NBA’s Development League as he tried to recover from one of his multiple leg injuries. Those ten teams include the Los Angeles Clippers team that drafted him (and hoped that Livingston would return to the Clips for the upcoming season).

Then he would move on to play with the Miami Heat, Oklahoma City Thunder, Washington Wizards, Charlotte Bobcats, Milwaukee Bucks, Cleveland Cavaliers, Brooklyn Nets before joining the Golden State Warriors prior to the 2014-15 season where he played 78 games and became a three-time NBA champion, winning three NBA Titles with Golden State in 2015, 2017, and 2018.