BASEBALL

South Hills High School graduate Jason Giambi and the A’s finalized a $5.25 million, one-year contract with an option, bringing the free-agent designated hitter and first baseman back to the place he began his big league career. … Jerry Hairston Jr. stayed with the Cincinnati Reds, agreeing to a $2 million, one-year contract…. Marcus Giles’ minor league contract was announced by the Philadelphia Phillies.

WOMEN’S BASKETBALL

Sparks star Candace Parker announced that she and her husband Shelden Williams are expecting their first child this spring. Parker said she intended to play in the 2009 WNBA season that begins June 6. Her due date is “in the spring,” before the WNBA season opener, but no other details were released.

BASKETBALL

Two hours after announcing they had acquired Hassan Adams from the Toronto Raptors, the Clippers waived the 6-foot-4 swing man. … The Miami Heat traded guard Shaun Livingston and cash to the Memphis Grizzlies for a conditional 2012 second-round pick.

GOLF

The Xerox Classic has been left off the Nationwide Tour schedule for 2009 after the corporate sponsor decided not to sign a new deal. Xerox Corp. cited the harsh economic climate that forced it to lay off 3,000 employees in October as reason for ending its sponsorship of the event. … Seve Ballesteros says he plans to return next year to his role as captain of Europe’s Royal Trophy team.

HOCKEY

The Maple leafs acquired hard-hitting forward Brad May from the Ducks for a conditional 2010 sixth-round draft pick…. Joe Sakic, already sidelined after a snow blower accident last month, underwent surgery for a herniated disk and will need about 10 weeks to recover…. Ottawa Senators forward Jarkko Ruutu has been suspended by the NHL for two games without pay for biting Buffalo Sabres enforcer Andrew Peters.

MOTOR RACING

Dakar Rally organizers say French motorcyclist Pascal Terry has been found dead during the race in Argentina. Terry was found in an area of dense vegetation, about 50 feet from his motorcycle, without his helmet and with food and water beside him.

SOCCER

The Galaxy signed veteran midfielder Leonard Griffin and released defender Eduardo Dominguez. The Galaxy also re-signed goalkeeper Steve Cronin and forward Jovan Kirovski.