Join us for another interactive discussion following our very successful April event on Earthquake Risk Mitigation, A Bridge Between Policy and Engineering. This time we have invited Amy Bach, the Executive Director of United Policyholders to talk to our members about earthquake insurance from the consumer perspective. Amy will give us a broad overview of various resources and initiatives that UP is involved in, giving us a good insight into their work both here and in the other states where they are involved in post-disaster insurance, delving more deeply into how UP has been assisting renters, home and business owners in California to be thoughtful and realistic about quake damage.

Please complete this survey to help us structure the interactive session even if you are unable to attend the meeting!

Date: Thursday, June 18, 2015

Time: 5:30 – 7:30 pm

Location: EPICENTER, 245 Third Street, San Francisco, CA 94103

Cost: FREE for EERI NC Chapter members

RSVP/Registration Details: email This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. to RSVP by June 12, 2015

Speaker: Amy Bach, Executive Director

Amy Bach has been a professional advocate for insurance consumers (policyholders), since 1984 and an attorney since 1989. A native of Brooklyn, New York residing in San Francisco, she co- founded United Policyholders in 1991. She currently serves as the organization’s Executive Director and spokesperson; shaping and overseeing the Roadmap to Recovery™, Roadmap to Preparedness, and Advocacy and Action programs. She is a nationally recognized expert on insurance claim and legal matters, and the author of numerous publications including “The Disaster Recovery Handbook” and consumer tips and guides in the UP Claim Help Library.

United Policyholders (UP) is a non-profit that was founded and operates in the Bay Area. Their mission is to be a trustworthy and useful information resource and an effective voice for consumers of all types of insurance in all 50 states.