Lewis Nkosi, who has died after a stroke aged 73, once described his fellow writers on South Africa's Drum magazine as "the new Africans, cut adrift from the tribal reserve – urbanised, eager, fast-talking and brash". In that heady 1950s Johannesburg newsroom, he fitted the bill more precisely than anyone else.

Nkosi – the name means "king" in Zulu – was born in the Durban township of Chesterville, the only child of Samson and Christine. Orphaned at 10, he was brought up by his grandmother, Esther. He was a bright student. For years after he had left primary school, his English teacher would read out his compositions to the class as the standard to which they should aspire. At 18, after a succession of labouring jobs, he joined the Zulu-language Durban newspaper Ilanga lase Natal.

Within a year, armed with his school-leaving matriculation certificate, he had moved to Johannesburg to become a trainee photographer on Drum, but it was writing he wanted to do. The picture editor, Jürgen Schadeberg, recalls him "larking about for a week with a James Baldwin paperback in his pocket". The handsome lad from sleepy Durban joined the newsroom. Every week his colleagues, who included his boyhood friend Nat Nakasa, exposed the injustices of apartheid, often in the language of American writers and films. The white proprietor, Jim Bailey, and his editor, Sylvester Stein, faced constant pressure from the authorities.

Nkosi effortlessly acquired the habits of his colleagues – the demanding journalistic assignments, the clashes with the law, the insatiable literary talk, heavy drinking, jazz through the night – against the backdrop of quotidian township violence. The super-confident Nkosi would go into a "white" bar and order a beer and the barman would be won over. Schadeberg remembers Nkosi standing up at a public meeting at Witwatersrand University in Johannesburg and telling a speaker he was nothing more than a racist. Around this time, he co-wrote the screenplay of Lionel Rogosin's film about township life, Come Back, Africa (1959).

In 1960 he left his homeland on an "exit permit", a one-way ticket into exile, for a Nieman journalism fellowship at Harvard University. He would not return for 30 years. His play The Rhythm of Violence was staged at the university's Brattle theatre. He moved to London, worked for BBC and American radio, and for a time was literary editor of New African magazine.

Nkosi attended the first African writers' conference (1962), in Makerere, Uganda, where the style of African literature was established for the coming decades. He found himself in the company of the continent's grandees – Chinua Achebe, Wole Soyinka, Ngugi wa Thiong'o, and Nkosi's Drum colleague, Ezekiel Mphahlele. Back home, his schoolteacher wife, Bronwen Ollerenshaw, was the family breadwinner.

Nkosi's career took off with his degree from Sussex University, where his inspiration was the African poetry specialist Gerald Moore. Professorships in Lusaka, Zambia, and Wyoming in the US followed, as well as a spell at Warsaw University. He wrote short stories, plays, criticism and essays, invariably on African literature and social concerns.

His debut novel, Mating Birds (1986), won a Macmillan/Pen prize. Its theme of love, rape or seduction – the critics were uncertain which – across the colour line ensured it was banned in his homeland. There were comparisons with Albert Camus's L'Étranger (The Stranger). The writer George Packer thought the book felt "like the work of a superb critic. Heavy with symbolism, analytical rather than dramatic, it attempts nothing less than an allegory of colonialism and apartheid, one that dares to linger in complexity." His novel Mandela's Ego (2006) was shortlisted for a South African Sunday Times literary award.

Nkosi's publisher, Annari van der Merwe, said he was "quite naughty, but endearingly so. For all his bravado, he was sensitive in a way that few men truly are. There was a real empathy with people – he had a very broad perspective from having lived in a different cultural environment for so many years."

Nkosi and Bronwen had twin daughters, Joy and Louise, but separated in 1973. Bronwen died in 2003. For the past 12 years he lived in Basel, Switzerland, with his partner, Astrid Starck. He is survived by Astrid, his daughters and four grandchildren.