On September 10, another African literary icon was interred. The ancestors called and Lewis Nkosi went to rest.

For a man who had lived for so long in exile and had just returned to South Africa a few years ago, Nkosi, as they say, went too soon.

He was born in 1936 and died in Johannesburg on September 5.

Nkosi was born in Durban, KwaZulu-Natal and, like many of his countrymen of the time, left South Africa on a one-way exit visa in 1960 to study at Harvard. Before that he worked at Ilanga lase Natal (The Natal Sun) newspaper in Durban and Drum magazine in Johannesburg.

Drum magazine is where several of the future South African writers and artists such as William ‘Bloke’ Modisane, Can Themba, Es’kia Mphahlele, Alex la Guma and Todd Matshikiza honed their skills.

Many of them endured harsh working conditions and harassment by the apartheid government but ended up establishing one of the most thriving popular literary and cultural publications that became a household name in many parts of English-speaking Africa from the 1950s up to the 1980s.

Nkosi went on to become a leading Africa(ist) writer, academic and literary critic. Among his best-known works are Mating Birds (1982), Underground People (2002) and Mandela’s Ego (2006).

He wrote plays and poetry and students of African literature will also remember him from his acerbic essays Home and Exile, The Transplanted Heart: Essays on South Africa and Tasks and Masks: Themes and Style of African Literature.

South Africa, its people, cultures and landscape remained at the centre of each of his works. This obsession with home seems to have been a natural reaction to the sense of loss and alienation that an individual experiences in exile.

But probably most people will remember Nkosi for his 1982 novel Mating Birds. This drama is one that many generations of South Africa dreaded: that moment when one impulsive act, like stealing a glance at the sight of a white woman’s body, could end a black man’s life.

Nkosi argued that his book was not about replaying the grinding realities of life under apartheid; he was of the view that South African writers needed to see beyond the subject and discover how to tell the stories of their conflicted society.

In his opinion, Mating Birds was an attempt to let “the critique of the accursed doctrine (apartheid) to emerge automatically out of the objective social relations between two individuals.” That was a difficult task but it seems Nkosi tackled it well enough in the book.

His legacy, though he had aversion to what he called the ‘township novel’, lies with this very same protest literature.