Once the project was green-lit, Carl began developing a new system to make the process easier for musicians. This was called the “tick system”. He used the frames from the cartoon and created a steady beat that musicians could follow, since there is such a change in pace with cartoons every second. The first time Stalling tested it out was with The Skeleton Dance. This process is still used today and is called a click track.

Stalling ended up leaving the Disney studios in 1930, but came back every once in a while to work as a freelancer on projects. He also followed Ub to his new studio when he left Disney too in the 1930s. Carl Stalling is now best known for his work with Warner Bros.’ Looney Tunes series.

The Skeleton Dance Animator Ub Iwerks

Ub Iwerks had been with Disney since their early days of chasing their dreams to be cartoonists. When Walt was ready to open his own little studio, Ub followed him, even with how much risk they were both taking. When they both found success with Mickey Mouse, Ub continued to be the main animator for most Disney projects until January 1930.

According to Mouse Planet, Ub went to a local library and found inspiration for the skeletons through Thomas Rowlandson’s drawings of skeletons. It’s also said that it was Ub’s idea to have the film be playful rather than on the scary side. It ended up taking Ub 6 weeks to animate the whole short.

The Skeleton Dance Story

The cartoon begins with an owl being startled up on a tree, a dog howling into the wind, and 2 cats fighting on top of gravestones. A menacing skeleton rises on top of the gravestone between them, and scares them away. The skeleton skips through the graveyard, removing his head and hitting the owl with it when he hears it cawing.

More skeletons appear from behind gravestones, dancing together, holding hands and swinging around in circles, and enjoying their night. At one point, one skeleton falls apart to turn into a xylophone for the other to play. Near the end of the 5 and a half minute cartoon, a rooster crows to signify morning, and all of the skeletons rush back into a grave.

Theatrical Release

Many distributors were reluctant to show this new spooky film at first - it was not something that had really been done in the past, so the audience reception was a gamble. Walt operated on taking chances and hoping it would work out. Finally, Columbia Pictures distributed the film and the Los Angeles Carthay Circle Theater agreed to show his new film. It was the first cartoon the Carthay Circle had ever shown. It was released on August 22nd, 1929.

The Skeleton Dance was a major hit with audiences despite the odd reactions to the idea at first. It ended up being a Halloween hit, especially with big names like Variety and The Film Daily. In a Variety article from July 17th, 1929 (26 years to the day before Disneyland opened, by the way), they write:

The Skeleton Dance Legacy

In 1994 Jerry Beck, an animation historian wrote a book titled “The 50 Greatest Cartoons: As Selected by 1,000 Animation Professionals”. The Skeleton Dance came in at #18, right after Popeye the Sailor Meets Sindbad the Sailor (1936) and right before Snow-White (1933) by Dave Fleischer.

The Skeleton Dance remains an important part of animation and film history. Not only was it the first Silly Symphony cartoon, but it also has a timeless, universal theme that can be presented every year. As discussed by Anya Stanley on the Shudder Blog in 2019, she brings up the theme of the danse macabre (dance of death). The cartoon mimics that theme, with the four skeletons all dancing together, no matter who they were in their previous lives. Anya says: