On STALLING: articles—

Funnyworld , no. 13, Spring 1971.

Soundtrack! (Hollywood), March 1991.

Filmfax , no. 34, August-September 1992.

Film Comment , vol. 28, September-October 1992.

Animatrix (Los Angeles), no. 7, 1993.

Film Score Monthly (Los Angeles), May 1995.

* * *

"I love music," said Warners' animator Friz Freleng. "Music inspires my visual thinking. I time my cartoons to music . . . everything is done rhythmically."

Musical director Carl Stalling was one of the unsung "back-room boys" of the Golden Age of the Hollywood cartoon from around 1930–60, working in a medium where even the directors and animators (and Stalling, especially at Warner Bros., worked with the best) have only recently begun to receive the acclaim their brilliant creations deserve.

Stalling broke into the movie business in the 1920s in time-honoured fashion accompanying silent movies and conducting theatre orchestras, principally in Kansas City. It was here that he met Walt Disney, who hired him as musical director in 1928 as the age of sound was about to dawn.

The importance of Carl Stalling's musical contribution to the success of the Mickey Mouse cartoons and other early Disney work should not be underestimated. Animation and music fused in these cartoons, the visual rhythm of movement and the punchlines of gags dancing to the beats of the soundtrack. Without music, reaction to the earliest Mickey Mouse cartoons ( Plane Crazy and Gallopin' Gaucho ) had been disappointing but the introduction of Stalling's music to the third cartoon, Steamboat Willie , transformed the situation. It was Stalling, also, who proposed the idea for the 1929 classic Skeleton Dance and launched the "Silly Symphonies" series for Disney.

A period in the early 1930s working for animator Ub Iwerks (who poached Stalling from Disney when he left to form his own studio) produced little opportunity for Stalling to shine (Iwerks' own cartoons were not outstanding) but this changed when Stalling joined Warners in 1936 after the failure of Iwerks' studio.

At Warner Bros., Stalling not only had brilliant cartoons to work on but also, thanks to the studio's ownership of several music publishers, access to a catalogue of hundreds of popular tunes. His grounding in the work of the masters of the clever tune/apt lyric brigade gave his arrangements an incredible diversity—light, graceful and witty—which complemented the on-screen action without ever distracting from it. He was helped considerably by an incredible recall which allowed him to select titles suited to the action or image, a facility which Chuck Jones referred to as "his computer." This helped Stalling in keeping up with the pace of work imposed at Warners where, as the principal person scoring for each of the cartoon "teams," he would often have to come up with an entire six-minute cartoon score every week. Along with the sound-effects of Treg Brown, Stalling's scores became an integral part of the output.

The reflex selection of music according to a title related to what was on-screen did, however, run the risk of descending into cliché. "Sometimes it worked and sometimes it didn't," said Jones, before adding that "it didn't mean anything because nobody knew the damn songs even then." This is only partly true, since even if Warner Bros. fans didn't know the titles, Stalling's method meant they came to recognize the tunes! The swingtime of "Powerhouse" became the hallmark for any mechanical activity, "California, Here I Come" accompanied trains going anywhere, and all games became jazzed up contests played out to "Freddie the Freshman."

Stalling had a particular soft spot for the catchy, energetic work of Raymond Scott (who wrote "Powerhouse," as well as such cartoony titles as "Reckless Night on Board an Ocean Liner" and "Dinner Music for a Pack of Hungry Cannibals") though he would latch onto anything with a crazy title, clearing the rights to songs such as "They Gotta Quit Kickin' My Dog Around," "Honey Bunny Boo," "Huckleberry Duck," "The Girl-Friend of the Whirling Dervish" and "Go Get the Ax."

The logic Stalling applied in his selection of music often, in fact, mirrored the remorseless extensions of logic which underlay the cartoon mayhem on screen which would take things and stretch them or put them in an oddball context. Stalling's efforts even earned the praise of the famous writer and critic James Agee for his pastiche of Lizst in the 1946 cartoon Rhapsody Rabbit : "A good musician must have worked on this . . . I have never seen anything done from so deep inside the ham."

If Stalling's musical eclecticism (ragtime, swing, the classics and just about any kind of popular ditty) let him down, it was only with faster jazz of the late 1940s and 1950s, when occasionally directors would bring in an outsider for a soundtrack (e.g. in Mouse Mazurka (1949) Friz Freleng turned to jazzman Shorty Rogers for music).

The pressure under which he had to work may have dictated his reliance on borrowing and playing with the work of others—as did the desire to pastiche everything which hung in the air on the Warners' cartoon lot—but Stalling was also a consummate musician, well able to compose his own themes or songs when the opportunity arose. Bugs' theme song, "What's Up, Doc?," was composed by Stalling in 1944 and saw the light of day to marvelous effect in the great rabbit's 1950 spoof bio-pic of the same name. Footage of this number, with Bugs doing terrible things to a deadpan Elmer, later appeared in Peter Bogdanovich's 1972 feature film What's Up, Doc? .

If Stalling's contribution in his 20 years at Warners' was a backdrop to the on-screen pyrotechnics it was an important one. An actor needs a platform to act upon and Stalling's music provided part of that platform. He was brilliant at adapting a staggering range of musical material to back up the cartoons' comic pace, mimicking the referential gifts of the animators with his own musical one. Chuck Jones has called Stalling "probably the most inventive musician who ever worked in animation," but perhaps he was only obeying the rarely heeded advice of producer Leon Schlesinger: "Hit 'em with the fast music."