Feline Frame-Up is a 1954 Looney Tunes short directed by Charles M. Jones.

Plot[]

Pussyfoot makes herself a cozy little bed on a pillow. Her nap is quickly interrupted by a swift kick from Claude's foot. Furious, Marc Anthony jumps in and attacks Claude, to protect Pussyfoot, then makes him return the kitten to his bed. After this, the conniving Claude convinces the animals' stodgy master named Filbert that Marc Anthony is trying to eat Pussyfoot, eventually leading to the dog being tossed outside. As Claude enjoys his new dog-free life, while harassing Pussyfoot, Marc Anthony makes various attempts to harass Claude from outside the house. After several successful attempts to beat up Claude, he eventually forces the cat to surrender and sign a confession admitting to his crimes, and in the end, it is Claude who is tossed outside the house.

Availability[]

Streaming[]

Notes[]

This cartoon is a rare instance where Robert C. Bruce voices an onscreen character instead of his usual role as a narrator; in this case, he voices the owner of Marc Anthony, Pussyfoot, and Claude Cat.

Claude Cat will antagonize Pussyfoot one more time in "Cat Feud". (and will appear with Marc Anthony once more in "No Barking".)

This is the last cartoon short in the Classic Looney Tunes Series where Claude is depicted with his classic yellow fur and design. In his final three cartoons, "No Barking", "Cat Feud", and "Louvre Come Back to Me!", Claude was redesigned as a mixed-breed cat with orange fur until his departure in the Classic Looney Tunes Shorts just 2 years before Termite Terrace closed down.

This is the last cartoon where Claude speaks. Claude has only one line at the end of the cartoon: "Just one of those days, I guess".

This is the last cartoon where Marc Anthony speaks. Marc Anthony said "1, 2, 3, 4, 5," two times in the middle of the cartoon before sawing.

This cartoon was loosely remade as the Tom and Jerry cartoon "The Unshrinkable Jerry Mouse" in 1964.

The gag where Claude taunts and abuses Pussyfoot from indoors right in front of Marc Anthony's eyes, followed by an angry Marc Anthony rushing into the house to clobber Claude in response, would later be re-used in the Tom and Jerry cartoon "The Cat's Me-Ouch", albeit with a different result.