Yedioth Books is the largest general publisher in Israel: our list is comprised of literature, fiction, non-fiction, Jewish fiction and philosophy, children, and YA – local and translated.

As we continue the eternal tradition of storytelling, we are constantly evolving, and are now distributing our wonderful books in print, digital and audio.

We love books and we aim to keep publishing them to our ever-growing audience, over classic and new media.

Our Story

Yedioth Books was founded in the 1950s, and in its different versions we have been publishing books for over 70 years. Its current iteration is a union between Yedioth Ahronoth, the leading media group in Israel, and Miskal, founded by Mr. Dov Eichenwald. Mr. Eichenwald is a second-generation publisher and grew up with words and print in his veins, his parents owning and managing Hemed Books.

Yedioth Media Group holds Ynet, the largest, most popular news website in Israel, Calcalist, a leading financial magazine and e-vrit, the strongest e-book and audio platform in Hebrew, holding over 60% of the digital book market in Israel.

Our Mission

Connect Hebrew readers, wherever they may be, to the reading experience.

Be the first choice for every reader, writer, and publishing professional.

Offer a warm, supportive, and creative home.

Lead the cultural discourse in Israel.

Authors

Dan Ariely; Fredrik Backman; John Banville; Jennifer Lynn Barnes; Chico Buarque; Katherine Center; Paulo Coelho; Kiera Cass; Hernan Diaz; David Friedman; Bill Gates; Victoria Hislop; E.L James; Harper Lee; Astrid Lindgren; Santa Montefiore; Jojo Moyes; Anna North; Barack Obama; Michelle Obama; Kiley Reid; J.K. Rowling; Laura Sebastian; Neal Shusterman; David Walliams; Colson Whitehead; Elie Wiesel; John Williams and many, many more.

2023 Publications (Selection!)

Trust Hernan Diaz; The Last Rose of Shanghai Weina Dai Randel; The Bodyguard Katherine Center; The Boy, the Mole, the Fox, and the Horse Charlie Mackesy; Better than the Movies Lynn Painter; The Hawthorne Legacy Trilogy Jennifer Lynn Barnes; The Cemetery by the Sea Aslak Nore; The Nickel Boys Colson Whitehead; Here and Now Santa Montifiore; We Were Never Here Andrea Bartz; Someone Else's Shoes Jojo Moyes; Arc of a Scythe, Neal Shusterman; When in Rome Sarah Adams; Seacrow Island Astrid Lindgren; The Betrayed Kiera Cass; The Last Kids on Earth Max Barllier; The Butcher and the Wren Alaina Urquhart; How to Prevent the Next Pandemic Bill Gates and many, many more.

Brands

Yedioth Books holds the rights to the world's largest media groups, Disney and Paramount.

We are also the Hebrew home for a vast list of brands, such as Guinness World Records, Minecraft, Gravity Falls, Paw Patrol, Cuphead, Rick and Morty, Lego Ninjago and National Geographic.

People

Yedioth Books is still managed as a family business.

Our editorial team is committed to excellence across all genres, and is supported by a all-star professional team of designers, scouts, proofreaders, editors, fact checkers and readers.

Our in-house marketing and PR teams is considered the best in the country, and they have the stats to prove it. The savvy, experienced team tailor marketing solutions for each individual title at all selling points – stores, classic media, new media, and social platforms.

Distribution

Yedioth Books owns an independent logistical center, serving approximately 500 points of sales and distribution. In addition to bookstores and chain, we also manage an independent distribution to all libraries in Israel. We've partnered with OverDrive to distribute e-books in libraries.

Sister Publishers

Yedioth Books serves as an umbrella for a select group of independent publishers: Achuzat Bayit Books; Astrolog; Books in the Attic; Babel; Carmel; Penn; Simanim; Sirkis.