Diether Ocampo and Kristine Hermosa should be by now free to marry again as their marriage has been declared null and void by the Court of Appeals. The court said that the marriage was void from the beginning because of the lack of the essential and formal requisites of marriage like a marriage license. Kristine and Diet, I hear are happy with the decision. Kristine’s family according to some sources is also happy with the Court’s verdict. But both Kristine and Diet are not talking about the annulment as both still have to receive a copy of the court’s decision.

Richard Gomez’s admirer

Bebe Gandanghari admits he has a crush on Richard Gomez. Richard’s wife Lucy is nonchalant about it. “Natatawa lang ako. Kami ni Rustom even before he became Bebe, nagkasama na kami, and he is a lot of fun,” says Lucy.

Is Kian Kazemi a kiss and tell?

Cristine Reyes was turned off when she learned that the press knew that Kian Kazemi ex-Pinoy Big Brother Housemate had sent her a bunch of beautiful white roses and one red rose. A startled Cristine asked, “Saan mo nalaman?” to which the reporter replied, “Kay Kian.”

“Hindi dapat pini-press release ’yun. I don’t like it. I am turned off,” Cristine said. She also enthused that she is not entertaining suitors now. But Kian, when asked if he is courting Cristine, replied, “Ah hindi, hindi.” What were the roses for Kian? Or is Kian just really a nice guy?

Jennylyn ready to work with Patrick

It looks like Jennylyn Mercado is softening up on Patrick Garcia. Tabloid reports say that Jenn is no longer mad with Patrick and is even willing to work with him. Still according to tab reports, Jenn, in the name of professionalism, won’t be distracted by whatever bad blood going on between her and Patrick. She allegedly even joked that she can do kissing scenes with him because she is used to kissing him anyway.

Current toast of music town

Charice was one of the performers during the Oscars Ball. She joined other Hollywood singers and celebrities during that momentous night. Charice made the Filipinos proud when she sang at the pre-inaugural ball of President Barack Obama. She is now the current toast of music town. Charice is currently in America working on a recording project with Warner Brothers. “Ito po siguro ang pinakamahirap na gagawin ko. The album will be sold around the world. And for me, if it turns gold ang saya saya ko po siguro.”

Geneva Cruz denies rumors

Geneva Cruz denied all the allegations thrown at her. Geneva said that she is in town to work on an album and that KC Montero will soon fly in to attend the christening of brother Troy and Aubrey Miles’ baby. It is not true she said that she left Heaven, her son by former husband Paco Arespacochaga of Introvoys, in the care of her in-laws in America. She also denied that she was admitted to a hospital for an alleged suicide attempt after an overdose of paracetamol tablets.

Obsessed with Angelina’s pouty lips

Pops Fernandez admitted that she is obsessed with having full lips. Yes it is true that she had lip augmentation. “Nila-line ko pa siya. Akala ng tao sumusobra. I think that’s the problem. Dream ko kasi maging Angelina (Jolie),” she laughs.

Astig, Mga Batang Kalye

Noel Ferrer Project Development and Promotions manager of GMA Films, consultant of Tony Tuviera’s APT Entertainment and Creative and Content Manager of Regal Films is working on a film project he has developed with director GB Sampedro and award winning writer, Gerry Gracio. The movie is billed Astig, Mga Batang Kalye and an entry to the Cinemalaya Independent Film Festival this year.

“We are excited with this project because Cinemalaya festival committee coordinator Robbie Tan told us that Astig is the best written material for the Cinemalaya this year. We have gathered the best people to work on this project,” says Noel.