CEBU, Philippines – Diether Ocampo wasn’t exactly thrilled at the unsolicited advice of ex-wife Kristine Hermosa concerning his plans to get married again. Kristine had suggested that Diet must think things over very carefully if he is contemplating marrying his non-showbiz girl friend, Rima Ostwani.

“He must really be serious, or else someone might get hurt again. (Marriage) is not a game that you can easily get out of,” Kristine said.

There was a hint of resentment in the way Diet reacted to Kristine’s remark. “As far as I’m concerned, whatever happened between us is already part of my past. What’s important to me now is my present and my future with Rima,” he said. Is Diet sending Kristine a message to let him be?

As far as tying the knot with Rima, that’s not gonna happen soon. She’s only 23, and they’re just beginning to know each other, he explained.

Diet is all praise for Rima, crediting her for lifting him up from the “dark part of my life.” Hmm. I wonder what that dark episode was.

Kristine, meanwhile, has not confirmed or denied if she and Oyo Sotto are on. She just says that they’ve been close friends since they met on the set of Enteng Kabisote. “Whatever comes out of our friendship, we leave it up to the Lord.”

* * *

There’s nothing ordinary about the house Rufa Mae Quinto is having built in Corinthian Gardens. In the first place, it’s so huge that prospective contractors had to bid for the project! Just how big? “There’s a meditation room, gym, spa, TV room, guest room,” narrates the sexy comedian. “I want every room to be functional.”

If there’s one thing Rufa Mae isn’t telling about her dream house, it’s the price tag.

She also told me there’s no reconciling with Mo Twister, who she blames for her spreading the rumors about her supposed sex video with Dr. Hayden Kho. “There’s no reason for us to be friends,” she insists.

* * *

Is thin still in?

Controversy hangs over Australia ’s Miss Universe pageant over the weight of one finalist.

At 5 foot 11 inch, Stephanie Naumoska cuts an imposing figure. But the stir is about how much she weighs – 49 kilograms (108 pounds). Together with 19-year-old Sydney model’s body mass index of 15.1, well below the official malnutrition level of 18, she’s grossly underweight, claimed at least one dietician.

Pageant director Deborah Miller attributed Naumoska’s lightweight frame to her Macedonian heritage. “They have long, lithe bodies and small bones. It is their body type, just like Asian girls tend to be small,'' Miller explained.

Naumoska didn’t win the crown, which went to another model, Rachel Finch, who must have weighed a lot more than her rival.