NBA icons Steve Kerr and Steve Nash have an investment in a team in a different sport which has fans surprised.

Kerr, 58, and Nash, 50, are both minority owners of a soccer club in Europe.

The Phoenix Suns legend Nash became a shareholder of the Spanish club Mallorca during the club's purchase in 2016.

And the current Golden State Warriors head coach Kerr, meanwhile, joined last November.

Former Suns vice chairman Andy Kohlberg is also one of the American owners of Mallorca, and he revealed how difficult the career venture can be.

“It’s very hard. It’s very different than running a normal business, and especially in another country, dealing with the difference in culture and language and customs," Kohlberg told AP.

However, the four-time NBA champion head coach Kerr and Nash aren't as involved as Kohlberg, who's Mallorca’s main shareholder and its president.

Still, Kohlberg revealed that Kerr and Nash watch the games and speak about the results after the contests.

Nash, who won two MVP awards as a player, is a huge soccer fan and even practiced with Mallorca's B squad in the past.

"When the team loses, they call me and ask, ‘What are you doing?’” Kohlberg joked about Nash’s and Kerr’s collaboration with the team.

Fans were shocked to hear about Nash and Kerr's investments with a European soccer club.

One commented, "Most random thing ever."

Another wrote, "Very interesting."

While a third said, "The more you know."

This week, Kohlberg as well as Kerr and Nash will be enjoying the soccer club-ownership adventure.

They'll be seeing Mallorca play Athletic Bilbao on Saturday in Seville in the final of the Copa del Rey.

Mallorca is one of just five first-division clubs in Spain with foreign ownership.

And Mallorca is the only team owned by Americans.

Mallorca is currently in 15th place, and just six points above the relegation zone.

Kerr will hope his nine-time championship-winning resume will rub off on the Spanish club.

And Nash will hope his eight-time All-Star achievements can have an effect on the squad.