Title

Joel Clyne Meadors Photograph Collection

Subject

Photography of horse sports

Description

Items in this collection were digitized from the Keeneland Library’s Joel Clyne Meadors Photographic Negative Collection. The collection, comprised of more than 5,000 acetate negatives, includes photographs of Thoroughbred horses, horse farms, racetrack scenes, horse sales, and people active in the Thoroughbred industry; as well as a group of negatives on business and commercial subjects in Lexington, Kentucky.

Joel Clyne “Skeets” Meadors maintained a full-time career as a photographer, specializing in conformation images of stallions, mares, and yearlings from 1947 to 1967.

Rights

These digital resources may be freely searched and displayed. Usage permission must be received, and license agreement must be secured for any use or distribution in print or electronically, including social media usage. Physical rights are retained by Keeneland Library, and copyright is retained in accordance with U.S. copyright laws. Contact Keeneland Library to secure required usage permissions and license agreements for these digital resources.

Collection Items

Northern Dancer works at Keeneland

This photo captures 1964 Champion Three-Year-Old Colt, 1964 Canadian Horse of the Year, and future influential sire and Racing Hall of Famer Northern Dancer at Keeneland during a workout under Ramon Cerda before claiming the Blue Grass Stakes,…

Chateaugay ahead of 1963 Blue Grass

This photograph features Chateaugay, Braulio Baeza up, at the 1963 Blue Grass Stakes.

One of 11 Blue Grass winners to also notch Kentucky Derby victories, Chateaugay won the 1963 Blue Grass Stakes by a head for Darby Dan Farm. Trained by James P.…

Horses break from the gate in 1958 Blue Grass

This photograph features the start of the 1958 Blue Grass Stakes. Plion went on to win with Dave Erb up. Trained by Tom Jolley, the colt edged out 2nd place finisher Warren G by 3/4 length.

Sherluck at the finish in 1961 Blue Grass

This photograph captures Sherluck, with Braulio Baeza up, winning the 1961 Blue Grass Stakes. Eight other horses trail as a packed crowd looks on from the grandstand and apron.

Round Table in 1957 Blue Grass Post Parade

Future Racing Hall of Famers Round Table and Ralph Neves parade to post before winning the 1957 Blue Grass by 6 lengths over One-Eyed King. Round Table earned a Horse of the Year title in 1958 and was leading sire in North America in 1972.

Racegoers

Racegoers at Keeneland Race Course in Lexington, Kentucky in 1951.

Keeneland crowd

This photograph captures a crowd of spectators at Keeneland Race Course in Lexington, Kentucky in 1949.

Will Harbut

Photograph of Will Harbut, Man o' War's groom at Faraway Farm from the fall of 1930 until the spring of 1946.

Man o' War with Will Harbut

This photograph of the American Thoroughbred Man o' War with his groom Will Harbut was taken at Faraway Farm in 1937. Harbut was Man o' War's groom at Faraway from the fall of 1930 until the spring of 1946.

Newspaper headlines from around the…

Man o' War Statue

This photograph of Herbert Haseltine's statue at Man o' War's gravesite was taken on October 16, 1948, at Faraway Farm nearly a year after Man o' War's death. Haseltine (front, middle) is regarding his work. The bronze stood at Faraway Farm until its…

View all 44 items