Early life

Alkiviades David was born in May 1968, in Lagos, Nigeria, to a trading and shipping family of Greek Cypriot origin. His father, Andrew A. David (1934-2000), was born in Petra, Cyprus and went on to study business at Trinity College in Dublin, Ireland. In 1957, Andrew A. David joined the family business, the Leventis-David Group in Ghana, where he managed Coca-Cola Bottling Plant in Accra.

David attended high school in Switzerland.

Career

In 1998, he co-founded the London modeling agency Independent Models, whose models included Helena Christensen.

In 2006, David partnered with veteran film producer Elliott Kastner to launch 111 Pictures Ltd., a UK-based independent production and international sales company. Also that year, David started FilmOn, an online streaming site.

He has appeared in films, including a 2008 motion picture, The Bank Job, in which David played a bank-vault expert hired by Jason Statham to help with a bank heist.

He founded the nonprofit organization BIOS to conserve, protect, and educate people on marine conservation around the Greek islands.

Personal life

David has been married three times and divorced twice, and has two sons, Andrew and Alexander, with his first wife. He met second wife Emma McAllister in 2004, marrying her in 2007, and separating in 2009. As of 2011 he is married to Jennifer Stano, a swimsuit designer and former model who founded Have Faith Swimwear with David in Beverly Hills, California, in 2010.

Business

David's projects include:

FilmOn, a video on-demand website and mobile service which is an extension of his 111Pix distribution venture.

BattleCam.com, a peer-to-peer video streaming website and community whose offerings including Fight Night and other pay-per-view tournaments built around mixed martial arts, gaming and comedy. David advertised for this venture by offering cash to the first person who streaks in a legal manner in front of US President Barack Obama, and by hosting a faked assisted suicide.

9021go.com, a home shopping site founded in 2011

Litigations