Greek Billionaire heir, Alki David is known globally for working with digital media companies like My Combat Channel and Filmon. He is also the co-founder of London modeling agency Independent Models.

David was born on 23 May 1968 in Lagos Nigeria. He currently ages 50 and possesses the birth sign of Gemini. He is Nigerian by nationality and possesses mixed ethnicity.

Quick Facts

Real Name Alki David Birthday 23rd May 1968 Birthplace Lagos Nigeria Zodiac Sign Gemini Nationality Nigerian Ethnicity Mixed Profession Director, Actor Parents Unknown Dating/Girlfriend No Married/Wife Jennifer Stano Siblings Unknown Income Under Review Net Worth $1.7 Billion

Alki David Arrested With Cannabis Worth $1.3 million On Board

14th May, Tuesday, David along with his billionaire business partners were arrested after landing at St. Kitts on a private jet with actor, Jonathan Rhys Meyers. Inboard, they were carrying the cannabis which was worth $1.3 million. David along with Chase Ergen is said to have transported 5000 cannabis. They said that they are about to start the new business to develop legal cannabis businesses in the region.

As per officers they were pulled aside by customs officials after landing and said they were held for eight hours.

In a statement, St. Christopher and Nevis Police Force confirmed that David had been charged with a purpose to supply, possession of controlled drugs and import of a controlled drug into the region

Net Worth, Salary, and Income

David co-founded the London modeling agency Independent Models in 1998. Then in 2006, he partnered with veteran film producer Elliott Kastner to start 111 Pictures Ltd.

Besides that, he also appears in films including The Bank Job (2008) where he portrayed the role as a bank vault expert hired by Jason Statham to help him with a bank heist.

Greek Coca Cola heir David has a colossal financial status. He has a net worth that swings around $1.7 billion.

Married to Wife, Jennifer Stano

Alki David has been married three times to date. He has two sons, Andrew, and Alexander with his first wife. Then he met his second wife Emma McAllister in 2004. After dating each other for nearly three years, they tied their knot in 2007. After their marriage of two years, the couple decided to separate from each other in 2009.

After that, he met Jennifer Stano who is a swimsuit designer and former model. Then after dating each other for a couple of years, they married in 2011.

Parents, Family, and Siblings

David was born to Greece parents. As of his education, he went to Switzerland to attend high school. Later he went to the British Army and studied at London’s Royal College of Art.

Body Measurements: Height, Weight, Size

Billionaire David stands tall at the height of 5 feet 10 inches and has black colored eyes.