Alki David

On 23-5-1968 Alki David (nickname: Alki) was born in Lagos, Lagos State, Nigeria. He made his 1900 million dollar fortune with Leventis-David Group & FilmOn. The celebrity his starsign is Gemini and he is now 56 years of age.

Alki David Facts & Wiki

Where does Alki David live? And how much money does Alki David earn?

Birth Date 23-5-1968 Heritage/origin Greek Ethnicity Middle-Eastern Religion - believes in God? Residence He owns a house in Malibu, California.

Alki David Net Worth, Salary, Cars & Houses

Alki David is a Greek billionaire who has a net worth of $1.9 billion. He is the majority shareholder of Leventis-David Group and owns FilmOn, 9021go.com, BattleCam.com, and Independent Models.

Estimated Net Worth 1900 million Dollar Celebrity Net Worth Revealed: The 55 Richest Actors Alive in 2024 Yearly Salary N/A These Are The 10 Best-Paid Television Stars In The World Colleagues Billy Zane & James Faulkner

Houses

Alki David is currently resides in Malibu. The $19.1 million house features 3847 square feet, 5 bedrooms and 4.5 bathrooms.

Cars

- manufactured by BMW

RELATED:These 10 Whopping Homes & Cars Of Celebrities Look Amazing!

Alki David: Wife, Dating, Family & Friends

Alki David has been married three times. He is currently with Jennifer Stano, a swimsuit designer and former model who co-founded Have Faith Swimwear. Alki has two sons with his first wife.

Who is Alki David dating in 2024?

Relationship status Married Sexuality Straight Current Wife of Alki David Jennifer Stano Ex-girlfriends or ex-wives Emma McAllister & Jennifer Stano More info Was previously married and divorced Has any kids? Yes, father of: Alexander & Andrew

Will the marriage of Greek celebrity Alki David and current Wife, Jennifer Stano survive 2024?

These Are The 15 Hottest Wives And Girlfriends Of Hollywood!

Family

Names of father, mother, kids, brothers & sisters:

Andrew A. David (Father) Andrew David (Son) Alexander David (Son)

Height, Weight, Body Measurements, Tattoos, Skin, Hair & Eye Color

This intelligent celebrity originating from Lagos, Lagos State, Nigeria has a slim body & oval face type.

Hair color Grey Hairstyle simple Beard or Mustache Beard Eye Color Dark Brown Height 178 cm Weight 85 kilo Feet size N/A Does Alki David smoke? No, never Caught Smoking: These Are The 60 Most Shocking Celebrity Smokers Does Alki David have a tattoo? Yes

These 50 Celebrity Tattoos Went Horribly Wrong

Chest Right lower arm Right upper arm tattoo

Does Alki David have official Social Media profiles?

Follow this page to stay up to date about the latest gossip and rumors (plastic surgery, scandals, new photos or videos and so on) of Alki David!

Trending

Lo and behold, this is our Top 60 of celebrities that have been caught smoking or

Celebrities don’t always wear makeup anymore. In fact, many of them lately like to show off

40/ 40Cardi B’s dream mansion in Atlanta rap-up.com After two years of house hunting Cardi B

55/ 55Sean Penn – $70,000,000 via bz-berlin.de Sean is a dinosaur in Hollywood, but he manages

A lot of celebrities do not know what to do with their money anymore in 2022.