One man who wears multiple bonnets is Alkiviades David, also known as Alki David. In Lagos, Nigeria, Alki was born on May 23, 1968, into a family of Greek and Cypriot traders and shippers. Given his extensive travels, a globe would have been a more appropriate childhood gift than a teddy bear. Among Alki’s many accomplishments are his several business and entertainment careers, as well as the Coca-Cola bottling empire that his family runs.

“Ludicrously good” was the description given to 10-year-old Musiala in a tweet from a decade ago after his performance in a UK age-group game. This early acknowledgment was merely the first step. Even as a young child, Musiala drew admiration from peers at all youth levels for his obvious aptitude.

As early as the age of 21, Musiala had established himself as an integral part of Germany’s roster. Against Scotland on the first night, he showed off all of his abilities. He was an integral part of Germany’s lopsided first-half performance, which he spearheaded alongside Florian Wirtz and Kai Havertz.

When Was Alki David Born?

The alkiviades David came from a Greek-Cypriot trading and shipping family in Lagos, Nigeria, where he was born in May 1968. Leventis-David Group, a family firm, owns bottling operations for Coca-Cola in more than one country. This is why David spent his youth moving throughout Europe and eventually ended up in Switzerland for high school. He continued his study at the Royal College of Art in London after finishing his undergraduate degree at Vermont’s Bennington College.

Career

Over the years, David has started or co-founded numerous businesses. Model Helena Christensen of Denmark was one of the clients of Independent Models, a London-based agency he co-founded in 1998 with Duncan Heath. Subsequently, in 2009, David debuted FilmOn, an Internet television provider that enables online and mobile streaming of local television channels.

He and film producer Elliott Kastner established 111 Pictures, a production and worldwide sales organization, and the service is a natural outgrowth of that. Among David’s other endeavors is BattleCam.com, a P2P video streaming platform that hosts MMA, gaming, and comedy-related pay-per-view events. In 2011, he also debuted the home-shopping website 9021go.com on the web.

David has acted, written, directed, produced, and edited in the film and television industries. He wrote, directed, and starred in his first feature picture, 2004’s “The Freediver,” a British release.

In addition to Judd Nelson and Dominique Swain, the cast also includes Adam Baldwin. In 2004, David had an appearance on the TV show “The Grid.” His film “Opa!” and television appearance in an episode of the British spy drama “Spooks” were both released the following year.

David has the role of Mr. Pappas in a 2006 episode of the British TV show “Hotel Babylon,” which was adapted from the same-titled book. A few years later, he co-starred with Steven Seagal in the action film “Flight of Fury,” which was released straight to DVD in 2007.

In that same year, David was involved in the production of the Billy Zane and Kelly Brook comedy “Fishtales,” in which he also had a role as an actor, writer, editor, and co-director. Among his other cinematic credits are the robbery drama “The Bank Job” and the action comedy “Bob Thunder: Internet Assassin.” Additionally, in 2009, David made appearances on British police procedurals “Trial & Retribution” and “Waking the Dead” on television.

David has the role of Mr. Pappas in a 2006 episode of the British TV show “Hotel Babylon,” which was adapted from the same-titled book. A few years later, he co-starred with Steven Seagal in the action film “Flight of Fury,” which was released straight to DVD in 2007. In that same year, David was involved in the production of the Billy Zane and Kelly Brook comedy “Fishtales,” in which he also had a role as an actor, writer, editor, and co-director.

Among his other cinematic credits are the robbery drama “The Bank Job” and the action comedy “Bob Thunder: Internet Assassin.” Additionally, in 2009, David made appearances on British police procedurals “Trial & Retribution” and “Waking the Dead” on television.

Alki David Personal Life

Even more exciting than his professional life is Alki David’s personal life. He has a total of four children from his three marriages. Andrew and Alexander, his boys, are the product of his first marriage. In celebrity years, 2007–2009 is nearly a decade; that’s how long his second marriage was to Emma McAllister. Jennifer Stano, a former model and current swimsuit designer, became his third wife in 2011. Niko and Constantine are their two sons from their marriage. I wouldn’t be surprised if you thought this was straight out of a soap opera.

Alki David Net Worth

Approximately $50 million is the current estimation of Alki David’s net worth. You better buckle up, for this figure has taken you on a wild ride. According to The Sunday Times in 2007, he boasted about being a billionaire with a net worth of $4 billion, which is more than $10 billion today. However, being the consummate showman that he is, Alki eventually confessed that his billionaire status was fabricated with the aid of public relations. A lot of people thought he was rich and was going to buy an English soccer team because of this minor embellishment. After battling $80 million in court judgments, Alki came clean about being completely bankrupt in 2021.

Alki David Height and Weight

Being 5 feet and 10 inches tall is quite an accomplishment for Alki David. Not much is known about his weight, but he has handled several lawsuits and several million dollars (at various points in time) with grace.