Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Admission 2021. Apply online for Admission in the Undergraduate (UG) B.A, B.Sc (Honours & General) courses on Chandidas Mahavidyalaya. This college is under Burdwan University. Online Admission for the seasons 2021 is started now. Higher Secondary passed eligible students can apply for Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Admission 2021. Download the admission Merit list. Know the subject-wise cut-off marks for UG Honours and Pass Course Admission in Chandidas Mahavidyalaya.

Know all the details information about Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Merit list 2021 and Admission. B.A and B.Sc (Honours & Pass) course Admission notification published. Apply Online and also check your Online Merit Rank for the next Admission List.

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Admission 2021

Here is some important information about Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Admission 2021 in a table.

About Chandidas Mahavidyalaya

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya is located at Khujutipara in Birbhum District. Chandidas Mahavidyalaya was established in 1965. This college is affiliated with The University of Burdwan. Currently, Arts and Science streams are available in this college. Chandidas Mahavidyalaya is recognised by UGC and Accredited by NAAC by C grade.

Available Departments of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya

Currently, there are total of 3 streams available on Chandidas Mahavidyalaya for the Undergraduate course. These three streams are Arts and Science. The following subjects are available under each course stream.

Arts

Bengali

English

Sanskrit

History

Political Science

Philosophy

Geography

Economics

Science

Mathematics

General

Read More, List of all Scholarships for College Students

Available Facilities

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya has the following facilities for the students.

Read More, List of Colleges under Burdwan University for UG Course Admission

Online Admission Process

Students have to apply Online to take Admission on Chandidas Mahavidyalaya under UG course. Online Admission portal will Open from 2nd August 2021. Students can apply for B.A and B.Sc course admission.

At first, visit the official admission portal of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya chandidasmahavidyalaya.ac.in and then register yourself by providing some basic information. Online Application for UG Admission will start from 2nd August 2021. Candidates have to pay ₹150 for each subject application online. For Online Registration valid email and phone number is required.

At the time of Online Registration / Application, students have to enter their HS marks in detail and also have to upload his/her scanned photo and signature. After completing all these steps take a printout the system generated application form containing a Unique Application Number.

Read More, Apply Online for Yuvashree Prakalpa – Employment Bank

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Admission Merit list

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya will publish the provisional Merit list on their official website for B.A, B.Sc, B.Com Honours and General Courses. Merit will be published within one week of the last date of application. Selected candidates’ can take admission after documents verification.

This admission merit list will prepare on the basis of candidates’ HS marks. Separate merit will publish for each honours subject and pass the course. The college will send an SMS to the selected candidates after publishing the merit list.

Generally, Chandidas Mahavidyalaya publishes 5 to 7 phases merit list to fillup it’s all the seats. Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Admissions Merit List 2021 will available on chandidasmahavidyalaya.ac.in website.

Admission Related Important Dates

Know the important dates for UG Course admission 2021 at Chandidas Mahavidyalaya. Key dates for Online Application Start, Last date of Online Application, Merit List Publish and Admission date.

Counselling & Documents Verification

Selected candidates have to pay the 1st-semester fees online (on college admission portal) at the time of admission to confirm his/her seat. After that, visit the college with all the original and self-attested photocopy documents for verification. The following documents will require at the time of verification.

Computer Generated Application Form

HS Marksheet & Certificate

School leaving Certificate

HS Admit Card or Certificate

Madhyamik Admit Card

Caste Certificate (if any)

EWS Certificate (if any)

PH Certificate (if any)

Colour photograph

Admission Helpline

Students can visit the Chandidas Mahavidyalaya for any help regarding the UG 2021 Admission process. You can also call at 03463-246233 or visit the official website of this college for the latest notifications and updates.