"Big River," the new show at Alhambra Theatre & Dining, is a 1984 musical based on Mark Twain's 1885 novel "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn."

It's a story of the unlikely friendship that grows between Jim, a runaway slave, and Huck, a runaway wild child, as they travel by raft down the Mississippi River, trying to find a place where Jim can escape slave territory.

Once regarded as a serious candidate for the title Great American Novel - it's the best novel by a man whom William Faulkner called "all our grandfather" - "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" has become controversial because of its language.

It's narrated in the vernacular by Huck, who has at best a rudimentary command of grammar, and it makes liberal use of a derogatory term for black people that was commonplace in the Antebellum South but is no longer considered acceptable. So a novel that is a subtle condemnation of racism is now considered by some to be racist.

"Big River" gets around the controversy by avoiding the controversial word. Instead it offers a condensed version of the raft trip Huck and Jim take down the river and the growing bond that Huck feels toward Jim, despite his concerns that helping a runaway slave will lead to eternal damnation.

Nominated for 10 Tony Awards in 1985, "Big River" won seven including best musical, best book and best score. The score was written by Roger Miller, a popular country singer-songwriter who had a series of chart-topping hits like "King of the Road" in the mid-1960s. "Big River," his only Broadway show, offers a series of likable country- and bluegrass-influenced songs, including the show-stopping duet "River in the Rain."

The Alhambra's production offers excellent performances by Cameron Bartell as Huck, James Webb as Jim, and Eric DeCicco and Larry Daggett as a couple of comical, though ultimately sinister, con men who call themselves the King and the Duke.

Bartell, though he's a little old for the role of Huck, has a lovely voice and a charming manner. Webb, whose previous work at the Alhambra included a show-stopping "Old Man River," has a magnificent voice. And DeCicco and Daggett are very funny until they aren't.

There's also a surprisingly effective raft that at times seems to be actually floating across the Alhambra stage.

Charlie Patton: (904) 359-4413

'BIG RIVER'

Where: Alhambra Theatre & Dining, 12000 Beach Blvd.

When: Nightly Tuesday-Sunday with matinees Saturday and Sunday through March 20

Cost: $47-$55, which includes a meal