Tyumen Region is situated in the South of the West Siberian Plain. The region divides the territory of the Russian Federation into two parts, with the Urals and European Russia to the west, and Siberia and the Far East to the east. The region has extreme climatic and natural conditions: 90% of its territory belongs to areas of the Extreme North or equivalent districts. The region has abundant freshwater resources (the Ob and Irtysh rivers and lakes) and is rich in mineral waters. Most of the region’s territory is covered with forest.

Most of Russia’s oil and gas resources are concentrated in Tyumen Region. It also has peat fields, and 400 deposits of raw stock for building materials manufacture have been identified and developed. Ore mineral resources and precious stones are also found here.

20 higher education institutions provide professional training to over 170,000 students.

Tyumen Region ranks first in Russia in industrial output volume. Fuel industry is the foundation of the region’s economy, accounting for 86.4% of its industrial output. Electrical power generation is well developed (Surgut GRES-1, Surgut GRES-2 and Nizhenevartovsk GRES are the largest electricity producers in Russia). Other industry sectors include machine building, chemical industry, petrochemistry, and wood chemical industry. Agricultural industry is focused on milk, eggs, and vegetable production. Traditional occupations of indigenous minorities of the North, such as reindeer breeding and fishing, are also preserved.

The industrial production index in 2006 in physical terms amounted on average to 111.8%. For the mining industry this index was 102.4%, for processing industries 112.8%, for power, gas and water production and distribution 112.4%, and for agricultural production 104.4%.

The region has an extensive transportation infrastructure. 4 federal highways and Trans-Siberian Railroad pass by its territory. Most industrial centers located along the Ob and Irtysh rivers have large river ports. The city of Tyumen is served by Roschino International Airport. An extensive pipeline transportation network includes 6 oil pipelines and 7 gas pipelines.