Pretoria West at a glance

Pretoria West at a glance:

Pretoria the administrative capital of South Africa is also a formidable and respected area for industry. The Western region of the city is also within close proximity to a sought-after industrial area entitled Pretoria Industrial which harbours some of the regions most highly respected commercial and industrial operations. Pretoria Industrial is situated adjacent to West Park, Proclamation Hill, and Kwaggasrand. The Western location of Pretoria is also within close proximity to more centrally located areas such as the Natural Museum of Natural history and the National Zoological Gardens of South Africa.

Industrial Hotspots

The main industrial hotspot in Pretoria West is the industrial area aptly named Pretoria Industrial where many highly regarded companies have their operational bases including RCL Food and beverage company and Afrox Pretoria branch. Pretoria West is also within close proximity to the centre of Pretoria which also has many commercial and industrial nodes of noteworthy interest.

Industrial/Business Developments and Parks

Pretoria West and Pretoria Industrial is a hive of industrial activity some of the more credible and well-known business parks include Pretoria Industrial Park, the N4 Gateway Industrial Park, and BMG Pretoria West. There is currently some development happening at the aforementioned N4 Gateway Business Park where warehouses and mini-factories are currently on sale.

Infrastructure

The entire city of Pretoria has world-class infrastructure and the Western region and Pretoria Industrial are no different. Some of the more popular schools in the area include Burgher Right Primary School, Queens Private School, Hoerskool Pretoria-Wes, ABC Primary Nursery School and Pretoria Central High School. Some of the hospitals include Pretoria West Hospital Pharmacy and Pretoria West Folateng Hospital. Some of the roads which connect Pretoria West with the rest of the greater Pretoria area include the R104, wf Nkong Street, Magalies Freeway, Buitenkant Street and Charlotte Maxeke Street. Roadways that connect Pretoria Industrial include Quagga Road, Transoranje Road, Edison Road, Stephenson Road and Research Road.

Distance from key points (Airport/CBD)

Pretoria West to the central business district of Johannesburg is roughly 60 km and takes around 50 minutes depending on which direction is taken. If one wishes to travel to the OR Tambo International Airport from Pretoria West it will take roughly 39 minutes and is just under 53 km in distance. From the central business district of Pretoria, its said to take 20 minutes and is 9 km away. In turn, making it a highly convenient location for industries. Pretoria West is situated roughly 47.2km from the Lanseria International privately owned airport and will take roughly 38 minutes travel time depending.

Malls/Shopping

Shopping centres around Pretoria West include Quagga Centre, Standard Bank West End, Lions auto parts Pretoria West, Celtis Spar, Botha and Roodt Pretoria Mark, Wholesale Meat Cash and Carry, Wonderboom Junction Shopping Centre and the Western Gateway.

Transport

Pretoria West and Pretoria Industrial are well connected via various modes of transport. The area is well connected via the MetroRail system. Other forms of transport include the municipal bus services and the minivan services which run throughout various urban and rural areas throughout the whole of South Africa.