On November 27, in the Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin, His Holiness Karekin II, Supreme Patriarch and Catholicos of All Armenians; received Mohammad Ahmad Haj Ibrahim, newly appointed Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Syrian Arab Republic to the Republic of Armenia.

His Holiness congratulated the Ambassador on the appointment, wishing him an effective mission for the benefit of the centuries-old friendly relations of the two peoples, and strengthening of the continual cooperation. His Holiness noted the historical Armenian-Syrian relations, emphasizing the important role of the Armenian community in strengthening them.

During the meeting, His Holiness and the Ambassador discussed the situation in Syria, reflecting on the painful losses that have occurred as a result of the conflict, and the devastation that has transpired. His Holiness expressed particular concern over the suffering and difficulties of the Syrian people, including the Armenian community, as well as the shrinking of the Christian presence in the Middle East.

Catholicos Karekin II stressed that the Armenian Church will continue to support the Syrian people. His Holiness stated that the Mother See is in constant contact with the Primate of the Armenian Diocese of Damascus and the Primates of the Sister Church, and that every effort is being made to bring the problems of the Middle East to the international community's attention in ecumenical meetings and other various platforms, and to contribute to the conflict resolution.

His Holiness also informed the Ambassador about the spiritual and material support rendered to the Syrian Armenians by the Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin.

Ambassador Mohammad Ahmad Haj Ibrahim expressed gratitude for the support to Syria during this difficult period. The ambassador also highlighted the role of the Syrian-Armenian community, who have always enjoyed great respect in the country, in overcoming the existing challenges.

The Ambassador of Syria conveyed to His Holiness the greetings and best wishes of the Syrian President Bashar al-Assad; and Ahmad Badreddin Hassoun, Grand Mufti of Syria.

Praying for the restoration of peace in Syria, His Holiness asked for God’s protection of the Syrian people and wished that as a result of the rehabilitative work in the country, everyone would soon be able to return to their place of residence.