As they prepared 4-ton Humvees loaded with ammunition for a possible airdrop, the paratroopers of the U.S. 82nd Airborne Division are ready to take as many as two airfields in Iraq if a war occurs, a commanding general said.

``We're getting pretty close - the next couple of days,' Gen. Charles H. Swannack Jr. said Saturday about the division's combat readiness. ``Our bread-and-butter operation ... is what we call an airfield seizure.``We jump in on an existing airfield that may be damaged in some manner (and) airborne-assault it with equipment such that we can repair the runway in about four to six hours and then receive follow-on aircraft,' he said. ``We've got enough parachutes to do a couple of them.'

Experts estimate that Iraq has more than 100 airfields of different sizes, mostly military ones, with major international hubs in Baghdad and Basra, which is about 80 miles north of Kuwait City.

``I know the ones we're looking at, but I can't divulge that,' Swannack said, referring to Iraqi airfields.

He said his division's capability specializes in securing airfields, rather than the rich oil fields of Iraq. An airfield is regarded as a major tactical and operational asset.

``It allows you to build up combat power,' Swannack said. ``You can use these airfields to evacuate the wounded, or you can use it to set up the 101st Airborne there. In an oil field, we have the capability of going in there and securing the facilities. We don't have the capability of ... operating the facilities.'

The 82nd works with the Air Force to transport equipment and personnel for distances much greater than what the other U.S. airborne division in Kuwait does, Swannack said.

The 82nd uses C-17 cargo and personnel jets to travel up to half a world away; the 101st Airborne, which also has forces in Kuwait, has a much shorter reach because it uses helicopters to advance in leapfrog fashion, the commander said. For paratroopers and infantrymen, the desert landscape of Iraq offers several advantages over the woodlands of Ft. Bragg, N.C., where the 82nd is based. Champion Main is the name of the headquarters where the division's 2nd brigade combat team is stationed in Kuwait, which is also largely desert. ``Softer drop zone - the sand. A soft landing is a big help,' Sgt. Erik Galloway, 27, an infantryman from the suburbs of Kansas City, Mo., said about the desert environment.

Sand can cushion the landing of paratroopers. Even under ideal conditions, the fall typically injures the ankles, legs or backs of 3 percent of troops, officials said. Under good conditions, a paratrooper jumps out of a plane flying 130 to 160 knots, with winds blowing 13 knots or less, officials said.

The absence of trees also disposes of another hazard for parachuting forces, soldiers said.

But the price of such comfortable landings is the sluggish running through sand while carrying heavy gear. ``It makes for tougher movement,' Galloway said.

Standing beside a Humvee strapped down for an airdrop and marked ``Bragg or Bust,' 1st Lt. Rick Barbato, 24, of Boston said he wasn't unnerved by the possibility of parachuting into a chemical warfare zone if the U.S. military buildup in Kuwait and the Persian Gulf leads to an invasion of Iraq.

``It seems like a scary and ominous threat, but in reality, it poses no more of a threat than any other conventional weapon. Of course, it's an unorthodox weapon,' said Barbato, who is battalion chemical officer.

He pointed out how doughboys in World War I faced mustard gas, a blistering agent, ``with meager equipment compared to what we have now.' During Saturday's preparations, GIs used 2-inch nylon lashing to secure machine guns, ammunition and anti-tank missiles within the Humvees and then tied down the vehicles to a metal platform that hits ground first.

The cushion between the axles and platform was nothing more than heavy, honeycombed cardboard, piled high enough to place the tires well above the metal pallet. ``Everything needs to be secured, and there can be nothing that can bounce around because if it does, it could destroy weapons, and that definitely can't happen,' said Pfc. D.J. Sipe, 24, a parachute rigger from Whitefish, Mont.

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.