The Castillo surname often denoted someone who lived "at or near a large fortified building" or a "worker in a castle," derived from castillo (Latin castellum), meaning "castle." It may also be a habitational name from one of the many places with "castillo" in their name.

Castillo is the 25th most common Hispanic surname.

Surname Origin: Spanish

Alternate Surname Spellings: CASTILLA, CASTILLOS, CASTEL, CASTELLO, CASTEEL, CASTILLO, CASTELA, CASTILLE, CASTIGLIONI, CASTIGLIONE, CASTILLION

Famous People with the Surname CASTILLO

Frank Castillo - American professional baseball player

Otto René Castillo - Guatemalan poet and revolutionary

Randy Castillo - American rock drummer (best known as Ozzy Osbourne's drummer)

Where is the CASTILLO Surname Most Common?

Castillo is the 232nd most common surname in the world, according to surname distribution data from Forebears. It is a prevalent name in many Spanish-speaking countries, including Mexico (the 25th most common last name), Venezuela (14th), Peru (18th), Guatemala (11th), Dominican Republic (14th), Chile (19th), Ecuador (25th), and Spain (44th).

WorldNames PublicProfiler doesn't include data from as many countries but does include both Argentina and Spain, where the Castillo surname is very popular. In Spain, Castillo is found in the greatest numbers in the Cantabria region, followed by Andalucia, Castilla-La Mancha, and La Rioja. Castillo is also very prevalent in the Gran Chaco, Patagonia, and Argentine Northwest regions of Argentina.

Genealogy Resources for the Surname CASTILLO

Castillo Family Crest - It's Not What You Think: Contrary to what you may hear, there is no such thing as a Castillo family crest or coat of arms for the Castillo surname. Coats of arms are granted to individuals, not families, and may rightfully be used only by the uninterrupted male-line descendants of the person to whom the coat of arms was originally granted.

The Castillo DNA Project: Individuals with the Castillo surname are invited to join this DNA project in order to work together to find their common Castillo ancestry through DNA testing and sharing of information.

CASTILLO Family Genealogy Forum: This free message board is focused on the descendants of Castillo ancestors around the world. Search the forum for posts about your Castillo ancestors, or join the forum and post your own queries.

FamilySearch - CASTILLO Genealogy: Explore over 3 million results from digitized historical records and lineage-linked family trees related to the Castillo surname on this free website hosted by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

CASTILLO Surname Mailing List: A free mailing list for researchers of the Castillo surname and its variations includes subscription details and searchable archives of past messages.

GeneaNet - Castillo Records: GeneaNet includes archival records, family trees, and other resources for individuals with the Castillo surname, with a concentration on records and families from France and other European countries.

The Castillo Genealogy and Family Tree Page: Browse genealogy records and links to genealogical and historical records for individuals with the Castillo surname from the website of Genealogy Today.

Ancestry.com: Castillo Surname: Explore over 3.5 million digitized records and database entries, including census records, passenger lists, military records, land deeds, probates, wills and other records for the Castillo surname on the subscription-based website, Ancestry.com.

-----------------------

References: Surname Meanings & Origins

Cottle, Basil. Penguin Dictionary of Surnames. Baltimore, MD: Penguin Books, 1967.

Dorward, David. Scottish Surnames. Collins Celtic (Pocket edition), 1998.

Fucilla, Joseph. Our Italian Surnames. Genealogical Publishing Company, 2003.

Hanks, Patrick and Flavia Hodges. A Dictionary of Surnames. Oxford University Press, 1989.

Hanks, Patrick. Dictionary of American Family Names. Oxford University Press, 2003.

Reaney, P.H. A Dictionary of English Surnames. Oxford University Press, 1997.

Smith, Elsdon C. American Surnames. Genealogical Publishing Company, 1997.

>> Back to Glossary of Surname Meanings & Origins

Format

mla apa chicago

Your Citation

Powell, Kimberly. "CASTILLO Surname and Family History." ThoughtCo, Jun. 25, 2024, thoughtco.com/castillo-last-name-meaning-and-origin-1422471. Powell, Kimberly. (2024, June 25). CASTILLO Surname and Family History. Retrieved from https://www.thoughtco.com/castillo-last-name-meaning-and-origin-1422471 Powell, Kimberly. "CASTILLO Surname and Family History." ThoughtCo. https://www.thoughtco.com/castillo-last-name-meaning-and-origin-1422471 (accessed August 15, 2024).