Robo Geisha DVD Review

Written by Daniel Benson

DVD released by Cine Asia Extreme

Written and directed by Noboru Iguchi

2008, Region 2 (PAL), 102 minutes, Rated 18 (UK)

DVD released on June 7th, 2010

Review:

Spinal Tap’s Nigel Tufnel has a Marshall amplifier that goes to eleven. I’m imagining that Noboru Iguchi has some kind of stupidity amplifier for his movies, but it goes to much more than eleven.

If you’ve seen his previous offering, the high-octane, blood-spurting Machine Girl, or any movie where collaborator Yoshihiro Nishimura has helmed the special effects (Hard Revenge Milly, Tokyo Gore Police), then you’ll know exactly what to expect from Robo Geisha.

The film opens with a Japanese businessman being entertained by a Geisha but as he gets a little too close for comfort she reveals herself as a member of the Tengu Ninja clan that has come to assassinate him. Before they can draw swords, another Geisha appears and comes to his aid using the formidable force of her surgically enhanced body. And we’re not talking about silicone here folks, we have breast machine guns, butt shuriken and wig napalm to name but a few of the modifications that adorn Robo Geisha.

After saving the man, she begins to tell the story of how she became the way she is and the rest of the film is told in retrospect with the occasional voiceover from Robo Geisha to push the story along.

While there’s a hearty dose of the aforementioned stupidity, the back story of two sisters torn apart by jealousy, but reunited in the face of adversity, is quite touching in places. Not to let sentimentality get in the way of some over the top action, Iguchi treats the viewer to some incredible scenes of tongue in cheek action featuring toxic breast milk, fried shrimp used as a deadly weapon, robotic Geisha legs that transform into tank tracks and a giant castle that becomes a marauding robot at the command of its owners.

You can’t possibly take a film like this seriously, but if you’re in the mood for some ass-kicking action mixed with elements of Austin Powers, Godzilla and even Tetsuo: The Iron Man you won’t come away disappointed.

Video and Audio:

Japanese language DD 2.0 soundtrack with English subtitles. Nothing to write home about, but nothing to complain about either. Video is rich and colourful with no issues to speak of.

The Blu Ray will offer a DTS HD Master Japanese 4.0 Audio Track

Special Features:

Just a trailer gallery for Cine Asia titles and the original trailer for Robo Geisha. A little more would have been nice, especially for the Blu Ray.

Grades:

Movie: Video: Audio: Features: Overall:

© 2010 Horror DNA.com. No use of this review is permitted without expressed permission from Horror DNA.com.