Film past event

2009, 102 min, DigiBeta, color, in Japanese with English subtitles. Directed by Noboru Iguchi. With Aya Kiguchi, Hitomi Hasebe, Takumi Saito, Asami, Cay Izumi.

© 2009 RoboGeisha Film Partners.

From the demented imagination of director Noboru Iguchi (Machine Girl) and special effects savant Yoshihiro Nishimura (Tokyo Gore Police) comes this brain-blasting vision of the future of genre cinema which defies description, sanity and good taste. The evil, Tea Party-esque Kageno Corporation wants to return Japan to more traditional values and the weapons in their arsenal include their massive Geisha Army, two supernatural bikini-clad assassins and a plan to detonate a nuclear device on Mt. Fuji. But that’s not enough! They’re so evil that they also recruit two sisters and turn them into….RoboGeisha! However, RoboGeisha have uncontrollable hearts and it’s not long before one of them begins to wonder if there’s more to life than being a kimono-clad, robotic killing machine.

The screen swarms with nutso concepts like acid breast milk, butt swords and fried shrimp weapons while peekaboo sexiness and goofy ultra-violence are the order of the day. One part Japanese schoolgirl melodrama, one part grindhouse swordplay, one part open-plains chambara and one part Daimajin-esque, city-stomping "suitmation," RoboGeisha might just be the one cult movie to rule them all.

This screening is co-presented with Subway Cinema, Giant Robot and Funimation, who will release ROBO-GEISHA to DVD this fall. It’s also a very special launch event for our 4th Festival of Contemporary Japanese Film (July 1 – July 11): Japan Cuts and for the New York Asian Film Festival 2010 (June 25 – July 8). It will be followed by a party of epic proportions, special announcements will be made revealing top secret titles in this year’s festivals, prizes will be given away and two short films by director Iguchi and Nishimura will be screened for the first time with English subtitles.

SCARY GEISHA ARMY: WELCOME TO HELL!

(16 min., directed by Noboru Iguchi, starring Yui Murata, Asami, Masaki Suzumura)

A spin-off to RoboGeisha, a young girl joins the Geisha Army with a secret mission: to discover what happened to her missing brother. The truth, it turns out, is far more bizarre and ridiculous than what she could have imagined.

VAMPIRE FRANKENSTEIN GIRL

(15 min., directed by Yoshihiro Nishimura, starring Tsugumi Nagasawa, Maki Mizui, Yoshiki Takahashi, Cay Izumi)

A spin-off from Vampire Girl vs. Frankenstein Girl, it follows Monami as she becomes a vigilante avenger, tracking down a red-haired, maniacal serial killer who’s targeted the infamous Ganguro Girls and Wrist-Cutter champion from the original film. She’s able to defeat him, but in the process, a new undead lifeform is created. If you thought the original Vampire Girl was politically incorrect, you won’t believe the follow-up.

And, if the Internet gods cooperate, there will be a one-of-a-kind, sure-to-be-ridiculous Q&A with the makers of the film afterward, live from Tokyo. If you value your fanboy cred and if IRON MAN 2 didn’t quite satisfy your yen for weapon-encrusted, battle-suit action, don’t miss this show!

Tickets

$12/$8 members, students & seniors