Missy Elliott, the five-time Grammy Award-winning rapper, songwriter and producer, is making history as the first female hip-hop artist to be inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame. Elliott has been a dominating force in hip-hop for three decades, delivering classics such as “Get Ur Freak On," "Work It" and “Lose Control.” Behind the scenes, she has contributed her songwriting skills to a number of iconic musicians, including Whitney Houston, Beyoncé, Mary J. Blige and Janet Jackson, among many others. Elliott is the third rapper to be inducted, joining Jermaine Dupri and Jay-Z.

The Songwriters Hall of Fame described Elliott as “one of the most significant female artists in contemporary music history” and an “across-the-board cultural icon.” The Portsmouth, Virginia-native released her acclaimed debut solo album, Supa Dupa Fly, in 1997 — paving the way for a string of hit singles “The Rain (Supa Dupa Fly), “Sock It 2 Me,” “Hit Em Wit Da Hee” and “Beep Me 911.” In 1999, Elliott released her sophomore album, Da Real World, home to her first No. 1 U.S. R&B hit “Hot Boyz (Remix),” according to the Songwriters Hall of Fame.

In 2002, Elliott received her first Grammy award for “Best Rap Performance” for “Get Ur Freak On” — a track from her 2001 album, Miss E…So Addictive. “Work It," the leading single from her fourth studio album, Under Construction, spent 10 weeks at No. 2 on the Billboard Hot 100 and received a Grammy award for Best Female Rap Solo Performance. Elliott’s sixth studio album, The Cookbook, was comprised of the Grammy-nominated single “We Run This" and the famous sing-along anthem “Lose Control,” the Songwriters Hall of Fame described.

Elliott is also the only female rapper to have all six studio albums go platinum.

Most recently, the rapper performed at the 2015 Super Bowl XLIX halftime show alongside headliner Katy Perry. She also appeared with other female artists for the all-star anthem, “This Is For My Girls,” as part of former First Lady Michelle Obama’s Let Girls Learn initiative and #62MillionGirls campaign, targeted toward raising awareness about the lack of education among girls around the world.

Elliott celebrated her historic achievement on Twitter, writing:

I want to CONGRATULATE all the AMAZING songwriters who have been inducted into the 2019 Song Writers Hall of Fame...also those who were nominated because their body of work is AMAZING. I AM SO HUMBLY GRATEFUL to now be inducted also. I [heart] you all #SHOF2019.”

According to the Songwriters Hall of Fame, songwriters can qualify for induction after writing a notable catalog of hit songs for a minimum of 20 years.

The induction event is scheduled for June 13 at the Marriott Marquis Hotel in New York City. Elliott will be inducted along with songwriters Dallas Austin, Tom T. Hall, John Prine, Jack Tempchin and Yusuf/Cat Stevens, into the 2019 class.