Missy Elliott Biography

Missy Elliott is an American rapper, singer, and record producer who goes by the stage name Melissa Arnette Elliott. In the early-mid 1990s, she formed the R&amp;B girl trio Sista, and then joined the Swing Mob collective with childhood friend and lifelong collaborator Timbaland, with whom she collaborated on songs for American R&amp;B performers Aaliyah, 702, Total, and SWV. After multiple collaborations and guest appearances, she released her debut album Supa Dupa Fly in 1997, which included the top 20 single “Sock It 2 Me.” The album debuted at #3 on the Billboard 200, becoming the biggest debut for a female rapper at the time.

Melissa Arnette Elliott was born on July 1, 1971, in Portsmouth, Virginia, at Naval Medical Center Portsmouth. She is the only child of Patricia Elliott, a dispatcher for a power company, and Ronnie Elliott, a former U.S. Marine. Elliott came from a family of church choir members, so singing was a natural part of her childhood. She wanted to be a singer since she was four years old, and she “would sing and perform for her family,” according to historian Veronica A. Davis. Her career began in 1991, when she and pals La’Shawn Shellman, Chonita Coleman, and Radiah Scott created Fayze (later renamed Sista), an all-female R&amp;B trio. She enlisted the help of her neighbor Timothy Mosley (Timbaland) as the group’s producer and began recording demos, including the 1991 promo “First Move.”

Da Real World, Elliott’s second album, was released in 1999 and featured the hits “She’s a Bitch,” “All n My Grill,” and the top five hit “Hot Boyz.” On the issue dated January 15, 2000, the remix of the latter song broke the record for most weeks at number one on the US R&amp;B chart, as well as spending 18 weeks at number one on the Hot Rap Singles chart from December 1999 to March 2000. Elliott began an international career with the releases of Miss E… So Addictive (2001), Under Construction (2002), and This Is Not a Test (2003), which included songs including “Get Ur Freak On,” “One Minute Man,” “4 My People,” “Gossip Folks,” and “Work It.” She earned a Grammy Award for Best Female Rap Solo Performance for the latter. In 2019, she released Iconology, her first extended play.

In the United States, Miss E… So Addictive (2001) debuted at number two and sold 250,000 copies in its first week. It produced the enormous mainstream and urban successes “One Minute Man” and “Get Ur Freak On,” as well as the worldwide club hit “4 My People” and the less commercially successful single “Take Away,” which featured Ludacris and Trina. The “Take Away/4 My People” music video was released in the fall of 2001, shortly after Elliott’s close friend Aaliyah died suddenly on August 25 and the 9/11 terrorist attacks. The video for “Take Away” featured images and statements about Aaliyah, and the slow ballad served as a memorial to her. The rest of the video, “4 My People,” was more positive, with scenes of people dancing gleefully in front of American flags and Elliott dressed in red, white, and blue. Despite the fact that “Take Away” did not chart on radio, “4 My People” became a major club song in the United States and Europe thanks to a successful remix by dance music duo Basement Jaxx in 2002.

Media outlets have dubbed Elliott as the “Queen of Rap.” In the United States, she has sold over 30 million records. Four Grammy Awards have been bestowed upon her. She was named the best female rapper of all time by the Mercury News. According to Billboard in 2017, she is the best-selling female rapper in Nielsen Music history.

She was the first female rapper to be admitted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame, and she was honored with the MTV Video Vanguard Award for her contribution to the music video scene at the MTV Video Music Awards. She was voted number five on Billboard’s list of the 100 Greatest Music Video Artists of All Time in 2020. She received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2021.

Missy Elliott Discography

Top Videos

Frequently Asked Questions

What Is Genre Of Missy Elliot’S Song?

The genre of Missy Elliott’s song is Hip-Hop/Rap.

What Is The Best Selling Album Of Missy Elliot?

The best selling album of Missy Elliot is “Supa Dupa Fly.” It was released in 1997 and has sold more than three million copies.

What Is The Most Popular Song Missy Elliot?

The answer is “Work It.” This song was released in 2002 and quickly became a hit. It topped the charts in several countries and is still a favorite among Missy Elliot fans.

What Is The Number One Played Song Of Missy Elliot?

The top played song of Missy Elliot is “Get Ur Freak On.” This song was released in 2001 and quickly gained popularity. It has since become a classic and is often considered one of her best songs.

Most Searched For Missy Elliott Songs