Harry How/Getty Images

The Miami Heat have been searching for a viable point guard since bringing the Big Three together before last season. They are just one of several teams interested in Derek Fisher now that the veteran has been bought out by the Houston Rockets.

Marc Stein of ESPN.com reports elite teams from both conferences are looking at Fisher as an option:

The Miami Heat and Oklahoma City Thunder have emerged as the early leaders in the race to sign veteran guard Derek Fisher after he clears waivers Wednesday, according to sources close to the situation.

Stein also mentions the Chicago Bulls and San Antonio Spurs as potential landing spots, depending on how things play out in the next couple days.

Miami provides the most intriguing option since the Heat having been searching for a point guard. Fisher still brings leadership to the table, which the team often lacked on the offensive end during last season's playoffs.

Mike Ehrmann/Getty Images

Nobody can doubt the amount of talent they have, but at times it seemed like nobody wanted to take control, so they would just pass the ball around for 20 seconds before hoisting up a bad shot.

They need somebody to direct the show.

Fisher wasn't exactly lighting it up for the Los Angeles Lakers, however. He has averaging just six points and three assists in 26 minutes. Those numbers would have found him on the bench if it weren't for his reputation.

The Heat are in a position where they can take a risk, though. Even if Fisher's struggles were to continue, they would simply find themselves right back where they were, still firmly in the title picture. If the experiment works, the front office, led by Pat Riley, will be widely praised.

It's really a low-risk move for Miami. Since Fisher appears to be narrowing his focus to title contenders, there shouldn't be any type of bidding war for him like other marquee free agents. He just wants the right situation, which the Heat would provide.

Oklahoma City is another promising option. The details would be different since Russell Westbrook is entrenched as the starter, but he's become the focus of criticism for his playing style because doesn't always defer to Kevin Durant in key moments.

Fisher, while also playing the backup role, could help the budding star better understand the finer points of the position. Having played with Kobe Bryant for so long, Fisher is well-schooled in the fine art of deferring to an elite scorer.

The Thunder are leading the Western Conference, so it's another scenario where Fisher remains in the thick of the championship conversation.

As long as expectations are kept within reason—he is 37, after all—Fisher would be a good addition for either team. If nothing else, his leadership abilities would help either team survive a stretch run.