The Miami Heat's attempt to round out its star-driven roster with low-end contracts apparently will not leave the franchise with a low-end look.

In addition to Heat President Pat Riley and team owner Micky Arison meeting Saturday with Los Angeles Lakers championship point guard Derek Fisher at the Mandarin hotel, there also is work afoot to bring back 3-point shooting forward James Jones, who took a buyout from the team last month.

Jones' buyout helped open the salary-cap space for the Heat to re-sign guard Dwyane Wade and add Cleveland Cavaliers forward LeBron James and Toronto Raptors forward Chris Bosh.

In addition, it was confirmed through a source by the Sun Sentinel that former Heat free-agent target Juwan Howard, the Portland Trail Blazers free-agent forward, has reached out to the Heat, with the team considering the possibility.

Fisher, 36, declined comment Saturday when approached by 790-AM personality Jorge Sedano. The Heat management staff also declined comment. Wade, James and Bosh apparently all reached out to Fisher to leave the two-time defending champions. Wade, James and Bosh apparently all reached out to Fisher to leave the two-time defending champions.

According to reports, the Lakers' current hard line with Fisher has them asking him to take a pay cut from the $5 million he earned last season, in the wake of the team recently signing Los Angeles Clippers free-agent point guard Steve Blake.

The Lakers, however, continue to express optimism that a deal with Fisher will get done.

The Heat will have approximately $4 million in remaining salary-cap space after it completes an anticipated singing of Washington Wizards free-agent swingman Mike Miller.

Several other veterans also are seeking to sign on with Riley's revamped creation, including former Florida International University standout Raja Bell.

In the end, with minimal salary-cap space left after the Wade, James and Bosh signings, the Heat could have one of its deepest rosters in years, with Heat free-agent Udonis Haslem considering a minimal deal to return.

Jones' return is predicated on the Southwest Ranches resident being unable to otherwise secure an offer at the $5.8 million mid-level exception.

Arison said the team's phones have been ringing off the hook with veterans seeking to sign on, even though it would mean taking the veteran's minimum of roughly $1 million for 2010-11.