OKLAHOMA CITY - When the Oklahoma City Thunder signed Derek Fisher late in the season, they added a guard with oodles more NBA Finals experience than the rest of the roster he was joining.

Whether Fisher can prepare his Thunder teammates for what they're about to face is another matter.

While the Miami Heat is returning to the Finals for the second straight season, it will be a new experience for most of Oklahoma City's youthful players. Only Fisher, starting center Kendrick Perkins and backup Nazr Mohammed have ever made it this far - each winning titles with other teams. Fisher won five with the Los Angeles Lakers.

But for all the leadership Fisher has provided since joining the Thunder in late March, he doesn't plan any lectures for the team's younger set, which includes three-time NBA scoring champion Kevin Durant and All-Star point guard Russell Westbrook.

"I've found it better to, on some level, allow guys to experience things for themselves in its natural state," Fisher said. "You can't always tell someone what they should feel or what they should be thinking as they get ready to go into what might be the biggest moment of their life or their career.

"I think it's important to allow people to be who they are and experience it the way they naturally would."

The Finals are sure to disrupt some parts of the Thunder's routine. Their practices will be uprooted from their new training facility on the north side of town and instead will be held downtown at the Chesapeake Energy Arena, where the Heat will also work out. They'll be surrounded by hundreds of additional media members, and it's not uncommon for old friends and family to come out of the woodwork at what might not be the most opportune time.

"Those are things that you can control and basically block out," Fisher said. "If they haven't called you in the past couple months, then don't take their call now." Not so easy for some to handle, he said, are the heightened emotions that come with playing for a championship. It could be anxiety or excitement.

"The bottom line is, on the basketball court everybody feels comfortable," said coach Scott Brooks, a reserve on Houston's 1994 NBA championship team. "Everybody will have nerves, nervous butterflies, before the game. … "Once the tipoff is in the air, our players aren't going to get nervous. Once that ball is in the air and they're ready to play, they're going to fly around the court, they're going to be aggressive and they're going to play good basketball."