Michael Galeotti is the former husband of Bethany Joy Lenz, the American actress who is popular for her appearance in One Tree Hill. Galeotti and Bethany Joy Lenz got married in December 2005, welcomed a daughter named Maria Rose Galeotti in 2011, and divorced the following year.

Michael Galeotti is currently a 39 year-old American musician who was once a member of Enation, an indie rock band formed in Battle Ground, Washington. He has since rolled back his musical exploits to focus on his family’s business, also located in Battle Ground, Washington.

Michael Galeotti Is Jewish American

Bethany Joy Lenz’s husband, Michael Galeotti, was born on the 28th of August 1984, so he is 39 years old at the moment. This means he is three years younger than his famous ex-wife, who was born on the 2nd of April 1981 and is currently 43 years old. Records have it that Galeotti was born in Manchester, Missouri, United States. He is a citizen of the country and belongs to the Jewish Caucasian ethnic group of the nation.

Michael was raised by his parents, Mike and Sheila Galeotti, in Missouri alongside his siblings. He has three younger brothers named Keifer, Aaron, and Luke Galeotti. Growing up, Michael attended Parkway South Senior High School, a public comprehensive high school located in Manchester, Missouri. He completed a diploma at the institution in regular time.

He is a Businessman and Former Musician

Bethany Joy Lenz’s ex-husband, Michael Galeotti, is a musician and businessman. It is said that he was drawn to music at a tender age and nurtured this interest until he became a skilled musician who could play the electronic keyboard very well. Thanks to this, he was able to gain a spot as a member of a band called Enation.

The indie rock band was formed in Battle Ground, Washington, in 2004 but is now based in Nashville, Tennessee. Micheal was the keyboardist of the band until 2011 when he left for reasons not known to the public. While with Enation, he recorded some significant successes, like the release of the acclaimed 2008 album titled World In-Flight.

At the moment, it seems Galoetti has left his days as a musician behind. It has been reported that he now works at a vineyard owned by his family, Galeott’s Wine Cellar. As culled from its website, Galeotti’s Wine Cellar prides itself as an open-to-the-public restaurant with entertainment events and a soon-to-come culinary school.

Michael and Bethany Dated for Three Months Before Getting Married in 2005

It is not clear how Michael Galeotti and Bethany Joy Lend met and fell in love. It is possible that their shared passion for music brought them together, but several reports claim they had a whirlwind romance. They reportedly dated for only three months after they met before they got married. Michael and Bethany exchanged marital vows on the 31st of December 2005.

Theirs was a quiet wedding that took place at an apple orchard in Hillsboro, Oregon. The intimate event was witnessed by a few friends and family members. After they wedded, Bethany took up Galeotti’s surname, and it dragged Michael into the limelight.

Years into their marriage, Bethany collaborated with Michael’s former band to release a song titled “Fell This”. The 2008 song was used in the fifth-season finale of the series One Tree Hill. To the public, Michael and Galeotti had a perfect marriage until it emerged they had decided to end their union.

They Had a Daughter Together Named Maria Rose Galeotti

Probably because of their career engagements, Michael and Bethany delayed having a child until years into their marriage. They had been married for nearly six years before they welcomed their only child together, a daughter named Maria Rose Galeotti.

Maria was born on the 23rd of February 2011, so she is 13 years old at the moment. It was barely a year after she was born when her parents decided to end her marriage. This, and the fact that Bethany has full custody of Maria, has left people curious about knowing why she and Michael divorced.

Michael Galeotti and Bethany Joy Lenz Divorced in 2012

Sources close to the former couple reportedly disclosed that Michael Galeotti and Bethany Joy Lenz ended their marriage because the former began abusing alcohol. This made him abusive towards the famous actress, who eventually decided that she had had enough of the marriage.

When news of their divorce first came to light, it was thought that it was a mutual and amicable resolution to end the marriage. This is so because Bethany issued a statement wherein she stated that she would remain friends with Michael as they were both committed to raising their daughter in love.

The statement which she issued on her now-defunct blog, BethanyJoy.com, confirmed her divorce from Michael, reinforced the notion that it was an amicable separation, and asked for the public to respect their privacy. This became a difficult request for the media to honor, especially after it was learned that the actress got full custody of her child with Michael. If it was an amicable divorce, why not share custody?

On that premise, the media began looking into the real reason behind their divorce. Soon enough, it emerged that Michael had embraced alcohol so much that he became abusive toward his wife. Because of that, Bethany decided to walk out of the marriage with their child. While this is widely believed to be what led to their divorce, neither Bethany nor Michael has acknowledged it.

Where is Michael Galeotti?

Michael Galeotti presently lives in Washington, D.C., where he makes a living working with his family’s business called Galeotti’s Wine Cellar. The establishment is located at 715 East Main Street, Battle Ground, Washington.

Michael, who has discontinued his music career, disappeared from the limelight after his marriage to Bethany Joy Lenz packed up. This left many asking questions about his whereabouts. In January 2016, it circulated that he had passed on. The reports claimed he was found dead in his room by a friend. And that he died from heart complications triggered by his abuse of alcohol.

But then, it was soon learned that the man discovered dead was American actor Michael James Galeota. Looking at the first and last names of the late American actor, it is not hard to see how he was mistaken for Bethany Joy Lenz’s ex-husband, Michael Galeotti.

FAQs

Who was Bethany Joy Lenz’s Husband?

Bethany Joy Lenz’s husband was Michael Galeotti. They got married in 2005 but divorced in 2012 after welcoming a child together. Bethany Joy Lenz’s ex-husband, Michael Galeotti, is a former indie rock musician who now works at his family’s wine business in Battle Ground, Washington.

Is Michael Galeotti Alive?

Bethany Joy Lenz’s ex-husband, Michael Galeotti, is still alive and lives in Battle Ground, Washington. In January 2016, an actor who bears a similar name, Michael James Galeota, was found dead, but Lenz’s ex was not the one found dead.

What Caused Michael Galeotti’s Death?

Michael James Galeota’s cause of death is a heart attack triggered by alcoholic abuse. It must be stressed that the man who died is not Bethany Joy Lenz’s ex-husband, Michael Galeotti, but rather a fellow, Michael James Galeota, who bears a similar surname.