About Blackfriars

Blackfriars is an area of central London, which lies in the south-west corner of the City of London. The name Blackfriars was first used in 1317 (as Black Freres from the French 'frère' meaning 'brother') and derives from the black cappa worn by the Dominican Friars who moved their priory from Holborn to the area between the River Thames and Ludgate Hill in 1276. The area is now the location of Blackfriars station, and forms the northern bridge-head for both Blackfriars Bridge and Blackfriars Railway Bridge. Alongside the road bridge is Blackfriars Millennium Pier, a stop for river bus services on London River Services. The Victoria Embankment stretches along the north bank of the river west from Blackfriars to Westminster Bridge. Notable buildings in the area include the large Art Deco Unilever House. The older parts of Blackfriars have regularly been used as a filming location in film and television, particularly for modern films and serials set in Victorian times.

Find out how much your flat or house is worth in Blackfriars.

Local Estate Agencies

Blackfriars estate agents

EC2 estate agents

Why not explore some other local areas

Southwark area guide

City area guide

Barbican area guide

Borough area guide

Clerkenwell area guide

Holborn area guide

Covent Garden area guide

Aldgate area guide

West End area guide

Bloomsbury area guide

EC2 area guide

Performance cookies

Performance cookies let us collect information about how the website is used. For example, we may record what pages are visited most. This data allows us to see where we could optimise the website and make it more efficient.

Foxtons: tbp, twp2, tws. tco, referrer

Foxtons uses performance cookies to help understand how our visitors use the website and how we can improve our website.

We also host the following third-party solutions, which may set the following cookies:

Google Analytics: _ga, _gat, _gat_UA-<TOKEN>, utmx, utmxx

Google Analytics cookies are used to distinguish users and sessions and gather usage data related to your visit to our website so we can improve our website.

AddThis: _atssc, _atuvc, _atuvs, _

Some pages may have the AddThis social plugin to allow you to share pages to your social network and for Foxtons to view reports on which pages were shared and how.

Crazyegg: _ceir, is_returning, _CEFT, _ceg.s, _ceg.u, s, u, cer.s, cer.v

Crazyegg is a third-party optimisation solution which helps us to test, analyse and improve each user's experience on the website based on their online behaviour.

Convert: _conv_v, _conv_s, _conv_r, _conv_sptest

Convert is a third-party A/B testing solution which helps us to test different versions of web pages to determine which design or content provides the best user experience.

What are cookies?

To make your experience visiting the Foxtons website as simple and convenient as possible we place small data files known as "cookies" on your computer. This practice is used by many websites.

Cookies are created when your browser loads the website. The website sends information to the browser which then creates a text file. Cookies are stored on your device for various periods of time, from as short time as the duration of your browsing session to several months.

Every time you come back to the website, the browser retrieves and sends cookies to the server, which helps to improve your experience of the website by:

Remembering settings, so you don't have to re-enter them every time you visit

Remembering your last properties and searches, helping you to keep on top of new listings

Measuring use of the website so that we can see where we can improve

You can manage and/or delete these small files from your device, but please be aware that this will limit the functionality that we are able to offer to you.