Blackfriars Station is located the City of London and it is an overground and underground station that has platforms that span the River Thames. The station opened in 1886 and a new entrance was opened in 2011 to make the flow of passengers through it easier. Each year there are around 30 million people who will use the combined services offered at the station.

Via YourParkingSpace you are able to find and book parking near to Blackfriars Station, whether it's a parking space for a few hours, secure overnight parking, or a place to park long-term. Through pre-booking you guarantee yourself a place to park and also save a significant amount of money when compared to many car parks.

If you have an empty front drive, off-street parking space, or secure garage in Blackfriars Station then you could earn additional income via putting it up for rent. Car parking spaces close to Blackfriars Station can be let out, whether it's overnight car park spaces for visitors to Blackfriars Station or local employees who require long-term car parking.

What facilities are available at Blackfriars Station?

The station offers facilities such as an ATM machine, public Wi-Fi, refreshment kiosks, and a news agent.

Is there an official Blackfriars Station car park?

There is no car park at Blackfriars Station. Parking is limited in the area and the station is inside the Congestion Charge Zone.

How many people pass through Blackfriars Station each year?

Each year there are around 30 million passengers using the services on offer at Blackfriars Station. The station is on both the District and Circle lines.

Does Blackfriars Station have a ticket office?

A ticket office is available at Blackfriars Station. It opens every day of the week for various hours.

Does Blackfriars have step free access?

There is step free level access to all platforms via the lifts.

Are there toilets at Blackfriars?

Yes, there are toilets available. These can be found in the North Bank Booking Hall.

What is the address for Blackfriars Station?

The station can be found on Queen Victoria Street, London, EC4V 4DY.