In “Nina’s Heavenly Delights” much is made of the “chemistry” required for great Indian cuisine. Too bad that overemphasis leaves Brit Pratibha Parmar’s romantic comedy about a prodigal daughter who returns to Glasgow from London when her father dies vulnerable to criticism that it lacks the very thing it touts.

Nina’s story begins promisingly. A warmth emanates from the screen as a father stands in the kitchen of his restaurant explaining to his young daughter the magic of spices, their mysterious but tantalizing properties.

** RATING | Romantic Comedy

Flash to the present. Nina (Shelley Conn) arrives at the airport. Bobbi, her childhood friend, is there to pick her up. Bobbi is a neon sign of problems to come.

Nina learns her father lost half his beloved New Taj restaurant betting on the horses. Nina must convince Lisa (Laura Fraser), the beneficiary of Dad’s lousy wager and Nina’s brother’s girlfriend, that they should compete in the Best of the West Curry Competition.

If, while they’re cooking up masalas and khormas, they fall for each other, all the better.

Or worse.

Parmar does a fine job treating Nina’s sexuality as an open secret. She makes clear, too, that Nina keeps the desire that made her a fugitive on the down low, especially with Mum (Veena Sood).

Ronny Jhutti’s gestural performance as Bobbi (he works days in a Bollywood videostore) proves that the “gay best friend” role is no richer in a love story featuring women than when the stereotype is cheering on his gal pal in a straight romantic comedy.

If his pizzazz eclipses character, what good is he?

“Nina’s Heavenly Delights” hints at better-simmered versions of similar dishes.

When it borrows a scene out of “My Best Friend’s Wedding,” it’s cute enough, but serves as a sharp reminder of how much better Rupert Everett and his material were.

Still, the actors are a likeable lot. And Parmar and writer Andrea Gibb are set on protecting their characters from being disagreeable. Even Nina’s jilted fiance is more wounded than vindictive.

This absence of troublemakers doesn’t have to be a flaw. Far from it. But tension has to come from somewhere.

“Nina’s Heavenly Delights” has a number of ingredients we’ve come to savor: the traditional Asian immigrant family living and loving in the U.K.; dutiful children forced to keep secrets from their parents about what makes them happy; even a few Bollywood song-and-dance numbers courtesy of Bobbi and his sashaying Chutney Queens.

Glasgow really is known for its Indian food. And one wishes Parmar had done more with the Scottish spin on South Asian life and vice versa. It’s a tease that Nina’s younger sister is a champion Scottish Highland Dancer.

Before the curry showdown, Nina and Lisa present a meal to family and friends. Guests are encouraged to rank the meal, “OK-ish” being one of the choices.

Despite montages of spices, meats and veggies becoming aromatic dishes, “Nina’s Heavenly Delights” is less marinated than microwaved. It’s been worked on, but remains OK-ish.

“Nina’s Heavenly Delights”

PG for some sexual content. 1 hour, 34 minutes. Directed by Pratibha Parmar. Written by Parmar and Andrea Gibb. Photography by Simon Dennis. Starring Shelley Conn, Laura Fraser, Art Malik, Raji James, Kulvinder Ghir, Veena Sood Opens today at the Starz FilmCenter.