Description

The first thing I hear is music. The first thing I've always heard is music.

Meet Marley, an unassuming high school junior who breathes in music like oxygen. In between caring for his heroin-addicted mother, and keeping his scholarship at a fancy prep school, he dreams of becoming a professional DJ.

When chance lands Marley his first real DJ job, his career as "DJ Ice" suddenly skyrockets. But when heart-rending disaster at home brings Marley crashing back down to earth, he is torn between obligation and following his dreams.

Praise for DJ Rising

* "This gritty, pulsating peek into a lesser-known world reverberates with the energy of a thumping dance club."—Booklist, starred review

"[R]eaders will relish reading about Marley's rise to fame despite his harrowing situation. A new voice worth watching."—Kirkus

"Passionate, insightful, and beautifully told."—Edward Bloor, author of Crusader and Tangerine

"I've got a mad beat in my heart for DJ Rising. It goes LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE."—Julie Anne Peters, author of Luna and Keeping You a Secret

"Love Maia spins the perfect mix in DJ Rising. Dreams, ambition, sadness, blooming love, and ultimately hope. I adore this novel. Marley's beautifully told story will steal your heart."—Matt de la Pena, author of We Were Here and I Will Save You

"In a crackling voice that will draw readers into the story and keep them there until the final page, Love Maia skillfully portrays the passion of pursuing a dream, and the difficulties that come with trying to hold on to it."—Tim Tharp, author of The Spectacular Now

"Love Maia has created a star in Marley, someone who overcomes the odds, fights for his dreams, and isn't afraid to get lost in the music!"—Coe Booth, author of Tyrell and Bronxwood

"If--like me--you've been saved by music a trillion times, this rhythmic, pulsing, hip, and completely satisfying debut was spun just for you."—Matthew Quick, author of Boy21 and Sorta Like a Rock Star