Atty. Cafer TANRIKULU

Lawyer / Founding Partner

After graduating from Istanbul University Faculty of Law, he attended a master’s program at Bilgi University Social Sciences Institute. He worked as a lawyer and a manager in the TMSF/Joint Fund Bank, Türksat and Avea/Türk Telekom. He has been working as a founder and lawyer in Tanrıkulu & Tunç Law Office since 2014. He is fluent in English. He is married and has 4 children.

Atty. Sezgin TUNÇ (LL.M.)

Lawyer / Founding Partner

He graduated from Istanbul University Faculty of Law in 2004. He has worked as attorney, consultant and manager at TMSF/Star Medya Group, Merkez Yayın Holding, Avea and Türk Telekom. He received his LL.M. degree from Istanbul Bilgi University Faculty of Law on Economy Law. Since 2017, he has been working for Tanrıkulu & Tunç Law Office as a lawyer and general manager. He speaks fluent English. He is married and has 4 children.

Atty. Yiğit OKUTANSOY

Partner

After completing his undergraduate education at Anadolu University Faculty of Law, he completed his graduate studies at Istanbul Bilgi University Social Sciences Institute. After working in the regulation and law departments of Türk Telekom and Avea companies, he joined Tanrıkulu&Tunç Law Firm. He continues to work in the fields of information technologies, cyber security, payment services, data privacy, financing projects, venture capital and corporate law. He is fluent in English.

Atty. Yusuf GÖRGÜN

Lawyer

Yusuf Görgün completed his undergraduate education at Istanbul University Faculty of Law, worked as a lawyer and consultant in the Network Law Department of Avea. In 2013, he gave lectures and seminars in the fields of Law of Obligations (General-Private), Basic Concepts of Law, Criminal Law, Constitutional Law, and International Law as a Research Assistant in the Department of Political Science and Public Administration of a university. He worked as an instructor lawyer in the field of Criminal Law in many cities in the Conciliator Training studies coordinated in the Alternative Solutions Department of the Ministry of Justice. Yusuf Görgün, who received his LL.M degree from Marmara University Faculty of Law and then continues his PhD in Public Law at Istanbul University Faculty of Law, has been working as a lawyer at Tanrıkulu & Tunç Law Firm since 2020. He is fluent in English and German.

Atty. Rümeysa Bayram

Lawyer

Rümeysa Bayram graduated from Marmara University Faculty of Law in 2020. She studied debating during her undergraduate period and actively worked in various clubs. She is a blogger on a social media platform and is also involved in photography. Bayram did internship in various fields during the summer months, joined Tanrıkulu & Tunç Law Firm after getting his lawyer license in 2021. She is fluent in English.

Atty. Necip Asım ARSLAN

Lawyer

Necip Asım Arslan graduated from Hendek Atike Hanım Anatolian High School and completed his undergraduate education at Marmara University Faculty of Law. He participated in the Future Arbitration Lawyer Competition (ISTAC) during his undergraduate education. In addition, he participated in the Data Science and Machine Learning Bootcamp and designed a project. He has MS Office skills and also advanced Python (PyQt5, Kivy, pandas, NLTK, Django REST Framework modules), CSS, HTML; He is proficient in C, C++, Java, JScript, JQuery, SQL, PostgreSQL programming languages at intermediate level. He is also interested in 2D-3D model design and can work with GIMP, Blender 3D, CorelDraw. He has experience in security testing using Kali Linux and its tools. He continues his publications on her personal blog, where he includes various publications as a lead author. Arslan, started his legal internship in 2020, continues his internship at Tanrıkulu & Tunç Law Firm. He is at upper intermediate in English and a beginner in German.