Libertarian presidential candidate Bob Barr received 1 percent of the vote in 2008.

Gary Johnson thinks he can do better.

Johnson, the former two-term governor of New Mexico, campaigned for the Libertarian Party nomination at the University of Georgia today. With voters disenchanted across the political spectrum, he sees a path to relevancy for a third party that’s been mired in single digits for decades.

“I think there’s a possibility of winning,” Johnson said. “I know that sounds outrageous, but here’s how it goes.”

The Libertarian nominee — presumably Johnson, the most experienced politician out of 11 candidates — will be on the ballot in all 50 states. If he’s polling above 15 percent, he’ll be included in the presidential debates with President Obama and the Republican nominee.

“I think anything is possible at that point,” he said.

Johnson, who was elected governor in New Mexico as a Republican in 1994 and 1998, initially ran for president in the Republican primary, but dropped out in December after failing to gain traction and switched parties.

“I don’t think the Republican Party is reformable,” he said.

Voters are craving an alternative to Republicans and Democrats, Johnson said.

“Right now, I think there’s tremendous disenchantment with the Republican establishment,” he said, citing record deficits, bailouts and an expensive prescription drug entitlement under the Bush Administration.

Meanwhile, liberals “feel betrayed” by Obama’s fighting in the Middle East and lukewarm support for gay issues like marriage equality, Johnson said.

Johnson’s views are orthodox Libertarian, a mix of radical fiscal conservatism and a lassez-faire attitude on social issues. He is opposed to the Federal Reserve, deficit spending, military intervention overseas and government involvement in health care. He supports massive budget cuts, gay marriage, gun rights, legalizing marijuana, making immigration easier for foreign workers and replacing income taxes with a national sales tax.

Johnson said he would cut federal spending by 43 percent, the proportion of the federal budget funded with borrowed or printed money. He would eliminate the Housing and Urban Development, Education and Homeland Security departments and drastically cut Medicare, Medicaid and military spending. Otherwise, he said, the U.S. is headed for a Greek-style fiscal collapse.

As governor, Johnson said he vetoed more bills than the other 49 state leaders combined. He described himself as a “contrarian” but said he’s running to spread a message.

“I have no aversion to being the turd in the punch bowl,” he said.