South Sudan has a population of 11.3 million according to the World Bank (2013). 50.6% of the population lives below the poverty line, with the poorest concentrated in rural areas. In urban areas, the figure is 24.4 percent (World Bank, 2011a).

South Sudan’s predominantly rural population has gradually been shifting to urban areas. Between 1972 and 2016 the proportion of the population living in urban areas increased from 8.6% to 18.8%. The magnitude of urban growth poses many challenges, exacerbated by dilapidated/destroyed infrastructure and services resulting from decades of war and marginalization. Infrastructure development and provision of amenities necessary to support the livelihoods of the population, have not been commensurate with the rise in the urban population. The country’s rapid urbanization, particularly its capital, Juba, calls for large scale urban planning and institutional capacity building of government institutions to be able to effectively plan and implement sustainable urban development initiatives in the country.

As the UN Agency mandated to promote sustainable urbanization, it is imperative that there be increased engagement between UN-Habitat and the government. The urban sector is a key driver of economic growth in South Sudan, due to its high potential to stimulate development and employment in secondary and tertiary sectors. It is also linked to the stimulation of other sectors such as infrastructure development, information and communication, tourism, and hospitality and financial services.

Re-settlement, reintegration of IDPs and returnees, and building their resilience: The anticipated outcome is IDPs, returnees and the host communities living peacefully together and accessing basic services. This is in line with priority area (III) of the United Nations Country Framework (UNCF) for South Sudan, i.e. Strengthening Social Services.

Land mediation, land governance and land administration: The anticipated outcome is to have land mediation and secure land tenure supporting peaceful co-existence and development in line with priority area (I) of the UNCF for South Sudan; Building Peace and Strengthening Governance.

National urban policy and physical planning for equitable development: This is to result in planned and sustainable urbanization to transform the lives of people in South Sudan; This is also in line with priority area (I) of the UNCF.

Housing and basic services through public works: The anticipated outcome is that basic services are meeting the needs of urban communities, and secondly that livelihoods are enhanced through employment in public works projects; in line with priority area (III) of the UNCF.