2. Contents • About South Sudan • Economy of South Sudan • Issues to be Addressed • Solution Pointers • Action Plan

3. About South Sudan World’s newest nation and Africa’s 55th country Created on July 9, 2011, following a peaceful secession from Sudan through Referendum Area : Total 619,745 km2 Population : 12,340,000 (2015 estimate)

4. Economy of South Sudan GDP per capita : USD 1,111 (in 2014) Dual challenge of dealing with legacy of more than 50 years of conflict and continued instability, along with huge development needs. Most oil-dependent country in the world, with oil accounting for almost the totality of exports, and around 60% of GDP. Outside oil sector, livelihoods are concentrated in low productive, unpaid agriculture and pastoralists work, accounting for around 15% of GDP. 85% of the working population is engaged in non-wage work, chiefly in agriculture (78%). Two-thirds of population is below the of 30. Around 38% of population has to walk for more than 30 minutes one way to collect drinking water, and some 80% do not have access to any toilet facility.

5. Issues to be Addressed Dual challenge of dealing with legacy of more than 50 years of conflict and continued instability, along with huge development needs. Around 38% of population has to walk for more than 30 minutes one way to collect drinking water, and some 80% do not have access to any toilet facility. 2.2 million people displaced internally or have relocated to neighbouring countries Food insecurity was expected to affect 4.6 million people (2016) Sharp fall in production, there has been a collapse of international oil prices Impact of the renewed conflict on the well being of its population

6. Solution Pointers Investment and development of basic infrastructure Balance of public and private institutions to guide the country with a vision Stable economic and financial policies Development of healthy and literate human capital Improved livelihoods

7. Action Plan Oil Production • Essential as oil revenues finance 70% of development programmes of the country • ODA in areas of oil refining and production for internal use and exports to kick start economic turnaround. • Line of Credit from IDA countries • Opening private sector through PPP route • Creation of a Sovereign Wealth Fund to cushion the revenues from oil Agriculture • Foreign assistance from Donor countries for industrial farming in areas of sugar, rice, cereals, oilseeds, cotton, etc. • Investment can stimulate rural development, generate employment, increase food productivity, provide sources of revenue, etc. • Investments in production, marketing, logistics, processing and distribution can impact.

8. Action Plan Exploiting Natural Resources other than Oil • Areas like timber, hydropower, other precious metals can be opned up for private investment. SMEs and MSMEs • Access to finance can incerase employment, generate income and reduce poverty. • IFIs can support through financial intermediaries for an outreach to companies and local institutions. • IFIs can also provide direct and indirect financing alongwith advisory services to strengthen business systems. • Creation of microfinance programmes through IFIs. Financial Sector • Line of Credit from IDA countries • Opening private sector through PPP route • Creation of a Sovereign Wealth Fund to cushion the revenues from oil