Ricky Groves and Hannah Waterman tied the knot in 2006 after first laying eyes on each other on the famous EastEnders set.

But their happily ever after was not meant to be, as the soap couple parted ways just four years later.

A decade ago, Ricky was left nursing a broken heart when wife Hannah suddenly walked out on him.

On the eve of 2010, Hannah dropped the bombshell that she had had an affair, and consequently no longer wanted in on their marriage.

Ricky was left heartbroken at the news, especially because he didn't see it coming.

The pair met back in 2000 on the set of the hit BBC One soap, when Ricky played mechanic Garry Hobbs as Hannah played Laura Beale.

The pair dated for roughly six years before Ricky popped the question, with the pair subsequently tying the knot in 2006.

But just over three years later Hannah called time on their marriage - leaving Ricky distraught.

At first, Ricky shifted blame on Hannah's "obsession" with her incredible weight loss.

After dropping a whopping three stone, it seemed to be the talk of the town that her weight loss was what spurred on their break-up.

She even cashed in on her significant slim-down, releasing her own Body Blitz DVD that made her a lucrative profit.

Rumours then swirled around about the pair, with many claiming Hannah decided to walk out on her marriage to Ricky because of her new figure.

But Hannah had previously shrugged those rumours off, telling Mirror Online: "The idea we split up and our marriage broke down just because I lost a couple of stone is ridiculous.

"There's always going to be more than one reason why a couple splits up, but those reasons are between us. Ricky knows what happened, and so do I. To think I lost weight, I turned horrible, I dumped my husband, is stupid."

Hannah blamed not being suited for married life on the reason behind the couple's shock split.

And naturally, their heavily publicised split began to take its toll on her.

She previously explained: "Around the time there was a lot of focus on my weight as well as everything else.

"I hit 7st 5lbs, which was too thin and it had a bad effect on my face. But that wasn't down to exercise and healthy eating, that was stress."

And while there's been a lot of water under the bridge since their split a whole decade ago, Ricky did previously admit that it took him a while to be happy again.

He explained: "It took me a long, long time to get over what happened. It was the lowest I've ever been.

"It was the clinical way it was done. I wish she had let me down gently but I suppose there is no easy way to leave someone."

He added: "Our break-up hit me hard because I took my vows very seriously. My parents celebrated their golden anniversary this year and I always saw marriage as being for life. But as Mum said to me, ‘You had ten good years’ and that’s how I see it too.

"I’m not bitter. Mind you, I’d always disliked New Year’s Eve. I dislike it even more now. This time of year brings back all those memories. But I’m not moping around the house on my own any more."

But despite not pointing to her weight loss as the culprit behind the pair's split, Ricky did admit that there was a time when he thought that was the reason she decided to end it.

Years ago, he explained: "There was a lot more wrong with our marriage than that."

He added: "I don't think being married to someone in the same profession is a great idea. Actors can be demanding and it gets difficult when one of you is doing well and the other isn't.

"You look back and think, 'What did I do wrong?' Maybe it was my fault. But I'm in a much better place now."

Soon after the split, Hannah settled down with actor Huw Higginson, with whom she shares a son.

Meanwhile Ricky has since found love, tying the knot with Kay Russell in 2015.