Former EastEnders star Ricky Groves has spoken of his heartbreak when he finally realised his marriage to Hannah Waterman was over - when he was told she'd had a baby with her new man.

What made matters worse was that the devastating news came from the ex partner of Hannah's new boyfriend Huw Higginson rather than from her.

Ricky, 43, claims he had previously learned that his 36-year-old former co-star was pregnant by former Bill star Higginson, 47, after reading about it.

Sadness: Former EastEnders star Ricky Groves has spoken for the first time about his heartbreak of hearing ex Hannah Waterman had given birth to a baby with another man

Talking to yesterday's Sunday People, Ricky revealed that prior to the call from Higginson's ex Geraldine Dove-Higginson about the birth, he'd held out that he could fix his and Hannah's five-year marriage.

He said: 'It hurts because it could have been me. Before we split up Hannah and I were trying to get pregnant because we wanted a family.

'When I found out Hannah was pregnant I went through our things and put everything she'd left or forgotten in a pile to send to her.

'I kept a few photos and our wedding album but that's about it.'

Ricky added bitterly: 'They didn't hang about, did they? I could have done with another year before coping with that. But I've got to get over it.

'They now have a kid and that's that. There's nothing I can say except to wish them luck.'

But he added: 'I am envious of Huw because he is with my lovely Hannah.'

Ricky and Hannah, who had her baby earlier this summer, got together in 2000 after meeting on the EastEnders set, where he played mechanic Gary Hobbs and she played Laura Beale.

Happier times: Hannah Waterman with Ricky in 2002 after two years together

They married in 2006. But after ungoing a dramatic weightloss regime and then releasing a fitness DVD, Hannah left him on New Years Day last year.

Then in June this year, Huw walked out on his wife Geraldine and two children after 13 years of marriage and moved into Hannah's Essex home.

Hannah and Huw, who had been friends for 10 years, then started dating.

Hannah told Closer magazine last month: 'I’ve been friends with Huw on and off for 10 years. We first met when he played my pervy landlord in EastEnders, but since then we’ve been in two plays together.

'Last year, Huw came a bit unstuck in his personal life and I was on tour with Calendar Girls, so he stayed at my house for a while. He moved in in June, and things progressed quite quickly from there!

'We spoke early on in our relationship about the fact that we’d like a family. I’m 35 and I didn’t want to wait around because, as everyone knows, it can be harder to conceive as you get older. But we didn’t expect it to happen so quickly.'

New father: Huw Higginson with another former EastEnders star Joe Absolom on The Bill

Higginson, who played lovable but dimwitted police officer George Garfield in The Bill, co-starred alongside Waterman in plays Rattle Of A Single Man and Killing Time in 2009.

Waterman also previously revealed to Closer magazine that the pregnancy probably saved her life, as she recently found out she has diabetes.

She added: 'I was recently diagnosed with type 1 diabetes, which was triggered by pregnancy hormones.

'It’s very unusual and can be very dangerous, which means this baby will probably be the only child I can have.'

'Being ill has made me re-evaluate my life. I was lucky doctors picked up on my problem when they did.

'Although the pregnancy triggered my diabetes symptoms, I would have developed them at some point, so at least it meant I was diagnosed earlier – it probably saved my life.'

Ricky meanwhile is preparing to star in a UK theatre tour of Alan Ayckbourn's play Seasons Greetings.