DISTRAUGHT Ricky Groves told last night of the moment he finally accepted his marriage to Hannah Waterman was over when her lovers {furious wife rang and said: By the way, shes had the baby.

The devastating news came as ex-EastEnder Ricky was still in shock from learning from a press report actress Hannah was pregnant.

And hed also only recently found out the dad was fellow TV star Huw Higginson.

Before the fateful call, Ricky secretly believed he and Hannah could mend their five-year marriage and he even dreamed they would go on to start a family together.

But in an exclusive interview with The People, Ricky, 43, admitted discovering Hannah had given birth to Huws son had dashed all his hopes.

He said: It hurts because it could have been me. Before we split up Hannah and I were trying to get pregnant because we wanted a family.

We even had a few baby-name books friends had given us.

I really liked Josephine for a girl but it obviously wasn't meant to be.

When I found out Hannah was pregnant I went through our things and put everything shed left or forgotten in a pile to send to her.

There were lots of family photos and the baby-names books.

I sent those back to her with everything else. I kept a few photos and our wedding album but that's about it.

Fighting to put a brave face on his heartache, Ricky added: They didn't hang about, did they?

I could have done with another year before coping with that. But Ive got to get over it.

They now have a kid and that's that. There's nothing I can say except to wish them luck.

Hannah with Huw

Anguish

Ricky who played unlucky-in-love mechanic Garry Hobbs in the BBC1 soap insisted he is happy for 36-year-old Hannah, despite the {torment of their marriage rift.

And he is convinced bearing her no ill-will is vital if hes ever to get over his feeling of loss.

Ricky said comedy helps and his memories were peppered with jokes as he talked.

But the cracks began to show whenever the subject returned to his wife and the future they had planned together before she left him for Higginson, best known for playing PC George Garfield in The Bill for 10 years.

Ricky confessed: I am envious of Huw because he is with my lovely Hannah.

But what can I do? They have made their bed and they are lying on it.

Now they have to bring up a child together. But being a mum will be an exciting learning curve for Hannah, especially because she hasn't done it before.

And he could not disguise the hint of anguish in his voice as he added: I know Hannah will be a good mum.

And would he be a good dad? He paused for a moment before answering: Yes, I always thought so.

Ricky started dating Hannah after they met on the Albert Square set in 2000 when she began a four-year stint playing Laura Beale.

They had been married for three years when Hannah was cast opposite Huw, 47, in two plays touring Britain in 2009.

At the time, the actress daughter of Minder TV legend Dennis Waterman made no secret of her admiration for her married co-star, dubbing him her rock in publicity interviews.

Ricky said: They were working together closely and got together ironically, while she was playing a prostitute.

But I suppose that is what can happen in those circumstances.

I don't want to know anything about it. But I suppose its quite Romeo and Juliet, with both of them doing a moonlight flit.

Despite trying to make light of it, Ricky still feels the betrayal deeply. Hannah left him on New Years Day last year and in June this year Huw, 47, walked out on his wife Geraldine and two children after 13 years of marriage and moved into Hannah's Essex home.

Ricky's voice trailed off for a while as he relived the moment Hannah went.

Ricky and Hannah in happier times

Then regaining his composure he said: Leaving you is one thing but suddenly becoming pregnant is another.

I found out she was pregnant from a paper a friend showed me. I was devastated.

Before that, I still thought we might be able to work things out if she came back to me.

I thought we could try separate beds and things like that and see how it developed.

But her pregnancy made me realise there was no going back at that point, it was over.

Soon afterwards, he got a call from jilted Geraldine. Ricky said: She told me her husband was the father of Hannah's baby. She was furious even more furious than me because Id had a year to get over what Hannah had done.

She told me they had two kids together and I remember thinking, How much more messy can this get?

Everyone had been feeling sorry for me till then but now another three people were getting hurt. Geraldine was livid but she doesnt want to talk about what happened. She just wants to focus on their children.

Ricky has no olive branches for Higginson and said if he bumped into him now he would have to leave the room.

But as we talked at the Cambridgeshire house he shared with Hannah, it was clear Ricky remains emotionally involved with his estranged wife.

Choosing his words carefully, he said: I'm still married to Hannah and I still have feelings.

I took my marriage vows seriously and I feel responsible for her, whether I want to or not.

Upset

During her pregnancy, Hannah was rushed to hospital on a trip to Australia and was found to be suffering from diabetes.

Ricky said: I was upset I couldn't be there because I understand it was quite serious.

But she was so far away I couldn't do anything to help at all.

He added: I hope shes lucky and Huw is a nice bloke who looks after her.

Pausing for a break, Ricky offered The People a tour of his home.

But he was soon talking about his wife again because her hand is everywhere in the way its furnished and decorated. Ricky said: There's a lot of Hannah here, a lot of memories because we were happy here.

But I don't think the memories will stop me moving on, even if I do remember things now and again for example, we used to do things like make breakfast in bed for each other.

He went on: Sometimes I miss our ordinary routine.

I have returned all her things now but every so often I will find an earring on the carpet and start thinking about her again.

Ill wonder whether I should have been kinder to her about certain things and not pushed her so hard about others.

Ricky added: I miss more things about Hannah than I don't which is why the last years been so horrible.

But now Ive lost that part of my life and I have to crack on with the rest of it.

And he is determined to be upbeat about the future rather than wallowing in the past. He said: It could have been me having kids with Hannah but I refuse to get angry and rage about what has happened.

You have to get over it, otherwise you would just sit in a dark room all the time. This is the hand of cards Ive been dealt.

Hannah has not phoned Ricky since the birth earlier this month.

He said: We only communicate about practical things the house, insurance, equity. If she sends me a text Ill ask how she is and she will do the same. But otherwise it is like talking to someone in a call-centre.

Despite the hard knocks, Ricky insists he wont give up hope of a new love.

But he admits he has found it difficult to start dating again and is not seeing anyone at the moment.

He said: I'm not off the shelf yet but I would like to meet someone, though I'm not actively looking. And with a smile, he joked: Id prefer to meet somebody who isnt an actress but understands my job and is blonde, 6ft 2ins and a millionairess.

Seriously, I do still hope I will find a woman who I can build a life with here and have a family with.

But I know Id be very lucky to find what I had with Hannah a second time.

Catching himself, he added: I dont want people to feel sorry for me because Im a very lucky man.

This has shown me sometimes happy endings aren't all they're cut out to be.

But Ive got a supportive family and good friends. And I'm happier than I have been in a long time.

Ricky is now rehearsing for a UK theatre tour of Alan Ayckbourns hit comedy Seasons Greetings. He said: I am a bit nervous but also excited.

Hes also organising a Help For Heroes fund-raiser at the Cromwell Golf Club in St Neots, Cambs, on 13 August.

He said: I have a lot to be grateful for and a lot to look forward to.

laura.armstrong@people.co.uk

The UK tour of Seasons Greetings starts on August 30. For more information visit www.kenwright.com