Steven Barnes has been recently signed by Del Rey to write a Star Wars novel.

Website: http://www.lifewrite.com/

Jedi Council Forums Username: Darth_Barnes

Full length novels that Steven has written include:

Dream Park (With Larry Niven), Ace Books 1981.

The Descent of Anansi (With Larry Niven) Tor Books, 1982

Streetlethal Ace Books, 1983.

The Kundalini Equation Tor Books, May 1986.

The Legacy of Heorot Pocket Books, written with Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle. Simon and Schuster , July 1987.

The Barsoom Project, Ace Books August 1989.

FUSION Five-part graphic novel for Eclipse Comics. 1987

Gorgon Child, Tor Books, December 1989.

Achilles' Choice (With Larry Niven), Tor 1991

The California Voodoo Game (With Larry Niven), 1991

FireDance-Tor, 1993

These works have been variously translated into Italian, Spanish, German, Japanese, Dutch, Hungarian and Polish.

Beowulf's Children, Tor, 1995 (With Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle)

Blood Brothers, Tor, 1996

Iron Shadows, Tor, 1997

Far Beyond the Stars, Bantam, 1998

Saturn's Race, Tor, 2000

Charisma, Tor 2000

Lion's Blood, Warner 2002

Discuss Steven's novels and aspects of his writing in this thread. You never know, Steven might drop by from time to time!

I've read two of his novels:

Star Trek: Deep Space Nine: Far Beyond the Stars was an adaptation of the episode with the same title, and was much, much better than the Episode. I forget the details, but it had to do with Sisko dealing with racism in America in the mid-20th century.

The Legacy of Heorot, written with Niven & Pournelle, was a fairly standard Aliens-style action/adventure sci-fi novel which was pretty unfulfilling but not bad.

Dual-meaning. The planet, Ord Cestus is the main setting for the novel.

However, the word is latin for a woman's belt, which has meanings from girdle to a specific type of symbolic belt worn by a bride.

So, therefore, I think we must obviously conclude from the title that this story will tie in with the Corellian Trilogy - a sort of prequel. Kit Fisto and Obi-Wan must stop bio war droids from accessing Centerpoint.

Because the bride in question, can only mean Roger, MacBride Allen.

...Or not.

Scheduled for June 2004 is The Cestus Deception, a Clone Wars hardcover novel by author Steven Barnes, published by Del Rey Books

Just as I thought, it's a hardcover. Like all prequel bridge books that have come out on recent years, I get to wait until June 2005 for a cheaper paperback. Is that cool or what?

1) Genghis -- your forgot the more used definition of "cestus" -- a hand covering of leather bands often loaded with lead or iron and used by boxers in ancient Rome. Typically this has just been adapted to "spiked gloves" but the original meaning still stands and is more common than a woman's belt.

2) I recently started reading "The Lives of Dax" for Deep Space Nine. Steven Barnes has an excellent little tale of a young Ben Sisko accompaning Curzon Dax as his aide. Very well done story. I'm quite hopeful for The Cestus Deception and to see how he plays in LFL's sandbox.

I believe he is. If he's not then all of the people posting in the OS thread for The Cestus Deception-originally titled "First African American to write a Star Wars book"-were very, very mistaken