"Our engagement with Actel Consulting helped validate the alignment of our roadmap with the development in the industry while offered us additional, valuable insight for the evolution"

By: Actel Consulting

HONG KONG - Oct. 15, 2013 - PRLog -- Strategy and technology consulting firm Actel Consulting today reported it has been appointed by SmarTone, a leader in wireless communications in Hong Kong, as a Technology consultant for matters of IT Architecture (ITA) Roadmap, and Analysis and Evolution of the IP Backbone (IPB).

Stephen Chau, CTO of SmarTone commented, “witnessing the mobile network evolved from voice centric to data centric in the past years, SmarTone has been putting emphasis in maintaining a robust, reliable and scalable packet network. In light of the continual growing demand on packet services and increasing reliance on packet network for service delivery, we have formulated an evolution roadmap for meeting the upcoming challenges. We are happy that Actel Consulting has brought in the right expertise to the projects. Our engagement with Actel Consulting helped validate the alignment of our roadmap with the development in the industry while offered us additional, valuable insight for the evolution.”

Claude Achcar, Managing Director of Actel Consulting, added, “SmarTone is an esteemed and innovative player in the competitive Hong Kong market. We are honored to be selected by SmarTone to contribute to their differentiation and to future-proof their systems and networks.”

The ITA project focus was to create an adaptable, flexible, and scalable IT architecture to enable the evolution towards LTE based IP centric services introduction. This included aspects related to service provisioning, cloud orchestration, service oriented architecture enablement for IMS services, M2M overlays, and OTT partnerships.

The key goal of IPB was to ensure that the core of the network evolution over the next 5 years is ready for any new service introduction. It also provided the right foundation for intelligent and value-add services to an evolving customer landscape. Specifically, we provided recommendations for the evolution of the IP network, dynamic QoS models, and end-to-end monitoring of services.

About Actel Consulting

Actel Consulting offers bespoke and unbiased advisory and strives for best customer experience through hands-on, implementable, and real-world consulting. Its experienced consultants cover the ICT spectrum, notably Internet and Information Technology, Advanced Network Infrastructure, and Emerging Network Services. Since its inception in 2002, Actel Consulting has achieved significant credentials in terms of new business generation, revenue growth, and strategic alliances formed to over 100 clients ranging from fast growing and innovative venture or PE backed high-tech firms to communications service providers and large multinational enterprises across various verticals including TMT, financial services, and the public sector. For further information, please visit www.actelconsulting.com

About SmarTone

SmarTone is a leader in wireless communications in Hong Kong. It provides voice, multimedia and broadband services through its territory wide 4G and 3G HSPA+ networks, and the use of unique X-celerator engine which speeds up the Internet experience. SmarTone is a subsidiary of SmarTone Telecommunications Holdings Limited (0315.HK) which is itself a subsidiary of Sun Hung Kai Properties Limited (0016.HK), both of which are listed on the stock exchange in Hong Kong. For more information on SmarTone Telecommunications Holdings Limited, please visit www.smartoneholdings.com

Contact:

Claude Achcar, +852 3975 2999

claude@actelconsulting.com

End