Publish date: 2024-05-06

Conway Twitty was an American country music singer and songwriter. He had a successful career in the rock and roll, R&B, and pop genres. He was the favorite of several people mainly because of his often use of romantic and sentimental themes in his songs.

Speaking of Conway Twitty’s romantic life, he had an interesting relationship with Temple Medley. Temple is now the ex-wife of Conway. The pair’s love story was full of twists and turns. They were married twice. This article is about Conway Twitty’s ex-wife, Temple Medley.

Temple Medley: Bio Summary

Temple Medley was previously married to Conway Twitty, who is also credited as an actor, per his IMDb profile. He was credited for Limitless (2011), Punch-Drunk Love (2002), and Hollywoodland (2006). Temple Medley was the second and third wife of Conway Twitty.

Temple Medley and Conway Twitty were married twice. They got married for the first time in 1955. They had three children and divorced after over a decade of marriage, in early 1970.

Temple Medley and Conway Twitty remarried in a secret wedding. They married quietly by the end of 1970. The marriage finally ended in another divorce in 1985. Their union was on and off. They separated because of Conway Twitty’s frequent absence.

Temple Medley’s Children With Conway Twitty

Temple Medley and her ex-husband Conway Twitty had three children. Their children are Joni Lee, Kathy Twitty, and Jimmy Twitty. Their first child is Joni Lee and she was born on July 2, 1957, in Helena, Arkansas, the U.S. She is 65 years old as of 2022. She is an American country music singer.

Joni Lee is known for Don’t Cry, Joni, and Touch the Hand, which she worked on with her father Conway Twitty. She recorded several singles as Joni Penn. She is known for her hit I’m Sorry Charlie, which peaked at number 16 on Hot Country Songs.

The song was included on a self-titled album for MCA Records in 1976. Joni Lee is a married woman. She is the wife of John Wesley Ryles. John Wesley Ryles is a country music artist. He is a singer-songwriter and session musician. He doesn’t record as a headline artist anymore but remains active in the music industry as a session musician.

Also Read: Ginean Rapp: Everything About Pat Monahan’s Ex-wife

The second child, Kathy Twitty is a country music singer. She was a member of a girl group dubbed The Next Generation together with other country superstars’ daughters: Loretta Lynn’s daughter Peggy, Johnny Cash’s daughter Cathy, and George Jones and Tammy Wynette’s daughter Georgette.

Kathy Twitty often covers her father’s songs. She is notable for the cover of Linda On My Mind. The youngest child, Jimmy Twitty has lived a private life and much is not known about him.

Temple Medley’s Personal Life

Temple Medley was born on 3 February 1939, in Arkansas, USA. Her parents are Clyde Jaco and Ruby Jaco. She was passionate about architecture and interior design and was also actively involved at the First Baptist Church in Hendersonville, per sources.

Temple Medley passed away on 6 October 2021, in Hendersonville, Sumner County, Tennessee, USA, at age 82. The cause of her death is still unknown. Her ex-husband Conway Twitty died on June 5, 1993, in Springfield, Missouri, USA. He was 59 years old when he died. He died of an abdominal aortic aneurysm, at Cox South Hospital in Springfield, Missouri.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7pbXCsqurnZ6ZwG%2BvzqZmrZ2dpbmmecyem6WdqWKzoq%2FTrGSamp%2BqwW6vzqeumrFdqcSqwNOyqmadqGLEqrLEaA%3D%3D

ncG1vNJzZmispaR7p77AamWdoZeewaK4zpycmqajpa6ksdJnmqilX6OyuL%2BOrZymqJyaeq6xw6WcsmWWlrC1v4yamaitpGKwsLrWmrBmrKeewbXF0macsWWnnrOmesetpKU%3D