Private Swim Lessons

Private Swim Lessons In Santa Maria, CA

5 Star Ratings

Our satisfied clients have rated us 5 stars for providing excellent private swim lessons. These ratings and reviews can be found throughout various platforms like Google and Facebook.

Certified swim Instructors

We carefully screen and background check each of our swim instructor to ensure they have proper CPR & First Aid certifications as well as the experience to deliver the best results in a friendly and safe environment.

OUR private swim LESSONS IN Santa Maria, California

InstaSwim offers high quality private swim lessons in Santa Maria, CA. Our certified and experienced private mobile swim instructors travel to your home pool or community pool to teach private at home swim lessons for all ages.

InstaSwim offers 4 different learn to swim programs for Infants, Toddlers, Kids, and Adults of all ages in Santa Maria, CA.

Our InstaSwim private mobile swimming instructors are experienced, patient, and have at least 2 years of experience teaching all ages the lifesaving skill of swimming and drowning prevention.

Our private swim instructors adapt to each student’s swimming goals and will ensure safety and a fun learning experience.

After your first private swim lesson, our InstaSwim swim instructors will develop a personalized, custom lesson plan so that our students can learn at a fun and fast pace.

Our private mobile swim instructors based in Santa Maria, CA are patient, fun, energetic and are passionate about what they do.

How It Works

Register

Registration is fast and easy! Submit your registration and we will connect you with the right swim instructor!

Schedule

Once we process your registration, your swim instructor will contact you for scheduling.

Start Learning

When scheduling is setup, you are ready to start lessons with InstaSwim!

What Our Clients Are Saying!

My 8 year old was afraid to go under water as he wasn't allowed last 2 years due to ear issues. We tried everything and couldn't get him past the fear. In one session Brian got him to go under and he loves going under water now and is swimming great ! It's like a different kid.

Blake was a very good instructor. She was patient, encouraging, professional, timely and caring. The company was very responsive to our needs and professional. The lesson plan was well organized and thought out.

My daughter has taken lessons for few summers at a different swim school and I feel she has progressed more in a shorter amount of time with Instaswim lessons. Jennifer is great with the kids, I would highly recommend this program for kids of any age!

We used Instaswim for lessons for our 2 year old and our instructor, Danielle was great! She was able to engage him through various games and activities and he looked forward to his time with her every week! Would definitely recommend!!

Reagan was phenomenal! Both of my boys enjoyed him and learned so much from him. Within 12 lessons (three times a week), my 5 year old can now swim on his own without any help or floaties and my two year old is able to flip onto his back and float. Reagan was very patient with the kids (especially my two year old), but taught them the life saving skills they needed. He was very punctual and professional! We definitely recommend Reagan and InstaSwim to everyone and anyone!

We did 12 one-on-one swim lessons with our 1 year old daughter and her progression from lesson 1 to lesson 12 was impressive. At the end of 12 lessons, she could hold her breath for approximately 20 seconds, find the side of the pool on her own and "monkey crawl" to a stair to get out. We highly recommend InstaSwim, specifically Veronique, who was our wonderful instructor.

Previous

Next

Our private Swim Lessons Programs in Santa Maria, CA

They say the earlier the better! InstaSwim offers private swim lessons for babies. Infants can start early on which can accelerate learning how to swim as they get older.

InstaSwim offers private swim lessons for toddlers. Our instructors focus on building confidence in the water as well as life saving skills for toddlers.

InstaSwim offers private swim lessons for kids. We can help accelerate their growth at a rapid level!

It’s never too late to start learning how to swim. InstaSwim offers private swim lessons for adults. Impress your loved ones and be water safe by learning this valuable skill.

ABOUT OUR PRIVATE SWIM LESSON PROGRAM

Wondering how long it takes to learn to swim independently? We find on average it takes our students about 10-12 swimming lessons to learn the basic water safety and lifesaving skills.

We suggest taking private at home swim lessons a minimum of 2x a week. We put a big focus on learning how to swim FAST!

Our main focus is to teach our students life saving skills and water safety in Santa Maria, CA.

Specifically back floating and building arm and kick strength so that our students can successfully swim to the side of the pool for safety in an emergency situation, or float on their back independently.

Our goal is to teach our students the necessary skills to save themselves if they were to ever fall into the pool on their own.

Once the basic water safety and life saving skills are accomplished, we move onto stroke development. We focus on the lifesaving skills first as we feel it is most important for our students to learn. Survival swim lessons are most likely top of mind for a parent with young children.

What separates our amazing swim lesson program from other swim schools is that we are very flexible when it comes to scheduling, custom lesson planning, and 1 on 1 close communication with your swim instructor and InstaSwim staff.

We cater the lesson plan around what the student needs to work on specifically without all the fluff. Our goal is to ensure water safety and cut the learning process in half.

100% Satisfaction Guaranteed or your money back!

InstaSwim wants to ensure that you are satisfied with the swim instruction provided by our private mobile swim instructors. This is why InstaSwim provides a full refund on your private swim lessons package if you are not satisfied with your first swim lesson.

We do not have a commitment contract here, feel free to take as many swim lessons as you wish. If you have any questions regarding our swim lesson services please call us at (888) 610-2656 or visit our contact page!

ABOUT OUR PRIVATE MOBILE SWIM INSTRUCTORS IN Santa Maria, CA

Certified in CPR/First Aid

2+ Years Minimum Experience

Background Checked

Fully Insured

Carefully Screened

Ability To View Instructors Profile Before Starting Lessons

Back-To-Back 5 Star Employee Reviews

Flexible Scheduling

Full Refund If Not Satisfied

Some Of Our Wonderful Swim Instructors!

 5/5

Lexie

I have been swimming for Most of my life and am passionate about helping others learn to swim and gain more confidence in the water. I have worked with all different ages and I’m excited to teach more individuals about water safety and prevent child drownings.

 5/5

Reagan

Hi there my name is Reagan. I just graduated with my Master’s degree in Accounting from UTD. I’ve been teaching swim lessons for almost 7 years now, and lifeguarding for almost 8!

I love being at the pool, and seeing the growth and progress of the kids I instruct is what drives my passion for swim instruction.

 5/5

Maurice

Maurice Britton learned how to swim at HES swim school at 8 yrs old and then joined the swim team when he reached 11 yrs of age. He also swam competitively all throughout middle school and up to his sophomore year in high school at JCC swim team.

Maurice joined the parks department in the summer of 2016. It was during this time that he began teaching kids how to swim and learned that he had a passion for It.

He continues to learn different ways to improve his teaching techniques to help give his students the swim skills that they need to become amazing swimmers.

 5/5

courtney

Hi, my name is Courtney! I started teaching swim and life guarding because of my love for the water. As a young gal I always had an affinity for swimming, so it came to no surprise that I later decided to come back something involving my love.

Aside from that- I always loved helping others, weather that’s helping them learn new skills or teaching them to be more brave an comfortable in the water.

My bubbly and fun personality helps me to get along with any age group as well as my patience.

InstaSwim private mobile swim instructors are experienced, patient and gentle. Our private swim instructors adapt to each student’s swimming goals and will ensure safety and fun learning experience.

All of our private mobile swim instructors In Santa Maria, CA are CPR/First Aid certified, carry at least 2 years minimum experience teaching all ages either privately or at public swim schools.

Our swim instructors in Santa Maria, CA are fully background checked, screened, and have fun, positive attitudes!

InstaSwim ensures you will receive the best quality private swim lessons in Santa Maria, CA due to a number of factors including the fact that our private mobile swim instructors near Santa Maria, CA are the highest paid swimming instructors in the industry.

We believe that if we offer great pay and benefits to our team, our team will deliver a great quality service. Many of our mobile swim instructors also have competitive swim backgrounds along with Lifeguarding experience.

Previous

Next

WHY ITS IMPORTANT TO LEARN TO SWIM

Almost 800 Children Drown In The U.S. Every Year

Babies & Toddlers Are More Likely To Drown In A Backyard Home Pool

5-17 Year Olds Are More Likely To Drown In Natural Water

More Than Half Of All Child Drowning Deaths Are Among Children Ages 0 To 4

Drownings Are Usually Silent & Occur Quickly

Private swim Lessons In Santa Maria, CA

InstaSwim offers a high quality private swim lessons from experienced swim instructors in your local area! Connect with an InstaSwim Instructor in your city and surrounding areas!

apply for a swimming instructor position!

Make Your Own Schedule!

Make Up To $50 Per Swim Lesson!

Travel As Far As You Wish!

5-Star reviews on our Indeed company page!

InstaSwim is always hiring private mobile swimming instructors. We offer flexible scheduling, ability to travel as far as you wish, and super fast, competitive pay! Learn more below and apply today for an awesome summer swim instructor job !

Why Private Swim Lessons Are Better Than Traditional Group Swim Lessons

Private swim lessons are an important way for individuals to learn how to swim, or to improve their swimming skills, in a one-on-one setting with a trained instructor. There are several key reasons why taking private swim lessons is important.

First and foremost, private swim lessons provide a safe and controlled environment for individuals to learn how to swim. When taking private lessons, individuals have the full attention of the instructor, who can provide personalized instruction and immediate feedback.

This allows for a more efficient and effective learning experience, as the instructor can make adjustments to the lesson plan and teaching methods based on the individual’s needs and progress.

Furthermore, in a private lesson, the student is less likely to be intimidated by other students, which can be a barrier to learning.

Private swim lessons offer flexibility and convenience. Unlike group lessons, which often have a set schedule and class size, private lessons can be scheduled at a time and frequency that is convenient for the individual.

This allows individuals to fit swim lessons into their busy schedules and to make the most of their time in the pool.

Private swim lessons can help individuals to achieve specific goals. Whether it’s learning a new stroke, improving technique, or preparing for a triathlon, a private instructor can tailor the lesson plan to the individual’s specific needs and goals.

This can help individuals to achieve their desired level of proficiency more quickly and efficiently than in a group setting.

Private swim lessons can help individuals to build confidence in the water. Many people are afraid of the water or have had a traumatic experience in the past, which can prevent them from learning to swim.

A private instructor can provide a supportive and encouraging environment, which can help individuals to build confidence and overcome their fears.

Finally, private swim lessons are an excellent way for individuals to stay active and healthy. Swimming is a low-impact form of exercise that can provide a full-body workout, improve cardiovascular fitness, and help to maintain a healthy weight.

By taking private swim lessons, individuals can learn how to swim properly and safely, which can help them to reap the many benefits of swimming for years to come.

In conclusion, private swim lessons are an important way for individuals to learn how to swim, or to improve their swimming skills, in a safe and controlled environment with a trained instructor.

They offer flexibility, convenience, tailored instruction, a supportive and encouraging environment, and an excellent way to stay active and healthy.

Furthermore, they can help individuals to achieve specific goals and build confidence in the water. Overall, private swim lessons are a valuable investment in one’s personal and physical development.

How To Ensure Safety During Private Swim Lessons

When it comes to private swim lessons, safety should always be a top priority. Here are some tips to ensure safety during private swim lessons:

Choose a qualified instructor:

1. It’s important to choose an experienced and qualified swim instructor who is certified in CPR and first aid. This will ensure that the instructor is equipped to handle any emergency situation that may arise during the lesson.

2. Maintain appropriate pool depth: Private swim lessons should take place in a pool with the appropriate depth for the swimmer’s ability. Shallow water is recommended for beginners, while deeper water is suitable for advanced swimmers.

3. Use proper swimming gear: Swimmers should wear proper swimming gear such as swimwear, goggles, and swim caps, as well as floatation devices if necessary. This helps to prevent accidents and ensures maximum comfort while swimming.

4. Stay hydrated: Swimming can be physically demanding and it’s important to stay hydrated before, during, and after the swim lesson. Instructors should encourage students to take frequent water breaks and to bring a water bottle with them.

5. Keep pool area clear: It’s important to keep the pool area clear of any potential hazards such as toys, floats, or other objects that could cause tripping or slipping. This helps to prevent accidents and creates a safe environment for swimming.

6. Follow pool rules: Swimmers should be familiar with and follow all pool rules, including those related to diving, jumping, and horseplay. Instructors should also enforce pool rules to maintain a safe environment for everyone in the pool.

7. Establish a clear communication system: Private swim lessons often involve one-on-one instruction and it’s important to establish a clear communication system between the instructor and swimmer. This helps to ensure that the swimmer understands the instructions and is able to ask questions if necessary.

In conclusion, ensuring safety during private swim lessons is important for preventing accidents and ensuring that everyone has a fun and enjoyable experience. By following these tips, you can create a safe environment for swimming and make the most of your private swim lessons.

We Travel To You

Our swimming instructors travel to your provided location to teach swimming lessons!

FLEXIBLE Scheduling

You and your provided swim instructor can work out a plan that works around your busy schedule!

Experienced Instructors

InstaSwim swimming instructors are highly skilled, certified and provide excellent service to our clients!

Personalized Lessons

Our swimming instructors give our students a one-on-one personalized experience that you don't receive in camps!

Frequently asked questions

We do not have locations, our instructors travel to any pool near you.

Please call us to find out more information about swim instructors in your area!

InstaSwim hand picks the instructor for you based on the information you provided to us in your registration. If the instructor is not a good fit for you, you may request for a different instructor in your area.

We charge a one time $20 registration fee per student. The fee will be added onto your invoice once you confirm a start date with your instructor.

Once you register for any of our services and confirm a start date with your Instructor or event. InstaSwim will send over an invoice to your email address in which you can pay via debit/credit card. If you do not see an invoice from InstaSwim, please contact our office at 888-610-2656

Now for a limited time, we are currently offering a pay per lesson option! Feel free to purchase a single lesson to try us out, if you like our service, you can contact us to purchase a 6 or 12 lesson package and save big!

We accept all major credit and debit cards!

Lesson packages are to be paid in full before the start of lessons. We will send over an invoice to your email address once you are matched with your instructor.

Once you complete your 6 lesson package, you have the option to upgrade to the 12 lesson package. You will have to contact our office and let us know that you would like to upgrade. We will then send you a new invoice with the difference owed.

InstaSwim LLC and our swim instructors are fully insured under our multi-million dollar general liability insurance policy.

Once you submit payment and sign our policy waiver, we recommend looking into a “bubble swim trainer backpack” which you can purchase (here)

We also highly recommend a puddle jumper if you are taking lessons as a group. Accidents can happen at any time, that is why we require all of our participants to be wearing a water safety flotation device while the child is waiting for his/her turn for lessons.

Our instructors and lifeguards bring a variety of different equipment such as diving ring, a kick board, toys, and potentially a water barbell if needed.

All of our contracted swim instructors and lifeguards carry CPR/First Aid certifications by accredited courses such as the American Red Cross and the American Heart Association. Alot of our Instructors also have competitive swim backgrounds or are also lifeguards. We require a minimum of 2 years experience working with all ages in swim instruction.

In a case where you and your instructor is not a good match for you and your family, we will switch that instructor out with another one who will be a much better fit for you. You will just have to contact our office and let us know. 888-610-2656

Our main focus is to teach our students life saving skills and water safety. Specifically back floating and building arm and kick strength so that our students can successfully swim to the side of the pool for safety or float on their back in an emergency situation. Our goal is to have our students be able to save themselves if they were to ever fall into the pool on their own. Since we offer lessons to all ages, our instructors create custom lesson plans based on what that student’s specific goals are including stroke development, water comfort, treading water, diving, etc.

We always suggest starting with the 6 lesson package first to see if it’s a good fit with your instructor. Once the 6 lesson package is complete, you have the option to upgrade to the 12 lessons, you will just have to pay the difference owed.

The 30 minute class is for 1 student only. If you have 2 students in a class, we recommend going with either the 45 minute or 1 hour class. We break down group classes into 1 on 1 increments so that this way each student will have undivided attention with the instructor.

We do not believe in a “learn to swim guarantee” especially without observing the performance of our students. Some students may need more lessons than others and every child is unique and different. Children all learn at their own pace so we cannot say that we guarantee you will learn in “X” amount of lessons. However, we have AMAZING 5 star reviews from many of our clients and students of all ages which you can view (here)

We are happy to further assist you with any questions you may have. Contact Us

Have Some Questions?

Reach us at 888-610-2656