Who is Samuel Karlin? Biography, gossip, facts?

Samuel Karlin (June 8 1924 - December 18 2007) was an American mathematician at Stanford University in the late 20th century. Karlin was born in Yanova Poland and immigrated to Chicago as a child. Raised in an Orthodox Jewish household Karlin became an atheist in his teenage years and remained an atheist for the rest of his life.

When is Samuel Karlin's birthday?

Samuel Karlin was born on the 8th of June 1924, which was a Sunday. Samuel Karlin's next birthday would be in 292 days (would be turning 101years old then).

What was Samuel Karlin's zodiac sign?

Samuel Karlin's zodiac sign was Gemini.

♊

The ruling planet of Gemini is Mercury. Therefore, lucky days were Wednesdays and lucky numbers were: 5, 14, 23, 32, 41 and 50. Scarlet and Red were Samuel Karlin's lucky colors. Typical positive character traits of Gemini include: Spontaneity, Brazenness, Action-orientation and Openness. Negative character traits could be: Impatience, Impetuousness, Foolhardiness, Selfishness and Jealousy.

Was Samuel Karlin gay or straight?

Many people enjoy sharing rumors about the sexuality and sexual orientation of celebrities. We don't know for a fact whether Samuel Karlin was gay, bisexual or straight. However, feel free to tell us what you think! Vote by clicking below.

0% of all voters think that Samuel Karlin was gay (homosexual), 0% voted for straight (heterosexual), and 0% like to think that Samuel Karlin was actually bisexual.

Advertisement

Was Samuel Karlin hot or not?

Well, that is up to you to decide! Click the "HOT"-Button if you think that Samuel Karlin was hot, or click "NOT" if you don't think so. 0% of all voters think that Samuel Karlin was hot, 0% voted for "Not Hot".

Did Samuel Karlin do drugs? Did Samuel Karlin smoke cigarettes or weed?

It is no secret that many celebrities have been caught with illegal drugs in the past. Some even openly admit their drug usuage. Do you think that Samuel Karlin did smoke cigarettes, weed or marijuhana? Or did Samuel Karlin do steroids, coke or even stronger drugs such as heroin? Tell us your opinion below. 0% of the voters think that Samuel Karlin did do drugs regularly, 0% assume that Samuel Karlin did take drugs recreationally and 0% are convinced that Samuel Karlin has never tried drugs before.

What is Samuel Karlin doing now?

As mentioned above, Samuel Karlin died 16 years ago. Feel free to add stories and questions about Samuel Karlin's life as well as your comments below.

Are there any photos of Samuel Karlin's hairstyle or shirtless?

There might be. But unfortunately we currently cannot access them from our system. We are working hard to fill that gap though, check back in tomorrow!