Samuel Karlin

Samuel Karlin is a socialist with a background in journalism. He mainly writes for Left Voice about U.S. imperialism and international class struggle.

With the Kursk Incursion, Zelenskyy Aims to Revive Waning Support for War

Ukraine’s stunning advance into Russian territory won’t do much to change dynamics on the battlefield, but it may succeed in prolonging the war.

The Iranian Regime is No Friend of Palestine

On August 7, Denver Communists held a meeting with Left Voice to discuss the role of Iran in the Middle East and its relationship to the Palestinian struggle.

The Presidential Debate Showed the Time Is Now to Build a Party that Fights for Immigrant Rights, Workers’ Needs, and Socialism

Both Trump and Biden reminded everyone at the debate that the two capitalist parties are in a competition to show who will wage a harder war on immigration. These attacks on migrants harm all workers and require a radical fight back.

Generation Z Is at the Forefront of a Powerful Uprising in Kenya

In response to an attempt by Kenya’s government to tax basic goods, a youth uprising has emerged that shows no signs of ending soon. Anti-imperialist youth internationally can strengthen the movement by showing solidarity with the protests and putting forward demands against the IMF and U.S. imperialism.

The Ayatollah Won’t Free Palestine, but Workers of the Middle East Can

A sector of the international movement for Palestinian liberation sees Iran and the Axis of Resistance as a military force interested in freeing Palestine and defeating imperialism. We need to be clear about the class character of the Iranian regime, its real role in the region, and the power the region’s working class has to win national liberation.

New Jersey Activists Fight Racist Charges Against a Pro-Palestine Protester

Pro-Palestine activists in South Orange, New Jersey were harassed by a local Zionist. Now, the town is using it as an excuse to hit a Black activist with bogus charges and discourage local actions for Palestine.

A Socialist Take on the Election in Mexico and Anti-Imperialism across Borders

Pablo Oprinari, a leader of our sister group in Mexico, discusses how AMLO has developed U.S. imperialism in the country and what class struggle may look like with Claudia Sheinbaum as president. Workers in both the U.S. and Mexico need to fight for class independence and solidarity across borders.

What the Movement for Palestine Can Learn from the Rutgers Encampment Deal

The Gaza solidarity encampment at Rutgers New Brunswick ended in a deal between the administration and a negotiations team at the camp. It’s been a highly controversial decision. The experience at Rutgers shows the need for a truly democratic, bottom-up fight for Palestine.

The Bipartisan War on Immigrants Is Heating Up

Towards the elections in November, Biden and Trump have both made immigration a central issue for their campaigns, showing the central role the crisis at the southern border is for U.S. imperialism – and the necessity for the American working class to reject the chauvinist divisions it imposes.

“There Are No Separate Fights”: Interview with a Mexican Student at the UNAM Encampment for Gaza

We interviewed a participant of the student encampment for Gaza at the National Autonomous University of Mexico about democratic assemblies, anti-imperialism, and how Mexican workers and students are fighting to free Palestine.

Argentina’s Far-Right President is Once Again Advancing Legislative Attacks on Workers

After a setback in February, Javier Milei, the far-right president of Argentina, is once again pushing a set of laws that would hurt workers. The union bureaucracies and center left parties are containing the ability of the working class to fight back.

U.S. Imperialism Is Pushing Tensions in the Middle East to a Boiling Point

U.S. Imperialism's support for Israel is driving the tensions behind Iran's attack and the escalations in the Middle East. It is all the more urgent for the working class to unite with the movement for Palestine against imperialism and chart a way out of the crisis in the region.

Liberal Towns in New Jersey Are Increasing Attacks on Pro-Palestine Activists

A group of neighbors in South Orange and Maplewood have become a reference point for pro-Palestine organizing in New Jersey suburbs. Now these liberal towns are upping repression against the local activists.

Pro-Palestine Activists in France Get Summons from Anti-Terrorist Police

As part of a repressive campaign against the movement for Palestine in France activists have gotten summons from “anti-terrorist” police. The movement for Palestine in the United States must oppose all repression of our movement here and in Europe.

New Jersey Democrats Attack the Public’s Right to Government Records

The New Jersey state assembly, led by the Democratic Party, just tried to fast-track a bill that would have gutted the Open Public Records Act. This is a reminder that their party is an obstacle, not an ally, in the fight to preserve democracy.

No More Aaron Bushnells

Aaron Bushnell was a victim of the U.S. military and a world where it's normal for people to burn. He should inspire a massive movement for a world without despair.

The U.S. is Putting Journalism on Trial: Interview with Kevin Gosztola

Left Voice spoke with journalist Kevin Gosztola about the political nature behind the trial of Julian Assange, the threat that extradition poses to international press freedom, and how the Biden administration has advanced other attacks on press freedom.

The United States Is Trapped in the Middle East

As a result of Israel’s offensive on Gaza, the United States is again becoming deeply entrenched in the Middle East. This is a humiliating blow to President Biden, who promised to reassert U.S. imperialism by moving away from direct involvement in the region.

Defying Repression: Socialist Electeds in Argentina Show Us What Revolutionary Parliamentarism Looks Like

Workers in Argentina are defying police repression and fighting back against the far-right government’s shock therapy. Trotskyist members of congress are not just protesting inside the chamber — they are on the front lines of the demonstrations, getting pepper sprayed and shot with rubber bullets.

“What Happened to the Nazis is What’s Gonna Happen to You”: Argentina’s Left and Workers Are Showing Us How to Fight the Far Right

As Argentina’s Congress debates an anti-worker omnibus bill put forward by the far-right president, leftist organizations and workers resisted police repression outside the National Congress building. We’re watching in real time how a revolutionary Left can fight the Far Right and a complicit center-left.

Six Ideas to Advance the Movement for Palestine

Nearly four months into Israel’s genocide in Gaza, what will it take for the movement to continue forward and impose its demands?

Capitalist Disagreements Over Immigration Erupt in Eagle Pass, Texas

A dispute over federal immigration policy has erupted, with 26 governors openly challenging the Supreme Court. This is part of a broader crisis of stability for the U.S. state and shows the power of the Far Right.

Solidarity with Argentinian Workers from the Heart of Imperialism

With over a million workers in Argentina on strike against the far-right, Zionist president, Left Voice, other socialist and left organizations, and groups leading the movement for Palestine rallied in New York City as part of international solidarity actions.

The World Kissinger Built Must Die Too

Henry Kissinger died at 100 years old. But his legacy remains in the brutal world system he built and the future generations of imperialist ghouls he inspired. They all must go.

Tens of Thousands Flood Washington DC to Support Palestine

Perhaps the largest pro-Palestinian protest in U.S history, today’s rally is a sign that the movement for the liberation of the Palestinian people is rapidly growing.