Briskly paced and enjoyable DTV action fare, despite the bland Eastern European setting and a heavy use of stock footage. Don't look for any logic either, but it doesn't matter all that much when you get ludicrous chase sequences, gory kills with massive blood squibs, and big explosions. DIRECT CONTACT is mindless fun that features an agile and well shaped Dolph Lundgren.

Shockingly decent Dolph Lundgren vehicle has him as an imprisoned ex-Special Forces guy tasked with rescuing an American woman from a dictator. Problem is that she doesn’t want to leave, and also the guy who hired him (Michael Pare) is lying.

In the positive column: It always helps when it looks like Dolph isn’t just collecting a paycheck, and he seems engaged here. Also it’s directed and edited somewhat competently, which I shouldn’t have to make mention of but it’s a rarity in this particular sub genre. And it uses a lot of squibs. Big, bloody, gushing squibs. This thing is VIOLENT. And bonus points for the way Michael Pare goes out, holy god.

Negatives: There’s a lot of stock…

This movie is very uneven. It's got some great action set pieces full of real explosions, car crashes, squibs and gun fires. Most importantly it has Lundgren kicking lots of guys asses. That is mixed with some terrible editing, bad acting, and a weird poorly made shootout at a stadium. It's almost as if they ran out of money for the second half. They also do that thing where they speed up shots to make the car chases look faster, that looks terrible.

Check out my Lundgren ranked list here.

letterboxd.com/kylejunt/list/action-movies-of-dolph-lundgren-ranked/

Looks like it was filmed when Dolph got breaks from filming The Expendables. I give them credit the stunts with tons of explosions and car crashes are impressive. Too bad they did not spend any money on plot. Tons and tons of cliches. Whatever movie cliche popped into your head...it was probably in this movie. Dolph is one of the Three Amigos of direct to dvd release....joining him are Cuba Gooding Jr. and Christian Slater.

The moment when our hero shoves a grenade down a corrupt CIA guys shirt, throws him out of a windows and we see him exploding in detail.

That's a magic moment in cinema.

The rest pretty much sucks, the action is below average, Lindgren is bored the entire time and the dialogue feels like the actors got an unfinished script, I which only general notes were made, but they rolled with it anyways. The soldiers costumes also looked more like pyjamas than uniforms.

But there was some nice squibwork and when they hit something during shootouts, there was a physical effect, not cgi, also the explosions looked real. Nice.

English part below

Ich fühlte mich hier wie das Knie von Lundgren, jede Bewegung auf dem Screen tat einfach weh. OK vielleicht nicht pervers schlecht, aber meine Güte, ist das eine Gülle.

Nicht eine Szene kommt ohne Stock-Footage aus, der Ostblock ist hässlich wie immer und alles läuft auf Sparflamme. Ja es spritzt recht nett, aber ansonsten gibt's hier nichts zu holen.

Ich trage die Schmerzcreme names Isaac Florentine auf oder ne kleine Pille Adkins.

3,5-4,0

I felt like Lundgren's knee here, every movement on the screen just hurt. OK maybe not perversely bad, but my goodness, is this a piece of slop.

Not one scene is without stock footage, the Eastern Bloc is ugly as ever and everything is on the back burner. Yes, there's a nice splash, but apart from that there's nothing to get here.

I apply the pain cream called Isaac Florentine or a small pill of Adkins.

3,5-4,0

This movie could have been called Direct Contact With Movie Tropes but Direct Contact rolls off of the tongue better. Everyone's hero Dolph Lundgren is sent to save a kidnapped young woman. Things get a little murky for Dolph and the young woman. You see, she wasn't really kidnapped. So what does Dolph do? He does what he does best, I don't mean boxing or taking intelligence tests, he sprays gunfire like it is going out of style. I am impressed by how many headshots he gets from his aimless gun-shooting style.

The action in Direct Contact is worth the price of admission, in my case $0.18 because I picked this up at Dollar Tree in a 7-movie Dolph Lundgren…

As much as the Dolph Lundgren keeps making me come back for his 1 out of 3 films that are good, like at least a B-letter grade, he has about the same number that are utterly dreadful that I would flunk. Direct Contact is one of that bad category, a bland and pedestrian film both without a single redeeming quality nor one that has anything unique or special (other than flippant coldblooded murders of its extras.)

Plenty of violence, variety of action set pieces, chases, fights, and explosions, turn this poorly acted and written adventure into something somewhat entertaining.

Lundgren is hired to rescue a kidnapped American woman. This doesn't feel like a stretch for a Lundgren script and it is not. We get a ton of terrible banter between Lundgren and the supposed kidnapped woman, plenty of unremarkable villain plotting, and very dull dialogue pieces in between all the action. Fortunately, the action is pretty constant, varied, and ambitious.

This is filmed with plenty of blood squibs, plenty expendable vehicles, plenty of explosions, and plenty of Lundgren beat downs. It's fast paced (when the action is flowing) and it will satisfy fans of straight to video ambitious action flicks.

I don't remember much of this film a day after viewing it, as there is not much to mentally grab onto. Perfect for a lazy, turn off the brain, night off.

What an utterly ridiculously entertaining bad-film! Dolph is the coolest guy on the planet, even reaching the heights of Arnold in some scenes. It almost feels like a parody of the genre, and as such it actually has great value, although I suspect it to be entirely unintentional.

There's so many explosions and blood spatter (none of them, except for one was CGI) that even though the story, the characters, the camerawork and the editing are way below par, one just have to entertained by the over-the-top stupidity of it all.

This is certainly a new favourite bad-movie of mine, and the best scene was when Lundgren blew up a bad guy with a grenade in mid-air, and blood splashed all over the place. Insane stuff.

Dolph Lundgren is an ex-Special Forces soldier serving time in Balkan prison. Freed by supposed CIA agent Michael Paré if he agrees to rescue a kidnapped woman (Gina Marie May), things get complicated when she doesn't want to go.

I have a real fondness for these mid-to-late 2000s Bulgarian productions that Nu Image and others cranked out, often with Steven Seagal as lead. Direct Contact is one of the best ones; the action rarely stops. It's frequent and it's bloody. Squibs everywhere! Also a heap of explosions, and it's all practical effects - no CG cheating here folks.

Dolph is clearly enjoying himself, and has plenty of bare-knuckle fights mixed with the gunplay. Paré is suitably ruthless and Gina is easy on the eyes. If you want to tromp around Bulgaria being chased by characters called Vlado and Drago (no, not Dolph) you can do far worse than Direct Contact