'Most of us learn to write by stealing from other writers. This event is an invitation to aspiring writers to do some serious shoplifting.' Mal Peet

Mal Peet, the New Zealand Book Council and the International Institute of Modern Letters invite 15 to 18 year old aspiring writers to join Mal and the members of his Creative Writing workshop in a special free workshop session.

Celebrated British novelist Mal Peet is the author of Tamar (winner of the Carnegie Medal) and Exposure (winner of the Guardian Prize), among other acclaimed novels for young adults.

He is currently teaching in New Zealand for the first time at the invitation of the International Institute of Modern Letters, where he convenes our CREW 352 Creative Writing workshop. CREW 352 boasts a talented line up of writers including well-known YA authors Mandy Hagar and Eirlys Hunter. The group meets weekly to discuss each other’s work, share ideas and encourage each other.

Mal would like to invite students aged 15-18 who are keen readers and aspiring authors to join him and CREW 352 for a special, free, one-off workshop session, kindly hosted by the Wellington City Library.

The session will kick off with the CREW writers introducing themselves and speaking briefly about the stories they’re working on. Then the writers, in pairs, will work with small groups of students on the practicalities and problems of writing; things like getting started, what to do when you’re stuck, getting narrative voices right, giving stories a good shape, writing dialogue. You'll come away with some great ideas about how to approach new work or improve and polish your existing writing.

While writing is, of course, a solitary activity, it need not be a lonely one. No matter what your age is, getting together with other writers, sharing thoughts and ideas – and having fun doing it – can give you the confidence and the encouragement to become a writer. It might even kickstart a workshop group of your own.

This is a rare opportunity to develop your writing with the guidance of an internationally-acclaimed and award-winning YA author, as well as some local stars. And it's free.

Please note: All students must be senior high school-aged, though not necessarily enrolled at a school. The workshop runs for three hours with one ten-minute break. There will be no food provided but there is a cafe on the premises.

Where: Wellington Central Public Library, Victoria St, Wellington

When: Sunday 16 June, 1.00 to 4.00pm

Participation is FREE but places are limited. Early booking is recommended.

For more information: contact Sarah Forster at the New Zealand Book Council on (04) 801 5546

Students, teachers or parents are welcome to download, complete and email / fax the booking sheet below by Friday 31 May to Sarah Forster: sarah@bookcouncil.org.nz / Fax: (04) 801 5547.

Document File size File type Write with the Experts workshop booking request form 161 KB PDF Write with the Experts poster 1 MB PDF

Praise for Mal Peet's novels:

Life: An Exploded Diagram

'A new novel by Mal Peet is always something to be eagerly anticipated: finely drawn characters, ambitious storytelling, a broad historical canvas, piercing social critique–and now, much more than in previous novels, a delightfully irreverent streak of humor.' (Jonathan Hunt, USA School Library Journal)

'An astonishingly engaging, wonderful, un-put-downable book.' (Carol Stoltz, Porter Square Books, Cambridge, MA)

Tamar

'...as fine a piece of storytelling as you are likely to read this year'.(The Guardian)

'Beautifully crafted, with a finale that took my breath away, this is simply unforgettable (Publishing News)

Exposure

'Clever, funny, moving and superbly well written, it's the work of a major author.' (Amanda Craig, The Times)

'Peet's writing is slick, assured and sophisticated. Don't think this is ladlit, girls will enjoy it just as much: a terrific read.' (Irish Times Review)

Keeper

'It's a brilliant book about soccer but there are some primitive forces at work here too – even if you’re not into football you’re going to be hooked.' (DMAG, Australia)

Read more about Mal Peet:

British Council Literature listing

Walker Books author page