The Dive Bar is closing in November, leaving behind a legacy of Thursday night performances orchestrated by Duncan Arsenault. Arsenault’s band, The Curtis Mayflower, has announced one final night of music at The Dive, beginning at 9 p.m. Oct. 24. We caught up with Arsenault to find out more about the venue that brought his band together.

What are the details of Thursday's last Dive Bar show?

The Curtis Mayflower is made up of musicians who were part of The Dive Thursday series in heavy rotation. We all enjoyed playing those Thursday shows so much that we gave the lineup a name, and began writing our own music. To be able to play The Dive on a Thursday one last time before they close is a beautiful thing for us. We plan to do the same thing we always did there and I hope your readers come see for themselves what it's all about.

How did you start curating live music at The Dive?

I spent a lot of time at The Lucky Dog Music Hall on Green Street at the time that Alec (Lopez) took over The Dive and switched over to craft beer. It was a common thing to be at The Dog and drop in to The Dive for a beer. Brendan Melican suggested to Alec and me that music would be good there. Alec is a musician and a music lover and he had already been thinking about it too. It had not occurred to me to play music there. The room is not a natural fit for a band, and what is now the beer garden out back, was an alley parking lot. I wanted to give it a try, so I came up with a simple idea. I thought that if I could find different musicians each week who were willing to play music with me and whoever else we could find, we could have some fun. I promised myself and Alec that the important thing would be the quality of the music, and that it wouldn't be anything that was happening anywhere else. I am grateful to know so many talented players who know a lot of songs. Some of the earliest incarnations of the series were very exciting and interesting. Steve Mossberg would play. Michael Thibodeau and Scott Ricciuti might be there. Jon Short was always ready and willing to jump in. These are people who not only play their instruments very well, but they are interested in the excitement of playing music with musicians they don't know and don't already know their material. In the first months of the series we kept things small, duos and trios and we started early. The thinking was that we would do music from 7-10 p.m. Soon after that, we were being asked to play later and later and eventually we settled into a 9 p.m. to midnight time, often closing the place with one more last set.

Who are some of the most memorable performers from your Thursday night shows?

We did a little over 300 Dive Thursdays consecutively, with about 80 different musicians. There are so many moments that are special to me that I couldn't possibly single one out. When I reflect back I think of the musicians who were there playing as much as I was. People like Jeff Burch, who is not only a tremendous bassist, but the kind of person who you can call on to play just about anything anywhere. Brooks Milgate is another musician who played hundreds of Thursdays with me. His musicianship is second to none, but again, he's a person who is willing to go out on a limb with other musicians. Scott Ricciuti (RIP) is also someone whose spirit was felt throughout the series whether he was playing or not. Incredible songwriting and singing was more than enough but he also brought an energy of collaboration and enthusiasm I still feel to this day. There's no way the series would have been the success it was without him. Other players who did dozens and dozens of these shows like Jeremy Moses Curtis, Jon Short, Paul Buono and Craig Rawding made the whole thing possible. I have a list of everyone that played these shows and I love everyone on that list. Another person I want to mention is Bill Connor. Soon after we started the series, Bill, who is a great drummer and performed at The Dive often with his own projects, is also a skilled Hammond organ technician. A year or so after the series started, Bill generously loaned a Hammond B3 and Leslie speaker to the bar. This opened up the opportunity to have organ players come in and play on an instrument you don't often get to hear, especially in the corner of a small bar. So cool that he did that, I'm forever grateful.

What makes a venue uniquely suited for live music in Worcester?

Some combination of good music and a good vibe seems to be the trick. It has less to do with the physical space as it does the people.

You’ve been featured on "NCIS" and "Young and the Restless." How did it feel hearing your music on national television for the first time?

It's bizarre and sort of cool to hear the music out of context like that. There is always the hope that someone will hear it and find the music for themselves.

Who are some of your favorite collaborators?

Every project is different and it's usually all about finding the perfect person for it. I follow my gut with projects I get involved in. Whatever I'm currently doing is usually my favorite thing. The Dive Bar was an explosive period of collaboration for me. So many bands were formed through those nights, not just with me but with musicians who would meet at the shows. I love this, and still do this with my Wednesday series at Vincent's.

What is your relationship with country chart-topper Sam James?

My relationship with Sam James is that he is a very dear friend. Far beyond making music together, he's my brother.

What are your proudest accomplishments with The Curtis Mayflower?

The music.

Is there anything else you’d like our readers to know about Worcester’s live music scene?

Live music is being made every night of the week in Worcester by fantastic musicians across all styles. While I've got the opportunity, I want to encourage your readers to get out there and take it in whenever they can. You'll never get the feeling from a video or from a recording of live music that you would in person. You need to go to the source, and if you don't demand live music it might get harder to find as time marches on.