From The Emperor’s Desk: Before I address the wedding of Princess Dagmar of Denmark and Emperor Alexander III of Russia, I will cover Dagmar’s engagement to Alexander’s brother, Nicholas Alexandrovich, Tsesarevich of Russia.

Princess Dagmar of Denmark [Maria Feodorovna] (November 26, 1847 – October 13, 1928), known before her marriage as Princess Dagmar of Denmark, was Empress of Russia from 1881 to 1894 as the wife of Emperor Alexander III.

She was the fourth child and second daughter of King Christian IX of Denmark and Louise of Hesse-Cassel, the daughter of Prince Wilhelm of Hesse-Cassel and Princess Charlotte of Denmark, a daughter of Frederik, Hereditary Prince of Denmark and Norway, and Sophia Frederica of Mecklenburg-Schwerin. Her

Princess Charlotte of Denmark’s father was a younger son of King Frederik V of Denmark and Norway, while her mother was a daughter of Duke Ludwig of Mecklenburg-Schwerin.

At birth she had two older siblings, Prince Christian Frederik of Denmark and Norway (who later became King Christian Frederik of Norway in 1814 and was King Christian VIII of Denmark from 1839) and Princess Juliane Sophie. She later had a younger brother, Prince Frederik Ferdinand.

Growing up, she was known by the name Dagmar. Most of her adult life, however, she was known as Maria Feodorovna, the name which she took when she converted to Russian Orthodoxy immediately before her 1866 marriage to the future Emperor Alexander III. Within her family, she was known as “Minnie” throughout her life.

At the end of 1863, as the daughter and sister of the kings of Denmark and Greece and sister-in-law of the Prince of Wales, Dagmar was now considered one of Europe’s most coveted princesses. She received a proposal from Crown Prince Umberto of Italy, but was reluctant to marry him because she found him unattractive.

Her mother was also reluctant to support such a marriage as she saw a greater status in the prospect of Dagmar marrying into the Russian imperial family. Due to the rise of Slavophile ideology in the Russian Empire, Alexander II of Russia searched for a bride for the heir apparent, Nicholas Alexandrovich, Tsesarevich of Russia, in countries other than the German states that had traditionally provided consorts for the tsars.

Princess Dagmar was one of the candidates, and as early as 1860 the emperor had made his first inquiries about a possible engagement. There were also already family ties between the two families, as Dagmar’s uncle, Prince Friedrich Wilhelm of Hesse-Cassel, had been married to the Emperor’s sister, Grand Duchess Alexandra Nikolaevna of Russia.

In 1864, the Russian Empress Maria Alexandrovna announced that her son would visit Denmark, and during the summer Nicholas, or “Nixa” as he was known in his family, arrived at Fredensborg Palace, where the Danish royal family was staying. Nicholas had never met Dagmar, but had for a number of years collected photographs of her, and both families wanted the marriage. When they met, Dagmar and Nicholas were mutually attracted, and Nicholas wrote to his mother:

I came here as if in a fever (…) I can not describe to you what came over me, when we approached Fredenborg and I finally saw the sweet Dagmar. How can I describe it? She is so beautiful, direct, intelligent, experienced, and yet shy at the same time. She is even more beautiful in reality than in the pictures we have seen so far.

After returning to Russia to obtain his father’s permission, Nicholas proposed to Dagmar on September 28, 1864 in the Bernstorff Palace Gardens and received a yes. The engagement was announced at Bernstorff Palace later the same day. Her future mother-in-law Maria Alexandrovna (Marie of Hesse and By Rhine) gave her a six-strand pearl necklace and Nicholas gave her a diamond bracelet. In total, the betrothal gifts Dagmar received from her future in-laws cost 1.5 million rubles.

The engagement was popular in both countries and at the same time ensured the Danish royal family even better connections. The engagement took place right during the Second Schleswig War between Denmark on one side and Prussia and Austria on the other, and during the peace negotiations after the war in October 1864, Dagmar unsuccessfully asked her future father-in-law to help Denmark against Prussia over the disputed territory of Schleswig-Holstein.

In a letter, she asked Emperor Alexander II of Russia: “Use your power to mitigate the terrible conditions which the Germans have brutally forced Papa to accept… the sad plight of my fatherland, which makes my heart heavy, has inspired me to turn to you.” It is believed that she did it with the consent of her parents, but it is not known if it was at their request. Her appeal was in vain, but from that moment on she became known for her anti-Prussian views.

Deathbed of Tsarevich Nicholas.

As Nicholas continued on his journey to Florence, Dagmar and Nicholas exchanged daily love letters for months. When he grew ill, Nicholas sent fewer letters and Dagmar teasingly asked him if he had fallen in love with “a dark-eyed Italian”. In April, Nicholas grew gravely ill with cerebrospinal meningitis.

Emperor Alexander II of Russia sent a telegram to Dagmar: “Nicholas has received the Last Rites. Pray for us and come if you can.” On April 22, 1865, Nicholas died in the presence of his parents, brothers, and Dagmar. His last wish was that Dagmar would marry his younger brother, the future Alexander III.

Dagmar was devastated by Nicholas’ death. Nicholas’ parents struggled to “pull Princess Dagmar away from the corpse and carry her out.” She was so heartbroken when she returned to her homeland that her relatives were seriously worried about her health. She had already become emotionally attached to Russia and often thought of the huge, remote country that was to have been her home.