woody harrelson Archives

Tallahassee (Woody Harrelson), Columbus (Jesse Eisenberg), Witchita (Emma Stone), and Little Rock (Abigail Breslin) appeared at cameo's house The cameo's signature film appears in his personal theatre and someone plays from the film's soundtrack Most often had the fictionalized version of the subject already turned to a zombie. In the Murray cameo, the actor "blended" in[...]

Woody Harrelson is stepping in to team up with star Kevin Hart in the action-comedy The Man from Toronto He signed to the Columbia Pictures film after Jason Statham backed out The Expendables star insisted on making the film R-Rated, but Sony executives refused to budge, according to The Hollywood Reporter. Editorial credit: Andrea Raffin /[...]

The ending of Venom implied that the other symbiotes will be appearing soon, and one that's certain is none other than the dangerous Carnage (played by Woody Harrelson.) If they can hold off integrating them for at least one more film for Venom to really discover his own identity outside of his Spider-Man affiliations, then[...]

The trailer starts with Tallahassee (Woody Harrelson) dropping a grenade into a vehicle and blowing it up Shocked, Wichita (Emma Stone) screams, "What the f***?!" at what just happened. The trailer then reveals to be the "More than the f-bomb trailer." They revisit the sequence around the White House where the four unload on the zombie[...]

While stars Woody Harrelson, Jesse Eisenberg, and Emma Stone look the same for the most part, it's Abigail Breslin, who's physically changed the most becoming an adult since the 2009 film. // Sony Pictures Sony Pictures released a featurette that takes the primary cast back to the funapalooza videogame ride through the two films asking what questions[...]

Short of Ryan Reynolds or a major cast member of The Walking Dead, there's hardly anyone out there who can impress in a cameo the way Murray has…well maybe the ghost of Burt Reynolds? Written by Paul Wernick, Rhett Reese, and David Callaham, Zombieland: Double Tap stars Woody Harrelson, Jesse Eisenberg, Emma Stone, Abigail Breslin, Luke[...]

In a recent interview with EW, Fleischer explained the projects and distractions that kept the further post-apocalyptic adventures of Tallahassee (Woody Harrelson), Columbus (Jesse Eisenberg), Wichita (Emma Stone), and Little Rock (Abigail Breslin) from happening until a decade later – in the upcoming sequel Zombieland: Double Tap. 953624 – ZOMBIELAND 2 "The easy answer is, I think[...]

The Most Dangerous Man in America, based off of the book The Most Dangerous Man, is being produced by Star Thrower Entertainment, with Woody Harrelson attached to play Leary. The series is going to focus on the years after Leary's prison break, and Nixon's fixation on tracking the former professor down Harrelson will not only star[...]

Kimmel and Lear hosted the event, which was directed by 10-time Emmy winner James Burrows. ● First up, leave it to Jamie Foxx to handle a live-on-air flub with the improv skills of a true pro: https://youtu.be/lniDj7L0VmEVideo can't be loaded because JavaScript is disabled: Jamie Foxx Breaks Character – Live In Front Of A Studio Audience (https://youtu.be/lniDj7L0VmE) ●[...]

To be a part of this is a dream come true for me and for everyone involved." – Jimmy Kimmel Live in Front of a Studio Audience: Norman Lear's 'All in the Family' and 'The Jeffersons' includes Woody Harrelson (Archie Bunker), Marisa Tomei (Edith Bunker), Jamie Foxx (George Jefferson), Wanda Sykes (Louise Jefferson), Ellie Kemper (Gloria Stivic), Will Ferrell (Tom Willis), Kerry Washington (Helen Willis), Justina Machado (Florence Johnston), Ike Barinholtz (Meathead), Sean[...]

To be a part of this is a dream come true for me and for everyone involved." – Jimmy Kimmel Live in Front of a Studio Audience: Norman Lear's 'All in the Family' and 'The Jeffersons' includes Woody Harrelson (Archie Bunker), Marisa Tomei (Edith Bunker), Jamie Foxx (George Jefferson), Wanda Sykes (Louise Jefferson), Ellie Kemper (Gloria Stivic),[...]

Second–Rosario Dawson's joined the cast. Rosario DawsonPhoto courtesy of Audible The Clerks 2 star joins an already loaded cast including original stars Woody Harrelson, Jesse Eisenberg, Emma Stone, and Abigail Breslin Also new to the cast are Zoey Deutch and Avan Jogia. #10YearChallenge? Challenge Accepted #Zombieland2 pic.twitter.com/cA1DL1bVZQ — Zombieland: Double Tap (@Zombieland) January 29, 2019 Fans craved for the sequel[...]

Check it out below: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u9Mv98Gr5pY&t=1sVideo can't be loaded because JavaScript is disabled: VENOM – Official Trailer (HD) (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u9Mv98Gr5pY&t=1s) One of Marvel's most enigmatic, complex and badass characters comes to the big screen, starring Academy Award® nominated actor Tom Hardy as the lethal protector Venom. Venom stars Tom Hardy, Michelle Williams, Woody Harrelson, Riz Ahmed, and Jenny Slate[...]

A bunch of new Solo: A Star Wars Story character posters (nine to be exact) dropped this morning and they feature many new characters from the film!

He also serves as executive producer this season alongside Scott Stephens; Matthew McConaughey and Woody Harrelson; Season 1 director Cary Joji Fukunaga; Scott Stephens, Steve Golin, Bard Dorros and Richard Brown. Variety (original exclusive reporting) With the third season of Nic Pizzolatto's crime anthology series True Detective having completed production on the the season's first two[...]

He will also executive produce this season along with Jeremy Saulnier (who will be directing as well), and additional returning EPs Scott Stephens; Season 1 stars Matthew McConaughey and Woody Harrelson; Season 1 director Cary Joji Fukunaga; along with Scott Stephens, Steve Golin, Bard Dorros and Richard Brown. Source: Deadline Hollywood Credit (Sarah Gadon, left): DFree –[...]

With his ambitious vision and Mahershala Ali and Jeremy Saulnier aboard, we are excited to embark on the next installment of True Detective." – Casey Bloys, President, HBO True Detective Season 3 has showrunner Pizzolatto also handling executive producer responsibilities with Scott Stephens; Matthew McConaughey and Woody Harrelson; Cary Joji Fukunaga; Scott Stephens, Steve Golin, Bard Dorros and[...]

As the grieving mother who puts up the three billboards criticizing a sheriff (Woody Harrelson) and his police department for a lack of movement on finding her daughter's killer, she commands your attention whenever she is on screen This may be her defining performance, and as great as she always is, she hasn't been this[...]

However, LBJ, the new biopic starring Woody Harrelson, is an intriguing perspective into the years leading up to JFK's assassination. The film is told mostly as a frame story, slowly moving through the events in Dallas on the morning of November 22nd, 1963 President Kennedy, the First Lady, LBJ, and the rest of the presidential party[...]

In the scene, Caesar (Andy Serkis) is captured and questioned by Colonel (Woody Harrelson) — and there appears to be a mole in Colonel's group. Summary: Caesar and his band of Simian brothers discover an unknown, newly evolved ape named "Bad Ape" (Steve Zahn) – an escapee from a zoo For the first time in the trilogy,[...]

Woody Harrelson also has a role as Solo's mentor, and Donald Glover will play a young Lando Calrissian We don't have too many details on the movie yet, but Harrelson dropped a major update on Instagram when he posted a photo of himself and Glover this week: View this post on Instagram. As you can see, Glover[...]

The movie has an all-star cast of Brie Larson, Naomi Watts, and Woody Harrelson. Summary: A young girl comes of age in a dysfunctional family of nonconformist nomads with a mother who's an eccentric artist and an alcoholic father who would stir the children's imagination with hope as a distraction to their poverty. The Glass Castle will[...]

Summary:In War for the Planet of the Apes, the third chapter of the critically acclaimed blockbuster franchise, Caesar and his apes are forced into a

It's very short but does feature some new footage of the The Colonel (Woody Harrelson) and Caesar (Andy Serkis) This third installment looks like it was feature more ape on human warfare so sign us up https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uq-aNhH_A2EVideo can't be loaded because JavaScript is disabled: War for the Planet of the Apes | Trailer Tomorrow |[...]

Unfortunately Wilson, opening this weekend and written by Daniel Clowes is more a part of the group that fails to hit the mark. Based on Clowes' 2010 graphic novel of the same name, it follows the story of the titular Wilson (played by Woody Harrelson), a late-middle aged divorcee who is lonely, overly self-absorbed, and has[...]

Ever since we learned that Woody Harrelson would have a role in the upcoming Han Solo centric Star Wars movie, fans have been clamoring to have all manner of important questions answered about that role Harrelson didn't answer any of those questions when he appeared on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, but he did give[...]

When her small-town police force fails to make any headway, she takes out three billboards alongside the local highway asking Why Not? aimed at the town's beloved Sheriff William Willoughby (played by Woody Harrelson). Foul mouthed and driven, Hayes refuses to let her daughters case get dropped by the wayside and pushes the town and it's inhabitants[...]

Shockingly, Shia LaBeouf was snubbed in the casting of the film, so it stars Woody Harrelson, Laura Dern, Isabella Amara, Judy Greer, and Cheryl Hine Wilson is set to hit theaters on March 3 Check out the new trailer below. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AKHFZumOS94Video can't be loaded because JavaScript is disabled: Wilson Trailer #1 (2017) | Movieclips Trailers (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AKHFZumOS94) [...]

Last week, we told you that Woody Harrelson was rumored to play a mentor role to Han Solo in the upcoming, untitled Star Wars standalone film about the character's adventures before A New Hope Yesterday, we told you that it was officially confirmed that Harrelson would have a role in the film, though the exact[...]