Then: As the main character in Clerks, O'Halloran played Dante, a 20-something clerk who gets called into work at the Quick Stop on his day off. The film, deemed as a dark comedy inspired by Dante Alighieri's Divine Comedy, is shot entirely in black and white.

Now: Currently residing in Staten Island, O'Halloran has kept a rather low-key profile since starring in Clerks. The 1994 film remains O'Halloran's most memorable onscreen stint. In fact, the actor also reprised his role in Clerks II and scored cameos in other Kevin Smith movies.

Then: Anderson took on the other lead role in Clerks, playing an apathetic slacker named Randal Graves, who works alongside O'Halloran's Dante in the New Jersey convenience store. Anderson was nominated for an Independent Spirit Award for the role.

Now: Following his turn in Clerks — and before reprising his role in the film's 2006 sequel — Anderson tried his hand at writing, directing and starring in his own debut film, 2002's Now You Know. Other credits include Love 101 (which nabbed the actor a best actor nod at the Chicago Film Festival) and an appearance in the 2008 Kevin Smith-directed rom-com Zack and Miri Make a Porno.

Then: Spoonauer portrayed one of Dante's old girlfriends, Caitlin Bree — a role she was offered after director Kevin Smith spotted the college student on the Brookdale Community College campus prior to filming.

Now: The actress appeared in only one other film — 1997's Bartender — before her death from "natural causes" in May 2017. She was 44. She died at home in New Jersey on Saturday, according to her obituary, and is survived by her husband, Tom Caron; her daughter, Mia Spoonauer; her stepson, Tyler Caron; her mother, Dolores Spoonauer; her twin brothers, Michael and Mark Spoonauer and their families; and her grandfather, Frank Figurelli.

Then: In Clerks, Ghigliotti took on the role of Veronica — Dante's girlfriend at the beginning of the film. Throughout the movie, Ghigliotti's Veronica attempts to get Dante to quit his job at the Quick Stop.

Now: Since starring in Clerks — which she landed for her ability to cry during her audition, according to the Clerks director — Ghigliotti has scored steady acting work, though her most memorable role continues to be the 1994 dark comedy. Aside from showing off her talents onscreen, Ghigliotti is also a respected makeup artist and wedding stylist.

Then: As one-half of comedic duo Jay and Silent Bob in Clerks, Mewes plays Jay, who is known for his excessive cursing and loitering. While Mewes made his film debut in the 1994 comedy, the actor continued working alongside Kevin Smith in 1995's Mallrats, 1997's Chasing Amy, 2008's Zack and Miri Make a Porno, as well as their own spin-off, 2001's Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back.

Now: Mewes continues to work alongside with Smith, co-hosting their weekly podcast, Jay & Silent Bob Get Old. In 2017, Mewes wrapped up his directorial debut in Madness in the Method, which he also stars in — a difficult feat, he revealed in an interview. "I get why Kevin, starting in Clerks, his whole plan was to be Silent Bob, because he didn't want to do both," Mewes said of directing and acting in his upcoming movie.

Then: Smith was catapulted to fame after directing and acting in Clerks, which would lead to its subsequent sequel and a string of Jay and Silent Bob spin-offs. Smith's Silent Bob is exactly just that — only choosing to speak to deliver an intellectual monologue.

Now: Along with co-hosting a weekly podcast with his Clerks costar, Jason Mewes, Smith stars and serves as executive producer of the TV series Comic Book Men. Smith also most recently directed his daughter, Harley Quinn, and Johnny Depp's daughter, Lily-Rose, in 2016's Yoga Hosers.