A Court authorized this notice because you have a right to know about a proposed Settlement of these class action lawsuits and about all of your options, before the Court decides whether to give final approval to the Settlement. This Notice explains the lawsuits, the Settlement, and your legal rights.

Judge Robert S. Lasnik of the United States District Court for the Western District of Washington is overseeing these class actions. The lawsuits are known as Kater v. Churchill Downs, Inc., No. 15-cv-00612 (W.D. Wash.) and Thimmegowda v. Big Fish Games, Inc., No. 19-cv-00199 (W.D. Wash.). The people who sued, Cheryl Kater, Suzie Kelly, and Manasa Thimmegowda, are called the “Class Representatives.” The companies that got sued, Big Fish Games, Inc., Churchill Downs Incorporated, Aristocrat Technologies, Inc., and Aristocrat Leisure Ltd. are called the “Defendants.”

The Court has not decided whether the Plaintiffs or the Defendants should win these cases. Instead, both sides agreed to a Settlement. That way, they avoid the uncertainties and expenses associated with ongoing litigation, and Settlement Class Members will get compensation now rather than years from now, if at all.

More information about the Settlement and the lawsuits are available in the “Court Documents” section of the settlement website, or by accessing the Court docket in this case, for a fee, through the Court’s Public Access to Court Electronic Records (PACER) system at https://ecf.wawd.uscourts.gov, or by visiting the office of the Clerk of the Court for the United States District Court for the Western District of Washington, Tacoma Courthouse, between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding Court holidays.

The Court decided that everyone who fits this description and chooses not to request to be excluded is a member of the Settlement Class

All persons in the United States who played Big Fish Casino, Jackpot Magic Slots, or Epic Diamond Slots on or before August 31, 2020. Excluded from the Settlement Class are (1) any Judge or Magistrate presiding over this action and members of their families, (2) the Defendants, Defendants’ subsidiaries, parent companies, successors, predecessors, and any entity in which the defendants or their parents have a controlling interest and their current or former officers, directors, and employees, (3) persons who properly execute and file a timely request for exclusion from the settlement class, and (4) the legal representatives, successors or assigns of any such excluded persons.

If you are not sure whether you are included, you can call the Settlement Administrator at 1-833-942-2822. Or you can get free help by calling the lawyers appointed to represent class members in this case at 1-800-204-1088.

If you are member of the Settlement Class, you may submit a Claim Form to receive a portion of the Settlement Fund. The exact amount of your payment can’t be determined at this time, but you can get an estimate by visiting the settlement website. The amount of your payment will depend on, among other things, (1) the total dollar amount of in-game purchases you made while playing Big Fish Casino, Jackpot Magic Slots, and Epic Diamond Slots, with those who spent more money receiving a higher percentage back, (2) whether or not your claims are potentially subject to the Dispute Resolution Provision in Big Fish Games’ Terms of Use, and (3) how many Settlement Class Members file valid claims. If you would like more information about how Settlement Payments are determine, click HERE.

If you are a Settlement Class Member and you want to receive a payment, you must complete and submit a valid Claim Form by January 4, 2021. Claim Forms can be found and submitted online, or you may request that a Claim Form be sent to you in the mail (and which you can then submit by mail). To submit a Claim Form online, click HERE or to request a paper copy, call toll free, 1-833-942-2822 or email info@bigfishgamessettlement.com

We encourage you to submit your claim electronically. Not only is it easier and more secure, but it is completely free and takes only minutes!

If the Settlement becomes final, you will give up your right to sue the Defendants for the claims being resolved by this Settlement. The specific claims you are giving up against the Defendants are described in the Settlement Agreement in Section 1.28. You will be “releasing” the Defendants and certain related parties (collectively, the “Released Parties”), described in Section 1.29 of the Settlement Agreement. Unless you exclude yourself (see Question 14), you are releasing the claims, regardless of whether you submit a claim or not. The Settlement Agreement is available through the “court documents” link on the website.

The Settlement Agreement describes the released claims with specific descriptions, so read it carefully. If you have any questions you can talk to the lawyers listed in Question 12 for free by calling 1-800-204-1088, or you can, of course, talk to your own lawyer if you have questions about what this means.

The Court has appointed a group of lawyers at the firm Edelson PC to represent the Settlement Class. Those lawyers—Jay Edelson, Rafey S. Balabanian, Todd Logan, Alexander G. Tievsky, and Brandt Silver-Korn—are called “Class Counsel.” They are experienced in handling similar class action cases. More information about these lawyers, their law firm, and their experience is available at www.edelson.com. They believe, after conducting an extensive investigation, that the Settlement Agreement is fair, reasonable, and in the best interests of the Settlement Class. You will not be charged for these lawyers. If you want to be represented by your own lawyer in this case, you may hire one at your expense.

The Court also appointed Plaintiffs Cheryl Kater, Suzie Kelly, and Manasa Thimmegowda, who each have played at least one of the social casino-style games in Question 3, as the Class Representatives.

To exclude yourself from the settlement, you must email, mail, or otherwise deliver a letter (or request for exclusion) stating that you want to be excluded from the “Cheryl Kater and Suzie Kelly v. Churchill Downs Incorporated et al., Case No. 15-cv-00612 (W.D. Wash.)” and “Manasa Thimmegowda v. Big Fish Games, Inc. et al., No. 19-cv-00199 (W.D. Wash.)” cases. Whether you identify one or both of the case names, you will be excluded from BOTH cases. Your letter or request for exclusion must include your (a) name (b) telephone number (c) U.S. Mail address, (d) email address, (e) Friend Codes and/or email addresses associated with Big Fish Casino, Jackpot Magic Slots, and Epic Diamond Slots, and (f) signature. You must email or mail your exclusion request no later than January 4, 2021, to:

Big Fish Games Settlement Administrator

Attn: Exclusion

P.O. Box 58220

Philadelphia, PA 19102

Info@BigFishGamesSettlement.com

You can ask the Court to deny approval by filing an objection. You can’t ask the Court to order a different settlement; the Court can only approve or reject the settlement being proposed. If the Court denies approval, no settlement payments will be sent out and the lawsuits will continue. If that is what you want to happen, you must object.

Any objection to the proposed settlement must be in writing. If you file a timely written objection, you may, but are not required to, appear at the Final Approval Hearing, either in person or through your own attorney. If you appear through your own attorney, you are responsible for hiring and paying that attorney. If you want to appear and speak at the Final Approval Hearing to object to the Settlement, with or without a lawyer (explained below in answer to Question Number 21), you must say so in your letter or brief. All written objections and supporting papers must include: (i) all Friend Code(s) associated with Big Fish Casino, Jackpot Magic Slots, and/or Epic Diamond Slots, (ii) all email address(es) associated with Big Fish Casino, Jackpot Magic Slots, and/or Epic Diamond Slots, (iii) current telephone number, U.S. Mail address, and email address, (iv) the specific grounds for the objection, (v) all documents or writings that the Settlement Class Member desires the Court to consider, (vi) the name and contact information of any and all attorneys representing, advising, or in any way assisting the objector in connection with the preparation or submission of the objection or who may profit from the pursuit of the objection, and (vii) a statement indicating whether the objector intends to appear at the Final Approval Hearing (either personally or through counsel, who must file an appearance or seek pro hac vice admission). All written objections must be emailed or otherwise delivered to Class Counsel and Defendants’ Counsel, and filed with the Court before January 4, 2021.

Class Counsel will file with the Court and post on this website its request for attorneys’ fees by December 14, 2020.

The Court will hold the final approval hearing on February 11, 2021, at 1:30 p.m., either in person at Courtroom 15106, United States Courthouse 700 Stewart Street, Seattle, WA 98101, or by telephone or videoconference. The purpose of the hearing will be for the Court to determine whether to approve the Settlement as fair, reasonable, adequate, and in the best interests of the Settlement Class; to consider Class Counsel’s request for attorneys’ fees and expenses; and to consider the request for an incentive award to the Class Representatives. At that hearing, the Court will be available to hear any objections and arguments concerning the fairness of the Settlement.

The hearing may be postponed to a different date or time without notice, so it is a good idea to check this website or call 1-833-942-2822 to confirm the hearing date. If, however, you timely objected to the Settlement and advised the Court that you intend to appear and speak at the final approval hearing, you will receive notice of any change in the date of such final approval hearing.