Cosmopolitan charm, a fusion of historical elegance and modern artistry, and the unparalleled beauty of the Rhine river make Basel one of Central Europe’s hidden gems.

Since its foundation, Basel has steadily evolved, today standing as Switzerland’s ‘cultural capital’. But don’t let its historical façade fool you – this vibrant city pulses with contemporary energy, often centered around its famed Art Basel event.

But what to do there? Dive into world-renowned art galleries or meander through the cobbled streets of the medieval old town. Embrace the melodies of the Rhine on a scenic bike trip, or indulge in delectable local treats ranging from spiced biscuits to sumptuous onion tarts or creamy garlic soups.

Whether you’re an art enthusiast, a history buff, or simply seeking a European weekend gateway, Basel promises a myriad of unforgettable experiences.

In this article we will look at some fun things to do in Basel to give you some inspiration for how to plan your next visit!

1 – Admire the impressive gothic Basel Minster

The Basel Minster is a reformed Protestant church made out of red sandstone. The roof stands out with picturesque brightly patterned tiles. The hill where the Minster stands is steeped in history, originally housing a Celtic fortified city and then later a Roman fort!

The original Minster was constructed between the 9th and the 13th centuries however the Minster was rebuilt in 1356 after an earthquake. Incredibly enough the St Gallus romanesque doorway survived the earthquake damage so visitors can still admire the beautiful 12th century stone carvings.

Inside the Minster there is a crypt containing graves that date back to 1000 AD. It is here that we can find the tomb of Erasmus of Rotterdam. Other illustrious figures buried within the crypts include Queen Anna Gertrude, the wife of King Rudolf I of Germany who died in 1981.

It is free to enter the Basel Minster church and cloister however there is a fee for climbing up the tower.

walking tours in Basel

2 – Take a tour of the Basel old town

At Marktplatz visitors will come across the Basel Town Hall, which like the Minster is made from bright red sandstone. The town hall was constructed between 1504 and 1514 and the impressive tower was added in the 1800s.

Step into the town hall courtyard to admire the restored wall paintings and an incredible statue from 1574 that represents the Roman senator Munatius Plancus who founded the oldest Roman colony on the Rhine, the nearby Augusta Raurica.

Marktplatz has a daily market where visitors can purchase some tasty Swiss specialities!

There are many other interesting things to keep an eye out for when walking around the old town area and surroundings. Look out for St. Peter’s Church which is the oldest parish church in Basel. Inside St Peter’s visitors can admire the beautiful stained glass windows and wall frescoes. While walking around look out for the ‘Cherry Garden House’ an example of a late Renaissance townhouse.

Make sure to look out for any basilisk fountains known as ‘Basiliskenbrunnen’ Basel has over 230 fountains with illustrated figures that all considered safe to drink from!

Basel old town tours

3 – Pause on the Middle Bridge to take in spectacular views of the Rhine river

The Middle bridge is a granite bridge with seven arches that was completed in 1905. The bridge connects the Basel old town with the new town and since 2015 the bridge has been car free.

In the centre of the bridge there is a small gothic chapel called Käppelijoch. The chapel has a small statue of a bishop surrounded by angels because the Prince-Bishop Heinrich von Thun pushed for the construction of the original bridge back in 1225.

Legend has it the small chapel in the centre of the bridge was where criminals or accused witches were thrown of the bridge into the river below!

Although the bridge we can walk on today was completed in the 20th century, it is amazing to think that a bridge has stood on the same site for centuries! The chapel standing today on the bridge is a replica and the original can be found in the Historical Museum in Basel.

4 – Undercover city legends during the Night watchman Tours

Wander through the historical narrow alleyways of Basel in the company of actors in costume who make the tales of the past come to life. Embark upon a walking tour through the streets of the St. Alban district, also nicknamed Basel’s ‘Little Venice’.

The tour includes a spot at the Zschokke-fountain which represents the three different ages of man. The tour also encompasses all the old tales around the St. Albans gate which dates back to 1400. The gate used to be part of the old city wall fortifications during the Middle ages.

Nightwatchman tours in Basel

5 – Take a tour around the Kunstmuseum Basel

Art History lovers will delight in a visit to the Kunstmuseum Basel, home to more than 300,000 works of art!

The Kunstmuseum Basel has the oldest collection of public art that has been viewed by the public since 1661 when the collection of the Amerbach cabinet was acquired by the city.

Collection highlights include portraits by Hans Holbein the Younger of Bonifacius Amerbach and Erasmus of Rotterdam. One of the most frightening works of the collection has to be the painting ‘Death of a Woman’ by Hans Baldung Grien from the 16th century which depicts a pallid female nude being receiving the kiss of death from a yellow skeleton who creeps up from behind her!

There are also many modern art works on display such as works by Picasso, Schiele, Daulanay, Cezanne and Munch.

6 – Observe some lions up close at the Basel Zoo

The Basel zoo is conveniently located right in the middle of the city. The zoo is the oldest in Switzerland as it has been open since 1874. Basel Zoo is home to 500 different animal species, for example snow leopards, meerkats, rhinoceros and gorillas!

The zoo is celebrated for its Rhino House which allows visitors to see the rhinos up close and the large penguin pool which offer underwater viewing points for seeing the penguins swim.

In the mornings it is possible to watch the King and Gentoo Penguins take their daily walk and get fed. The zoo also contains a new aviary that has recently opened where visitors can spot some pelicans and northern Bald Ibises amongst many other exotic birds.

7 – Immerse yourself in the tranquil botanical gardens of Merian Gärten

Breathe in some fresh air and enjoy colorful flower displays of peonies and fuschias. The gardens are particularly celebrated for the gorgeous rhododendron valley and the English garden. Visitors should definitely remember to take time to explore Europe’s largest collection of irises, involving 1,500 different species!

The park also contains an impressive manor house, Villa Merian, built in 1711. There is also a café on site that produces food using fresh produce from the garden allotments. There are many small trails around the garden, a small lake and even a little maze.

8 – Marvel at the kinetic mechanical artworks of the Museum Tinguely

The Museum Tinguely is found right on the banks of the Rhine river. The museum houses a large collection of artworks by the Swiss artist Jean Tinguely (1925–1991).

Tinguely is famous for his giant sculptural assemblages made from used objects such as scrap metal and iron. Tinguely explores the concept of the mechanical machine through his works. His machine-like assemblages make the viewer reflect on the technological overproduction of modern developing societies.

The Museum Tinguely holds various events, workshops and guided visits throughout the year. Make sure to remember that the Museum is closed on Mondays.

9 – Uncover clues and quiz questions to complete the Foxtrail

A fox trail is an exciting game and walking tour where participants will have to solve clues and hidden puzzles to advance to the next step.

The exciting fox trail will take you to some more unusual parts of Basel such as the hydraulic power station or the SMS-bell.

If you enjoy a good quiz and seek to increase your general knowledge about Basel, the fox trail challenge is right for you! Put your team skills and your problem solving abilities to the test in this immersive and fun experience.

Foxtrail in Basel

10 – Take some great photos of the Spalen Gate

The Spalen Gate dates back to 1371 and used to be a part of the old city walls. The city walls were demolished in 1859 however the Spalen Gate and two other gates managed to remain intact. This gate was where many food products coming from Alsace would enter the city.

The gate still has a hefty oak portcullis that would have been used to lock up and protect the city. It also features some statue decorations of the Virgin Mary and other prophets. There is a tall middle section that stands between the two towers with attractive green, black and yellow tiling.

11 – Spend quality time shopping in the Spalenberg district

Spalenberg is a district in the Old Town of Basel full of charming windy alleyways and houses adorned with green and red shutters. Some houses have balconies decorated with flower pots or small signs confirming that certain houses have been standing since the 1300s! Take a stroll and enjoy shopping in some of the characterful boutique stores and small galleries. Spalenburg is a good place to search for artisanal crafts such as handmade pottery, leather goods and textiles.

In Spalenberg, visitors can find ‘Zum Goldenen Sternen’ Basel’s oldest pharmacy, which dates back to 1376!

12 – Enjoy a romantic candlelight concert

Relax after a full day’s site-seeing with an atmospheric candle illuminated concert. Wind down and listen to the soothing melodies of Vivaldi, Hans Zimmer or Ludovico Einaldi in an unforgettable setting surrounded by the gentle glow of candles flickering and casting shadows.

Concerts typically feature instruments such as cello, piano and the violin. One of the popular concert venues that is slightly further out of the city centre of Basel is the Reithalle Wenkenhof in Riehen. The venue is a large country riding house surrounded by a beautiful green park.

See price and reviews

13 – Spot hundreds of teddy bears at the Toy Worlds Museum Basel

Kids will love the Toy Worlds Museum Basel due to its collection of teddy bears, dolls, miniature doll houses and folk art toy recreations.

The Toy Worlds Museum Basel contains more than 6,000 objects to inspire and delight the imagination. The museum is located in the heart of the city of Basel in an historic building dating back to 1867 that stretches over four storeys. The display windows are often updated with different themes for example ‘the underwater world’ or ‘pumpkin harvest’.

14 – Get to know some local culinary delights on a food tour

Opt for a ‘Self-guided food tour’ to get to know some speciality Swiss restaurants that are off the beaten track.

The tour includes 4 stop offs with different snack tastings, recommended by locals! Discover one of Basel’s oldest bakeries or a traditional chocolate and cookie shop founded in 1753! Browse around the Klara foodcourt where lots of different international cuisines come together. At the Klara foodcourt there are nine different kitchens with a focus of using local and seasonal products.

Another stop off on the self-guided food tour is the zero-waste organic shop on Erasmusplatz called Basel unverpackt. Learn more about their sustainable strategies and environmentally friendly local produce.

food tours in Basel

15 – Enjoy some time in nature at the Tierpark Lange Erlen Animal Park

Take a nice walk around this animal park which is free to enter. Visitors can look out for red deer, lynx, wild cats and wild boar! There are stables where children can go and watch horses, donkeys, goats and pigs.

Beautiful peacocks roam freely through the park grounds and there are many leafy shaded trees. There is also a large playground area for kids and a zone to have a picnic.

16 – Understand how paper is made inside the Medieval Basel Paper Mill

The Basel Papel Mill is a fascinating museum that focuses on bookbinding, printing and typesetting.

The Basel Paper Mill entrance fee includes hands-on activities such as making marble paper and using a goose quill. Experiment using a typewriter and learn how to typeset your own name!

17 – Hop on a sightseeing bus tour of Basel

Ensure that you cover all the major landmarks of Basel by taking a sightseeing bus tour. A bus tour allows you to visit the city in comfort particularly during a rainy or very hot day. Take the pressure off your feet and absorb some interesting facts from the audio guide that is available in several different languages.

The bus tour is a 2 hour route including 12 stops for photo opportunities. Highlights of the tour include the Basel SBB railway station built in the neoclassical architectural style, Basel zoo, Hotel Les Trois Rois and the Tinguely Museum. Hotel les Trois Rois is one of Europe’s oldest city hotels located right on the banks of the Rhine. In this hotel many illustrious historical figures have spent the night such as Napoleon, Elizabeth II, Thomas Mann and Picasso! Learn more about its secrets as you sweep past on the bus tour!

bus tours in Basel

18 – Stroll around the University of Basel Botanical Garden

The University of Basel Botanical Garden dates back to 1589 and is home to a staggering 7,500 different plant species.

Make your way through the different themed garden areas such as the Fern Gorge or Mediterranean garden. The University of Basel Botanical Garden has seven green houses for example a Cloud forest greenhouse, a tropical greenhouse, a moss house and a succulent house.

The botanical gardens is a place for the conservation and research into different plants and visitors can enjoy the lush green surroundings and learn more about plant types.

19 – Opt to take a day trip to see Lucerne

Lucerne is a charming town situated on the shores of Lake Lucerne and surrounded by the Swiss Alp mountains. Visitors to Lucerne will have the opportunity to discover the iconic wooden Chapel Bridge that was constructed during the 14th century.

During the 17th century the bridge was adorned with painted panels depicting the dance of Death! It is likely that these macabre paintings were inspired by the plague that swept through the city in the past.

Visitors can enjoy wandering round the cobbled streets of the Old Town or walk along the city wall ramparts. The ramparts are well preserved and dotted with watchtowers.

Lucerne tours from Basel

20 – Check out the Tinguely Brunnen kinetic fountain

Created in 1977, this unusual fountain is found right outside Basel’s Theatre. The fountain consists of a shallow water basin with 10 mechanical iron figures. The figures dance and interact, mimicking the movement of actors and dancers who perform in the theatre close by.

These figures are constantly in motion thanks to a low voltage current. Watch in awe as the mechanisms splash around in the water!

21 – Discover some ancient mammals or prehistoric organisms at the Museum of Natural History

The Basel Museum of Natural History is full of Swiss fossils, minerals, rocks, plant specimens and animals. Learn more about the dinosaurs that once inhabited our Earth or be inspired by the intriguing ‘Mammoth & Saber-toothed Tiger’ exhibition!

At the Museum of Natural History there are often temporary exhibitions in addition to the permanent collections so visitors can learn more about up and coming scientific discoveries or research projects.

22 – Sample some excellent wines on Alsace wine tours

Wine lovers will enjoy embarking on Alsace wine tours from Basel to visit some specially selected family run wineries with the guidance of a private sommelier. Don’t worry about the transportation between the wineries as visitors will be driven around the region in the comfort of a private vehicle.

Alsace is famous for top quality white wines made from grapes such as Gewurztraminer, Riesling and Pinot Blanc. Try some of the Alsace bubbly known as Alsace Crémant. Whilst around 90% of the wines produced in Alsace are white, red wine enthusiasts will certainly enjoy tasting the local Pinot Noir.

Alsace tours from Basel

23 – Browse for gourmet and local fresh food products at the Markthalle

The Markhalle is a covered market with lots of different stalls selling international street food, fresh fruits and vegetables, meats and fish.

The food court is conveniently located right in the centre of Basel, near Barfüsserplatz. The market hall has an attractive dome shape and the building was first opened in 1929. The place also has many bars where locals and tourists congregate in the evening.

Often there are fun and lively cultural events such as salsa or music concerts.

24 – Take a scenic railway ride to Mount Pilatus, 2128 meters above sea level!

Tours of Mount Pilatus involve a cruise around Lake Lucerne followed by a ride in the world’s steepest cogwheel railway to reach the summit.

Take in the breathtaking panorama of the Swiss alps and the fresh mountain air. Mount Pilatus overlooks the city of Lucerne that looks like a picture postcard from up at the peak.

According to local folklore, Mount Pilatus used to be the home of dragons and some argue that visitors should particularly look out for fossilised dragon footprints imprinted in the rocks!

Mount Pilatus tours from Basel

25 – Appreciate Ancient Art at the Museum of Antiquities and the Ludwig Collection

Learn more about the Ancient Egyptians or admire the amazing collection of Greek vases at the Museum of Antiquities and the Ludwig Collection. Visitors will enjoy browsing the collections featuring Cypriot ceramics, Egyptian mummies, coins ,Roman sarcophagi and statuettes!

The museum also has a bistro with an outdoor courtyard during the summer months. From time to time they also hold events, for example the Roman Festival in August.

26 – Encounter innovative architecture and extraordinary art at the Fondation Beyeler

The Fondation Beyeler museum is one of the most interesting things to do in Basel for lovers of contemporary art. It is located just outside of Basel in the town of Riehen.

The museum is surrounded by a leafy green park and architecture enthusiasts will admire the museum’s curved roof made from glass panels.

The building of the Fondation Beyeler was designed by the celebrated architect Renzo Piano and the glass roof certainly creates a light space to showcase the artworks.

The collection has a wide range of first class artworks such as pieces by Warhol, Monet, Matisse, Basquiat and Mondrian!

27 – Pass by snow capped peaks, majestic valleys and geological formations on the Glacier Express Train

Take a private day trip to discover the beauty of the Swiss Alps! The Glacier Express is described as the ‘slowest express train in the world’ due to its leisurely pace so that visitors can admire the magnificent scenery!

Pass by stunning lakes such as Lake Zurich and Walensee. One of the highlights of the journey is going past the striking ‘Swiss Grand Canyon’ also known as the Rhine Gorge. This deep gorge was formed by erosion of the river and landslides cutting into the slate and limestone rock faces.

During the train trip visitors will stop off at Chur where there is a 13th century cathedral and a Bishops palace. Another exciting moment of the journey is the crossing of the Oberalp Pass, the highest point of the Glacier Express, at 2,033 meters above sea level!

Glacier Express Train tours

28 – Admire the modern architecture of the Novartis Campus

The Novartis Campus is also referred to as ‘the campus of knowledge’ because it is a place for medical research and scientific progress. There is a current exhibition called ‘the wonders of medicine’ where visitors can learn more about the treatment of diseases in the future,

The campus was designed by the Italian architect Michele de Lucchi who promotes the use of natural and sustainable materials.

The Novartis pavilion is an exhibition space with an impressive exterior that is made up of lights that run on solar energy. These solar powered lights illuminate the pavilion at night.

29 – Embrace the mountain scenery by visiting the enchanting Alpine village of Zermatt

Walk around the charming Alpine village of Zermatt full of typical wooden chalets and narrow streets. When in Zermatt, make sure to take some photos of the iconic pyramid-shaped peak of the Matterhorn!

On a day tour to Zermatt, visitors can ascend up to the Gornergrat Ridge on a cogwheel train. From the summit, visitors can gaze out over 29 mountain peaks and take a look at the Gorner Glacier, one of the largest glaciers in the Alps that extends around 23 kilometers!

Zermatt tours from Basel

30 – Visit the largest Anthropological Museum in Switzerland, the Museum of Cultures

The Museum of Cultures has been collecting cultural artifacts from around the world since 1849. Nowadays the Museum has around 300,000 objects from a wide range of societies worldwide.

The Museum of Cultures gives visitors the opportunity to discover more about the unique rituals, ceremonies, art and religion of different cultures!

Walk around the exhibitions and marvel at the many African and Oceanic tribal masks. The Asian collection also has some fascinating ceramics, textiles and religious artifacts.

31 – Take a trip to Jungfraujoch, ‘the top of Europe’

Jungfraujoch is one of the highest railway stations in Europe and offers breathtaking views of the Swiss alps!

During the ascent up to Jungfraujoc, visitors pass through the 7.3-kilometer-long tunnel that runs inside the Eiger and Mönch mountains.

At the top, you will find amazing viewing platforms such as the Sphinx observatory where visitors can look out over the Aletsch Glacier, the largest glacier in the Alps.

In good conditions, it is even possible to see as far as the Black Forest in Germany!

Whilst in Jungfraujoch, visitors can also marvel at some ice sculptures and an ice chapel in the Ice Palace.

Jungfraujoch tours from Basel

32 – Get festive during a magical Basel Christmas walking tour

The Basel Christmas market is held in Barfüsserplatz and Münsterplatzn and it was even voted the Best Christmas Market in Europe 2021!

Enjoy a heartwarming cup of mulled wine and browse the rustic wooden stalls for Christmas decorations or stocking gifts.

On a Christmas walking tour of Basel, visitors can learn more about the traditional Christmas traditions and stop off at a Christmas shop. Walk around the best Christmas light decorations of Basel and soak up the cheery atmosphere.

walking tours in Basel

33 – Walk around the border triangle of Dreiländereck

The border triangle is where the three countries of Switzerland, France and Germany all meet in the middle of the Rhine river, at the confluence of the Rhine and the Birs rivers.

The monument is a tall metal pillar with the flags of the three countries painted on its surface. The monument is a pleasant symbol of friendship and co-operation between the neighboring countries.

In the far distance, you can see the Three Country Bridge that connects Weil am Rhein in Germany, to Huningue in France. This long bridge is for pedestrians and cyclists.

34 – Learn about Contemporary Design at the Vitra Design Museum

This world class design museum is located in the town Weil am Rhein in Germany. However it is easily accessible from Basel, just a 15 minute bus ride or a 5 minute train journey.

The main museum was designed by the famous Frank Gehry! The museum collection showcases many designs of avant-garde furniture, lighting, household objects and textiles.

The Vitra Design Museum is situated within the Vitra Campus so after visiting the Museum, visitors can stroll around and admire the other modern buildings designed by celebrated architects such as Zaha Hadid, Tadao Ando and Herzog & de Meuron.

35 – Stroll around Kannenfeldpark

Kannenfeldpark is a park located in Basel with playground areas for kids and grassy areas for family picnics.

This small park is a great place to escape the commotion of the city centre and to rest and relax. The park used to be a cemetery until 1932 and now it is popular amongst joggers and families.

36 – Enjoy the stunning Alpine views from Mt. Gornergrat

As mentioned above, Mount Gornergrat stands at an impressive height of 4,000 meters. Visitors on the summit can see for miles and appreciate views of similar prominent peaks such as the Matterhorn, Monte Rosa, and Dufourspitze!

Breathe in some clear mountain air and watch the sunlight dance off the snowy peak and shine down into the valleys! From Gornergrat you can try and spot some Alpine wildlife such as wild ibex, chamois, marmots and roe deer.

For those who have never heard of a chamois, its a type of goat-antelope that lives in the mountains.

Mt. Gornergrat tours from Basel

37 – Pay a visit to the fairy-tale Bottmingen Castle

This scenic castle dates back from 1363, and it was built with defensive features such as a moat, battlements and towers.

The castle was rebuilt during the 18th century in a French style but many features of the medieval castle still remain.

The castle is surrounded by a beautiful park and nowadays it is a popular spot for weddings, banquets and special events.

38 – Party and go wild at the Carnival in Basel

Basel Carnival takes place in the month of February each year. The Basel Carnival is the largest carnival in Switzerland and is part of the Swiss UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage.

The streets of Basel light up with illuminated hand painted lanterns and the music from pipers and drummers fill the air. There are also large street parades with floats, horse drawn carriages and brass bands. During the festivities there are lots of costumes, masks, confetti and sweets!

One of the unique features of the Basel carnival are the Schnitzelbanks singers who compose satirical rhyming songs, poking fun at topical current issues. They provide an added element of humor to the carnival party!

39 – Step inside an Ice cave on Mount Titlis

Take a cableway up to Mount Titlis, situated 3,238 meters above sea level near the town of Engelberg. At the top visitors can enter an ice cave and walk over the highest suspension bridge in Europe. From the bridge you can look down at the ridge and glacier below!

Take a thrilling ride in the ‘Ice flyer’ chair lift to get some amazing panoramic views of the snow covered mountains.

Mount Titlis tours from Basel

40 – Brush up on the city history at the Basel Historical Museum

The Basel Historical Museum is one of the most interesting things to do in Basel for travellers curious to learn more about Basel’s past. Starting in prehistoric times, follow the collection to learn more about different time periods.

There are impressive medieval tapestries on display and fragments of the famous Basel Dance of Death. This part of the museum is located in an Old Church called the Barfüsserkirche. The name translates to ‘barefoot church’ because the Franciscan monks who lived there during the 13th century probably went around without shoes!

The museum also has a large section which is also home to Switzerland’s largest collection of musical instruments! The musical instruments are displayed on the site of a former convent.

The Museum itself is located in three different sites but one of the buildings (the Haus zum Kirschgarten) is set in a neoclassical style mansion built by a silk ribbon manufacturer and army colonel in 1780.

Discover how the bourgeoisie of Basel decorated their interiors during the 18th and 19th century by walking through rooms preserved in this traditional style.

41 – Taste some sweet Mässmogge

Mässmogge are hazelnut or almond praline-filled sugar candies that are a real delicacy in Basel.

Traditionally these sweets were always consumed during the autumn Basel fair. Mässmogge comes in bright colours and flavors such as strawberry, lemon and chocolate.

Mässmogge accounts for one-fifth of all the candy production in Switzerland, so it’s definitely worth a try when on holiday in Basel. G

ive yourself a sugar boost to give you more energy to continue your sightseeing journey! They make a lovely bright souvenir.

42 – Learn fun facts about Basel with scavenger games

Download a self-guided scavenger hunt on your mobile to discover key places and hidden gems though out the city..

This innovative and tech-savvy approach allows you to immerse yourself in the city’s history, culture, and landmarks while having fun and challenging yourself to solve intriguing puzzles and riddles.

Unlike traditional tours, there’s no need to rush from one location to another, giving you ample time to savor the beauty of each spot and delve into the stories that shaped the city’s identity.

This self-guided game is perfect for solo travelers, couples, families, or groups of friends, as it caters to various interests and ages. It promotes teamwork, problem-solving, and creativity, making it an ideal bonding activity for families and friends.

Aside from the historical and cultural aspect, a self-guided scavenger hunt is also an excellent way to keep active and engage in physical exercise as you navigate the city’s charming pathways and backstreets.

scavenger games in Basel

43 – Eat out at some of the best restaurants in Basel

Cheval Blanc by Peter Knogl offers an exceptional fine dining experience with some intense flavour sensations. The restaurant is located within the Grand Hotel Les Trois Rois on the Rhine riverfront. They serve refined French style haut cuisine. It is often acclaimed as being one of the best restaurants in Basel, if not the world!

Another exquisite culinary experience involves a meal at the restaurant Roots. The restaurant puts an extra emphasis on their fresh vegetables. Dishes are beautifully and intricately presented. Diners can opt for either a 6 course of a 10 course menu!

Taverne Johann offers French and Swiss style rustic dishes such as coq au vin. They are also known for refined stews from the pot. They have a great local wine list and a relaxed ambiance.

If you are looking for a classic Swiss bistro head to Parterre One. The place is stylishly modern with high quality ingredients. They also organise lots of cultural events such as stand up comedy or music nights.

For those searching for a quick place to get a take away lunch try out Sapori del Sud for some delicious Italian sandwiches. The place is located next to the Botanical gardens so conveniently located if you fancy a picnic.

44 – Experience traditional fair rides at the Basler Herbstmesse, Basel’s Autumn fair

During the Autumn fair seven different fairgrounds with lots of different nostalgic attractions pop up around the city.

Take a ride on the carousel, the ferris wheel or bump around in the dodgem carts! There are also some super adventurous rides for the adrenaline seekers.

The Basler Herbstmesse dates back to the 15th century when the Emperor Frederik III granted Basel the right to hold the event ‘in perpetuity.’ The fair marks the end of summer and the beginning of winter.

During the Basler Herbstmesse it is traditional to purchase new tableware for example crockery and dishes. Browse the craft markets and food stalls for tasty snacks such as grilled sausages, fondue, spiced cake or caramelized candied almonds.

How to get to Basel?

International visitors can fly into the EuroAirport of Basel Mulhouse Freiburg. Check out the Tourscanner site to compare different offers for airport transfers to the city centre. Booking up airport transfers in advance can ease the journey hassle and save precious holiday time.

The main railway station of Basel is known as the ‘Basel SBB.’ The number 50 bus runs from Basel train station to Basel airport daily. The railway station is located just a 5 minute walk away from the Markhalle food court, so very convenient if you arrive to the city hungry

Where to stay in Basel?

The 4 star Märthof Basel is one of the best hotels in Basel. It has a fitness centre, spa, terrace and excellent restaurant. The hotel is situated extremely close to the Marktplatz making it a great base for exploring the Old town of Basel.

Another great hotel is the 4 star Hotel Spalentor, located opposite the botanical garden. It takes just 5 minutes to walk into the Old Town of Basel and the hotel also offers free bikes for guests to get around on. The Spalentor has a fitness area and a garden well equipped with deckchairs. Sit out under the leafy oak tree to enjoy a relaxing drink after sightseeing.

The Gast-und Kulturhaus Der Teufelhof Basel is an elegant 3 star hotel with lots of artwork. The rooms are thoughtfully arranged by Swiss and Italian designers with a modern and spacious feel. The place is full of artistic vibes and well situated in an attractive traditional house.

The Passage Urban Retreat is a 4 star hotel built upon the boundary between Basels old town and new town. The place has a sauna, a fitness room and a patio lounge. The hotel is situated very close to the railway station.

if you are looking for accomodation on a budget, the Basel Youth Hostel is very close to the Old town gate of St. Alban. Designed by the architects Buchner & Bründler, the hostel has a very spacious dining and lounge area. The rooms are very minimalist and the area is very quiet, extremely close to the Paper Mill Museum.

best hotels in Basel

Where to go next?

After spending time enjoying what Basel has to offer, remember that there are many other fun things to do in Zurich. Zurich is just a one hour bus or train ride away from Basel so easily accessible! Fun things to do in Zurich include taking a boat trip on Lake Zurich, spending a night at the Zurich Opera house or climbing up the Grossmünster tower for some great cityscape views!

As mentioned during the article, Lucerne is a charming city to visit with some beautiful churches, scenic bridges and peaceful squares. Learn more about fascinating city landmarks such as the Lucerne Lion Monument, the Chapel bridge and the defense Musegg Wall.

Nature lovers will enjoy stopping off at the town of Interlaken which is nestled in between the two lakes of Thun and Brienz. The town is surrounded by mountains so a great if you want to do some hiking or adventure activities like paragliding or skydiving. When visiting Interlaken visitors should try and fit in a visit to the Trummelbach Falls, some striking glacial waterfalls.

From Basel, visitors can hop on an hour train ride to get to Bern. Explore the Swiss capital with an Old Town that has been classed as a UNESCO World Cultural Heritage Site. Take a stroll through the unique arcades, cobbled streets and sandstone buildings of the Old Town and stop to watch the medieval astronomical Zytglogge Clock Tower that performs a mini show every hour.

Whilst in Bern visit the Albert Einstein House or art lovers will enjoy the Paul Klee centre. Bern’s cathedral, known as the Bern Munster has the tallest cathedral tower in Switzerland!

Another fantastic place to visit whilst in Switzerland is the city of Geneva sometimes coined ‘the Capital of Peace’ due to the fact it houses the European seat of the United Nations and the headquarters of the Red Cross.

When in Geneva, take some fun photos of the iconic Jet d’Eau (the water fountains on Lake Geneva that shoots up 140 meters high)! Take the tram to visit the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) where visitors can learn more about the famous Large Hadron Collider!

Final thoughts

With so many captivating things to do in Basel, where will you begin?

Will it be the masterpieces in the world-renowned art galleries? The whispers of history echoing from the Gothic cathedral? Savoring the unique tastes of local Basel delicacies? Or perhaps a serene bike ride alongside the glistening Rhine river?

Whatever captivates you, Basel promises to be an enchanting journey for your senses and soul!

Happy travels!