yeah-brackie! wrote:

Not what you might think by the title but...

Already on this forum there is a habit developing that people who like having a go at Doctor Who or Torchwood are desperate for Primeval to be the best piece of television ever transmitted so that they can stand up and go "nyah-nyah, I know better" and people who love DW & TW are desperate for Primeval to be utter garbage so that their favourite show retains its crown (in their eyes).

My question is - why do they have to be compared to each other? It's not like they're head to head in the ratings or that the cancellation of one hangs in the balance of the sucecss of the other.

Why the resistance to just enjoy any of the 3 shows you like and not tune into the others?

I'm interested to know your opinions on this. Ladies/Gentlemen...your thoughts please

They don't have to be, but people may just feel like it because there are direct similarities between Torchwood and Primeval.

There's plenty of discussion to be had by making comparisons and thinking about what one show might to do well at and what one show doesn't do so well at.

It's just discussion. You can compare any programme you want with another if they have things in common and you feel like it.

0

Have to say i dont like any of them, i think American TV seems to be of such a higher standard than what we produce in this country i dont think it stands up against modern programmes like Lost, Heroes, or 24.

We lack ideas, decent direction, quality actors, good special effects, and a decent workable budget but instead we can get the reality tv production line running which is mostly trash.

Im going to give Primeval another week but what i saw tonight was less than encouraging.

We could really use taking some ideas, concepts, and direction techniques from across the pond and then we can start to produce some decent things but i dont see that happening anytime soon.

0

Interesting thought. Well as I've just posted on the main thread I quite enjoyed the show tonight and will keep watching for now - I love Who too. I just like sci-fi so will give anything like this a shot. I don't want to see one thing cancelled over another - sci-fi/fantasy is a broad church so there should be something for everyone. We need more of it on prime time!!

OK I admit I have 'issues' with Torchwood primarily 'cause I HATE Gwen. I have to say if it wasn't for fact that I liked the character of Capt Jack in DW and was therefore engaged enough to want to know more about him I doubt I'd have stuck with it past Episode 2.

At the moment I am besotted with Battlestar Galactica which is truly the best thing on TV but that doesn't mean I get overly sniffy about lesser efforts (hell I even liked Robin Hood which will probably get me pilloried round here !).

Not everything can be a BSG or Firefly or Buffy (that's why they are iconic) but it doesn't mean you can't enjoy lots of things. Some people just like to 'champion' one show over another which is fair enough - unless it's Charmed of course - there really is no excuse for that! .

0

Team53 wrote:

let's wait till Primeval has finished it's run and then we can compare the shows.

for all we know, there might be "are you my mummy" episode coming up.

if Primeval get's a 2nd series, it would be interesting to see if ITV would be willing to put it against Doctor Who.

No, let's not.

Anybody can talk about anything they want to.

There are similarities there already, so if somebody wants to compare the show then it's entirely up to them.

I don't understand people who come on here and try to control discussion by saying what people should or shouldn't talk about, or when.

It's mainly on DS where there appears to be some people who tell you not to compare one show with another.

Why? What's it to them?

Like the slappers r us says above, it doesn't have to be either/or....somebody may actually find comparisons that are favourable to them.

0

jorrai wrote:

Have to say i dont like any of them, i think American TV seems to be of such a higher standard than what we produce in this country i dont think it stands up against modern programmes like Lost, Heroes, or 24.

*Bangs head against the wall*

It's not supposed to be. Drama like State of Play? That is.

Programmes like DW and Primeval are family shows, aimed at a much bigger audience that isn't post watershed.

I think it's a good thing that more genre programming is being made. If ITV make some as well as the BBC, I think that's great news.

Sadly, I didn't think Primeval was very good, but I'm willing to give it a few more episodes.

Phazer

0

marling wrote:

For me, no contest. I started watching Primeval but gave up after 30 minutes. It was all too Land of the Giants for me. I know it's not always going to be like that but I also did not take to any of the pretty boy/girl characters.

Dr Who and Torchwood, yes please!

I know what you mean, it was very much like those Irwin Allen shows from the early seventies wasn't it?

But then again they were hugely successful in their day.

I did find some good things about Primeval, but I thought it was aimed too much at young children and needed much more tension.

I'll probably keep watching it, but if I decide to drift away from it as it doesn't turn out to be my thing, then I still hope it does well.

If it doesn't, ITV simply won't even bother again in the near future.

0

I can't really judge Primeval, as we had a power cut and I missed the first half of it. From what I saw the the CGI was excellent, the girl from S Club wasn't that good and some of the editing/directing was a bit dodgy. The jump cuts were getting in the way of telling the story. The little dinosaur nodding it's head to the lift music was a bit too cutesy, but it was amusing. I will reserve judgement until I've seen the whole episode, but it seemed to be not that bad and it's good to see ITV making a drama family entertainment show.

0