Croatia’s Bojan Bogdanovic — the one who was drafted in 2011 and will be playing for the Brooklyn Nets this season — scored a game-high 27 points on 11-for-19 shooting in his team’s loss to France on Saturday.

Serbia’s Bogdan Bogdanovic — the one drafted this year by the Phoenix Suns – followed that up with a game-high 21 points on 7-for-11 shooting in his team’s 90-72 win over Greece on Sunday. The younger, shorter Bogdanovic and Serbia advanced to Wednesday’s quarterfinal against the winner of Argentina-Brazil.

“I think he was looking for this kind of game for a long time,” Serbia coach Sasha Djordjevic said afterward. “He was anxious to have this kind of game.”

Bogdan had an up-and-down week in Granada as Serbia went 2-3 in group play. He was had his best game against Iran, but shot just 10-for-27 (37 percent) in Serbia’s three losses to the three other teams that advanced out of Group A (which is now 3-0 vs. Group B in Barcelona).

At the end of Serbia’s 74-73 loss to France, coach Djordjevic put the ball in Bogdanovic’s hands. But he turned the ball over (on a play where Djordjevic wanted a foul called), leading to France’s game-winning free throw. After starting his team’s first four games, Bogdanovic came off the bench in the Granada finale against Spain.

He did the same on Sunday, and finally found a real rhythm offensively. Shortly after entering the game with 2:14 left in the first quarter, he hit a contested jumper from the elbow. He then hit two catch-and-shoot threes early in the second period to help Serbia maintain a narrow lead.

Bogdanovic started the second half and scored four points in the third period as Serbia really gained control. Another catch-and-shoot three gave his team an 11-point lead early in the fourth. A few minutes later, he scored his most impressive two points of the day on a running lefty hook on a post-up against Greek point guard Nikos Zisis.

It was a performance that made you realize why the Suns drafted him, even though he clearly falls short of his listed height of 6-6.

“He’s a huge talent,” Serbian center and NBA vet Nenad Krstic said. “I’ve seen him play even better games, but today he was huge for us, because it was an elimination game.”

“He’s this kind of player,” Djordjevic added. “That’s why he was drafted. That’s why he’s going to Fenerbahce next year.”

That’s the thing. Phoenix will have to wait for their Bogdanovic, just like the Nets had to wait for theirs. Bogdan signed a four-year contract with Fenerbahce Ulker and won’t be able to come to the NBA until 2016 at the earliest.

That might help him be a more consistent contributor when he does finally arrive. It will also help with the confusion for NBA fans. Only one Bogdanovic will be in the league this season. The other will be in the World Cup quarterfinals.