Adaptations of novels that have been described as 'unfilmable' have always got their work cut out. This 1987 BFI/Film 4 movie from director Andrew Grieve is an adaptation of one such novel, 1982's On the Black Hill by Bruce Chatwin.

The book tells the story of 80 years in the lives of Welsh farmers and identical twins, Lewis and Benjamin Jones. The narrative explores their near psychic bond and simplistic life as well as the courtship, marriage and subsequent life of their parents, the refined and educated Englishwoman Mary and their proud and mercurial Bible thumping father Amos. That it effectively tells the story of the twentieth century from the point of view of its protagonists in just 250 pages is remarkable. Grieve, who also wrote the screenplay as well as directed the film, had his work cut out.

On the Black Hill is a film to be filed somewhere between Sir Peter Hall's Akenfield and Edgar Reitz's Heimat. In many ways it reminded me of Peter Moffatt's sadly all too shortlived BBC drama The Village, whose ambition was to be the English version of Heimat and whose tortured farmer patriarch played by John Simm is a clear cousin of the inarticulate, domineering Amos, brought harrowingly though sympathetically to life by Bob Peck here.

Dour is definitely a word I would use to describe Grieve's adaptation, whose punchy episodic nature arguably recalls the efficiency of Chatwin's relatively slim source material. This sparsity allows the Welsh countryside to take centre stage, and the changing seasons, taking us from the late 1800s through to 1980, are evocatively and atmospherically captured in what is a true film of the soil and the uncompromising reality of rural life.

That said, the protagonists placed upon the landscape make their mark; Peck is in his usual eye-catching form as Amos, whilst Gemma Jones provides a perfect, gentle counterpoint to his anguish. As the twins, brothers Mike and Robert Gwilym are cast. OK, they're not identical, they're not even twins!, but their performances carry enough conviction for Grieve to catch some of the lighting inside the bottle.