We are now looking for a talented Data Engineer to join Konecrane’s IoT Datalake team for a parental leave substitute and contribute to their mission of harnessing the power of data. By joining the team you will play a crucial role in managing and optimizing the data infrastructure to support Konecranes services and applications such as customer-faced applications and internal collaborations.

About the role

As a Data Engineer within the Datalake Team, you will be responsible for designing, implementing, optimization and managing scalable and secure, AWS solutions for data storing and processing and APIs for retrieving the data. In addition you would handle a task for creating a simple front-end UI application for data entry. You will collaborate closely with cross-functional teams to ensure seamless integration and delivery of solutions.

You are offered

A great team to work with

Independent and responsible role in a global organization

Hybrid working model (once in the office at Espoo every two weeks)

An exciting opportunity to immerse yourself in the cutting-edge realm of IoT crane data for both industrial and port cranes

Work tasks

Design, develop and optimize AWS data pipeline for IoT data to enhanced performance and efficiency

Develop a simple front-end UI application for data entry

Development of technical specifications and plans

Create automated tests for developing software

Participate in Agile development processes, including daily stand-ups, sprint planning, backlog grooming, and retrospectives

Collaborate with cross-functional teams, including developers, architects, and testers, to design and implement software solutions that meet customer requirements

Communicate effectively and professionally in all forms of communication with other teams and stakeholders

We are looking for

Solid understanding of Data lake concepts and technologies

Hands-on experience with AWS services such as S3 storage, Athena, Dynamo DB

Proficiency in SQL and Python

Experience with DevOps practices and integration in development environments

Experience with automated software testing

Fluent written and spoken English

Experience with GraphQL and/or API Gateway for building and managing APIs is considered as an advantage.

To succeed in the role, your personal skills are:

Independent

Responsible

Proactive

Our recruitment process

This recruitment process is handled by Academic Work and it is our client’s wish that all questions regarding the position is directed to Academic Work.

Our selection process is continuous and the advert may close before the recruitment process is completed if we have moved forward to the next phase. The process includes two tests: one personality test and one cognitive test. The tests are tools to find the right talent for the right position, to enable equality, diversity, and a fair process.

Information

Konecranes is a world-leading group of Lifting Businesses™, serving a broad range of customers. We are truly a global company with 16,900 employees at 600 locations in 50 countries. For over 80 years, we have been dedicated to improving the efficiency and performance of businesses in all types of industries. We believe that sustainable growth is a result of a strong responsible performance. Konecranes is committed to ensuring that all employees and job applicants are treated fairly in an environment which is free from any form of discrimination.