Experience

S3 Consulting has been the standard for excellence in ERP system implementation services for more than 15+ years. Our strong background in Technical Accounting, HR and Corporate Technology allow us to deliver comprehensive and insightful support.

Our team of consultants have a wealth of experience with ERP system implementation before joining us, and come from successful corporate careers in Finance Accounting, Human Capital, and Technology. S3 Consulting understands issues from your perspective and our consultants are adept at providing practical, real world solutions to your most pressing issues, and challenging projects.

Our diverse background, extensive corporate experience, and dynamic approach enables S3 to offer uniquely insightful perspective, effective solutions to even the most complicated problems, and tailored support to suit your business’ needs.

ERP

Implementation

As a NetSuite Alliance Partner, we attain the highest industry standards. Our NetSuite certified team provides a seamless experience from start to finish.

We provide support from planning to implementation and beyond. We’ll help you connect the dots and build a comprehensive plan to suit your business’ unique needs. Using our understanding of Finance, FP&A, Human Capital, and Customer Relationship Management Systems, we will work with you to design, develop, test and deploy the best solutions for you.

Our unique approach as a NetSuite Alliance Partner achieves collaboration between teams and departments, and provides transparency to senior executives and stakeholders. We employ industry best practices, clearly defining functional and technical requirements to transform your organization to the next level.

Change Management

We understand that change isn’t easy. That’s why we’re present throughout the implementation phase to ensure that the entire workplace can feel supported as they adjust to the new changes.

We recognize how this crucial phase can often be ignored, so our team goes the extra mile to provide a fluid change over.

We’ll create a customized plan that provides employees with the leadership, coaching, and training they need to be successful, allowing a seamless transition from old to new. We also deliver dynamic resources—including trainings, live demos, and Knowledge Exchanges—so that you can rest easy knowing that your new resources will be adopted quickly and effectively.