Zelig Eshhar, PhD

Professor of Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel Immunology Chimeric Antigen Receptor for Adoptive T cell Therapy of Cancer: Emergence of the CAR Strategy James P. Allison, PhD

Professor and Chair, Department of Immunology University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center Immunology Targeting Immune Checkpoints in Cancer Therapy 2013 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – Molecular Mechanisms of Intracellular Motility Michael Sheetz, Ph.D

Director, Mechanobiology Institute, National University of Singapore; William R. Kenan, Jr. Professor of Biological Sciences, Columbia University Cell Biology, Bioengineering Mechanosensing by Controlled Myosin Contractions James A. Spudich, Ph.D

Douglass M. and Nola Leishman Professor of Cardiovascular Disease Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University Biochemistry The Myosin Family of Molecular Motors: Nature’s Exquisite Nanomachines Ronald D. Vale, Ph.D

Professor of the Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco; Investigator in the Howard Hughes Medical Institute Biology, Chemistry Mechanisms of Microtubule-Based Motors 2012 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – Genetics of Circadian Rythms Jeffrey C. Hall, Ph.D

Professor Emeritus of Biology – Brandeis University Molecular Neuorgenetics Genetics of Drosphila, function of the nervous system; molecular neurogenetics of courtship and molecular neurogenetics of biological rhythms Michael Rosbash, Ph.D

Professor of Biology and HHMI Investigator – Brandeis University Behavioral Genomics RNA processing and the genes and mechanisms that underlie circadian rhythms Michael W. Young, Ph.D

Richard and Jeanne Fisher Professor Head, Laboratory of Genetics Vice President for Academic Affairs – The Rockefeller University Genetics Genetics of Sleep and the Circadian Rhythms; Cloed the clock gene period 2011 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – Protein Folding F. Ulrich Hartl, M.D.

Professor of Cellular Bio Chemistry – Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Cell Biology Chaperone-assisted protein folding Arthur Horwich, M.D

Sterling Professor of Genetics – Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University Genetics Chaperonin-mediated protein folding 2010 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – Membrane Fusion James E. Rothman, Ph.D. (*)

Fergus F. Wallace Professor of Biomedical Sciences; Chair, Department of Cell Biology – Yale University(*) 2013 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (with Randy Schekman and Thomas Sudhof) Cell Biology Membrane fusion Randy Schekman, Ph.D. (*)

Professor and Investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute – Univeristy of California, Berkeley(*) 2013 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (with James Rothman and Thomas Sudhof) Molecular and Cell Biology Cellular memranes 2009 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – MicroRNA Gary Ruvkun, Ph.D.

Professor of Genetics – Simches Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School Molecular Genetics Co-discovery of microRNA Victor Ambros, Ph.D.

Silverman Professor of Natural Sciences, Program in Molecular Medicine – University of Massachusetts Medical School Molecular Genetics Co-discovery of microRNA 2008 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Shinya Yamanaka, Ph.D. (*)

Professor & Director, Center for iPS Cell Research & Application, Institute for Integrated Cell – Material Sciences; Senior Investigator & Professor of Anatomy – Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan; J. David Gladstone Institutes, University of California at San Francisco(*) 2012 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (with Sir John Gurdon) Cell Biology Contributions to stem cell science that led to the 2007 discovery of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells Rudolf Jaenisch, M.D.

Professor of Biology – Whitehead Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Molecular and Cell Biology Contributions to stem cell science that led to the 2007 discovery of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells James Thomson, Ph.D.

Director of Regenerative Biology and John D. MacArthur Professor; Adjunct Professor of Molecular, Cellular, & Developmental Biology – Morgridge Institute for Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine Cell biology – stem cells Groundbreaking discovery made a decade before of human embryonic stem (ES) cells and subsequent work in developing induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells 2007 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – PET Scan; Its Clinical Applications Michael Phelps, Ph.D.

Norton Simon Professor & Chair, Molecular & Medical Pharmacology; Director, Crump Institute for Molecular Imaging – University of California at Los Angeles, David Geffen School of Medicine Pharmacology The Invention of Positron Emission Tomography 2006 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – Novel Therapeutics Akira Endo, Ph.D.

President – Biopharm Research Laboratories, Tokyo Biochemistry The Discovery of Statin Drugs 2005 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – RNA Interference Andrew Fire, Ph.D. (*)

Professor of pathology and genetics – Stanford University School of Medicine(*) Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (with Craig Mello) Molecular Genetics Co-discovery of RNA interference Craig Mello, Ph.D. (*)

Blais University Chair in Molecular Medicine and Howard Hughes Medical Institute Investigator – University of Massachusetts Medical School(*) 2006 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (with Andrew Fire) Molecular Genetics Co-discovery of RNA interference David Baulcombe, Ph.D.

Professor of Botany at Cambridge University – The Sainsbury Laboratory, University of East Anglia Plant Scientist and Geneticist Work in plants leading to the discovery of RNA interference 2004 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – Ribosomal Structure Harry Noller, Ph.D.

Director, Center for Molecular Biology of RNA, Sinsheimer Professor of Molecular Biology – University of California at Santa Cruz Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Groundbreaking research on the structure and function of the ribosome Ada Yonath, Ph.D. (*)

Director, Helen & Milton A. Kimmelman Center for Biomolecular Structure & Assembly; Martin S. & Helen Kimmel Professorial Chair – Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovat, Israel(*) 2009 Nobel Prize in Chemistry (with Venkatraman Ramakrishnan and Thomas Steitz) Crystallography Groundbreaking research on the structure and function of the ribosome 2003 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – Nuclear Chromation C. David Allis, Ph.D.

Head, Laboratory of Chromatin Biology and Epigenetics; Joy & Jack Fishman Professor – Rockefeller University Molecular Biology Deciphering and translating the histone code Roger Kornberg, Ph.D. (*)

Professor of structural biology – Stanford University Medical School(*) 2006 Nobel Prize in Chemistry Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Studies of the process by which genetic information from DNA is copied to RNA, “the molecular basis of eukaryotic transcription”. Deciphering and translating the histone code Michael Grunstein, Ph.D. D

Distinguished Professor of Biological Chemistry – UCLA Geffen School of Medicine Molecular Genetics Deciphering and translating the histone code 2002 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – Transgenics Mario Capecchi, Ph.D. (*)

Distinguished professor of human genetics & biology – University of Utah(*) 2007 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (with Oliver Smithies and Martin Evans) Molecular Genetics The discovery of principles for introducing specific gene modifications in mice by the use of embryonic stem cells Oliver Smithies, Ph.D. (*)

Excellence Professor of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine – University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill(*) 2007 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (with Mario Capecchi and Martin Evans) Molecular Genetics Discovery of principles for introducing specific gene modifications in mice by the use of embryonic stem cells 2001 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – The Ubiquitin System 2000 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – Cell Cycle Lee Hartwell, Ph.D. (*)

President & Director; Professor of Genetics – Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, University of Washington(*) 2001 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Molecular Genetics The discovery of more than 50 genes crucial to controlling the cell cycle, cell growth, and cell development 1999 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – Protein Traficking Gunter Blobel, Ph.D. (*)

John D. Rockefeller, Jr., Professor – Rockefeller University(*) 1999 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Cell Biology The discovery that proteins have signals that govern their movement and position in the cell 1998 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – Growth Factors Judah Folkman, M.D. (deceased)

Director, Vascular Biology Program; Julia Dyckman Andrus Professor of Pediatric Surgery – Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School Surgery and Cell Biology Mechanisms of angiogenesis. This work founded the anti-angiogenic approach to cancer therapy. 1997 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – Regulation of Transcription Mark Ptashne, Ph.D.

Ludwig Chair of Molecular Biology – Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center Molecular biology Discoveries leading to the understanding of how regulatory proteins control the transcription of genes 1996 Massry Prize Co-Recipients – Signal Transduction