About Roald Dahl

Roald Dahl was born in Wales in 1916 to Norwegian parents. During the Second World War he worked as a fighter pilot and diplomat and then settled into family life and a full-time writing career. He had some success as an author before making the transition to children’s fiction, writing books based on stories he made up for his own family. His first children’s book, James and the Giant Peach (1961), was published in America to limited acclaim. It wasn’t until his second book, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, was published in 1964 that Dahl became better known and his books were published in the UK. He went on to experience phenomenal worldwide success, with his work being published in more than 40 languages, and is today considered to be one of the world’s greatest children’s authors. Roald Dahl died in Oxford in 1990.

About Quentin Blake

Born in Kent in 1932, Quentin Blake is an artist, writer and illustrator who has worked on more than 300 books and won numerous awards, including the Hans Christian Andersen Award for Illustration and the Kate Greenaway Medal. He is perhaps most famous for his long and fruitful collaboration with Roald Dahl, whose children’s books he illustrated from 1975 until Dahl’s death in 1990. In 1999, Blake was appointed the first Children’s Laureate and he is a patron of the Association of Illustrators.

About Donald Sturrock

Donald Sturrock was born in 1961 and spent his childhood in England and South America. After studying Modern History at Oxford University, he worked as a director and producer in BBC Television’s Music and Arts Department for ten years. He continued writing and directing, working on numerous series, including the award-winning The Art of Singing and the Grammy-nominated The Art of Piano. Sturrock has been the artistic director of the Roald Dahl Foundation since 1992 and has adapted and directed a series of musical versions of Roald Dahl's children's stories. He was selected by the Roald Dahl Estate to write Dahl’s official biography, Storyteller: The Authorized Biography of Roald Dahl.