Roald Dahl was born in Llandaff, South Wales on September 13, 1916 into a Norwegian family. Young Dahl attended Llandaff Cathedral School, but after a harsh beating for playing a practical joke, Dahl’s mother withdrew her child and enrolled him in a British boarding school hoping to tame some of his rambunctiousness. Later, Dahl transferred to Repton, which is a private school known for its academics. After graduating in 1932, and despite his mother’s offer to pay for Oxford or Cambridge, the adventurous Dahl went on an expedition to Newfoundland. After his trip, he began a job with Shell Oil in Tanzania, where he remained until 1939.

In 1939, Dahl joined the Royal Air Force where he became a World War II fighter pilot. During his service, Dahl suffered a serious plane crash which left him with many serious injuries. After several surgeries, including a hip replacement and two spinal surgeries, he was transferred to Washington D.C. where he served as an air attache (“Roald Dahl”).

It was during his time in D.C. that Dahl began writing, with encouragement from C.S. Forrester. His first short story was published in the Saturday Evening Post, but he went on to be published in major newspapers such as The New Yorker and The New York Times. In 1942, Dahl wrote his first piece of children’s literature, The Gremlins for Walt Disney. The story was not very successful, so Dahl went back to writing stories geared towards more adult readers. His best selling story collection, Someone Like You, was published in 1953 (“About Roald Dahl”).

During that year Dahl married actress Patricia Neal, which lasted 30 years and produced five children. The bedtime stories told to his children inspired many of Dahl’s most famous children’s books. In an interview with The New York Times, Dahl once stated that “Children are…highly critical. And they lost interest so quickly” (“Roald Dahl Biography”). After multiple brain hemorrhages in the 1960s, Dahl stood by Neal during her recovery. Dahl’s marriage with Neal ended in 1983, and Dahl married Felicity Ann Crosland, who was his partner until death.

Dahl’s publication of James and the Giant Peach in 1961 ignited the author’s career as a children’s writer. Following ‘James’ were other famous hits such as Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, The Witches, Chitty Chitty Bang Bang and Matilda (“About Roald Dahl).

On November 23, 1990 at age 74, Roald Dahl passed away in Oxford, England of a blood disease and was buried at St. Peter and St Paul’s Church in Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire, England where many children have left toys and gifts on his grave (“Roald Dahl”).

Over the years Roald Dahl published many children’s books that later become featured films such as James and the Giant Peach, Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory, and Chitty Chitty Bang Bang. His awards for contribution to literature include the 1983 World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement, and Children’s Author of the Year from the British Book Awards in 1990. In 2008, The Times placed Dahl 16th on its list of “The 50 greatest British writers since 1945” (“About Roald Dahl”). While sometimes met with criticism, overall Dahl’s works were loved and cherished by many. His appeal to children and their unique sense of humor are what endeared his stories to children and parents alike.

Contributed by: Jacqueline Kana & Madison Brown