Construction on a new Sydney Harbour tunnel is set to begin next year after the multibillion-dollar project was given the green light by the NSW government.

The government confirmed to the Herald on Thursday that planning approval had been granted for the Western Harbour Tunnel and Warringah Freeway upgrade, which is expected to be completed in 2026.

The combined cost of the projects, which includes a 6.5-kilometre tunnel from an underground junction for the WestConnex toll road at Rozelle to the upgraded Warringah Freeway at North Sydney, is slated at $14 billion.

Major construction on the four-kilometre Warringah Freeway upgrades will begin in late 2021, while some work will begin as early as March.

The tunnels will be built in a trench on the harbour floor, and large prefabricated concrete tubes lowered into place from barges above. Concerns were raised last year by the Port Authority of NSW about the movement of toxic sludge that will be dug up during construction of the tunnel.

The authority said the handling of the contaminated material would be occurring within 150 metres of homes, suggesting odour and volatile emissions could become a problem.

The government has undertaken testing at the proposed site of the tunnel, while a dedicated team of environmental specialists have been assigned to the project.

“The plan for the Western Harbour Tunnel and Warringah Freeway upgrade project is based on expert peer-reviewed advice, past experience and world’s best practice,” a Transport for NSW spokesman said.

Among concessions made to the project in order for its approval are a new pedestrian and cycle path through the Cammeray Golf Club (the existing one will be destroyed) as well as offsets to the marine environment, according to government documents seen by the Herald.

Transport Minister Andrew Constance said the tunnel, which will run three lanes of traffic in each direction, would cut travel times between North Sydney and Olympic Park by up to 20 minutes.

“This city-shaping piece of infrastructure will deliver a vital boost to the NSW economy, with the tunnel and freeway upgrade, along with Beaches Link, expected to support around 15,000 full-time equivalent jobs,” Mr Constance said.

Planning Minister Rob Stokes said any trees removed need to be replaced at a ratio of two-to-one.

“Community feedback on the project has been valuable in helping understand and deliver positive changes to the design and plan, and we will continue to work closely with local communities as the project gets underway,” Mr Stokes said.

He described the Warringah Freeway as “one of Sydney’s busiest and most complex road corridors”.

The government warned last year, in an environmental impact statement, that parts of the Warringah Freeway, used by as many as 250,000 vehicles a day, will be temporarily shut overnight during construction.

Partial or complete closures of the Warringah Freeway were outlined in the report, which indicated most would occur after 10pm, or during off-peak times.