Bane NOR is planning the construction of 10 km of double-track from Drammen to Kobbervikdalen and from Drammen to Gulskogen, as part of the ongoing modernization of the Vestfold Line. The Drammen-Kobbervikdalen project includes a 290 m long soil tunnel, a 320 m cut&cover tunnel, a 6 km long rock tunnel as well as a new 160 m long bridge crossing E18 in Kobbervikdalen. Drammen station and Gulskogen station will both be rebuilt, with new platforms and tracks.

The design speed is 200/250km/t, pre-qualification in 2018, planned opening – end of 2024, estimated cost 10 billions NOK .

The project is complex, with extensive groundwork and substructure works, multidisciplinary technical railways works, and a number of demanding construction phases. Work on procurement is underway, and several contracts will be announced in the coming months. The construction works are split into three main contracts.

UDK 01 - Rock tunnel and open stretches

The scope of work includes the 6-km double track rock tunnel, the tunnel approach and the open stretches connecting to the existing Kobbervikdalen track. Tracks and other railway engineering installations are not included in the contract.

UDK 02 - Concrete tunnel and soil tunnel

The scope of work includes a "cut & cover" concrete tunnel from the branch towards the Vestfold line from Drammen. This tunnel is built with an open construction pit. The concrete tunnel passes into a soil tunnel built in loose deposits.

UDK 03/05/06 - Drammen-Gulskogen

Bane NOR has reviewed and made changes to the project's contract strategy.

The large contract UDK 03 will be replaced by three contracts. They are all implementation contracts. The new contracts are:

UDK 03 - Groundworks Drammen-Gulskogen

UDK 05 - Superstructure and catenary system

UDK 06 - Electricity and telecom More information about the contracts will be made available shortly.

The project includes several smaller contracts. These contracts include important preparatory works, such as:

UDK 28 – Preparatory technical railway works.

The contract is expected to be signed in March 2019.

UDK 33 – Preparatory groundwork and substructure works.

The contract is expected to be signed in March 2019.

All calls for tender will be announced through Bane NORs procurement system, using TED and/or the TransQ pre-qualification system.

The project is using model-based-design and BIM-enabled software.

Click here and no/255 for tunnelbuilder archive. Visit https://www.banenor.no/Prosjekter/prosjekter/vestfoldbanen/drammen-kobbervikdalen/procurementcontracts/.

45/18.