Kevin Garnett , a Hall of Famer, has found himself in a unique position as both the Boston Celtics and Minnesota Timberwolves make their way to the Conference Finals. If they meet in the NBA Finals, Garnett will be torn between his love for both teams, having shone for both franchises during his storied career.

Garnett recently expressed his neutrality, as he said he’s “50/50” and “part wolf, part Celtic.” He also joked about wearing a half-Minnesota, half-Celtic jersey and having “money on both blocks.” The 48-year-old legend made it clear he wouldn’t choose one side over the other, no matter the outcome.

I’m the only one here qualified to be in this position, to hold the position that I have. I’m 50/50. I love-love. I’m the only one that can sit here in the middle and root for both. I’m the only one that can do that, in the world. Me. Y'all can't tell me what side to be on. I'm both sides... I'm part wolf, part Celtic, n***a. Kevin Garnett said on the Ticket and The Truth podcast:

Garnett’s history with both teams is rich. He began his career with the Timberwolves in 1995 and led them to the playoffs for the first time in franchise history. He won his first and only MVP award in 2004 before being traded to the Celtics in 2007. With Boston, he won a championship and the Defensive Player of the Year award in his first season.

Furthermore, as the Celtics and Timberwolves aim for the NBA Finals, Kevin Garnett is likely to have a huge smile on his face, regardless of the outcome. His legacy as a beloved figure in both franchises is secure, and his humorous take on his neutrality has fans entertained.

Kevin Garnett on how Anthony Edwards and Karl-Anthony Towns can play perfect together

Kevin Garnett is thrilled to see the Minnesota Timberwolves’ success, particularly the partnership between Karl-Anthony Towns and Anthony Edwards. He believes Edwards has outgrown the “Robin” role and needs to join forces with Towns to lead the team together.

[Anthony Edwards] has too big of a personality to be Robin. He's too big of a personality. It's time for them to come together and become one. It ain't about stepping back, it's about both stepping forward together. They are the faces of the franchise… My advice to KAT is always, 'Hey, you and young fella, get on the same page.' Kevin Garnett said on Inside the Smoke

As a rookie, you go through KAT. Now he's done proved himself, he has a brand. He got a whole, 'That's who Anthony Edwards is?' And it's growing. The best thing for them now, get together and say, 'This is what we on,' let them two initiate it and go. As the two go, the Wolves are gonna go, and everybody below that will fall in. Kevin Garnett further added

Garnett also emphasized the importance of mentality in duos thriving and cited his own experience with Paul Pierce and how they complemented each other. He went further to advise Towns and Edwards to get on the same page and initiate their leadership together.

The Edwards-Towns duo has finally found their dynamic and has led the team to the conference finals. Edwards has averaged 28.9 points, 6.2 rebounds, and 5.9 assists in the postseason, while Towns has also contributed 18.8 points and 9.3 rebounds. Their partnership has the Timberwolves just eight wins away from an NBA title.