Katie Hartman and Meredith Bloom for their great catches and notes!

Family, friends, writers, and others: Elissa Ambrose (my mom and go-to proofreader), Aviva Mlynowski, Larry Mlynowski, Louisa Weiss, Robert Ambrose, Vickie and John Swidler, the Dalven-Swidlers, the Finkelstein-Mitchells, the Steins, the Wolfes, the Mittlemans, the Bilermans, Courtney Sheinmel, Anne Heltzel, Lauren Myracle, Emily Bender, Tori, Carly, and Carol Adams, Targia Alphonse, Jess Braun, Lauren Kisilevsky, Bonnie Altro, Robin Afrasiabi, Jess Rothenberg, Stephen Barbara, Jen E. Smith, Robin Wasserman, Maureen Johnson, Adele Griffin, Milan Popelka, Leslie Margolis, Maryrose Wood, Tara Altebrando, Sara Zarr, Ally Carter, Jennifer Barnes, Alan Gratz, Penny Fransblow, Avery Carmichael, Maggie Marr, Jeremy Cammy, and Farrin Jacobs. Special shout-out to my cousin and junior editor, Maddie Wolf.

Jess, John, Stella, and Sadie Green — thank you for the extra push!

Thanks to all the bookstores, big and small, for your wonderful support! Can’t wait to visit soon.

Whatever After readers: Thank you for reading and sharing my books. You guys are the best!

Lots of love to my husband, Todd, and our daughters, Anabelle and Chloe. What should we call ourselves? TACS? Or CATS? Love you all the time just because you’re mine. And because you’re awesome.

Sarah Mlynowski is the author of the Magic in Manhattan series, Gimme a Call, and a bunch of other books for tweens and teens. Originally from Montreal, Sarah now lives in the kingdom of Manhattan with her very own Prince Charming and their fairy-tale-loving daughters. Visit Sarah online at www.sarahm.com.

#1: Fairest of All

#2: If the Shoe Fits

#3: Sink or Swim

#4: Dream On

#5: Bad Hair Day

#6: Cold as Ice

#7: Beauty Queen

Each time Abby and Jonah get sucked into the magic mirror, they wind up in a different fairy tale — and find new adventures!

Whatever After #1: FAIREST of ALL

In their first adventure, Abby and Jonah wind up in the story of Snow White. But when they stop Snow from eating the poisoned apple, they realize they’ve messed up the whole story! Can they fix it — and still find Snow her happy ending?

Whatever After #2: IF the SHOE FITS

This time, Abby and Jonah find themselves in Cinderella’s story. When Cinderella breaks her foot, the glass slipper won’t fit! With a little bit of magic, quick thinking, and luck, can Abby and her brother save the day?

Whatever After #3: SINK or SWIM

Abby and Jonah are pulled into the tale of the Little Mermaid — a story with an ending that is not happy. So Abby and Jonah mess it up on purpose! Can they convince the mermaid to keep her tail before it’s too late?

Whatever After #4: DREAM ON

Now Abby and Jonah are lost in Sleeping Beauty’s story, along with Abby’s friend Robin. Before they know it, Sleeping Beauty’s wide awake and Robin is fast asleep. How will Abby and Jonah make things right?

Whatever After #5: BAD HAIR DAY

When Abby and Jonah fall into Rapunzel’s story, they mess up everything by giving Rapunzel a haircut! Can they untangle this fairy tale disaster in time?

… And more stories to come!

Copyright © 2014 by Sarah Mlynowski

All rights reserved. Published by Scholastic Press, an imprint of Scholastic Inc., Publishers since 1920. SCHOLASTIC, SCHOLASTIC PRESS, and associated logos are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Scholastic Inc.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Mlynowski, Sarah, author.

Cold as ice / Sarah Mlynowski. — First edition.

pages cm. — (Whatever after ; 6)

Summary: On their sixth trip through the magic mirror, Abby and Jonah find themselves in the story of the Snow Queen, a troubled character who chose power over family and friendship, and Abby has to free the children the Queen has under her spell — with the help of her new friend, a talking reindeer called Ralph, and a strange girl named Sharon.

ISBN 978-0-545-62734-4 (jacketed hardcover) 1. Snow Queen (Fictitious character) — Juvenile fiction. 2. Fairy tales — Adaptations — Juvenile fiction. 3. Magic mirrors—Juvenile fiction. 4. Reindeer—Juvenile fiction. 5. Brothers and sisters — Juvenile fiction. 6. Friendship — Juvenile fiction. [1. Characters in literature — Fiction. 2. Fairy tales — Fiction. 3. Magic — Fiction 4. Reindeer — Fiction. 5. Brothers and sisters — Fiction. 6. Friendship — Fiction.] I. Title.

II. Series: Mlynowski, Sarah. Whatever after ; 6.

PZ7.M7135Co 2015

813.6 — dc23

2014031601

First edition, December 2014

Author photo by Heather Waraksa

Cover design by Elizabeth B. Parisi

Cover illustration © 2014 by Helen Huang

e-ISBN 978-0-545-62737-5

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereafter invented, without the express written permission of the publisher. For information regarding permission, write to Scholastic Inc., Attention: Permissions Department, 557 Broadway, New York, NY 10012.

‹ Prev Next ›