Teens have it so good these days. I mean, come on. Cell phones, (we're from the "pager" era) IPods, (um, is this where we mention we remember 8-tracks?) and YA fiction. So not only do these kids get to listen to their favorite song over and over without rewinding a tape, they also have a whole genre of fiction devoted just to them. And the best part? There's a ton of awesome YA writers out there. (Just ask Liz-she's a closeted YA addict!) And we're lucky enough to have Sarah Mlynowski sharing 5 things we don't know about her today. She's the author of the popular Magic in Manhattan series. Her latest YA effort, Gimme a Call is a lot of fun (AND has already been optioned by Paramount!). It's a lighthearted read about a girl who, after dropping her cell phone in a fountain, is able to call her fourteen-year-old self and tell her all the things she wish she had known three years ago.

Want to win a copy? We've got five! Just leave a comment and you'll be entered to win! We'll choose the winner by random drawing on Wednesday evening.

And if you're just unable to embrace your inner teen, don't fret-Sarah's got some chick lit up her sleeve too. In fact, Me vs. Me is one of our favorite books and See Jane Write is a must read for any aspiring chick lit author!

So take a minute to get to know more about the fabulous Sarah! And wait till you see the VIDEO evidence she provided to back up one of her 5 things! Love it!

5 things Liz & Lisa didn't know about...Sarah Mlynowski!

1. I speak four languages. English, French, Hebrew and Yiddish. Yes, Yiddish. I’m not kibitzing with you.

2. I’ve moved eleven times in the last fifteen years. Two countries, four cities, six roommates, one husband, and one adorable baby. So much packing tape.

3. My mom is a novelist too. She’s published four romance novels under the name Elissa Ambrose. Obviously, when I read her books, I skip over the sex scenes.

4. I hate soda. I don’t understand the appeal. I’ve never understood the appeal. Those bubbles burn. Why would anyone want to drink something that causes pain? It makes no sense.

5. I learned how to ride a bike when I was twenty-seven. My dad tried to teach me when I was a kid, but I refused to let him take off the training wheels. My husband decided enough was enough, and taught me on our honeymoon. Unfortunately, I mowed down some flowers. Unfortunately, there is video evidence-see below!

To read more about the lovely Sarah Mlynowski, head on over to her website or find her on Facebook and Twitter!

xoxo, Liz & Lisa