List of tennis stadiums by capacity — The following is a list of tennis stadia. They are ordered by their capacity, that is the maximum number of spectators that the stadium can accommodate. It contains stadia that are either built specifically for tennis, or multipurpose venues that … Wikipedia

Major professional tennis tournaments before the Open Era — Before the beginning of the Open era in 1968 only amateurs were allowed to compete in mainstream tennis tournaments, including the four Grand Slams there was no prize money and players were compensated for travel expenses only. This changed with… … Wikipedia

Tennis — This article is about the sport. For other uses, see Tennis (disambiguation). Tennis The … Wikipedia

Tennis Channel Open — Infobox ATP Tennis Tournament Name = Tennis Channel Open Current = Logo size = 150px City = Las Vegas, Nevada Country = USA Category = International Series Surface = Hard / Outdoors Draw = 32S/16Q/16D (round robin) Prize Money = $416,000 Web site … Wikipedia

Tennis at the 2008 Summer Olympics — Tennis competitions at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing were held from August 10 to August 17 at the Olympic Green Tennis Centre. The DecoTurf surface rendered the event a hardcourt tournament. The women s single event proved notable for being … Wikipedia

Tennis statistics — Statistics play an important role in summarizing tennis performance and evaluating players in the sport, both present and past. While not all statistics are known, this article tries to be comprehensive on major tournament wins for singles, same… … Wikipedia

List of male tennis players — This is a list of top international male tennis players. To keep the list at a reasonable length, it includes only players who have been officially ranked among the top 25 singles players in the world during the Open Era ; been ranked in the top… … Wikipedia

Tennis terminology — The following is a list of tennis terms, sorted alphabetically.TOC|left|Contents A* Ace ndash; a serve where the tennis ball served is served in and not touched by the receiver, aces are usually powerful and generally land on or near the one of… … Wikipedia

List of ATP number 1 ranked players — The ATP Rankings is the Association of Tennis Professionals historical objective merit based method used for determining entry and seeding in men s tennis tournaments. The number 1 ranked player is the player who over the immediate cumulative… … Wikipedia