Scandinavia is in northern Europe. But where exactly are its borders and which countries are regarded as Scandinavian countries? What about Scandinavian languages and the flags with the Scandinavian Cross? Learn more about Scandiavia and the countries of northern Europe here.

In most definitions “Scandinavia” is defined as the area of the Scandinavian Peninsula in Northern Europe, which is dominated by the Scandinavian Mountains (see for example Wikipedia or Encyclopædia Britannica).

This means that Norway and Sweden are clearly Scandinavian countries. The northeastern border of the Scandinavian Peninsula is not clearly defined. Northern Finland and most of Finnish Lapland do undoubtedly reach into the Scandinavian Peninsula and Mountains.

The most northern point of Scandinavia is the Nordkap in Norway. In the south of the country is Scandinavia's highest peak, the Galdhøpiggen with an elevation of more than 2,400 meters.

left: Scandinavian Peninsula with Norway and Sweden.

right: The “usual” Scandinavian countries Norway, Sweden, and Denmark.

The issue with a proper definition for “Scandinavia” is clearly that geographical and cultural elements are usually combined. Depending on which aspects you stress, this leads to different results, when determining which countries should be regarded as part of Scandiavia.

Denmark is mostly regarded as one of the Scandiavian countries, which has foremost linguistic, historic, and overall cultural reasons. The Danish autnomous areas of the Faroe Islands and Greenland are viewed separately, though. In pure geographical terms there would be a lot of ground to claim Denmark to be Central Europe's most northern part and perhaps a transition area to Scandinavia. Depending on your point of view regarding Denmark, Scandinavia's most southern point is either at Smygehuk in Trelleborg in southern Sweden, or on the Danish island Falster in the Baltic Sea.

Finland is less frequently counted as part of Scandinavia than Denmark, even though, as stated above, geographically there is a lot of reason to count at least the country's north as part of it. The Finnish history is closely intertwined with that of Sweden in particular, since the country was under Swedish rule for centuries.

Iceland also has close linguistic and historic ties with Scandiavia and is therefore sometimes also seen as part of a Scandinavian or Nordic cultural community of values, even though the island on Europe's outmost margin is situated almost 1,000 kilometers away from the Norwegian coast.

Ski Resorts of Scandinavia

Our first Marmota Map of northern Europe is SKI RESORTS OF SCANDINAVIA with all downhill ski areas in Norway, Sweden, and Finland (with data from skiresort.info). With everything above this leads to two questions:

1) Shouldn't Denmark be on a map with this title?

This is relatively easy to answer. Denmark is a great holiday destination, but unfortunately not the best one if you want to go skiing. Since October 2019 technically there is now a Danish outdoor ski area - CopenHill in Copenhagen on the roof of the incineration plant Amager Bakke, having about 400 slope meters. Since it is a purely artificial area, which can also operate without any snow, we still decided not to include it on our list of Scandinavian ski areas (as we also did with indoor ski resorts). That's why, in the end, we left out Denmark completely on our ski map.

2) Is Finland part of Scandiavia?

We can see that our decision to put Finland on the map as a whole is controversial, considering the map title. For us the crucial point is that Finland's northern part is clearly part of Scandinavia geographically. Defining a border through Finnish territory would also be somehow arbitrary. Even though most Finnish ski areas are in the south of the country, where also the vast majority of the people live there are also strong cultural ties with the rest of Scandinavia. That's why we finally decided to include the Finnish south on our map of the Scandinavian ski areas.

We hope we will be able to produce more maps of northern Europe in the future. We may not have convinced everyone but we still hope to have brought up some valid arguments for our decision to publish our first map with this area and title.

Unskyld dear Danish and all Denmark-fans and ski ahoy!