One Hundred and Fifty (150) Racey Helps postcards. As seen in photograph preview.

(5) "Postkarten" cases: postcard collection, 20th c., book-form cases containing postcards of Old Master paintings, Russia and Russian royalty, 6"h x 4.5"w x 1.75" (cases)

100+ Baseball HOFers &amp; Legends Signed Photograph and Postcard Collection Featuring Warren Spahn, Johnny Mize, Stan Musial &amp; More! Fantastic Dealers Lot! 100+ signed 5 x 3.5"-inch photographs a

Cowboy and Round Up Real Photograph Postcard Collection Approximately (150) items including 'R.P.P.C' depicting riders, broncos and people in western attire; together with (1000) mostly U.S. postcards

Lot of 300 postcards featuring people of Hawaii. Many of native girls, hula dancers, Hawaiian musicians, flower markets, tourist gatherings. Coconut tree climbers. Date: Country (if not USA): State: H

[COLORADO]. Massive postcard collection and associated ephemera. Single-owner lifetime collection of Colorado postcards, an estimated 1,000 altogether, with a fine selection of early real-photo postca

Excellent dealer stock of Ohio postcards, all early 20th c. cards with earlies and linens. All are in sleeves and priced. All are sorted by county. The majority of them are $1-5 cards with scattered b

Large Group of circa 1910 Valentine Postcards, including a total of approximately (397) cards in five loose leaf albums with plastic double sleeves, with great images and print quality from variety of

Lot of over 170 postcards featuring elephants. Many from zoos around the world; some in natural environments. Several store cards featuring elephants as well. Date: Country (if not USA): State: City:

o Wonderful Leather Postcard Collection. Very attractive collection of 420 different, many are used, nicely presented on well annotated home-made album pages in four large 3-ring binders. Most are col

Lot of about 1,000 postcards concerning aviation. All types of aircraft from the Curtiss Biplane at airshows in 1910, through the B747. Postcards of airports all around the country; Cleveland Air Race

JEAN-MICHEL BASQUIAT PAINTING SOUVENIR SUBWAY ART POSTCARD COLLECTION (KING ME) Read Description - See all photos please. Hand Painted N York SAMO Collection-No ReserveJean-Michel Basquiat was born on

Lot of over 160 postcards depicting ocean liners and their interiors; some ferries from San Francisco and Victoria; greeting cards from passengers on board. Date: Country (if not USA): State: City: Pr

A box of over 200 vintage post cards. Mostly all greeting cards, c1906-1908; numerous pre-1906, pioneer cards, political cards, bull fighting and the 1904 World's Fair, "Meet Me in Saint Louis, Louis"