"Paul Robeson’s all-around versatility during his four years at Rutgers was more than matched by the wide range of his activities over the next four years. From the summer of 1919, when he moved to New York, Paul worked his way through law school, got married, played three seasons of professional football, made his debut on Broadway as a dramatic actor, appeared there again as a singer in a hit musical show, toured England playing opposite one of that country’s most famous actresses, sang numerous recitals (some for fee and some for free) at churches, schools, and community centers, served as an assistant football coach for Rutgers in New Jersey and for Lincoln University in Pennsylvania, played semi-pro basketball, tutored a Newark high school student in Latin, clerked in a Wall Street law office, . . ."

"In 1917 and 1918 Walter Camp, the legendary Yale coach, put Robeson on his All-American football team–the first Rutgers player ever named–calling him ‘a veritable superman. . . . the National Football Foundation’s Hall of Fame whose officials contend that though Robeson’s playing record qualifies him for their roster of college gridiron greats, his later controversial activities make him unacceptable. . . .’ On January 18, 1995, the National Football Foundation announced that Paul Robeson would be posthumously inducted that year into the College Football Hall of Fame, seventy six years after the legendary ‘Robeson of Rutgers’ played his last game for that school."

The Young Paul Robeson by Lloyd L. Brown

"PAUL ROBESON SINGS

Orchestra Hall did not seem large enough to house the distinguished audience assembled to hear Paul Robeson in his recital of spirituals last night. Mr. Robeson returns to us after an interesting experience abroad for we all have read of his adventure with Othello under Maurice Browne’s direction, if I mistake not?

Barely has a reputation so perfectly fitted the stature of an artist. Robeson is all that, we have heard, and more. He is a singer first, with a gloriously rich and expressive baritone which modulates with the resiliency and docility of a violin. But he is also a musician of parts, for no one can sing and feel song as Robeson does without a technical foundation abetted and employed to reveal an innate kinship with the musical intent of a composer. . . .

The public may almost be called historic. It was décolleté and white-shirted audience, whites predominating, and the whole auditorium had an air of informed sophistication, for we Chicagoans confess to liking our Americans, principally after they have received the cachet of European approval."

Chicago Tribune, 2/1/31

"I remember how, after the concert, the audience was invited to attend a reception in honor of the singer and his family. It was to be at the Appomattox Club on Grand Boulevard, later South Parkway Avenue, now Dr. Martin Luther King Drive. I took the number three bus and got off at 35th Street. I wanted to get a close look at this magnificent black artist. I remember how frightened and insignificant I felt surrounded by so many elegant and prominent people, both black and white. I was jostled along in the receiving line where I got a chance not only to shake Paul’s hand but also those of his wife, Eslanda, his son Pauli, about eight years of age at that time, and his mother-in-law, Mrs. Goode. Paul shook my hand, me, an insignificant, awed and frightened black daughter of a worker, with just as much warmth, sincerity and interest as he did the furred and sequined fancily dressed dowagers of the black bourgeoisie. Then Paul spoke of his travels in faraway lands and how much he learned from other peoples and their cultures. Throughout it all, he exuded love and respect for people, especially the common people."

Essay, Margaret Burroughs, Paul Robeson The Great Forerunner

"Paul Robeson Wins Ovations from Throng in Grant Park

Paul Robeson, the great Negro bass-baritone, made his first Chicago appearance in nearly five years last night. He sang from the stage of the Grant Park band shell to an audience that packed the tens of thousands of available seats and overflowed onto the spacious lawns all about. . . .

Mr. Robeson first won the enthusiastic friendship of his audience by the charm of his personality. He is a great giant of a man, with an infectious smile; bright, humorous eyes, and that dignity of bearing that springs from an honest sense of worth. The moment that he walked upon the stage the crowd that faced him from every corner of the big breezy auditorium put on a big demonstration in his honor. . . .

The climax of the evening came when popular demand–in the shape of numerous shouted requests from the audience–compelled Mr. Robeson to do ‘Ol’ Man River.’ He sang it with an awesome virility. There were cheers and screams at its end. After another Negro number–the mock-serious ‘Scandalize My Name’–the singer offered ‘Ballad for Americans,’ a folksy and warming piece that has become one of the best liked bits of Americana of our day. . . ."

Chicago Tribune, 7/29/40

". . . By 1937, war raged in Spain, a kind of dress rehearsal for World War II. Fascists in Spain, with the help of Mussolini and Hitler, were fighting to overthrow the popularly elected government in Spain. The Spanish Civil War became another turning point in Paul’s life. He cut short a second trip to Moscow to participate in a huge meeting in London’s Albert Hall for the Spanish Loyalists. His appearance on stage was greeted by a deafening roar. Through his music, Paul had come to symbolize the artist dedicated to the cause of freedom. . . . [It was there that Paul Robeson made the now-famous quote: ‘The artist must choose to fight for freedom or for slavery. I have made my choice. I had no alternative.’–ed.]

A few months later, my grandparents were on their way to Spain at the height of the civil war there. Paul sang to the front-line Loyalist troops, which included volunteers from America and all over Europe. He traveled with Essie to the front lines at Madrid and Barcelona, where they experienced some of the worst bombings of the war. At Teruel, the guns on both sides were stilled while Paul sang. Paul emerged a living legend and a worldwide symbol of the artist as freedom fighter."

The Whole World in His Hands by Susan Robeson

". . . It was the first of only three stars that we gave to men who had been with us, but not in the Brigades. It was the only one we gave without reservations of any kind, for in some way that it is impossible to define, he had become one of us. And it was more than that; for when I stood beside him to pin the star on his lapel, up there on the stage at our first convention, all the veterans gathered sitting quiet, watching, I had this feeling that Paul Robeson was not so much becoming a member of the Lincoln Brigade, as that we were becoming a part of Paul Robeson, that Robeson joining us in this way was all the medals, ribbons and honors that any organization could want to have. And still have."

Article, Milton Wolff, The Daily World, 4/10/71; Mr. Wolff, with the rank of major, was last commander of the American volunteers in Spain.

[One of the few Lincoln Volunteers to have previous military experience was Oliver Law, an African American from Chicago. He rose from the rank of private to be commander of an Abraham Lincoln Battalion. Law was killed in action. He was the most celebrated of the black Volunteers and the first African American to lead integrated U.S. troops. While Paul Robeson was touring Spain, he was so moved in learning about Oliver Law that he was determined to make a film on his life. Funding for this film was never forthcoming.–ed.]

"Of Robeson’s public efforts, his participation in the campaign to desegregate major-league baseball brought him special satisfaction. The pressure created by the long-standing arguments of the Negro Publishers Association and other groups for the desegregation of baseball was heightened in 1943 when Peter V. Cacchione, Brooklyn’s Communist councilman, introduced a desegregation resolution. Kenesaw Mountain Landis, the high commissioner of baseball, agreed to let eight black newspapermen and Robeson attend the annual meeting of the club owners in December 1943 and plead their case . . .

Mr. Robeson took along to the meeting two friends, William Patterson [founder of the Abraham Lincoln School of Social Research-ed.] and the Chicago-based Ishmael Flory (who was executive secretary of the left-wing Negro People’s Assembly and managing editor of its newspaper, The New World)–but both were kept cooling their heels in the anteroom. Robeson, however, was allowed to address the club owners. ‘I come here as an American and former athlete,’ he told them. ‘I come because I feel this problem deeply.’ For twenty minutes he used his own history to make an impassioned appeal, citing his earlier experience in college football and his current performance as Othello as arguments against the assumption that racial disturbance automatically follows desegregation. When Robeson finished, the owners applauded him vigorously but did not ask questions . . ."

Paul Robeson by Martin Duberman

"History is being written by the great Paul Robeson these nights at the Erlanger theater in the loop. It is more than theatrical history. It is epoc-making, precedent-shattering American history that is a happy omen of a new world acomin’ in U.S. race relations.

But Robeson’s magnificent performance as Othello is important not only because it is a historic event. Its significance goes further than the simple fact that Robeson is the first Negro to play Othello on an American stage and kiss a white person before a mixed audience.

Perhaps even more remarkable is Robeson’s masterful ability to translate this great work of Shakespeare into human terms, into thrilling, moving drama understandable to the everyday common man. Othello, as played by Robeson and a splendid supporting cast, is not the heavy-handed Elizabethan drama of free verse that is crammed down the throats of unwilling students. The Erlanger production is as modern and up-to-date as a jazz concert. . .

His achievement in bringing Othello down to terms of today will live and be remembered for years to come. To miss Robeson in Othello is to miss history in the making."

Chicago Defender, 4/14/45

"After a busy schedule the greying Robeson had earned himself a two-month rest before he began a cross-country tour (including the Canadian cities Toronto and Montreal) of Othello in September 1944. Of course the Southern Jim Crow states were omitted, except for black colleges and unsegregated audiences. This tour, covering some forty-five cities, gave him the opportunity to take the tragedy of the moor to an even wider public. Above all the tour was instructive. The play had a unifying effect on educationalists. Schoolteachers—black and white—who had brought their classes to see the play, would crowd around Robeson’s dressing-room with their pupils after the performance.

In spite of the demands of the role, and a punishing schedule, Robeson always gave them the warmest welcome. For him, tiredness was no grounds for excusing himself, especially when children and students were involved. The next generation must know and understand the problems of the present,

to ensure a more enlightened approach to the future. In effect, then, Robeson was not merely a symbol but a living example to American youth who looked to him."

Paul Robeson the Man and His Mission by Ron Ramdin

"Informants advised that ROBESON maintained a rigorous schedule during his stay in Chicago during April and May, sometimes making two or three appearances in addition to his performances in Othello. . . ."

FBI files, 7/6/45, recently released

"Young Nisei Vets Flay Bilbo and Rankin at Testimonial Dinner

Rankin and Bilbo, known as America’s leading race baiters, were flayed here by young Japanese American war veterans during a testimonial dinner in honor of their war dead at the Stevens hotel.

Fighting racism as he had fought fascism, militant young Ben Kuroki, a former tail gunner on America’s bombers during the war, denounced racial bigotry . . . . He bitterly criticized this nation’s overall jim crow pattern against minority groups, and declared that ‘Japanese Americans are the worst persecuted minority in this country.’ . . .

Paul Robeson, America’s famed actor-singer and crusader against fascism, brought thunderous applause from the Japanese war veterans and guests by singing ‘Ol’ Man River,’ ‘Water Boy,’ and a new tune dedicated to the success of the United Nations organization. Robeson took time out to appear on the Nisei program in spite of his engagement to appear at a Win-the-Peace rally at Orchestra Hall.

‘Your fight is my fight,’ he said. ‘We must all unite to fight against fascism here at home and abroad.’ . . .

Among the prominent guests present were Marshal Field, publisher of the Chicago Sun; . . . and Ira Latimer, executive secretary of the Chicago Civil Liberties Committee"

Files of Claude Barnett, Associated Negro News Service, Chicago Historical Society

"When the school was inaugurated, telegrams came from many workers. James E. Murray, Democratic Senator from the state of Montana, made the principal speech. I quote from his address:

‘The front on which the Abraham Lincoln School and other similar institutions of learning are today fighting for the protection of democracy is a front that must not be neglected if liberty and freedom are to survive. They are fighting the battle for a better world and for a lasting peace. . . .

The Abraham Lincoln School has been established to train your fellow-citizens in sound democratic principles and in the maintenance of national unity so necessary for the winning of the war and the preservation of democracy. Today the people are often confused by the great welter of propaganda they encounter in the press and on the air and find it difficult to form sound judgment on national problems. I think you are giving the best answer to that question right here in Chicago through the Abraham Lincoln School, dedicated to the preservation of the people and for the people.’"

The Man Who Cried Genocide by William Patterson

"We would like to introduce ourselves to you. Our name is American Youth for Democracy, and Democracy is just what we ARE for. We have no million dollar organizing fund; we were not set up, nor are we led, by adults. AYD was established by young people who recognized that there was a ‘youth problem’ and saw the need for an organization to fight for a solution to all the phases of this many-sided problem. What are some of these phases? There’s the problem of the married veteran who can’t find a place for his family to live; the student who can’t get into an overcrowded school; the problem of the young Negro, who faces all the above problems magnified a hundred times by the system of discrimination that blocks his right to equality."

Excerpt, program booklet

"Steelworkers, railroad workers, packinghouse workers—they all turned out this week to hear one of the greatest of the greats, the mighty Paul Robeson.

Largest of the three labor meetings at which Robeson spoke and sang was the mass rally in the Union Stock Yards called by the Packinghouse Workers for Wallace and Taylor.

An estimated 5,000 stockyards workers poured out of the Swift, Armour, Wilson and other plants to gather on the street, on overhead runways, and in the buildings overlooking the famed ‘CIO Corner"–43rd St. and Packers–where a temporary stand was set up.

‘Packing is a union that must understand the problems that face the working man today,’ said Robeson, urging his listeners to join the Progressive Party.

He said they must ‘see the link’ connecting the Meat Trust that fights their union with the Democratic and Republican politicians who work on behalf of the Meat Trust in Washington.

He told his listeners not to be discouraged by the seeming power of their enemies.

‘In the end,’ he declared, ‘the people–the people–are the power.’

Cheers greeted his announcement that he intends to follow Henry Wallace’s footsteps in a tour of the South beginning early in October.

The setting for Robeson Speech was possibly the most colorful in Chicago. Truckloads of bawling cattle rolled past as he spoke at the corner where the United Packinghouse Workers of America (CIO) first organized the stockyards workers.

The thousands of workers, with only a half hour for lunch, munched sandwiches as the full, rolling voice filled the dusty lanes of America’s slaughtering center. . . .

Other candidates who spoke with Robeson at one of the three meetings included Sam Parks, ex-president of the Wilson local of UPWA and nominee for sanitary district trustee; Grant Oakes, candidate for governor: Sidney Ordower, nominee for Congress from the 6th district; and Oscar Brown, Jr., candidate for state representative from the 1st senatorial district."

Illinois Standard, 9/18/48

"City Honors Paul Robeson

Chicago made its answer to Peekskill last weekend by greeting the great Paul Robeson with an outpouring of thousands who came to packed halls and stood out on the streets to hear his words and his songs.

The world-beloved Negro leader spoke to close to 10,000 people here who palisaded themselves against any would-be perpetrators of fascist violence.

His brief visit, marked only by silence in the commercial press, revealed his full stature as a people’s leader as masses of Negro and white Chicagoans thronged to his two overflow meetings and thundered their ovation.

Symbolic of his strong ties with the people, Robeson made an unscheduled appearance last Sunday afternoon at Washington Park for an informal day with the people of the South Side. . . .

Robeson spoke simply and from the heart, revealing in almost intimate terms the reasons why he must fight unceasingly for the freedom of his people and all oppressed people, and why personal glory is not enough for him.

‘I found that my career was going along fine,’ he said, ‘but my people were having more and more trouble.’

Then he lashed out suddenly at those who say he should remain simply a great artist an incomparable singer, a matchless actor.

‘I’m not sacrificing anything!’ he exclaimed. ‘It’s only right that I should give of what I have to the labor movement, to my own people.’

‘I say to the Negro youth of this land: "Don’t bow your heads!"’ he declared, speaking in a warm personal vein of his own youth and of his realization that he comes from a people ‘who have a potential second to no people on earth.’"

The Worker, 10/2/49

"Dr. Louis Rawls, pastor of Tabernacle Baptist Church, a man of deeply conservative religious and political values, had not hesitated to open his church to Robeson. ‘I saw no reason,’ Rawls recalls, ‘why this church that serves the community should not allow these people to come in. Who are we to judge? They say Robeson "believes in Communism." Now, he never told me that. He said he wants freedom.’ Rawls not only agreed to lend his church, but also reduced the usual fee from $150 to $75. In a welcoming statement, Bishop W.J. Walls of the A.M.E. Zion Church compared Robeson to ‘the noble Frederick Douglass,’ who also refused ‘to bask in the sunlight of his great advantages without always bringing to the front the cause of his enslaved people. . . . You have gone the second mile.’ When Robeson attended a White Sox baseball game in Chicago, he was surrounded by autograph-seekers–but when he tried to get a meal at the Hotel Sherman, he was refused service."

Paul Robeson, The Man and His Mission by Ron Ramdin

"Robeson Not ‘News’ for Chicago Press

The corruption of Chicago’s ‘free press’ lay naked before its readers last week.

The Paul Robeson who rated ‘front page’ when rocks were hurled at him in Peekskill, N.Y., the Paul Robeson who rated column after column of distortion in that press when he spoke out against war in Paris, that Paul Robeson wasn’t ‘news’ when he came to Chicago!

Readers of the Sun-Times, Chicago Tribune, Daily News, or Herald-American never knew that Paul Robeson’s first meeting in Chicago was held with the men who write for these papers, one half hour after his arrival in the city.

THE newspapermen were there, that afternoon at the Southway Hotel, with their notebooks, their flashbulbs, their questions. Robeson talked, and they wrote.

In the stirring, passionate tones that make songs of his sentences, Paul Robeson told the press why he had put aside his career as actor and concert artist to devote his life to the fight for Negro rights, to carry around the world the plea for allies in the cause of liberating America’s Negroes from Jimcrow, and all Americans from the threat of fascism and war.

They wrote, as he told them: ‘At Peekskill, I knew I loved America. The 25,000 who stood with locked arms, ready to die for my freedom, these were the symbol of America for me–not the miserable band of fascists who attacked us, with the aid of state troopers and police.’

‘Peekskill,’ the magnificent voice thundered, ‘proved the American people will never let fascism conquer them!’

THOSE who run Chicago’s press could find nothing in the stories or pictures their working reporters brought back with which they could ‘scandalize’ Paul Robeson’s name.

Chicago gave Robeson not rocks–but an outpouring of love. There was no Peekskill here, but a magnificent Peekskill Protest.

The press chose the one way left to ‘scandalize’ Paul Robeson–silence. Cold, deadly, silence. But to the thousands who came to hear Robeson that very silence headlined the true scandal of Chicago–the scandal of its prostitute press."

The Worker, 10/2/49

"The prospects for the black worker seemed very bleak to these leaders when a group of them met in Harlem in 1949 to organize a fight for a larger share of the economic resources of the United States. In a move to establish a national organization, a call was sent out to other cities for representation; and a meeting was scheduled for June 10, 1950 in Chicago. Robeson, one of the organizers, gave a benefit concert in New York to help finance the Chicago meeting. The purpose of the Chicago meeting was to launch a more militant attack on job discrimination than had been undertaken by other existing organizations. The 900 delegates, black and white, were told that they had a common fight against a common enemy, in Robeson’s keynote address entitled ‘Forge Negro Labor Unity for Peace and Jobs’:

‘Here we are gathered together the basic forces, the Negro sons and daughters of labor and their white brothers and sisters, whose increasingly active attention to national and world affairs is an essential requirement if we are to have peaceful and democratic solutions to the burning issues of our times.

. . . Who built this land? Who have been the guarantors of our historic democratic tradition of freedom and equality? Whose labor have produced the great cities, the industrial machines, the basic culture and creature comforts of which our voice of America spokesmen talk so proudly about? It is well to remember that the America we know has arisen out of the toil of many millions who have come here seeking freedom, from all parts of the world. The Irish and Scotch indentured servants, who cleared the forests and built the colonial homesteads, were a part of the productive backbone of our early days. The millions of German immigrants, of the mid-nineteenth century, the millions more from eastern Europe, whose blood and sacrifices, in the steel mills, the coal mines and factories made possible the industrial revolution of the 1880s and 1890s.

. . . The workers from Mexico and the east, Japan and the Philippines, helped to make the west and the southwest a fruitful land. And through it all, from the earliest days, before Columbus, the Negro people, upon whose unpaid toil, as slaves, created the basic wealth of which this nation was built. These are the forces that have made America great and preserved our democratic heritage. . . .’

The delegates established continuation committees to organize local councils throughout the United States before the next annual meeting. They chose "National Negro Labor Council" (NNLC) as the name of their organization. . . ."

Robeson: Labor’s Forgotten Champion by Dr. Charles Wright

"Last Friday in Mandel Hall Paul Robeson sang and spoke. Words and music were in perfect harmony.

His songs were drawn from the Negro people in America, the partisans of the Warsaw ghetto, and the Chinese revolution. He also performed some of his standard favorites: ‘Love Will Find a Way,’ ‘Scandalized My Name,’ and ‘Old Man River.’ The last of these was sung with the words Robeson has made famous–‘. . . must keep fightin’ until I’m dyin’. . . .’

The tonality of his speech was identical. Robeson explained why he has become a member of the ‘progressive’ movement in America. He told of his travels throughout the world, of the conditions of the Negro in America, and of the colonial revolutions of the Asian and African peoples.

The most important platform of progressives, he emphasized, is peace, for without peace there can be no improvement in the lot of any people. This idea paralleled a song that he sang about the four rivers: the Mississippi, the Thames, the Yangtze, and the Don. . . .

He said that neither the American Legion nor any other group could deprive him of his right to speak, won with three hundred years of struggle by his people."

Chicago Maroon, 11/10/50

"‘It is a conspiracy,’ charged the Greater Chicago Negro Labor Council, ‘vicious, calculated conspiracy to silence the great artist and leader of the Negro people, Paul Robeson. It is a conspiracy to violate the basic rights of all Americans–the freedom of speech and assembly.’

This charge was leveled against federal, state and city authorities this week by the Council after repeated efforts of the Council and Committee for the Negro in the Arts to secure an adequate place in which to hold the birthday celebration of Paul Robeson with a festival of songs. . . .

Originally Robeson’s concert was scheduled to be held at Tabernacle Baptist Church [Rev. Louis Rawls, pastor–ed.]. The committee felt that it was fitting that a man, who had spent much of his life in the fight for the rights of his people, should celebrate his birthday in the greatest of Negro institutions–the church.

However, outside forces brought pressure upon the pastor of that church–pressure of such character as to make it impossible for him to go through with his plans to permit the Robeson concert to take place. . . ."

Chicago World, 5/31/52

[Efforts to secure the auditorium at DuSable and Wendel Phillips High Schools were also denied–ed.]