2012 (12A, 157 min)

Stars: John Cusack, Chiwetel Ejiofor, Amanda Peet, Tom McCarthy, Thandie Newton, Danny Glover, Liam James, Morgan Lily, Woody Harrelson

Directed by Roland Emmerich

7/10: epic fun

ACCORDING to this new film by director Roland Emmerich our time on earth will come to a dramatic end on December 2, 2012, when planets align as decreed by the Mayan calendar.

So there’s no point worrying about the London Olympics then.

Let’s call the whole thing off and instead channel all of the billions into endless parties.

If the end of days is truly upon us, we may as well go out with a bang.

And that’s certainly what Emmerich does in his gloriously overblown and knowingly trashy disaster epic.

Having previously destroyed all the major cities during an alien invasion (Independence Day) and plunged the globe back into the Ice Age (The Day After Tomorrow), the German-born film-maker goes one better in 2012 by attempting to wipe out the entire human race.

Every nickel and dime of the reported £155m budget is up there on the screen as he wreaks carnage on a jaw-dropping, logic-defying, grand scale.

It’s unabashedly silly, yet exhilarating, as Emmerich follows one dazzling special-effects sequence with another, upping the ante as he gleefully references all of the disaster movie cliches.

Limousine driver Jackson Curtis (John Cusack) is one of the heroes of the hour, joining estranged wife Kate (Amanda Peet), her new boyfriend Gordon (Tom McCarthy) and the children Noah and Lilly as they flee the US West Coast.

The survivors head for Yellowstone Park in search of a conspiracy theorist (Woody Harrelson), who claims to know about a secret government plot to save mankind from disaster.

Meanwhile, President Thomas Wilson (Danny Glover) pushes ahead with a covert plan to build giant arks in China that will save those with the biggest wallets.

His daughter Laura (Thandie Newton), slippery Chief Of Staff Carl Anheuser and scientific advisor Adrian Helmsley (Chiwetel Ejiofor) join the thrill ride.

2012 is two-and-a-half hours of pure, adrenaline-fuelled entertainment.

There’s nothing sophisticated or remotely plausible about Emmerich’s apocalyptic vision: for the first special effects-laden sequence, Jackson manages to outrun a giant earthquake in his limo and even drives through a skyscraper as it collapses around the vehicle.

Co-screenwriter Harald Kloser introduces a dog in distress, a greedy Russian billionaire who shot-putts his son to safety, and a glimpse of our Queen arriving at one of the arks, clutching two corgis.

Cusack and his co-stars constantly seem to be a smirk away from showing how much they are enjoying this big-budget extravaganza, striking a final note of wistful self-reflection with a rallying cry from Ejiofor’s man with a conscience that leaves you feeling all warm and fuzzy.