Wikipedia as a credible source for your research paper?

Although Wikipedia is a good place to start your research, it is not a credible source you should cite in your research papers. Wikipedia allows all kinds of different users to edit, and it is not safe to assume that the facts presented there have been checked before publishing them. Wikipedia's policy does say that references should be used whenever possible, but the quality of these references is questionable because people who are not experts in a field can update a page anytime to reflect whatever information they feel to be true and even back it up with heavily biased sources.

Wikipedia is not the only user-created encyclopedia. Wiki sites, too, are not credible sources. They exist on a variety of topics, so pretty much anything with the word “wiki” appearing in the title or link should be avoided.

That said, Wikipedia entries are generally at the forefront of any web research. They can be great sources for preliminary information on a topic and finding reliable sources through their notes, references, external links, and further reading sections. Here's how you can use Wikipedia for your research:

Getting background information

Wikipedia can be great for your first research on a topic. It has such a broad subject matter available, and it can connect you to further research on the subject.

Generating keywords and search terms

The hardest part of your research can sometimes be finding the right keywords to use when searching libraries or databases. Reviewing a Wikipedia article for terms that could be relevant to your own research can bring many clues and lead your research in new directions.

Many articles have a list of external links at the bottom. These can be sites with further information, and often, those are credible sources that can be used to cite from.

References

Make sure always to check the references section at the bottom of the article. It links to the various sources used when the article was put together. These sources can be useful for your own research and can also inform you of the reliability of the article on Wikipedia.

Frequently Asked Questions about Wikipedia as a credible source