Are you an EPFL student looking for a semester project?

Work with us on data science and visualisation projects, and deploy your project as an app on top of GraphSearch.

Learn more about Graph Apps.

Noah Lewis "Ned" Pines (December 10, 1905 – May 14, 1990) was an American publisher of pulp magazines, comic books, and paperback books, active from at least 1928 to 1971. His Standard Comics imprint was the parent company of the comic-book lines Nedor Publishing and Better Publications, the most prominent character of which was the superhero the Black Terror. Pines also established the paperback book publisher Popular Library, which eventually merged with Fawcett Publications. Pines was born in Malden, Massachusetts, the son of Joseph and Dora Goldes Pines. He had two brothers, Robert A. Pines, who would work with Ned in publishing, and Kermit L. Pines, who became a doctor; and a sister, Lillian. Their father, a native of Russia, had settled in the Boston, Massachusetts, area and founded the Pines Rubber Company, of which he was president for 26 years before retiring sometime prior to his death in 1930, at age 57, at his home in Brooklyn, New York City, New York. Pines was president and owner of the Manhattan company Pines Publications, which he established in 1928, remaining as president until 1961. He published pulp magazines and other periodicals under a variety of company names, including Thrilling Publications, with pulp magazines that included Thrilling Western, The Lone Eagle, and Thrilling Wonder Stories. His Collegian Press, Inc. bought the existing magazine College Humor from Dell Publishing by the mid-1930s, publishing it through 1942. In mid-1936, Pines refuted a claim by the Cartoonists Guild of America that College Humor had not agreed to pay the $15 Guild minimum, payable within 30 days, for drawings by Guild members. In October 1952, his Standard Magazines purchased Silver Screen and Screenland from the Henry Publishing company. Pines added comic books to the mix in 1939 with the publishing imprint Standard Comics, which became in turn the parent company of two comic-book lines: Better Publications and Nedor Publishing. Collectors and historians sometimes refer to them collectively as "Standard/Better/Nedor".