The mausoleum in Santos (Brazilian state of São Paulo), where Pelé is buried, was opened to the public on Monday (15).

The Sportsman of the Century died of multiple organ failure on December 29, 2022, at 82.

The “Soccer King” body is buried in the Memorial Necropolis Ecumenical vertical cemetery.

The visitation can be done in two periods. In the morning, from 09:00 to 12:00, and in the afternoon, from 14:00 to 18:00 local time.

To visit the mausoleum, a free registration is required on the Memorial’s website.

Around 30 members of the “Torcida Jovem do Santos” (Santos FC fan group) were on hand Monday to once again pay their respects to the “Soccer King”.

The fans sang the club anthem and became very emotional at the site.

Reservations are made through Memorial’s website. You can choose the day and time, morning or afternoon.

Right now, the number of visitors is limited to 30 in the morning and 30 in the afternoon.

There is no limit to visiting hours; you can pay your respects at your leisure and visit the entire structure – explains Paulo Campos, commercial director of the Memorial.

Edinho, Pelé’s son, represented the family at the opening of the mausoleum to the public.

He explained that throughout his life, he and the other family members had to understand that his father also belonged to the whole world.

“It is a reason for great joy and gratitude for so much veneration and love that people have shown and expressed to him.”

“All of us who belong to the immediate family circle have had to understand during our lives that he does not belong 100% to us.”

“He belongs to the world.”

“It was not always so easy. But once again, we must share an intimate, delicate moment with everyone.”

“But at the same time, this love and care helps us bear the pain and sadness.”

“We also share that pain and sadness with everyone.”

“It’s a mixture of feelings. But in the end, there is pride.”

“Pride in this history that goes on and on.”

The mausoleum was the idea of the cemetery owner.

Pelé had already purchased space on the ninth floor of the vertical cemetery in 2003 in honor of his father, Dondinho, who wore jersey number nine during his playing days.

Pelé’s tombstone faces the Vila Belmiro, the stage of the great moments in the King’s career.

The stadium is 850 meters from the gravesite.

However, the family and the cemetery agreed that Pelé would be buried in the mausoleum for logistical reasons and public access.

Designed by Pepe Altstut, the Memorial’s owner, the mausoleum is 200 m2 and houses two life-size brass statues of Pelé.

On the walls, a large photo simulates Santos fans, and the floor is covered with artificial grass.

The tomb is covered with golden aluminum panels and has four panels, two of which represent Pelé’s goals and the other two the celebration with the traditional jump in the air.

There are also cornerstones in the four corners of the tomb in the shape of the Jules Rimet trophy, a jersey with the number 10, and a crown.

The mausoleum also displays the sky blue over Pelé’s grave and the Brazilian national team and Santos jerseys.

Visitors can also see the Mercedes Benz S-280 the manufacturer gave Pelé in 1974 to commemorate his 1,000th goal.

The car is on display in the cemetery’s vehicle museum.

Brazil news, English news Brazil, Brazilian soccer, Pelé