Even now, after all these years, I can close my eyes and transport myself back to 2004 and those goose-bump nights at The Palace of Auburn Hills.

Sure, the basketball was great. The joyride those “Goin' to Work” Pistons took us all on that season was epic. I can easily conjure up the drama of that season, the Rasheed Wallace trade, the soap opera that always attended Larry Brown, the unwavering leadership of Chauncey Billups and the indominable force that Ben Wallace became.

But what hits me when I reflect back, what connects me, really, to those times, is more about the atmosphere of that arena at that time. That seemingly organic and spontaneous crescendo of energy and excitement that started slowly but once the playoffs started threatened to blow the roof off that not-so-old barn.

I’ve been covering sports in this city for a long time. No event, no environment — including Michael Jordan’s championships in Chicago — caused the hair to stand up on my arms like being courtside at The Palace in 2003-2004.

It was a total sensory overload. It wasn’t a corporate fan base then, not yet. It was a young, vibrant, almost grassroots fan base that completely wrapped their arms around that team — similar, probably, to what we saw at Ford Field this past winter — and their spirit, their all-in enthusiasm rocked the building.

But there was so much more going on. Do you remember? It wasn’t just the pyrotechnics. It wasn’t just the booming voice of public address announcer John Mason intoning “Deeetroit basketball” or “Chauncey b-b-b-Billups.”

The music and sound effects were so sharp, so savvy and so much a part of the fabric of that experience. Remember Ben Wallace’s gong? Remember “yessir” every time Rip Hamilton made a bucket? Remember the Prince song that played every time Tayshuan Prince made a block, steal or basket? Remember “Mr. Big Shot” every time Billups drained a three?

Remember how intense even the pregame intro was with “The Final Countdown” blaring and synced expertly to Mason’s extended exaltations?

It was fresh and it was wonderful and it was every night.

And, sadly, the man who was responsible for infusing so much of that color and nuance into that tapestry is no longer with us.

Steve Conway, who served as the arena DJ at The Palace from 1993 to 2013, died Sunday at the age of 58.

“He was a major factor in all of that,” said Pete Skorich, who was the executive director of broadcasting, game presentation and multi-media for Palace Sports and Entertainment and played a role in hiring Conway. “An arena DJ can take you to new heights and he definitely did that.

“He had such an incredible feel for not only the game, but the personalities within the game. And he did a lot of what I would call now, sonic branding of players and of the Detroit Pistons.”

The gong sound became synonymous with Ben Wallace. The “ball don’t lie" sound byte became a tag for Rasheed Wallace, just as “yessir” and “Mr. Big Shot” were for Hamilton and Billups. My faulty memory is probably leaving some good ones out, too.

“He was just so on top of it,” Skorich said. “It was funny; our philosophy was, we were never mean to opponents. We were very respectful to the NBA. But every once in a while, when an opposing team would shoot an airball, you could hear that downward whistle just buried in the background; not super loud, but you could hear it.”

That describes Conway, too. He was not super loud. He wasn’t well known outside of that Palace circle. But he was gregarious and clever, sneaky funny, and he was kind and so creative in his realm.

“Like the best arena DJ’s, Steve had the best recall of the right song at the right time,” said Stan Fracker, who was the director of productions at the Palace then and brought Conway to the Tigers and Comerica Park in 2013. “It’s a real skill and Steve definitely had it. He was just inventive, and he had an ear for what felt right at the moment.

“And it all came together in 2004 with that particular team. Because we had so many characters on that team that lent themselves to Steve’s abilities.”

Conway was firing up the Mr. Big Shot song before anybody else was calling Billups that. He picked up on it the previous year before Billups fully grew into that reputation.

“He just had the ear for it and those things became part of their persona,” Fracker said. “Between him and Mason, they made for an incredible atmosphere. It was fun and it almost seems improvisational, but a lot of thought goes into it.”

Another Conway innovation at The Palace was amplifying the rims. That was being done for television broadcasts, but not in-house. Not for the arena itself.

“Yeah, he mic’d the rims so that fans in the arena could hear the ball swishing through the net or clanking off the rim,” Skorich said. “Just little nuances that really brought the game to life in-venue. That was stuff they did for TV, but he somehow managed to pull it off in the arena without drawing feedback through the speakers.”

The audio room at The Palace was hallowed ground. It was Conway’s lair. He was one of the rare, maybe the only at that time, DJ who operated his own audio board.

“Nobody does that,” Skorich said. “Usually there is an engineer running the board and the DJ is just the DJ. But we didn’t know what we didn’t know at the time (laughing). Probably shouldn’t have been doing that, but he did it great.”

If you were lucky enough to visit that room, you didn’t forget it.

“So many people have come forward and said their favorite part of that tour was being brought up to his sound room,” said Steve’s wife, Stacey. “He would always make it fun for them and make you feel like you were part of the show.

“He gave them memories they will never forget.”

If Conway saw Kid Rock or Eminem or Bob Seger or any other Detroit luminary in the house, he’d be sure to play good sampling of their music. He didn’t miss a trick.

George Blaha, the voice of the Pistons since 1976, told Conway once that he was going on road trip to Memphis to see Graceland. Conway whipped him up a mix tape to get him in the mood along the way.

He’d do the same for all his buddies on the Palace and Comerica Park crews, the cameramen and women, the technicians, the engineers, producers and directors and even the occasional sportswriter — he was beloved.

“We’ve had such a huge community of support,” Stacey said. “I can’t thank everyone enough. It meant a lot to Steve and to me.”

Conway’s health, never great — he was a Type I diabetic and had open-heart surgery when he was in his 40s — deteriorated rapidly after he got COVID in 2020.

“He fought to the end,” Stacey said. “He was a fighter and he beat the odds every time.”

The official cause of death was kidney failure. Conway had asked to go off dialysis.

“Before all of this, his kidney doctor told him, ‘If you get COVID, you will not survive,’” Stacey said. “He told me to protect him, to do everything you can to keep him from getting the disease. Then he got it and he survived.

“What an incredible fighter he was.”

The fight was brutal. He was in a coma for a month. He lost the use of his arms and legs. Eventually he regained strength in his arms, but he needed a walker to get around the last few years. He was moved to eight different hospitals and rehab facilities for a full year.

Finally, in 2021, he came home.

“He spent the rest of his days in a hospital bed in the living room,” Stacey said. “And he was happy. He really was. He loved to laugh. He was a funny guy. Cheerful and happy to the end. He just wanted to be with his family and he was.”

Conway is survived by Stacey, their two daughters Emma (25) and Molly (23), plus his sister Lisa who lives in Oregon. The family is hosting an open house and celebration of Steve’s life from 1-4 p.m. Saturday at 1740 Kirkton, Drive, in Troy.

On May 19, Skorich, former sportscaster and broadcaster Eli Zaret, who visited Conway just about every week since he’d gotten home, and a large group of his former Palace teammates and friends visited him for what ended up being the last time.

“We had a good visit with him,” Skorich said. “He was totally with it. We had a great conversation and kind of went through his career. We talked about how wonderful his timing was. I told him, ‘Steve, you’re the greatest of all time in this spectrum of arena DJing.’ And he really was. We had him doing stuff that arena DJ’s don’t do.”

chris.mccosky@detroitnews.com

@cmccosky