Suns power forward Markieff Morris has known Rasheed Wallace since he was a preteen. Wallace was several years into a long NBA career after excelling at Philadelphia’s Simon Gratz High – to which Morris and his twin brother, Marcus, would matriculate – and at about age 10 or 11 the Morris brothers played for a club team run by Wallace’s foundation.

“We always keep in contact,” Morris said. “He’s like a big brother.”

Wallace’s mentoring of Morris continues. The mission this summer was for the 6-10 Wallace to help the similarly towering Morris with his 3-point shooting.

Wallace shot 33.6 percent from behind the arc over his 16-year career. He averaged nearly three attempts per game. The 26-year-old Morris attempted 179 3s last season – 2.2 per game – and hit just 31.8 percent of them, ranking him 16th out of 19 qualified power forwards.

He wants a better percentage, and would like to get closer to Wallace’s volume, with a goal of about 240 attempts per season.

The key, Wallace has told him, is to shoot when he’s ready. Don’t rush the shot, being sure to bring the ball to his shooting pocket before letting loose.

“Just take your time,” Morris said. “That’s mainly what I’ve been working on.”

It seemed to pay off in the preseason. Morris attempted 17 shots from distance – mostly at the top of the key or near the right timeline – and made nearly 44 percent of them. But Suns coach Jeff Hornacek doesn’t want Morris to rely on the 3-pointer too much.

“His strength is taking it strong inside, and we need him to be inside,” Hornacek said. “We need him to draw fouls and we need to put teams in the penalty. If we’re shooting nothing but jump shots, we’ll never get to the penalty or to the free-throw line.”

There are limits to what Morris will ask Wallace to help him with, though. The young forward was second in the NBA with 15 technical fouls last year, and tied for sixth with 12 a year before that.

Wallace was notorious for his ability to rack up techs – he had an NBA-record 41 one year before a league rule change mandated a suspension after 16 – but Morris doesn’t want to emulate that part of his mentor’s game.

“I haven’t (asked him about technicals) because that would be the wrong thing to do,” Morris joked. “His entire career he was getting techs. I’m still young and I’ve got a chance to empty that out of my career.”

Remembering Flip

Longtime Minnesota Timberwolves coach Flip Saunders died of cancer on Sunday, and Suns assistant coach Jerry Sichting couldn’t help but be emotional when remembering his colleague and friend a day later.

Sichting and Saunders broke into the league together with the Timberwolves in 1995, Saunders as general manager and Sichting as scouting director. Early in the season, Saunders also took over as coach and brought Sichting to the bench with him.

The pair spent 10 years together in Minnesota, and while the rigors of NBA life made spending quality time together difficult after they went their separate ways, Sichting said they would fall back into their friendship and share old stories when they crossed paths.

“That first year we moved to Minnesota we were staying in the same hotel and just living downtown until we brought our families there,” Sichting said. “I hung out with him almost every night.”