Joan Geraldine Bennett (February 27, 1910 – December 7, 1990) was an American stage, film, and television actress. Besides acting on the stage, Bennett appeared in more than 70 films from the era of silent movies, well into the sound era. She is possibly best-remembered for her film noir femme fatale roles in director Fritz Lang's movies such as Man Hunt (1941), The Woman in the Window (1944), and Scarlet Street (1945). Bennett's career had three distinct phases: first as a winsome blonde ingenue, then as a sensuous brunette femme fatale (with looks that movie magazines often compared to those of Hedy Lamarr), and finally as a warmhearted wife-and-mother figure. In 1951, Bennett's screen career was marred by scandal after her third husband, film producer Walter Wanger, shot and injured her agent Jennings Lang. Wanger suspected that Lang and Bennett were having an affair, a charge which she adamantly denied. Bennett married four times. In the 1960s, she achieved success for her portrayal of Elizabeth Collins Stoddard on TV's Dark Shadows, for which she received an Emmy nomination (1968). For her final movie role, as Madame Blanc in Dario Argento's cult horror film Suspiria (1977), she received a Saturn Award nomination. In her New York Times obituary, she was said to be "... one of the most underrated actresses of her time".

David Niven, a name synonymous with the golden age of Hollywood, was born on March 1, 1910, in London, England. He was a charismatic and versatile actor who became one of the most recognizable faces in film during the mid-20th century. Niven's early life was marked by adversity; he lost his father during World War I and was expelled from several schools. Despite these challenges, he managed to secure a place at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, which set the stage for his future career. Niven joined the British army upon graduation but left in the mid-1930s to pursue an acting career. His charm and good looks quickly caught the attention of Hollywood producers, and he made his film debut in 1935. Over the next three decades, Niven starred in over ninety films, including classics like The Pink Panther, Around the World in 80 Days, and Separate Tables, for which he won an Academy Award for Best Actor. His roles were marked by his quintessential Englishness, which made him a favorite among American audiences. Aside from his acting career, Niven demonstrated remarkable courage during World War II. He returned to the British army and served with distinction, rising to the rank of lieutenant colonel. After the war, he resumed his acting career and also became a successful author, penning two witty and candid autobiographies. David Niven passed away on July 29, 1983, leaving behind a legacy that continues to inspire actors and audiences alike.

Akira Kurosawa (Kyūjitai: 黒澤 明, Shinjitai: 黒沢 明 Kurosawa Akira; March 23, 1910 – September 6, 1998) was a Japanese film director and screenwriter, who directed 30 films in a career spanning 57 years. He is regarded as one of the most important and influential filmmakers in the history of cinema. Kurosawa entered the Japanese film industry in 1936, following a brief stint as a painter. After years of working on numerous films as an assistant director and scriptwriter, he made his debut as a director during World War II with the popular action film Sanshiro Sugata (a.k.a. Judo Saga). After the war, the critically acclaimed Drunken Angel (1948), in which Kurosawa cast then-unknown actor Toshiro Mifune in a starring role, cemented the director's reputation as one of the most important young filmmakers in Japan. The two men would go on to collaborate on another 15 films. Rashomon, which premiered in Tokyo, became the surprise winner of the Golden Lion at the 1951 Venice Film Festival. The commercial and critical success of that film opened up Western film markets for the first time to the products of the Japanese film industry, which in turn led to international recognition for other Japanese filmmakers. Kurosawa directed approximately one film per year throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, including a number of highly regarded (and often adapted) films, such as Ikiru (1952), Seven Samurai (1954) and Yojimbo (1961). After the 1960s he became much less prolific; even so, his later work—including his final two epics, Kagemusha (1980) and Ran (1985)—continued to win awards, though more often abroad than in Japan. In 1990, he accepted the Academy Award for Lifetime Achievement. Posthumously, he was named "Asian of the Century" in the "Arts, Literature, and Culture" category by AsianWeek magazine and CNN, cited there as being among the five people who most prominently contributed to the improvement of Asia in the 20th century. His career has been honored by many retrospectives, critical studies and biographies in both print and video, and by releases in many consumer media formats.