Angela Hinkle, 29, studied public relations and event planning at Iowa State University, even considering a career as a wedding planner. Angela’s background was particularly helpful as she planned the wedding and coordinated the day of!

Blair Hinkle, 30, attended the University of Missouri where he met his friend Corwin Mackey, who gave him $30 to try to play poker online. After Blair turned $30 into more money, he realized he was pretty good at online poker and soon Blair dropped out of college to focus on playing poker full time. Now, he is a professional poker player and has been for about eight years, winning his first tournament during the World Series of Poker in 2008.

Angela and Blair went to the same high school and had many mutual friends but didn’t actually meet until their junior year of college. “Over winter break we both came home from college and a mutual high school friend had a party at her house,” Angela reminisces. “We met and played some card games. He asked for my number and we went on our first date just a few days later!”

In January 2014, Angela and Blair had just closed on their first home, but hadn’t moved in yet; Blair used the empty home to his best advantage. “He tricked me into thinking we needed to stop by the house before going out to dinner,” laughs Angela. “The house was empty except for flowers and a scrapbook. I thought he was just celebrating us getting a new home! We looked through the scrapbook of photos, notes, tickets, cards, and seven years of memories. Then he showed me the rest of the blank pages and told me, ‘We will fill them with our future,’ kneeled, pulled out the ring, and asked me to marry him! I was completely surprised and of course I said ‘Yes!’ The first call I made was to my dad and I found out that Blair had already talked to him to get his blessing. Blair did everything to make it such a special and memorable moment for both of us!”

The blissful couple tied the knot on May 9, 2015. Angela’s Matron of Honor was Katie Halls; bridesmaids were dear friends Alix Cox, Magann Orth and Amanda Wallace. Blair chose Blake Cahail as Best Man; groomsmen were his brothers, Grant, Taylor and Mason Hinkle. Matt Donaldson, Corwin Mackey and Chris Juul served as ushers. Ring bearers were Ben Hinkle and Jackson Hinkle, and flower girl was Lily Hinkle.

“Our wedding day was special and fun,” Angela smiles. “The wedding party stayed at the beautiful Hotel Ambassador for the weekend. The girls played badminton as we got ready. They had helped make decorations for the reception, especially for our selfie photo booth, with its creative backdrop, and handmade seed packet favors for guests.

“Blair’s Uncle Mike designed and created my engagement ring, his Uncle Kelly officiated the wedding, and Katie was such a wonderful part of the day even while being a new mom to a two-month-old baby girl! The Patrick Lentz Band sang live at our ceremony and reception, playing ‘I Will Wait’ by Mumford and Sons for our first dance, which turned from a slow dance to a swing dance! Our guests didn’t expect it and neither did we! We invited our guests back to the hotel bar for an after party, where everyone had a great time continuing the celebration.”