Matt was a dedicated and accomplished Quiz Bowler throughout his college career. As an undergraduate at Iowa State, he participated in tournaments throughout the country. He had continued to be active in Quiz Bowl and had just completed his first semester of graduate study at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, when he suddenly contracted acute pancreatitis. He died on January 2, 2005.

We began our buzzer grant program in 2005, hoping to continue Matt's love for Quiz Bowl and to help make it possible for Middle and High School students to participate with all of the requisite equipment. Our program has grown to also include Elementary School students and Home School students who participate on an organized Academic Team.

If you would like to be considered for a Matt's Buzzers Grant in December 2024, please complete and submit the application found on our 'Application' page. If you are having problems submitting the application through our website, please email the contact information for your school, coach and team to mattsbuzzers@gmail.com. We would also love to hear a little bit about your school and your team. Thank you so much! Our grants will be $250 per team. We plan to select ten teams to receive grants. Our 2024/2025 selections will be made on Saturday, December 7, 2024.

We will again award an additional buzzer grant in memory of Matt's dad Mike who died on July 25,2017 after a nearly yearlong battle with head & neck cancer. On November 20, 2024 (Matt's birthday) we will select two teams to receive grants. These selections will be made by Matt's mom from funds given in memory of Mike. We have also been fortunate to receive donations from several other individuals and organizations which will allow us to award this additional buzzer grant. Thank you all so much.

Because there will, unfortunately, be many teams who do not receive a grant but who are in need of a buzzer system, we have partnered with a former Quiz Bowler named Andrew who has begun purchasing used buzzer systems that he will repair/refurbish and offer to teams who are still in need on a ‘pay as you will’ basis. I believe that this is a great opportunity for teams to get a buzzer system at little or no cost and get your teams the valuable practice that would help them better prepare for tournaments. We have, therefore, added a question to the bottom of our application asking whether or not your school would be interested in this opportunity if you are not selected for one of our grants.

Andrew is also looking for a person or persons who would be willing and able to help with the repair of some of these used systems. The repairs would include “basic repair (usually to power cords and buzzer cords and the like)”. If you or someone you know is interested in doing this please let me know. It would be great to get this ‘second chance’ opportunity going and keep it going.

Please check our Facebook page for news and updates as the school year progresses.