AS Roma reached the Europa Conference League final with a 2-1 aggregate victory over Leicester City and will go on to face Feyenoord in the final at the Arena Kombëtare in Tirana on 25 May. Roma have waited 31 years to reach another European final – the last time being the 1990-91 UEFA Cup, where they lost to Serie A rivals Inter 2-1 over the course of a two-legged tie staged in Italy – and José Mourinho shed a tear of delight when the whistle sounded in the Stadio Olimpico. It hasn’t all been plain sailing for Mourinho’s side in the inaugural season of the competition, with the Giallorossi suffering what the Portuguese manager described as the “worst defeat of my career” when his side were thrashed 6-1 at Bodø/Glimt. Now, Roma have decided to reward the 166 fans who made the trip to the Aspmyra Stadium to witness that mauling by handing them free tickets to the Conference League final.

The Arena Kombëtare only holds 22,000 spectators so demand for tickets to witness Roma back in a European final – for a new generation of fans their first chance to do so – will be at a premium. As such, Roma have gone one step further by organizing a giveaway for the remainder of season ticket-holders at the Stadio Olimpico.

Roma to hand out allocation for final for free

Instead of selling the prized tickets in the usual way, Roma have announced that they will give them away in a sort of raffle, with season ticket holders simply needing to register on the club’s official website. After the draw, those fans lucky enough to have won will receive an email with a free ticket for what could be a historic night for Roma.

The Serie A side have not won anything since the 2007-08 Coppa Italia and who have had to play 14 games to reach a European final for the first time in three decades. It will also be a game keenly followed in Italy as a whole, with no Serie A side winning a UEFA club competition since 2010, when Mourinho led Inter Milan to the Champions League title by beating Bayern Munich 2-0 at the Bernabéu.