Stadio Olimpico, 24 April 1991: UEFA Cup semi-final, second leg.

A scrappy, hard-fought match played on a muddy pitch that was barely playable in parts and began with the tie at 0-0 after the first leg in Brondbyvester two weeks earlier.

A goalless draw in the away leg was a decent result but Roma certainly didn't feel comfortable going into the return at the Olimpico – and it showed.

The Giallorossi looked tense and were slow out of the blocks, while the visitors had no such hang-ups and nearly scored in the opening minutes.

The turning point came 33 minutes into the game, when Ruggiero Rizzitelli sparked the game into life. Brondby keeper Peter Schmeichel could only beat away Sebastiano Nela's fierce drive and Fabrizio Di Mauro was quickest to react, crossing for Rizzitelli to head into the empty net.

In the 63rd minute Bryan Jensen sent a cross into the box, Giovanni Cervone came out to claim but Antonio Comi got there first, knocking it past the keeper and towards the goal. Nela made a desperate attempt to clear but could only send it into the net, thus making unwanted appearance on the score sheet.

At 1-1 the Danes were going through on away goals until Roma came up with the winner three minutes from time.

Stefano Pellegrini lofted the ball into the area, Thomas Berthold got his head on it but the defence cleared; Stefano Desideri collected the ball and hit a low drive which Schmeichel parried; Rizzitelli and Rudi Voeller were both lurking and the German got there first, smashing the ball into the net to send the Olimpico into raptures – one of the loudest roars ever heard at the stadium.

The Giallorossi held on to claim a vital 2-1 victory and take their place in the UEFA Cup final.

Giovanni Cervone: Born in Brusciano, Campania, the goalkeeper spent eight seasons at Roma. A goalie blessed with technique and character – he would raise a knee when going for crosses to intimidate opponents – but wasn't always the most consistent of performers. Nonetheless, he was a worthy successor to Franco Tancredi, making 246 appearances between 1989 and 1997.

Stefano Pellegrini: Same name but a different player to the Stefano Pellegrini, a striker, who scored Roma's first-ever goal in the UEFA Cup against Dunav Ruse in 1975. This Pellegrini was a defender who had two older brothers, Luca and Davide, who were also footballers. It was his cross that led to Voeller's winner in the semi-final against Brondby. 71 appearances, one goal.

Sebino Nela: The only player in Roma history to have played in two European finals (in 1984 against Liverpool and in 1991 against Inter), he was also a member of Nils Liedholm's Scudetto-winning side of 1982-83. A touch-tackling, fast, powerful defender who started out as a full-back and ended his career as a reliable centre-half. 397 appearances, 19 goals.

Thomas Berthold: Two seasons at Roma after first playing for Verona in Italy. A versatile player who could operate both in defence and midfield. As a Roma player, he won the World Cup with Voeller and Germany in 1990. 87 appearances, five goals.

Aldair Nascimento Santos: One of the greatest defenders of all time, both for Roma and in absolute terms. A lanky gait, sublime technique and a phenomenal sense of position and anticipation. An all-round top-class centre-back who spent 13 years at Roma. 436 appearances, 20 goals.

Antonio Comi: A defender, a midfielder, and even a striker at the start of his career. He won the Coppa Italia with Roma in 1991 and played in the UEFA Cup final the same year, as well as the unfortunate Coppa Italia final against Torino in 1993 – the same season he scored a stunning scissor-kick volley against Ancona at the Olimpico. That was one of his five goals in 135 appearances.

Stefano Desideri: A powerful midfielder, Roma's No.7 in the early '90s and an idol for many younger fans. He possessed a fearsome long-range shot – too hot for Schmeichel to handle in the build-up to the winning goal against Brondby. A Roman who came through the Giallorossi academy. 190 appearances, 32 goals.

Fabrizio Di Mauro: A skilful central midfielder who often wore No.8 on his back and white tape around his ankles. Like Desideri, a product of the Roma youth system. It's just a shame he spent a season at Lazio (1993-94)... 132 appearances, nine goals.

Rudi Voeller: The 'Flying German' inherited Roma's No. 9 from Roberto Pruzzo and carried the Giallorossi into the UEFA Cup final in 1991 with 10 goals in 12 games. A master marksman, he netted 68 times in 198 total appearances for the club.

Giuseppe Giannini: Il Capitano. The Rome-born midfielder took the armband after Agostino Di Bartolomei. Il Principe carried the team on more than one occasion and lifted the Coppa Italia in 1991. He might have done it again in 1993 had he not been denied by the post in the final against Torino (after scoring a hat-trick of penalties). He was unlucky in the two-legged UEFA Cup final against Inter in 1991 too. His poster was proudly displayed on the wall of many a young Roma fan – including one by the name of Francesco Totti. 437 appearances, 75 goals.