Shook Ones Pt. II is a song released in 1995 by Hip-Hop duo Mobb Deep. The song is available in Fuser and was released as part of the Pass The Beats Pack on November 4th, 2021. It was later made available for individual purchase on February 3rd, 2022.

On December 19th, 2022, the song was delisted along with the game and all other DLC. Following a patch on January 17th, 2023, the song was briefly bugged for Epic Games Store users to be missing in the song selection. The issue was resolved on January 21st, 2023.

It is composed of one drum part, one keys part, one sampler part one vocals part. The beat part samples "Dirty Feet" by Daly-Wilson Big Band. The loop part samples "Jessica" by Herbie Hancock and "Kitty With The Bent Frame" by Quincy Jones.

Used in: N/A

Price: $1.99 (Single) / $8.99 (As part of Pass The Beats Pack)

Official description[]

“Shook Ones. Pt. II” by Mobb Deep hails from the group's 1995 album The Infamous where it served as the lead single. Mobb Deep originated in New York, New York and rose to fame becoming one of the most successful Hip-Hop duos of all time having sold over 3 million records worldwide. This track has made its mark on popular culture having been sampled by world class acts and featured in blockbuster films.

The song was honored by Pitchfork Media with a top 25 spot on their list of Top 200 Tracks of the 90s, and Rolling Stone helped cement its legacy with a spot on the Top 50 Greatest Hip-Hop Songs of All Time. The song is a moving original work that pays homage to some legendary jazz tracks setting a complex and effective musical foundation.

The lead vocal disc boasts a distinctive lyrical style that has the potential for impressive emotional impact when blended with contrasting genres. The sample on the lead instrument disc maintains a near industrial style that has strong potential for Dance or EDM mixes. The resonant bass is sparse and lays a solid base for the rest of the arrangement to shine. The drum disc sustains the 90’s Hip-Hop style of the song as well as contributes to the free and easy nature of the track.

Lyrics[]

*Asterisks signify that the previous note is continued at the start of the measure.

Main Structure[]

PART 1 01 - heard of us, official Queensbridge murderers / The Mobb comes equipped for warfare, beware / Of my 02 - crime family who got 'nough shots to share / For all of those who wanna profile and pose 03 - Rock you in your face, stab your brain with your nose bone / You all alone in these streets, cousin 04 - Every man for they self in this land we be gunnin' / And keep them shook crews runnin', like they supposed to PART 2 05 - They come around, but they never come close to / I can see it inside your face, you're in the 06 - wrong place / Cowards like you just get they whole body laced up / With bullet holes and such 07 - Speak the wrong words, man, and you will get touched / Take these words home and think it through 08 - Or the next rhyme I write might be about you (Son, they shook) / 'Cause ain't no such things as halfway PART 3 09 - crooks / Scared to death, scared to look, they shook / 'Cause ain't no such things as halfway 10 - crooks / Scared to death, scared to look, they shook / 'Cause ain't no such things as halfway 11 - crooks / Scared to death, scared to look, they shook / 'Cause ain't no such things as halfway 12 - crooks (crooks) / Livin' the life that of diamonds and guns / There's numerous PART 4 13 - ways you can choose to earn funds / So some get shot, locked down, and turn nuns 14 - Cowardly hearts and straight up shook ones, shook ones / He ain't a crook, son 15 - He's just a shook one 16 - I got you stuck off the realness, we be the infamous / You

Riser[]

01 - to all the killers and a hundred dollar billers 02 - to all the killers and a hundred dollar billers 03 - to all the killers and a hundred dollar billers 04 - -we be the infamous / You

See also[]