Lesley Gore (1946-2015) was an American popular singer and songwriter who had major hit singles in the early to mid-1960s, such as the songs "It's My Party," "You Don't Own Me" (regarded as an early feminist anthem), "Judy's Turn To Cry," "Maybe I Know," and "She's A Fool," among others.

Born Lesley Sue Goldstein in Brooklyn, New York, Gore grew up in Tenafly, New Jersey. In 1963, at the age of 16, her voice teacher produced vocal demonstration recordings which came to the attention of the producer Quincy Jones at Mercury Records. Jones immediately recorded her performing "It's My Party," collaborating with the arranger Claus Ogerman. The song became an instant hit, and was Jones's first as a producer. Gore's follow-up singles and albums, with the same team of Jones-Ogerman, continued to have success until 1967. Her mid-1960s hits included two early songs by Marvin Hamlisch, "Sunshine, Lollipops and Rainbows" and "California Nights." Gore was one of the few pre-Beatles recording artists to continue to have hits during the British Invasion of 1964 to 1965.

Gore maintained her career while attending Sarah Lawrence College, from which she graduated in 1968. By that time, the girl-group-style in which she had worked had gone out of fashion, and Mercury dropped her contract by the end of the decade. She maintained her public profile through concert, theater, and nightclub engagements, as well as appearances on film and television. She also publicly supported the presidential campaign of Robert F. Kennedy.

Gore began a more thorough study of music in order to develop her songwriting skills. She moved to California in 1970 and began writing her own songs, either on her own or in collaboration with lyricist Ellen Weston (her partner at the time). Other composers or lyricists with whom she worked over the years included Lou Christie, Howard Greenfield, composer Michael Gore (her younger brother), Benjy King, Gloria Nissenson, and Louis St. Louis.

Gore recorded two albums of material she wrote with Weston, Someplace Else Now (1972) and Love Me By Name (1975, produced by Quincy Jones), but neither sold well. In 1980, she returned to New York and collaborated with her brother Michael, on songs for the Alan Parker film Fame, one of which, "Out Here On My Own," was a hit for Irene Cara, and was nominated for a Grammy for best original song. She released an album of cover material, The Canvas Can Do Miracles, in 1982, and co-wrote the song "My Secret Love" for the film Grace of My Heart (1996).

Gore continued to perform her old songs, as well as newer material, in cabaret and concert appearances, and she also found work in musical theater, such as her 1999 Broadway run in "Smokey Joe's Café." She came out as a lesbian in 2005, and was with her partner, Lois Sasson, for over 30 years. Both were active in causes for women and LGBTQ rights. Gore hosted several episodes of In The Life, a PBS series about LGBTQ people. In 2005, she released her final album, Ever Since, in which she recorded new material and re-interpreted earlier songs such as "You Don't Own Me" and "Out Here On My Own." Gore began work on a memoir in 2007, but it was left unfinished. She died of lung cancer in 2015 in New York City.