Alternative rock is one of newer genres as compared to some other famous genres like; jazz or country. It’s a sub-genre of rock. The genre mainly comprises of a typical rock and roll band setup, 1-2 guitar, Bass, Drums and Vocals.

History

The alternative music scene was not as much inspired by rock music as much as it wanted to break free from the conventional rock music scene. In the 70’s and 80’s. It was the time dominated by the like of led zeppelin and The Beatles and they were considered to be the conventional rock music. The music was referred as to “Classic rock” and it was much loved by the people. The idea was to be not ‘Classic Rock” and stand out of the genre.

“Alternative rock music is really a name given to rock music that didn’t fit any other genre. However, the technical meaning is usually any rock music that descended from punk rock.”

The alternative rock bands mostly use to operate from their own house garages as compared to the big boys of the rock who use to practice at various studio venues. In the 1980s the record companies started to hunt for a new sound and started inviting these new coming generation with a different sound to the ongoing rock scene. For eg: In Hollywood, Jane’s Addiction signed with warner brothers records and made Nothing’s Shocking (1988), an album on which they offered odd guitar tones and disrupted metres as clearly and forcefully as had been done on any classic rock recording. In 1991,, Nirvana released “Smell Like Teen Spirit”. The tones of the distorted guitars and harsh but controlled vocals expanding the horizon of grunge but was partly because of the same movement which gave birth to alternative rock.

Nowadays, bands like Coldplay and Imagine dragons fall under the category of alternative rock but if you compare their music with the bands in the 90’s from the same genre it is so widely different. It is because during the post 90 era technology has played such an important role in producing the sounds that it has totally changed the way we make and listen to music now. The alternative bands in today’s time include more electronic music production techniques. Speaking of which, Let’s talk about the techniques used in such genre

Alternative Rock Artist

R.E.M.

Radiohead

Red Hot Chili Peppers

U2

Nirvana

Mumford & Sons

The Sonics

Foo Fighters

Pearl Jam

Song Structure and Arrangements

Most of the song structures and arrangements in this genre lean heavily towards the conventional rock arrangements.

Intro

Verse

Pre Chorus

Chorus

Verse

Pre Chorus

Chorus

Bridge

Solo

Chorus

Outro (Coda)

Music Characteristics

A lot of music that was considered ‘alternative’ at the time would now be considered ‘mainstream’ eg REM was considered alternative from 1983 to 1987, Nirvana became mainstream pretty soon after ‘Nevermind’ and so on. And as alternative music became more popular in the 90s (becoming mainstream in the US with grunge and Britpop in the UK), it was used as a marketing strategy to make mainstream music more ‘cool’ and ‘edgy’ eg Alanis Morrisette’s first album, a strategy still used today (eg Lana Del Rey).

DISTORTION

From the monotony of rock songs in the previous decades and overuse of synth lines for melodies, bass and even arps. The alternative genre used different tones to the usual tones to develop even harmonic content which was not very popular at that time It also helped them to stand out from the mainstream music. The guitars would usually have distortion pedals, with chorus and flangers on it. Then they would usually double track the guitars and mix it with a clean version to control the grit on the guitars.

DOUBLING

Butch Vig deconstructs Nirvana’s song “In Bloom” You can see him in the video explaining how he uses harmonies and doubling chorus performances using usually the octave technique.

The Real Fake: The first, and most obvious, process was ADT, or automatic double-tracking, which was usually accomplished by using the playback‑head monitor facility of a tape recorder to produce a short ‘slap‑back’ delay. It’s this technique that creates the familiar effect that was used on countless early rock & roll records and was famously exploited by artists such as John Lennon.

You can create the ADT effect easily using modern technology. Simply add a digital delay to the vocal at around the same level as the original part, with a delay time of 80‑120ms, and then turn the feedback control to a minimum so that you get only one repeat.

AUTOMATION

I know it doesn’t sound too interesting but from my personal experience and also after reading 100’s of articles on mixing by pro engineers. It is clear to me that there are no substitutes for fader riding. It stands true especially in a genre like “alternative rock” where there can be heaps of guitar tracks. Rich Costey, the mixing engineer for foo fighters “The Pretender” says in an interview with sound on sound “The other difficulty with ‘The Pretender’ was in getting all the dynamics to work properly. The only way to do this type of mix is to simply do loads and loads of fader rides. I don’t think any amount of EQ can substitute for doing rides.”

I’m sure automation seems like a very obvious choice and hence not is talked about as a major production technique but I’m sure you cannot overlook at the advantages of automation as it paves way for easy implementation of other techniques like; EQ and compression.

Screenshot – Stems of “The Pretender” by Foo Fighters.

In conclusion, I would like to say that my research and analysis have helped me understand that alternative rock is very heavily linked with the classic rock but because the people wanted to experiment with new sound in the era when classic rock was just referred as to “Rock”. Who knows if not for alternative rock, maybe classic rock would still be referred as to rock. Also, these new sounds also lead to other unique sounding genres especially “Grunge”

Some of the arrangement and production techniques are mostly interchangeable but when it comes to the sound of the finished product (Song), the genre dictates the tone and the feel of the music and it would be easy to distinguish an alternative rock song from a rock or other closely knit genres even though they have so much in common.

References

(2018). Retrieved from https://www.britannica.com/art/alternative-rock.

Alternative Music Genres List. (2018). Retrieved from https://www.musicgenreslist.com/music-alternative/

Double-tracking Vocals |. (2018). Retrieved from https://www.soundonsound.com/techniques/double-tracking-vocals