Synopsis

​The award was presented in the shape of a casket containing an engraved copper plaque. It also included a cash prize - a lump sum of Rs 1,00,000.

The names of the recipients of the prestigious Sahitya Akademi Awards were announced on Wednesday.

The list of works that were deemed eligible by the Akademi for awards includes six novels, nine poetry anthologies, five short story collections, three essays, and one literary study.

The award was presented in the shape of a casket containing an engraved copper plaque. It also included a cash prize - a lump sum of Rs 1,00,000.

Here is a list of all the recipients:

Novelist Neelam Saran Gour’s novel ‘Requiem In Raga Janaki’ won the award in the English language category. Set in Allahabad during the British Raj, the novel traces the life and times of Janki Bai Illahabadi, a celebrated singer.

Sanjeev bagged an award in the Hindi language category for the novel ‘Mujhe Pehchano’.

Sadiqua Nawab Saher received an award for the book ‘Rajdev Ki Amari’ (Urdu). Swarnjit Savi won for his poetry anthology ‘Mann Di Chip’ (Punjabi).

Other winners include -

Assamese: Pranavjyoti Deka for the short story collection ‘ Dr Pranavjyoti Dekar Srestha Galpa’

Bengali: Swapnamay Chakrabarti for the novel ‘Jaler Upar Pani’

Bodo: Nandeswar Daimari’s short story collection ‘Jiu-Safarni Dakhwn’ received the prize.

Dogri: Vijay Verma’s poetry book ‘Daun Sadiyan Ek Seer’ won.

Gujarati: Vinod Joshi, ‘Sairandhree’ (Poetry)

Konkani: Prakash S Parienkar’s short story collection ‘Varsai’ was selected.

Maithili: Basukinath Jha’s essay collection ‘Bodha Sanketan’ won big.

Malayalam: E V Ramakrishnan’s in-depth literary study ‘Malayala Novelinte Deshakalangal’ won the award in this category.

Manipuri: Sorokkhaibam Gambhini won for his poetry book ‘Yachangba Nang Hallo’.

Marathi: Krushnat Khot, ‘Ringan’ (novel) won.

Nepali: Judhabir Rana’s essay collection ‘Nepali Loksahitya Ra Loksanskritiko Parichaya’ bagged the award.

Rajasthani: Gaje Singh Rajpurohit, ‘Palakati Preet’ (Poetry)

Sanskrit: Arun Ranjan Mishra’s poetry collection ‘Shunye Meghganam ’ bagged the award in this category.

Santali: Taraceen Baskey’s (Turia Chand Baskey) short story collection ‘Jaba Baha’ won big.

Sindhi: Vinod Asudani, ‘Hathu Pakidijain’ (Poetry)

Tamil: Rajasekaran (Devibharathi), ‘Neervazhi Paduvum’ (Novel)

Telugu: T Patanjali Sastry’s short story anthology ‘Rameshwaram Kaakulu Marikonni Kathalu’ won.

Odia: Ashutosh Parida, ‘Aprastuta Mrutyu’ (Poetry)

Kannada: Lakshmisha Tolpadi, 'Mahabharatha Anusandhanada Bharathayatre' (Essays)

Kashmiri: Manshoor Banihali, 'Yeth Waweh Halay Tsong Kous Zalay' (Poetry)

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

Why a new Sebi paper is making options traders sweat

Spotted a flying saucer? Don’t fret, it’s just doing an e-com delivery.

For multiplex operators like PVR Inox, Cinepolis, is it interval or curtains?

Three reasons why Tata Motors has taken a contrarian view on hybrids

Two things that froze a gold smuggling route

Trump and Harris came to the rescue of this asset. They didn’t see Japan coming around the corner.

1

2

3