Sahitya Akademi has recently announced to give the Sahitya Akademi awards 2023 to writers of 24 Indian languages on 20 December 2023.

Sahitya Akademi 2023 Award for Hindi language has been given to Sanjeev for his novel 'Mujhe Pehchano'.

Neelam Sharan Gaur's novel 'Requiem in Raag Janaki' will be awarded in English language and Sadiqa Nawab Sahar's novel 'Rajdev Ki Amrai' will be given in Urdu language.

This time the literature selected for the awards includes 9 poetry collections, 6 novels, 5 story collections, 3 essays and one criticism.

Sahitya Akademi Award Winners:

Award-winning authors for poetry and their poetry collection-

Vijay Verma (Dogri) – ‘Daun Sadiyaan Ek Seer’

Vinod Joshi (Gujarati) - Tundiltundika Padyavarta

Manshoor Banihali (Kashmiri) - Yeth Waveh Hele Sang Kaus Jele

Sorokhaibam Gambino (Manipuri) - Yachangba Nang Halo

Ashutosh Parida (Odia) - Unexpected Death

Swarnjit Savi (Punjabi) - Man Di Chip

Gajesingh Rajpurohit (Rajasthani) – ‘Palkati Preet’

Arun Ranjan Mishra (Sanskrit) – Shunyaye Meghanam

Vinod Asudani (Sindhi) - Hathu Pakidijain

Award-winning writer for novel-

Swapnamaya Chakraborty (Bengali) - Jaler Up Paani

Krishnat Khot (Marathi) - Ringad

Rajasekaran (Tamil) – Neeravazhi Paduvum

Writer awarded for story collection -

Pranab Jyoti Deka (Assamese) - Shrestha Galpo

Nandeshwar Daimary (Bodo) - Jiu-Safarni Daavn

Tarasin Baski (Santali) - Jaba Baha

Prakash S Paryankar (Konkani) – Varsal

T Patanjali Sastri (Telugu) - Rameshwaram Kakulu Marikonni

Awarded writers for essay -

Lakshmisha Tolpadi (Kannada) - Mahabharata Anushandada Bharatyatre

Basukinath Jha (Maithili) - Understanding Notation

Yudhveer Rana (Nepali) - Introduction to Nepali folklore and folk culture.

Malayalam writer EV Ramakrishnan will be awarded for criticism.

Sahitya Akademi Award:

Sahitya Akademi Award, established in the year 1954, is a literary honour.

This award is presented annually by the Sahitya Akademi (National Academy of Letters).

Apart from the 22 languages included in the Constitution of India, this award is also given in English and Rajasthani.

The Sahitya Akademi Award is the second-highest literary honour conferred by the Government of India after the Jnanpith Award.

The first winner of the Sahitya Akademi Award was RK Narayan, who was given the award in 1960 for his novel 'The Guide'.