Saturday will be a perfect autumn day, ideal for the free community walk and the Harvest Moon Hometown Celebration that follows, the National Weather Service predicts. Walkers can register starting at 10 a.m. in JD Redhouse. The 10,000-step trek (about 5 miles) is scheduled to begin at 11 a.m. Immediately following the walk, the Harvest Moon Celebration will kick off.

“The Harvest Moon Celebration is intended to draw attention to the great bounty of friendship, food and joy to be found here in Willits,” says Chamber of Commerce Executive Director Lynn Kennelly.

Downtown businesses will be open, offering specials, raffles and other goodies to celebrate. A number of booths will line Main Street, some offering local crafts and items and others manned by service clubs offering baked and other treats. The ever-popular prize wheel will be positioned in front of JD Redhouse.

The community walk is designed to allow participants to take part in the entire walk, or to walk as much or as little as desired. Past walks have included all ages, from toddlers and infants in strollers to great-grandparents. Several have even participated in wheelchairs.

Although the NWS is forecasting good weather, the walk will take place rain or shine.

The 10,000-step course takes walkers throughout northern Willits, from Brookside Elementary School, to Baechtel Grove Middle School and Blosser Lane Elementary School, to the ball fields, and back to JD Redhouse for a grand finish.

The walk is taking place on the International Day of Climate Action. Organizers around the planet are finding creative ways to bring the number 350 to the world”s attention. In Willits, the first 350 walk registrants will receive a free T-shirt.

“The goal is to have 350 walkers to represent the 350 parts per million scientists, climate experts, and many national governments say is the safe upper limit for carbon dioxide in the atmosphere,” according to walk organizer Jed Diamond. “We are now almost at 390. Our walk will be one of thousands of events going on throughout the world, including one in Laytonville on October 24, co-sponsored by the group 350.org.”

“We have an historic opportunity here in Willits to add our voice to those of millions of people throughout the world who are committed to a better world for ourselves, our children, and all future generations.

“Come join us for early registration on October 24 at 10 a.m. and be one of the first 350 to receive your T-shirt,” says Diamond. “Bring your friends and family. This is a wonderful way to do something good for yourself, for your community, and for the planet.”