The documentary was made by In Focus Productions and uses archive footage of firefighters, including during the Blitz, when Churchill described fire fighters as ‘Heroes with Dirty Faces’. The film also highlights the 88,000 women ‘who worked on the frontline as well as in control rooms’. Early firefighters worked in appalling conditions under a ‘continuous duty’ system, working with no pensions and near non-existent holiday and sick pay, living in fire stations in cramped conditions with their families.

In a blog post on the FBU website, Tam McFarlane – FBU executive council member for the South West – reviews the documentary.

In 2017, S&C worked with a local firefighter and representative of the Fire Brigade Union to report on the impact of cuts to the fire and rescue service in Hampshire, following an announcement of £4.1 million of cuts to the service in February 2016.

In February 2019, the FBU reported that central government funding for the fire and rescue service is set to fall by £155 million in 2019/2020, representing a 15% cut from 2016/17 to 2019/20, in addition to a 30% cut between 2010 and 2015.

‘It is appalling that the government is trying to sneak through cuts to fire and rescue services with virtually no scrutiny. They are ramping up their austerity measures despite claiming that austerity is over,’ said Matt Wrack.

‘Nearly two years on from the Grenfell Tower fire, this Tory government is still showing a complete disregard for public safety. A properly funded fire and rescue service is essential to protect our communities from fire and a wide range of other threats. These cuts are a danger to firefighters and a danger to the public.’

The urgent need for public understanding and support for the impact of government cuts on the fire and rescue service makes this event perfect viewing for Portsmouth residents keen to show solidarity for local firefighters, and to find out more about the long history of the Fire Brigades Union.

The Firefighters Story will screen at Action Stations, Historic Dockyard from 7pm-10pm on Friday 27th September.

Check out the trailer below – extra points if you spot Cosham Fire Station in there!

Then get the date in your diary and book your tickets at Eventbrite.

Follow Hampshire Fire Brigades Union on Facebook and Twitter.