Amy Brandon: Lysis

Canadian composer Amy Brandon has a penchant for examination of phenomena in her music, finding rarefied beauty in refined and unbridled noise, experimentation with alternate tuning, and innovative …

MetalofonicoJon Nelson & Metalofonico

Trumpeter Jon Nelson releases his second album on New Focus, Metalofonico, a collection of works for brass ensemble with percussion and electric guitar by luminary figures of contemporary composition …

Tina Davidson: Barefoot

For many years, composer Tina Davidson has written music that endeavored to connect with issues larger than herself. Barefoot is no exception, though here Davidson looks inward towards her personal …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS, vol. 33

SEAMUS releases Volume 33 of its ongoing series featuring electro-acoustic works from its member composers. Volume 33 features works from the 2023 SEAMUS National Conference in New York City, as …

RAHA Duo: Swirl

RAHA Duo (Amelia Hollander Ames, viola and Elaine Rombola Aveni, piano) release Swirl, a collection of new works for viola and piano by composers with strong links to Boston, where the duo is based. …

David Kaplan: New Dances of the League of David

Pianist David Kaplan releases New Dances of the League of David, comprised of a set of miniatures he commissioned between 2013 and 2015 to be woven into the Davidsbündlertänze of Robert Schumann. …

Richard Cameron-Wolfe: Passionate Geometries

Richard Cameron-Wolfe's Passionate Geometries features eight of his chamber works written over a thirty year period, displaying the wide range of aesthetic approaches at play in his music, from his …

Scott Wollschleger: Between Breath

Scott Wollschleger's Between Breath contains four works for different duo and solo combinations that are presented here as a multi-movement complete work. Featuring performances by Miranda Cuckson, …

Fotina Naumenko: Bespoke Songs

Soprano Fotina Naumenko releases Bespoke Songs, a collection of works she commissioned for voice and ensembles with various instrumentations that set texts by female authors. In pieces by Jonathan …

la vida que vendráOrlando Jacinto García & loadbang

Cuban-American composer Orlando Jacinto García releases la vida que vendrá features four electro-acoustic solo works culminating in an ensemble work for the prolific loadbang ensemble. García …

Reiko Füting: Broken Song

Reiko Füting's newest release Broken Song alternates choral settings of poetry by his long term collaborator Kathleen Furthmann with a solo piano performance of his introspective work, Five …

The Rhythm Method: Pastorale

The Rhythm Method string quartet (Leah Asher, Marina Kifferstein, Meaghan Burke, and Carrie Frey) celebrates its 10th anniversary season with the release of Pastorale, featuring three works written …

Federico Bonacossa: Elettroarmonico

Federico Bonacossa releases Elettroarmonico featuring seven works that explore microtonal, electro-acoustic, and extended timbral contexts. Bonacossa's music unfolds elegantly in large arcs. pacing …

Lainie Fefferman: Here I Am

Composer Lainie Fefferman's Here I Am is the culmination of a fifteen year creative journey engaging and grappling with the ancient texts of the Hebrew Bible, and writing music in response to her …

James Díaz: [speaking in a foreign language]

Composer James Díaz releases his debut recording, [speaking in a foreign language], an album length collaboration with violinist Julia Jung Un Suh. The layered, processed, and reorganized violin …

Yi-Ting Lu: An Unopened Seashell

Composer Yi-Ting Lu releases her debut album, An Unopened Seashell, a collection of five solo works that demonstrates her capacity for using musical materials to explore extra-musical phenomena. …

Paolo Marchettini: Ebony Chants

Composer and clarinetist Paolo Marchettini releases his second album with New Focus, Ebony Chants, evoking the rich wood that is used in clarinet construction. The recording includes solo works …

Kate Soper: The Hunt

Composer Kate Soper releases The Hunt, a one act chamber opera inspired by a series of medieval tapestries known as "The Lady and the Unicorn." The work is scored for three sopranos who also play …

Jessica Meyer: I long and seek after

In 2019, Jessica Meyer’s first composer/performer portrait album Ring Out highlighted her lyrical, expressive works that celebrate the arts of interpretation and performance. In her sophomore …

Natalia Cappa: Una

Argentine soprano Natalia Cappa releases Una, her first solo album and a collection of works written in Spanish for her by composers from her home country. Works by Jorge Sad Levi, Diego Tedesco, …

Kyle Bruckmann: of rivers

Oboist Kyle Bruckmann, founding member of the wind quintet Splinter Reeds, releases of rivers, a collection of vanguard music for the instrument that highlights its integration with electronics, …

Varty Manouelian: Serenade with a Dandelion

Violinists Varty Manouelian and Movses Pogossian continue their admirable advocacy for the work of Armenian composers with this extensive 4 disc collection of new works, a follow up to …

Ekmeles: We Live the Opposite Daring

Following up on a debut release with New Focus that was hailed as "spectacular" by The Whole Note and "remarkable" by textura, Ekmeles vocal ensemble, led by director Jeffrey Gavett, brings their …

Osnat Netzer: Dot : Line : Sigh

Composer Osnat Netzer releases her debut recording, featuring performances by Ensemble Dal Niente in full ensemble and chamber settings, saxophonist Geoffrey Landman, Mivos Quartet, flutist Eric …

Michael Hersch: Poppaea

A nominee for the 2023 Austrian Music Theater Prize for Best Contemporary Music Theater, Michael Hersch's epic setting of Poppaea turns the classic tale of Nero inside out, examining it from multiple …

Yu-Hui Chang: Mind Like Water

Composer Yu-Hui Chang's Mind Like Water presents three ensemble works and one solo cello piece that all feature a dialogue between musical elements. Sometimes this dialogue unfolds between …

Tessa Brinckman: Take Wing, Roll Back

Flutist Tessa Brinckman's Take Wing, Roll Back brings together new works for flute that reflect global influences. In solo tracks as well as duo settings, Brinckman displays a pervasive versatility …

Yvar Mikhashoff: Songs and Dances

While Yvar Mikhashoff (1941-1993) is best known as a pianist, and in particular a champion of contemporary music, a large portion of his formal studies was in composition, the culmination of which …

Christopher Whyte: Cold Stability

Percussionist Christopher Whyte releases Cold Stability, a collection of works for different percussion instruments that explores paths to quietude through sound. Featuring works by Toshio Hosokawa, …

Chris Fisher-Lochhead: Wake Up the Dead

Chris Fisher-Lochhead's Wake Up the Dead features performances of his bristling scores by Ensemble Dal Niente, JACK Quartet, Quince Ensemble, and bassoonist Ben Roidl-Ward. Fisher-Lochhead conjures …

Douglas Boyce: The Bird is an Alphabet

Douglas Boyce's The Bird is an Alphabet is a collection of his recent chamber works with voice, featuring performances by poet Marlanda Dekine, counter)induction, Byrne:Kozar:Duo, tenor Robert Baker, …

Robert Gross: Penumbra

Composer Robert Gross releases his second album on New Focus, highlighting his deft electro-acoustic writing for live instruments with Absynth 5 synthesizer and his post-serial approach to pitch …

John Aylward: Oblivion - Opera in One Act

John Aylward's chamber opera Oblivion tackles questions of memory, self-knowledge, and meaning through its rich, colorful score for four voices, viola, cello, double bass, electric guitar, and …

Eric Moe: Strenuous Pleasures

Pittsburgh based composer Eric Moe releases Strenuous Pleasures, a collection of chamber music written in the decade 2010-2020. Featuring performances by counter)induction, Da Capo Chamber Players, …

Afterword: An Opera in Two ActsGeorge Lewis & International Contemporary Ensemble

International Contemporary Ensemble releases Afterword: An Opera in Two Acts by George Lewis on its Tundra Records imprint. Lewis’s first opera, Afterword, premiered in 2015 at the Museum of …

Doug Bielmeier: Music for Billionaires

Composer Doug Bielmeier combines disparate styles to find a hybrid that chips away at the edges between genres. Music for Billionaires features five of his experimental ambient electronic works next …

Eric Nathan: Some Favored Nook

Composer Eric Nathan's Some Favored Nook is so much more than a vocal setting of Emily Dickinson texts, as ambitious an undertaking as that can be. Weaving Dickinson's poetry into a libretto that is …

Joseph Bologne: Three Sonatas for Violin & Fortepiano, Op. 1b

Violinist Andrew McIntosh and fortepianist Steven Vanhauwaert collaborated on a historically important volume of Joseph Bologne, Chevalier de Saint Georges's Op. 1b sonatas on Olde Focus Recordings. …

Sumptuous PlanetThe Crossing/Donald Nally, conductor/David Shapiro

Composer David Shapiro and The Crossing release Sumptuous Planet: A Secular Mass, a work that extols a science based stance on the universe and the nature of existence while using a musical form that …

Jenny Beck: Up To The Surface

Composer and sound designer Jenny Beck releases Up To The Surface, an introspective electronic EP of variegated ambient textures. Like so many musicians, Beck turned inward during the lockdown, …

Reuben Blundell and the Lansdowne Symphony Orchestra: American Discoveries

The Lansdowne Symphony Orchestra and conductor Reuben Blundell release American Discoveries, a continuation of their series of promoting previously unrecorded orchestral repertoire unearthed at the …

A Giant Beside YouBen Verdery & Ulysses Quartet

Guitarist Ben Verdery and the Ulysses Quartet release an album of music for guitar and string quartet that displays the versatility and accessibility of the combination. With music by Bryce Dessner, …

Ekmeles: A Howl, That Was Also A Prayer

New York based contemporary vocal ensemble Ekmeles releases their debut album, "A Howl, That Was Also a Prayer," a collection of premieres by Erin Gee, Christopher Trapani, and Taylor Brook that …

Dither: Potential Differences

The New York based electric guitar quartet Dither has established itself as one of the premiere ensembles of its kind, cementing their reputation as keen champions of inventive composers and deft …

Lei Liang: Hearing Landscapes/Hearing Icescapes

Acclaimed composer Lei Liang releases Hearing Landscapes/Hearing Icescapes, a multidisciplinary diptych that marries diverse areas of inquiry into Chinese landscape painting and folk song, …

Transient Canvas: Right now, in a second

Boston based Transient Canvas (Amy Advocat, bass clarinet; Matt Sharrock, marimba) releases their newest recording documenting their extensive work commissioning new works for their instrumentation. …

Bergamot Quartet: In the Brink

Bergamot Quartet releases its first full length recording with premieres by Suzanne Farrin, Tania León, Paul Wiancko, and Ledah Finck, who is also a violinist in the group. The critically acclaimed …

Dark DaysScott Wollschleger & Karl Larson

Composer Scott Wollschleger releases his second album with New Focus, Dark Days, chronicling solo piano repertoire written between 2007 and 2020 and featuring his longtime close collaborator, pianist …

David Fulmer: Sky’s Acetylene

Composer, conductor, and violinist David Fulmer has received critical acclaim for his works, performances, and dedicated commitment to contemporary music. Sky's Acetylene was commissioned and …

Adam Roberts: Bell Threads

Composer Adam Roberts releases a collection of his chamber music which highlights his depth of expression, lyricism, and powerful command over structure and compositional arc. Featuring performances …

Brendon Randall-Myers: dynamics of vanishing bodies

Composer/guitarist Brendon Randall-Myers, in collaboration with electric guitar quartet Dither, releases dynamics of vanishing bodies, a 37-minute piece deploying a full gamut of techniques. Several …

Vaster Than Empires: Three Days

Improvising trio Vaster Than Empires (Allen Otte, Erica Dicker, and Paul Schuette) formed in Cincinnati where Dicker and Schuette were pursuing doctoral work, and Otte had been a pivotal staple of …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS, vol. 30

Music from SEAMUS, vol. 30 continues the organization's series of recordings chronicling the work of its member composers. Featuring music by Christopher Biggs, Elizabeth Hoffman, Joo Won Park, Julie …

Algebra of Night: Music of Eugene O'Brien21st Century Consort & Eugene O’Brien

American composer Eugene O'Brien and the 21st Century Consort (ensemble-in-residence at the Smithsonian’s Hirshhorn Museum) release Algebra of Night, featuring two chamber works that reveal …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS, vol. 5

SEAMUS releases Volume 5 of its back catalog, chronicling electro-acoustic from its member composers from …

Makaris: Wisps in the Dell

In the late-classical era, composers including Beethoven, Weber, and Haydn were commissioned to orchestrate traditional Scottish folk songs in their original English. A lush sampling of these songs …

Reiko Füting: Mechthild

Composer Reiko Füting releases his third album on New Focus, the chamber opera Mechthild in collaboration with librettist and theologian Christian Lehnert. Mechthild of Magdeburg (the German …

Resistance/Resonance113 Composers & Duo Gelland

Based in the Twin Cities, the 113 Composers Collective was formed in 2012 to create immersive opportunities for new means of musical expression, including through their annual Twin Cities New Music …

DUO Stephanie and Saar: Cavatine

Piano four hands ensemble DUO Stephanie & Saar (Stephanie Ho and Saar Ahuvia) continue their series of recordings that challenge listeners to hear iconic works in new guises. Catalyzed by …

Michael Hersch: the wreckage of flowers

Michael Hersch’s haunting disc of violin works, the wreckage of flowers, features all of Hersch’s music for violin written during the first decade of the 2000s. The recording, originally released …

Jennifer Grim: Through Broken Time

Flutist Jennifer Grim releases Through Broken Time, a collection of works at the intersection of Afro-Modernism and post-minimalism, by composers Tania León, Alvin Singleton, David Sanford, Valerie …

Colin Hinton: Simulacra

Composer and drummer Colin Hinton's Simulacra exists at the intersecting edge of experimental improvised music and contemporary composition. Bringing together a band of crack colleagues from the …

Bonnie Whiting: Perishable Structures

Percussionist and composer Bonnie Whiting's Perishable Structures places works for speaking percussionist within a context of storytelling. Through works by Rzewski, Globokar, Parenti, Logan-Greene, …

Scott L. Miller: Ghost Layers

Composer Scott Miller releases "Ghost Layers" in collaboration with the critically acclaimed TAK Ensemble. The album features recent chamber works, all but one of which include an electronic element. …

Real Loud

The New York–based antiphonal chamber metal band Real Loud tackles four premieres for mirrored electric basses, electric guitars, and drum sets that draw on influences from progressive metal and …

The Consent of Sound and Meaning: The Music of Eric RichardsEric Richards/loadbang/Ekmeles

Composer Eric Richards approached listening as an embodied activity, an amalgamation of the auditory, psychological, and emotional experience we have hearing artistic sound. This album, produced by …

Julia Den Boer: Kermès

Pianist Julia Den Boer releases Kermès, a collection of four poignant solo works that invite the listener to examine and absorb themselves in the resonance, sustain, and sonority of the instrument. …

Pathos Trio: When Dark Sounds Collide: New Music for Percussion and Piano

“When Dark Sounds Collide” is a collaborative project between Pathos Trio, and composers Alyssa Weinberg, Alison Yun-Fei Jiang, Alan Hankers, Finola Merivale, and Evan Chapman, dedicated to …

Diana Golden: Tanbou Kache

After a decade of performance and research of Haitian art music, New York City-based cellist Diana Golden releases Tanbou Kache (Hidden Drum), an album that celebrates Haiti’s rich and fascinating …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS, vol. 31

SEAMUS (Society for Electro-Acoustic Music of the United States) continues its series of releasing its back catalogue along with new recordings. Volume 31 features compositions reflecting the …

Tomás Gueglio: Duermevela

Composer Tomás Gueglio releases "Duermevela," a collection of solo and ensemble works that reflect his interest in microtonality, extended technique, and blending musical lineages and styles. …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS, vol. 22

Music from SEAMUS, vol. 22 continues the organization's series of recordings chronicling the work of its member composers. Featuring music from this 2013 edition by Asha Srinivasan, Paula Matthusen, …

counter)induction: Against Method

New York based new music collective counter)induction celebrates its 20th anniversary with an album that features premiere recordings of works written for the group by its member composers, Kyle …

Makaris: The Galant David Rizzio

In the early eighteenth century, a number of the most popular traditional Scottish songs were bizarrely attributed to David Rizzio, who more than 150 years earlier had been brutally murdered while …

Barbora Kolářová: Imp in Impulse

Virtuoso Czech violinist Barbora Kolářová releases her debut recording of solo violin works, including the premiere recording of Pascal Le Boeuf's title track, alongside rarely heard works by Jean …

Lee Weisert: Recesses

Composer Lee Weisert releases his second album on New Focus, Recesses, a follow up to the 2014 release, Wild Arc. Weisert is heard on piano, guitar, percussion, and electronics, and is joined by …

Patchwork

Patchwork (Noa Even, saxophones and Stephen Klunk, drum set) releases its dynamic debut album featuring works written for them by Erin Rogers, Eric Wubbels, Dan Tramte, Osnat Netzer, and Hong-Da …

Guy Barash: Killdeer

Composer/performer Guy Barash teams up with poet Nick Flynn for this affecting work featuring spoken word and structured improvisation with collaborators Kathleen Supové, Frank London, Eyal Maoz, …

Quaking AspenStephanie Lamprea & William Bond

Quaking Aspen is the debut solo album of Colombian-American soprano Stephanie Lamprea. An architect of new sounds and expressions as a performer specializing in contemporary-classical repertoire, …

Kimia Hesabi: Nemāno Gaona

Iranian violist Kimia Hesabi releases her debut album of music by composers of the Iranian Diaspora, featuring works for solo viola, viola and electronics, viola and voice, and viola and piano. The …

Movses Pogossian: Modulation Necklace: New Music from Armenia

On "Modulation Necklace," violinist Movses Pogossian has curated a recording chronicling a vibrant repertoire of contemporary Armenian music. Featuring performances by the Dilijan Chamber Music …

David Tanenbaum: As She Sings

Luminary guitarist David Tanenbaum releases As She Sings, a compilation of works written for him reflecting a rich trajectory of aesthetics on the instrument. The program includes works by legendary …

Alicia Lee: Conversations With Myself

Clarinetist Alicia Lee releases Conversations With Myself, a collection of works for solo clarinet with and without electronics, chronicling a year of artistic activity in isolation. Works by Pierre …

Music in the Barns: Bolton - Godin - Oesterle

Music in the Barns is a Canadian ensemble directed by violist Carol Gimbel highlighting the new chamber music community in Canada. Their debut album includes works by Rose Bolton, Scott Godin, and …

Richard Carrick: lanterne

Composer Richard Carrick releases a timely compendium of music for compact spaces which serves as an evocative and varied reminder of the way one can create sonic resonance with even the most sparing …

Beauty Crying Forth: Flute Music by Women Across TimeSarah Frisof & Daniel Pesca

On "Beauty Crying Forth," flutist Sarah Frisof and pianist Daniel Pesca present repertoire spanning one and half centuries for flute by female composers. Including music by Clara Schumann, Lili …

Georgina Isabel Rossi: Mobili: Music for Viola and Piano from Chile

Violist Georgina Isabel Rossi and pianist Silvie Cheng release Mobili, an overview of Chilean repertoire featuring viola. Compiling six works by five composers, including five world-premiere …

Byrne:Kozar:Duo: It Floats Away From You

Byrne:Kozar:Duo (Corrine Byrne, soprano and Andy Kozar, trumpet) release their debut recording, It Floats Away From You, featuring compositions by Alexandre Lunsqui, Beth Wiemann, Li Qi, Lei Liang, …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS, vol. 29

SEAMUS (Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States) releases its newest recording in an ongoing series featuring works by the organization's member composers, under the curation of …

Cat Toren: Scintillating Beauty

Pianist/composer Cat Toren conjures music as healing force and hope for the future on the second album by her exploratory quintet HUMAN KIND. "Scintillating Beauty" evokes 60s spiritual jazz, sound …

Greg Stuart: Subtractions

Percussionist Greg Stuart releases Subtractions, featuring solo works by Sarah Hennies and Michael Pisaro-Liu that reframe virtuosity, inviting vulnerability and dialogue into the context of …

Julia Werntz: Someone Who Loves You Throws Me At You

Boston based microtonal specialist Julia Werntz releases Someone Who Loves You Throws Me At You, a collection of chamber works with and without voice that demonstrate her highly personal style, often …

CoincidentScott L. Miller & Zeitgeist

Composer Scott L. Miller releases Coincident, a collection of works exploring the potential of telematic collaboration (musicians playing together via remote technology) and graphic score notation. …

Music from the Association for the Promotion of New Music (APNM), vol. 1 & 2

The Association for the Promotion of New Music (APNM) was founded in 1975 by Jacques-Louis Monod as a community of American composers with shared aesthetic values. This double album release features …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS, vol. 28

SEAMUS (Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States) continues with its commendable series of releasing recordings of works by its member composers. This volume is the most recent, the …

Ning Yu: Of Being

Pianist Ning Yu (Yarn/Wire, counter)induction) releases "Of Being," a compilation of three pathbreaking works by composers Wang Lu, Misato Mochizuki, and Emily Praetorius. Combining traditional …

a.pe.ri.od.ic: for a•pe•ri•od•ic

Chicago based a•pe•ri•od•ic performs music grounded in post-Cagean experimental traditions. "for a•pe•ri•od•ic" features music written for the ensemble by ensemble members Nomi …

Jacob Greenberg: Bright Codes

Jacob Greenberg’s first solo disc for TUNDRA features his exciting commissions for piano and harmonium, premiered at venues such as Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts and Miller Theatre. Four …

Tom Flaherty: Mixed Messages

Composer and cellist Tom Flaherty releases Mixed Messages, a collection of his electro-acoustic works for various instruments. Flaherty's music combines a versatile approach to diverse electronic …

Science Ficta: Ronde de Saisons

First recordings of rare viol consort music from the Belle …

Anthony Gatto: The Making of Americans

Composer Anthony Gatto releases his radio opera setting of Gertrude Stein's "The Making of Americans," a reworking of his original opera premiered at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis in 2008. …

Nomi Epstein: sounds

Composer and artistic director of Chicago based experimental ensemble a.pe.ri.od.ic, Nomi Epstein releases "sounds," a compilation of her own works for ensemble and solo piano. Epstein's sensitive …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS, vol. 21

SEAMUS releases Volume 21 of its back catalog, chronicling electro-acoustic from its member composers from …

Anthony Cheung: All Roads

Composer Anthony Cheung releases All Roads, a follow up to FCR215 Cycles and Arrows. Featuring performances by the Escher Quartet, violinist Miranda Cuckson, soprano Paulina Swierczek, and pianists …

TENET Vocal Artists: Love Enfolds Thee Round

TENET Vocal Artists, NYC’s preeminent early music ensemble led by artistic director Jolle Greenleaf, releases a Christmas disc of music spanning medieval to modern day repertoire. TENET’s …

Ted Hearne: Hazy Heart Pump

Composer Ted Hearne releases "Hazy Heart Pump," a portrait album of chamber works that radically combine and layer various sources of inspiration to create music that pulls both emotionally and …

Rising w/ The CrossingThe Crossing & Donald Nally, conductor

Philadelphia based contemporary vocal ensemble The Crossing, under the direction of Donald Nally, releases "Rising w/ The Crossing," an uplifting album that serves as an offering of hope amidst a …

SetDana Jessen & Taylor Brook

Bassoonist Dana Jessen and composer Taylor Brook collaborate on an album length work, Set, that fuses through composed material, improvisation, and electronics to create an immersive musical …

Ofer Pelz: Trinité

Composer Ofer Pelz celebrates an eight year collaboration with Israeli based Meitar Ensemble with Trinité, a collection of five works that highlight Pelz' intricate hybrid ensemble textures and deft …

Dai Fujikura: Akiko’s Piano

Dai Fujikura’s latest release on his Minabel label is “Akiko’s Piano”.2020 marks the 75th anniversary of the atomic bombing, and the world premiere of Dai Fujikura’s Akiko’s Piano - Piano …

The Crossing: Carols after a Plague

Philadelphia based contemporary music choir The Crossing releases Carols after a Plague, a collection of works by twelve composers that responds to our collective experience of the last few years …

Max Johnson: When the Streets Were Quiet

Composer, bassist, bandleader, and stylistic chameleon Max Johnson releases this collection of his recent through-composed chamber music, displaying his impressive versatility across many contexts. …

Spektral Quartet: Experiments in Living

Grammy nominated Spektral Quartet releases Experiments in Living, a modular journey through canonic and contemporary works that is designed to be reordered each time a listener experiences the …

Akropolis Reed Quintet: Ghost Light

Detroit based Akropolis Reed Quintet releases Ghost Light, a collection of works written for them that are in dialogue with various "ghosts" — histories that are manifest in personal, collective, …

Departure Duo: Immensity of

Departure Duo (Nina Guo, soprano, and Edward Kass, bass) releases their debut recording, Immensity Of, including works by Katherine Balch, John Aylward, Emily Praetorius, and György Kurtág. By …

PrecipitationsSteven Ricks & Ron Coulter

Precipitations features two composer/performers, Steven Ricks and Ron Coulter, who have cultivated sophisticated hybrid instruments that merge their respective instrumental practices (trombone and …

Jacqueline Leclair: Music for English Horn Alone

Oboist Jacqueline Leclair releases a collection of new works for English horn that cover a wide range of stylistic territory and explore the rich, penetrating voice of this beguiling instrument. …

Richard Beaudoin: Digital Memory and the Archive

Composer Richard Beaudoin continues his deep investigation into the realm of microtiming with Digital Memory and the Archive, the follow-up to his 2012 New Focus double-album Microtimings. On this …

Milton Babbitt: Works for Treble Voice and PianoNina Berman & Steven Beck

Soprano Nina Berman and pianist Steve Beck release a recording of Milton Babbitt's complete works for treble voice and piano, including his epic A Solo Requiem for soprano and two pianos with Eric …

Catch SomewhereJohn Liberatore & Zohn Collective

Composer John Liberatore writes poetic music that often embeds actual poetry into the fabric of its composition. While only one of the four works on Catch Somewhere includes sung text, each piece is …

Michael Hersch: Carrion-Miles to Purgatory

Michael Hersch's newest release, "Carrion-Miles to Purgatory", features three intensely introspective duos performed by close collaborators of his, virtuoso violinists Patricia Kopatchinskaja and …

Borderlands Ensemble: the space in which to see

Formed in 2017, Tucson based Borderlands Ensemble formed to foster connections across disciplines and music communities that have traditionally been separated. the space in which to see specifically …

William Kentner Anderson: Der Weg Ins Freie

Guitarist/composer William Kentner Anderson releases a collection of works ... music is not like anything else, often engaging with simple musical materials-pop songs, folksongs and folk lyrics. He …

Douglas Boyce: The Hunt by Night

Composer Douglas Boyce's second release on New Focus, The Hunt by Night, is a collection of his finely wrought chamber music. Boyce's music balances an affinity for subtle motivic development with …

SirventèsBrian Thornton & Iranian Female Composers Association

Cleveland Orchestra cellist Brian Thornton releases Sirventés, a collection of new works for cello, solo and in ensemble, by members of the Iranian Female Composers Association. Thornton's …

Luis Ianes: instrucciones de uso

Argentinean/Uruguayan guitarist, composer, and improvisor Luis Ianes releases, "instrucciones de uso”, a set of music both through composed and improvised on solo acoustic guitar. In the creation …

Robert Gross: Chronicles

Composer Robert Gross' Chronicles is a collection of music that exists in a lineage of pitch-determinate electronic works written for one synthesizer, heavily influenced by Babbitt and Wuorinen. …

Wilfrido Terrazas: The Torres Cycle

Composer Wilfrido Terrazas presents a seven part album length work, The Torres Cycle, which explores ritual, indigenous tradition from his native Mexico, alternative notation, structured …

Eric Nathan: Missing Words

Composer Eric Nathan's releases the ambitious cycle of works "Missing Words", featuring performances by some of new music's most prolific ensembles: International Contemporary Ensemble, Boston Modern …

Dai Fujikura: Zawazawa

Dai Fujikura’s latest release on his Minabel label covers a wide range of instrumentation, from solo works for soprano, clarinet, violin and double bass to a Tuba concerto, an ensemble piece for …

Eric Huebner: Désordre

Critically acclaimed pianist Eric Huebner releases his performance of György Ligeti's famous Études alongside his iconic Trio for Violin, Horn, and Piano with colleagues Yuki Numata Resnick and …

Edward Smaldone: Once and Again

Composer Edward Smaldone releases "Once and Again," a collection of chamber music including song cycles and instrumental works that encapsulate his openness to diverse sources of inspiration. …

Frederic Hand: Across Time

Guitarist/composer Frederic Hand's Across Time is an album of original compositions composed over several decades that draws its inspiration from diverse traditions and musical languages. Including …

Musicians from soundSCAPE: After the End

The soundSCAPE summer festival in Italy was founded in 2005 by Artistic Director Nathanael May, and each summer hosts composers, faculty, and student performers for two weeks of lectures, …

String Noise: Giga Concerto

Violin duo String Noise (Pauline Kim Harris and Conrad Harris) team up with composer Eric Lyon, Deerhoof drummer Greg Saunier, and the International Contemporary Ensemble for this release of Lyon's …

Ali Can Puskulcu: Gibberish Shreds

Turkish-American composer and violinist Ali Can Puskulcu releases his debut album "Gibberish Shreds," a series of compositions for violin, voice, and processed electronics using a midi pedal …

Michael Hersch: The Vanishing Pavilions

Michael Hersch’s The Vanishing Pavilions, originally released in 2007 as a 2-CD boxed set, is the first part of his ten-hour, three-part cycle, sew me into a shroud of leaves. The recording was …

ACRONYM: The Battle, the Bethel, & the Ball

ACRONYM's exploration of the wild music written by and attributed to H.I.F. von Biber includes several pieces recorded here for the first time. Works include programmatic battle music, Latin church …

Michael Hersch: the script of storms

Composer Michael Hersch releases two works featuring his frequent collaborator soprano Ah Young Hong: cortex and ankle with Dutch based Ensemble Klang and the script of storms with the BBC Symphony …

Belinda Reynolds: Secret

San Francisco based composer Belinda Reynolds releases a single, Secret, in collaboration with vocalist Holly Nadal and electric guitarist David Nadal. On Secret, Reynolds sets a collage of four …

Paolo Marchettini: The Months have ends

Composer, clarinetist, and pianist Paolo Marchettini releases his debut recording of works for orchestra that are characteristic of his lush, lyrical style. Born in Rome and currently living in New …

American Wild Ensemble: Duos and Trios

The intrepid American Wild Ensemble was formed around a project to perform new works in national parks in the US, and has continued to create exciting events outdoors in unconventional spaces, from …

Kivie Cahn-Lipman: Sumna

Sumna is the third solo album of Kivie Cahn-Lipman (founding cellist of the International Contemporary Ensemble, founder of baroque band ACRONYM and HiP Scottish ensemble Makaris, and co-founder of …

Richard Cameron-Wolfe: An Inventory of Damaged Goods

The music of Richard Cameron-Wolfe is not intrinsically abstract, instead residing in various realms of non-abstraction - each composition’s seed-ideas emanating from an extra-musical impulse. Here …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS, vol. 32

SEAMUS releases Volume 32 of its ongoing series featuring electro-acoustic works from its 2022 annual festival at Western Michigan University. This volume includes pieces by Kristopher Bendrick, …

Longleash: Passage

Critically acclaimed piano trio Longleash releases a debut album featuring first commercial recordings of innovative works, written by an international group of composers launching remarkable …

Scherzinger EtudesMartin Scherzinger & Bobby Mitchell

Composer Martin Scherzinger releases his second album with New Focus, Scherzinger Etudes, focusing on his piano etudes. Performed here by pianist Bobby Mitchell, Scherzinger describes these works as …

The Bowers Fader Duo: Between Us All: New American Art Songs for Voice & Guitar

Since their formation in 2009, The Bowers Fader Duo (Jessica Bowers, mezzo-soprano, and Oren Fader, guitar) has commissioned over 20 new works from American composers representing a wide range of …

Wavefield Ensemble: Concrete & Void

Wavefield, a New York City based contemporary music ensemble founded in 2016, releases its debut recording Concrete & Void featuring works recorded in October 2020 in an outside parking garage in …

Christopher Trapani: Waterlines

Rome Prize winner and New Orleans native Christopher Trapani's first portrait recording is in part inspired by Hurricane Katrina's devastation of his home town. Trapani found himself reaching towards …

Scott Lee: Through the Mangrove Tunnels

Inspired by his experiences growing up exploring the swamps and bayous of Florida, composer Scott Lee’s album-length work, Through the Mangrove Tunnels, features the JACK Quartet with pianist …

The Will To AdornInternational Contemporary Ensemble & George Lewis

George Lewis is a modern musical polymath, in the truest sense of the word. The Will To Adorn chronicles his fruitful relationship with the International Contemporary Ensemble, with works written for …

Olivia De Prato: STREYA

Violinist Olivia De Prato (Mivos Quartet) releases this wide ranging release of music for solo violin and violin and electronics. Included are works by a broad cross section of some of the most …

Wendy Richman: vox/viola

Violist Wendy Richman, a founding member of the International Contemporary Ensemble, releases her debut full length recording of music she commissioned for voice and viola for one performer. …

Michael Hersch: end stages, Violin Concerto

Virtuoso violinist Patricia Kopatchinskaja, for whom Michael Hersch's Violin Concerto was composed, wrote recently of the piece that it "is an open wound, there is no other way to say it." She …

Arcomusical: Emigre and Exile

Arcomusical, led by percussionist/composer/scholar Gregory Beyer, is an ensemble devoted to the promotion of the berimbau, an Afro-Brazilian instrument closely associated with the body game of …

Movses Pogossian: Hommage à Kurtág

The centerpiece of violinist Movses Pogossian's Hommage à Kurtág is his recording of Kurtág's Signs, Games, and Messages for violin (there are others in the series for different instruments). …

New Thread Quartet: Plastic Facts

"Plastic Facts" is the debut album of New Thread Quartet, a NYC-based saxophone quartet hailed as “adventurous, rule-breaking” (NewMusicBox). The album serves as a showcase of modern compositions …

Dai Fujikura: Diamond Dust

Dai Fujikura’s latest release on his Minabel label covers a wide range of instrumentation, from solo works for horn, Japanese shakuhachi, violin and trombone to two concertos: a piano concerto and …

Ashley Bathgate: 8-Track

Cellist Ashley Bathgate releases a recording of works inspired by Steve Reich's Counterpoint series, meant to be performed by a single live performer playing along with seven pre-recorded tracks of …

Greg Chudzik: Solo Works, Vol. 2

Bassist and composer Greg Chudzik releases his follow up volume 2 to his 2015 "Solo Works, Vol 1" on the Panoramic imprint. Expansive, layered compositions incorporate a wide range of extended bass …

ACRONYM: Cantica Obsoleta

ACRONYM presents forgotten works from the Düben Collection. The Düben archive consists of approximately 2300 music manuscripts, assembled by and named after a family of composers who served in …

Aaron Myers-Brooks: Oblique

Guitarist/composer Aaron Myers-Brooks specializes in microtonal music, specifically writing in a 17 equal division of the octave system that provides a fresh and striking set of intervals and colors …

Van Stiefel: Spirits

Composer, guitarist, and electronic musician Van Stiefel releases his second recording with New Focus, Spirits, a collection of his own performances of layered compositions developed in his home …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS Volume 27

SEAMUS continues its series of releasing new compilations of works by its electroacoustic composer members alongside back catalogue recording. Volume 27 features works by Carter Rice, Brian Sears, …

Secret MessagesJon Nelson & Tom Kolor

Trumpeter Jon Nelson and percussionist Tom Kolor release Secret Messages, a collection of works for duo by Moshe Shulman, Dave Ballou, Jeffrey Stadelman, Dafnis Prieto, and Emil Harnas 2. The works …

TúsFinola Merivale & Desdemona

Irish composer Finola Merivale releases her debut album, a collection of works spanning ten years of her life, and featuring the Desdemona Ensemble, a group Merivale has collaborated closely with …

David Liptak: Dove Songs

Composer David Liptak releases a collection of chamber works, featuring the cycle, "Dove Songs," written for soprano Tony Arnold with pianist Alison D'Amato. Liptak, longtime composition professor at …

Mikel Kuehn: Entanglements

Composer Mikel Kuehn releases his second recording on New Focus, Entanglements, featuring three electro-acoustic works alongside ensemble music that highlights his cultivated approach to character, …

HeartEndangered Quartet/Roy Nathanson/Curtis Fowlkes/Jesse Mills/Tim Kiah

Endangered Quartet (Roy Nathanson, saxophones; Curtis Fowlkes, trombone/vocals; Jesse Mills, violin/vocals; Tim Kiah, bass/vocals) releases their debut recording, "Heart," a collection that …

Marti Epstein: Nebraska Impromptu

Boston based composer Marti Epstein releases this collection of her chamber music including clarinet, featuring Rane Moore and the Winsor Music ensemble. Epstein's music is shaped in equal measure by …

Jonathan Fitzgerald: Luminescence

Guitarist Jonathan Fitzgerald, currently based in Perth, Australia, releases an engaging collection of premieres for electric guitar, with and without electronics, solo, and in chamber settings. This …

String Orchestra of Brooklyn: afterimage

The String Orchestra of Brooklyn releases "afterimage," an album featuring two works written for the ensemble by Christopher Cerrone and Jacob Cooper that respond to older works by Paganini and …

David Liptak: Brightening Air

David Liptak, longtime composition faculty member of the Eastman School of Music, releases this compilation of his music for wind ensemble, written for and inspired by the august group at his …

JACK Quartet: Filigree: Music of Hannah Lash

Composer Hannah Lash writes music that is informed in equal measure by historical precedents, such as the Baroque inspired "Suite: Remembered and Imagined," as it is by a modernist examination of …

loadbang: old fires catch old buildings

Unique ensemble loadbang (baritone Jeff Gavett, trumpeter Andy Kozar, trombonist Will Lang, clarinetist Carlos Cordeiro) releases their second full length recording on New Focus, continuing to …

Michael Hersch: Images from a Closed Ward

Composer Michael Hersch's string quartet Images from a Closed Ward, performed here with absolute commitment by the New York based FLUX Quartet, is inextricably connected to his friendship with the …

Robert Honstein: An Economy of Means

Composer Robert Honstein revels in illuminating subtle corners of textures woven out of limited materials. "An Economy of Means" highlights that quality in two extended fantasies for solo …

Johann Heinrich Schmelzer: Le Memorie Dolorose

Early-music ensembles TENET Vocal Artists and ACRONYM have joined forces to make the first commercial recording of a sumptuous work by composer Johann Heinrich Schmelzer (1623-1680), a sepolcro set …

Dai Fujikura: Glorious Clouds

Dai Fujikura’s latest release on his Minabel label covers a remarkably wide range of instrumentation. Beginning with solo works for horn, recorder, double bass, contrabass clarinet and viola, there …

The City of Tomorrow: Blow

The City of Tomorrow releases Blow, a collection of three works for wind quintet, anchored by the premiere of a multi-movement work written for them by Hannah Lash. Guided by their virtuosity and …

Suzanne Farrin: Dolce la Morte

Dolce La Morte, Suzanne Farrin's monodrama for countertenor and ensemble, is based on Michelangelo's love poetry inspired by the young Roman nobleman Tommaso de Cavalieri. Farrin's sensual …

Fonema Consort: Vistas Furtivas — The Music of Juan Campoverde

Chicago based ensemble Fonema Consort releases this beguiling recording of music by the Ecuadorian composer Juan Campoverde. This collection of music highlights his innovative compositional …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS, Vol. 1

SEAMUS' series of new and archival recordings of electro-acoustic music by its members continues, with this re-release of Volume 1 of its series, from …

Mabel Kwan: Georg Friedrich Haas: Trois Hommages

Chicago based pianist Mabel Kwan (Ensemble Dal Niente) releases the premiere recording of Georg Friedrich Haas' Trois Hommages, a beguiling work for two pianos tuned a quarter tone apart and played …

Marianne Gythfeldt: Only Human

Clarinetist Marianne Gythfeldt’s “Only Human” is a collection of recordings of works with electronics written for her by colleague composers John Link, Mikel Kuehn, David Taddie, Elizabeth …

Anthony Gatto: Wise Blood

Composer Anthony Gatto releases "Wise Blood," his operatic setting of Flannery O'Connor's wild, Southern Gothic novel about a crisis of faith in a young war veteran. The pace and syntax of …

George Lewis: The Recombinant Trilogy

Pioneering composer George Lewis releases The Recombinant Trilogy, an album consisting of three works for solo instrument and electronics that use interactive digital delays, spatialization and …

Olivia De Prato: Panorama

Violinist Olivia De Prato releases her second solo album on New Focus, Panorama, exploring the multi-dimensionality of expression and identity. Composers Missy Mazzoli, Jen Shyu, Angélica Negrón, …

Duo Noire: Night Triptych

In this wonderful collection of works for two guitars by a group of composers hailing from many spots on the globe, Duo Noire provides a compelling snapshot of the range of expression in contemporary …

Vespro della Beata VergineGreen Mountain Project & TENET Vocal Artists

TENET Vocal Artists, NYC’s pre-eminent early music ensemble, releases a CD of the final performance of its Green Mountain Project. For the past ten years, the Green Mountain Project has been made …

Ryan Muncy: ism

ism is the second solo album by saxophonist Ryan Muncy, and the third on the International Contemporary Ensemble’s New Focus imprint, TUNDRA. The recording resurrects one of the instrument’s …

Ben Melsky: Ben Melsky / Ensemble Dal Niente

Harpist Ben Melsky, of Ensemble Dal Niente, a staple on the Chicago new music scene, releases a recording of innovative chamber works with his colleagues by a wonderful collection of composers …

Sarah Bernstein: VEER Quartet

Violinist/composer Sarah Bernstein presents the debut release from her new ensemble, VEER Quartet. Chamber jazz string quartets represent a fascinating sub-genre, a small cross section of string …

Dai Fujikura: Turtle Totem

Dai Fujikura’s latest release on his Minabel label covers a wide range of instrumentation from solo works for double bass, Japanese sho and electronics, and clarinet; a chamber piece for electric …

Cenk Ergün: Sonare & Celare

The JACK Quartet performs two works by Turkish-American experimental composer Cenk Ergün on this EP release. Ergün's immersion in the worlds of electronic music and improvisation shape material …

Du Yun: Dinosaur Scar

Pulitzer Prize winner Du Yun's collaboration with the International Contemporary Ensemble traces back to the group's formation at Oberlin Conservatory. This new release on ICE's Tundra imprint …

Antigone: The Writings of Sophie Scholl and the White Rose MovementLorelei Ensemble & James Kallembach

Lorelei Ensemble, a critically acclaimed choir of women's voices, releases an EP of James Kallembach's Antigone. Merging Sophocles original dramatic framework with texts from the Nazi opposition …

DUO Stephanie and Saar: Bach: The Art of Fugue

DUO Stephanie & Saar’s third release on New Focus Recordings, The Art of Fugue, is the first ever complete piano duo recording of Johann Sebastian Bach’s enigmatic final …

Jeff Herriott: The Stone Tapestry

Jeff Herriott's "The Stone Tapestry" is a collection of interwoven myths, about origins, lifecycles, and the pace and significance of change. The ritualistic approach to the performance of many …

MotherlandQuince Ensemble

Quince Ensemble releases their second recording on New Focus, "Motherland", featuring socially engaged works by Gilda Lyons, Laura Steenberge, Cara Haxo, and Jennifer Jolley. The contemporary vocal …

Richard Valitutto: nocturnes & lullabies

Pianist Richard Valitutto releases "nocturnes & lullabies", a collection of works organized around themes of transitional states between light, dark, consciousness, and unconsciousness. Featuring …

Christopher Trapani: Horizontal Drift

Composer and Rome Prize winner Christopher Trapani releases Horizontal Drift, a collection of six works written for custom instruments that explore rich corners of microtonal tuning, timbre, and …

Michael Harley: Come Closer

Bassoonist Mike Harley releases an album of premieres demonstrating the range of aesthetics present in the growing repertoire for the instrument. Including works by Carl Schimmel, John Fitz Rogers, …

Francesca Anderegg: Wild Cities

Violinist Francesca Anderegg has gathered an exciting collection of new works for violin and piano from young composers influenced by the minimalist heritage of John Adams. Inspired by Ginsberg’s …

Aaron Jay Myers: Clever Machines

Boston based composer Aaron Jay Myers' Clever Machines features his eclectic music for a broad range of chamber combinations, including two works for New Focus veterans, the percussion and clarinet …

loadbang: Plays Well With Others

loadbang’s third release on New Focus, “Plays well with others,” is a celebration of a community of artists with a shared sensibility. The voice and winds quartet is joined here by string …

Claire Chase: Density 2036: Part VIII (2021)

Virtuoso flutist Claire Chase continues her laudable documentation of her multi-year commissioning project, Density 2036, with digital release of newly premiered works from 2021. Featuring …

Third Coast Percussion: The Book of Keyboards

Grammy winning ensemble Third Coast Percussion releases a recording of two landmark works by French composer Philippe Manoury, Le Livre des Claviers and Metal. The otherworldly sonic landscapes …

Shai Wosner: Variations on a Theme by FDR

"...remember, remember always, that all of us... are descendants of immigrants and revolutionists." This Franklin Delano Roosevelt quote from a 1938 speech was the trigger for pianist Shai Wosner's …

Trio Kavak: Heirlooms: New Music Inspired by Young Children

A group of distiniguished Yale composer alumni (Carl Schimmel, Orianna Webb, Armando Bayolo, Adam B. Silverman and Daniel Kellogg) undertook a charming and ambitious project to write a series of …

Unraveling BeethovenNicholas DiEugenio & Mimi Solomon

Violinist Nicholas DiEugenio and pianist Mimi Solomon release their second recording on New Focus, this one a chronicle of their commissioning project, Unraveling Beethoven. The duo approached …

Johann Rosenmüller in ExileACRONYM & Jesse Blumberg

This recording presents music from the time of Rosenmüller's exile in Italy, and alternates large-ensemble chamber sonatas published in Venice in 1670 with the first recordings of unpublished bass …

“...through which the past shines…”Nils Vigeland/Reiko Füting/Daniel Lippel/John Popham

"…through which the past shines…" is a collection of the current complete works for guitar, both solo and in ensemble, by composers Nils Vigeland and Reiko Füting. The music is emblematic of …

Invisible RitualJennifer Curtis & Tyshawn Sorey

Violinist/composer Jennifer Curtis and multi-instrumentalist/composer Tyshawn Sorey have been performing as a duo for several years, as an outgrowth of a collaboration that initiated from their work …

Dmitri Tymoczko: Fools & Angels

Dmitri Tymoczko’s “Fools and Angels” includes four works for voices and ensemble that demonstrate a wide range of approaches to vocal writing and genre. With nods to 70s progressive rock, Early …

Music from the Association for the Promotion of New Music (APNM), vol. 3

APNM (Association for the Promotion of New Music) releases Vol. 3 of their ongoing series documenting recordings of music by their member composers. Featuring works by Erik Lundborg, Ionel Petroi, …

Three BurialsPablo Santiago Chin & Dalia Chin

Costa Rican born composer Pablo Santiago Chin revels in bracing timbral experimentation and an expressivity ranging from ethereal to strident. As the artistic director of Chicago based Fonema …

Zosha Di Castri: Tachitipo

Canadian composer Zosha Di Castri releases this stellar collection of music for various instrumentations, featuring the JACK Quartet, pianist Julia Den Boer, Yarn/Wire, the International Contemporary …

Christopher Bailey: Rain Infinity

Composer Christopher Bailey releases Rain Infinity, his second album on New Focus after his double CD set of keyboard music, Glimmering Webs. Featuring performances by Miranda Cuckson, Mariel …

NakedEye Ensemble: A Series of Indecipherable Glyphs

Lancaster, Pennsylvania based NakedEye Ensemble, directed by Ju-Ping Song, releases A Series of Indecipherable Glyphs, a collection of works for chamber ensemble that take inspiration from rock …

Robert Honstein: Lost and Found

Composer Robert Honstein releases his third recording with New Focus (follow ups to FCR146 Re: You and FCR202 An Economy of Means), this time featuring percussion trio Tigue, cello and percussion duo …

Andrew Conklin: Field Reports

On "Field Reports," Composer Andrew Conklin engages with the rich legacy left behind by early 20th century composer Sidney Robertson Cowell's Northern California Folk Song Project, an archival …

Vivaldi: Seven Cello ConcertosGuy Fishman, cello & Members of Handel and Haydn Society

Guy Fishman, principal cellist of the Handel & Haydn Society Orchestra, presents a brilliant and energized period-instrument performance of seven miraculous and seminal concertos by the Red …

Ensemble Dal Niente: confined. speak.

Chicago based Ensemble Dal Niente releases confined. speak., a collection of works the group programmed in streaming performances during this past year. Despite the formidable hurdles associated with …

Eren Gümrükçüoğlu: Pareidolia

Turkish born composer Eren Gümrükçüoğlu's Pareidolia presents seven of his kinesthetic works for chamber ensembles, with and without electronics, as well as fixed media. Featuring performances …

January: Songs & Chamber Music of Mark Rimple

Mark Rimple has always taken a Janus-like position toward music of the past and of the future, performing ancient and modern works side by side while composing in a hybridized, contemporary style for …

Reiko Füting: Distant Song

Reiko Füting's second release on New Focus documents his unique approach to exploring the relationship between temporality and material in his composition. In this collection of works for ensemble …

Sid Richardson: Borne by a Wind

Boston born composer Sid Richardson releases his debut recording, shaping the program around literary influences that have had a strong impact on his work. The centerpiece of the album is a setting …

Jocelyn Dueck: Durey Rediscovered

Pianist and Louis Durey scholar Jocelyn Dueck’s recent art song recording, a collaboration with critically acclaimed vocalists Jesse Blumberg (baritone), William Burden (tenor), Sidney Outlaw …

De l’espace trouver la fin et le milieu: Dan Barrett plays Dominique Lemaître

Cellist Dan Barrett releases a collection of premiere recordings of solo and duo works by French composer Dominique Lemaître. Lemaître's music is characterized by sensuality, melodic contour, and …

ImaginistLe Boeuf Brothers & JACK Quartet

“imaginist” is a unique concept album collaboration between genre bending jazz artists, the LeBoeuf Brothers, and the virtuoso contemporary music string quartet, the JACK Quartet. The album’s …

andPlay: playlist

Violin and viola duo andPlay (Maya Bennardo, violin, and Hannah Levinson, viola) release their debut recording featuring music by Ashkan Behzadi, Clara Iannotta, and David Bird. The duo's fluency …

Roadshow: Music of Carl Schimmel

Iowa and Illinois based composer Carl Schimmel's music has been praised by The New York Times as “vivid and dramatic." He often employs humor in works that are dense with literary and …

loadbang: Quiver

loadbang releases their fourth album on New Focus, this time featuring centerpieces by Heather Stebbins and Chaya Czernowin as well as music by ensemble members Jeffrey Gavett and Andy Kozar. …

Jacob Greenberg: Hanging Gardens

Pianist Jacob Greenberg connects two post-Wagnerian compositional lineages on this beautifully curated release: Debussy's visceral harmonic world and the Second Viennese School's rigorous approach to …

David Bowlin: Bird as Prophet

Violinist David Bowlin releases a program of works for solo violin, with and without electronics, alongside select chamber works. Featuring works by close colleagues Du Yun, Alexandra …

Michael Compitello: Unsnared Drum

Michael Compitello's Unsnared Drum reframes how people think about, perform, and practice the snare drum, freeing the drum from its historical and idiomatic chains. It asks whether the snare drum can …

Dalia Raudonikytė With: Solitarius

Dalia R. With’s expressive palette is driven by an internal muse, informed by her interest in literary sources, philosophy, and multi-media disciplines. At her disposal is a strong command over …

Kathleen Supové: The Debussy Effect

Pianist Kathleen Supové is well known in contemporary music circles and beyond for her committed performances and inexhaustible programming and project creativity. On this double CD set, she …

Alexander Sigman: fcremap

The foundation of composer Alexander Sigman’s fcremap project is a collaborative piece with Korean visual artist and animator Eunjung Hwang called Future Creatures. The generative seed of Future …

CPE Bach: Cello ConcertiGuy Fishman & Members of Handel and Haydn Society

Cellist Guy Fishman releases a follow up to his critically acclaimed Vivaldi Concertos on Olde Focus with this recording of the concerti of C.P.E. Bach. Along with his colleagues from the Handel and …

Andy Kozar: A Few Kites

American trumpet soloist Andy Kozar releases “A Few Kites,” his premiere solo record, featuring extraordinary new works for trumpet and electronics from many of the country's leading composers. …

Quince Contemporary Vocal Ensemble: Hushers

Quince Contemporary Vocal Ensemble's second recording, Hushers, posits a new paradigm for a capella vocal music, in which text setting and linear structure exists side by side with works that use the …

LeStrange Viols: Æternum - Music of the Elizabethan Avant Garde from Add. MS 31390

LeStrange Viols presents a second disc for Olde Focus Recordings: an exploration of a "Booke of In Nomines and Other Solfainge Songs," known by its shelfmark in the British Library as Add. MS 31390. …

Michael Hersch: I hope we get a chance to visit soon

New Focus releases Michael Hersch's I hope we get a chance to visit soon, the long-awaited companion piece to his critically acclaimed monodrama, On the Threshold of Winter. Scored for two …

David Kirkland Garner: Dark Holler

Composer David Kirkland Garner draws inspiration from archival recordings capturing the musical heritage of the American south. His ebullient work for large chamber ensemble Dark Holler puts some of …

Christopher Cerrone: The Air Suspended

Composer Christopher Cerrone releases an EP featuring two recent works, his piano concerto The Air Suspended written for Shai Wosner and recorded with the Argus Quartet and bassist Pat Swoboda, and …

Aesopica: Music of Marcos BalterMarcos Balter & International Contemporary Ensemble

ICE (International Contemporary Ensemble) releases a recording documenting its close and longstanding relationship with Brazilian born composer Marcos Balter on its own in-house recording label, …

Movses Pogossian: Inspired By Bach

Movses Pogossian's follow up release to his Bach Sonatas and Partitas recording on New Focus explores three works for solo violin that are inspired by those iconic pieces. Featuring solo music by …

14 RécitationsStephanie Lamprea & Georges Aperghis

Soprano Stephanie Lamprea releases her performance of Georges Aperghis' genre defining 14 Récitations for solo voice, highlighting her precise approach to the notation. These works, written in …

Christopher Cerrone: Liminal Highway

Composer Christopher Cerrone and Grammy Award-winning flutist Tim Munro release Liminal Highway, a hypnotic work for flute and electronics. Liminal Highway evokes the moment of limbo between …

scapegoat: The Threshing Floor/Plastic Disorder

Experimental saxophone and percussion duo scapegoat (Noam Bierstone, percussion; Joshua Hyde, saxophone) releases The Threshing Floor/Plastic Disorder, a recording featuring two path breaking works …

Iron OrchidNing Yu & David Bird

Iron Orchid, David Bird’s collaborative electro-acoustic work for pianist Ning Yu, is the audio component of a larger multi-media sculpture project with sculptor Mark Reigelman, Echo Chamber. …

Claire Chase: Density 2036: Part VII (2020) - Liza Lim: Sex Magic

Virtuoso flutist Claire Chase continues her laudable documentation of her multi-year commissioning project, Density 2036, with a digital release of Australian-Chinese composer Liza Lim's Sex Magic …

Mark Kirschenmann: Cybersonic Outreach

Trumpeter and composer Mark Kirschenmann releases Cybersonic Outreach, a collection of unedited improvisations. Known for his solo electric trumpet performances, Kirschenmann's use of pedals and …

Fernando Benadon: delight/delirium

Composer Fernando Benadon’s background as an improviser manifests itself in fascinating ways on his new release delight/delirium. In varying ways, Benadon explores and attempts to replicate the …

Peter Gilbert: Burned Into the Orange

Composer Peter Gilbert releases his second full length album on New Focus, Burned Into the Orange, a follow up to his 2008 release The Bold Arch of Undreamt Bridges. Featuring performances by the …

Ken Thomson: Sextet

Saxophonist/Clarinetist/Composer Ken Thomson has been an active member of the New York freelance scene for nearly two decades, as a performing member of the Bang on a Can All Stars and Asphalt …

ToyNakedEye Ensemble & Ju-Ping Song

Toy pianist and artistic director Ju-Ping Song joins her Lancaster, PA based group NakedEye Ensemble for an album of new solos and ensemble works for toy piano by several composer colleagues of hers. …

String Noise: Way

String Noise (Pauline Kim Harris and Conrad Harris, violins) returns for their second release on New Focus, a follow up to Eric Lyon's Giga Concerto which featured them as soloists with the …

Giovanni Valentini: Secondo libro de madrigaliACRONYM & Les Canards Chantants

This recording pairs the “brilliant and moving” vocal ensemble Les Canards Chantants with the “groundbreaking, gutsy” (Early Music America Magazine) string band ACRONYM, and consists of the …

Matt Holman: The Tenth Muse

Trumpeter and composer Matt Holman releases a recording of his large scale composition The Tenth Muse, written for his ensemble (trumpet, vibraphone, piano, woodwinds) of the same name. …

Douglas Boyce: Some Consequences of Four Incapacities

Composer Douglas Boyce, composer-in-residence of acclaimed new music ensemble counter)induction, releases his debut portrait CD, featuring three of his kinetic chamber works in riveting performances …

Curtis K. Hughes: Tulpa

Curtis K. Hughes' Tulpa is a collection of his rhythmically incisive music heard in solo, duo, and ensemble settings, and culminating in the title work for ten players and guest soprano. The Boston …

Ogni Suono: SaxoVoce

This ambitious release by Cleveland based saxophone duo Ogni Suono (Noa Even and Phil Pierick) explores new works, all written for the group, that extend the range of their instruments to include …

Hypercube: Brain on Fire

New York based ensemble Hypercube (Erin Rogers, saxophones; Jay Sorce, guitars; Andrea Lodge, piano & accordion; Chris Graham, percussion) releases "Brain on Fire," including works written for …

Wang Lu: Urban Inventory

Composer Wang Lu brings a wide range of influences to her work, ranging from her background growing up and studying in China to the prism of contemporary instrumental techniques and new sonic …

Nathan Davis: Hagoromo

Composer Nathan Davis's dance opera Hagoromo sets a 500-year-old Noh drama about a fisherman who covets an earthbound angel's magic garment. The work's premiere performances featured dancers …

Jacob Greenberg: Neo/Classic.

Pianist Jacob Greenberg curates recordings that possess deep insight into the repertoire, casting familiar works in a new context and presenting new works within a larger trajectory. His newest …

Collage Project: Off Brand

Collage Project was born out of stylistically ambiguous collaborations from the late 1990s and early 2000s in Cleveland, Ohio between bassist Aidan Plank, and guitarists Dan Bruce, and Dan Lippel. …

RootsChristopher Chandler & Heather Stebbins

Composers Heather Stebbins and Christopher Chandler explore their interest in the essence of sounds on the granular level through their advanced use of electronics integrated with innovative …

Rand Steiger: Coalescence Cycle, Volume 1

Composer Rand Steiger releases the first volume chronicling his collaboration with the International Contemporary Ensemble, Coalescence Cycle. Volume 1 highlights works Steiger wrote for soloists in …

Traceur: American Music for Clarinet and PianoMichael Norsworthy & David Gompper

Clarinetist Michael Norsworthy (Boston Conservatory) and pianist and composer David Gompper (U. of Iowa) join forces to release “Traceur,” a survey of premieres and new transcriptions for …

Steven Ricks: Assemblage Chamber

Composer Steven Ricks' Assemblage Chamber features three chamber works that incorporate elements of the Baroque into Ricks' glitchy, collage oriented textures. An eclectic artist who is active in …

Movses Pogossian: J.S. Bach: Six Sonatas and Partitas for Unaccompanied Violin

Virtuoso violinist Movses Pogossian releases his soulful performance of Bach’s iconic Sonatas and Partitas for solo violin. The recording represents a wonderful balance between historically …

Scott L. Miller: Raba

Minneapolis based composer Scott L. Miller's "Raba" reflects his increasing interest over the last two decades in ambient music inspired by sounds of the environment. Miller is a pioneer in the field …

Mariel Roberts: Cartography

Cellist Mariel Roberts releases her second solo recording with bold premiere performances of works written for her by George Lewis, Eric Wubbels, David Brynjar Franzson, and a collaborative work she …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS, vol. 4

Music from SEAMUS, vol. 4 continues the organization's series of recordings chronicling the work of its member composers. Featuring music from this 1994 edition by Jon Christopher Nelson, Mark Edward …

Scott Wollschleger: Soft Aberration

Described as “evocative” and “kaleidoscopic” (The New York Times), composer Scott Wollschleger’s music is at times deconstructive, disembodied, and dystopic, anchored by his penchant for …

Eric Huebner: Earth: Music for Solo Piano by Stephen Barber

Eclectic composer Stephen Barber releases this collection of character pieces that reflect his unique career straddling the worlds of popular music, film scoring, and contemporary classical …

Dai Fujikura: Chance Monsoon

Dai Fujikura’s newest release on his Minabel imprint occupies a wide range of instrumentations, from solo works for guitar, Japanese shamisen, and piano to a work for voice and string quartet, a …

Wang Lu: An Atlas of Time

Composer Wang Lu releases An Atlas of Time, her second recording on New Focus, featuring two large ensemble works performed by the Boston Modern Orchestra Project (BMOP). The album title, also the …

Red Light New Music: Barbary Coast

Barbary Coast, the debut album from New York-based ensemble Red Light New Music, features works by the group's founding composers: Christopher Cerrone, Ted Hearne, Vincent Raikhel, Liam Robinson, and …

Timuçin Şahin's Flow State: Funk Poems for 'Bird'

Guitarist/composer Timuçin Şahin releases Funk Poems for 'Bird', a reckoning with the ghost of one of the most important figures in the history of jazz, Charlie Parker, as well as a document of …

David Smooke: Nutshell Studies of Unexplained Death

Composer David Smooke (Peabody Conservatory of Music faculty member) is a sonic tour guide, taking the listener on a journey that explores, in his own words, “alien topographies” and “unreal …

Rebekah Heller: Metafagote

METAFAGOTE, bassoon virtuoso Rebekah Heller’s second release on the International Contemporary Ensemble’s (ICE) in-house imprint TUNDRA, is an album that explores and inverts the raw sound of the …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS Volume 24

SEAMUS (Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States) releases the next in its series of back catalogue and new compilations by its composer members. Volume 24 includes music by Scott L. …

Anne Leilehua Lanzilotti: Sola

Violist Anne Leilehua Lanzilotti releases the first in a series of three digital albums chronicling her commissioning work with three prominent composers of our era. Icelandic composer Anna …

Josh Modney: Engage

Multifaceted violinist Josh Modney (Wet Ink Ensemble, ICE, formerly of Mivos Quartet) releases an ambitious 3 CD set highlighting his various arenas of virtuosity, from premiere recordings of works …

String Orchestra of Brooklyn: enfolding

String Orchestra of Brooklyn releases enfolding, featuring works by Scott Wollschleger and Anne Leilehua Lanzilotti. Wollschleger's work Outside Only Sound was written with pandemic restrictions in …

Splinter Reeds: Hypothetical Islands

Ambitious reed quintet Splinter Reeds presents a bracing program of new works written for the group by composers Sky Macklay, Matthew Shlomowitz, Cara Haxo, Eric Wubbels, Theresa Wong, and Yannis …

Resonant Bodies

The Resonant Bodies festival, founded and directed by mezzo-soprano Lucy Dhegrae, ran for three nights of performances in a row at downtown Brooklyn's Roulette Intermedium each year from 2013-19. The …

Hasco Duo: The Same Old Wonder

Hasco Duo (Amanda DeBoer Bartlett, soprano, and Jesse Langen, guitars) releases their debut recording of innovative music for voice and guitar. Exploring textures incorporating electric guitars, …

Gregory Oakes: Aesthetic Apparatus: Clarinet Chamber Music of Helmut Lachenmann

Clarinetist Gregory Oakes releases a recording of the complete chamber works for clarinet by eminent German composer Helmut Lachenmann, the first including all three pieces together on the same …

Alexander Sigman: VURT Cycle

Composer Alexander Sigman releases "VURT Cycle," featuring performances by violinist Hajnal Pivnick, flutist Matteo Cesari, Ensemble Phorminx, Ensemble Modelo62, and Discord Workshop. Inspired by a …

Karr-Yang Duo: Felix Mendelssohn: Sonatas from Childhood, Adolescence, and Adulthood

Fresh interpretation and technical brilliance imbue “Mendelssohn: Sonatas from Childhood, Adolescence, and Adulthood,” the first period instrument recording of this repertoire. This debut …

Celestial Forms and StoriesJohn Aylward & Klangforum Wien

Inspired by Ovid's Metamorphoses and Calvino's deconstructive analysis of the classic Roman recasting of Greek myths, John Aylward's Celestial Forms and Stories establishes musical analogs to Ovid's …

Eric Moe: Uncanny Affable Machines

Pittsburgh based composer Eric Moe releases a new compilation of several of his works for solo instrument with and without electronics, all of which engage with the concept of mechanization, whether …

Daniel Lippel: Aufs Lautenwerk

Aufs Lautenwerk presents three beloved masterworks in their original keys on a classical guitar refretted in Baroque well temperament. They were written at & for the keyboard, where each key has …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS, vol. 3

SEAMUS (Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States) continues its project of releasing its extensive back catalogue of recordings, including Volume 3 which features works by Scott A. …

Into the SilenceNicholas DiEugenio & Mimi Solomon

Violinist Nicholas DiEugenio and pianist Mimi Solomon release a recording representing three generations of composers, linked through the eminent Steven Stucky, whose recent passing in 2016 left the …

janus trio: Book of Memory

This recording documents two works written for the intrepid janus trio (Nuiko Wadden, harp; Amanda Baker, flute; Beth Meyers, viola). Paul Lansky’s large scale work Book of Memory and Jason …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS, vol. 23

SEAMUS (Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States) continues its project of releasing its extensive back catalogue of recordings, including Volume 23 which features works by Cort Lippe, …

The Understanding of All ThingsKate Soper & Sam Pluta

Composer/vocalist/pianist Kate Soper teams up with longtime Wet Ink Ensemble colleague composer/electronic musician Sam Pluta in this bracing collection that explores the ever shifting hierarchy …

Claire Chase: Density 2036: Part VI (2019)

Virtuoso flutist Claire Chase continues her laudable documentation of her multi-year commissioning project, Density 2036, with digital release of the works from 2019. Featuring pathbreaking music for …

Transient Canvas: sift

On their bold debut full length recording, the excellent Boston based bass clarinet and marimba duo Transient Canvas (Amy Advocat, bass clarinet & Matt Sharrock, marimba) present repertoire that …

Anne Leilehua Lanzilotti: in manus tuas

Violist Anne Lanzilotti releases her debut solo album, focusing on the art of transcription, with repertoire by Caroline Shaw, Andrew Norman, Anna Thorvaldsdottir, and Lanzilotti herself. Featuring …

Mikel Kuehn: Object/Shadow

Composer Mikel Kuehn, a 2014 Guggenheim Fellow, writes music that is deftly structured, exquisitely orchestrated, and imbued with an ideal balance between deep pathos and intellectual rigor. Heard …

Transient Canvas: Wired

Transient Canvas releases their second recording on New Focus, "Wired", continuing to document their work commissioning music for bass clarinet and marimba, this time featuring works including …

Daniel Lippel: Mirrored Spaces

Guitarist Daniel Lippel releases a double CD set of premieres for solo classical and electric guitar and with electronics by several composer colleagues: Ryan Streber, Orianna Webb, John Link, Kyle …

Guillaume Gargaud: 17 Compositions

French composer and guitarist Guillaume Gargaud releases 17 Compositions, a compilation of acoustic guitar works that are framed by pitch and intervallic restrictions. Gargaud has systematically …

LucyJohn Glover, composer & Kelley Rourke, librettist

Composer John Glover and librettist Kelley Rourke's opera Lucy takes as its subject the fascinating and thought provoking story of a chimpanzee raised by a human family in Oklahoma in the 1960’s …

Ben Verdery: Scenes from Ellis Island

Guitarist and composer Ben Verdery's "Scenes from Ellis Island" contains selections of his eclectic solo and ensemble music. Verdery's broad sources of inspiration include world music traditions, …

New Morse Code: Simplicity Itself

As their name suggests, contemporary music duo New Morse Code (cellist Hannah Collins and percussionist Michael Compitello) prioritize communication in their performances. Their new recording, …

John Aylward: Angelus

Composer John Aylward releases Angelus, his monodrama for voice and ensemble inspired in equal measure by his mother's experience as a refugee fleeing Europe during World War II, Paul Klee's …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS, volume 2

The release of the back catalog from the Music from SEAMUS series continues with Volume 2, originally released in 1993. Electro-acoustic works by composers Scott Wyatt, Jeffrey Haas, Barry Schrader, …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music from SEAMUS Volume 26

SEAMUS Records continues its series celebrating the electro-acoustic and electronic works by its member composers. This release, Volume 26, features works by Scott A. Wyatt, Eli Fieldsteel, Keith …

Duo della Luna: Mangetsu

Duo della Luna (Susan Botti, soprano/composer; Airi Yoshioka, violin) releases Mangetsu, centered around the multi-movement title piece that Botti wrote that catalyzed the duo's formation. Botti's …

Susie Ibarra: Talking Gong

Composer and percussionist Susie Ibarra releases a portrait album featuring solos, duets and trios with her new trio. Talking Gong with Claire Chase and Alex Peh will release in digital and limited …

ACRONYM: Oddities and Trifles: The Very Peculiar Instrumental Music of Giovanni Valentini

ACRONYM's third release, this time featuring the harmonic and rhythmic surprises of the music of Giovanni …

Rebekah Heller: 100 Names

Rebekah Heller releases her debut recording and launches Tundra, the new imprint for recordings by the International Contemporary Ensemble (ICE) with several boundary pushing works for bassoon and …

Nameless: Works by Matthew GreenbaumCygnus Ensemble/Momenta String Quartet/Miranda Cuckson

Furious Artisans is pleased to release the first album recording of works devoted to composer Matthew Greenbaum, featuring an all-star cast of performers including 4 renown sopranos (Ben-Ze’ev, …

loadbang: Lungpowered

Loadbang, a unique New York based ensemble of bass clarinet, trumpet, trombone, baritone voice, has been energetically expanding the repertoire for their instrumentation since their formation in …

Eric Huebner Plays Schumann, Carter And StravinskyEric Huebner, piano

New Focus Recordings expands its representation of iconic works from the solo piano repertoire with this recital release of works by Carter, Stravinsky, and Schumann, performed with grace and …

The Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States: Music From SEAMUS Volume 25

SEAMUS (Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States) has been promoting electro-acoustic composition, performance, and recording since its founding in 1984. This new imprint devoted to …

Christopher Bailey: Glimmering Webs

“Glimmering Webs” is a comprehensive collection of Christopher Bailey’s solo piano music, displaying his uncommonly broad palette. Featuring pianists Shiau-uen Ding, Augustus Arnone, and Jacob …

Dai Fujikura: Mina

Dai Fujikura’s newest recording is named after his daughter Mina, who was born just before he began composing the title piece on the recording, written for five soloists from the International …

LeStrange Viols: William Cranford Consort Music for 4, 5 and 6 Viols

[AN OLDE FOCUS RELEASE] LeStrange Viols’ modern premier recording of the chamber music of William Cranford on the Olde Focus Recordings division is the first major single-composer release by an …

Reiko Füting: names, erased

Reiko Fueting’s "names, erased" features works of exquisitely crafted chamber music performed by members of New York City’s most celebrated contemporary ensembles, including Either/Or Ensemble, …

Steven Ricks: Young American Inventions

Composer Steven Ricks's music reflects a sophisticated and complex relationship to modernism, vernacular language, musique concrete, and conceptualism, creating works that mashup these different …

CROSSINGS New Music for CelloKate Dillingham, cello & Amir Khosrowpour, piano

CROSSINGS: New Music for Cello, performed by Kate Dillingham, cellist, and Amir Khosrowpour, pianist, is a collection of contemporary compositions for solo cello and cello and …

Duo Figer-Khanina: Unearthing

Unearthing is the debut recording by Duo Figer Khanina, a violin and piano duo that focuses on promoting unsung repertoire, and includes seldom heard works by Grazyna Baciewicz, Rodrigo, and Malcolm …

Intersecting LinesJason Kush & Billy Test

Saxophonist Jason Kush and pianist Billy Test team up for a recording capturing the mix of spontaneity and trust that develops between two improvisers who have truly entered into a musical …

Andrew Violette: Sonata for GuitarDaniel Lippel & Andrew Violette

Andrew Violette's hour long Sonata for Guitar, here performed by Daniel Lippel, is one of three recent solo unaccompanied string works, all of which share a neo-Baroque emphasis on counterpoint and …

FMFlexible Music/Daniel Lippel/Tim Ruedeman/Eric Huebner/Haruka Fujii

This debut full length recording from NYC based new music quartet Flexible Music features Louis Andriessen's iconic "Hout", and five commissioned works that, in responding to it, defined the group's …

Abandoned TimeInternational Contemporary Ensemble/Tony Arnold, soprano/Daniel Lippel, guitar

Abandoned Time was the International Contemporary Ensemble's second full length cd, and the first entirely programmed and curated by members of the group. It features several pieces that have become …

Beyond Romance - Songs By Ben Bierman

Trumpeter/composer Ben Bierman releases his cabaret/art song cycle exploring mid life romance, Beyond Romance, featuring pianist Jeb Patton (Heath Brothers), vocalists Hilary Gardner and Matthew …

JACK Quartet: JACK Quartet plays áltaVoz composers

New music powerhouse JACK Quartet performs works by four Latin American emigré composers whose works transcend boundaries of nation and …

Inflorescence: Music From soundSCAPETony Arnold, soprano/Aiyun Huang, percussion/Thomas Rosenkranz, piano

This recording, by three members of the faculty at the soundSCAPE Festival in Maccagno, Italy, features works commissioned by the festival in 2012 by Oberlin Conservatory faculty composer Josh …

Daniel Lippel: Sustenance

Sustenance is a concept album of premieres on which several chamber pieces are linked together by electronic "passages" by composer Peter Gilbert. Includes performances by several of New York's most …

Neil Thornock: Between the Lines

Neil Thornock's release Between the Lines features his music for percussion, especially those struck instruments that ring, and includes his own performance on carrillon in the large ensemble …

Daniel Lippel: J.S. Bach BWV 998, 1003, 1010

This collection of three works in transcription for guitar by J.S. Bach was the product of an interest in capturing a snapshot of one performer's relationship to these pieces in a point in time, and …

a.pe.ri.od.ic: Jürg Frey: more or less

a.pe.ri.od.ic’s inaugural release “more or less” is a CD of three recent works by the Swiss composer, Jürg Frey. The 10-member mixed ensemble brings out the unique and unusual blend of beauty, …

Alan Tormey: Theories of Place

Composer Alan Tormey's Theories of Place is a new and provocative full-length digital release of ‘industrial chamber music’ that integrates classical, electronic, and environmental sounds into a …

Kivie Cahn-Lipman: J.S. Bach, Six Suites for Solo Violoncello Without Bass

Cellist Kivie Cahn-Lipman releases his unique approach to Bach's seminal cello suites, informed by his work as an early music performer and balanced with his sensibility as a performer of modern …

Richard Carrick: Stone Guitars

Composer and guitarist Richard Carrick's Stone Guitars is a collection of pieces comprised of independently improvised electric guitar tracks layered in the studio, marrying the beauty of the …

Phyllis Chen: Little Things

Composer and toy pianist Phyllis Chen's third solo recording, Little Things, is a compilation of works written for her which expand the boundaries of this idiosyncatic …

DUO Stephanie and Saar: Beethoven Dialogues

Duo Stephanie and Saar’s Beethoven Dialogues, the second New Focus release following their critically acclaimed Bach Crossings, recasts three of Beethoven’s iconic op. 18 set of string quartets …

Yegor Shevtsov: ...avec un frisson: Late Piano Works of Debussy and Boulez

Pianist Yegor Shevtsov focuses on late works of two of the towering figures in French composition on this recording, Pierre Boulez and Claude …

ACRONYM: Wunderkammer

[AN OLDE FOCUS RELEASE] In seventeenth-century Germany, a Wunderkammer (typically translated as “Cabinet of Curiosities”) was a type of private museum collection in the home of an aristocrat. …

Importango: Tango for Import

Importango’s debut release, Tango for Import, is also the first release on Panoramic Recordings, a new division of New Focus Recordings dedicated to a wide continuum of stylistic diversity. The New …

Stress PositionDrew Baker & Marilyn Nonken, piano

Stress Position is a collection of Drew Baker's piano music, focusing on works that take a politically charged stance through their presentation, and performed with virtuosity and conviction by …

WAMMichael Finnissy & Michael Norsworthy

On “WAM”, British composer Michael Finnissy plays with various elements of “musical culture” - rearranging and recontextualizing old “classics”, writing chamber music without traditional …

RighteousGIRLS: gathering blue

RighteousGIRLS (flutist Gina Izzo and pianist Erika Dohi) present their debut recording, "gathering blue" featuring works written for them that draw from the worlds of contemporary classical music, …

R WE WHO R WE

Subversive duo R WE WHO R WE, featuring composer/performers Ted Hearne (vocals) and Philip White (mixer feedback), reimagines, dissects, and radically reconstructs the cover …

NY Licorice Ensemble: Licorice Rhapsody

The NY Licorice Ensemble’s first recording distributed in the US, Licorice Rhapsody features the unique clarinet ensemble is heard here in arrangements of iconic music by Gershwin, Bernstein, …

Van Stiefel: Solaris

Van Stiefel's Solaris explores the fragile and delicate world of electric guitar played with a classical technique. Featuring performances by guitarists Daniel Lippel, David Nadal, and the composer …

Dai Fujikura: Flare

London based composer Dai Fujikura launches his own imprint for recordings of his work, Minabel Records, with this first release, Flare, featuring performances from such acclaimed ensembles as the …

Martin Scherzinger: African Math

Martin Scherzinger is a South African-born composer and media theorist, who works on and engages with the music of Africa. African Math is a recording of piano trio music that "africanizes" these …

Daniel Lippel: Steve Reich: Electric Counterpoint

Guitarist Daniel Lippel releases a new version of Steve Reich’s iconic Electric Counterpoint. In collaboration with South African born ethnomusicologist Martin Scherzinger, Lippel approached the …

Haruka Fujii: Ingredients

Percussionist Haruka Fujii releases her first full-length solo recording Ingredients, exploring the colorful components of virtuoso repertoire for mixed …

David Laganella: The Calls of Gravity

David Laganella's music is intensely focused and rhythmic, often swirling around around a central pitch, as objects swirling around their gravitational center. Featuring performances by the Prism …

Greg Chudzik: Solo Works, Vol. 1

Bassist Greg Chudzik, frequent performer with new music groups Talea Ensemble, Ensemble Signal, and Wet Ink Ensemble, as well as the eclectic band Empyrean Atlas, releases this solo digital only EP …

American Romantics IIReuben Blundell & Gowanus Arts Ensemble

“American Romantics II” is the second volume in a project initiated by conductor Reuben Blundell after he discovered several scores for string orchestra through the Fleisher Collection. These …

Olivier Messiaen - HarawiTony Arnold, soprano & Jacob Greenberg, piano

Longtime collaborators Tony Arnold (soprano) and Jacob Greenberg (piano) release a poignant recording of Olivier Messiaen’s evocative song cycle Harawi: Song of Love and Death. The solar chaos of …

Edgar Guzmán: Différance

This collection of electronic and electro-acoustic pieces by one of Mexico's most prolific young composers explores a pallette of sonic materials derived from the technological and online …

Dai Fujikura: my letter to the world

[A MINABEL RELEASE] Dai Fujikura’s latest release documents his close relationship with two remarkable institutions, New York based new music ensemble ICE (International Contemporary Ensemble), and …

Ecstatic Music: TAK Ensemble plays Taylor Brook

Ecstatic Music: TAK Ensemble plays Taylor Brook is the product of years of collaboration between Brook and TAK, and captures the range of Brook’s compositional voice, as well as TAK’s …

Joshua Rubin: There Never is No Light

ICE Clarinetist and Program Director Joshua Rubin releases his debut album with several works for clarinet and electronics, including premieres by Mario Davidovsky, Olly Wilson, and Mario Diaz de …

American Romantics: Premiere Recordings of Turn of the Century Works for String OrchestraReuben Blundell & Gowanus Arts Ensemble

“American Romantics” is a project initiated by conductor Reuben Blundell after he discovered several scores for string orchestra through the Fleischer Collection. These scores were all composed …

Dai Fujikura: Ampere

[A MINABEL RELEASE] Dai Fujikura presents three large ensemble works, conducted by Pierre Boulez, Thierry Fischer, and Michael Lewanski, alongside three solo pieces. The ecstatic character of …

ACRONYM: Paradise: Instrumental Sonatas of Antonio Bertali

ACRONYM is pleased to present the first recordings here of six sonatas by Antonio Bertali, and the first recordings in their present orchestrations of several …

Antares: Antares plays works by Peter Lieberson and Roger Reynolds

Antares, an ensemble formed to perform Messiaen's Quartet for the End of Time, releases this recording of two major works written for one of the group's predecessors, the Tashi Quartet, by Peter …

Richard Beaudoin: Microtimings

The inaugural recordings of Richard Beaudoin’s music based on microtiming: a refined methodology for translating micro-temporal properties of a recorded …

Mivos String Quartet: Garden of Diverging Paths

The Mivos Quartet's newest release features three recent works for string quartet by US-based composers Taylor Brook, Andrew Greenwald, and Kate Soper. Literary elements inspired each work on this …

David Funck: Stricturæ Viola-di Gambicæ

ICE founding cellist Kivie Cahn-Lipman releases this first recording of the complete consort music of little known 17th century composer David Funck, as part of a launch of a new early music division …

NatarajaConor Nelson, flute & Thomas Rosenkranz, piano

Several of the works on this collection of fascinating music by flutist Conor Nelson and pianist Thomas Rosenkranz (colleagues at Bowling Green State University) are oriented around dance, but a …

ManachayanaDai Fujikura & Shin Sasakubo

The polystylistic recording, "Manayachana", was co-composed by Dai Fujikura and guitarist Shin Sasakubo with an ocean dividing …

Breaking TrainingConor Nelson & Ayano Kataoka

In their debut release, the Conor and Ayano Duo explores repertoire for flute and percussion that takes its inspiration from various folkloric, world music, and vernacular …

DUO Stephanie and Saar: Bach Crossings

Bach Crossings, a first release for DUO Stephanie and Saar on New Focus, features Gyorgy Kurtag's inspired transcriptions of works by Bach for four hands …

NY Licorice Ensemble: Warabe-Uta Remix

Furious Artisans presents the 3rd release from NY Licorice Ensemble, featuring all new works composed for the group as part of a composers competition in which the candidates were asked to arrange …

Claire Chase: Terrestre

Virtuoso flutist Claire Chase offers stunning performances of some of the towering works of the modern flute repertoire by luminaries Boulez, Saariaho, Carter, Donatoni, and close collaborator …

Nathan Douds Ensemble

The Nathan Douds Ensemble's instrumentation suggests modern jazz as its foundation, but a deeper look reveals elements of electronic, world, contemporary and free improvisation operating within …

Lee Weisert: Wild Arc

Composer Lee Weisert, faculty member at University of Chapel Hill Chapel Hill, writes acoustic and electro-acoustic music that seeks to find, through experimentation, tinkering, and unconventional …

ACRONYM: Johann Christoph Pezel: Opus Musicum Sonatarum: the “Alphabet Sonatas”

[AN OLDE FOCUS RELEASE] Period music ensemble ACRONYM features the quirky and unique "Alphabet" Sonatas by Polish born Johann Christoph Pezel, a composer who occupied a position of prominence in …

Jacob Greenberg: Solitary

Solitary is a collection of solo piano works written during periods of extreme isolation and creative austerity in the respective composers’ lives. The recording, Jacob Greenberg’s debut full …

Simple SongsDoug Perkins, percussion

Doug Perkins’s “Simple Songs” is a document of the dynamism that exists in the constantly growing percussion repertoire, from Michael Gordon's athletic, virtuosic XY to Nathan Davis' …

Claire Chase: Aliento

Aliento carves out a vast range of expressivity within a dramatically new context of sound on the flute. The recording features several works written for Claire Chase by Nathan Davis, Du Yun, Marcelo …

Robert Honstein: RE: You

The pieces on Robert Honstein's Re:You are inspired by an experience which is a window into a uniquely 21st century phenomenon – an errant string of messages written by an internet dating site …

Scott L. Miller: Tipping Point

SCOTT MILLER and ZEITGEIST celebrate the first decade of their work together with the release of Tipping Point, a CD featuring Miller's deft works for instrument and electronics alongside his only …

Song Cycle: Schubert Lieder TranscriptionsTony Arnold & Daniel Lippel

Song Cycle features soprano Tony Arnold and guitarist Daniel Lippel, colleagues in ICE (International Contemporary Ensemble), in a collection of transcriptions of Schubert lieder for voice and guitar …

Schumann and BusoniJacob Greenberg, piano

Pianist Jacob Greenberg releases his second album on New Focus Recordings, featuring two towering works by Robert Schumann and Ferruccio …

Pasos en otra calleFonema Consort/Pablo Santiago Chin/Mauricio Pauly

Chicago based ensemble Fonema Consort performs works by Costa Rican composers Pablo Santiago Chin and Mauricio Pauly that stretch vocal chamber music into new and highly expressive territory, lending …

Auricolae Children's Troupe: Fairy Tales, Folklore, and Fables

Led by artistic director, narrator, and violist David Yang, Philadelphia based Auricolae Children's Troupe has performed for thousands of students in the Delaware Valley, introducing young people to …

The Bright and Hollow SkyNathan Davis & International Contemporary Ensemble

Inspired by natural processes and acoustic phenomena, composer and percussionist Nathan Davis makes music that elucidates essential characters of instruments and the fragile athletics of playing …

Suzanne Farrin: Corpo di Terra

Suzanne Farrin's Corpo di Terra is a collection of "songs without words" that composer Suzanne Farrin has created based on sonnets by the Italian poet, Petrarch. These solos and duos explore a …

Ryan Streber: Concentric

Composer and Owner/Engineer of Oktaven Audio, Ryan Streber, releases a compendium of his recent chamber works, featuring performances by counter(induction, Line C3 Percussion Quartet, Daniel Lippel, …

Omri Shimron: "The People United Will Never Be Defeated!" {36 Variations on "¡EI Pueblo Unido Jamás Será Vencido!"}

Pianist Omri Shimron releases an incisive and personal account of Frederic Rzewski's iconic variations set on a Chilean Marxist anthem, "The People United Will Never be Defeated." Shimron's version …

Reuben Blundell and the Lansdowne Symphony Orchestra: American Romantics III

“American Romantics III” is the third volume in a project initiated by conductor Reuben Blundell after discovering several scores of previously unrecorded works by 19th century American …

Du Yun: Shark in You

Du Yun, critically acclaimed as a composer of concert music, releases her first album as her pop diva alter-ego, …

Frederic Hand: Samatureya

Samatureya is composer/guitarist Frederic Hand's second release on Panoramic Recordings, an imprint of New Focus Recordings. The longtime Metropolitan Opera guitarist, Mannes School of Music faculty …

Third Coast Percussion: Resounding Earth

Augusta Read Thomas’ “Resounding Earth” is a work for written for the intrepid Third Coast Percussion ensemble, exploring the meditative and profound sound world of …

Frederic Hand: Odyssey

Longtime Metropolitan Opera guitarist and lutenist, versatile and award winning composer, and mentor and teacher to generations of guitarists, Frederic Hand has enjoyed an impressive and impactful …

Rotational TemplatesTravis Reuter & Travis Reuter Quintet

Guitarist and composer Travis Reuter's debut, Rotational Templates, exists at the margins of avant garde jazz and contemporary composition, weaving searing improvisations around strains of …

Adam Silverman: Sturm

The compositions of Adam Silverman reflect his adventurous curiosity—he’s written music in many styles, from tonal to microtonal, from minimal to maximal, but the music is always direct, …

Dai Fujikura: Mirrors

Dai Fujikura's third release presents four stunning orchestral works in a vital document of the composer's sonic …

Ryan Muncy: Hot

Saxophonist Ryan Muncy releases a recording that features works that highlight the shifting and increasingly prominent role that his instrument plays in the avant …

Nicholas Phillips: American Vernacular: New Music for Solo Piano

Pianist Nicholas Phillips, called "an able and persuasive advocate" of new music (New York Times), releases a recording documenting his ambitious commissioning project, American Vernacular, featuring …

Three Free Radicals: Diary of a Left-Handed Sleepwalker

Minneapolis based composer and live electronics performer Scott Miller teams up with Estonian guitarist Mart Soo as "Three Free Radicals" for this collection of free improvisations. The …

Claire Chase: Density

Density takes the seminal flute solo Density 21.5 by Edgard Varèse as an endpoint and works backwards through an exploration of the concept of "density" as a springboard for sonic explorations of …

Peter Gilbert: The Bold Arch of Undreamt Bridges

Composer Peter Gilbert's debut full length recording features his ethereal compositions for live instruments and live electronics, and includes performances by flutist Mario Caroli, saxophonist …