Clay Davidson, country music newcomer whose hit single, "Unconditional," is now No. 10 on Billboard's country charts, comes to the Sooner Theatre Saturday at 8 p.m.

Sarah Getto, a 17-year-old Norman resident, is the opening act.

Davidson, of Saltville, Va., has been singing and picking ever since he can remember. Neighbors in the small town sat outside, entertaining themselves with music.

"It was a good upbringing, but there wasn't much to do except music. We'd start with bluegrass at the beginning of the day and end up playing Molly Hatchet by the end of the night, so it was real fun. The only disadvantage, I guess, was not knowing anything but those immediate surroundings."

Davidson's eclectic musical roots are reflected in the artists who most influenced his work. He names Lynyrd Skynyrd, Stevie Ray Vaughn, Merle Haggard, Don Williams, Elvis and his dad as models to whom he owes his inspiration.

As a high-schooler, the musical muse moved Davidson to form a band with his buddies, and the group opened for such artists as Tom T. Hall and Restless Heart. His big break came when he won TNN's Charlie Daniels Talent Round-up competition and used the prize money to move with his wife to the outskirts of Nashville.

Once there, he pumped gas by day to support his music habit and began making the rounds of publishers on Music Row until he landed steady work as a demo singer. He met Virgin Studio president and CEO Scott Hendricks and writer-producer Jude Cole at a private party where he was a last-minute substitute for Michael McDonald. Hendricks signed him to Virgin that night.

"Then Jude signed on to co-produce, and I couldn't believe it. It was pretty wild. I never even thought I'd get to meet Jude, let alone work with him. ... It was mind-boggling, the way it all happened so fast."

It almost didn't happen. When Davidson first heard "Unconditional," with its powerful message of generational conflict, he found the message frightening. "The words were just so strong," Davidson said during a recent interview.

"That word 'hate' is a strong word. I can't say I ever told my parents I hate them, but I have stood in the kitchen and left when we were both a little angry. It hit me so hard that I almost backed away from the song, but then I listened again and realized the message is really a positive one. After that, I fell in love with it."

The opening act for Davidson, local high-schooler Sarah Getto, responded to a contest by Davidson's agents at Buddy Lee Attractions to submit a CD to open the show.

"I'm so excited! I'm just ecstatic! There were so many good performers turning in tapes - I didn't have my hopes up that high," she said about winning. "I really do like Clay Davidson - he does lots of guitar licks, kind of like rock, but it's country. It's really a mix. I hope I get to meet him," she said.

Getto, too, has been steeped in music since birth. She started playing piano at the age of 3, mimicking her music teacher, and took up violin at 8.

She began composing at 10, a song called "Flying into Space," which she did as a project for the school science fair. Blind since birth, she said she often writes a song when other students are doing visual arts for a project.

Like Davidson, Getto's musical style is varied.

"My style is a mix of country, pop, classical, and some rock... not just one style. I've done quite a bit of country and am working on some crossover mixes between country and pop," she said. "Soak it," one of her newer pieces, is styled after European dance music, and so named because of a comment by her mother.

"She said that whatever I listen to I absorb like a sponge," Getto said.

Getto, who has 12 copyrighted songs to her credit, hopes to perform professionally after high school graduation.

Davidson is working on his second album. As a relative newcomer, he offers this advice to Getto: "Try not to get discouraged. Continue with what you love. It takes a lot of hard work and dedication. Give it all you have. I wish you luck!"

Reserved-seat tickets are $20 and may be reserved by calling the Sooner Theatre at 321-8091.

Archive ID: 849519