THUNDER

Ridnour: 4 teams, 7 days

OKLAHOMA CITY -- Luke Ridnour may be in need of a rest -- or a good travel agent -- after being traded for the fourth time in less than a week.

The Oklahoma City Thunder sent the veteran guard and cash to the Toronto Raptors on Tuesday in exchange for a trade exception and the rights to forward Tomislav Zubcic.

It was just the latest move for Ridnour: After averaging 4 points and 2 assists for Orlando last season, he was dealt to Charlotte last Wednesday in a deal involving Memphis and then almost immediately sent to the Thunder along with a conditional 2016 second-round draft pick for guard Jeremy Lamb.

And now he's on the move again. Ridnour has played for five NBA teams in 12 years, and the former Oregon Duck has a career scoring average of 9.3 points per game.

The Thunder will have one year to exercise the trade exception. Zubcic was the 56th overall pick in the 2012 draft and has yet to play in the NBA.

The Thunder also announced former University of Arkansas player Michael Qualls is joining Oklahoma City on a free-agent deal. He will rehab with the Thunder but will not be ready for summer league or camp because of his ACL.

PELICANS

Davis gets new deal

NEW ORLEANS — A person with knowledge of the details says All-Star power forward Anthony Davis and the New Orleans Pelicans have agreed on a five-year extension worth more than $140 million.

Davis tweeted: “NOLA, I am here to stay! Just getting started” shortly after free agency opened late Tuesday night, and the person confirmed the agreement to The Associated Press on condition of anonymity because the deal cannot yet be signed.

Davis, 22, is entering the final season of a four-year contract he signed after being drafted first overall out of Kentucky in 2012. He had until Oct. 31 to accept the offer or could have become a restricted free agent next offseason.

Davis averaged 24.4 points, 10.2 rebounds and 2.9 blocks this season. The exact value of his extension can’t be determined until the salary cap has been set next week.

CAVALIERS

Three receive offers

CLEVELAND -- Tristan Thompson, Matthew Dellavedova and Iman Shumpert all received qualifying offers from Cleveland on Tuesday, meaning the Cavaliers can match any offers those players get from other clubs this summer.

All the moves were expected. The Cavs had indicated they want each to return next season.

Thompson is of particular importance to the Cavaliers, who went to the NBA Finals this past season. He has appeared in 308 consecutive games for Cleveland, has averaged 10.1 points and 8.4 rebounds over his four-year career and saw his stock soar by averaging 9.6 points and 10.8 rebounds in this year's playoffs.

Dellavedova -- who played an increased role once starting point guard Kyrie Irving was lost for the postseason with a knee injury. Shumpert started 16 playoff games for the Cavs, who lost in the finals to Golden State 4-2.

HAWKS

Antic returning to Europe

ATLANTA -- Pero Antic is returning to Europe following two seasons with the Atlanta Hawks, most spent as a backup power forward and center.

The 6-11 Antic, born in Skopje, Yugoslavia, has signed a two-year deal with Fenerbahce of the Euroleague. The team announced the signing.

Antic averaged 5.7 points and 3.7 rebounds in 63 games, including only three starts, as the Hawks advanced to the Eastern Conference finals this season. The 32-year-old Antic had some success stretching the floor with his three-point shooting, though his accuracy declined this season. He averaged 7.0 points and 4.2 rebounds in 2013-14.

Antic and Hawks teammate Thabo Sefolosha were arrested outside a Manhattan nightclub on April 8. They were charged with obstructing authorities and disorderly conduct but have denied any wrongdoing.

Sports on 07/01/2015