In a week, Luke Ridnour was traded from Orlando to Memphis to Charlotte to Oklahoma City to Toronto – the first three trades in 25 hours – and he never visited any of his "new" teams.

Ridnour spent the past week unconcerned about which team traded him and which team is going to trade him and enjoyed time his four boys, all six and younger.

"I've got a lot of texts from friends and family worried about us," Ridnour told USA TODAY Sports from his home on a lake on suburban Seattle. "It really hasn't affected us at all. It's been pretty funny ...

"Honestly, not much has changed."

Ridnour said he's up around 6:30 a.m., running around with his sons, playing in the lake and having fun.

He is the 2015 version of the Quentin Richardson who in 2009 was traded from New York to Memphis to the Los Angeles Clippers to Minnesota to Miami in seven-week span in the offseason.

"I just laughed about it and realized my contract is the reason I'm getting traded and how valuable my deal is for teams in free agency," Ridnour said.

At 34 years old and with a non-guaranteed contract, Ridnour had a hunch he could be on the move – or least his contract could be on the move – but he didn't expect four trades in seven days.

"I knew what was going on and never really got invested in any team that traded for me," he said. "We've taken it pretty light-hearted and laughed at all the funny pictures we've seen."

Ridnour isn't much of a social media person. He's on Twitter and has never tweeted, but knows he's been popular on social media in the past week.

Friends have texted and e-mailed him some of the Internet memes featuring his peculiar story. One photo is a "Where's Waldo?" scene. One photo shows Ridnour wearing an NBA jacket with the logo of every NBA team on it.

"People are telling me I'm trending and it's pretty funny how people get into it," he said.

Had this happened earlier in his career, he's not sure he would be so laid-back about it. Now, he's having fun in the offseason, getting ready to hold a camp for kids 12-and-under in his hometown of Blaine, Wash.

He will also need to decide what he wants to do next with his career. It's possible he could end up with another team soon and it's more than likely that whatever team has Ridnour's rights next week will cut him before his contract becomes fully guaranteed on July 10.

The 12-year veteran is considering at least another NBA season, and he and his agent, Jim Tanner, have looked at potential teams with which he could sign. But retirement is a possibility, too.

"I'll look at the situation and see if it's something that's worth my family and me moving to and see if I'm going to keep playing or not," he said. "That's where my mind has been."

Through four trades in seven days, his mind has been in a good spot.