By of the

Point guard Luke Ridnour is returning to the Milwaukee Bucks as part of a three-team trade involving Minnesota and Oklahoma City.

The 32-year-old Ridnour played for the Bucks for two seasons from 2008-'10 before signing a free-agent deal with the Timberwolves, where he has played for the last three years.

Minnesota needed to clear enough salary cap space to sign free-agent forward Corey Brewer to a three-year, $15 million contract. And the Timberwolves were able to do it by reaching agreement on a sign-and-trade with free agent Kevin Martin and by sending Ridnour and his $4.3 million salary to the Bucks.

The Bucks also received a 2014 second-round draft pick from Minnesota (via the Los Angeles Lakers) and cash considerations from Oklahoma City as part of the trade. Milwaukee sent the draft rights to 2003 second-round pick Szymon Szewczyk to the Thunder as part of the deal.

Oklahoma City received a trade exception in the deal, which became official Thursday night.

Ridnour will be able to return to his natural point guard position with the Bucks after starting all 82 games with Minnesota last season and averaging 11.5 points and 3.8 assists. The 6-foot-2 Ridnour often started at shooting guard and defended much bigger players while playing in tandem with point guard Ricky Rubio.

The 10-year veteran shot 45.3% from the floor and 84.8% from the free throw line.

Minnesota coach Rick Adelman was a strong believer in the toughness of Ridnour and employed him at shooting guard despite his size disadvantage.

"It's amazing he's been able to play every game," Adelman said late in the past season. "He just keeps going out every day."

Ridnour started 50 games and appeared in 72 with Milwaukee in 2008-'09 after arriving in a three-team deal that involved Mo Williams and Desmond Mason leaving the Bucks. The former Oregon star played the first five seasons of his NBA career with the Seattle SuperSonics.

He appeared in all 82 games in his second year with the Bucks, all as a reserve, and played a key role behind rookie point guard Brandon Jennings. Ridnour averaged 10 points and 4.5 assists in his two seasons in Milwaukee.

He has career averages of 10 points, 4.8 assists and 2.4 rebounds in 722 regular-season games.