Luke Ridnour, 34, entered the NBA's postseason having played for five teams, including two stints with the Milwaukee Bucks, in his 12-year career.

"He's the very definition of a 'journeyman,' until this week," wrote Kelly Dwyer of Yahoo Sports. "We're going to have to find a new word for the guy."

In the span of 24 hours, the former Minnesota Timberwolves guard was traded three times. On Wednesday, the Timberwolves traded him to the Memphis Grizzlies for the rights to 22-year-old Latvian small forward Jannis Timma. On Thursday, the Grizzlies traded Ridnour to Charlotte in exchange for forward Matt Barnes. Later on Thursday, the Bobcats sent Ridnour to Oklahoma City in exchange for shooting guard Jeremy Lamb.

For those counting at home, that's four NBA teams (Orlando, Memphis, Charlotte and Oklahoma City) in a day-long span.

The stop in Oklahoma City might be considered a blast from the past for Ridnour, who once played for the Seattle SuperSonics. Ridnour was also both a Charlotte Bobcat and a Charlotte Hornet in the span of 14 months.

The roller coaster ride Ridnour just went through may not be the end. As Dwyer noted, the Thunder are nearly assured of cutting Ridnour before July 10, when his $2.75 million team option for the 2015-2016 season becomes fully guaranteed.

"Ridnour, who averaged 4 points and 2 assists in 14 minutes a game last season, is well worth that money. But Oklahoma City is looking to shy away from the luxury tax, while opening up a roster spot to facilitate trades and/or signings," Dwyer wrote. "That means Ridnour will be a free agent in July, set to join his fifth team in a month's time."

"At some point, Ridnour should shut off his phone, close his eyes and fall into a Rip Van Winkle-caliber slumber," Thomas Duffy of Bleacher Report wrote. "When he awakens, the onslaught ... will be over, and hopefully -- for his sanity, at least -- he'll have finally found a concrete home....somewhere."

Interesting idea

A video review of a play during Wednesday night's game between the Los Angeles Dodgers and Chicago Cubs left Cubs Manager Joe Maddon calling for an overhaul of the replay system.

His idea could be called interesting, to say the least.

The play in question occured with two outs and the Cubs trailing by three in the bottom of the ninth. Right fielder Chris Denorfia lined a ball off the left-field wall that bounced to left fielder Scott Van Slyke.

Van Slyke threw the ball to second base as Denorfia slid in. Denorfia was called out on the field, but replays showed he might have gotten his left arm on the bag as he was being tagged on the front of his jersey.

After a review, the call stood but was not confirmed. It was then that Maddon lashed out at the replay system, calling for an overhaul that includes "nerds" well versed in analyzing video on the fly.

"I think it screams for an independent group back there to research the video," Maddon said after the game. "I think you should get a bunch of nerds back there that know how to look at a videotape and then come to a conclusion. I think it would be much more interesting that way."

Where exactly would these "nerds" be found? Is Steve Bartman available, perhaps?

Sports quiz

Where did Luke Ridnour play college basketball?

Answer

Ridnour played at Oregon, where he was Pacific-10 Player of the Year in 2003.

Sports on 06/26/2015