Corrosion of Conformity (C.O.C.) was formed in North Carolina in the early ‘80s by guitarist Woody Weatherman. Known as one of the first punk-metal fusion bands, Corrosion of Conformity is highly regarded for its intelligent political lyrics, aggressive sound, and willingness to deviate from metal and hardcore conventions.

C.O.C. debuted in 1984 with Eye for an Eye, their first album influenced by Black Flag. It featured Weatherman, Reed Mullin (drummer), Mike Dean (bassist), and Eric Eycke (vocals). With the release of their Animosity in 1985, the band started to build a strong cult following.

After years of internal stability and several lineup changes, the band released Blind in 1991, a focused, powerful, and metallic record that increased their cult following by leaps and bounds. When the band released Wiseblood in 1996, the band was more popular than ever.

After a long break from recording and fresh from a tour with Metallica, Corrosion of Conformity released America’s Volume Dealer, another album, in the fall of 2000. After taking another break, the band released the live recording Live Volume a year after. After regrouping in April 2005, they released the hard-hitting In the Arms of God.

After another hiatus, the members worked on different side projects until 2010. In 2012, the band released its eighth album, Corrosion of Conformity, via Candlelight Records. Shortly after in 2014, they released IX. After the release of IX, they started working on their next studio album, No Cross No Crown.

No Cross No Crown was the first album to enter the top 100 on the Billboard 200. The band’s influence included heavy metal bands like Iron Maiden, Judas Priest, Black Sabbath, and Scorpions. They are also influenced by hardcore groups like Circle Jerks, Minor Threat, and Black Flag.

Corrosion of Conformity has collaborated with several artists through the years, including Warren Haynes of the Allman Brothers Band, Metallica’s James Hetfield, and Stanton Moore of Galactic. Members of COC have also collaborated with several groups and musicians, including Lynyrd Skynyrd, Metallica, and Dave Grohl.