Band Details

From the Promoter

CORROSION OF CONFORMITY

Corrosion of Conformity are reuniting with guitarist/vocalist Pepper Keenan for UK/European and North American dates. Other than a few surprise appearances, this will be the first time Keenan has toured with the band since 2006. This will also be the first time the "Deliverance" lineup of the group has played together since 2001.

C.O.C. recently emerged from hibernation as a trio and released 2012's eponymous album and 2014's "IX" to wide acclaim, but many have been eagerly awaiting the return of Pepper Keenan.

The band were originally an influential hardcore punk/heavy metal crossover act before reaching critical success with a new lineup on 1991's "Blind" album. That trajectory continued with wider appeal as Keenan took over as primary vocalist on "Deliverance" (1994) and "Wiseblood" (1996). These two recordings in particular fused the raw energy of the previous albums with some great strides forward in classic rock inspired songwriting and more spacious production and execution, which were often copied but rarely equalled. This juggernaut gained mass and momentum with relentless touring alongside Metallica, Clutch, Eyehategod and many more. Eventually following "In the Arms of God", 2005, Keenan focused all energy on his hometown band Down. Until now, that is. Recent internet chatter on the subject of a reunion turns out be true.

CROWBAR

As undisputed heavyweight champions of the New Orleans sludge sound, CROWBAR have remained a true force in aggressive underground music for over a decade.

Even with an ambitious and genre-defining musical legacy in their wake, CROWBAR continues to evolve while remaining the sonic definition of 'heavy.' Guitarist and vocalist Kirk Windstein's wrecking ball of charged emotion remains as crushing as ever...

THE OBSESSED

The Obsessed were formed in the late 1970's by teenage friends Scott Weinrich, aka "Wino (2)", (guitar) and Mark Laue (bass) along with drummer Dave Flood (aka "Dave The Slave") and guitarist/vocalist Johnny Reese in Maryland, USA. Over time, the line-up would fluxuate, with Reese leaving, and vocalist Vance Bockis and guitarist Norman Lawson passing through the ranks. Finally, as a trio consisting of Weinrich (now handling vocals and guitar), Laue, and Flood, the band released their debut 7", commonly known as "Sodden Jackyl". The band made a name for themselves in and around Maryland, even gaining a following in Washington DC's famous hardcore punk scene, and made an appearance on a "Metal Massacre" compilation. Flood was eventually replaced by Ed Gulli and this line-up recorded a tape together in 1985 but were unable to find anyone to release it. Faced with a lack of success and label disinterest, the group disbanded shortly afterwards. However, word of the band reached Saint Vitus, whose singer, Scott Reagers, had announced his departure from the band, and they asked Wino to join. The Obsessed tape began making the rounds in tape-trading circles and, soon enough, Hellhound Records, Saint Vitus's German record label, offered to release it. To support its release, Wino put a new version of the band, consisting of drummer Greg Rogers and bassist Scott Reeder (who replaced Danny Hood, who was killed in a motorcycle accident shortly after joining the Obsessed), for a tour. However, after the tour, Wino decided to quit Saint Vitus for reasons that remain a point of contention between Wino and Vitus leader Dave Chandler. Wino maintained that he received Chandler's blessing for the released of the Obsessed album and subsequent tour but upon returning home was unhappy with the new material Chandler was writing and upset that the band chose Don Dokken to produce their next album. Chandler claimed that he was apprehensive about the Obsessed project and that Wino lost interest in Saint Vitus because of it. In any case, the Obsessed was now Wino's full-time band the group recorded "Lunar Womb" for Hellhound in 1991. Dissatisfied with Hellhound, Wino accepted a record deal with Columbia Records for the band's next album "The Church Within", which saw Guy Pinhas replace Scott Reeder. However, life on a major label was not much better. The label pulled promotion for the album just as it was being released and it was a commercial failure. The band soon split and, for a time, Wino sank into substance abuse. However, he eventually managed to clean himself up and, after living for a number of years in Los Angeles, returned to Maryland were he fronted Spirit Caravan and The Hidden Hand before going solo. In 1999, Southern Lord Recordings put together an odds-and-ends collection called "Incarnate".

In February 2016, Wino announced that his band Spirit Caravan would be adopting The Obsessed moniker while continuing to play material from both bands' catalogs.

MOTHERSHIP

Rock n' Roll history is rife with brothers working together to create their artistic vision. But rarely do we hear about a full-fledged family unit embarking down the treacherous path of a musical career. In the case of Texas based Mothership, the Brother Juett (Kyle on bass, younger brother Kelley on guitar) enlisted the aid of their father, John Juett, to help get the 'ship off the ground. Raised on a healthy dose of their father's 70's-era record collection, the brothers began crafting songs fueled on the raucous and raw good time vibe when music seemed to know no bounds. Lifting off the pad for the first time in 2010, the band began to gain momentum and notoriety with their unabashed live shows. Knowing that the service of the family patriarch was temporary, Father Juett actively helped his boys find his replacement, and in late 2011, enter the mighty Judge Smith to hammer away on the skins.

In early 2012, Mothership entered Crystal Clear Studios with Wo Fat mastermind Kent Stump manning the boards and by mid-year, the band self-released their debut album. It was the combination of the 70's-era heavy rock fuzz and fury mixed with the blistering guitar solos of the NWOBHM-era that drew the bands attention to California-based Heavy Rock label, Ripple Music. In the waning months of 2012, after a successful year of traveling regionally throughout Texas and opening for national acts such as Prong, Red Fang, Gypsyhawk, Earthen Grave, and Lo-Pan, Mothership officially dubbed Ripple Music as its Home Port and began plotting a course for their first U.S. Tour in early 2013. The band's debut album will see its official Ripple release on February 12th, 2013 in the way of CD, LP, Deluxe LP, and Digital releases.

Facebook Event