Justin Moore will perform at the St. Augustine Amphitheatre with guest Dylan Scott opening.

Justin Moore is an American country music singer and songwriter hailing from Arkansas. Since being named Billboard's Top New Country Artist of 2009 his musical star has been rising with eight singles topping the Hot Country Songs charts including number one hits "Small Town USA," "If Heaven Wasn't So Far Away," and "Til My Last Day" and the top 10 hits "Backwoods" and "Point at You".

Moore has sold over 4.5 million digital downloads and his GOLD-certified, sophomore album Outlaws Like Me hit the #1 spot the week it was released. He has been singing and performing since high school. He last came to St. Augustine for Off The Beaten Path as part of his first headlining tour.

His latest album, Kinda Don't Care was released in 2016 which features the 2 hit singles, "You Look Like You Need a Drink" and "Somebody Else Will."

Guest star Dylan Scott, known for his low notes, hails from Louisiana. His song "My Girl" released in 2016 has found lots of air time on country stations across the nation.

Admission: Ticket prices are $69.50 for General Admission Standing Pit, $54.00 for Level 100, $44 for Level 200 & 300, $34 for Obstructed View. See seating chart below.

When: Saturday, March 3, 2018, at 7:00 p.m. Gates open at 5:30 p.m.

Where: St. Augustine Amphitheatre is located at 1340 A1A South in St. Augustine, FL 32080.

For more information on the St. Augustine Amphitheatre, please call (904) 209-0367 or visit here.

Parking Information: The St. Augustine Amphitheatre is located on Anastasia Island next to Anastasia State Park. Limited paid parking is available in the St. Augustine Amphitheatre Main Lot, but only with advance purchase of a Premium Parking ticket. Free satellite parking areas are located within one mile of the Amphitheatre, at R.B. Hunt Elementary and at Anastasia State Park (see map below).

Shuttle Information: The St. Augustine Amphitheatre shuttle system begins its run 45 minutes prior to show time. The shuttle will pick up event patrons at four designated shuttle stops: the R.B. Hunt Elementary School Soccer Field, the west entrance of the Anastasia State Park Main Parking Lot, the Loop at the Anastasia State Park, and the entrance of the St. Augustine Amphitheatre. To see the full shuttle route, please see the map below.

Shuttles will run continuously until approximately 45 minutes after the scheduled start time of a concert. For anyone wanting to leave prior to the end of a show, shuttles will begin taking people back to the satellite parking areas one hour before the event is over. The driver will not depart the Amphitheatre until the shuttle is more than 50% full.