Justin Moore is a Senior Vice President and Senior Financial Advisor with KM & Associates at Merrill. Justin provides tailored advice, detailed analysis, and reliable responsiveness to individuals and families, helping them harness the power of their wealth. He has significant experience guiding people through key crossroads in their finances, while helping them cultivate the long-term habits that can enhance their financial security.

Justin has earned multiple accolades for his work as a Financial Advisor, recognition that he attributes to the quality of his client relationships:

Forbes "Top Next-Generation Wealth Advisors Best-in-State" 2023

Published on August 8, 2023. Rankings based on data as of March 31, 2023.*

Forbes "Best-in-State Next Generation Wealth Advisors," 2019.

Published on September 4, 2019. Rankings based on data as of March 31, 2019.

Forbes/SHOOK "America’s Top Next-Generation Wealth Advisors," 2017, 2018.

Published annually July – Sept. Rankings based on data as of March 31 of current year.

Forbes “America's Top Wealth Management Teams High Net Worth,” 2022 & 2023

Published annually in November. Rankings based on data as of March 31 the same year.

People from varied paths look to Justin for advice and guidance. Many are physicians and other professionals in the medical field. Others are CPAS and executives in financial services. And still others have created a unique path to wealth, including business owners and multigenerational families. To each client’s situation, Justin brings a readiness to engage deeply with client priorities through attentive listening, a balanced perspective, and resolute problem solving. Empathetic by nature, he appreciates the singularity of each relationship, sensitive to each person’s distinctive ambitions and goals. He strives to do everything he can to demonstrate each client’s importance, connecting them to a suite of capabilities designed to make their financial lives easier, more streamlined, and less stressful.

Justin joined Merrill in 2011, providing him with significant experience addressing the needs of an affluent clientele. Previously, he served as a Financial Auditor and Consultant with Dixon Hughes Goodman (DHG). Justin earned his B.S. in Accounting and Finance from North Carolina A&T State University and his Master’s degree in Accounting from the University of North Carolina at Greensboro. Committed to bringing clients a differentiated level of advice, he holds two wealth-management credentials: the Accredited Asset Management SpecialistTM AAMSTM designation and Chartered Retirement Planning CounselorTM CRPCTM designation.

Within Merrill, Justin is a member of the Black/African American National Leadership Council and the Black Professional Group (BPG). Dedicated to giving back to his community, he serves on the boards of Big Brothers Big Sisters of the Central Piedmont and Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Inc.

Justin and his wife Hona live in Greensboro with their three young children: Sawyer, Jade, and Sora. Outside the office, Justin loves to spend time with his family, cycle outdoors, and explore new destinations with his family.

Merrill, its affiliates, and financial advisors do not provide legal, tax, or accounting advice. You should consult your legal and/or tax advisors before making any financial decisions.

*2019 Forbes “America’s Top Next-Generation Wealth Advisors Best-in-State” list. Opinions provided by SHOOK® Research, LLC considered advisors born in 1980 or later with a minimum 4 years as an advisor. Advisors have built their practices, lead their own teams, joined teams, are considered future leaders, or combinations thereof. Ranking is based on in-person and telephone due-diligence meetings that measure best practices, client retention, industry experience, compliance records, firm nominations, assets under management and Firm-generated revenue (investment performance is not a criterion). Shook’s rankings do not reflect all client experiences, endorse any advisor, indicate future performance and are available for client evaluation only. Compensation was not received from anyone for the study. Past performance is no guarantee of future results. Details available at www.SHOOKresearch.com. SHOOK is a registered trademark of SHOOK Research, LLC.

*2023 Forbes “America’s Top Next-Generation Wealth Advisors Best-in-State” list. Opinions provided by SHOOK® Research, LLC considered advisors born in 1984 or later with a minimum 4 years as an advisor. Advisors have built their practices, lead their own teams, joined teams, are considered future leaders, or combinations thereof. Ranking is based on in-person and telephone due-diligence meetings that measure best practices, client retention, industry experience, compliance records, firm nominations, assets under management and Firm-generated revenue (investment performance is not a criterion). Shook’s rankings do not reflect all client experiences, endorse any advisor, indicate future performance and are available for client evaluation only. Compensation was not received from anyone for the study. Past performance is no guarantee of future results. Details available at www.SHOOKresearch.com. SHOOK is a registered trademark of SHOOK Research, LLC.

*Forbes “America’s Top Next-Generation Wealth Advisors” list. Opinions provided by SHOOK® Research, LLC considered advisors born in 1984 or later with a minimum 4 years as an advisor. Advisors have built their practices, lead their own teams, joined teams, are considered future leaders, or combinations thereof. Ranking is based on in-person and telephone due-diligence meetings that measure best practices, client retention, industry experience, compliance records, firm nominations, assets under management and Firm-generated revenue (investment performance is not a criterion). Shook’s rankings do not reflect all client experiences, endorse any advisor, indicate future performance and are available for client evaluation only. Compensation was not received from anyone for the study. Past performance is no guarantee of future results. Details available at www.SHOOKresearch.com. SHOOK is a registered trademark of SHOOK Research, LLC. Forbes “America’s Top Wealth Management Teams High Net Worth” list. Opinions provided by SHOOK Research, LLC and is based on in-person, virtual and telephone due-diligence meetings and a ranking algorithm that measure best practices, client retention, industry experience, credentials, compliance records, firm nominations, assets under management and Firm-generated revenue (investment performance is not a criterion because client objectives and risk tolerance vary). SHOOK’s rankings are available for client evaluation only, are not indicative of future performance and do not represent any one client’s experience and available for investor help in evaluating the right financial advisor and not an endorsement of the advisor. Compensation was not received from anyone for the rankings study. Past performance does not guarantee future results. Details available at www.SHOOKresearch.com. SHOOK is a registered trademark of SHOOK Research, LLC.

Investing involves risk. There is always the potential of losing money when you invest in securities. Past performance does not guarantee future results. Asset allocation, rebalancing and diversification do not guarantee against risk in broadly declining markets.

Merrill, its affiliates, and financial advisors do not provide legal, tax, or accounting advice. You should consult your legal and/or tax advisors before making any financial decisions.

This material is not intended as a recommendation, offer or solicitation for the purchase or sale of any security or investment strategy. Merrill offers a broad range of brokerage, investment advisory (including financial planning) and other services. Additional information is available in our Client Relationship Summary.

This material does not take into account a client's particular investment objectives, financial situations, or needs and is not intended as a recommendation, offer, or solicitation for the purchase or sale of any security or investment strategy. Merrill offers a broad range of brokerage, investment advisory (including financial planning) and other services. There are important differences between brokerage and investment advisory services, including the type of advice and assistance provided, the fees charged, and the rights and obligations of the parties. It is important to understand the differences, particularly when determining which service or services to select. For more information about these services and their differences, speak with your Merrill financial advisor.

Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated (also referred to as “MLPF&S” or “Merrill”) makes available certain investment products sponsored, managed, distributed or provided by companies that are affiliates of Bank of America Corporation (“BofA Corp.”). MLPF&S is a registered broker-dealer, registered investment adviser, Member SIPC and a wholly owned subsidiary of BofA Corp.

Insurance and annuity products are offered through Merrill Lynch Life Agency Inc., a licensed insurance agency and wholly owned subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation.

Trust, fiduciary and investment management services, including assets managed by the Specialty Asset Management team, are provided by Bank of America, N.A., Member FDIC and wholly owned subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation (“BofA Corp.”), and its agents.

Bank of America Private Bank is a division of Bank of America, N.A.

U.S. Trust Company of Delaware is a wholly owned subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation.

Banking products are provided by Bank of America, N.A. and affiliated banks, Members FDIC and wholly owned subsidiaries of Bank of America Corporation.

Investment, insurance and annuity products:

Are Not FDIC InsuredAre Not Bank GuaranteedMay Lose ValueAre Not DepositsAre Not Insured by Any Federal Government AgencyAre Not a Condition to Any Banking Service or Activity