Bio:

Madeleine Stowe (born Madeleine Marie Stowe Mora in Los Angeles, CA on August 18, 1958) is an American actress most famous for her role as Victoria Grayson in the hit ABC show Revenge. Madeleine has amassed over 40 television and film credits throughout her career. Her big break came in 1987, when she was cast in the film Stakeout. Madeleine has gone on to make a lasting mark in Hollywood, and has been cast in such projects as The Last of the Mohicans and Blink

Best Known For:

Madeleine is best known for her role as the vindictive and manipulative Victoria Grayson in the show Revenge, which lasted for four seasons on ABC.

Personal Life:

She has been married to husband, and fellow actor, Brian Benben since 1982. The couple has one daughter together named May Theodora, and the family currently resides in Texas. The couple also owns a cattle ranch together. Madeleine also helped found Artists For Peace and Justice.

On March 9 ‘Revenge’ returned after a nearly two month hiatus, and delivered shockers galore. It’s so good to be back in the Hamptons!

The Mar. 9 episode of Revenge was the beginning of a what’s sure to be an insane and shocking latter half of the season. The hit show returned at a new time and upped the ante in its new time slot. Emily (Emily VanCamp) continued her downward spiral, one character bit the dust, and Jack (Nick Wechsler) got the surprise of his life.

Even though she’s proved countless times that she doesn’t really deserve it, ‘Revenge’ fans have always held on to hope for a happy ending for Emily Thorne. Unfortunately, the Jan. 12 episode ‘Endurance’ crushed that hope to death with one of Victoria Grayson’s stilettos.

Revenge’s third season is getting dark. Gone are the happy-ish days of yore, when Emily (Emily Van Camp) would gleefully take down a worthy opponent week after week; all while keeping her eye on the prize of a happy ending with the Graysons in jail and Emily finally free of her demons. Nowadays, she’ll be lucky if she makes it out of the Hamptons in one piece.