BAROQUE ARCHITECTURE is a term used to describe the building style of the Baroque era, begun in late sixteenth century Italy, that took the Roman vocabulary of Renaissance architecture and used it in a new rhetorical and theatrical fashion, often to express the triumph of the Catholic Church and the absolutist state. This is how my friend, Wikipedia define the baroque architecture.

A day with my fellow architecture students exploring, we again visited some churches that possess the characteristics of Baroque Architecture.

Our first stop was the Quiapo Church located in Quiapo, Manila. A mass was on-going when we came in. We took some photos quietly but unfortunately the security saw us. So we hide all our cameras and go out. I tried to sneak again and take pictures but the security are walking all over the place.

So back to the topic, Minor Basilica of the Black Nazarene, also known as Saint John the Baptist Parish and commonly called as Quiapo Church is an example of Baroque church in the Philippines. This church is known as the church who is enshrining the Black Nazarene, a dark statue of Jesus Christ which many faithful claim to have miraculous powers.

I can see Quiapo Church in the façade of the beautiful baroque-styled Saint Peter’s Church located in Lima, Peru The facades are beautiful and were largely inspired by both the Renaissance and the Neoclassical movements. Double cornices, Roman Pilasters and three doors corresponding three naves make up the central interior of the church.

The façade of Quiapo church shows symmetry and balance though proportionality of the building structure. It shows equality on both sides of the church. The two towers, that stand four storey high, are quite interesting to look at and it adds both Christian faith authority, elegance and beauty to the structure. Its designs are that of a combination of Renaissance style bell towers and pagodas.

Honestly, this was the first time that I saw the Church closely. Before, I thought the Quiapo Church was so dirty and uninviting. After this encounter, now I can say that Quiapo Church is lovely.

Our next stop was the Sta. Cruz Church established at Plaza Lacson (formerly Plaza Goite) in Santa Cruz. It is fronted by Plaza de Sta. Cruz and the famous Carriedo Water Fountain is just directly across the street.

Sta. Cruz church can be compared to the Dresden Frauenkirche church of Germany. Frauenkirche’s architecture is very different compared to other major churches and cathedrals in Germany. The altar, pulpit, and baptismal font directly centered in view of the entire congregation. Instead of typical Gothic architecture with tall towers and spires, the baroque-styled Frauenkirche is focused around its massive, 96 meter high dome, called “die Steinerne Glocke”; “the Stone Bell”.

The Sta. Cruz church’s tower, however, is comprised of a series of sections whose girth decreases as they climb upwards. Their shape and dimensions are reminiscent of the composition of other Asiatic styles of architecture. It shows the Baroque style by using broad naves and oval forms.

The simple and ascetic style of the exterior reflects the interior. At the entrance of the church are two chapels, on the right chapel is a small space with statues of saints and a replica of Jesus of Nazarene. Besides are tombs of prominent first Filipino-Chinese citizenry people from the community in the area. At the left chapel is austere space which contains numerous saints were houses in a small mirrored box for the pilgrims to see.

As for its altar, it may seem understated at first glance, but its dramatic lighting is quite awesome, actually. And it is one of the characteristics of baroque with the use of dramatic lighting either strong light-and-shade contrasts

And at the first glance, the façade looks like simple, plain and straight-forward. But when I examined it visually I can say that it was quite complicated.

Moving on, the next stop was the Binondo Church or the Minor Basilica of St. Lorenzo Ruiz located near the Sta. Cruz Church.

The Manila Binondo Church used to be a fine example of Spanish architecture. Replica of the St. Peter’s dome at the main alter and the Madonna. The dome of St. Peter’s rises to a total height of 136.57 metres (448.1 ft) from the floor of the basilica to the top of the external cross.

Actually, Binondo church was my favorite among all the churches that we visited on this trip. Even it was often rebuilt Binondo church still reflects its historic Spanish and European Baroque style and retains many elements of its original character. The octagonal bell tower, however, is the only significant remaining part of the original structure.

Another thing that I liked about this Church is that, it looked like “sobrang makaluma” but when I came in, I was very surprised because I did not expect that the interior of the church was awesome. The ceiling frescos, optical illusions and blending of paintings and architecture are fascinating. Surely the ceiling paintings are a must see in this church.

And also it is interesting to know that the local Catholic Chinese community maintains the church. The church also highlights the long tradition of Christianity in the society.

Our last destination, the San Agustin Church located inside the walled city of Intramuros. One of the famous and oldest Church in our country.

The design of the church was said to be derived from churches built by the Agustinians in Mexico that’s why it was able to withstand all the calamities that have destroyed many churches in Manila. The ceiling of San Agustin Church was painted by Italian Artist Cesare Alberoni and Giovanni Dibella in 1875. The facade is unassuming and even criticized as “lacking grace and charm”, but it has notable baroque touches, especially the ornate carvings on its wooden doors.

The best counterpart of this is the Church of St. Catherine. One of the main “exhibits” of Vilnius` church “collection”. It is famous not only for its` baroque and rococo forms, but also for amazing inside acoustics and brilliant music performances that here are often held.

The San Agustin Church also house tomb of Spanish conquistadors, several Spanish Governors-General and archbishops, and even Juan Luna’s, Pedro Paterno’s and Trinidad Pardo de Tavera’s are among whose remains are within the church.

It was my first time inside this church and I was overwhelmed with the architectural design of it. The feel, smell and what you can see can make you feel so nostalgic. Now I know why a lot of couples dream to be married here, such a magnificent display of history.

I enjoyed this trip, adventure, journey, excursion and whatsoever.

“A contemporary artist can use the findings of all epochs and all styles, from the most primitive literary expressions up to the most refined products of the baroque.”