Our Lady of Light Catholic Community is located in Fort Myers, Florida. We invite you to browse our web site to learn more about our parish community and what it has to offer.

The parish’s spiritual life is entrusted to the Oblates of St. Francis de Sales, a religious community headquartered in Wilmington, Delaware.

Mission Statement:

We, the people of Our Lady of Light Catholic Community, embrace the call to Live Jesus. As a Catholic Community we strive to grow personally and with one another. Through prayer, worship, Faith Formation and acts of community service we continue Jesus’ mission, Guided by the Holy Spirit.

St. Francis de Sales

Because of St. Francis De Sales influence on the life of the people of his time and generations thereafter, he earned the title, Doctor of the Church. Pope Francis wrote an apostolic letter commemorating the works and lifelong commitment to the church, the people of God. The Letter gives a summary of both personal life and his teachings. To read this Apostolic Letter, Totus Amoris Est, translated Everything Pertains to Love click on the following link:

https://press.vatican.va/content/salastampa/en/bollettino/pubblico/2022/12/28/221228b.html

Additional documents you may want read on St. Francis de Sales:

Pope Francis releases new apostolic letter on St. Francis de Sales, doctor of the church

Prayer for the Canonization of Blessed Louis Brisson, OSFS

Lord Jesus, Who has told us “Ask and you shall receive,” we address our prayer to You through the intercession of Blessed Louis Brisson. Attentive to the signs of the times and in obedience to Your Will, he founded the double family of the Oblate Sisters and of the Oblates of St. Francis de Sales. Confident in Your Providence and joyful in hope, he knew, as a good Father, how to make himself all things to all people. Grant us, through his intercession, the favors which we ask of You, Especially……May the Holy Church rejoice in glorifying this priest after Your own Heart, who gave himself totally to Your Love.

Amen.