TY - CHAP

T1 - For Socialist Revolution or National Liberation?

T2 - Anti-Colonialism and the Communist Parties of Great Britain, Australia and South Africa in the Era of Decolonisation

AU - Smith, Evan

PY - 2021

Y1 - 2021

N2 - In 1950, the discussion journal of the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB), Communist Review, published a statement by the Communist Party of India (CPI) on the changing world situation. Adapted from an editorial of the Communist Information Bureau’s (Cominform) For A Lasting Peace, For A People’s Democracy, the CPI statement outlined thefive factors that seemed to present new opportunities for the international Communist movement (viewed through the lens of high Stalinism), now tied up in the Cold War and the decolonisation process: 1. The Great October Socialist Revolution, the victory of Socialism in the U.S.S.R. and the Lenin–Stalin national policy which turned the former oppressed peoples into equal Socialist nations.2. Victorious people’s liberation war led by the U.S.S.R. against fascism, the defeat of German and Japanese imperialism, and the weakening of such colonial powers as Britain, France, Italy, Holland and Belgium.3. The establishment of People’s Democratic power in the countries of Central and South-Eastern Europe. 4. The resolute struggle of the democratic camp head by the U.S.S.R. against Britain and American imperialism – the main oppressors of the freedom of the colonial peoples.5. The world-historic victory of the Chinese people over the combined forces of the reactionary Koumintang and American imperialism.

AB - In 1950, the discussion journal of the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB), Communist Review, published a statement by the Communist Party of India (CPI) on the changing world situation. Adapted from an editorial of the Communist Information Bureau’s (Cominform) For A Lasting Peace, For A People’s Democracy, the CPI statement outlined thefive factors that seemed to present new opportunities for the international Communist movement (viewed through the lens of high Stalinism), now tied up in the Cold War and the decolonisation process: 1. The Great October Socialist Revolution, the victory of Socialism in the U.S.S.R. and the Lenin–Stalin national policy which turned the former oppressed peoples into equal Socialist nations.2. Victorious people’s liberation war led by the U.S.S.R. against fascism, the defeat of German and Japanese imperialism, and the weakening of such colonial powers as Britain, France, Italy, Holland and Belgium.3. The establishment of People’s Democratic power in the countries of Central and South-Eastern Europe. 4. The resolute struggle of the democratic camp head by the U.S.S.R. against Britain and American imperialism – the main oppressors of the freedom of the colonial peoples.5. The world-historic victory of the Chinese people over the combined forces of the reactionary Koumintang and American imperialism.

UR - https://liverpooluniversitypress.co.uk/books/isbn/9781800859685/

M3 - Chapter

SN - 978-1-800-85968-5

T3 - Studies in Labour History

SP - 249

EP - 271

BT - Workers of the Empire, Unite

A2 - Kirk, Neville

A2 - Béliard, Yann

PB - Liverpool University Press

ER -