By Mike Garofola

For the IWCOA

After a disastrous round in the semifinals that saw Hersey drop seven-of-nine bouts, head coach Joe Rupslauk, and his two top men, Manny Mejia and Billy Spassov brought the troops together and gave the Huskies the famous ‘It Ain’t Over Until It’s Over’ speech.

“That and let’s just go out there and wrestle for each other like we have all season long,” was all Rupslauk needed to say as he then watched his club overcome a 30-point deficit to leap-frog over Conant, Fremd, and then division rival Prospect to take the lead for good at the 49th MSL Conference Wrestling Tournament at host Buffalo Grove.

The MSL East champion Huskies claimed their 9th league title and first since 2001. Hersey collected 14 medals overall, and 12 in the consolation rounds to outscore runner-up Fremd 237.5-215.5. Prospect (211.50), Conant (194.0) and Barrington (191.0) rounded out the top five during two days of quality throughout the brackets.

“This is the way this team has competed all year. We’re a tight knit bunch that wrestles for each other first, and right now I cannot tell you how proud I am of these guys,” said Rupslauk.

“This program was really bad four years ago. We basically had the two Joyce brothers (Zach and Matt) plus Sean Paton, who all made sectionals, but after that we just were unable to come close to filling out a lineup,” said Rupslauk.

“We began our building project with guys like Billy and Manny and slowly things turned around with hard work, dedication, and a belief that – as I told them – we could win the MSL when they’re seniors.”

“We were just terrible during those first two years,” agreed Spassov with a wry smile.

“But Rup always believed in us right from the start, and we believed in him so we all knew what had to be done after the semifinals, and my teammates really came through when we needed it most.”

“The biggest reason for our success is coach,” Mejia said. “He’s made this program like a family, he’s upgraded our tournament schedule so we can be challenged every weekend, and he’s been the difference for all of us.”

When the Huskies fell behind by 30 to front runner Prospect (179.5-149.5) it meant the 12 wrestlers who were still alive in the back-draw would have to stay alive in order to earn valuable points.

They did just that, eventually advancing 8 into third-place bouts, and converting one half-dozen into victories.

“Hersey just crushed it after the semifinals,” said Fremd head coach, Jeff Keske,who came within one point (208.50-207.50) after 126 pounds, but never drew closer thereafter.

“Credit Joe’s guys, they went out and did what they had to, and even with just two in the finals, their depth proved to be the difference today.”

Third-place Prospect might have been in the thick of things if not for the rough ride the Knights took in the finals. The Knights won just two of the six they were part of, including three consecutive defeats to dash the hopes of Tom Whalens’ club for good.

Conant enjoyed a solid tournament, claiming a tournament high four individual titles, while fifth-place Barrington took home three, the same as Fremd.

“It was a great tournament, which was expected with so many state-ranked wrestlers here, plus four teams in the top 20,” began Barrington head coach, Dave Udchik.

“Hersey really came through with their big finish, so credit Joe and his guys for a well-deserved conference championship.”

“This MSL title happened because of the great effort from each guy in our starting lineup, especially from the guys who kept on winning in their consolation matches, which really proved to be the difference today,” said a proud Rupslauk.

Let’s have a look now at each weight class:

106 – Wiley Jessup, Fremd

When you have a guy like Wiley Jessup leading off, it more than likely will begin a wonderful day of results for the Fremd wrestling team.

The Vikings senior won his third major of the year, while running his overall record to an impressive 32-2 following his 17th pin of the season to help lead his club to second place finish in this MSL Conference Tournament.

“Wiley has improved his neutral defense, and understanding of when to use his scrambling skills, but it’s his leadership that has his teammates just loving the motivational speeches he gives,” Fremd head coach Jeff Keske said of Jessup, who now has 11 wins over state-ranked opponents.

Jessup had his hands full early on with Brady Phelps (24-2) of Schaumburg, trailing the talented freshman 6-2, then 6-5 when (Jessup) recorded his 27th near fall of the campaign near the edge.

“Brady is a very good wrestler, who likes to go upper body, so I was prepared for that,but when I went down early on I just stayed composed and looked to get back into the match before the first period was over,” said Jessup, who drew back even at 6-6 to start the second period, went up moments later (8-6) with a take-down, before closing out Phelps with his pin at 3:15.

Jessup, fourth overall in Rob Sherrill’s IWCOA 3A rankings, has contributed 166 total team points on the season, and 69 near-fall points.

113 – Evan Gosz, Fremd

It appears that as the post-season draws closer, Evan Gosz is the guy who is next up to lead the Vikings during his next three seasons.

The Vikings freshman collected his team-high fourth major trophy after yet another sterling performance, which ended with his 17th pin of the season at just 1:39 over Elk Grove sophomore Grant Madl.

“I wrestled Grant in back in seventh grade and he was a solid opponent then, and he is now,” said Gosz. Gosz has had terrific results against several state-ranked opponents, including defending state champion and current No. 1 Jameson Garcia of Marmion Academy as well as No. 4 Caelan Riley of Libertyville, who will compete next fall at The Citadel.

“Wiley is just a great partner in the room and he’s helped me in so many ways,” Gosz said. “And having a head coach like (Jeff) Keske is a big reason for what I’ve been able to do so far.”

No. 6, Gosz has recorded 28 near-falls, good for 76 overall points, while contributing 162 team points for the MSL West division champions.

“Evan’s leg riding is much improved,” Keske said. “He would get reversed in middle school while riding legs, and his counter attacking from the neutral position has really improved as well.”

Elk Grove coach Dan Vargas likes what the sophomore Madl is bringing to the sport.

“Grant just absolutely loves to compete and wrestle. He’s a rare breed that will go after anyone and does not shy away from tough competition,” Vargas said.

“His confidence and ability to wrestle through positions is always iimproving, and will continue to serve him well. In his final with (Gosz) our plan was to just to attack, wrestle how he always does, and just focus on what he’s able to do well.”

120 – Tom Miller, Prospect

Tom Miller became the second member of his family to become an MSL conference champ, after his 15-2 major decision over No. 2 seed Sam Santangelo (11-7) from Conant.

Miller would start fast, and finish strong, piling up points all along the way, particularly after his opening period 5-2 advantage. That lead quickly became 9-2, and the Knights senior went to work in search of bonus points to help his club.

“It feels real good to win a conference championship, just like my brother Joe did in 2020,” said Miller.

Joe Miller claimed his title at 138 pounds to help the Knights nab second place honors behind eventual 2020 MSL champion Barrington.

“My plan all along was to lock him up as much as I could, and try to score as many points as I could on top. Things worked pretty good for me in my final,” said Miller, who defended an attempted ankle pick from Santangelo when the two began the third period in neutral. After successfully stopping the Santangelo shot, Miller scored a takedown to make it 11-2 before adding a near fall with 30 seconds left to make it 14-2.

126 – Brian Beers, Barrington

A two-time state qualifier and now three-time MSL champ, Brian Beers (32-4) made an early lead stand up when the Barrington senior defended with all his might to defeat Schaumburg junior, Caden Kirchner (26-6) 3-0 to claim the 126-pound trophy.

“That first takedown in the first period was big – especially against Caden, who is so long,” offered Beers, who earlier in the season defeated Kirchner 1-0.

“I expected a low-scoring, defensive match so again, that’s why scoring first was so important. Plus, it gave me the chance to ride out the period, and just work as hard as I could to keep the lead, and make him work harder than he wanted to,” said Beers, who with this win now has 141 career victories.

There were six stalemate calls in this contest, the last coming shortly after Beers, who started down to begin the third period scored a late escape to make it 3-0.

“I was looking to sink a half to add to my lead, but he fought hard – so I just worked hard to keep him down, and not allow him any chance to score in the last 30 seconds or so,” said Beers.

“Brian’s defense and positioning were very good in his final. He wrestled a smart match against Caden, who is a very good wrestler,” said Broncos head coach Dave Udchik.

132 – Will Baysingar (Prospect)

When Will Baysingar squashed the competition to win at the 61st Mudge-McMorrow Invite inside his own fieldhouse, he was quick to say that he was happy with the title, but it was back to his 24-7 approach to the sport to further enhance his game.

After another dominating tournament performance where the Prospect junior overwhelmed the competition to earn his third major, Baysingar accepted gratulations before turning the conversation around to talk about his lone defeat of the season.

Baysingar ran his record to a dazzling 39-1 when he recorded a pair of falls in advance of his 12-3 major decision over Maddox Khalimsky (25-6) of Fremd, who came in as the No. 9 man at 132, and fourth-place medal winner at the IWCOA state tournament.

“It’s great to win a second MSL title against a quality opponent, and to help my team stay in the race for a conference championship, but my 9-4 loss to Kannon Webster (Washington) at the Flavin is something that will make me work even harder, in and away from the room,” said Baysingar, an IWCOA state champion last year who is No. 4 at 126.

“That loss exposed a few things that I need to address. So while you never want to take a loss, that’s one that I’ll learn from in order to fine tune some things,” said Baysingar, who will join Webster in the fall of 2023 at the University of Illinois.

Intense, focused, with wonderful speed and finishing ability, Baysingar added a near-fall towards the end of the first period to go up 5-0, then scrambled free of a Khalimsky midway through the second period to make it 10-1 en route to victory.

138 – Phil Chapa, Barrington

Phil Chapa (29-9) would breathe some life into the Broncos’ chances of holding off Conant for a top four finish when he recorded a well-deserved 13-9 decision over Lennon Steinkuehler (30-5) from Prospect.

After the opening period ended level at 5-5, the two engaged for the next four minutes as they kept the scoreboard operator alert, and ready to add points as they came fast and furious.

“We knew Lennon was a big time thrower, so my tie-ups were important, and something I had to do really well,” said Chapa.

“It was a little more scoring that I expected, but I felt good throughout and I was ready to compete,” Chapa said. Chapa enjoyed an 11-7 advantage with a minute left before a takedown with 17 seconds remaining ensured Chapa’s 100th career win, and a greeting party from his teammates after his arm was raised.

“Phil is a hard worker, who has been a three-year starter. He battled injuries this entire season but he came back to get himself a conference championship,” said Udchik.

Chapa, who would like to continue to wrestle on the collegiate level next fall, has Bradley and the Milwaukee School of Engineering listed as two of his favorites.

145 – Charlie Fifield, Fremd

It took just over six minutes for Charlie Fifield (35-4) to give Fremd its third individual title, and his second straight major when his takedown in the first extra session decided the 145-pound weight class.

The Vikings senior unlocked the key to his MSL crown when his takedown near the edge broke a 1-1 match with rival Damien Puma (Prospect, 27-8) to give the Vikings star a 3-1 decision.

“Every time Damien and I have wrestled, the matches have been very close. I beat him 5-4 earlier this year so I expected this one to be just as hard-fought and close,” said Fifield, a state qualifier in 2020 with 39 victories, before he tore both ACL’s to erase his junior season.

Fifield would book his spot in the finals with back-to-back tech-falls, giving him 15 on the year.

“Charlie’s hand fighting, neutral defense, and finding ways to win tight matches late in the action are just three areas that we’ve seen improvement in him,” said Fremd coach Jeff Keske.

“His commitment, dedication, and work ethic are second to none, witnessed by his determination in coming back from two ACL surgeries.”

The University of Illinois recruit has an eye-popping 85 near falls, as well as 217 near-fall points thus far, plus 98 takedowns.

“It was nice to win an MSL championship and to see the team do well also, but there’s still a lot ahead of us to work for,” said Fifield, No. 6 in the IWCOA rankings.

152 – Ethan Stiles, Conant

Fresh off his triumphant return from his championship run at the prestigious Doc’ Buchanan tournament in California, Conant junior Ethan Stiles (21-1) entered this tournament as the prohibitive favorite to collect an MSL crown.

Stiles, the No. 2 man in the most recent IWCOA rankings, didn’t disappoint. The former Montini Catholic star and IWCOA state championclosed out a stubborn Connor Munn (25-9) of Prospect in the final with an 18-6 major decision.

“I would have liked to make it three pins on the day to finish strong, and to help my team earn bonus points, but I’m still happy with winning it all. Now it’s time to turn my attention to the state series,” said Stiles, third in the state in 2020 at Montini, and second most recently at the Dvorak, where he dropped a 7-3 decision in the final to former Montini teammate and the current No. 1 man in 2A at 152, Braden Stauffenberg.

“You always learn a few things from a loss, things that I’ll need to work on, and this is the time of the year to clean things up,” offered Stiles, who at the Doc’ Buchanan, beat Noah Tolentino from California state power, Clovis, 3-0 at 148 pounds.

160 – CJ Gilbert, Conant

Stiles’ victory inspired upper-weight success for the Cougars, who used a trio of wins after the Stiles triumph to help ensure a well-deserved fourth place finish just ahead of division rival Barrington.

Senior CJ Gilbert (24-6) overcame an early 4-2 deficit to top seed Billy Spassov (32-8) to register a stunning second period pin (2:26) over the Hersey captain to claim his first ever MSL crown.

“It feels really good right now to win a conference title,” admitted Gilbert.

“I knew from before that (Spassov) is very aggressive, and looks to shoot a lot, but I stayed composed. I thought I defended his shots and after I posted him up, and turned him onto his back, I felt confident I could finish him off.”

“CJ was really looking forward to this tournament as he had the opportunity to avenge two early season losses (to Fremd’s Matt Meehan and Spassov) and that’s exactly what he did in his semifinal and final,” Conant coach Andrew Guilde said of Gilbert, who is a 2021 IWCOA state qualifier.

“We knew his final would be tough, and (Spassov) is as tough as they come, but CJ is dangerous from everywhere he’s a pinner. Once he gets his hands locked, he finishes matches.”

170 – Cody Sebo, Conant

Conant’s Cody Sebo (21-9) followed up Gilberts’ win with a hard fought 7-6 decision over top seed Jalen Curtis (24-4), holding off the talented Hoffman Estates junior to claim his first MSL title.

“Sebo really put a complete match together for his final,” began Guilde.

“Curtis is tough, he’s fast, strong, and very technical, so we knew going into the finals that Cody has to wrestle six minute hard, and that’s exactly what he did.”

“This is something I’ve been working for for a long time, so to win a conference championship in my senior year means a lot to me,” said Sebo, who is planning on a studying finance in college, while looking to continue to wrestle, perhaps at the University of Dubuque, should the opportunity present itself.

“It was important to get the first takedown in my final, and to turn up the pressure on him in the second period. When he was able to get closer towards the end of the match, I just stayed calm and positive to hold onto the victory,” said Sebo, who led 6-1 after two periods, using a double to grab the lead, before Curtis came back within one (7-6) with a takedown of his own with 17 seconds remaining.

“It’s all about Sebo believing in himself. That’s really been the only missing ingredient in his game but with each match, his confidence continues to grow,” added Guilde.

182 – Ayden Salley, Barrington

Ayden Salley proved he belonged with the big club after his marvelous effort at the prestigious Rex Whitlach, just before the new year, when the Barrington sophomore came home with a second-place medal at 182 pounds.

Salley went one better when he captured his first major of the campaign, and first-ever league title when he registered a fall at 3:30 over AJ Hernandez (Conant, 18-10) to give his club its third championship of the tournament.

“It’s kind of tough being a sophomore at this weight class. There’s a lot to learn, and you are going up a lot of guys who are older and have more experience,” began Salley, now 23-6 on the season.

“But we have a great coaching staff and I have a great partner in the room with Zach (Meyer), and a lot of support from my teammates, so that’s made it all a little easier for me.”

Salley gave up the sport in second grade then returned two years later, thanks in part to his uncle, Jason Salley, an IHSA referee, who was the first to greet his nephew upon his victory.

Salley said he watches plenty of film of his opponents, which in this particular contest would help in his preparation.

“I watch so much video,” he said. “It helps with my confidence and in knowing what the plan will be before I go out there.”

Salley opened up a 5-0 advantage with a nicely-executed near-fall near the edge in the first period. He conceded two points early into the second period to make it 6-3, before a scramble and flurry led to his pin.

“Ayden had a great tournament for himself, he’s officially in the big leagues,” Barrington coach Dave Udchik said.

195 – Henry Chang, Conant

Yet another Conant senior helped the cause for head coach Andrew Guilde’s club when a marvelous overtime effort from Henry Chang resulted in a hard-fought 11-9 victory over No. 2 seed Zach Meyer (31-6) from Barrington.

Meyer, who recently committed to play football at the University of Chicago, appeared to be in control of the contest when he cradled up Chang to increase his second period advantage to 7-2. Chang escaped and earned a takedown with 9 seconds left in the period to make it 7-5.

Meyer executed an escape to make it 8-5 in advance of the third period.

“I had to be more defensive in that second period in order to hang in the match. I knew going in that he likes to go heavy on the legs, but when we got to overtime it felt to me like he was getting tired. So I went outside and locked him down to get the takedown to win,” said Chang, who was up 9-7 in the third period before Meyer drew back even with 30 seconds left in regulation.

“Chang is all heart, he loves to compete, and will put everything he has into every second that he’s out there,” says Guilde.

“This final was a rematch from last week where Henry won, and although he got himself into that early hole, he’s a guy who never quits and he just kept coming. Because of that he was able to get himself another well-deserved victory in overtime.”

Chang (24-6) plans to major in Data Sciences at either Purdue, Illinois or Wisconsin in the fall.

220 – Manny Mejia, Hersey

There were plenty of reasons for the Hersey team victory, but head coach Joe Rupslauk says it all begins with his 220-pound champion Manny Mejia, No. 8 in the IWCOA rankings.

“Manny is such a quiet and humble guy. He really doesn’t like to talk about himself or his accomplishments. For him it’s family first, and his family is this team, and he just loves to be with his teammates grinding,” said Rupslauk of his senior, who pinned his way to his second major of the season.

“Manny has just scratched the surface in his wrestling career. He just goes out and wrestles whoever is across from him,” Rupslauk said.

“He does not care who is ranked, and where. His mental approach to the sport is what is important to him at all times. He’s an athlete whose offense has really opened up on his feet, and fundamentally he can attack in so many different ways.”

With his three victories, Mejia (38-5) is now within four wins of assistant coach Hunter Rollins, who in 2013 went 42-2 on his way to a second place state finish at 160 pounds.

“Hunter has been a huge part of Manny’s success. He made all-tournament recently at The Clash, and we expect his to compete for a state medal and to continue to work hard, and improve in order to help lead our team forward,” said Rupslauk.

Despite his loss in the final to Mejia, junior Casey Bending (Fremd, 33-9) enjoyed a wonderful day which included two hard fought decisions to help him advance.

Bending won his first major title of the season just before the new year at the Berman Holiday Classic at host Palatine.

285 – Kehinde Akintunde, Hoffman Estates

In the wild and unpredictable world of the heavyweight division it was, well, wild and unpredictable.

Oleg Simakov (Hersey, 32-11) and Sean Mitchell (Prospect, 20-3) may have been the clear favorites to reach the final but they found themselves on the short end of things when the unknown junior from Hoffman Estates, Kehinde Akintunde, stunned both on his way to the first Hawks league championship since 2009.

Akintunde, who came to the United States three years ago from Nigeria, pinned the top two seeds in winning his MSL title. He pinned Mitchell in the final at 3:29 to end this tournament in style.

“Kehinde is a great athlete, who also plays football, and was encouraged to wrestle. For a first-year wrestler, he had himself quite a day,” said a proud Leo Clark, the Hawks head coach.

“I am really glad my football coaches told me to wrestle. It’s been a lot of fun and I really enjoy the sport. I feel with my quickness, speed and athleticism, I can have some success in my first year in the sport,” said Akintunde, who came in at 234 pounds.

“Kehinde has come a long way in a short time, and he’s beginning to figure things out with his hips, and positioning,” Clark said. “But he knows there’s a lot more to learn if he wants to be able to compete with the big boys.”

Akintunde (21-13) who plays on both sides of the line for the Hawks football team, pinned his way into the final from his No. 4 seed spot in the bracket, including top the top seed (Simakov) in his semifinal at 1:54.

The Hawks claimed the MSL crown in 2009, with Patrick Scully (119), Tommy Wadas (145), Andrew Petit (160) and heavyweight, Mike Eisele all winning individual titles on that day.

Scully and Petit would later advance into the state tournament.

FROM THE IWCOA: If you are enjoying these articles, please consider a small donation to the IWCOA so that we can continue funding feature stories for our website and social media. The IWCOA is non-profit, 501(c)(3) organization. Click this link to make a donation. Thank you!

By Patrick Z. McGavin

For the IWCOA

SUMMIT—Lemont was ready to make a statement.

The Indians are still the defending state champions until proven otherwise.

“There have definitely been high expectations since the beginning of the year,” said coach Erik Murray, who took over for the retired John St. Clair last year.

The Indians won the first state championship in program history by defeating four-time defending state champion Washington 30-26 in the Class 2A State Dual Meet at Bloomington in February, 2020.

With the pandemic wiping out the state dual series, Lemont remains the last team standing.

Lemont made the first statement of the opening salvo by dominating the South Suburban Conference Meet Saturday at Argo.

The Indians had six individual champions to run away with the team title with 224.50 points.

Lemont had nine wrestlers reach the finals.

With three individual champions, Oak Forest was second with 162 points.

Evergreen Park (88), Oak Lawn (80), Hillcrest (78), Reavis (75) and Shepard (72) followed.

The South Suburban is made up of 14 teams, with two seven-team divisions, the Red and Blue.

“When we won the state title two years ago as sophomores, the seniors were the leaders,” senior Mo Khalil said.

“The younger guys just wanted to make them proud.”

Lemont is ranked No. 4 in Class 2A. Washington is No. 1, followed Joliet Catholic and Deerfield.

Lemont (19-3) has lost only to Deerfield and 3A programs McHenry and Stevenson.

Lemont and Joliet Catholic are set to face off at the LaSalle-Peru Regional.

“We have a good group of homegrown kids,” Murry said. “We have six seniors who are leading the way.

“When you get that taste of the championship, you obviously want to get back there.”

The 2022 South Suburban Conference Champions

106–Zack Koschnitzki, Reavis

Apart from his youth, sophomore Zack Koschnitzki shows a rare combination of athleticism, range and composure in such a young athlete.

“I’m long for a 106-pounder, and I just go for the legs,” he said. “Any time I can go for easy shots, I am going to go for them.”

Koschnitzki improved his record to 27-5 by dominating the lowest weight class with his savvy, speed and superior technique.

He repeatedly got into the legs of his opponents.

He captured the championship with a fall 1:47 over Lemont freshman Julian Vallianatos.

Waiting for his opportunity, he executed a deft cradle to close out the match.

“I just put in the legs, and I went from there,” he said. “I never wrestled him before. I was not really familiar with him.

“I saw that it was open.”

He was fresh and ready.

Having earned a bye into the semifinals, Koschnitzki posted the 9-0 major decision over Hillcrest’s Elijah Wofford in qualifying for the final.

Vallianatos (16-12) recorded a first period fall of Dutchess King of T.F. South to reach his half of the championship bracket.

Wofford (5-2) earned third-place with the fall over Argo’s Juan Villa at 1:09.

113–Juan Jurado, Eisenhower

For drama and last second excitement, nothing topped what Eisenhower senior Juan Jurado pulled off against Reavis senior Vladimir Vasquez.

Their rematch turned out to be the most pulse-pounding final.

“We wrestled in the first tournament of the year, and he beat me 6-3, or 9-6, something like that,” Jurado said.

“My dad asked me at the beginning of the season whether I was going to win one more tournament before I graduated.”

Jurado (22-4) provided a remarkable family moment.

Seeming out of answers in the closing seconds, he pulled out a reversal with five seconds remaining for the stunning 4-3 victory.

The match played out like a dance between the two rivals. They circled and moved around each other.

Neither athlete quite secured the advantage through the first two periods. Vasquez (26-9) appeared to grab the irreversible momentum with a takedown for the 3-1 lead with just under a minute remaining.

Jurado was awarded a point.

Still, Vasquez appeared in control as the clock worked toward all zeroes.

“Honestly, I don’t even know how to explain it,” Jurado said. “It was just a burst of energy.

“Ever since that first match, I have been working on my training and my conditioning.

Jurado earned a bye into the semifinal, and he posted a late third period pin over Argo’s David Gonzalez.

Vasquez also had a first-round bye and dispatched Lemont’s Omar Khraiwesh with a .33 second fall.

Gonzalez posted the first period fall of Khraiwesh at 1:00 in finishing third.

120–Tyler Evitts, Oak Forest

Progress is not always measured in linear movements.

Thankfully, Oak Forest senior Tyler Evitts had the ideal means of recording his growth.

“Every tournament I have competed in since my sophomore year I have gone up in placement,” Evitts said.

“My sophomore year, I took fourth here, so this was another improvement.”

Listed in the honorable mention in 2A, Evitts (16-3) flashed an excellent combination of power, athleticism and grace.

He effectively wore down Oak Lawn’s Eduardo Nunez, Jr., 6-0, for the title.

“I was really good on top today,” Evitts said. “I was able to ride the legs of my opponents, and control the different matches I had.”

Evitts posted the third period fall of TrayVonne Robert’s of T.F. South in the semifinals.

“I was able to hold them down, and tire them out,” Evitts said.

Nunez, Jr. (21-5) qualified for the final by defeating Bremen’s Charles Portis 6-4 in the semifinals.

Portis (14-9) captured third-place with a first period fall of Robert’s (14-9).

126–Caden Musselman, Oak Forest

On paper, the showdown here suggested the best matchup of the day with No. 4 Caden Musselman of Oak Forest against Lemont’s No. 10 Sam Schuit.

Musselman (22-2) was too fast, quick, explosive and elusive for the talented

Schuit (27-7).

Relying on his jet quickness and length to control Schuit from distance, Musselman posted the highly-impressive second period fall at 2:53.

Musselman put in one of the most exhilarating performances of the day, making fast work of Steven Paredes of T.F. South in the quarterfinals (0:19) and Richards’ Muath Jilani (0:46) in the semifinals.

Schuit also dominated in his part of the bracket.

He posted equally strong performances over Evergreen Park’s Axel Rubalcava (0:39) and Tinley Park’s Alfonso Insalaco (1:31).

Insalaco (23-4) responded with two dominant victories, posting a fall over Bremend’s Gavin Jeronimo in the semifinal wrestlebacks.

He captured third place with a first period fall over Rubalcava (17-7).

132–Johnny O’Connor, Lemont

Junior Johnny O’Connor (24-9) underscored the Indians’ top to bottom dominance.

Ranked No. 6, he proved virtually untouchable in mastering his bracket. His quickness, athleticism and power overwhelmed the opposition.

He posted the fall over Oak Forest’s Joe Loranger at 2:00 for his own conference title.

He also had a second-period fall of Argo’s Paul Hernandez in the quarterfinals.

He qualified for the final with a 15-0 technical fall over Eisenhower’s Kris Barrera in the semifinals.

Loranger (10-7) was one of the revelations of the day.

He stunned Tinley Park’s Andrew Koepke with a second period fall in the quarterfinals.

He also recorded a fall of Richard’s Luke Kawa to reach the final.

Hernandez (9-3) posted the first period fall of Koepke (25-8) to capture third place.

138–Evan Schiffman, Lemont

Sometimes the best laid plans never quite materialize in clear or obvious ways.

Lemont senior Evan Schiffman had to improvise. He also had to hold clear to his own impulses.

“From my freshman through my junior year, I was really sticking with my carries,” he said.

“That is what has always pushed me through.”

He had to recalibrate on the fly after his opponents worked to take away his trademark action.

“This year I haven’t been hitting it as much, which is probably why I lost two of the matches I lost this year.

“I have been working it out in practice room, and hitting that carry again.”

Practice made perfect.

Ranked No. 6, Schiffman (27-5) put it all together with a seamless and beautiful performance.

He posted three falls, the most impressive coming in just 1:06 against Hillcrest’s talented sophomore Jovan Williams in the final.

“I have been working really hard with my coaches about perfecting all the different kinds of finishes out of the carry,” Schiffman said.

“Today I just executed it better than I have.”

He also posted falls of Evergreen Park’s Adam Viravec (2:17) and Richards’ Dom Paul (1:07) in the preliminary rounds.

“Hopefully I will be able to carry this momentum into the state series,” he said.

Williams (13-2) posted a fall over Tinley Park’s Sam Zayyad and a tight 4-3 decision over Oak Forest’s Hunter Hale to win the lower bracket.

Paul (13-5) had the first period fall of Hale (14-13) to capture third place.

145–Nate Pacetti, Eisenhower

Senior Nate Pacetti delivered the Cardinals’ second champion by defeating Oak Forest’s Connor Nowicki 10-5.

Pacetti (23-2) showed a bracing combination of speed, athleticism and power.

He recorded falls of Evergreen Park’s Ryan Serna (1:22) and Richards’ Xavier Lara (2:45) in dominating the upper bracket.

Nowicki, listed in the 2A honorable mention for his weight class, posted falls over Oak lawn’s John Parquette (2:41) and Lemont’s Noah O’Connor (3:41).

Noah O’Connor (18-14) recovered for the strong first period pin of Lara (17-9) for third place.

152–Damari Reed, Shepard

The obvious question for Shepard’s Damari Reed is what do you do for an encore?

The defending state champion at 152 pounds is making his bid for being one of the state’s top wrestlers, regardless of weight or class.

“I just want to stay focused,” he said. “My end goal is defending my state title and being a two-time champion.

“That’s my motivation to keep going.”

His blend of athleticism, quickness and strength is breathtaking to behold.

He put on a master class with his sharp and mesmerizing second period fall over Oak Forest’s gifted Ivan Corral in the final.

Reed (27-0) posted quick falls over Tinley Park’s Fawzi Zayyad (0:25) and and Hillcrest’s Latrell’s Hall (0:47) in the lead up to the final.

“I think I am a really smart wrestler as far as my selection of moves,” Reed said. “I think on the fly, and I understand my opponents really well.”

His five first period takedowns offset the three escapes he allowed of Ivan Corral in establishing a 10-3 advantage.

His cradle at the start of the second period proved the exclamation point to a remarkable day in which he was named the most outstanding wrestler.

“That’s my go-to move when I want to put a guy away,” he said.

Ivan Corral (21-6) posted falls of Evergreen Park’s Dane Bik and Richard’s Mike Taheny to qualify for the final.

Taheny (21-7) posted the fall, in just 0:29, over Bremen’s Konya Lewis-Hunt, for third place.

160–Max Corral, Oak Forest

After his older brother, Ivan Corral, ran into the buzzsaw in the form of the incomparable Damari Reed, sophomore Max Corral gave the necessary answer.

“I have been wrestling with my brother for a long time, and we have really good competition,” Max Corral said.

Max Corral edged Oak Lawn’s Rakan Eid 5-1 for the championship.

“It feels great because my brother did not win the conference when he was a sophomore,” he said.

After posting a fall in the quarterfinals, Max Corral defeated Tinley Park’s Nate Cossyleon 2-0 in his semifinal.

“I like to throw in under hooks, and get shots out of that,” Max Corral said. “That’s what I was able to do.”

Eid (7-2) upset Evergreen Park’s Aseal Rubalcava with the first period fall. He also defeated Argo’s Luke Wesolowski 9-7 to reach the final.

Rubalcava (25-4) dominated Wesolowski (15-9) for third place with a fall at 0:28.

170 pounds—Alex Tagler, Lemont

Lemont senior Alex Tagler is a known commodity.

Ranked No. 5, he is been one of the fixtures and a direct link to the state championship team.

He also is not afraid to try and reinvent himself. It is how he stays fresh and impactful.

“One of the things I have become very conscious of is working at a much faster pace,” he said.

“I talked a lot with my coaches about pushing the tempo and scoring my points.”

That strategy paid off with a strong 10-3 victory over Oak Lawn junior Hani Odeh in the final.

The first period ended scoreless. Odeh used his superior length to frustrate Tagler.

A late second period reversal put Tagler in charge. Using his superior strength, he made a dramatic charge for a late takedown and three-point near fall for the final margin.

“I was trying to push the pace, and I went heavy to his head and it worked out,” Tagler said.

“He went to his back.”

After a first-round bye, Tagler posted a pin of Richards’ Jeremiah Gill to reach the final.

Odeh (19-8) had an opening pin and then upset second-seeded Mike Torres of Evergreen Park 10-9 in their semifinal.

Torres (25-3) responded with a first period fall of Reavis’ Anas Everette for third place.

182–Mo Khalil, Lemont

Lemont junior Mo Khalil is the Indians’ highest ranked athlete at No. 4.

He also entered the conference meet with a bit of a chip on his shoulder.

He lost a regular-season dual against Oak Lawn’s Evan Zambrano 4-3.

“I was coming out of a state quarterfinal playoff game in football, and I was not even sure I was going to wrestle that particular dual.”

Khalil had a message for Zambrano.

“I told him I will see you come conference time.”

Khalil (26-4) exacted his revenge with the 1-0 victory.

He secured the victory by securing his escape with just under a minute remaining in the third period.

Khalil, who was fourth in the state last year, posted a fall in the quarterfinal. He secured the 9-1 major decision over James Williams of Evergreen Park in the semifinals.

“Two years ago, Williams beat me inn the blood round to go downstate because of a bad throw by me,” Khalil said.

“I beat him 5-0 last week in our dual. I just feel like I have made big strides this season.”

Zambrano (27-4) posted consecutive falls to capture the upper bracket.

James Williams (23-5) posted the first period fall of Argo’s Ethan Medel (15-7) for third place.

195–Alex Jackson, T.F. North

Alex Jackson was just trying to catch his breath.

“My arms felt numb,” he said.

A volatile and wild third period showdown with Lemont’s Cole Brannigan had all manner of possibilities.

Jackson utilized his superior quickness for the 6-3 lead into the third period.

A bang-bang sequence, illustrating his fatigue, saw Brannigan pull off a stunning reversal and near fall.

Jackson recovered and executed his own reversal for the 8-7 lead.

He granted No. 8 Brannigan the escape for the 8-8 tie.

His fourth and final takedown proved the difference in the riveting 10-9 victory.

Jackson (13-0) maintained his perfect mark.

“I try to wrestle very smart,” he said. “My conditioning has not been very great this year because we have not been able to practice a lot.

“I like to wrestle slow, and what happened is that he started pushing, and I had to move and slow it down.”

Jackson had two falls to reach the finals.

Brannigan (26-5) also had two impressive pins in the upper bracket.

Hillcrest’s Rodney Sims (6-2) posted the first period fall of Shepard’s Gabe Smith for third place.

220–Tyler Wilms, Lemont

Lemont senior Tyler Wilms proved the immovable object.

Ranked No. 9, he ran over everybody in his path.

Wilms (22-3) needed just over the equivalent of one regulation match to secure the title.

He posted the fall in 1:38 of Shepard’s Niko Bucio for the championship.

He had earlier pins of Oak Forest’s Adam Rickter and T.F. North’s Bryant Bobadilla to qualify for the final.

Bucio (10-6) emerged from the pack to capture the lower bracket.

He edged Angelo Temko of Reavis 5-3 and recorded the fall of second-seeded Eduardo Antunez of Evergreen Park in his semifinal.

Rickter posted the first period fall of Temko for third place.

285–Alex Pasquale, Lemont

Alex Pasquale is young. He also has the savvy to understand the need to stay unpredictable.

“Today I was just trying to do things I haven’t done so far this year,” he said.

Mission accomplished.

Pasquale completed a sharp performance with the fall at 3:08 of Bremen’s Eric Perez-Nava for the individual title.

“I was trying to go for that single, and that worked into my power move, which is how I got most of my pins today,” Pasquale said.

Ranked No. 8, he also posted pins in the two preliminary rounds.

“This means a lot to me,” he said. “Usually sophomores are not expected to win big tournaments like this, especially at heavyweight.”

Perez-Nava (19-3) also posted falls in the two preliminary rounds

By Curt Herron

For the IWCOA

NEW LENOX – When a coach sees 13 of his wrestlers make trips to the awards stand at one of Illinois’ top tournaments and six of those win titles to help his team to claim the championship in impressive fashion over several other ranked teams, it’s already a great weekend.

Then throw in that you get to enjoy the whole experience while going up against other coaches who either were teammates with you or attended your alma mater, including your brother, and have the final day highlighted by having not just one of your college coaches back but two of them there, with one of those being another brother.

That’s the enjoyable Friday and Saturday that Brendan Heffernan was able to experience at the latest edition of the Illini Classic at Lincoln-Way Central in New Lenox, when his Marist Redhawks turned in their best tournament performance yet for what those involved with the program hope will feature many more special moments throughout the rest of the season.

Marist, which is fifth in Class 3A in Rob Sherrill’s most-recent IWCOA rankings, finished with 274.5 points, placing it well ahead of No. 7 in 3A, St. Charles East, who was the runner-up with 219.5 points, while No. 8 in 3A, Lincoln-Way East, took third place with 179.5 points. This was the RedHawks’ first championship in the Illini Classic since 2016, when they capped a run of three-consecutive titles. The program’s best tournament showings had been third place at DeKalb’s Flavin duals and seventh at the Dvorak.

Plainfield North (120), Bloomington (105), Carl Sandburg (104.5), Lincoln-Way West (103.5), Lincoln-Way Central (99), Providence Catholic (97.5) and Minooka (90.5) rounded out the top-half of the field in the tournament, which featured 12 individuals ranked in the top-10 winning titles as well as nine others in the top-10 who finished second.

The 20-team competition was held at Lincoln-Way Central, which is appropriate since Knights coach Tyrone Byrd initiated the competition that features many teams coached by University of Illinois alumni with 12 teams in 2011 while at Lincoln-Way East and things have grown considerably since then.

A total of 18 head coaches or their assistants were on hand for the unique competition that pays tribute to their alma mater, the U of I, including Pat Heffernan, who was at Illinois at the same time that his brother Brendan was. As has been the case throughout nearly every year, the head coach of the Illini from 1992 to 2009, Mark Johnson, was in attendance to hand out medals and the special Illini singlet to each champion.

As a bonus this year, Jim Heffernan was able to attend for the first time. He was coach Johnson’s assistant from 1993-2009 and then succeeded him as the Illini head coach in 2010 and held that position until last season when he retired and was succeeded by his assistant, Mike Poeta.

“For me, it’s an opportunity to see all of my old guys,” Johnson said. “Of course I like wrestling, but I come up here to see the guys and have fun and joke around. They’re working, but we still have a lot of fun, too. You see what you put in, your legacy that goes on and as they become young men and affect kids in their own right. You get into coaching to make a difference. When you get here, it’s not about who won or who lost, it’s about that time that we spent together. It was good times and the connection goes from me and Jim and now Poeta and all of these guys.

“It’s a very tight-knit bunch of guys. When I talk to people and I’ve been around other programs, I say that one of the things that makes me feel the proudest are these guys. And this thing definitely helps because they’re still close buddies and in contact. The main thing is that it’s about your experience. I know that these men had a great experience at that time of life in our program. We made it fun, were intense and did it by the rules. and hopefully we produced good kids, and now they’re doing that.”

Winning titles for the RedHawks were Owen Dunlap (6-1 at 138), Ricky Ericksen (22-7 at 145), Tommy Boland (26-4 at 160), Jake Liberatore (9-0 at 170), Peter Marinopolous (26-0 at 195) and Ghee Rachal (21-2 at 220).

Taking third place were Michael Esteban (25-7 at 113) and Luke Liberatore (9-2 at 182) while placing fourth were George Marinopoulos (22-6 at 106), Will Denny (21-7 at 120), Matthew Cornfield (14-9 at 132) and Andrew Dado (16-6 at 152) and Conor Phelan (17-8 at 182) finished fifth. Luka Anoshenko (120), Jesse Herrera (126) and Michael Maloney (285) also won matches for the RedHawks.

Leading Marist in team points were Ericksen (29.5, second), Rachal (28.5, T-third), Boland (28, T-sixth), Jake Liberatore (28, T-sixth), Peter Marinopoulos (27, T-ninth) and Dunlap (24, T-14th). The RedHawks led following the first day by a 108.5-92 margin over St. Charles East while Lincoln-Way East was third at 88.5 heading into Saturday.

“It’s nice to see them coming together as a team,” said Brendan Heffernan of his RedHawks. “It’s really the first time that we’ve basically had all 14 starters in there, so it was good to see what that looked like. And they’re really wrestling with confidence now, which is good. All of these kids have had a long couple of years, so it’s good to see them be able to have some success and to enjoy it, so I’m happy for them in terms of that. Right now, we have a nice group that’s been put together and it’s starting to take shape, which is nice.

“You see a bunch of ex-teammates and college roommates and it’s great to see Mark Johnson here every year. And this was the first time that my brother Jim has been here and my twin brother Pat is the coach at DePaul, and Jason (Potter) and I were freshman-year roommates at the U of I. It was a great idea when it was originally brought up and it’s nice that these Lincoln-Way coaches have been able to execute it and keep it going, so it’s nice. It’s one thing to think about it, and it’s another thing to do it.”

Coach Jason Potter’s runner-up Saints had nine individuals in the top-five on the awards stand and four who advanced to the title mat, with two winning championships.

Leading the way for the Saints was Ben Davino (24-1 at 120), who received the tournament’s Outstanding Wrestler Award after prevailing in a weight class that featured four individuals who were ranked in the top-five in Class 3A or 2A. The Saints sophomore, who’s top-ranked in Class 3A and was an IWCOA champion, led all participants with 30 team points after recording four falls, including pins over Bloomington’s No. 2 in 2A Carson Nishida in the finals and Marist’s No. 5 in 3A Denny in the semifinals.

Also winning a title for the Saints was Tyler Guerra (19-5 at 132) while finishing in second place were Elijah Chiaro (17-2 at 170) and Brandon Swartz (20-6 at 182). Taking third were Ethan Penzato (18-4 at 126), Gavin Connolly (20-4 at 138) and Brody Murray (20-6 at 160) and claiming fifth were Maddox Stieb (4-2 at 145) and Lane Robinson (13-5 at 152) while Anthony Chiaro (13-8 at 195) and Austin Barret (16-9 at 285) both finished sixth.

“We’re clicking and the best part of that is that for the most part, we’re pretty young,” Potter said of his Fighting Saints. “You can see week to week that we are improving and as a coach, that’s what you’re looking for. We’ve stubbed our toes a couple of times, but every one of the kids on our team keep elevating their games and if they fall short in a match, they want to get better. They watch the guy next to them busting their butt and things are happening for them. When we have kids like that who are elite, watching them work hard and then seeing how that translates into performances makes all of these guys want to start to work harder and to do better.

“This is a testament to coach Heffernan and coach Johnson. With them being such good coaches for us, it made us want to aspire to be good coaches for other kids. I think that’s kind of made us raise our game as coaches and I think now our teams kind of show that. It makes itself very competitive, but on top of that, just the environment and being able to see these guys, especially with Johnson and Heff coming up here, too, they’re like families to us. For most of us, it’s like a second dad. So to have that experience and be able to see them at least once a year is fun.They were our role models and that’s why we do what we do. We love coaching because they had such a good impact on us.

“And every day that we step foot in the wrestling room, it’s part of them that’s getting passed on through to the sport of wrestling and the relationships that you build. To have both Heff and Johnson as coaches, they made it clear the whole time that it had more to do than just wrestling. They built relationships with every single guy that they ever coached and that’s why they still know all of their names and they are in contact with them. Probably the biggest impact they had on me is the relationship side of coaching with kids and using the sport of wrestling to do bigger and better things.”

Kevin Rockett’s third-place Griffins were led by champion Gavin Jones (23-0 at 182), runner-up Jack Marion (27-2 at 152) and third-place finisher Ari Zaeske (20-5 at 170). Jones led his squad with 27 team points. Finishing fourth were Alex Lizak (15-6 at 138), Domanic Abeja (15-6 at 145), Dominic Adamo (19-5 at 160) and Zach Lamonto (7-2 at 182). Placing fifth were Tyson Zvonar (26-4 at 120), Connor Lindaur (23-4 at 195) and Alex Knaperek (18-5 at 285) while Brayden Mortell (18-12 at 113) took sixth.

Shepard’s Damari Reed (22-0 at 152), an IWCOA champion who’s top-ranked in 3A at 152, continued his unbeaten season when he captured a 6-5 decision over Marion in the 152 finals. He was 12th in team points with 26.5 after winning his first three matches by technical fall, which was two more than any other individual had.

Plainfield North’s Jacob Macatangay (33-0 at 126), an IWCOA champion, remained unbeaten after capturing a 4-3 victory in the 126 finals over Providence Catholic’s Billy Meiszner (20-4 at 126) in a matchup of the third- and sixth-ranked individuals at their weights in 3A. Macatangay was tied for ninth in team points with 27.

The other team in the tournament that had more than one champion was Carl Sandburg, who received titles from Ryan Hinger (20-4 at 113) and Kevin Zimmer (5-0 at 285). Hinger tied for third with 28.5 team points while Zimmer tied for sixth with 28 team points. Also winning a championship was Lincoln-Way West’s Matt Soltis (22-10 at 106).

Bloomington, which is ranked 11th in 2A, had four second-place finishers. They were Carson Nishida (28-4 in 120), Dylan Watts (24-6 at 132), Jacob Barger (28-7 at 145) and Jack Weltha (25-2 at 220).

Other second-place finishers were Carl Sandburg’s Rocco Hayes (16-9 at 106), Schaumburg’s Callen Kirchner (23-4 at 113), Lincoln-Way Central’s Conor Smetana (28-4 at 138), Plainfield North’s Jared Gumila (33-3 at 160), Harvard’s Nathan Rosas (28-3 at 195) and Lincoln-Way West’s Jake Ziemniarski (22-10 at 285).

Other close finals were at 106 where Soltis edged Hayes 3-2, at 138 where Dunlap prevailed 2-1 over Smetana and at 170, where Jake Liberatore won 3-1 over Elijah Chiaro.

Here is what the official program for the tournament had to say about former University of Illinois coaches Mark Johnson and Jim Heffernan:

Mark Johnson – 1992-2009 (Head coach): Mark Johnson’s career is unmatched at Illinois, as he finished with the most wins, NCAA Champions, All-Americans and NCAA qualifiers of any coach in Illini history. He was named the National Coach of the Year in 1995 and 30 of his 45 All-Americans came in his last 10 years. He led the Orange and Blue to a team title at the 2005 Big Ten Championships, Illinois’ first Big Ten crown in 53 years, and a pair of Big Ten dual titles in 2005 and 2006. He also guided the Illini to a No. 1 national ranking in 2004.

Jim Heffernan – 2010-2021 (Head Coach); 1993-2009 (Assistant Coach): Considered one of the most prominent collegiate coaches in the nation, Jim Heffernan coached 73 All-Americans, 215 NCAA qualifiers, 11 individual NCAA champions and 20 Big Ten champions during his time at Illinois. He helped lead the Illini to Top-10 finishes at the NCAA Championships 13 times. And during his coaching career in Champaign, the Illini had at least one All-American on the roster in 28-consecutive seasons.

Current head coaches who competed at the U of I who were on hand in addition to the Heffernan brothers and Byrd were Riverside-Brookfield’s Nick Curby, Niles West’s Anthony Genovesi, Lincoln-Way West’s Brian Glynn, Bishop McNamara’s Jake Kimberlin, Schaumburg’s Mike Levanti, Carl Sandburg’s Clinton Polz, St. Charles East’s Jason Potter and Providence Catholic’s Don Reynolds. Assistants with the programs that also were Illini include Providence Catholic’s Keith Healy, Carl Sandburg’s Tony Siebert, St. Charles East’s Joe Barczak, Marist’s Deuce Rachal, Minooka’s Matt Harding, Morris’ Jon Lanning and Reavis’ Eric Novak.

Here’s a breakdown of the 2022 Illini Classic champions and their weight classes:

106 – Matt Soltis, Lincoln-Way West

For the second time this season, Matt Soltis came up with a hard-earned 3-2 victory over Rocco Hayes in an important matchup in a major tournament.

Last month, the Lincoln-Way West senior claimed a semifinals win over the Carl Sandburg freshman enroute to a championship at 106 at Hinsdale Central’s Whitlatch. On Saturday, Soltis edged Hayes 3-2 in the 106 finals to capture the title of the Illini Classic, giving him two first-place finishes in his two finals appearances. Soltis (22-10) earned his spot on the title mat with a 5-3 semifinals victory over another Carl Sandburg freshman, Madden Parker, after opening the tournament with a pair of falls.

“This was our rematch from the Whitlatch, but luckily I came out on top,” Soltis said. “The third period was really hard but I just persevered with what we’ve been working on all week. At the start of the season it was a little rocky but we just got in the practice room and we worked on it and now we’re back and feeling good. Now we’re working toward conference and the state series. I’m ready to see what I can do and hopefully make it downstate and then place there.”

Hayes (16-9), who also took second at Conant and was third at Hinsdale Central, had a pair of major decisions to start the tournament before beating Harvard senior Brian Hernandez, who’s ranked eighth in Class 1A, by a 5-1 score in the other semifinals match. Parker (18-7) bounced back from his semifinals loss with a fall to advance him to the third-place match, where he pulled out a 2-0 victory over Marist freshman George Marinopoulos (22-6), who posted his best tournament effort of his young career.

Plainfield North freshman Maddox Garbis (29-9) responded to a quarterfinals loss to Hayes by winning three of four matches in the consolation bracket to claim fifth place over Hernandez (14-6) with a 7-4 decision. Garbis also finished fifth at Granite City’s Schmitt while Hernandez won a title at his own invite and was second at Vernon Hills.

113 – Ryan Hinger, Carl Sandburg

Callen Kirchner won titles in his first two trips to the title mat in his initial season while Ryan Hinger settled for second in his tournament debut and was third in his next attempt.

But when the two freshmen clashed in the 113 title match at the Illini Classic, Carl Sandburg’s Hinger, who’s ranked fifth in 3A, finally got his breakthrough when he defeated Schaumburg’s Kirchner by technical fall in 3:44 for his first tournament title following a second at Conant and a third at the Whitlatch to improve to 20-4. The Eagles champion opened with a pair of first-period falls before claiming a 12-4 semifinals victory over Marist freshman Michael Esteban.

“Just hard work and dedication is really all you need and it just comes down to how much you want it and how much time and effort that you put into the sport,” Hinger said. “I really love my coaches because they help me. I just learn new technique and they push me a lot. I definitely like my stamina and how I just keep going at it, you just have to put your head down and work.”

Kirchner (23-4), who finished first at Buffalo Grove and Niles West, won 7-4 in the quarterfinals before recording a fall in 4:45 in the semifinals over Plainfield North sophomore Cayden Amico. The losers in the semifinals bounced back with falls of just under 4:00 in the consolation bracket to advance to the third-place match, where Esteban (25-7) won by injury default over Amico (28-10). It was the best showing for Esteban, who was fifth at the Dvorak, while Amico’s best effort is a second-place finish at Granite City.

In the fifth-place match, DePaul College Prep received its best finish when freshman Max Rosen (19-3) recorded a fall in 2:34 over Lincoln-Way East freshman Brayden Mortell (18-12). Rosen, ranked sixth in 1A, had a title win at Fenton to his credit while Mortell was fourth at Niles West and fifth at Wheaton Warrenville South.

120 – Ben Davino, St. Charles East

Ben Davino is 2-for-2 in Outstanding Wrestler Awards in major Illinois competitions after adding to his 120 championship at the Dvorak with a title at the same weight in the Illini Classic and competed for his his third title with his lone loss in a 24-1 season being in the finals at the Ironman to Marc-Anthony McGowan of New Jersey’s Blair Academy.

The St. Charles East sophomore, who was an IWCOA champion and is top-ranked in 3A, recorded four falls in 7:23 and led all competitors in the field with 30 team points to claim his second OWA following a fall in 1:29 over Bloomington senior Carson Nishida in the title match. His lone fall that didn’t occur in the opening period came in the semifinals, when he needed 2:34 to record a fall against Marist freshman Will Denny.

“It felt good and it was dominant all the way through,” Davino said. “I think there was just one second-period pin, and that was it. Other than that, I’m just having fun out here. I work as hard as I can every day so that I get better every single day. It’s nothing special, just hard work. I love my team. We’re coming together and we’re getting a lot better and we just have a great bond. So I think that we’re going to come out pretty high at the end of the season.”

Nishida (28-4), ranked second in Class 2A and an Illini Classic runner-up in 2020, was hoping to add to titles that he won at Conant, Civic Memorial and Sycamore, but still advanced to the finals for the fourth time in five tournaments following a pair of first-period falls with an 8-2 semifinals victory over Lincoln-Way Central’s Joey Malito, handing the senior his first loss of the season. Malito (32-1), ranked third in 3A and a champion at Glenbrook South and Lincoln who also took third at the Illini Classic in 2020, responded with two wins, including a 5-3 decision in the third-place match over Denny (21-7), who’s ranked fifth in 3A and whose best previous showing was a fifth at the Dvorak.

Lincoln-Way East freshman Tyson Zvonar (26-4) captured a 14-8 win over Lincoln-Way West sophomore Jase Salin (24-10) for fifth place. Zvonar, son of the school’s very successful football coach, Rob Zvonar, won a title at Wheaton Warrenville South and was second at Niles West while Salin was a runner-up at the Whitlatch.

126 – Jacob Macatangay, Plainfield North

Jacob Macatangay has plenty of decisive victories to his credit in a 33-0 season, but the IWCOA champion also is very adept at pulling out close wins when he needs to, which has especially been the case in his three tournament title matches.

That was once again the case in the finals at 126 at the Illini Classic where the Plainfield North senior claimed a 4-3 victory over Providence Catholic senior Billy Meiszner in a showdown of two of the best at their weight in 3A and also two IWCOA finalists. Macatangay, who’s ranked third, added to title wins at the Dvorak and Granite City, while Meiszner, who’s ranked sixth, was fifth at the Dvorak. Macatangay followed two falls with a 16-5 major decision over St. Charles East junior Ethan Penzato in the semifinals.

Macatangay competed in the finals at the Illini Classic for the third time, also winning a title in 2019 while Meiszner placed fifth in the event two years ago.

“I’m real happy with all of the success that I’ve had,” Macatangay said. “I’ve been wrestling really good competition and am just getting better and better every week. I just like getting pushed in the room by my coach every day and getting a little beat up during practice really pushes me and it drives me to succeed.”

Meiszner (20-4) opened with a fall and added a win by technical fall before claiming a 10-0 major decision over Schaumburg junior Caden Kirchner in the semifinals. Penzato (18-4) bounced back from his semifinals defeat with a fall in 0:50 over Minooka junior Dominic Shiavone (15-2) to claim third place. It was the best tournament showing of the season for both Penzato and Shiavone.

Kirchner (24-4) claimed a 12-0 major decision over Riverside-Brookfield senior Mateo Costello (21-4) in the fifth-place match. Kirchner had title wins at Buffalo Grove and Niles West to his credit while Costello, who was also sixth in the Illini Classic in 2020, is ranked seventh in 2A with a title win at Fenton and runner-up showing at Harvard.

132 – Tyler Guerra, St. Charles East

After just missing out on a medal in the prestigious Ironman in his first tournament of the season, Tyler Guerra has definitely been on a roll in his next two competitions, going 6-1 and finishing third at the Dvorak and then getting a fall, a major decision and a win by technical fall to capture the 132 title at the Illini Classic.

The St. Charles East sophomore improved to 19-5 after capturing his first championship and was one of two title winners and four finalists for the Fighting Saints. After claiming a 17-5 semifinals win over St. Rita’s Sean Larkin, Guerra, who’s in his first year with the Saints, won by technical fall in 2:23 over Bloomington junior Dylan Watts in the 132 finals.

“It feels good and my hard work is finally starting to pay off,” Guerra said. “Coming to St. Charles East has really helped my wrestling career and I got a lot better. It’s awesome since we have a lot of hammers in the room. More than just Ben Davino, there’s Gavin Connolly and Lane Robinson, it’s our whole team and everyone is scrapping. This team, we’re all just so close. and coach Potter is awesome, so I love the program. It’s awesome and I couldn’t ask for anything better.”

Watts (24-6), who won a title at Sycamore and was third at Conant, followed up on a pair of falls with a 4-3 semifinals victory over Lincoln-Way Central freshman Caden Harvey. The two semifinals losers were beaten in the wrestlebacks by Minooka sophomore Cale Stonitsch and Marist sophomore Matthew Cornfield and Stonitsch won a 5-0 decision between the two to finish in third place. It was the best tournament performances of the season for the two sophomores.

In the fifth-place match, Larkin (15-6) won 6-4 in sudden victory over Harvey (18-8).

138 – Owen Dunlap, Marist

As a three-time state qualifier and placewinner in 2020, Owen Dunlap figured to be a key contributor for Marist but prior to this weekend, he had competed in just three matches.

Four matches and four wins later, things are looking very positive for Dunlap (6-1), a senior who’s ranked ninth in Class 3A. He won three close decisions and added a fall in 0:22 in the quarterfinals to claim top honors at 138 after pulling out a 2-1 decision over Lincoln-Way Central senior Conor Smetana in the 138 finals. After winning 5-1 in his first match and then getting the quick fall, he earned his spot in the title match after capturing a 6-4 semifinals victory over St. Charles East sophomore Gavin Connolly. This was the third time that he placed in the Illini Classic, also winning a title in 2020 after taking second in 2019.

“We have a real young team with a lot of talent on it and we’re hoping that we can continue this success down the stretch,” Dunlap said. “And I want to help the team out as much as possible and hopefully we can make a run at state because I think that we have the guys to do so. I can’t wait to get down there, back in Champaign, where there’s a whole different feel, so it definitely will be exciting. We want to go as far as we can. We’re all tight together and if anything bad happens, everyone is there to pick each other up. We’re all there for each other and pushing each other as much as we can and just getting the best out of each other.”

Smetana (28-4), who’s ranked eighth at 132 and also finished second at Glenbrook South and Lincoln and was fourth in the Illini Classic in 2019, earned his third-consecutive trip to the finals with a a pair of pins in just over a minute and then a fall in 0:55 in the semifinals against Minooka junior Elijah Munoz. Connolly (20-4) bounced back from his semifinals loss to Dunlap to claim third place with a fall in 3:43 over Lincoln-Way East freshman Alex Lizak (15-6), who won his first title at Wheaton Warrenville South.

Munoz (14-7), who previous-best was a sixth at the Whitlatch, took fifth place after winning by technical fall in 3:40 over Plainfield North senior Carter Alexander.

145 – Ricky Ericksen, Marist

Ricky Ericksen made a breakthrough performance by not only becoming one of the four members of his team to win their first tournament titles of the season but it’s the first title of what the freshman hopes is many more during his career.

Ericksen (22-7) recorded a fall in 3:24 in the 145 finals over Bloomington senior Jacob Barger to highlight a weekend where he kicked things off with a win by technical fall and then recorded a pair of first-period falls, including one in 1:02 in the semifinals over Lincoln-Way East sophomore Domanic Abeja. Thanks to those results, Ericksen was second in the entire tournament in team points with 29.5, which was just one-half point behind the leader, who also happened to receive the OWA, St. Charles East’s Ben Davino.

“This feels pretty good,” Ericksen said. “This year has not been going as well as I planned it to, but coming in here, I felt pretty good and showed it out there. I’m trying to get my name out there and get kids to respect me. It’s all about the partners in the room and how they’re getting me better every day and we’re helping each other to get better. I didn’t do as good as I wanted to at the Dvorak, but when I came here, I was ready to go. This team is great. I feel like this could be our year to go out and make a name for ourselves.”

Barger (28-7), who won a title at Conant, advanced to the finals for a second time this season and placed sixth or better for the fifth time. He definitely went the hard route to reach the finals, opening with three-straight decisions, which featured one-point victories in both the quarterfinals and semifinals, edging Harvard senior Ivan Rosas 10-9 in order to reach the title mat, which assured him of an improvement from his third at the Illini Classic in 2020.

Rosas (22-4), who’s ranked sixth in 1A and won a title in his own school’s invite and was second at Leyden and fifth at the Mid-States in Wisconsin, bounced back from the tough semifinals setback to take third place after capturing a 3-0 decision over Abeja (15-6), who was second at WW South’s Ewoldt and third at Niles West. St. Charles East senior Maddox Stieb (4-2) took fifth after claiming a 5-3 win over Plainfield North senior Brody Wyller (24-14).

152 – Damari Reed, Shepard

The IWCOA champion at 152 remained perfect on the season at 22-0 and captured his fourth-straight tournament title but things certainly weren’t easy for him in the 152 finals after he dominated in order to reach the title mat.

The Astros senior, who’s top-ranked in Class 3A and has also won titles at Joliet Central, Berwyn/Cicero Morton and Geneva, captured wins by technical fall in his first three matches, which was two more than anyone else in the field had. That included a semifinals win by technical fall in 4:51 over Marist junior Andrew Dado. But in the title match, Lincoln-Way East senior Jack Marion showed why he had only lost once thus far when he forced Reed to go the full six minutes before he prevailed by a 6-5 score.

“It was a close match, but I had the match under control the whole time,” Reed said. “I have to give it to him since he was a tough opponent and I’m glad that I got a tough match. I always have to fight my way up in some type of way so with me being the number one now, I just have to hold my position and continue to do what I was doing in order to get to the top. My school really appreciates it and supports me a lot as far as being the first state champion in a lot of years. And my friends support me, too, and wish me good luck before my matches and I appreciate that. Ever since I was in eighth grade, it was my goal to at least get two state titles. I’ve got one, now I’ve got to get two.”

Marion (27-2), who’s ranked fifth in Class 3A, competed in his third-straight tournament finals after winning titles at Niles West and WW South’s Ewoldt. He reached the title mat with two falls and a decision, recording a pin in 3:30 over Bishop McNamara junior Luke Christie in the semifinals. Christie (15-2), who’s top-ranked in Class 1A who won a title at Unity in his only other tournament appearance, took third place after winning 5-2 over Dado (16-6), who’s ranked tenth in 3A and turned in his best showing of the season. In 2020, Dado took fifth and Christie was sixth at the Illini Classic.

In the fifth-place match, St. Charles East junior Lane Robinson (13-5) edged Lincoln-Way West senior Cameron Knepper (24-12) by a 3-2 score.

160 – Tommy Boland, Marist

Tommy Boland prevailed over Jared Gumila 11-6 in the 160 championship in a clash of two state-ranked seniors who not only have both placed before at state but also have qualified at least twice.

Marist’s Boland (26-4), a two-time qualifier who took fifth at the IWCOA, is ranked fifth in 3A with a fifth-place showing in the Dvorak his previous-best of the season. Plainfield North’s Gumila (33-3), who’s ranked seventh in 3A, is a three-time qualifier who was fourth in the IHSA in 2020. Boland, who fourth in the Illini Classic in 2020, earned his spot on the title mat with two first-period falls before getting a pin in 3:21 in the semifinals over Lincoln-Way East senior Dominic Adamo.

“I think our team did a great job this weekend,” Boland said. “Our goal was to just go out and have fun, because when you’re having fun, you’re wrestling your best. We have great depth on the whole team and there’s really no weak spots. Whenever we wrestle in practice, we make sure to push each other so that we always are getter better every day. We all want each other to do their best and when everyone is doing their best, then it’s a lot of fun.”

Gumila (33-3), who also was a runner-up at Granite City’s Schmitt and a fourth-place finisher at state in 2020, also opened the tournament with two first-period falls before capturing a 14-5 major decision over St. Charles East sophomore Brody Murray in the semifinals. This was the third time that the Tigers senior placed in the Illini Classic, placing third in both 2020 and 2019.

The two semifinals losers bounced back to compete for third-place with Murray recording a fall in 5:27 over Adamo, who was third in the Illini Classic in 2019 and fifth in the event in 2020. It was the best tournament showing of the season for Murray (20-6), who’s ranked eighth in 3A, while Adamo (19-5) took second place at Niles West and the Ewoldt. In the fifth-place match, Harvard senior Bailey Livdahl (24-8) won by fall in 4:15 over Lincoln-Way Central senior Dustin Kozlowski (13-9). It was the fourth top-six finish for Livdahl, who took third at Leyden while Kozlowski was fifth at Lincoln.

170 – Jake Liberatore, Marist

There was a time when doctors advised Jake Liberatore that he should no longer compete in the sport due to serious issues that he was dealing with involving his stomach.

But the Marist junior was determined to continue on and as his resolve strengthened, so did his health, and Liberatore, who’s ranked sixth in Class 3A, is off to a 9-0 start, which includes a 4-0 effort in the Illini Classic where he opened with three falls before getting a decision to win the 170 title. He beat St. Charles East senior Elijah Chiaro 3-1 in the finals to claim his first tournament championship and now hopes that he’s done battling serious health issues and can finally begin to experience a normal career in the sport.

“It’s just amazing to be back, it’s beyond words,” Liberatore said. “In my freshman year, I was hospitalized and then in my sophomore year I also had COVID. This year I had COVID and my stomach issues again, so I was out for six or seven weeks. They actually told me that I wasn’t going to be able to wrestle again, and I kind of said no. When I was in the hospital, I called my dad and I told him that I wanted to leave and go back to practice. There’s been a lot of ups and downs. But I love the sport. Since I was five years old, I loved watching it and I wanted to be able to compete at the highest level, just like the guys that I was watching.”

Chiaro (17-2), who’s ranked seventh in 3A, also posted his best tournament showing of the season thanks to a major decision, a fall and a 5-4 decision over Lincoln-Way East junior Ari Zaeske in the semifinals. Zaeske (20-5), who also took third at Niles West, recorded a fall in 3:29 in the third-place match over Riverside-Brookfield senior Brock Hoyd (21-4), who has title wins at Fenton and Harvard to his credit.

In the fifth-place match, St. Rita’s Jon Fulgencio (14-7) recorded a fall in 3:38 over Shepard senior Dominic Chillmon (15-9).

182 – Gavin Jones, Lincoln-Way East

Gavin Jones admits that many people may not know much about him, but after improving to 23-0 and winning a championship at 182 pounds at the Illinois Classic, it’s a good bet that he will be more on the radar as regular season competition winds down and the postseason discussion heats up.

The Lincoln-Way East senior led the way for his program that took third place in an event that they originally hosted after capturing the title at 182 with a 14-6 major decision over St. Charles East sophomore Brandon Swartz. After recording a quick fall in the quarterfinals, Jones, who’s ranked sixth in 3A and also has a title win at Niles West, captured a 3-1 victory over Griffins teammate, junior Zach Lamonto, in the semifinals to earn his spot on the title mat.

“This year, everything has started to click,” Jones said. “In the past years, I’ve either had problems making the spot or I just haven’t been able to put it together in matches. But this year, I’m pretty proud that I’ve been able to put it together against the higher-ranked guys and guys that I’m not supposed to beat and being the underdog feels pretty good. Last year was kind of so-so since the year was kind of cut off. I had some success at the lower levels but I’ve always been in the same weight class as some of the top guys.”

Swartz (20-6) advanced to the finals with falls in his first two matches and then a 6-2 triumph over Marist junior Luke Liberatore in the semifinals. His best previous showing was seventh at the Dvorak. In the third-place match, Liberatore (9-2) recorded a fall in 3:59 over Lamonto (7-2) for third place to post his best tournament effort of the season.

Like Lincoln-Way East, Marist also got two individuals on the award stand at 182 after sophomore Conor Phelan (17-8) got a fall in 1:36 over Providence Catholic senior Sean O’Connor in the fifth-place match.

195 – Peter Marinopoulos, Marist

After making news a few weeks back as one of the first individuals to go from team manager to Dvorak champion in two years, Peter Marinopolous can now start focusing on bigger things both individually and for his team after claiming top honors at 195 at the Illini Classic.

The Marist junior, who’s second-ranked in Class 3A with a perfect 26-0 record, picked up his second tournament title of the season when he captured an 8-0 major decision over Harvard senior Nathan Rosas in the 195 title match. Marinopoulos followed a fall in the quarterfinals with a 5-3 semifinals victory over Bloomington senior Anthony Curry to become one of six individual champions for the RedHawks, who easily won the title of the 20-team competition by 55 points over St. Charles East.

“I’m very excited,” Marinopolous said. “It’s the first time in a while that I’ve been just dominating everyone. I’m getting into my offense and riding people out and everything has been great. We had six finalists, six that went for third and one that went for fifth, so we’re all doing great. Everyone in the room is super excited about how we would do toward the end of the year and we’re shining right now. It’s very intense, everyone stays focused and there’s no goofing around. We’re all very focused on what we have to do and we’re working on our craft. I think that we’re all going to do great at the end of this year and hopefully come out with the team trophy and that would be great for the program.”

Rosas (28-3), who’s ranked third in Class 1A and has placed fifth at state the past two seasons at 195, won titles at his own school’s meet and at Vernon Hills and now has placed third or better in five-straight tournaments. He followed two falls with an 8-2 semifinals victory over Lincoln-Way East senior Connor Lindaur to reach the finals.

Curry (27-6), who’s ranked fifth in 2A with seconds at Conant, Civic Memorial and Granite City and two thirds in five tournament appearances, claimed third place with a 7-0 decision over Minooka senior Louis Johnson (20-9), who also placed fourth in the Whitlatch. Curry placed fourth in the Illini Classic in 2020. Lindaur (23-4), whose best showing is a third at Niles West, captured fifth-place with a 9-1 major decision over St. Charles East senior Anthony Chiaro (13-8), who had his best tournament finish.

220 – Ghee Rachal, Marist

After placing fourth in the IWCOA and pushing the bar even higher with an eighth-place showing at Fargo in Greco-Roman for champion Team Illinois, Ghee Rachal clearly is focused on the big picture as he prepares to make his third appearance in state competition.

The RedHawks senior is 21-2 and improved upon his previous-best, a third-place showing at the Dvorak, when he claimed top honors at the Illini Classic at 220 with a 13-5 major decision over Bloomington senior Jack Weltha. He advanced to the finals with a pin and a win by technical fall in 4:25 over Lincoln-Way West senior Michael Sneed. Beside being one of six RedHawks champs and the second-leading scorer in team points for the first-place team with 28.5 points, Rachal has plenty of U of I connections since his brother, Deuce, a Marist assistant, competed there, and twin brothers, Baan and We, are currently with the Illini.

“Two of my brothers are twins and they go to the U of I now and one graduated and he coaches at Marist now,” said Rachal, who was a runner-up in the last Illini Classic in 2020. “I feel pretty good, I just have to win state. It takes hard work and fixing mistakes, like watching out for cradles.I think that we can win team state this year. We like to get ourselves ready for matches. I’ll talk to someone and tell them that it’s just a match and there’s no nerves and we get 100 percent.”

Weltha (25-2), ranked second in Class 2A with title wins at Sycamore and Conant and a second at Civic Memorial where he suffered his other defeat, 6-5, to Waterloo’s top-ranked Jordan Sommers, earned his spot in the finals with two falls, with the last of those coming in 4:42 in the semifinals over Providence Catholic senior Liam McDermott. The Purple Raiders senior placed fifth at the last Illini Classic.

McDermott (33-3), who’s ranked third in 3A with a title at Antioch and a fifth at the Dvorak, bounced back from his semifinals loss to claim third place, just as he did in the last Illini Classic in 2020, with a 4-1 decision over Sneed (20-7), who turned in his best tournament finish. In the fifth-place match. Carl Sandburg senior Yazan Arafeh recorded a fall in 1:22 over Minooka senior Josh Gunther.

285 – Kevin Zimmer, Carl Sandburg

After being disappointed with a second-place finish as a sophomore and not getting the chance to compete in IHSA competition last season, Kevin Zimmer is focused on the big prize as he made his return to the mat for his senior year after recovering from an injury.

Ranked third in Class 3A, Carl Sandburg’s Zimmer used three falls and a decision to capture the 285 title at the Illini Classic and improve to 5-0 in the process. In the title match, he recorded a fall in 4:13 over Lincoln-Way West senior Jake Ziemniarski, which followed a 9-3 semifinals decision over Lincoln-Way East senior Alex Knaperek.

“This is my first full week back and I had two matches right before this tournament,” Zimmer said. “It’s been seven or eight months too long, I’ve been ready to get back to sports. It was long and tough, but I stayed positive and kept a good attitude, looking at the main goal of a bracket board at the end of the season. In the past three or four weeks, I’ve been going full go, my cardio is good and I feel good. I feel super fresh and this is like the start of the season for me and I get it right for the state series, so that’s awesome.”

Ziemniarski (22-10), who’s ranked eighth in 3A and whose previous best finish was a sixth at the Whitlatch, followed two falls with a 4-2 win by sudden victory over Lincoln-Way Central senior Braeden Barrett (31-4) in the semifinals. Providence Catholic’s RJ Schneider (25-11), wrestled back from a quarterfinals loss to Ziemniarski to claim third-place with a 5-2 victory over Barrett, who was a runner-up at Glenbrook South and Lincoln.

In the fifth-place match, Knaperek (18-5), who was second at the Ewoldt and third and third at Niles West, claimed a 3-1 decision over St. Charles East junior Austin Barrett (16-9), who had his best finish of the season.

FROM THE IWCOA: If you are enjoying these articles, please consider a small donation to the IWCOA so that we can continue funding feature stories for our website and social media. The IWCOA is non-profit, 501(c)(3) organization. Click this link to make a donation. Thank you!

By Mike Garofola

For the IWCOA

In its heyday, when the circus came to town, people would drive from miles around to be treated to hours of entertainment never seen before.

The sport of girls wrestling had one of its most entertaining days of the year play out Saturday, as 26 teams and over 150 wrestlers descended on Hoffman Estates, thrilling fans for hours with quality and exciting competition.

Oak Park and River Forest would lose its day-long lead late in the day to Schaumburg, before sisters Tiffany and Trinity White won their respective weight classes to help the Huskies jump up and over Schaumburg to help OPRF lift the championship trophy by a mere four points (187-184). BRACKETS

“This was just a great tournament, well-run, and one that offered a complete tournament format with team points,” began OPRF head coach, Fred Arkin.

“It was really touching to see how the girls cheered and supported each other throughout the day. Their spirit really raised each other up, and it was also great to see how each team developed healthy and competitive programs. It was just a great tournament, and a great day of wrestling.”

Arkins’ club collected 10 medals on the day, the same as Matt Gruszka’s Schaumburg Saxons team, which made a valiant effort to overtake the eventual champion Huskies.

“Going into the final round we knew it was close, and it was just a lot of fun wrestling that last round because the girls knew it was for the team championship as well,” Gruszka said.

“After coaching boys wrestling for so long, it was really cool to share this experience with the girls in such a big tournament, and a close team race. It was awesome.”

Gruzska made a point of praising host Hoffman Estates and its tournament director, Leo Clark, who continued to add teams in the week leading up to the tournament. Clark and his staff kept the action moving, provided clear and concise announcements throughout the day, and provided the wrestlers and fans plenty of memorable moments.

“Credit OPRF and Schaumburg and their coaches for their achievements, and for our girls we’re excited to finish fourth overall in this tournament,” said Clark.

“Our girls were really fired up, and now have made it their goal to go out and recruit others to help fill our weight classes so we can compete with teams like OPRF and Schaumburg,” added Clark, who also complimented his captain, Evelyn Simon (13-4), who placed third at 120 and led by example for her team throughout the day.

The host Hawks fell just short of third-place Glenbard West (93.0-92.0)but had enough in its gas tank to outscore fifth-place Lockport (89.0) and Porters head coach Nathan Roth.

“Our girls wrestled great all day long, each one of them is a first year wrestler, and it was their first bracketed tournament,” Roth said. “Despite getting up earlier than normal to compete in so many matches, their spirits remained high to the end of the tournament.

“This tournament was a really fantastic experience and a ton of fun for all the girls. It will definitely help them be better prepared for sectionals later on.”

“It was really nice to have all of the mats on the floor, with the fans in the balcony, it kind of added to the drama of it all. I can tell you when it was all over, we brought the team together and asked them if they had fun and in unison they yelled out ‘yes!’”

Oak Forest (88.5), Maine East (65.0), Lane Tech (60.0), Homewood-Flossmoor (57.0) and Downers Grove South with 53 overall points would round out the top ten here.

Champion OPRF will host an 18-team tournament this coming Saturday, January 22, in advance of what Arkin believes will be the first ever conference tournament in the state when Addison Trail welcomes the West Suburban Conference on Tuesday, January 25.

“All of our seniors – Bentley Hills, Maria Dias, Bella Tyma and Kennedi Dickens – have shown incredible resilience. The entire team had to go through dealing with Covid but through it all, they remained focused and dedicated. They trained in basements, back yards, bedrooms, and porches over zoom sessions — so today, we are incredibly proud of all of them,” Arkin said.

“The awards ceremony is nothing like I’ve seen before, it was a true celebration,” said Gruszka in closing.

“The thing I’ve noticed is the girls are making their own community in this sport – they become friends, follow each other on social media, and hug a lot.”

But make no mistake, when they get on the mat, they are out for blood, they want to win and succeed, but when they’re done, they are friends again.”

Hoffman Estates championship matches:

100 – Kat Bell, Montini Catholic

Montini Catholic freshmen Kat Bell (14-7) left little doubt as to who was the best at 100 on this day after her impressive effort in her final with top seed Ava Anderson (13-4) of Homewood-Flossmoor.

With her father Pat in her corner, Bell followed up her semifinal pin with another at 3:14 to claim the her first top prize of the season.

“There’s a lot of tradition at Montini with our boys program, so it feels good to start to kind of continue that tradition in girls wrestling, and especially with my dad in the corner, who wrestled at Montini,” said Bell.

“Obviously I got into the sport because of my dad but it’s such a great sport, I think I would have gotten into anyway,” continued Bell, whose tilt led to a near-fall just before the first period came to a close to give her a 7-3 advantage.

Bell, who went 1-1 last weekend at the Schaumburg Invite, with her loss coming at the hands of Anderson, started the second period in neutral and immediately added a take-down off the whistle. Bell then went to work on her eventual pin to finish her tournament with a flurry.

105 – Gianna Gagliani, Conant

Gianna Gagliani put on a devastating attack during all three of her matches with an explosive, quick, and technical finishing touch that never allowed any of her opponents time to breathe against this power-packed diminutive dynamo from Conant.

The Cougars’ senior needed just 60 seconds to capture her title, after using up a mere 104 seconds in her two previous bouts to send her into the final.

“Gianna is a four-year veteran, who is a three-time state qualifier, and fifth place medal winner at 106 last year,” said Conant head coach Andrew Guilde.

“She is an absolute workaholic who is never afraid of hard work, or her competition, and is without a doubt, one of the hardest workers in our program.

The biggest improvement for her this year is her positioning, and mat awareness.

“Gianna has always been very aggressive; however, she would often find herself in trouble because she would throw caution to the wind. This year she has made it a point to work on position, before points, and as you can see it has really paid off for her.”

With her three victories, Gagliani is now 11-1 overall.

110 – Camila Neuman, Oak Park and River Forest

Neuman gave her club its first of three individual titles with a pin at 3:45 to capture the 110-pound trophy over Harika Matakumall of Schaumburg.

The four-year veteran, who wants to continue to wrestle at the collegiate level, where she plans on a secondary education degree, wasted little time taking the lead with an early take-down, before riding out her opponent hard for the remainder of the period.

“I’ve been working a lot on improving my shots, stance, and with being more patient in my approach and because of that I’ve become a better wrestler this season,” said Neuman, who needed just 46 seconds in her semifinal to book her spot in the finals.

“(Cam) began wrestling as a freshmen, and is super dedicated to the sport,” began OPRF head coach, Fred Arkin.

“Her work ethic is incredible, and her focus on strength training during covid (lifting) in her basement has made her so much better, as has the extra time spent during the offseason training at Beat the Streets.

“After her fifth place finish last summer at the IWCOA state finals, her focus is squarely on the first-ever IHSA State Championships in Bloomington.”

115 – Sophia Ball, Hoffman Estates

Host Hoffman Estates enjoyed a wonderful day on the mats, earning its fourth-place team finish, five overall medals, and a pair of individual titles beginning with Sophia Ball at 115.

“Sophia is a gymnast and she’s extremely athletic, so when you watch her wrestle you see how she moves really well, and has a natural instinct to know where she needs to be on the mat,” said head coach Leo Clark.

“Being a freshman and already having this level of body awareness out there has made her very difficult to beat and really exciting to watch.”

Ball defeated top seed Madyson Meyer (Schaumburg, 16-3) in her semifinal to advance to meet No. 2 seed Sharon Moreno (15-3) and after finding herself trailing the Lane Tech star (4-0) in the early going, Ball got back level at 4-4 with a pair of take-downs before the period ended.

“I got myself into a little bit of trouble at the start of my final,” Ball said. “Nothing was really working for me in that first period, but that first take-down really helped me get back into the match and after that, everything seemed to work for me.

“I like everything about this sport – the friendships developed, and just being in the room, and around my teammates.”

Meyer went on to finish third overall after recording a pin in her final bout of the tournament.

“As a first-year freshman in the sport, Madyson has developed by leaps and bounds,” Gruszka said. “She literally gets better each day because of her competitive spirit, which keeps her in every match when she goes out to wrestle.”

120 – Hannah Suboni-Kaufman, Maine East

You would hard pressed to find a better ambassador for the sport or for Maine East girls wrestling than this four-year veteran who continues to shine for the Blue Demons program.

The senior Suboni-Kaufman pinned her way to her second major of the season, needing just over six minutes on the day to claim a well-deserved crown at 120-pounds.

“I like the fact that it’s an individual sport so it’s all on me, but I like that it’s also a team sport. I love everything about it,” said the affable Suboni-Kaufman, sixth at the IWCOA tournament last summer at 113, and now a perfect 13-0 on the season.

Suboni-Kaufman, who won her first title of the campaign on her home mats at the 3rd annual Emiliano Hernandez Girls Open in late December, does so many things well that it makes her a handful to take on.

Technically sharp, Suboni-Kaufman is a defensive wizard and shows wonderful positioning and balance, but can attack with lightning quickness to send her opponents out of their comfort zone and rhythm.

“It’s really exciting to be a part of a big tournament such as this one, and to a part of the first ever IHSA sanctioned state tournament next month,” added Suboni-Kaufman, who plans to continue to wrestle next fall should she attend Augustana College, with either Loyola Chicago, or Bradley on the radar if wrestling is not in the cards.

125 – Bethany Regione, Schaumburg

A proud Matt Gruszka would heap plenty of praise on his two individual champs (Regione and Valeria Rodriguez), beginning with the senior Regione, who dominated from start to finish to earn top honors at 125.

“This is the third season in the sport for Bethany, and much of her success has come from always being in the room,” Gruszka said. “She has put a ton of offseason work in and right now she is seeing the benefits of all of that hard work.”

Regione has her eye on the big prize this season.

“I was injured my sophomore year, but I worked hard last year, and came back to get a fourth place medal at state,” she said, “so now it’s all about continuing to put the work in so I can go after a state championship.”

“To be honest, Bethany’s better days are still ahead of her because her plan is to wrestle in college, and that’s all the motivation she needs to reach her goal of doing so,” said Gruszka.

Regione (15-1) recorded a nicely-played near fall late in the first period to go up 5-0 on junior Eunice Ji (Hoffman Estates), and extended her advantage to 10-2 with a high-crotch single in the third period before registering a 15-3 major decision victory.

130 – Abby Ji, Hoffman Estates

Freshman Abby Ji (11-7) treated the home side faithful to its second championship of the day after her hard fought contest with league rival, Madeline Zerafa-Lazare (11-3) which ended when the Schaumburg freshman was forced to concede to an injury with just 43 seconds remaining in their title match.

“Madeline wrestled each other the day, and we’re also friends, so to see her re-injure her shoulder during our match was very hard to watch,” said Ji, who connected with Zerafa-Lazare shortly after the Saxons young star was attended to in order to console her fallen opponent in a terrific show of sportsmanship.

“We were actually talking to one another during our match – even complimenting each other after a certain move for points,” Ji continue with a big smile.

“(But) I knew she was in trouble after my near fall late in the match, and I never want to see anyone I’m wrestling be injured.”

Ji, the younger sister of Eunice Ji, who placed second at 125, says the sport of wrestling allows her to channel her anger in the Hawks room, which of course, includes the Hoffman Estates boys, who have been helpful in her development.

“Abby has greatly benefited from being able to watch Eunice,” coach Leo Clark said. “They are both very close, but always pushing each other in the room, and her ability to be strong and tough out there could lead to making some waves at sectionals.”

135 – Keira Dafnis, Wauconda

Keira Dafnis (16-1) found herself in a couple of hard-fought bouts in the semifinals and finals at 135, but the Wauconda senior showed her mettle when it was needed to prevail in style, en route to her first big win of the season.

“I was a cheerleader for ten years so you always had to be a certain type of person to be in cheer,” Dafnis said. “But when I left that to become a wrestler my freshman year, the hard work in the room and away from it kind of changed things for me.

“I am always still upbeat about things, but I just love this sport, so you kind of change your approach to things because of it.”

Wauconda coach Anthony Piltaver likes what Dafnis brings to the sport.

“Keira is very coachable and will apply given feedback during tournaments, or in the room to make adjustments where needed,” he said.

“She has a lot of ways to get into her shots and set-ups, and she’s constantly looking to add pressure on the top and bottom.”

Dafnis conceded a late take-down to Noemi Marchan (12-4) in the second period to allow the Lane Tech star to draw back even at 4-4, until a nifty escape and then a takedown seconds later gave Dafnis the lead at 7-4.

“Keira was able to to secure a takedown to put Marchan on her hip, and from there she reached a cross-face pinning combination,” said Piltaver after Dafnis’ pin at 4:44.

“Noemi is a great opponent. We saw her at Larkin and then Schaumburg last week, so we knew she would give Keira a real battle in the final.”

Marchan was a state qualifier in 2020 and 2021.

140 – Anika Navarro, Glenbard West

Glenbard West secured its top-three finish with seven medals overall on the day, with junior Anika Navarro leading the way with her win at 140 pounds over Wauconda sophomore, and No. 1 seed, Hazel Hartwig.

“To win my first tournament championship at such a big invite feels real good right now, and makes all of the hard work I’ve put in thus far really worth it,” said Navarro with a smile.

The one-time soccer player and current field hockey player at Glenbard West used a pin at 37 seconds in her semifinal to reach the final. Navarro and Hartwig went back-and-forth to a 7-7 tie on a reversal from Hartwig with 90 seconds left in the second period.

Inspired by the roar of the crowd, these two combatants traded the lead until the final whistle of the third period, with the score level at 11-11.

“It was a wild and crazy match but all of that helped keep me going, even into overtime where I was able to surprise her with a head lock to win,” said Navarro, whose match-winning effort came with 13 seconds remaining in overtime.

“The atmosphere in the room next to the boys program really helps all of us push ourselves to improve, and that’s one of the things that I like so much about the sport,” added Navarro.

Hartwig’s coach liked what she showed on Saturday.

“This is Hazel’s first real season of wrestling (after two COVID-shortened seasons) so to advance into the final against such a great opponent like Anika was really good for her,” Piltaver said.

“They pushed each other right until the end to make it a worthy final for both girls, and for Haze