RIGHT-CENTER BIAS

Detailed Report

Bias Rating: RIGHT-CENTER Factual Reporting: HIGH

Country: USA

Press Freedom Rank: MOSTLY FREE

Media Type: TV Station

Traffic/Popularity: Minimal Traffic

MBFC Credibility Rating: HIGH CREDIBILITY

History

Founded in 1981, WVAH – Charleston News is a Fox-affiliated television station licensed to Charleston, West Virginia United States. The associated website is wvah.com which provides news, sports, weather, lifestyle, and crime reporting.

Read our profile on the United States government and media.

Funded by / Ownership

WVAH – Charleston News is owned by Sinclair Broadcast Group, a publicly traded American telecommunications company controlled by the family of company founder Julian Sinclair Smith. The company is the second-largest television station operator in the United States by the number of stations, and largest by total coverage; owning or operating a total of 193 stations across the country in over 100 markets (covering 40% of American households), many of which are located in the South and Midwest.

Sinclair has been scrutinized by multiple media outlets for consistently favoring conservative politics. They are considered a rival to the right biased Fox News for the conservative audience. The Seattle Times has written a piece documenting Sinclair’s right-wing bias. Further, according to the Center for Responsive Politics (Open Secrets), the Sinclair Broadcast Group has donated $1,143,508 or 80% to Republican candidates since 1994.

Finally, in March 2018, Sinclair ordered its stations to produce promos with an “anchor delivered journalistic responsibility message” dictated by the company. The wording of the mandated script was criticized by some station news staff and outside pundits for its discussion of “fake news,” with some critics arguing that the message used similar language and rhetoric to Donald Trump. Trump responded to the promos on April 2, 2018, defending the company as being “far superior to CNN and even more Fake NBC, which is a total joke.”

Advertising generates revenue.

Analysis / Bias

In review, WVAH – Charleston News reports local news with minimal bias in wording such as this 100-year-old high school in Calhoun County turning into a community center. Many news stories are accompanied by videos from the TV station. National and international news is provided through the Associated Press and others by Sinclair properties.

Editorially, WVAH – Charleston News does not publish op-eds; however, they tend to favor the right when reporting on politics slightly. Further, the website also features links to conservative TV host Sharyl Attkisson’s Full Measure TV program. In general, the news is reported factually and with a slight right-leaning editorial bias.

Failed Fact Checks

None in the Last 5 years

Overall, we rate WVAH – Charleston News Right-Center Biased based on editorial positions that slightly favor the right. We also rate them High for factual reporting due to proper sourcing and a clean fact check record. (D. Van Zandt 12/04/2021)

Source: https://wvah.com/

Last Updated on July 1, 2023 by Media Bias Fact Check

Do you appreciate our work? Please consider one of the following ways to sustain us.

MBFC Ad-Free

or

MBFC Donation

Left vs. Right Bias: How we rate the bias of media sources