Take me back to July 25, 1999

Let's go back to the nineties.

The date is July 25, 1999, and it's a Sunday. Babies who are born today will have the star sign Leo. People are currently enjoying their weekend. However, because it's a Sunday, some are dreading the week ahead.

The summer of 1999 is in full swing. The weather is warm, and the evenings are brighter than usual. Most schools and colleges are now finished until August or September. In America, the song "Bills Bills Bills" by Destiny's Child is at the top of the singles charts, while "Livin' La Vida Loca" by Ricky Martin is the number-one song in the UK. Bill Clinton is the President of the United States, and the movie The Haunting is at the top of the box office.

Tony Blair is the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. On television, people are watching popular shows such as "Frasier", "Beyond Belief: Fact or Fiction", "Stargate SG-1", and "Dawson's Creek". The CD is quickly becoming the dominant format for music, and people are buying portable players such as the "Discman". Consequently, sales of cassette tapes are continuing to decline.

In fashion, bright and metallic colors are all the rage—a big change from the darker "grunge" colors of the early 1990s. Women are wearing maxi skirts, bell bottoms, knee boots, crop tops, tube tops, slip dresses, maxi coats, and platform shoes. Meanwhile, a lot of men have ditched their grunge and skater clothes in favor of a "dress casual" look. They are also beginning to cut their hair shorter. A relatively new form of communication called "text messaging" is becoming more widespread. Although the technology has been around since the mid-1990s, it was only recently that cell providers allowed users to send SMS messages to people on different networks. It's 1999, so radio stations are being dominated by the likes of Cher, TLC, Monica, Whitney Houston, Britney Spears, Jennifer Lopez, Santana and Ricky Martin.

The Nokia 3210 is currently one of the most popular cellphones on the market. J. K. Rowling has just published "Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban", which is her third novel in the Harry Potter series. People are saddened by the recent death of John F. Kennedy Jr., who died after his plane crashed off the west coast of Massachusetts.

If you were to travel back to this day, notable figures such as Wilt Chamberlain, Walter Payton, Big Pun, and Jim Varney would all still be alive. People are playing video games such as "Metal Gear Solid", "Crash Bandicoot: Warped", "FIFA 99", and "Driver". Children and teenagers are watching television shows such as "Beverly Hills, 90210", "In the House", "Daria", and "Bob the Builder".

Children are playing with toys such as Screwball Scramble, Jenga, Styrofoam plane gliders, and Furby.