Runaway Bride is 25 years old!

The romantic comedy, which hit theaters July 30, 1999, saw Julia Roberts reunite with her Pretty Woman costar Richard Gere as Maggie Carpenter — the "runaway bride" in question, who has left multiple men at the altar. Gere, on the other hand, plays a reporter who has come to meet Maggie and write a story about her. (You can probably guess what happens next!)

From Roberts and her boyfriend at the time, Benjamin Bratt, to Christopher Meloni and more, see all the stars who stepped out to celebrate the movie's premiere in L.A., 25 years ago.

01 of 10

Julia Roberts and Benjamin Bratt

Julia Roberts arrived arm-in-arm with Benjamin Bratt for the 1999 premiere at the Mann National Theatre in L.A. The two dated for nearly four years before going their separate ways in 2001.

02 of 10

Richard Gere

Meanwhile, costar Richard Gere had some fun on the red carpet with this thematic wedding cake.

03 of 10

Christopher Meloni

Christopher Meloni, who plays one of Roberts' love interests in the film, kept it cool and casual for the occasion. That year he would go on to kick off his tenure as Detective Elliot Stabler on Law & Order: SVU.

04 of 10

Garry Marshall and Barbara Wells

Director Garry Marshall had the support of his wife Barbara Wells at the premiere of his 1999 film. Marshall, of course, was responsible for several beloved movies including Pretty Woman and The Princess Diaries films prior to his death in 2016.

05 of 10

Penny Marshall

Actress and director Penny Marshall, Garry's sister, was on deck to support her brother at his big premiere.

06 of 10

Hector Elizondo and Carolee Campbell

Hector Elizondo, who appeared in Marshall's Pretty Woman, Runaway Bride and later in The Princess Diaries films, celebrated his latest film with his wife Carolee Campbell.

07 of 10

Michelle Trachtenberg

Michelle Trachtenberg was just a teen when she stepped out for the Runaway Bride premiere. While she was not in the film, her career as a young actress was underway with appearances on All My Children, The Adventures of Pete & Pete and an upcoming role in 1999's Inspector Gadget — which was released just a few days before Runaway Bride.

08 of 10

Kyle MacLachlan

After starring in '80s films like Dune and Blue Velvet, Kyle MacLachlan hit the red carpet for Runaway Bride sporting some very '90s shades.

09 of 10

Gloria Stuart

Gloria Stuart, who had recently starred as the older version of Rose in Titanic, attended the event wearing vibrant blue and statement accessories.

10 of 10

Diane Warren

Diane Warren's song "Blue Eyes Blue," performed by Eric Clapton, was featured on the Runaway Bride soundtrack, so it was only fitting that she attended the celebration — wearing blue, no less!