I have tremendous respect for our U.S. military service members and their hard work, dedication and sacrifice to protect our freedoms. There’s not a day that passes that I don’t reflect on the brave men and women who have and continue to serve our country. And I believe that military spouses are truly unsung heroes, particularly as it relates to their role in managing financial decisions for their families—and they deserve more opportunities for empowerment. With greater recognition and support of military spouses, I’m incredibly optimistic about the future of military family stability and the benefits it will bring to our military forces.

Current Realities of Military Life

Before delving into what’s possible, allow me to touch on the realities of the current situation.

Financial readiness is a particularly important issue in the lives of military spouses. Military spouses shoulder the primary responsibility for household budgeting and savings – particularly when their active-duty spouse is deployed for extended periods. In research from the First Command Financial Behaviors Index, nine out of ten military spouses say it is primarily their role to manage household finance, including budgeting and saving. After all, military service members are not paying bills and balancing their checking accounts on the battlefield. That said, even in the midst of incredible mission focus, they are worrying about their family finances at home and when deployed.

One of the most prominent realities of military life is Permanent Change of Station (PCS). As a result of these frequent moves, military spouses face unique challenges in finding and maintaining meaningful employment. Many also have had to pause their careers to complete lengthy and costly licensing requirements imposed when a PCS requires them to move between different states. Adding to the challenge, research from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce found that military spouses often face extended periods of unemployment after their PCS moves. The fulfillment and sense of purpose that an individual gets from a job cannot be underestimated. Military service members’ jobs on the front lines are most visible, but the spouse they leave behind is often looking for a job that provides a challenge, comradery – and a paycheck to help support their family.

Also noteworthy, military spouses carry the burden of knowing that they will face all financial responsibilities alone in the event of a combat death. And at the end of active-duty service, military spouses play a critical role in navigating the financial complexities of the family’s transition to civilian life.

Since most military spouses manage the finances, we need to provide them with employment resources, financial readiness training and coaching to help them prepare and avoid common money management mistakes. After all, the implications of financial literacy cut to the heart of many important life decisions, including education, divorce, safety and mental health.

A Few Ways to Support Military Spouses’ Financial Readiness

Now let’s examine how we can improve military life if we focus on a few key areas.

Teach military spouses basic financial readiness through knowledge and coaching, starting with understanding their valuable government benefits. Service members are eligible for benefits such as money for housing, subsidized groceries and healthcare. They receive education and training about these benefits. This information should also be available to spouses. If they don’t understand these benefits, they could miss out on the opportunity to integrate it into household financial planning efforts. Also, they should have greater access to educational and training resources that address key personal finance topics like the importance of contributing to a savings account, consolidating and paying down credit card debt, weighing the pros and cons of homeownership, planning now for retirement and selecting sound investments. With financial readiness training, military spouses will have the knowledge and foundation on which to build a strong financial future.

Critical to the equation of financial readiness is not only having the financial knowledge but also developing sound behaviors. Financial coaches work with military members to set goals and provide guidance on how to adjust behaviors to remain on track to reach financial goals. Our survey results consistently find that military families who work with a financial coach feel more secure with their finances and confident in the future than those who don’t work with one. When military families avoid the potential pitfalls that inevitably come without this knowledge and coaching, they are not as likely to be victims of scams, max out their credit cards and be left without savings. Instead, they’ll be able to more easily manage their spending, establish savings, send their children to college and save for retirement – all pieces that contribute to a more satisfying life.

Allow military spouses’ professional licenses to transfer immediately between states when they PCS. The U.S. House of Representatives passed the bipartisan Military Spouse Licensing Relief Act of 2021 and the companion legislation currently sits with the U.S. Senate. This legislation supports military spouses with valid professional licenses that are in good standing in one state by making that professional license also valid in the new state where their family is stationed. My hope is that the U.S. Senate soon will pass the companion piece of legislation to address this employment challenge. When military spouses can transfer their professional licenses easily from one state to another, they can maintain not only their income but also a sense of career consistency. Some might consider sewing their entrepreneurial oats and starting their own business and hiring other military spouses.

Connect military spouses with meaningful employment to empower them to contribute to their family’s financial well-being. All too often we hear that the nature of military PCS orders makes military spouses less desirable as employees. However, as work-from-home has proven during the pandemic, employees can be extremely productive in this environment. If military spouses could find challenging and fulfilling jobs that they can keep during PCS moves, they will experience greater overall satisfaction with their lives. This increased contentment will cascade to the health of their marriage and family life, creating a stronger sense of happiness.

Many efforts are underway to address military spouse unemployment challenges. The Military Spouse Hiring Act, which would authorize a tax credit to businesses who hire military spouses, currently is in Congress. More employers also need to recognize the tremendous value that military spouses bring to the work environment and leverage their skills. Military spouses are highly adaptable, motivated and dependable – just to name a few of their valuable qualities. Furthermore, research is underway to better understand the military spouse employment challenges, which inevitably will bring greater clarity and opportunities to address the issue.

Possibilities that Come with Change

If we offer this support to military spouses, I’m confident that the overall financial health of military families will improve. If military spouses are financially ready and have better access to employment opportunities, that creates a winning combination. Here’s how these improvements for military spouses also would improve the lives of military service members.

Enable greater mission focus. With improved financial stability, military members will have fewer distractions. They’ll have a clear focus on the mission at hand because they won’t have the same concerns about their family’s financial challenges and their spouse’s happiness and job satisfaction.

Support better health. Financial troubles create anxiety, resentment, communication challenges and even health issues within relationships. When military families are financially sound, they’re better able to reduce stress and worries about how they’ll put food on the table for their family, or pay down debt on a high-interest credit card. Research has shown that stress increases the risk of developing depression and anxiety in some people, so with less financial stress, the hope is that military service members and their spouses will achieve greater overall happiness.

Improve military recruitment and retention. Solving the challenges of military spouse career and employment issues will improve families’ financial situations, which in turn will reduce stress within military families. U.S. Chamber of Commerce research found that lack of employment opportunities creates more stress and ultimately can affect a family’s decision to remain in the service. Service members will have a stronger commitment to serving and remain in service to their country longer if their spouse is employed and contributing to the financial health of their family.

By recognizing and elevating the true role of military spouses and their roles in securing the financial well-being of their families, we will discover potential for dramatically improving military life.