1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s

We've added a new feature that allows you to create your own lists from our database of recognized novels and short stories. You can set your own date ranges. Change the citation numbers to focus on more popular titles.

I’ve been reading science fiction for over fifty years, and I’m touring my SF memories decade by decade. So far I’ve written about the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s.

Something happened to the world of science fiction books in the 1980s. The genre grew, gaining new writers, publishers and readers. Star Trek and Star Wars got millions of media fans to try reading SF, often introduced by novelizations. Science fiction became big business. From my view of the genre, two SF books went nova in the eighties: Neuromancer and Ender’s Game, making William Gibson and Orson Scott Card the breakout science fiction writers of the decade, like Delany and Zelazny had been for the 1960s.

Computers and video games made the 1980s a happening decade for science fiction. Personal computers became all the rage, with the IBM PC being introduced in 1981 and the Apple Macintosh in 1984. Fandom shifted from fanzines to computer networks like CompuServe and GEnie, connecting readers to the cyber world – letting us all live in a science fictional reality. Kids growing up with Atari 2600s from the 1970s, jumped to the Nintendo, accelerating the cyber addiction of the 1980s, so is it any wonder that in the mid-80s that teens totally resonated with Ender’s Game and Neuromancer? They were what the Heinlein juveniles were to my generation.

Now this is a longshot, but I think it was the massive influx of female fans that made Ender’s Game a mega success. Over the years I’ve been surprised by countless women telling me that Ender’s Game is one of their all-time favorite books. This was particularly shocking because most of my lady bookworm friends didn’t read science fiction. Ender’s Game got them started on the genre though, if only a book now and then.

Ender’s Game is often taught in schools, and I’ve met both students and teachers who have gushed over this story. To me Ender’s Game was just another outstanding science fiction novel, but to new readers it was a mind blowing introduction to the world of written science fiction. They grew up on science fiction comics, television shows, games, toys and movies, but it’s the books that are the real heroin of science fiction addiction. Remember, the Golden Age of Science Fiction is 12, and to the 1980s generation, their time was just as exciting to them, as the 1960s were to us baby boomers.

These essays about remembering past decades of science fiction are about memory – my memory, our collective fan memory, and maybe the world at large memory of science fiction. I’m not the only person looking backwards at science fiction. Last year, Ernest Cline remembered the 1980s in his novel Ready Player One, and its over-the-top success is due to Cline speaking directly to the heart of the Nintendo generation. The year before that, Jo Walton remembered growing up with science fiction in her novel Among Others. Walton spoke to the heart of introverted science fiction bookworms, which won her the Hugo, Nebula and British Fantasy Awards. Here is a list of novels she wrote about in Among Others. Most of the science fiction books she mentions have been listed in my defining decades lists, but her novel goes further because Walton also remembers fantasy, classics and non-genre books. Walton resonated with lonely book lovers everywhere.

With each succeeding decade, science fiction gets more sophisticated, and the overall quality of writing improves. More people take science fiction seriously, and science fiction becomes more serious. It’s still escapism, but the stories are getting longer and less simplistic. It also obvious by the 1980s that the genre was shifting more towards fantasy, a trend that has been accelerating ever since.

Science fiction became big in the 1980s. Bigger books, more books, more series, bigger series, wordier writing, and bigger sales. In the 1980s writers took to writing trilogies and series like never before. Lois McMaster Bujold is another standout writer of the 1980s, by developing a huge fan base for her Vorkosigan series. Her 1980 books won awards back then, but they are still huge sellers today because the series keeps growing. Every new convert to her fictional universe wants to jump back to the 1980s to start the series from the beginning.

For the long list below, I only list the first book in a series unless a later title makes some kind of splash, wins an award, or was very popular for that year. The 1980s was dominated by series, both new and renewed. As you gander down the list, think of how many of these stories are part of a bigger whole? Orson Scott Card, C. J. Cherryh, Iain M. Banks and Lois McMaster Bujold started series in the 1980s that continue to current times. Isaac Asimov capitalized on his classic Foundation and Robot series in the 1980s in a tremendous way. David Brin and Gene Wolfe wrote two standout series of the decade. Dan Simmons started his Hyperion series at the end of the decade. The most memorable books of the decade were seldom standalone novels.

Not only did we see more series books, but the books seem to be getting bigger, and some writers developed baroque writing styles, moving science fiction away from fast action pulp writing. Gardner Dozois started his annual The Year’s Best Science Fiction series in 1984, by showcasing a massive amount of short fiction in a single volume. The 1980s was a boom time for science fiction.

The 1980s will also be remembered for the Cyberpunk moment. Neuromancer by William Gibson got a subgenre rolling that breathed new life into the old genre. It was as revolutionary as the New Wave had been back in the 1960s, with Bruce Sterling leading the charge with his fanzine Cheap Truth. The SF big three, Heinlein-Clarke-Asimov, the old guard of classic 1950s SF, were still selling lots of books, but their future visions were being eclipsed by new ones from Young Turks.

I divide the decade into two lists. First, a short list for those books that are the most remembered today, and maybe most known by people who don’t normally read science fiction. Then, a longer list of the books that hardcore science fiction fans should remember, and probably newer fans are slowly discovering.

The Best Remembered Science Fiction Books of the 1980s

Timescape by Gregory Benford (1980)

Startide Rising by David Brin (1983)

Neuromancer by William Gibson (1984)

Blood Music by Greg Bear (1985)

Ender’s Game by Orson Scott Card (1985)

The Handmaid’s Tale by Margaret Atwood (1985)

Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1986)

The Warrior’s Apprentice by Lois McMaster Bujold (1986)

Dawn by Octavia Butler (1987)

Replay by Ken Grimwood (1987)

Falling Free by Lois McMaster Bujold (1988)

Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1989)

The Defining Science Fiction Books of the 1980s

1980

Beyond the Blue Event Horizon by Frederik Pohl

Dragon’s Egg by Robert L. Forward

Lord Valentine’s Castle by Robert Silverberg

Mockingbird by Walter Tevis

Riddley Walker by Russell Hoban

Roderick by John T. Sladek

Sundiver by David Brin

The Arbor House Treasury of Great Science Fiction Short Novels edited by Robert Silverberg

The Garden of Delight by Ian Watson

The Number of the Beast by Robert A. Heinlein

The Restaurant at the End of the Universe by Douglas Adams

The Shadow of the Torturer by Gene Wolfe

The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge

The Visitors by Clifford D. Simak

Timescape by Gregory Benford

Wild Seed Octavia Butler

Wizard by John Varley

1981

Downbelow Station by C. J. Cherryh

Dream Park by Niven and Barnes

God Emperor of Dune by Frank Herbert

Little, Big by John Crowley

Oath of Fealty Niven and Pournelle

Radix by A. A. Attanasio

Sandkings by George R. R. Martin

The Claw of the Conciliator by Gene Wolfe

The Divine Invasion by Philip K. Dick

The Many-Colored Land by Julian May

The Silver Metal Lover by Tanith Lee

VALIS by Philip K. Dick

Windhaven by Martin & Tuttle

1982

2010: Odyssey Two by Arthur C. Clarke

A Rose for Armageddon by Hilbert Schenck

Courtship Rite by Donald Kingsbury

Foundation’s Edge by Isaac Asimov

Friday by Robert A. Heinlein

Helliconia Spring by Brian W. Aldiss

In Viriconium by M. John Harrison

No Enemy But Time by Michael Bishop

Psion by Joan D. Vinge

Software by Rudy Rucker

The Compass Rose by Ursula K. Le Guin

The Crystal Singer by Anne McCaffrey

The Sword of the Lictor by Gene Wolfe

The White Plague by Frank Herbert

1983

Against Infinity by Gregory Benford

Forty Thousand In Gehenna by C. J. Cherryh

Helliconia Summer by Brain W. Aldiss

His Master’s Voice by Stanislaw Lem

Millennium by John Varley

Startide Rising by David Brin

Tea with the Black Dragon by R. A. MacAvoy

The Anubis Gates by Tim Powers

The Armageddon Rag by George R. R. Martin

The Citadel of the Autarch by Gene Wolfe

The Robots of Dawn by Isaac Asimov

The Void Captain’s Tale by Norman Spinrad

1984

Emergence by David R. Palmer

Icehenge by Kim Stanley Robinson

Job: A Comedy of Justice by Robert A. Heinlein

Native Tongue by Suzette Haden Elgin

Neuromancer by William Gibson

The Final Encyclopedia by Gordon R. Dickson

The Integral Trees by Larry Niven

The Peace War by Vernor Vinge

The Stars in My Pocket Like Grains of Sand by Samuel R. Delany

The Wild Shore by Kim Stanley Robinson

West of Eden by Harry Harrison

1985

Ancient of Days by Michael Bishop

Blood Music by Greg Bear

Brightness Falls from the Air by James Tiptree, Jr.

Contact by Carl Sagan

Cuckoo’s Egg by C. J. Cherryh

Ender’s Game by Orson Scott Card

Eon by Greg Bear

Firewatch by Connie Willis

Footfall by Niven and Pournelle

Helliconia Winter by Brian W. Aldiss

Robots and Empire by Isaac Asimov

Schismatrix by Bruce Sterling

The Cat Who Walks Through Walls by Robert A. Heinlein

The Handmaid’s Tale by Margaret Atwood

The Postman by David Brin

1986

A Door into Ocean by Joan Slonczewski

Artificial Things by Karen Joy Fowler

Burning Chrome by William Gibson

Chanur’s Homecoming C. J. Cherryh

Count Zero by William Gibson

Foundation and Earth by Isaac Asimov

Hardwired by Walter Jon Williams

Heart of the Comet by Brin and Benford

Marooned in Realtime by Vernor Vinge

Mirrorshades edited by Bruce Sterling

Robot Dreams by Isaac Asimov

Shards of Honor by Lois McMaster Bujold

Soldier of the Mist by Gene Wolfe

Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card

The Falling Woman by Pat Murphy

The Hercules Text by Jack McDevitt

The Ragged Astronauts by Bob Shaw

The Songs of Distant Earth by Arthur C. Clarke

The Warrior’s Apprentice by Lois McMaster Bujold

This Is the Way the World Ends by James Marrow

1987

A Mask for the General by Lisa Goldstein

Consider Phlebas by Iain M. Banks

Dawn by Octavia E. Butler

Great Sky River by Gregory Benford

Life During Wartime by Lucius Shepard

Lincoln’s Dreams by Connie Willis

Mindplayers by Pat Cadigan

Replay by Ken Grimwood

Sphere by Michael Crichton

The Essential Ellison by Harlan Ellison

The Forge of God by Greg Bear

The Jaguar Hunter by Lucius Shepard

The Uplift War by David Brin

The Urth of the New Sun by Gene Wolfe

True Names … and Other Dangers by Vernor Vinge

Vacuum Flowers by Michael Swanwick

When Gravity Fails by George Alec Effinger

1988

Becoming Alien by Rebecca Ore

Cyteen by C. J. Cherryh

Deserted Cities of the Heart by Lewis Shiner

Desolation Road by Ian McDonald

Eternity by Greg Bear

Falling Free by Lois McMaster Bujold

Full Spectrum edited by Aronica and McCarthy

Islands in the Net by Bruce Sterling

Mona Lisa Overdrive by William Gibson

Prelude to Foundation by Isaac Asimov

The Gate to Women’s Country by Sheri S. Tepper

The Gold Coast by Kim Stanley Robinson

The Healer’s War by Elizabeth Ann Scarborough

The Player of Games by Iain M. Banks

Wetware by Rudy Rucker

1989

The Wall Around Eden by Joan Slonczewski

Good News From Outer Space by John Kessel

Grass by Sheri S. Tepper

Hyperion by Dan Simmons

Orbital Decay by Allen Steele

Patterns by Pat Cadigan

Phases of Gravity by Dan Simmons

Rimrunners by C. J. Cherryh

The Boat of a Million Years by Poul Anderson

The Child Garden by Geoff Ryman

1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s