Conference Schedule

Thursday, May 23, 2024

9 a.m. | Registration and Coffee

9:45 a.m. | Welcome

Susan Juster (The Huntington) and André Carrington (University of California, Riverside)

10 a.m. | Session 1: Creativity as Praxis

Moderator: Sage Ni’Ja Whitson

Queer & Trans anti-disciplinary artist and writer, Department of Dance and Department of Black Study at UC Riverside

Damian Duffy

Author of the graphic novel adaptations of Kindred and Parable of the Sower

Steven Barnes

Author of The Eightfold Path, Marvel’s Black Panther: Sins of the King podcast series, and Horror Noire: A History of Black Horror on Shudder

Sheree Renée Thomas

Editor of The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction and the Dark Matter anthologies, poet, author of Nine Bar Blues: Stories from an Ancient Future

Noon | Lunch

1:30 p.m. | Session 2: The Books of the Living: Collection Researchers

Moderator: Ademide Adelusi-Adeluyi

Historian, digital humanist, author of Imagine Lagos, Department of History at UC Riverside

Ayana Jamieson

Educator, mythologist, depth psychologist, founder of the Octavia E. Butler Legacy Network

Alyssa Collins

University of South Carolina professor, 2021–22 Octavia E. Butler Fellow at The Huntington

Lois Rosson

Historian, Berggruen Institute Fellow, 2023–24 Octavia E. Butler Fellow at The Huntington

Friday, May 24, 2024

9:30 a.m. | Registration and Coffee

10 a.m. | Session 3: Mind of My Mind: Scholarship & Pedagogy

Moderator: Jasmin Young

Co-editor of Black Power Encyclopedia; Department of Ethnic Studies, UC Riverside; Visiting Scholar in the Charles Warren Center for Studies in American History, Harvard

Gerry Canavan

Author of Octavia E. Butler (Modern Masters of Science Fiction), Department of English at Marquette University

Ashanté Reese

Anthropologist, author of Black Food Geographies, Department of African & African Diaspora Studies at the University of Texas at Austin

Marisa Parham

Director of the African American Digital & Experimental Humanities Initiative; Harriet Tubman Department of Women, Gender, and Sexuality Studies at University of Maryland

Valorie Thomas

Author, consultant, coach, Phebe Estelle Spalding professor emerita at Pomona College

Noon | Lunch

1:30 p.m. | Session 4: Earthseed: Sustainability & Activism

Syrus Marcus Ware

Artist, activist, member of the Performance Disability Art Collective, co-editor of Until We Are Free: Reflections on Black Lives Matter in Canada, School of the Arts at McMaster University

Rasheedah Phillips

Author of The Recurrence Plot, attorney, housing advocate, co-founder of Black Quantum Futurism

Elyse Ambrose

Assistant Professor of Religious Studies Department at UC Riverside, author of the forthcoming book A Blackqueer Sexual Ethics: Embodiment, Possibility, and Living

4:30 p.m. | Closing Remarks

Day of Program

Parking Is free. There are two entrances to the parking lot: Oxford Road and Allen Avenue. Handicap parking and bicycle racks are conveniently located in the south end of the lot closest to the main entrance and admission windows.

Heading to registration. You'll check in with Security and then proceed to Rothenberg Auditorium for check-in at the registration table. Signage will direct you.

Attendee badges. We will provide you with two stick-on name badges, one for each day of the conference. Your badge grants you access to the Huntington grounds and galleries during normal business hours.