Following the release of her Billboard-charting debut album Girl of My Dreams last year, and an incredible, sold-out show in The Academy, New Jersey pop singer-songwriterFLETCHER is delighted to announced a show in 3Olympia Theatre on Saturday 4th November 2023.

Tickets from €24.90 including booking fees on sale Friday 17th March at 10AM

Praised by leading outlets like TIME, Wonderland, Harper’s Bazaar, Interview Magazine, NME and The Guardian, acclaimed singer/songwriter FLETCHER hails from Asbury Park, New Jersey, where she cultivated her passion for music and her unforgettably candid storytelling.

In 2019 she released her debut EP you ruined new york city for me. The widely lauded EP features her breakthrough hit ‘Undrunk’, a track that spent several weeks on the Billboard Hot 100, scored the #1 spot on Spotify’s Viral Chart, and emerged as the fastest-rising song at pop radio from a new artist in the past five years. Released in September 2020, FLETCHER’s EP THE S(EX) TAPES hit No. 1 on iTunes across all genres and drew praise from outlets like Teen Vogue, SPIN, PAPER, GQ, and more, with its gold-certified lead single ‘Bitter’ fast approaching 200 million global streams. FLETCHER continued her triumphant run with recent singles ‘girls girls girls’ – a bold reimagining of Katy Perry’s iconic ‘I Kissed a Girl’ (released with Perry’s early stamp of approval) – and ‘Cherry’ featuring trailblazing pop star Hayley Kiyoko. With her music amassing over a billion combined streams worldwide, FLETCHER was also nominated for a GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Breakthrough Music Artist and landed on Forbes’ 30 Under 30 list for 2022.

Her debut album Girl Of My Dreams arrived in September, immediately earning raves from the likes of Rolling Stone, Billboard, Nylon, Vulture Consequence and more. Featuring ‘Becky’s So Hot’ – a standout cut that reached #3 on the iTunes chart across all genres and landed on Billboard’s Hot Rock and Alternative Songs chart, the album also includes the tracks, ‘Her Body Is Bible’, ‘Sting’, and ‘Serial Heartbreaker’.

In support of the LP, FLETCHER performed on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon and set out on a sold-out 25-date tour across North America. Her new single, ‘Suckerpunch,’ was named Hottest Track Of The Week by BBCR1 is available now on the Girl Of My Dreams Deluxe Edition.