Hume was born in 1711 in Edinburgh, Scotland. His father died when Hume was only two years old, and he was raised by his mother, Katherine, an advocate (or lawyer). Hume matriculated at the University of Edinburgh at the tender age of 10, pursuing the then-standard course of study of Greek, Latin, metaphysics, and “natural philosophy” or natural science. Until he was 22, he engaged in independent study, reading widely in history, literature, philosophy, law, and theology.

Hume wanted to devote himself to reading and writing literature and philosophy. His resources were “very slender,” however, so he traveled to France and resolved to live as frugally as possible so that he could maintain his independence and dedicate his life to “the improvement of my talents in literature.” During his time there, and by this time in his late twenties, he wrote what is now considered one of the great texts in Western philosophy, his Treatise of Human Nature, which was published in two parts in 1739 and in 1740. The Treatise offered an account of human psychology, of causation and the limits of human knowledge, and of the origins and nature of moral judgments. He went on to produce penetrating insights on topics in political economy such as debt, interest, trade, and the origins and limits of political obedience, along with insights on many other areas ranging from aesthetics to religion. This book focuses on a handful of his central contributions with an emphasis on political economy, in particular his conception and defense of commercial society and of the role government should play in protecting it.

To his regret, Hume never married and had no children, and he was twice denied university professorships because of his religious “scepticism.” He included among his friends Adam Smith and many other luminaries of his time, but it was and is through his writings that his brilliance, his insight, his wit, his curiosity, and his joy emanate.

David Hume from the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

A detailed breakdown of Hume’s life, influence as an Enlightenment figure, and philosophical ideas.

Hume’s Moral Philosophy from the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

An explanation of Hume’s position in ethics, specifically his empiricist theory of the mind that asserts (1) Reason alone cannot be a motive to the will, but rather is the “slave of the passions” (2) Moral distinctions are not derived from reason (3) Moral distinctions are derived from the moral sentiments: feelings of approval and disapproval felt by spectators who contemplate a character trait or action (4) While some virtues and vices are natural, others, including justice, are artificial

David Hume from Britannica.com

A biographical account of Hume’s life from his early days in Edinburgh to his influence as a philosopher, historian, economist, and essayist.

David Hume 1711-1776 from Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

A peer-reviewed commentary on David Hume’s unique position in intellectual thought, including his epistemic understanding of the self and notions of personal identity, and how this broadly translated into his political and scholarly influence in the 18th century that has endured years after his death.

Hume Texts Online from David Hume.org

A robust, accessible online collection of David Hume’s essays, treatises, dissertations, and books (both acknowledged and originally anonymous, published in his time and posthumously).

Western Philosophy: David Hume from The School of Life

A detailed breakdown of Hume’s philosophical positions and an elementary explanation of the crux of Hume’s most significant contribution to the ideas of human nature: people are more influenced by our feelings than by reason.

David Hume: Causation from Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

A peer-reviewed commentary on Hume’s position on the notion of causation and how it relates to everyday occurrences and his (Hume) own empirical standards for knowledge.

David Hume from EconLib

A brief overview of Hume’s contributions to economic thought in addition to or in tandem with his treatments of philosophy, history, and politics.

A Very Brief Summary of David Hume UWPlatt.edu

A short entry that focuses on David Hume’s position in the tradition of British empiricism and his ethical theory on moral distinctions being rooted in emotion as opposed to the previous, long-held belief that they’re based in reason.

A Treatise of Human Nature by David Hume from Project Gutenberg

A free, open-access e-book copy of Hume’s seminal text on empiricism, skepticism, and naturalism.

A Treatise of Human Nature (1739), Section VI: Of Personal Identity from Web MN State.edu

A public domain copy of the “Section VI: Of Personal Identity” from Hume’s A Treatise of Human Nature.

David Hume’s Life and Works from Hume Society

A detailed, succinct overview of Hume’s life and works, his relationship to contemporaries such as Adam Smith, his time spent working on A Treatise of Human Nature, Essays Concerning Understanding, and The History of Great Britain, and years in Paris and Edinburgh up until his death.

David Hume from the Online Liberty Library

A brief biography of Hume’s life and works, and includes a list of quotes, books and titles (with links to epub, pdf, and kindle formats for reading), and associated movements.

David Hume from Oregon State University.edu

A one-page blog post from a “Great Philosophers” series discussing Hume’s impact on the theory of knowledge, ethics, and the philosophy of religion. Includes an explanation of Hume’s account of the mind by identifying the ways in which ideas might be related to one another i.e. resemblance, contiguity, and cause and effect.

David Hume’s Treatment of the Mind from BU.edu

A relatively short but comprehensive paper that critically examines Hume’s argument against the knowledge/existence of substantival mind.

David Hume from Oxford Reference.com

A quick reference/overview of Hume’s status as a philosopher, historian, and economist.

David Hume at 300 from Philosophy Now

A retrospective analyzing the life and legacy of David Hume, from his biography to the crux of his major works, in honour of his 300th year.

David Hume from the New World Encyclopedia

An encyclopedic entry on David Hume with an in-depth contents list.

David Hume from the Encyclopedia of Scientonomy

An encyclopedic entry on David Hume’s life, major contributions, historical context, and criticism specific to the science of human nature and scientific methodology applied to his philosophical approach.

David Hume (1711-1776) from National Records of Scotland

An overview of Hume’s life and his legacy as an enlightenment figure in Scotland. It likewise includes images/scans of original documents related to his life uploaded to the online archive, including his last will and testament.

Hume: Empiricist Naturalism from Philosophy Pages

A quick overview of Hume’s life followed by more in-depth analysis of Hume’s ideas, specifically his notions regarding matters of fact, rationality, skepticism, necessary connection among people and experience, our relation to the self, and the external world at large.

David Hume from Open Learn.edu

A free, open-access course on the philosophy of David Hume, including learning outcomes, quizzes/examinations, lectures on enlightenment and romanticism, Hume’s intellectual background, opinions on death, life, suicide, how his views were received, and the philosophy of religion and everyday life (to name a few).

Hume, David (1711-1776) from Encyclopedia.com

An encyclopedic entry on Hume’s life, his impact on secularism, his notable works, and a breakdown of the elements of Hume’s science of human nature (objects, perception, the copy principle and theory of origins, natural and philosophical relations, and associations) as well as Hume’s rejection of abstract ideas and how this interacts with his treatment of space and time.

Commentary on David Hume from Lumen Learning’s Epistemology chapter

A short summary of the central themes of An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding and An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals, and Hume’s relationship to Kant’s criticism and the later appreciation of logical positivists.

David Hume from Essays Moral, Political, and Literary (1742-1754) from University of Pennsylvania.edu

An open-access copy of Hume’s Essay X: Of Superstition and Enthusiasm from Essays Moral, Political, and Literary.

Hume on the Importance of Humanity by Jaqueline Taylor from Cairn Info

A comprehensive commentary that details Hume’s perspective on humanity and sympathy, more specifically humanity as a sympathy-engendered response to the tendencies of character, in his body of work.

Words of Wisdom, Intro to Philosophy: David Hume from Minnesota Libraries Publishing Project

A short summary of David Hume’s legacy and role as a sentimentalist, his notions of what is vs. what ought, followed by Hume’s introductory text on “the General Principle of Morals”.