How did Hitler rise to power? - Alex Gendler and Anthony Hazard

10,274,245 Views

99,327 Questions Answered

TEDEd Animation

Let’s Begin…

Decades after the fall of the Third Reich, it feels impossible to understand how Adolf Hitler, the tyrant who orchestrated one of the largest genocides in human history, could ever have risen to power in a democratic country. So how did it happen, and could it happen again? Alex Gendler and Anthony Hazard dive into the history and circumstances that allowed Hitler to become Führer of Germany.

Additional Resources for you to Explore

There were several key dates in Hitler’s political rise to power. First and foremost, the way World War I ended had a huge influence on these events. The German government surrendered without being militarily defeated. This caused a great deal of frustration and anger amongst the German people. Hitler exploited this to the fullest extent, and used it to discredit and criticize the new Weimar Republic that was created thereafter. The Great Depression was another key event in the story of how Hitler was able to rise to political power in Germany. He continued feeding the German people lies of government economic conspiracies, and banking corruption (which he alleged were caused by Jews within the country).

While this lesson focuses on Hitler’s rhetoric and exploitation of Germany’s fears in his campaign for power, more information on his life before politics can be found here. For more information on his background, childhood, and rise to power, see Hitler’s Boyhood and political views.

It is also interesting to consider the international contemporary perspective on Hitler's ascension - see British media perspectives on Hitler’s Rise, key events and dates for his ascension to the top of German politics. Also, this BBC video is included for visual learners. This is a documentary that takes people through the reasons why the German people grew to think of Hitler as the savior of the country. Propaganda played a core role in convincing the German people that democracy and freedom was making the country weak and powerless.

For a useful resource for younger learners curious about the rise of Hitler and Nazi Germany, please see Nathaniel Harriss 2004 picture book The Rise of Hitler.

For older readers, Henry Ashby Turner Jr.'s book Hitler’s Thirty Days to Power: January 1933 book explains how government officials and business leaders made certain behind closed doors that Hitler would become chancellor of Germany. These officials underestimated Hitler, and thought he could be used as a government puppet to increase their own power and further their own agendas.

A number of the sound effects for this video were sourced from Free Sound. Special thanks to: Robinhood76, Cell31_Sound_Productions, unchaz, RT759

Full credits for this video:

Directed by Owen Gent and Hugh Cowling

Produced by Owen Gent and Hugh Cowling

Designed by Owen Gent and Hugh Cowling

Art Directed by Owen Gent and Hugh Cowing

Storyboard Art by Owen Gent and Hugh Cowling

Illustration by Owen Gent

Animated by Hugh Cowling

Edited by Hugh Cowling

Composited by Hugh Cowling

Sound Design by Hugh Cowling

Composed by Hugh Cowling

Next Section »

About TED-Ed Animations

TED-Ed Animations feature the words and ideas of educators brought to life by professional animators. Are you an educator or animator interested in creating a TED-Ed Animation? Nominate yourself here »

Meet The Creators

Educator Anthony Hazard, Alex Gendler

Creator Owen Gent, Hugh Cowling

Narrator Addison Anderson

More from The World's People and Places

05:41

Social Studies

Why did people wear powdered wigs?

Lesson duration 05:41

Manage Library

449,394 Views

05:32

Social Studies

The rise and fall of the Maya Empire’s most powerful city

Lesson duration 05:32

Manage Library

266,491 Views

05:20

The true story behind the legend of the 47 Rōnin

Lesson duration 05:20

Manage Library

441,250 Views

05:31

Social Studies

The underground cities of the Byzantine Empire

Lesson duration 05:31

Manage Library

495,783 Views