Kahlil Gibran, a towering figure in the world of literature, had an incredible impact with his poetic writings. He would view the human experience from a number of philosophical angles. Despite his involvement in the philosophical world, Gibran was also known for his multitalented nature. He would write world-class poetry and create art, sketches, and paintings. His thematic pattern of introspection has provided those who read his work with new perspectives.

When he was young, Gibran experienced immigration to the United States alongside his family. As an early immigrant to the United States, Gibran encountered a number of cultures that nurtured his expansive worldview. This would help him combine Eastern and Western philosophies. His prose and poetry, infused with wisdom and mysticism, make him one of the most widely read and translated poets of his generation.

Early Life

Kahlil Gibran, or Gibran Khalil Gibran, was born in the town of Bsharri in Mount Lebanon Mutasarrifate, which was a part of Syria and the Ottoman Empire, on 6 January 1883. His parents, Kahlil and Kamila Gibran, were very poor Maronite Catholics. They were unable to provide their son with any formal schooling. His only educational experiences during his youth came at the hands of a priest who taught him about the Bible. He was not the only child in the family, with a half-brother, Butrus Rahma, and two younger sisters. His sisters were called Sultana and Marianna.

In the early 1890s, Gibran’s father, who was a tax collector, was imprisoned for embezzlement, and the small amount of property they owned was seized by the authorities. A few years later, Gibran’s mother decided to move their family to America. His father was released from prison, but she left with the young writer and his siblings, Sultana and Marianna, in 1895. They made a home in the South End of Boston in what was then the second-largest Syrian-Lebanese-American community.

Education

Gibran began attending school and was placed in a special class to learn English. He was later enrolled in an art school. It was here that he was introduced to the avant-garde artists of the day. He produced drawings that were later used as book covers. At the age of 15, Gibran was sent back home to attend a Maronite school in Beirut, where he was known as a writer for his poetry. He was there for a few years before returning to Boston. Over the course of the following year or two, Gibran’s sister, Sultana, and half-brother, Butrus, died of tuberculosis while his mother succumbed to cancer.

From 1908 to 1910, Gibran attended the Académie Julian in Paris, France. As a young man, he became accomplished in drawing and watercolor. During this time period, Gibran came to know Mary Haskell, a headmistress. She helped fund his career over the following years, and the two were involved in a relationship, the details of which are not completely known. In 1911, he moved to New York City, which was apparently funded by Haskell.

Literary Career

The preceding years had seen Gibran publish a number of works in Arabic. These were known for their variety, as he drew sketches and wrote short stories, poems, and prose poems. These included Nubthah fi Fan Al-Musiqa, or Music, in 1905 and Dam’a wa Ibtisama, or A Tear and A Smile, in 1914. In 1918, Gibran started publishing writings in English. Gibran’s first book written in English was The Madman: His Parables and Poems. It was released by Alfred A. Knopf, the young up-and-coming publisher, and written in biblical cadence.

Gibran was also a part of a group of poets known as the New York Pen League. It would be during this time that he showed his work al-Mawakib to the world. He had written the collection during a trip to Cohasset, Massachusetts. His second volume in English, Twenty Drawings, followed in 1919. Then, The Prophet was published in 1923. In 1928, Gibran published his longest book, Jesus, the Son of Man: His Words and His Deeds as Told and Recorded by Those Who Knew Him. His final novel was The Earth Gods.

Gibran’s death occurred in April of 1931 due to cirrhosis of the liver and tuberculosis, both of which had been brought on due to severe alcoholism.

Famous Poems

Kahlil Gibran’s poetry was responsible for a wide array of iconic works. Some of his most famous poems include the likes of:

‘A Tear and a Smile‘

‘On Love‘

‘On Giving and Taking‘

‘Song of Love XXIV‘

‘Song of the Rain VII‘

‘The Perfect World‘

‘The Coming of the Ship‘

‘Song of the Soul‘

‘The Creation‘

‘The Criminal‘

‘The Farewell‘

‘On Joy and Sorrow‘

‘And When My Sorrow Was Born”And When My Sorrow Was Born‘

‘On Children‘

‘Song of the Flower‘

Influences

Like many of the great poets, Kalil Gibran was heavily inspired by works and poets that came before him. Some of his greatest poetic influences include the likes of Friedrich Nietzsche, William Blake, Walt Whitman, Gabriele D’Annunzio, and Maurice Maeterlinck.

Throughout the years after his publications, Gibran has also been integral in inspiring the new generation of poets. Some of these include Adonis, Rumi, Maya Angelou, W.S. Merwin, and Derek Walcott.