Phillip Jones’ Post

Chief Tourism Officer

11mo Edited

To many of us in the world, archaeology is a science of the past, what has happened before us? How does it help our understanding of today – it’s Indiana Jones stuff right? But the speakers at day one of today’s AlUla World Archaeology Summit #AWASKSA have suggested that archaeology has immense power to shape cultural identity and shared human experience of the future. “Archaeologists should think of their own identities as well as those of the sites they are excavating or studying,” Dr Khaled Melliti, an historian and researcher with France’s National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS), said during a panel discussion. Some 300 delegates from 39 countries arrived in AlUla yesterday and I was honored to be first to welcome them at a gala dinner outdoors amid palm groves at the ancient oasis of #Daimumah. The adventurer and writer Levison Wood observed in a speech that the summit is a journey of exploration and extends the tradition of other explorers and pioneers in the region, from Ibn Battuta to Gertrude Bell and Lawrence of Arabia. Today at Maraya, our architectural marvel in the desert, we unveiled a bespoke exhibition of AlUla's history detailing ongoing archaeological excavations and artefacts. We are so proud to be bringing the world to #AlUla. #alulaworldarchaeologicalsummit #livingmuseum #experiencealula #alula #archaeology

Like Comment

Transcript

Archaeology is a lens through which we can magnify our past, catch a reflection of our present, and peer into our future. It helps us connect the dots, understand behaviors and predict outcomes. All heritage carries a knowledge of a long lost world. Of extraordinary achievements and failures, we hear echoes of history shaping who we are now and who we might become. History has a pattern, and archaeology is a reminder of the resilience of humanity. Societies of old faced challenges, some similar to ours, and they found solutions and invented techniques which, if adopted today, could reduce the harm we inflict on nature. Each new discovery about the past unearth stories, traditions and beliefs. Bringing us closer to understanding our shared human experience. Piece by piece, our heritage teaches us that our world has always been interconnected and our history intertwined. We are more alike than we are different. The relics of our collective past are fragile, and by preserving them, we preserve traces of our shared humanity. By bringing archaeology into our modern lives, by ensuring our children hear those echoes of the past, we can all be stewards of our heritage. We have more in common than we think. We have more accumulated wisdom than we realize. And if we so choose. We can enact meaningful change. We are gathered in a Lula to do just that together across disciplines, in pursuit of a better future, exploring our past, guiding our future. Welcome to the Alula World Archaeology Summit.

See more comments

To view or add a comment, sign in