Adam Paskowitz – Vox

Joshua Paskowitz – Vox/Rhymes

Peter Perdichizzi – Guitar

James Book – Bass

Nick Lucero – Drums

Hollywood-based band THE FLYS capture the energy and driving propulsion that is not only the essence of rock ‘n’ roll, but the embodiment of the band’s lifestyle. It’s hot rods, women, surfing, tattoos, high tech and shooting hoops, along with the music, that is the genesis of THE FLYS’ original sound.

“The band is very action oriented on and off the stage,” says Peter, THE FLYS’ guitarist. “Nick, our drummer, is the extreme sport guy who likes jumping out of airplanesas seen on our album cover for Holiday Man. Adam is a dedicated surfer, and I’m into hardcore mountain biking. It’s all about being active. We actively pursue things.” “We take a bite out of life,” adds Adam, THE FLYS’ vocalist and key songwriter.

THE FLYS formed out of the informal jam sessions of James,Adam and Peter, and continued to develop when Josh hit puberty and joined up. They found Nick flying through the air, and soon a sound was born that is a mixture of each of their

individual musical tastes. With the invention of their own mega-vocal distortion generator by Adam, which has become known as the “Paskowitz Nebulizer,” the singer grinds his fierce vocal sound through the collective conscious and unconscious. The band has uniquely evolved, transforming into a solid and edgy unit. Their songs are powerful and infectious, featuring a distinctive vocal style.

THE FLYS’ sound goes international with Holiday Man (TraumaRecords/ Delicious Vinyl), an aural celebration of Fly-style heard on the catchy and emotional “Got You (Where I Want You),” also featured on the Disturbing Behavior soundtrack. The hit single builds from a melancholy progression into a sonic thrust with reggae-style rhymes, slamming beats and blazing guitars. “Take U There,” the final song recorded for the album, dynamically blends the band’s hard-hitting sound of rock ‘n’ rhymes into a menagerie of sophisticated grandeur. The anthem “The Gods of Basketball” has monstrous grooves while “Family” has a Sly-meets-Fly sonic feel.

The Holiday Man album kicks off with a guitar-driven, pop-masterpiece “She’s So Huge,” one of the band’s nods to the feminine mystique. “I can’t say enough sweet things aboutthem. This is always a pleasurable topic for me,” grins Adam.

“We’re big rock fans,” says James, THE FLYS’ bass player. “Adam is a huge fan of Ozzy. Josh adds some toasty-rhymes.This is a combination of what we are all into musicallyit rides the crest of rock with a real soulful vibe.”

Adam and Josh were raised in a camper always in search of the best waves. In keeping with their mobile lifestyle, the Paskowitz offspring were home schooled by their father (a Stanford medical doctor who surfs daily at 78 years of age). While their father was keeping his then teenage boys on the surfing circuit, their mother was contributing to their varied musical influences with her opera singing.

A former professional surfer who continues to surf as often as possible, Adam this summer participated in the U.S. Surfing Open competition in Huntington Beach, California. Their brother Israel (a.k.a. Izzy) is still a pro-surfer in addition to running thefamily’s summer surf camp located in Orange County.

Another Paskowitz brother (there are eight plus a sister) is one of the founders of Black Flys eyewear, which while not directly related to the music, is a part of the lifestyle. This has allowed them to become a part of the notorious Black Flys Syndicate, a collective that are bound by their appreciation of classic cars, fine women, looking sharp, and of course, doing rather than watching.

A self-proclaimed “mad scientist”a trait he inherited from his fatherAdam during the recording of Holiday Man built a 400 small block Camaro to pass the time during the day. “The producer Chris Goss is like a vampire,” laughs Adam. “He only likes to do his work at night. We could not have been happier to work with Chris who is from Masters of Reality,” Adam explains.

“So here we are in Palm Springs and it’s 100 plus degrees each day and I’m sweating it out putting the car together to keep myself occupied,” says Adam. “Funny enough the Camaro was finished before the album.”

With an energetic and bombastic approach to their live shows, THE FLYS have spent years of die-hard touring, which has included jaunts through Europe and extensive West Coast dates.

THE FLYS refer to themselves as the homeless James Bond. Their mission: to make heavy music that is danceable. You’re invited to hang out with the Holiday Men, so put on your best threads and don’t be late.