Östersund Ski Stadium is beautifully situated over Storsjön with only a 15 minute walk to the center and a 15 minute drive to the airport.

The National Arena for Biathlon and Östersund Ski Stadium, are truly worth a visit. There are up to 89 km of standard tracks to choose from. Exercise tracks, electric light tracks and competition tracks start from the ski stadium. Parking spaces and a paddock for the public are located adjacent to the ski stadium. The exercise tracks and competition tracks start and end inside the ski stadium by the track board.

The ski tracks are linked to Spikbodarna-Odensala and Torvalla.

Link to Ski trails

The stadium in Östersund has also been selected as the official Vasaloppet Center, where Vasaloppet has chosen to collaborate with selected and successful facilities that have a conscious commitment to cross-country skiing, cycling or running.

The trend to “take a course” is popular! At the stadium, there is group training and an individual instructor to book.

With better technology, you get on the track easier and faster, so therefore you should book an instructor!

Track Fees

A fee is charged for the training and competition tracks in the ski stadium area, for the the stadium area / artificial snow track including the stadium plate, the World Cup tracks, exercise track 2.7 km (blue / yellow), exercise track 3.5 km (red / yellow) and exercise track electric light 5.0 km (green / yellow).

The fee includes access to free parking and a public waxing hut.

Day pass cross country

Adult (18yrs) 80 sek/day or 990 sek /season

Senior from (65 yrs) 45 sek/day or 530 sek/season

Children and youths 0-17 years free of charge

Biathlon

Adult (18 yrs) 100kr/day or 1700 sek /season

Senior from (65 år) 55 sek/day or 790 sek/season

Children and youths 0-17 years free of charge

You can buy a season ticket at supermarket Ica Maxi´s pre-store or at the ski shop at the Ski Stadium.

Contact us and more information:

Östersund with surroundings

Take the car 8km from the city to Svartsjöarna and choose one of the nice 3, 5, or 8-kilometer tracks. Here are windbreaks, flat bogs with a mountain character and forest areas where the snow waves from the branches. Beautiful tracks that invite to hot chocolate and orange.

If you are looking for a longer trip, you can go from Svartsjöarna to Löfsåsen where waffle house awaits, 10 km easy road.

Other wonderful recreational trails we are happy to recommend are:

Lövsta on Frösön 3.2 km (electric light until 10 pm) and 5 km. Slightly hilly terrain that runs through the spruce forest.

Östberget’s electric light trail 2.2 km in really hilly terrain.

Spikbodarna 2.5 km, 5 km and 13.5 km. Slightly hilly terrain that also runs through the spruce forest.

Torråsen 5 km, quiet and beautiful trail where it is also allowed with dogs and sledges.

Many of the villages in the immediate area also offer electric light trails run by non-profit associations.

On Östersund municipality’s website there is information about ski trails in the Östersund area, on Frösön, in Lugnvik, Brunflo and Lit.

Link to Östersund Municipality’s website

Contact us and more information: