BURLINGTON, Massachusetts, April 22, 2015 /PRNewswire/ --

ClickSoftware Technologies Ltd. (NasdaqGS: CKSW), the leading provider of automated mobile workforce management and optimization solutions for the service industry, today announced that it will release its first quarter 2015 financial results on Wednesday, May 6, 2015, during pre-market hours.

ClickSoftware will host a conference call and live webcast on the same day, at 9:00 a.m. ET. The earnings release and supplemental slides will be available on the Company's website at http://ir.clicksoftware.com prior to the call.

Please call the following dial-in numbers to participate in the call: United States 1-888-407-2553 (International +972-3-918-0610). This call will be webcast live on ClickSoftware's website at http://ir.clicksoftware.com. Please allow 10 minutes prior to the call to visit this site to download and install any necessary audio software.

Following the conclusion of the call, a replay of the webcast will be available on the Company's website and will also be available on ClickSoftware's investor relations app, which is available free of charge at Apple's App Store for the iPhone and iPad and at Google Play for Android mobile devices. Alternatively, a telephone replay of the call will be available until May 13, 2015 at 11:59 p.m. ET, and may be accessed by dialing: United States 1-888-326-9310 (International +972-3-925-5900).

About ClickSoftware

ClickSoftware (NasdaqGS: CKSW) is the leading provider of automated mobile workforce management and service optimization solutions for the enterprise, both for mobile and in-house resources. As pioneers of the "Service chain optimization" and "The real-time service enterprise" concepts, our solutions provide organizations with end-to-end visibility and control of the entire service management chain by optimizing forecasting, planning, shift and task scheduling, mobility and real-time management of resource and customer communication.

Available via the cloud or on-premise, our products incorporate best business practices and advanced decision-making algorithms to manage service operations more efficiently, in a scalable, integrated manner. Our solutions have become the backbone for many leading organizations worldwide by addressing the fundamental question of job fulfillment: Who does What, for Whom, With what, Where and When.

ClickSoftware is the premier choice for delivering superb business performance to service sector organizations of all sizes. The Company is headquartered in the United States and Israel, with offices across Europe, and Asia Pacific. For more information, please visit http://www.clicksoftware.com. Follow us on Twitter.

To download ClickSoftware's investor relations app, which offers access to SEC documents, press releases, videos, audiocasts and more, please visit Apple's App Store to download on your iPhone and iPad, or Google Play for your Android mobile device.

ClickSoftware Contact:

Noa Schuman

Investor Relations

+972-3-7659-467

Investor Relations Contact:

Christopher Harrison

KCSA Strategic Communications

+1-212-896-1267

charrison@kcsa.com

SOURCE ClickSoftware Technologies Ltd