BURLINGTON, Massachusetts, August 1, 2012 /PRNewswire/ --

ClickSoftware Technologies Ltd. (NasdaqGS: CKSW), a leading provider of automated workforce management and optimization solutions for the service industry, will be presenting at the Oppenheimer 15th Annual Technology, Internet & Communications Conference. The conference will be held at the Four Seasons Hotel in Boston, MA on August 14-15, 2012.

Shmuel Arvatz, Chief Financial Officer of ClickSoftware, will present on Wednesday, August 15, 2012 at 3:05 PM ET, with one-on-one meetings held throughout the day. Investors attending the conference who wish to meet with Mr. Arvatz for a one-on-one meeting should contact their Oppenheimer representative.

A live audio webcast of the presentation will be available online on the Investors section of the Company's website at http://ir.clicksoftware.com. A replay will be available for ninety days.

About ClickSoftware

ClickSoftware is the leading provider of automated workforce management and optimization solutions for every size of service business. Our portfolio of solutions, available on demand and on premise, creates business value through higher levels of productivity, customer satisfaction and operational efficiency. Our patented concept of 'continuous planning and scheduling' incorporates customer demand forecasting, long and short term capacity planning, shift planning, real-time scheduling, mobility and location-based services, as well as on-going communication with the consumer on the expected arrival time of the service resource.

As the pioneers of the 'W6' concept more than 20 years ago, we have perfected solutions for solving a wide variety of problems on Who does What, for Whom, with What, Where and When. The combination of proven technology with educational services helps businesses find the right balance between reducing costs, increasing customer satisfaction, employee preferences and industry regulations/legislation. ClickSoftware's solutions manage hundreds of thousands of resources in service businesses across a variety of industries and geographies. Our flexible deployment approach, breadth and depth of solutions and strong partnerships with leading CRM/ERP vendors and system integrators makes us the number one choice to deliver superb business performance to any organization. The Company is headquartered in the United States and Israel, with offices across Europe, and Asia Pacific.

For more information, please visit http://www.clicksoftware.com or follow us on Twitter, the content of which is not part of this press release.

ClickSoftware Contact:

Noa Schuman

Investor Relations

+972-3-7659-467

[email protected]

Investor Relations Contact:

Rob Fink

KCSA Strategic Communications

+1-212-896-1206

[email protected]

SOURCE ClickSoftware Technologies Ltd