BURLINGTON, Massachusetts, May 4, 2011 /PRNewswire-FirstCall/ -- ClickSoftware Technologies Ltd. (NasdaqGS: CKSW), the leading provider of automated workforce management and optimization solutions for the service industry, today announced that it will host an Analyst and Investor Day on Tuesday, May 24, 2011, at The New York Palace Hotel in New York City.

Dr. Moshe BenBassat, ClickSoftware's Chairman and CEO, and other members of the executive management team will provide a financial and business overview and discuss the Company's vision and strategic direction, growth initiatives, market trends and opportunities and execution strategies. Also presenting will be Kevin Benedict - a popular enterprise mobility consultant, writer and speaker - who will explore how field service organizations can take advantage of recent mobility advances; and Dwight Jellison - Manager, Service Delivery Team of Diebold Inc., a global leader in providing integrated self-service delivery and security systems and services - who will discuss the impact and value of ClickSoftware products.

The event will begin at 7:30 a.m. ET and will conclude with lunch and a Q&A forum at approximately 1:30 p.m. ET.

Space is limited, but analysts and investors interested in attending may still RSVP by contacting Rob Fink ([email protected]) or Marybeth Csaby ([email protected]) at KCSA Strategic Communications, tel. +1(212)-896-1206.

For those unable to attend in person, a live webcast of the presentations will be available on the Investor Relations section of the Company's website at http://ir.clicksoftware.com.

About ClickSoftware

ClickSoftware is the leading provider of automated workforce management and optimization solutions for every size of service business. Our portfolio of solutions, available on demand and on premise, creates business value through higher levels of productivity, customer satisfaction and operational efficiency. Our patented concept of 'continuous planning and scheduling' incorporates customer demand forecasting, long and short term capacity planning, shift planning, real-time scheduling, mobility and location-based services, as well as on-going communication with the consumer on the expected arrival time of the service resource.

As the pioneers of the 'W6' concept more than 20 years ago, we have perfected solutions for solving a wide variety of problems on Who does What, for Whom, with What, Where and When. The combination of proven technology with educational services helps businesses find the right balance between reducing costs, increasing customer satisfaction, employee preferences and industry regulations/legislation. ClickSoftware's solutions manage over 200,000 resources in service businesses across a variety of industries and geographies. Our flexible deployment approach, breadth and depth of solutions and strong partnerships with leading CRM/ERP vendors and system integrators makes us the number one choice to deliver superb business performance to any organization. The Company is headquartered in the United States and Israel, with offices across Europe, and Asia Pacific.

For more information, please visit http://www.clicksoftware.com or follow us on Twitter, the content of which is not part of this press release.

ClickSoftware Technologies Contact: Noa Schuman Investor Relations +972-3-7659-467 [email protected] Investor Relations Contact: Marybeth Csaby / Rob Fink KCSA Strategic Communications +1-212-896-1236 (Marybeth) / +1-212-896-1206 (Rob) [email protected] / [email protected]

SOURCE ClickSoftware Technologies Ltd