LOWELL — As Lowell painfully learned last night, these are not the same old Springfield Falcons.

Springfield 4, Lowell 1

Springfield, which has qualified for the American Hockey League playoffs only once in the last seven seasons, received two goals and an assist from second-year pro Liam Reddox to thump the Devils, 4-1, before 1,182 fans at Tsongas Arena.

Jean-Francois Jacques added a goal and two assists for the flying Falcons (12-7-1-3), 7-2-2 in their last 11 games.

“The way they play, Edmonton plays,” Lowell head coach Kurt Kleinendorst said. “But we’re pressing. First periods we’re basically fine, but somewhere we lose that focus. Same old stuff. It’s not that we’re not working hard. We’re working hard. Guys — they’re doing what I’m asking them to do.

“That’s what’s disheartening,” he added.

Lowell (7-11-2-0) was outscored 3-0 in the second period. The hosts peppered Jeff Deslauriers with 36 shots in the game, 16 in the third period, but only defenseman Olli Malmivaara, who tied the game 1-1 in the first period, was able to score.

“Right now we’re just really struggling to score goals,” Kleinendorst said.

Springfield blew past Lowell with a three-goal second period.

Reddox pocketed his second goal of the night when, with Jordan Parise (22 saves) looking the wrong way, he wristed a shot from the bottom of the right faceoff circle into Lowell’s net at 3:19. Reddox earned his third point at 6:06 when his centering pass was deflected in by Marc Pouliot.

Lowell nearly tied it 50 seconds later, but Ivan Khomutov’s long shot struck hit the crossbar. Late in the period, at 18:43, just four seconds after Rosario Ruggeri was called for holding, Springfield made it 4-1 on a deflection by Jean-Francois Jacques.

Lowell dominated the first period, outshooting the Falcons 11-5, and controlling play after Springfield took a 1-0 lead on its second of the game.

While on the power play, a Rob Schremp shot was stopped by Parise, but the rebound squirted to Liam Reddox, who slipped the puck into an empty net at 3:00.

But the Devils rallied to tie it 1-1 after 20 minutes.

Seconds after Barry Tallackson blistered a shot from right wing, Petr Vrana backhanded the rebound past Deslauriers. The puck rolled to the goal line, where Springfield’s T.J. Kemp threw it down ice.

Malmivaara, however, was on the spot to one-time it into the left corner at the 11:21 mark.

How surprising was Malmivaara’s goal? It was his first goal in 17 games this season, he only had one in 60 games in Lowell last season, and it was just the third goal a Devils defenseman has tallied this year.

Lowell was in position to slow down the hot Falcons until the fateful second period.

“It’s just a tough period. It’s tough to get yourself back in the game when they score three in the second. The second period has been our Achilles’ heel. We’ve got to find a way to conquer the second period,” left wing Stephen Gionta said, “to be ready when they drop the puck. It’s a 60-minute game, not a 40-minute game.”

Notes: Despite receiving a stick to an eye during practice this week, left wing Ryan Murphy was in Lowell’s lineup. … Veteran right wing Grant Marshall, coming off his best game of the season, was sidelined with the flu. … Burlington native Mike Pandolfo was the victim of a terrific toe save by Deslauriers in the third period. … The Devils are at Bridgeport today before hosting Manchester on Sunday.