Charles Darwin, best known for his theories of evolution, passed away on April 19, in the year 1882.

According to his theories on human evolution, every species of human has descended from a common ancestor.

Darwin Day

His birth date, February 12, is celebrated as Darwin Day to celebrate science and reason.

A wax figure of Charles Darwin

Did you know that the naturalist who linked humans to monkeys waited for 20 years for his ground-breaking theory of evolution to be published?

Here are some interesting facts about Charles Darwin:

advertisement

1. Charles Robert Darwin, an English naturalist and geologist, is best known for his contributions to the evolutionary theory.

2. He attended Edinburgh University to become a doctor but couldn't stand the sight of blood and dropped the field. Instead, he helped to investigate marine invertebrates.

Specimens are displayed in Charles Darwin's former home, Down House, in Kent, southern England.

3. He established that all species of life have descended over time from common ancestors.

4. Darwin published his theory of evolution with compelling evidence in his 1859 book, The Origin of Species, overcoming scientific rejection of earlier concepts of transmutation of species.

5. A total of 1250 copies of Darwin's book Origin of Species were printed and sold for 15 shillings (Rs 9.86) each. Each of them is now valued at around 23,000 USD.

6. Puzzled by the geographical distribution of wildlife and fossils he collected on the voyage, Darwin began detailed investigations and in 1838, conceived his theory of 'natural selection'.

7. Darwin has been described as one of the most influential figures in human history. He was also honoured by burial in Westminster Abbey.

Pigeon bones are displayed in Charles Darwin's former home, Down House, in Kent, southern England.

8. His research on plants was published in a series of books, and in his final book, he examined earthworms and their effect on soil.

9. He observed that "an American monkey, after getting drunk on brandy, would never touch it again, and thus is much wiser than most men."

10. He didn't coin the phrase 'survival of the fittest'. It was coined by Herbert Spencer.

Also read: Remembering Herbert Spencer: 10 quotes by the renowned English Philosopher

Also read: 5 instances where man-made climate change altered the face of Earth

Interested in General Knowledge and Current Affairs? Click here to stay informed and know what is happening around the world with our G.K. and Current Affairs section.