The Nepalese rupee (NPR) is the national currency of Nepal. It is administered by the central bank of Nepal, the Nepal Rastra Bank.

Introduction:

The NPR was introduced in 1932, replacing the previous currency, the Nepalese mohar.

Nepal Rastra Bank, the central regulatory bank of Nepal, was established in 1956.

Until 1956, Both Nepali and Indian rupees were legal tenders in Nepal. The exchange rate is decided by private money, the exchange rate depends upon demand and supply.

Nepal Currency Circulation and Expansion Act were introduced in 1957 which abolished the dual currency system. Before that, people could deposit the Indian currency directly in the bank(no need to exchange). With the act, a single currency regime has been started.

Regarding the exchange rate of Indian Rupees and Nepali Currency, Prior to 1994, the NPR was pegged at a rate of 1 INR per 1.45 NPR.

Pegged: It is the policy where the government sets a specific fixed exchange rate for its currency.

Now it's value 1 INR to 1.60 NPR.

Why is the exchange rate with India "constant"?

Most currencies are free-floating which is based on supply and demand in the market. Currencies are pegged to one another to ensure their value remains relatively stable.

Daily changes in rate hampered trade as Nepal imports most essential goods from India like oil, petroleum products, medicine, etc. Nepal export neither on a great scale nor any essential goods which Indian customers would have to pay higher money if NPR would be stronger than INR, which ultimately decrease the demand of Nepali products being expensive. So the decision of pegging was introduced to maintain trade relations between two neighbouring countries.

History:

Nepal's economy has grown at an average rate of roughly 4% between 1961 and 2019. More recently, gross domestic product (GDP) was 7%, respectively.

Between 2008 and 2016, inflation hovered around 9% but dropped to roughly 3.6% in 2017. Since then it has edged back up and was slightly higher than 5% in 2020.

Relative to the USD, the NPR has depreciated over the past 10 years. In Sept. 2009, 1 USD was equivalent to just over 75 NPR. However, by July 2021, the value of 1 USD had risen to over 119 NPR.

Causes of depreciation of value:

Nepal's economy is not improving in comparison to the USA.

Import of external goods is more than the export of Nepali products.

Effects of depreciation in value:

Nepal will face difficulty while paying interest on the international debt.

Nepal will have to pay a large amount to buy construction equipment.

Depreciation of value results in inflation which then increases the prices of fuel and other assets.

What can an individual do to preserve the value?

There are many options to be on the safe side and save ourselves from the depreciation of the value of money we hold. A financially literate person will always invest the money in good return giving places not keeping the money in the degrading one. We can invest in the stock market, gold to preserve the value of money we have. They can be volatile too (in some cases) but looking for the option is always a good option.