R&B is like many genres which has dramatically changed through time. From the development of ‘Rhythmic Blues’ to the fusion of styles that has created the contemporary sub-genre we know today.

But what exactly does R&B mean?

In the late 1940’s, R&B was originally a combination of jazz vocals with the styles of funk, pop and soul. African-American artists first performed the Rhythm of Blues as they explored the themes of relationships, goals/aspirations, freedom through their experiences of pain in the 20th century. Mainstream R&B has a jazz feel through the saxophone beat and drum rhythms with melodic qualities made by the artists vocals.

A variety of audiences began to show an interest in the R&B music genre in the 1970’s; extending the genre worldwide, not just the audience in the UK and US.

As a result, more R&B music videos featured on the hit MTV station in the 1990’s including Destiny’s Child and Boyz to Men. Other R&B artists/groups began to add hip-hop sound to their music; subsequently the sub-genre of contemporary R&B music soon evolved.

In the late 1990’s, the style of neo-soul music stemmed from the influence of smooth soul and hip-hop. The meaningful lyrical content of the neo-soul genre makes the difference from the dance/pop style contemporary R&B music began to uncover. This further made it difficult for audiences to distinguish between the R&B and hip-hop genre.

Many to name, but some 1990’s R&B artists include:

However, R&B can be categorised under the integrated approach of a variety of styles as rap, soul and hip-hop make this particular genre.

So what is contemporary R&B?

Arguably, the original R&B genre is fading out and contemporary R&B styled artists are taking over through focusing on the vocals of the artist, whilst being shaped through the hip-hop beat. But some artists incorporated the soft smooth sound of the traditional genre as fans grew over the recent decade.

Mid 2000’s artists which have kept the genre’s original feel include:

Contemporary R&B is different from the Rhythm and Blues of the 1950’s/60’s as the abbreviation is used, not the full expression. In 2004, 80% of R&B songs topped the R&B charts as well as the Billboard Hot 100; meaning that the peak time for the hip-hop/R&B industry was in fact contemporary.

For example: Contemporary R&B artist Beyonce released her hip-hop and soul influenced song called “Crazy In Love”; which the 2009 single won a Grammy for “Best R&B song”. This can arguably be interpreted as being popular in the time of it’s release for the inclusion of rap, the verse from her husband Jay Z, incorporated with her R&B vocals. The video can be viewed below:

Conventions of male R&B artists in music videos:

Old styled R&B male artists wore suits so that the formal attire represented them with a sophisticated style; subsequently attracting the female audience.

However, modern R&B artists reveal their tattoos through their shirtless appearance, which stills attracts the young teenage based female audience as their body on show will uncover the artists strength.

Plus, the cinematography will emphasise the artist’s body covered in tattoos as the tattoos symbolise their masculinity, as well as revealing an element of uniqueness because not one of the R&B artists will have the same tattoos as them. Furthermore, the audience will become even more captivated in the video by gaining a sense of knowing the artist through their expressions of body art.

Fashionable items such as designer labels and branded outfits including Nike trainers generate a brand image that then becomes associated to the artist. The men also show off their expensive material possessions through the wide variety of gold/silver chains, watches and necklaces on frequent display during the music video. Which the artist represents their power status and success image through their material possessions as well as including shots of expensive cars that belong to them.

But in some cases, the clothing appears rather casual to allow their male audiences to relate to the topic they cover in their song; thus resulting in the male audiences wanting to follow the trends set by the R&B artists.

Conventions of female artists in R&B music videos:

The mise-en-scene in particular for female R&B artists include minimal clothing and arguably appearing in provocative clothing such as crop tops and short skirts/shorts. This is so that the “Male Gaze” is attracted to the video to increase the support of the song since the women are presented as sexual objects of the male desire. Also exemplified through the sexual manner and behaviour of certain dances in the music video.

Within the music video close up shots present the expensive jewellery and golden accessories to the audience; highlighting the successful nature of the artist. The artist’s looks are defined through their heavy make-up that is used to attract the audience and adds a sense of uniqueness to the artist as it illustrates their individuality in comparison to other artists in the music industry.

But Beyonce is an R&B artist who subverts these stereotypes because she is a strong independent woman who conveys an aspect of feminism through her sophisticated style and success. She juxtaposes the previous representations of female R&B artists that evidently objectified the women in a sexual way.

The R&B culture’s evolving state today:

Late in the 1990’s, R&B had changed from the upbeat soundtrack to more of a slower rhythm; this was reflected in the music videos because the performance based dancing that was used, was instead replaced by the video following a narrative.

Fast styled songs allow the artist to uncover their eccentric nature through the sense of the extreme make-up in terms of bright/vivid colour choice and the outfits appearing rather provocative. The settings are usually in night clubs, so the lighting used is mainly low-key from the artificial lights; the choreographed dancing is the most prominent feature. The artists are are presented as having fun at parties with the main props including expensive alcohol bottles such as champagne, with fast pace montage editing used to convey the colourful and happy atmosphere.

Then in the slow styled R&B songs, the themes of love and heartbreak are usually explored to convey a high sense of emotion. This is presented in vast locations to convey the artists’ loneliness from the relationship breakup or in typical urban settings of glamorous mansions. The love songs are usually edited with a black and white effect or sepia style as the tones/shadings emphasise the emotions of sadness the artist is attempting to convey through their music. The artist is usually part of the narrative through being the narrator and a character, as this way the audience feel like they can relate to the artist’s emotions expressed, as it’s of the perspective of the artist. Therefore, the continuity editing used in the songs about love adds to the sense of realism.

Music videos at the start of the 21st century began to contain more of a conceptual style where each R&B song was visualised to convey the different meanings. It was during the start of this time period where women were objectified to be materialistic belongings to men as represented in nearly all R&B music videos.

But soon with the rise of female R&B artists and feminism becoming more prenounced, gender stereotypes were challenged in the R&B music genre through artists such as Beyonce. For instance the simplistic nature of the female artist’s makeup, with natural lighting used adds a classier feel to the artist rather than being represented as an object. As their natural beauty is emphasised through close up shots used throughout the music video. Therefore, reflecting the rise of feminism in terms of female artists also dominating the music industry with male artists as well as.

Therefore, I am strongly interested in producing a media text which will either conform or subvert the conventions of the contemporary R&B music genre.

References:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contemporary_R%26B