The L Word actress Karina Lombard will take centre stage in Perth on Thursday 21 September to share her experiences on the award-winning TV series.

Lombard will chat about working alongside the biggest names in Hollywood in an exclusive Q&A session with fans. Lombard will be fielding fans questions at the Aviary from 7-9pm as well as discussing her time on the hit TV drama The L Word — which followed the lives and loves of a small, close-knit group of lesbians living in the Los Angeles suburb of West Hollywood.

- Advertisement -

While in town the actress will will be facilitating a two-hour wellness workshops in Cottesloe. The workshop will be presented twice on Wednesday October 20th, in the morning and afternoon.

She will then venture down to WA’s South West to host a two-day hands-on wellness workshop in Bunker Bay, which looks at shifting energy and connecting mind and body.

As well as her success playing Marina Ferrer in The L Word, Lombard has co-starred alongside movie stars Bruce Willis (Last Man Standing), Tom Cruise (The Firm) and Brad Pitt (Legends of the Fall).

She’s also appeared in the TV series NCIS, CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, Rescue Me and The 4400.

Karina Lombard began her career as a model in ad campaigns for designers such as Calvin Klein, Ralph Lauren and Donna Karan, she then went on to appear on the pages of countless fashion magazines including Vogue, Elle, Harper’s Bazaar, Cosmopolitan and dozens more.

Her first break in film came when director Oliver Stone cast her in The Doors, the biopic on the life of Jim Morrison and the legendary band.

After appearing in a few more films, director Sydney Pollack cast her opposite Tom Cruise in the action-thriller The Firm which also starred Gene Hackman and Hal Holbrook. She then co-starred opposite Brad Pitt in Legends of the Fall, which was followed soon thereafter by the Walter Hill film Last Man Standing opposite Bruce Willis, Christopher Walken and Bruce Dern.

When not acting, Lombard pursues her interest in spiritual wellness and gives classes on connecting mind and body and creating positive energy in order to improve one’s life and achieve goals.

Only 100 tickets are available for the exclusive meet and greet event which are $40 each. For more information on where to purchase tickets head to Eventbrite.

Karina Lombard, 7-9pm Thursday 20 September: Exclusive Meet and Greet Event, Location: The Aviary, Perth, get tickets from Eventbrite.

Wednesday 20 September

Two Hour Workshop: “What if the purpose of life is to have fun?”

Time: 10am – 12pm (2 Hour Workshop)

Location: The Wellness Centre, Cottesloe

Buy Tickets

Wednesday 20 September

Two Hour Workshop: “What if the purpose of life is to have fun?”

Time: 1pm – 3pm (2 Hour Workshop)

Location: The Wellness Centre, Cottesloe

Buy Tickets

Saturday 30 September & Sunday 1 October

Two Day Workshop: “The secret to eternal youth and beauty is being timeless”

Location: Bunker Bay

Tickets coming soon

OIP Staff

Update: 11-09-2017 This article was updated with a new date for the meet and greet event.