Fans have raved about a Liam Neeson movie that is so good that they claim they weren't able to take their eyes away from the screen. Irishman Neeson has become known as one of the leading action stars in Hollywood.

As well as early roles in the likes of Schindler's List and Star Wars, Neeson veered heavily towards action thrillers in the later part of his career. The Co Antrim native has become famous for roles in tense action flicks such as Taken and The A-Team.

There is one Liam Neeson action movie that fans have raved about and it is free to watch with an Amazon Prime membership. Memory stars Liam Neeson as an assassin-for-hire who finds that he's become a target after he refuses to complete a job for a dangerous criminal organization.

Liam Neeson was not a fan of his legendary Taken speech at first - and had one word to describe it

Liam Neeson film free on Amazon Prime now dubbed 'bone chilling' and a 'tremendous movie'

The film was released in 2022 and received mixed reviews. Currently, it stands at just 29 percent on Rotten Tomatoes.

However, not everyone thought the film was as bad as critics said. One viewer praised the film heavily in a review and said that they couldn't take their eyes away from the screen.

"The Story starts off as Liam Neeson who plays a contract killer is doing his job as he is hired to do, until he encounters a job that goes against his better judgement to kill children," writes Casey Wintons. "As the story progresses he find out that the person he is working for is in deep with sex traffickers, and he decides to take a stand aganst them.

"The story is action packed as it is emotional, I want to tell you how it ends but no spoilers as I am sure this is based on a true story somewhere, this is one story that may leave you in tears. Even as the righteous man I am I can not fight the feel of satisfaction I got when the end came. Five Stars!!! The sound track is very powerful towards the end.

"Trust me you will not take your eyes off the screen but I will say this watch it during a time when you will not be bothered by anyone in order to take in the entire story, from start to finish. Bravo Liam. Bravo."

For all the latest news straight to your inbox, sign up for our FREE newsletters here.

Another fan of the film said: "I like that this movie didn't depend on Liam Neeson to carry it through. Neeson good, and he plays an assassin who is rapidly advancing into full blown Alzheimer's. Guy Pierce is a perfect counterpunch as the good guy cop who is tracking him down. They are both strong performers in this movie."

A third wrote: "In the end if you're looking for fairly engaging (emotionally) story that has great cast and is fairly believable without an expectation of 100% real world portrayal, this fits the bill. If you're expecting "taken" type of movie this is not it. Liam is not age defying and, while he is still very much action figure and does indeed provide scenes with a fair amount of action in them, scenes have been humbled down in a way to allow him to be in them rather than using a much younger double (deepfake anyone?)."