Liam Neeson is an award-winning actor who has been internationally recognized for his work in both major studio blockbusters and acclaimed independent features. He has been honored for his depictions of three very different real-life figures. Neeson received Academy Award®, Golden Globe and BAFTA Award nominations for his performance as Oskar Schindler in Steven Spielberg’s 1993 Oscar®-winning Best Picture “Schindler’s List.”

Three years later, he played the title role in Neil Jordan’s biopic “Michael Collins,” earning another Golden Globe nomination and winning an Evening Standard British Film Award and the 1996 Venice Film Festival’s Volpi Cup for his impassioned portrayal of the Irish Republican hero. In 2004, Neeson starred as controversial sex researcher Alfred Kinsey in Bill Condon’s “Kinsey,” for which he garnered his third Golden Globe nomination and an Independent Spirit Award nomination, and won a Los Angeles Film Critics Award.

Liam’s most recent projects include Jaume Collet-Serra’s “Non-Stop”; “Run All Night”; “A Million Ways to Die in the West”; and “A Walk Among the Tombstones.” He also lent his voice to Open Road Film’s animated film “The Nut Job,” directed by Peter Lepeniotis; “The Lego Movie,” directed by Phil Lord; “The Prophet,” based on the classic Kahlil Gibran book; and Millennium Entertainment’s animated film “Khumba,” directed by Anthony Silverston.

He also starred in Peter Berg’s actioner “Battleship,” was Zeus in “Wrath of the Titans,” and starred in Joe Carnahan’s thriller “The Grey,” which topped the box office in its opening weekend. His film credits also include the hit crime thriller “Taken,” Jaume Collet-Serra’s thriller “Unknown”; Paul Haggis’ thriller “The Next Three Days”; “The A-Team”; “Clash of the Titans”; and “The Chronicles of Narnia: The Voyage of the Dawn Treader.”

Neeson starred in the box-office phenomenon “Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace” (1999). In addition, he starred in the screen adaptation of Victor Hugo’s “Les Miserables” (1998) in the role of Jean Valjean. Also that year, Neeson played Oscar Wilde in David Hare’s new play, “The Judas Kiss” which opened in London’s West End and subsequently on Broadway.

His other credits include “Ethan Frome” (1993) with Joan Allen, Michael Apted’s “Nell” (1994), starring opposite Jodie Foster and Natasha Richardson; “Before and After” (1996) with Meryl Streep; and the title role in Michael Canton-Jones’ “Rob Roy” (1995), co-starring Jessica Lange.