Joe Jonas is a man of many talents, and he lent more than one of them to Devotion, the Korean War movie starring Jonathan Majors that debuted this week at Toronto International Film Festival.

In the movie, Jonas not only plays a supporting role as Marty Goode (Vanity Fair’s review out of TIFF says Jonas “shines” in his scenes), but also co-wrote and performed the song “Not Alone,” which plays over the movie’s closing credits. He performs the song alongside Khalid, and Ryan Tedder and Harv are co-writers on the track, which Jonas says was inspired by the movie’s main characters, Jesse and Daisy Brown, who are based on real people and played in the film by Majors and Christina Jackson.

“I had a conversation with our director J.D. [Dillard] and he asked me to take a stab at writing the end credit song,” Jonas tells VF. “I was honored for the opportunity, so I wanted to put together some incredible collaborators such as Ryan Tedder and Harv along with my good friend Khalid to help bring this song to life. What made this truly special to me was being able to bring my passions of acting and music together for this film. It was a truly special experience to combine the two, which are normally very separate hats for me, and I was honored to do so.”

Jonas stopped by Vanity Fair’s studio at the Toronto International Film Festival to play a game of Six Degrees of Separation. Spoiler alert: he didn’t need all six.

Celebrity

Travis Kelce Was Stressed About Whether to “Curtsy” When Taylor Swift Introduced Him to Prince William

But William isn’t the royal he came away calling “a superstar.”

Hollywood

Here: Robert Zemeckis’s New Movie Spans a Century, but the Camera Never Moves

Tom Hanks and Robin Wright reunite the Forrest Gump team for a drama set entirely in one household’s living room.

Politics

Trump Suggests Biden’s Debate Prep Includes Cocaine and Steroids

These things are necessary when you’ve been claiming for years that your opponent is an elderly man who can’t string “two sentences together.”

Celebrity

Taylor Swift and Travis Kelce Reached New Heights With A Relationship First In London

I can do it with a broken eardrum.

Hollywood

Emma Roberts Says Seeing Aunt Julia Roberts’s Fame Changed Her Priorities

Seeing firsthand what supernova fame can do was “really scary,” according to the actor.

Politics

The GOP’s Abortion Albatross

Just as reproductive rights motivated voters in 2022 and 2023, new polling shows how Republicans’ crusade to control women’s bodies could propel Democrats in November.

Celebrity

Dave Grohl Just Picked a (Foo) Fight With Taylor Swift: “We Actually Play Live”

Both musicians played concerts in London over the weekend—live.

Television

Everything We Know About The Bear Season 3

All episodes of the Emmy-winning series hit Hulu on Wednesday, June 26, at 9 p.m. E.T.

Style

How Radha Arora Travels in Style

From a fairy-tale stay in Austria to polished airport attire, the Rosewood Hotels & Resorts president shares his favorite picks.