Singer Joe Jonas is best known for the Jonas Brothers. Actress Sophie Turner appeared on "Game of Thrones" and the "X-Men" film "Dark Phoenix."

Singer Joe Jonas filed for divorce from actress Sophie Turner on Sept. 5, 2023.

The “Game of Thrones’ actress sued the Jonas Brothers singer and DNCE lead singer to return their kids to England, reports show.

Couple purchased their Miami, Florida, mansion in 2019 for $11 million. It recently sold for $15 million.

Another beloved celebrity relationship has fallen victim to 2023's curse.

The status of Joe Jonas and Sophie Turner's divorce has been dominating headlines and feeds since the news was released Sept. 3.

The Jonas Brothers singer filed for divorce from the "Game of Thrones" actress in Miami-Dade County court on Tuesday, Sept. 5, according to court documents reviewed by USA TODAY. Since the announcement, every update has added another layer to this already complex situation, complete with alleged smear campaigns, lawsuits and … dinners with Taylor Swift.

Need an over-exhaustive guide to understanding Joe Jonas and Sophie Turner's relationship and divorce? Here's what to know.

Spilling the tea. Joe Jonas, Sophie Turner and when divorce gossip won't quit

Who is Joe Jonas?

Joseph Adam Jonas is a singer and graduate of the popular Disney Channel 2010's class, most known for making up 1/3 of the Jonas Brothers group. Jonas has starred in several movies and led his own band "DNCE" (pronounced like "dance").

Jonas is currently on tour with the Jonas Brothers as the band's largest tour to date is underway, with more than 90 shows across 20 countries scheduled.

Who is actress Sophie Turner of 'Game of Thrones' and 'X-Men?'

Sophie Belinda Turner is an English actress, making her acting debut in 2011 as "Sansa Stark" in the HBO fantasy television series "Game of Thrones." Dubbed as "the Queen of the North" from her hit show, Turner has since gone on to play young "Jean Grey" in the X-Men reboot series and become the face for luxury brand Louis Vuitton.

Turner was recently in England filming the upcoming British TV series "Joan."

How much older is Joe Jonas than Sophie Turner?

Since the news of their divorce, their age difference has come up as a potential factor as Joe is 34 years old while Sophie is 27. According to Cosmopolitan, the "Game of Thrones" actress and DNCE frontman first started dating when Sophie was only 19.

Turner commented on their age difference in an issue of Glamour UK in spring 2019: “I think once you’ve found the right person, you just know. I feel like I’m much older a soul than I am in age. I feel like I’ve lived enough life to know,” she said in the Glamour UK interview published March 7 of 2019. “I’ve met enough guys to know — I’ve met enough girls to know. I don’t feel 22. I feel like 27, 28.”

How did Joe Jonas and Sophie Turner meet?

While it's not known when the couple first met, Joe Jonas and Sophie Turner were first spotted together after attending the same Halloween party in 2016. Joe dressed up as a Dalmatian while Sophie stepped out as a rabbit.

They were then spotted them at a Kings of Leon concert in Rotterdam ahead of the MTV Europe Music Awards later that year.

When did Joe Jonas and Sophie Turner first become official?

They didn't declare their relationship to the masses until the start of the new year on Jan. 1 of 2017, Turner making their relationship "Instagram-official" when she posted a photo of Joe smoking a cigar on her account.

This started the wave of "Jophie" shippers for years to come.

When did Joe Jonas propose to Sophie Turner?

After less than a year of attending events and adopting a dog, Joe Jonas proposed to Sophie Turner in October 2017. They once again took to Instagram to announce their engagement, complete with matching photos and captions.

When did Joe Jonas and Sophie Turner get married?

It depends on which wedding you're asking about. Joe Jonas and Sophie Turner had two weddings in 2019 — a campy Las Vegas celebration right before the Billboard Music Awards in May and a classic French countryside festivity in July.

How many kids do Sophie Turner and Joe Jonas have?

The pair have two daughters together, a 3-year-old reportedly named Willa and another who was born in 2022.

When did Joe Jonas and Sophie Turner move to Miami, Florida?

According to People Magazine, Jonas and Turner moved to their $11 million Miami mansion shortly after selling their Los Angeles home in September 2021.

Speaking to Architectural Digest about the property in 2022, Sophie and Joe's interior designer Sarah Ivory said that they had wanted to remodel the space with a "classic '70s meets modern tropicalism" feel, with "color, lots of plants." It has six bedrooms and nine bathrooms, along with a 94-foot private dock with direct access to the bay and ocean, the story states.

Turner later told Elle UK she would ultimately like to live in England: "We're very lucky to live in Miami. We have good weather and live by the water," she shared, "I really love living in America but, for my mental health, I have to be around my friends and my family. And also for my daughter – I would love her to get the education and school life that I was so lucky to have. England would ideally be the final destination, but [Joe] might take quite a bit of convincing."

They would end up quietly selling their home for $15 million last month.

When did Joe Jonas file for divorce?

Joe Jonas filed for divorce from Sophie Turner on Sept. 5, 2023. According to Turner's lawsuit, she found out about Joe Jonas filing for divorce through the media.

The following day, the couple spoke out in a joint statement with posts to both of their Instagram accounts: "After four wonderful years of marriage we have mutually decided to amicably end our marriage," they wrote. "There are many speculative narratives as to why but, truly this is a united decision and we sincerely hope everyone can respect our wishes for privacy for us and our children."

Why is Joe Jonas filing for divorce?

According to documents, the petition states, “The marriage between the parties is irretrievably broken” and asks to split custody of their two young daughters as “it is in the best interests of the minor children.”

The file also confirmed the former couple have a prenup in place, over two weeks before the announcement of the divorce.

What was said about Sophie Turner following the divorce filing in Florida?

Joe Jonas is being accused of launching a "misogynistic smear campaign" against Turner since the news of the separation, with sources close to the pair highlighting the actress in a negative light.

Sources close to the musician told TMZ that they had conflicting lifestyles. "She likes to party, he likes to stay at home," the insider said.

However, some fans have been expressing skepticism about the claims that Turner "likes to party" by sharing old comments Turner made in a 2020 interview with Conan O'Brien, where she referred to herself an a "homebody," and to Joe as a "social butterfly."

It was also said the divorced was filed after seeing Sophie either say or do something in footage from their Ring camera. Neither party has confirmed or denied this.

How does Taylor Swift come into Joe Jonas-Sophie Turner divorce case?

After two weeks of nonstop divorce coverage, Turner was spotted with Swift in New York City on Sept. 18 on their way to dine at Italian restaurant Via Carota, a hot spot for Swift sightings according to USA TODAY.

Why is this a big deal? Taylor and Joe dated years ago and broke up in 2008, around the time she was recording her "Fearless" album. It's said that the pair ended with an infamous 25-second phone call from Jonas.

In 2021, Sophie jokingly commented on Swift’s vault track “Mr. Perfectly Fine” off her rerelease album "Fearless (Taylor’s Version)," which is said to be about Jonas. She shared a screenshot to her story listening to the song with the caption, “It’s not NOT a bop.”

Why is Sophie Turner suing Joe Jonas?

Turner filed a lawsuit against Jonas on Sept. 21 for allegedly refusing to return the pair's children to England amid their divorce.

She claims in a lawsuit in the southern district of New York that she met with the Jonas Brothers singer on Sept. 17 where they were "to discuss their separation," according to documents obtained by USA TODAY.

Jonas is disputing the claims, his rep said in a statement to USA TODAY on Thursday, Sept. 21, alleging a Florida court has issued an order blocking either parent from relocating their children. USA TODAY has obtained and reviewed a copy of the court order.

Full breakdown of Turner's lawsuit: Sophie Turner sues for return of 2 children, ex Joe Jonas disputes claims amid divorce

Turner alleges that the children were supposed to be returned on Wednesday, Sept. 20 , but Jonas has withheld their daughter's passports and "refuses to send the children home to England." Jonas' rep Jeff Raymond said in the statement that: "Joe and Sophie had a cordial meeting this past Sunday (Sept. 17) in New York, when Sophie came to New York to be with the kids. They have been with her since that meeting."

Jonas alleges that if he complies with Turner's request to let the children go to England, he "will be in violation of the Florida Court order."