The Westfield Washington School district is looking to acquire more than 95 acres of land on Westfield's western edge for a middle school and, farther in the future, an additional elementary school.

The district's concept plan, which was presented to the Westfield City Council in early December, shows mockups of two school buildings, parking lots and athletics fields on the parcel of land at the northeast corner of Centennial Road and State Road 32.

Westfield Washington Schools found the parcel while working with a real estate agent to identify properties available for additional facilities, Brian Tomamichel, an assistant superintendent and chief financial officer for the district, said.

"Since 2018, we've done pretty significant additions to our intermediate, middle and high school and that's really allowed us to kind of work through the increasing enrollment these last several years," Tomamichel said.

The middle and intermediate schools campuses, located next to each other and about five miles away from this parcel, are nearing capacity so a middle school on the property is part of early plans, he said.

"As we look at these next several years, we're really kind of hitting that fork in the road of, We have to start making decisions today to ensure that we're not bursting at the seams in the next three years, four years," Tomamichel said.

The land is priced at $62,000 per acre, a total of about $5.9 million, according to the district.

If the purchase goes through, Westfield Washington would need to issue a bond to complete it and likely another one for building any schools on the land, Tomamichel said.

In November, Westfield voters renewed an operating referendum, which does not impact this project or purchase, Tomamichel said. The proposed land purchase and subsequent building projects can be done without an increase to the tax rate, he said.

Westfield's operating referendum:Westfield passes operating referendum renewal; 1 of 8 districts with tax hike on ballot

The land purchase is not finalized, Josh Andrews, spokesman for Westfield Washington Schools, said. Members of the public will be given opportunities to weigh in on how Westfield Washington can address this possible expansion, he said.

If all goes well, the purchase could be finalized by spring, Tomamichel said.

"We're working through the zoning process with the city to make sure that we can construct the school on it before we execute the purchase agreement and purchase the property," Tomamichel said.

The land is among the last planned unit developments, or PUDs, in the area that have been untouched for years, Westfield City Council President Mike Johns said at the council's Dec. 12 meeting. The surrounding land is primarily agriculture.

“I think this is a huge win for the city,” Johns said. “When we as a council started three years ago, one of our big concerns was some of these old PUDs that have been laying out there for 10-15 years without any action being taken on them.”

According to documents filed with the Westfield City Council, these future developments require a change of zoning request to allow for school uses. The land, which was previously zoned as part of the Towne Road Crossing development in 2007, permitted multifamily residential and retail developments.

Westfield Washington Schools have experienced consistent population increases over the last several years and projections show more children are expected.

So far this school year, there are 9,087 students enrolled in the district, almost 200 more students than projected in a demographics study completed last year.

The school district will share a virtual presentation about overall growth and plans for this parcel at 6 p.m. Jan. 29 on the district's Youtube channel. Prior to the presentation, the district's parent and community group, Shamrock Academy, will be able to hear the presentation and offer feedback.

A community discussion, specifically about the land, will be held at 6 p.m. Jan. 23 at Maple Glen Elementary.

Rachel Fradette is a suburban education reporter at IndyStar. Contact her at rfradette@indystar.com or follow her on Twitter at @Rachel_Fradette.