The surname Ellicombe was first found in Devon at Ellacombe, a place under the Haldon Hills, where the 'de Ellacombes' were resident in 1306 1

In Wiltshire, Elcombe dates back to the Domesday Book of 1086 when it was known as Elecome. 2 Literally, the place name means "valley where elder trees grow," or "valley of a man called Ella." 3

More recently it is a "tything, in the parish of Wroughton, union of Highworth and Swindon, hundred of Elstub and Everley" 4 but now is a hamlet in Wroughton.

Ellicombe Spelling Variations

Until quite recently, the English language has lacked a definite system of spelling rules. Consequently, Anglo-Saxon surnames are characterized by a multitude of spelling variations. Changes in Anglo-Saxon names were influenced by the evolution of the English language, as it incorporated elements of French, Latin, and other languages. Although Medieval scribes and church officials recorded names as they sounded, so it is common to find one person referred to by several different spellings of his surname, even the most literate people varied the spelling of their own names. Variations of the name Ellicombe include Ellacombe, Ellicombe, Ellicomb, Ellacomb, Elcom, Elcum, Elcomb, Elacombe, Elacomb, Ellcum and many more.

Migration of the Ellicombe family

Searching for a better life, many English families migrated to British colonies. Unfortunately, the majority of them traveled under extremely harsh conditions: overcrowding on the ships caused the majority of the immigrants to arrive diseased, famished, and destitute from the long journey across the ocean. For those families that arrived safely, modest prosperity was attainable, and many went on to make invaluable contributions to the development of the cultures of the new colonies. Research into the origins of individual families in North America revealed records of the immigration of a number of people bearing the name Ellicombe or a variant listed above: settlers, who arrived along the eastern seaboard, from Newfoundland, to Maine, to Virginia, the Carolinas, and to the islands.