Vesta M. Roy, the first woman to serve as New Hampshire's governor and as president of its State Senate, died Saturday (Feb. 9, 2002) in her Kenmore home after suffering a heart attack. She was 76.

Mrs. Roy was born Vesta Coward in Dearborn, Mich., in 1925. She attended public schools in Dearborn.

When she tried to enter the military during World War II, she was rejected for being too young. So she crossed the border and joined the Royal Canadian Air Force, which had less-stringent age requirements, serving as a radio operator.

She married Dr. Albert L. Roy in 1945.

Mrs. Roy began a long and impressive career in New Hampshire politics when she served as the Salem, N.H., supervisor of checklists. She later served on Salem's Board of Selectmen and as a Rockingham County commissioner.

Mrs. Roy was elected a New Hampshire state representative and, later, a state senator.

Listen now and subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Google Podcasts | Spotify | RSS Feed | SoundStack | All Of Our Podcasts

She was the first woman to serve as president of the New Hampshire State Senate. She became the first woman to serve as New Hampshire's governor when she was named acting governor upon the death of Gov. Hugh Gallen.

Mrs. Roy was a campaign adviser in her state to former Presidents Gerald R. Ford, Ronald Reagan and George Bush and was a delegate to Republican presidential conventions on many occasions.

She was named the New Hampshire woman of achievement in 1983, and the Daniel Webster Council Boy Scouts of America named her its New Hampshire distinguished citizen in 1986.

In addition to her political work, Mrs. Roy was a frequent world traveler and a prize-winning painter and quilter.

She moved to Kenmore in 1999 and attended St. Paul's Catholic Church.

In addition to her husband, who lives in Kenmore, she is survived by four sons, David of Kenmore, Greg of Atkinson, N.H., James of Bangor, Maine, and Donald of Woodland Hills, Calif.; a daughter, Nancy Wood of White River Junction, Vt.; two brothers, Tom Coward of Las Vegas and James Coward of Kirkland, Wash.; 12 grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren.

A funeral will be held at 9:30 a.m. Wednesday in St. Paul's Church, Delaware Avenue and Victoria Boulevard, Kenmore. Burial will be in St. Joseph's Cemetery, Lowell, Mass.

[S/Watson].

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.