Name

Introduction: Lin Zexu was a Chinese scholar-official of the Qing dynasty. In 1839, he wrote this open letter to Queen Victoria, urging her to end the opium trade.

After a long period of commercial intercourse, there appear among the crowd of barbarians both good persons and bad, unevenly. Consequently, there are those who smuggle opium to seduce the Chinese people and so cause the spread of the poison to all provinces. Such persons who only care to profit themselves, and disregard their harm to others, are not tolerated by the laws of heaven and are unanimously hated by human beings. His Majesty the Emperor, upon hearing of this, is in a towering rage. He has sent me, his commissioner, to come to Kwangtung, and to investigate and settle this matter.

All those people in China who sell opium or smoke opium should receive the death penalty. We have however received a specially extended favor from his Majesty the Emperor, who considers that for those who voluntarily surrender can be excused them from punishment. But as for those who again violate the opium prohibition, it is difficult for the law to pardon them repeatedly.

Having established new regulations, we presume that the ruler of your honorable country, who takes delight in our culture and whose disposition is inclined towards us, must be able to instruct the various barbarians to observe the law with care. It is only necessary to explain to them the advantages and disadvantages and then they will know that the legal code of the Celestial Court must be absolutely obeyed with awe.

We find that your country is sixty or seventy thousand li [3 li equals one mile] from China. Yet there are barbarian ships that strive to come here for trade for the purpose of making a great profit. The wealth of China is used to profit the barbarians. That is to say, the great profit made by barbarians is all taken from the rightful share of China. By what right do they then in return use the poisonous drug to injure the Chinese people? Even though the barbarians may not necessarily intend to do us harm, yet in coveting profit to an extreme, they have no regard for injuring others.

Let us ask, where is your conscience? I have heard that the smoking of opium is very strictly forbidden by your country; that is because the harm caused by opium is clearly understood. In the London metropolis where you dwell, as also in Scotland, Ireland, and other such places, no opium whatever is produced. Since it is not permitted to do harm to your own country, then even less should you let it be passed on to the harm of other countries - how much less to China!

Source: Chinese Repository, Vol. 8 (February 1840), pp. 497-

Who is Lin referring to when he says the ³EDUEDULDQV ́&quot; a. An ancient tribe b. Chinese peasants c. Americans d. Europeans

According to Lin, what punishment should an opium dealer receive? a. 20 years in prison b. The death penalty c. Life in prison d. Exile from China

1.

2.