Dallas Mavericks legend and NBA champion Jason Terry joined CBS Sports Radio’s Zach Gelb recently to talk about his former team, what’s going on around the NBA and more. Here are some of the highlights.

Donnie Nelson out after 24 years. Rick Carlisle not coming back. How’d you react to all those changes last week?

Terry: “I’m a huge Donnie Nelson Jr. Fan. He was here in Dallas in 2004. When I was here, he was as an assistant coach under Donnie senior. He gave me my biggest contract in my career. And he’s a friend. Not only was he a business partner, but he was a friend. And I hate to see him leave. But I mean, he’ll go down as one of the greatest GMs the Mavericks have ever had. He did great things, obviously, bringing Dirk, bringing Luka. I mean, he’s bar none, he’s, he’s a top exec in all of basketball. And then seeing Carlisle go I mean, hey, that’s my NBA championship coach. I mean, he’s taught me so much about the game, the X’s and O’s of the game. He was a mad scientist when it came to matchups and putting players in position to succeed. So he had a great run. I wouldn’t put it past anyone to see coach Carlisle in the near future on another bench in the NBA. He’s that valuable to our league and he’s one of the good ones. So you know, the Dallas Mavericks franchise, you know, Cuban, he’s ultra-competitive. He’ll make sure he puts the right people in place, would love to see Michael Finley in that GM seat, he’s a good friend of mine. Obviously, Dirk is back involved now. So they’ll be in good hands they’re under good leadership. And you know, the Mavs got a great young star in Luka. They continue to build around him and we’ll see them making deep runs in the playoffs as well.”

Do you have confidence that Luka is going to stay with the Mavericks?

Terry: “It’s always interesting when you see articles and you see people put things out there but you never see direct quotes from Luka himself. And me knowing Luka the way I do is he’s a hooper. But he’s not concerned about what management got going on and analytics and all that. He’s a hooper. And if you watched him in these playoffs, you understand that. Right now he’s busy in Slovenia, getting ready for the Olympics. And so I know, and trust, you know, Cuban, and the powers that be to do the right things to put the necessary pieces around him. And you know, he loves the city of Dallas. I mean, that’s the city, that gave him his start. And when you watch him play, he wears the city on his chest and on his back. He’s all in when it comes to Dallas. So I don’t buy into the rumors. And I haven’t seen anything or heard anything of it from his end.”

What would your message be to Kristaps Porzingis? Because I don’t think he seems to be happy in Dallas.

Terry: “Well the one thing about it is you always want to self-reflect and look at what can I do to help the team, the organization, the franchise be better? And for him, he just has to remain healthy. I mean, I don’t think he’s played a full season since he’s been in the NBA. And so a healthy Kristaps Porzingis is a very, very viable second guy next to Luka. He’s very valuable on the defensive end but offensively, he stretches the floor. I just think, you know, for him, he has to get healthy. You know, he has to be healthy and feeling confident and good about himself. And I think they can make it work, man. I mean thing about it is if they continue to go through the pitfalls of the rigors of the NBA season and playoff series, the fire will burn deep enough that you’ll want to get out there and get to it. But you know, I’d hate to see him go. But again, this the NBA, it’s a business and they’re going to do whatever they have to to make their team better.”

Jason Terry, can you just speak a little bit more? Did you and Dirk not get along at first and how’d you smooth that over?

Terry: Well, you know, for Dirk, you got to look at what transpired. I mean, Steve Nash was not brought back by management. They didn’t give them the contract that he was looking for. And so they brought me in to kind of take his place, fill the shoes, so to speak. You know, that was Dirk’s best friend, a guy that he came to the Mavs and grew up with, and they did everything together. So you know, I had to win Dirk over. But the only way you can win a superstar over like Dirk is you have to earn his respect. And for me, I only earned it on the floor and I earned it off the floor. You know, late-night shooting sessions. When he’s down at the other end, I’m on the other end shooting, and he’s looking down there he sees me making shot after shot, putting that work in and then he sees it carry over to games where he knows he can look down and see me and count on me in the fourth quarter when the game’s really on the line. So I earned his respect over the years and eventually it translated into a championship and our relationship has been like the big brother-little brother ever since. So it’s great, man. Like I said, I would never have the amount of success in my career without playing along somebody, a Hall of Famer, like Dirk.”

Haralabos Voulgaris’ contract is up after this postseason. Do you think the Mavs should bring him back? Do you know anything about him?

Terry: “Don’t know much about him. Know about his history, the legend, so to speak. In Vegas, I heard he was pretty good at what he did. But other than that, don’t know much about him.”

If the Mavericks call you, do you think you can be a head coach right now?

Terry: “One-hundred percent. That’s definitely on my bucket list and goals of dreams to come true. But when you put all the X’s and O’s aside, it’s about managing people. Are you a people person? Can you get people to buy in to your system and fight for one cause and the betterment of the team? For me, that’s kind of what I did my whole career. Selfless guy, sacrifice for the betterment of the team and always brought guys together.”

Click here to listen to the full interview.

+++

Related:Why Michael Finley is likely the Dallas Mavericks’ next president of basketball operations

Related:Report: Masai Ujiri, Danny Ainge ‘not being pursued’ by Dallas Mavericks

Related:Are the Luka Doncic-Cade Cunningham comparisons legit? Experts say yes, thanks to Mavs star’s innovation