Forrest Tucker, a veteran actor of film, stage and television, died of cancer Saturday at the Motion Picture and Television Hospital and Country Home in Woodland Hills, Calif. A resident of Los Angeles, he was 67 years old.

Mr. Tucker played in more than 50 films in a motion-picture career that began in 1939 and spanned almost four decades. In recent years he was probably best known for his portrayal of the comicly scheming Sgt. Morgan O'Rourke, a cavalry soldier, in the 1960's television series ''F Troop.''

As a stage actor his feats included three and a half years of touring with a national company of ''The Music Man'' in the late 1950's and early 1960's, in the starring role of Prof. Harold Hill.

His long movie career saw him in a variety of films ranging from light comedy (''Auntie Mame'' with Rosalind Russell) to war (''Sands of Iwo Jima'' with John Wayne). Many Roles in Westerns

Tall (6 feet 5 inches) and ruggedly handsome, he was frequently cast in Western films and in fact got his start in ''The Westerner,'' with Gary Cooper and Walter Brennan.

Mr. Tucker was born on Feb. 12, 1919, in Plainfield, Ind. He got his first job in the entertainment field at the Gayety Burlesque Theater in Washington.

Lying about his age, he did a two-year stint in the Army in the field artillery before returning to the Gayety and deciding to work there nights while he attended high school in Arlington, Va.

His wandering spirit eventually took him to Hollywood, where a screen test landed him in ''The Westerner''.

Mr. Tucker's film credits included ''The Yearling,'' ''Never Say Goodbye,'' ''Keeper of the Flame,'' ''Canal Zone,'' ''Chisum'' and ''Fighting Coast Guard.'' His Latest Films

His more recent films included such comedies as ''The Night They Raided Minsky's,'' with Elliott Gould, in 1968, and ''The Wackiest Wagon Train in the West,'' in 1976.

He was married three times. The first marriage ended in divorce. His second wife died.

He is survived by his wife, Sheila; two daughters, Brooke and Cynthia of Los Angeles; a son, Sean, of Los Angeles; a sister, Mrs. Betty Hitchcock of Los Angeles; his mother, Mrs. Doris Patton of Los Angeles and a granddaughter.

A memorial service will be held Saturday at the Church of the Hills in Forest Lawn Cemetery in Burbank, Calif.