How to charter a private flight from London Biggin Hill Airport?

London Biggin Hill Airport is located in the London borough of Bromley, which is situated in the southeast of Greater London, and is used solely for private aviation. The airport has its own executive terminal allowing quick, easy and discrete access for passengers. London Biggin Hill Airport is one of just 3 commercial airports operating within the confines of the M25.

London Biggin Hill Airport field was originally opened during the First World War, and the Royal Flying Corps were based there from 1917. During the Second World War, the airport was one of the commanding bases for the Battle of Britain, and was attacked many times during the war. After the closure of the original London Airport in nearby Croydon, much of the civilian air traffic moved to Biggin Hill which became a joint civilian and military airport. London Biggin Hill Airport waxs purchased by the local council from the RAF in 1974 and then leased to a private firm in 1994.

What facilities are available at London Biggin Hill Airport?

For aircraft, a comprehensive service wrap is available including jet washing, deicing and refuelling services. Emergency technical support and maintenance is also available. London Biggin Hill Airport is open from 0630 – 2300 hrs on weekdays and 0800 – 2200 hrs on weekends and public holidays. For passengers and crew, 2 VIP lounges are located within the Executive Terminal building, The Ambassador’s Lounge and The Club Lounge,which afford great views of the airfield. Additional facilities available from the fixed base operators include showers, conference rooms and a gift shop. Customs and immigration facilities are based on-site. London Biggin Hill has a ‘SkyPets’ team, consisting of experienced pet handlers, who will do all the necessary checks as soon as you land and in your presence, in order that you continue with your pet on your onward journey, with minimal waiting times. For late arrivals, or those looking to stay over, more than 20 hotels are conveniently located near to London Biggin Hill Airport. In addition to the airports close proximity to central London , it is also within a short distance of Canary Wharf and Epsom Downs Racecourse.