Bio

Einstürzende Neubauten, formed in West Berlin in 1980, is one of the few German bands which export worldwide a genuine impulse. The group was originally composed by singer Blixa Bargeld (stage name for Christian Emmerich) and percussionists Mufti F.M.Einheit (Frank Strauss) and N.U.Unruh (Andrew Chudy), and is one of the most important pop experiments known internationally as well as an icon for an entire generation.

Einstürzende Neubauten’s first album (the name of the group comes from the German language and it means “new buildings that fall”) is Kollaps (1981), which was a strike against the mainstream way of listening to music. Their musical instruments were made of metal sheets, drills, or hammers that dominated over the rambling lyrics. All of this not only was the fundamental element of the band’s musical production but was also an introduction to a new way of understanding music and listening to it.

The second album of the group was Halber Mensch (1985), which had a more linear structure despite the extreme heterogeneity of sounds. Subsequently, Einstürzende Neubauten went on a promotional tour and collaborated with Sonic Youth, an experience that led them to record and publish Fünf auf der nach oben offenen Richterskala (1987),an album closer to the sonorities of the American band and with a more fascinating and foley sound.

The band’s following album was Haus der Lüge (1989), which was published after the fall of the Berlin Wall. For this reason, the lyrics of the songs became more engaged politically, less complicated, and free from complex allegories.

In 1993 Einstürzende Neubauten published Tabula Rasa, after which the band suffered a period of crisis that ended with the addition of Jochen Arbeit and Rudi Moser to the group’s formation and the release of Ende Neu in 1996.

After a long period of inactivity, Einstürzende Neubauten recorded and released several new albums such as Silence is Sexy (2000), Perpetuum Mobile (2004), Alles wieder offen (2007), and The Jewels (2008), in which the group tried to find a new balance between silence and noise.

In 2014 they published Lament which was a reminiscent project: the band took inspiration from the First World War and decided to restore some old tapes of the war prisoners convicted in one of the first big concentration camps near Berlin.

After Gründstuck (2018), Einstürzende Neubauten published Alles in Allem in 2020, a collection of ten tracks that wandered between memories, dreams, fragmentations, and explorations in what can be interpreted as a musical journey in between past and future.

To promote the release of the album, Einstürzende Neubauten programmed four concerts to be held in May 2021 – which were rescheduled in May 2022 due to Covid-19 emergency- in major Italian cities such as Turin (Teatro Colosseo), Milan (Alcatraz), Bologna (Auditorium Manzoni) and Rome (Auditorium Parco della Musica).

website

Share