Milo M. Unruh, Jr. was born in Wichita, Kansas. Mr. Unruh, Jr. received his Bachelor of Science degree in 1976 at Kansas State University graduating cum laude. He was a member of Sigma Phi Epsilon fraternity where he served as President. He earned his Juris Doctor with honors in 1979 from the Washburn University of Topeka where he was a member of Phi Delta Phi legal fraternity. Mr. Unruh, Jr. was admitted to the bar in 1979.

Mr. Unruh began his law career with this firm in 1979 and has earned an “AV” rating from the Martindale Hubbell Law Directory, the highest rating which can be achieved. Mr. Unruh co-authored the law review article “Suppression of In-Court Identification Testimony on the Basis of a Fourth Amendment Violation”, Washburn Law Journal 21-2.

Mr. Unruh is a member of the Kansas Bar Association and Wichita Bar Association. He has and is currently serving on the Wichita Bar Association Ethics and Grievance and Real Estate committees. He is licensed to practice in Kansas State Courts; Federal District Court for the District of Kansas; and the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals.

Mr. Unruh has litigated multiple cases in both state and federal courts and has prevailed on both oral arguments and written briefs before the Kansas Appellate Courts. Currently, Mr. Unruh’s practice focuses primarily on corporation and business law, real estate law, estates and employment law.

Kris J. Kuhn was born in Wichita, Kansas. Mr. Kuhn earned his bachelor’s degree in Business Administration, cum laude, in 1981 at the University of Kansas. He earned his Juris Doctor in 1984 from the University of Kansas law school where he was selected as a member of Order of the Coif. Mr. Kuhn was admitted to the bar in 1984 and is currently licensed to practice in Kansas State Courts; Federal District Court for the District of Kansas; 10th Circuit Court of Appeals and the United States Tax Court.

Mr. Kuhn began his law career with this firm in 1984 and enjoys Martindale Hubbell Law Directory’s high “BV” rating for lawyers reflecting exemplary professional expertise, experience and stature.

Mr. Kuhn is a member of the Kansas Bar Association and Wichita Bar Association.

Roger K. Wilson was born in Great Bend, Kansas. Mr. Wilson earned his bachelor’s degree in 1963 at the University of Kansas where he was a member of Sigma Nu fraternity and was active in student school activities including being chairman of the campus political party Vox Populi. He earned his Juris Doctor in 1966 from the University of Kansas law school where he was a member of Phi Delta Phi legal fraternity. Mr. Wilson was admitted to the bar in 1966 and is currently licensed to practice in Kansas State Courts; Federal District Court for the District of Kansas; 10th Circuit Court of Appeals and the United States Supreme Court.

Mr. Wilson began his law career with this firm in 1966 and has earned the Martindale Hubbell Law Directory’s highest “AV” rating.

Mr. Wilson has represented corporate and individual clients since 1966 in the areas of eminent domain, business formations, oil and gas matters, probate, estate planning, trusts, guardianship and conservatorships; family law; and civil litigation; He has been a speaker at probate administration and estate planning seminars.

Mr. Wilson is a member of the American Bar Association; Kansas Bar Association; Wichita Bar Association and the Wichita Estate Planning Council. He has and is currently serving on the Wichita Bar Association Probate and Civil Practice Committees.

Mr. Wilson is an Elder at Eastminster Presbyterian Church and Past Chairman of the Sedgwick County Chapter of the March of Dimes.

John C. Nodgaard was born in Omaha, Nebraska. He received his Bachelor's Degree in Economics and his Masters of Science in Finance and Accounting with Honors from Wichita State University where he was a member of Omicron Delta Epsilon, Psi Chi and Beta Gamma Sigma honor societies. Mr. Nodgaard was also a member of Kappa Sigma fraternity, where he served as President and Treasurer, and Alpha Kappa Psi, professional business fraternity. He subsequently received his certification as a Certified Public Accountant in Kansas and Oklahoma. He received his legal education at Washburn University of Topeka where he was a Member of the Board of Editors, Washburn Law Journal. Later he earned a Master of Arts in Air and Land Warfare with Honors from the United States Army Command and General Staff College.

Mr. Nodgaard has co-authored three legal publications: Administrative Law; “Modifications of Natural Gas Price Formulas,” Washburn Law Journal, Vol. 15-3, “Community Property in a Common Law Jurisdiction, A Seriously Neglected Area of Law,” Washburn Law Journal, Vol. 16-1 and “Suppression of In-Court Identification Testimony on the Basis of a Fourth Amendment Violation,” Washburn Law Journal, Vol. 21-2. Mr. Nodgaard has been formally recognized for his outstanding service to the Judicial System by the Kansas Bar Association.

Mr. Nodgaard has been a member of the Wichita, Kansas and American Bar Associations, The Association of Trial Lawyers of America; Kansas Trial Lawyers Association; American Association of Attorney-Certified Public Accountants and the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. He has also served as an Adjunct Professor of Finance at Wichita State University. He is licensed to practice in the Courts of the State of Kansas, the United States District Court for the District of Kansas, the United States Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals and the United States Tax Court.

Mr. Nodgaard has litigated multiple cases in both state and federal courts and has prevailed on both oral arguments and written briefs before the Kansas Appellate Courts and the Kansas Workers’ Compensation Appeals Board. Currently Mr. Nodgaard’s practice focuses primarily on civil litigation, estates, family law and workers’ compensation. In workers’ compensation he represents claimants, employers, insurance carriers and state insurance funds. He also serves as a Special Administrative Law Judge for the Kansas Division of Workers’ Compensation.

Mr. Nodgaard enlisted in the U.S. Army following high school. After being released from active duty, he continued his military career serving in the U.S. Army Reserve. He received his officer commission in January, 1973. During his military career, he served in Southeast and Southwest Asia and Europe. He is a graduate of the U.S. Army’s Infantry School; Finance School; Adjutant General School; Nuclear, Biological and Chemical Warfare School; United States Department of Defense Defense Information School; and the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College. During his military service he received numerous decorations, award and citations. After 37 years of military service, he retired at the rank of colonel.