For the second time in his career, Channing Frye is going home.

The Birthplace

On May 17, 1983, Channing Frye was born approximately an hour's drive away from Madison Square Garden in the city of White Plains, New York.

Fast forward 22 years later to the night where Channing Frye finally became a millionaire.

On June 28, 2005, the New Yorks Knicks made Channing Frye's dream come true by drafting him with the 8th overall pick in the NBA Draft.

It was a tense moment until the Toronto Raptors announced that they were drafting Charlie Villanueva out of the University of Connecticut. The fear was that they were going to draft Channing Frye before the New York Knicks could.

In the end, Channing Frye was able to play for his hometown team.

Sent Away

Exactly two years after he was drafted by the team, Channing Frye was traded by the New York Knicks to the Portland Trailblazers during the 2007 NBA Draft.

The New York Knicks traded guard Steve Francis, Channing Frye, and a future second round draft pick to the Portland Trailblazers in exchange for Dan Dickau, Fred Jones, Demetris Nichols, and Zach Randolph. It was basically a trade where the two teams traded away their biggest headaches (Steve Francis and Zach Randolph) for the other team's biggest headache.

Channing Frye was all the way across the country now.

The Teen Years

When his contract ended, and he was given the choice as to where he wanted to play, Channing Frye decided to sign with a team whose city he grew up in.

The 6'11", 250 forward/center has decided to return to Phoenix. Channing Frye signed a 2 year deal with the Phoenix Suns worth almost $4 million.

In high school, he attended St. Mary's High School, which is located in Phoenix. After high school, he attended the University of Arizona in nearby Tucson. Having spent a lot of time there during his formative years, Channing Frye does have a soft spot for Phoenix.

That was one of the key reasons why he chose to return to the city.

Fitting In With The Suns

The bigger reason why Channing Frye chose to sign with the Phoenix Suns is because he's such a good fit for the team.

After a season in which the team struggled to get into gears because the starting center was unable to keep up with the high paced offense, Steve Kerr and company began to look for quicker front line players. They needed someone that was much faster and more athletic than Shaquille O'Neal.

Despite being blessed with tremendous size, Channing Frye was also blessed with superb athletic abilities. He can run the floor better than most frontline players; that ability should serve him well with a point guard like Steve Nash. Channing Frye is also capable of hitting the perimeter shot.

Minutes shouldn't be too hard for Channing Frye to come by. Amare Stoudemire is going to get as many minutes as he can handle at one of the forward spots (with Channing Frye getting the backup minutes behind him). That means that Channing Frye only has to compete with the inexperienced Robin Lopez for minutes at the center spot.

Channing Frye was really looking to join a team that played an up tempo offense. He feels that it fits his skills better. It was even enough to get him to turn away from the lure of playing with LeBron James and Shaquille O'Neal in Cleveland (Cavaliers play a much slower pace than the Suns).

Closing Thoughts