Hi, Kathyrn.

I may have some exciting news for you. Please keep in mind that this is unverified and very preliminary information. Also, I have a few issues with the information. Nevertheless, it's a good starting point.

According to the Norman families stories and written by Terry Headley,

the Normans were the fourth family to establish themselves in Milton,

New Jersey. They came from Cornwall, England.

John Peter Norman immigrated to the United States and settled in Albany, NY. From Albany, he came to Sparta, New Jersey with seven of his brothers, one of whom was William Norman. John and William built and operated a forge on the outlet of Morris Pond, located on Sparta Mountain, Sparta, New Jersey.

------------------------------------------------------

Other notes:

John Peter Norman came from Cornwall, England about 1740-1750. He first

settled in Albany, NY in Orange County. After that he relocated to

Warwick, NY in Orange County where he opened an iron and forge shop and

farmed. In 1777 he enlisted in the New York State Militia for the Revolutionary War and was commissioned as a Captain in the Orange County New York Regiment.

=============================================

The issues I have are with some of the seemingly inaccurate early locations.

Albany, NY has never been in Orange County, NY. The city of Albany and its home county of Albany was one of the original counties of New York State. Orange County was also an original county in NYS, and is located about 120 miles south of Albany County. If there was ever a town called "Albany" in Orange County, NY, I couldn't find it.

However, John Norman's town of Warwick, Orange County, NY is on the New Jersey border. There is also city name Orange in New Jersey. Sheesh! -- Couldn't these people come up with original names for new towns and cities so it wouldn't be confusing? :-)

Dear Debbie:

Thank you for all that information. You've done so much work and taken so much time that I'm embarrassed to tell you that the family has done much of that work. The whole genealogy of our John in America has been kept up......our problem is looking backward to how he got here....the ship he came on with his brothers....the actual parish he was born in in Cornwall...we haven't been able to find his birth records or his brothers in Cornwall however we did find a Norman family in Padstow with our name pattern...but their records seem to stop at 1674...and John was born abt. 1737.

William Mecabe, our cousin, was commissioned by the government to write a book on the history of the Normans in New Jersey. I had been in touch with Bill in the 60s'....but more has been found. I have a copy of Bills' book. I am out of Johns' youngest child, James.

John was a Captain in the Sterling Company in Warwick, N.Y. He married in Orange County in 1762 to a Rachel-------( it just has her last name as Norman on the record.) Yes, he was prolific...the Normans always had large families. A couple of his sons, Oliver and Peter had 16 each! My own father came from a family of 9.( His mother died young!)

One of the cousins recently found a record of land deeds of 1774 (before the Rev.War) which listed much acreage purchased by Oliver and William Norman (his brothers) in Sparta. William was a Cpl. killed in the war. I don't know what happened to Oliver. At this time John was in Warwick, N.Y., just over the N.J. border but in 1782 he was found in Sparta, New Jersey. His last 5 children were born in Sparta, New Jersey. He apparently joined his brothers and built the forge. Sparta and Milton was the "seat" of the Norman clan.

As far as Albany, N.Y. goes....I haven't been able to find any of our Normans there at that time. I looked at all the Church records and couldn't find John...though the Normans were religious (Protestants).If he did land in Albany, N.Y. he gradually migrated South to Warwick,then Sparta, N.J.. That was my question...where could they have landed? Which Port? Where did they embark? Apparently Cornwall...but could it have been Plymouth? I understand that part of Plymouth was ,at that time, Cornwall...or did they embark at Padstow...where they had passengers on log ships going to Canada? If the Padstow Normans are ours (and we think they possibly are)...there were mariners in the family (John Norman the elder b.abt. 1580 and his son John,b. 1600) did they have connections to a private ship? Where else in Cornwall was there an embarkation point at that tiy Oliver and William Norman (his brothers) in Sparta. William was a Cpl. killed in the war. I don't know what happened to Oliver. At this time John was in Warwick, N.Y., just over the N.J. border but in 1782 he was found in Sparta, New Jersey. His last 5 children were born in Sparta, New Jersey. He apparently joined his brothers and built the forge. Sparta and Milton was the "seat" of the Norman clan.

There is an Orange County, N.Y. (where Warwick is) and an Orange, New Jersey which is much further South.

One of the names which seems to be important in our family is the given name of Oliver. It was in every generation of the Padstow Normans and was prolific in ours. At that time Oliver was not a very popular first name. The Padstow family had it as well as a Norman family from Kent...and there was an Oliver Norman in Parracombe, Devon in 1545. These were the only Oliver Normans I found at that time. The other given names were popular...especially John and William!! Hundreds!

So, Debbie, this is my brick wall! I don't know if there's any help for my search but all suggestions are very welcomed and I can't thank you enough for the work you have done on my behalf! I'm grateful for your time and good-heartedness!!

Peace!

Kathryn

Thank you so much, Debbie! I appreciate it....by the way...as far as the Malitia records go the National Archives in Washington told me that the State has the records....but it seems there was a fire in Warwick, but there is supposed to be copies in Albany. But my cousin did get into the DAR through the records of our John in the History books, etc, and she was the first to do so. I don't know about pensions...but Johns' firstborne son ,Oliver, was said to have a "military grant " for land on Jersey Ridge, in Muskingum, Ohio....Hopewell Township. He was too young for the Rev. War (13) when it started...but it may have been the War of 1812 or he could have joined in the Rev. War later. Bill Mecabe said that the relative who told him this had seen the actual Military grant.

When I think of our ancestor, Rachel ,raising all those children while there was a war going on in the town of Warwick, N.Y. and never losing any...I consider the courage of these women left at home to be monumental! The suffering was so great in this area...with the Malitia having rags for shoes,almost no food , and Tories going into the homes and murdering...even Col. Hathorn, himself, tried to offer his resignation...but it was refused. Tough times to live through!

Thanks again, Debbie. I look forward to hearing from you!

Peace!

Kathryn

Kathryn, you're right about tough times. I know that I can't imagine being left with so many children when my husband went off to war -- managing the home and the husband's work too. Phew!

Whenever I'm tempted to complain about some minor inconvenience, I stop and think about how easy we have it compared to our ancestors.

As far as a young one going to war -- my 6th great grandfather joined the Continental troops from Massachusetts at the ripe old age of 15. He was at several battles. It was a fairly common phenomenon, even up to through the 2nd half of the 1800s. Actually, you even hear about young men who lied about their ages to join the military in WWI and WWII. But they were probably much less selective -- and much less strict -- about age requirements back in the 1700s. :-)

I spent a couple of hours at a library tonight and was going through the indexes of various records for the entire Albany area, encompassing the years 1624 thru 1898. Grantors, grantees, mortgages, and court records. I could not find too many Normans, and none that fit yours.

Then I happened to think that your John Norman was a child when he came here. Now that I'm posting this reply, I can't see the earlier posts. I'll go back and reread when finished. But let's just check a few facts. Please fill in any information that won't be found above.

John was born around 1743 in Cornwall and arrived here about 1750, give or take a few years. Therefore, he would have been traveling with his parents. What were their names? (Again, don't answer if you supplied that info earlier.)

We know that John was in Orange County, NY by 1762 because that is when and where he married Rachel. That makes him less than 20 years old when he left Albany, so it's no surprise that there are no land records for him. I did find some Albany records for an Elizabeth Norman -- she granted property to another female Norman -- but I didn't know if she was related. [Continued on next post]

The library also had many volumes devoted to passenger lists. As we previously discussed, there were no regulations back then that required ships to keep passenger lists. If they did keep lists, they may have only recorded the name of the head of the family. If the given name of John's father was also "John" then I didn't find him. If the name is different then I can go back and look again. I wanted to check out more of the collection anyway, and this would be a great opportunity to do so.

My subscription has finally been renewed and I looked to see if I could find a Revolutionary War pension claim for John, his brothers, or any of his sons. There was no luck there, but that only means that no one applied for the pensions.

I will spend the next 7-10 days checking out libraries. If that fails, I'll go to the State archives. But I have learned that it's best to have as much background information as possible before going there. They have wonderful records and collections but, when you are well-prepared with background information, the search can be more specific and ambiguities can be easily eliminated, which leaves you more time to search for additional information in other collections.