Yul Edochie is a Nigerian actor, film director and politician. He began his professional acting career in 2005 and has grown to become a Nollywood superstar.

He established the Yul Edochie Academy in 2015 in order to improve the professionalism in the Nollywood industry by training the next generation of actors and actresses. Also, in 2018, he was appointed as a senior special assistant to the governor of Anambra state.

See Also: Jidenna – Biography and Story of a Classic Man.

Yul Edochie Biography

Yul Chibuike Daniel Edochie was born on January 7, 1982 as the last of six children. He was born to a veteran actor, Pete Edochie and his mother Josephine, a broadcaster. He hails from Anambra State, Nigeria. Yul was named after a popular Hollywood actor, Yul Brynner who acted in movie, King and I in 1956.

In 1984, Yul started his education at Lillians’ Day Nursery School. Later on, he moved to Robinson Street Primary School, Enugu. Then, he proceeded to Marist Brothers’ Juniorate, Uturu in 1992 and three other secondary schools in Enugu until he graduated in 1998. Similarly, for his university education, he attended the University of Port Harcourt and bagged a B.A degree in Theatre Arts.

See Also: Biography and story of a talented Nigerian Actress, Adesua Etomi.

Yul Edochie Personal Life

Edochie got married in 2004 at age 22 to May Aligwe, and the union is blessed with four children: 3 boys, 1 girl. He lives with his family in Lekki, Lagos.

He gave his life to Christ shortly after escaping death in a ghastly motor accident along Ore road in June 2019.

See Also: Jide Kosoko – Biography, early career and net worth of a veteran actor.

Yul Edochie Early Career

His career in the industry began after relocating to Lagos from Enugu in 2005. When he arrived Lagos, for proximity to movie locations, he moved in with Nonso Diobi who housed and fed him. His intention was to hustle and become a big wig in the industry. And Luckily, that same year, he debuted in The Exquires together with Late Justus Esiri and Enebeli Elebuwa.

Then, in 2007, he rose to stardom after featuring in the movie Wind of Glory together with Genevieve Nnaji and Desmond Elliot. Since then, Yul has gone on to act with other prominent artistes like Patience Ozokwor, Mercy Johnson, John Dumelo, Olu Jacobs, Osita Iheme, Chinedu Ikedieze and many more.

See Also: Biography, movies and net worth of an ace Nollywood actress, Uche Jombo

Movies

As a film director, writer and actor, some of his films include;

Sleek Ladies, 2007

Wind of Glory, 2007

Keep it Up, 2008

Kiss my Pain, 2008

Tears of Hope, 2009

My Loving Heart, 2009

Unstoppable, 2010

Sarafina, 2011

Pleasure and Crime, 2011

Zone 9, 2012

Bridge of Contract, 2012

The End is Near, 2012

Against the Law, 2012

Death Certificate, 2013

Restless Soul, 2013

Agony of a Princess, 2013

Money Kingdom, 2013

Apostles of Lucifer, 2014

The Mirror, 2014

Python Queen, 2014

Dowry Man, 2015

Dooshima, 2015

Brothers of War, 2015

Compound Fools, 2015

Royal Maid, 2015

Rain of Hope, 2016

The Affectionate Wife, 2017

Passion of a Prince, 2017

The Man Keeper, 2017

Loving Your Hurts, 2017

Mysterious Family, 2017

The Billionaires, 2018

Moms at War, 2018

See Also: 100 profitable business ideas to start for aspiring entrepreneurs and investors.

Awards and Recognition

He is an award winning actor, and some of his awards are;

Best New Actor of the Year, (English), City People Entertainment Awards, 2009

Best Actor, Papyrus Magazine Screen Actors Award (PAMSAA), 2013

Best Actor of the Year (English), City People Entertainment Awards, 2013

Best Lead Male, Nollywood Movies Awards

Best Actor, Afrifimo Awards

See Also: 12 online business ideas that you can start from home and become rich.

Yul Edochie Academy

Yul Edochie Academy was founded in 2015 by Yul Edochie as a subsidiary of his Art World. The Academy is a training ground for aspiring actors/actresses. In the academy, students are trained by Yul himself and are presented with numerous opportunities.

The academy was founded as result of deterrence in quality and professionalism of the youngsters in the industry. Yul’s goal is to build an army of focused and professional actors and actresses and steer them towards greatness.

See Also: RMD – Biography of an iconic Nigerian Actor, Richard Mofe Damijo

Politics

Yul declared his intention to run as a Governor of Anambra State on July 14, 2017. This was shortly after the Not Too Young to Run Bill was passed by the Nigerian Senate. To confirm his intention, he picked up the nomination form under the Democratic People’s Congress (DPC) on August 22, 2017. Luckily, he became the party’s gubernatorial candidate but lost in the general election.

Then, on July 6, 2018, he was appointed Senior Special Adviser on creative and entertainment media by the Governor of Anambra State, Gov. Willie Obiano.

See Also: 9 business funding opportunities for women owned business in Nigeria.

Yul Edochie Net Worth

Currentschoolnews.com estimated Yul’s net worth at $1.85 million. In July 7 2019, He emerged a brand ambassador for a Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO), Citizen Journalists Network.

See Also: Femi Kuti – Biography and net worth of a legendary Afrobeat icon.

Yul Edochie Quotes

“The moment you find yourself discussing people you are already failing; you are losing valuable time. Discuss ideas, discuss ways to promote your business/your talent, discuss your future, how to better your environment.”

“…The power to change your life lies in your hands.”

“I always thought our problem was our leaders till I joined politics and realized the people are also a big part of the problem.”

“For you to achieve you MUST respect those who have achieved before you.”

“We have 24hrs in a day. No matter how busy you are, devote at least 1hr to God in prayers. I recommend you do it before you start your day’s hustle.”

“Life can end in a second. The money, the cars, the mansions, the fame, the good life, all vanity. Be close to God. God is everything.”

“If you are good at something, never do it for free.”

“One of my success tips: I mind my business.”

“Rough times only come to test you. Rough times don’t last, but tough people do.”

See Also: Joke Silva: Biography, business life and movies of an ace Nigerian actress.

Entrepreneurial Lessons From Life Of Yul Edochie

Try Out New Things

In one of Edochie’s interview, he explained how he changed from playing lover boy’s role into playing other technical roles. Obviously, he is ever willing to take up new challenge in his professional journey.

Also, for entrepreneurs, we should note that we need to always unveil new concepts to our customers as life itself is dynamic.

Hardwork And Commitment

Just like any successful entrepreneur, Yul reiterated that he didn’t reach the peak of his career by riding on the fame and popularity of his father, Pete. Rather, he maintained that he got to the peak of his career through hard work and commitment.

Entrepreneurship is a lonely journey, let us help you get through it with our services.

Photo Credit/Source: Latest Naija.com, Wikipedia, Austine Media, Pulse.ng, Kamdora, Instagram, Punch Newspapers and PM News.