Description

Yul Chibuike Daniel Edochie (known as Yul Edochie) was born in Lagos, Nigeria on January 7th, 1982 to veteran acor, Pete Edochie of Oyi local govrnment area of Anambra State, and his wife, Josephine Edochie. Named after popular Russian actor Yul Brynner, he is the last of his parent's six children.

Yul Edochie Age

Yul Edochie is 39 years old.

Yul Edochie Early Life

Yul spent the better part of his early life in Lagos and Enugu. Between 1884 and 1992, he attended Robinson Street Primary School and Lillians’ Day Nursery School, both institutions located in Enugu. In 1992 to 1998, he joined and successfully pursed his secondary school education in four different schools, both located in Enugu. They include New Haven Boys Secondary School Enugu, University Secondary School Enugu, Marist Brothers’ Juniorate, and Ecumenical Community Secondary School Enugu. He graduated in 2003 with a B.A degree in Theatre Arts at the respected University of Port Harcourt (NYSC).

Yul Edochie Career

Yul has not only participated in acting but is also interested in other endeavors. He has an academy under his name in Lagos opened in 2015. The primary goal of starting this academy was to boost the declining professionalism and quality of forthcoming actress and actors in Nigeria. He aims to personally train and introduce the future Nollywood actors to the country’s film industry by himself.

The journey to the success of his career has been very long and challenging. In 2005, he joined Nollywood staring in his first film named “The Exquires” but his breakthrough came in 2007 following his performance in the film “Wind of Glory”.

In 2017, Yul ran an unsuccessful bid to become the Governor of Anambra State under the Democratic Peoples Congress. In April 2018, he declared his intention to vie for the office of the president at the 2019 general elections.

Yul Edochie Personal Life

Yul Edochie is happily married and has 2 sons and a daughter. He got married to his wife, May Aligwe Edochie in 2004 when he was 22years old. He has a matching elder brother and also a famous Nollywood movie director, actor, film maker, and producer, Linc Edochie.

Yul Edochie Awards

Yul has won numerous awards including 2009 Best New Actor Of The Year (English) at the City People Entertainment Awards, 2013 Best Actor at the Pamsaa Awards and 2013 Best Actor of the Year (English) at the City People Entertainment Awards.

Yul Edochie Net Worth

His net worth is not available.