Isaac Hayes, the singer and songwriter whose luxurious, strutting funk arrangements in songs like “Theme From ‘Shaft’ ” defined the glories and excesses of soul music in the early 1970s, died Sunday in East Memphis, Tenn. He was 65.

The Shelby County Sheriff’s Office said Hayes’ wife, Adjowa, found him collapsed near a treadmill at their home in Cordova, an eastern suburb of Memphis, and he was pronounced dead an hour later. The cause of death was not known.

With his lascivious bass-baritone and flamboyant wardrobe, Hayes developed a musical persona that was an embodiment of the hyper-masculine, street-savvy characters of the so-called blaxploitation films of the era.

His theme song to Gordon Parks’ “Shaft” in 1971 won an Academy Award and has become one of his best-known songs. But Hayes’ career stretched far beyond soundtracks. For much of the 1960s and into the ’70s he was one of the principal songwriters and performers for Stax Records, the trailblazing Memphis rhythm-and-blues label, and in the 1990s he revived his career by providing the voice for the amorous and wise Chef on the cable television show “South Park.”

Isaac Hayes was born Aug. 20, 1942, in a tin shack in rural Covington, Tenn., to a mother who died early and a father who left home. He was raised largely by his grandparents, and worked in cotton fields while going to school.

In the mid-’70s, Hayes’ finances collapsed and his music turned explicitly to disco, which turned out to be a career dead end. Through the 1970s and into the ’90s he acted in several films, including “Escape From New York” in 1981 and the spoof “I’m Gonna Git You Sucka” in 1988. His music from this era sold poorly, but his career revived in 1997 when he began playing Chef on “South Park.” A Scientologist, he quit the show in 2006, saying he had been offended by an episode that ridiculed Tom Cruise and other prominent Scientologists.

Hayes had been married three times previously. In addition to his wife, he is survived by their son, Nana, and 11 other children.