Foundation Problems & Issues

Living in Colorado has its perks, like those majestic snow-capped peaks sitting on the horizon, an abundance of parks and trails for hiking, and of course, year-round skiing. But due to the dry climate and varying weather and soil conditions, foundation issues can occur. The important thing is to identify these problems before it’s too late.

Get a free on-site inspection and cost estimate by a licensed professional by using the form below or review general information about foundation issues that home and commercial property owners in Colorado typically encounter and how you should go about mitigating them.

Settling and Sinking Foundation

All homes tend to settle to an extent, but some Colorado homeowners may experience extreme foundation settlement or sinking that can threaten the stability of their home, especially along Front Range cities like Colorado Springs, Pueblo, Boulder, and Fort Collins.

Here are signs that your foundation is sinking or settling:

Cracked sheetrock

Sticky doors and windows

Cracked tile or flooring

Misaligned trim or molding

Leaning walls

Cracks in exterior or interior walls

Water leakage

Gaps around doors and windows

Cracks in foundation

Leaning chimneys

Cracks in Foundation

A cracked foundation can be an unsettling discovery, but it is an unfortunate reality for Colorado home and business owners. Sometimes, settling soil is the culprit, while other times, soil moisture is to blame. You can read more here about the causes of cracked foundations. If you notice cracks in your foundation, give us a call and we’ll come out to assess the issue free of charge with no obligation.

Wet Basements

The American Society of Home Inspectors estimates that 60 percent of U.S. homes have wet basements, and Colorado is no exception. Of course, water can ruin the carpeting and furniture of your finished basement. But even if your basement is unfinished, excess moisture can ruin the flooring of the level above. As with all foundation problems, a wet basement should be repaired as quickly as possible.

Sagging Floors

Older homes can sometimes suffer from sagging floors. Usually, floors slope towards the center of the home, away from the foundation that supports the perimeter. Extreme sagging is often caused by decaying support beams or posts, so make sure that these are intact as not to risk further structural damages to your home.

Bowed Walls

Often, foundation walls will become “bowed” before they crack. Even if a bowed foundation wall has not yet cracked, it may still indicate that your home is not structurally sound. Bowed walls are a common problem in Colorado, and are often the first sign of serious foundation trouble, so don’t take them lightly!

Identifying Foundation Cracks and What to Do About Them

Foundation cracks in Colorado can be result of settling foundations, expansive soil, every-changing climate conditions, or even something as simple as a large tree next to the base of your home. Sometimes these cracks can be hairline cracks and seemingly minor. Other times they are bigger and expand across a larger area and can become rather dangerous, like sinkholes. Cracks can run diagonal, vertical, or horizontal. If you have discovered foundation cracks in your home or commercial building, it is important to get an assessment quickly to avoid more serious issues.

Call us today!

If you believe that your home or commercial building is showing signs of any of the above foundation-related problems, call us at (720) 202-7015 (Denver) or (719) 650-9573 (Southern Colorado) to set up a free, no-obligation inspection. Give yourself peace of mind knowing that your loved ones and most cherished possessions are safe.

Causes of Foundation Cracks – What to Look For and How to Fix Them