Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario – Born Yesterday, Garson Kanin's classic comedy and one of the most popular and longest running post-war comedies in American theatre, opens this Saturday, May 22nd at The Shaw Festival Theatre in Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario.

Arriving in Washington D.C., Harry Brock (Thom Marriott), a nouveau riche garbage king, is convinced that with money and a zeal for power, he can "run the men who run the country". Harry's only problem seems to be his very blonde and brash girlfriend Billie Dawn (Deborah Hay) – she's just not smart enough. He decides she needs an education to get "culturefied". But he gets more than he bargained for as she and her tutor (Gray Powell) prove that knowledge is power, not to mention very attractive!

From its opening run at the Lyceum Theatre in 1946, to the 1950 film that made actress and comedian Judy Holliday a star, to recent productions, Born Yesterday has not lost the lustre of its relevancy or the wit of its repartee. Largely borrowing the core of the story from Pygmalion by Bernard Shaw, Kanin's story of the brazen blonde broad from Brooklyn with a heart of gold, who eventually realizes the value of knowledge and her awakened sense of self, continues to gleefully combine delightful romance with pointed political comment.

Directed by Toronto director, actor and playwright Gina Wilkinson

,Born Yesterday also features Donna Belleville, Patrick Galligan, Lorne Kennedy, Ali Momen, Prince Amponsah, Beryl Bain, Anthony Bekenn, Ijeoma Emesowum, Al Kozlik, Peter Millard, Craig Pike and Jonathan Widdifield.Designed by Sue LePage, the production also features lighting design by Alan Brodie and original music and sound design by Keith Thomas. The Shaw Festival stage management team includes Stage Manager Allan Teichman, Production Stage Manager Judy Farthing and Assistant Stage Manager Amy Jewell.

Born Yesterday opens Saturday, May 22 and plays in repertory until Sunday, November 1. Born Yesterday is sponsored by Sun Life Financial.

To find out about Niagara-on-the-Lake vacation packages or purchase tickets for the 2009 Shaw Festival Season, call locally 905-468-2172 or toll free 1-800-511-SHAW (7429) or visit www.shawfest.com.

About the Shaw Festival | Inspired by the brilliance, bravery, humanity and humour of George Bernard Shaw, the Shaw Festival is a crucible of progressive and provocative ideas, which illuminate our understanding of today's world. The Shaw's playbill, centred on the era of Bernard Shaw (1856-1950), covers a diversity of views that shine light on different worlds during a period of extraordinary shift. Please visit our website at www.shawfest.com for other Shaw Festival media releases.