Manila, October 27, 2023 – IDinsight was honored with a Bronze Award at the Healthy Pilipinas Awards for Partners 2023. This recognition was granted by the Philippine Department of Health (DOH) in collaboration with the Galing Pook Foundation during an event that celebrated contributions to health promotion and literacy.

The Healthy Pilipinas Awards for Partners 2023 recognized the efforts of organizations and individuals who consistently support the DOH Health Promotion Framework Strategy with its seven priority areas. This award is specifically for partners of the DOH Health Promotion Bureau who have made meaningful contributions to health promotion in three key areas: Healthy Governance, Healthy Settings, and Health Literacy.

IDinsight’s achievement results from our ongoing partnership with the DOH on the National Health Promotion and Literacy Longitudinal Study (HPLS). The HPLS is a five-year study that involves gathering data on knowledge, attitudes, and practices (KAP) of a nationally representative panel to inform DOH’s Health Promotion Framework Strategy and achieve goals under the Universal Healthcare Act. The data and evidence IDinsight gathers through this study will help DOH at the national and sub-national levels to develop high-impact policies and programs for improving health promotion, prevention, and literacy among Filipinos.

“What we’re really looking forward to is continuing to build up data over the next coming years that can be used to make as impactful decisions as possible to inform each of (the seven health) pillars, and hopefully can be shared with all partners (of the Department of Health),” says Alice Redfern, Associate Director, IDinsight.

IDinsight is proud to be recognized for our commitment to this important research project, which contributes to improving public health in the Philippines. Our partnership with the Philippine Department of Health is dedicated to advancing their health promotion goals and creating a healthier future for Filipinos.