If someone told me the only device I could ever use for the rest of my life was an iPad Air, I'd probably cry. In theory, its versatility sounds wonderful. I can use it like a laptop during the workday and like a TV when I wind down in the evening. In practice, it's hindered by the frustrating software that is iPadOS. The thought of only ever using the iPad is enough to make me clutch onto my MacBook for dear life.

The fifth-generation tablet packs the same speedy M1 chip as Apple's MacBooks and desktop computers, making it more powerful than ever for both content creators and gamers. This new version also gets an upgraded front-facing camera, a faster USB-C port, and 5G connectivity. Even with these new guts, the price starts at $599, which is the same amount as the last iPad Air. But in order to get your full money's worth, it's crucial to make sure your day-to-day tasks would truly benefit from the added performance and features—and that iPadOS is up to the challenge.

Familiar Physique, Subtle Tweaks

Back in 2020, the iPad Air received a long-overdue makeover. Apple added a bigger, nearly bezel-free display; integrated Touch ID into the top button while ditching the home button; swapped a proprietary Lightning port for an industry-standard USB-C port; and added fun color options like sky blue, green, and rose gold.

The 2022 iPad Air sports nearly the same bezel-free design, a 10.9-inch display with 500 nits of brightness, a Touch ID top button, USB-C port, 12-megapixel rear camera, and an array of vibrant colors. And while repetition is typically prone to criticism, the iPad Air’s redesign is still fresh enough that this new Air doesn't feel boring. The colorful tablet has a sleek look that begs to be carried around without a case.

But if you do want to use a case for additional protection, Apple's proprietary smart connector on the back allows you to magnetically attach the iPad to Apple's Smart Keyboard, Smart Folio, and Magic Keyboard. And since the new iPad Air has the exact same dimensions as the 2020 version, you won't have to buy new accessories if you're upgrading.

It's also worth noting that if you want to get the most out of your slim new computer and enjoy the complete iPad Air experience, you'll have to splurge for the Magic Keyboard ($299) and second-generation Apple Pencil ($129). Adding those things to the $599 64-GB iPad Air brings your total to $1,028. Meanwhile, the M1-powered MacBook Air starts at $999. So you might want to look into third-party accessories.

Apple made a few changes to the exterior that are not obvious to the naked eye. For starters, it comes in new colors, including pink, purple, blue, and Starlight (a light champagne color). If you’re looking for a more muted tone, you can opt for the traditional Space Gray. The USB-C port is twice as fast as the previous version, which speeds up transfers of large files and photos from other devices.

There’s also now a 12-megapixel ultrawide front-facing camera (up from 7 megapixels on its predecessor), complete with Center Stage—making Apple's intelligent framing software for video calls a standard feature that’s now available on all iPad models. The camera's sensor automatically pans and zooms to help keep you (and other humans) in the frame during FaceTime calls, as well as apps like Zoom and WebEx. If you move around, the camera follows you. It’s supposed to help offset the awkward angle of the iPad's camera, which sits at the side of the device when the iPad is in landscape mode, the orientation that's most natural for video calls. But no software can fix that weird angle. It's too extreme, and Apple will have to physically move the camera to undo that problem. Until then, I’ll have to continue looking off to the side—and apologizing for the awkwardness—during video calls.

Center Stage is more useful if you’re on FaceTime while cooking, cleaning your room, or even doing your makeup. That way, you don’t have to constantly move the iPad around with you. But it’s not as helpful when you’re sitting at your desk, because it can be super sensitive at times. During Zoom calls for work, the camera has a tendency to wiggle around if I’m adjusting my seating position in my chair or pan to the side if I’m reaching for my coffee cup. It’s awkward, and slightly nauseating if you’re sensitive to that kind of stuff. Thankfully, you can turn it off whenever you’d like.

The iPad Air comes with 5G connectivity. It doesn't have support for the faster millimeter-wave 5G service, but it supports the more prevalent sub-6 5G networks, which give you a slight speed boost over LTE. To get the 5G connectivity you will of course have to purchase the cellular model of the iPad Air, which starts at $749. On top of that, you'll need a cellular plan.

Change Comes From Within

Externally, the new upgrades to the iPad Air are slightly incremental. But the same can’t be said for the internals. Apple swapped its A-series chipset (found in both the iPad and iPad Mini) for a beefier M1 processor. That’s the same silicon that powers the iPad Pro, MacBook Air, MacBook Pro, and the 24-inch iMac. Apple claims the M1 is 60 percent faster than the A14 chip that powers the 2020 version of the iPad Air, and that its graphics output is twice as fast.

So what exactly does that mean for the performance? It depends on what you’re using the iPad Air for. If you’re someone like me who uses it only for tasks like browsing the web, writing stories, taking notes, answering emails, and watching Netflix, then it's unlikely you'll notice a crazy boost in performance between the A14 and M1 chips. Apps might load a little more quickly and feel a bit snappier, but it's not a wild difference.

The boost will be more noticeable to content creators who use the iPad for more intensive tasks like editing batches of RAW images, working with 3D objects, rendering designs, and for any type of job where having extra cores (and therefore, extra power) is imperative for a smoother workflow. If you're a creative professional who's new to the iPad lineup, it's important to make sure the mobile versions of the apps you use are fully optimized for the tablet—especially if you're used to working off the macOS versions. Otherwise, you might lose out on certain functions or run into workflow hiccups that will force you back to your iMac or MacBook.

Mobile gamers will also benefit from better graphics performance. Even with the M1 chip, battery life remains the same: 10 hours of web browsing on Wi-Fi or watching video. During my testing, I used the iPad Air for about four to five hours a day, with the screen at 50 percent brightness. I used apps like Spotify, Chrome, Messages, Google Docs, YouTube, and Telegram, keeping them open simultaneously. I would routinely end up with 45 or 50 percent battery life after the five-hour mark. If you're using Apple's native apps (like Safari and Apple Music), you'll likely see even better battery life.

iPadOS Fanatics Only

Apple touts that its iPad Air's performance is up to twice as fast as the “best-selling Windows laptop in its price range.” And that would be impressive if the iPad Air didn't run iPadOS.

When paired with the Magic Keyboard, the iPad Air mimics the feel of a laptop—touchpad, cursor support, and all. But I really wish Apple would have included a more touchscreen-friendly desktop-style OS similar to macOS, especially now that the tablet packs an M1 chip.

Regardless of how long I've been using iPadOS 15, I'm tired of being forced to memorize specific gestures and to be picky about the apps I'm splitting the screen with. Even though I could easily accomplish all the same tasks on the iPad Air as I could on the MacBook Pro—I wrote most of this review on the tablet—it felt like I was working in slow motion. I was constantly second-guessing gestures, hunting for open tabs, and adjusting app windows.

Don't get me wrong, the iPad Air is a highly capable tablet with plenty of power, solid battery life, and a lightweight and portable design. The versatility is also a plus, giving me the ability to switch between using the same device as a laptop, a notepad, and a TV. But I'm willing to give that all up in exchange for a MacBook laptop with intuitive, proven software.

If you're a fan of iPadOS who's comfortable with its particular quirks, and you feel like the M1 chip will benefit your workflow, then it's a great option. For those looking for a good iPad that's compatible with a wide range of keyboard cases, then the eighth-generation iPad ($329) is more than enough iPad for you. As for me, I prefer to work comfortably and quickly. So for any serious tasks that require lots of switching between (and fiddling around within) various apps, I'll stick with my MacBook Pro.