The Gambler Review: A True Story Came to Life

Regardless if you are a gambling fan or not, The Gambler review will provide an enticing topic for a variety of movie enthusiasts out there. Following a true story, the film takes you inside the secret life of a blackjack gambler. Read our The Gambler review to learn more.

What Is the Gambler Movie About?

Released on January 1, 2015 and distributed by Paramount Pictures, The Gambler is a movie about a literature professor who leads a double life by the casino blackjack tables at night. The movie’s director is Rupert Wyatt. Famous actor Mark Wahlberg stars as the main character, Jim Bennett.

The film belongs to the drama/crime genre and explores the topic of addictive gambling. It also offers a bit of action for those who like fast-paced movies. There is also a love story for the fans of romance.

The Gambler: Movie Plot

Naturaly, we will begin our The Gambler review by describing the plot. We hope we do not include too many spoilers and keep your interest high. The Gambler portrays the intriguing story of Jim Bennett – a literature professor by day and an avid gambler at night.

While he teaches the great literary works to young people and earns a decent living, Bennett also searches for high-adrenaline adventures by night. His love for gambling leads him to the blackjack tables at Mister Lee’s casino. As you might have guessed, his taste for high stakes casino gambling and expensive thrills leads Bennett into trouble.

The literature professor soon falls into debt, and becomes prey to a few dangerous people. In the meantime, he falls for his student Amy. The blonde is a young girl, who also lives a double life. During the day, she attends the college where Bennett teaches. At night, she works as a cocktail waitress at the casino the literature professor frequents.

The Gambler: Memorable Female Characters

Amy seems to have a taste for the bad guys and falls in love with Bennett. However, the romance between the two of them seems rather complicated thanks to all the trouble the gambler has gotten himself into. Thus, Amy is bound to get involved into situations she may have not expected.

Another interesting female character in The Gambler is Bennett’s filthy-rich mother. The part is played by celebrated actress Jessica Lange. She appears tough on the outside and bitterly scolds her son for his addiction and lack of good judgement. However, she goes to the bank to get $240,000 to clean one of his debts.

The Gambler’s Male Roles: A Brilliant Play

As for the male characters, The Gambler has a stellar trio of supporting male actors. John Goodman, Michael K. Williams, and Alvin Ing make a great performance. Ing plays Mr. Lee, to whose casino the gambler is indebted. Williams is another gangster called Neville, who is sort of a mentor to Bennett.

All three of them perform brilliantly, but Goodman is definitely the most fun of them. He plays his entire part shirtless and swears quite a lot. He appears in the role of a parochial character, from whom Bennett borrows money.

As for Wahlberg, he has gotten into his character pretty well. He has a pale and unhealthy expression, but still manages to be cocky and escape in the face of danger. His intelligence shines through the clever schemes he makes to evade his enemies and get out of trouble.

The Critics’ Verdict

The critics have been fairly divided in their The Gambler reviews. Some claim the movie is more suitable for the action genre and does not fully correspond to the drama criteria. Others rate it highly and praise the fast-paced screenplay.

Critics also widely differ in their evaluation of Wahlberg’s play. While the majority find his character quite likeable, the rest do not estimate his performance as plausible enough. In any case, even if he does not play the part, Wahlberg at least looks it.

Interesting Facts about The Gambler

The Gambler is the modern-day remake of the 1974 movie of the same name. The original film was directed by Karel Reisz and starred James Caan as the gambler. Both the movie and the main character were very well accepted by the critics. The plot was penned by screenwriter James Toback.

Interestingly enough, The Gambler is based on a true story. This was revealed many years after the original was released. In 2011, screenwriter Toback published an essay, where he said that he wrote the script describing his personal experience.

Toback revealed that after graduating from Harvard in 1966, he began leading a double life, just as his main character. In his daytime, he would teach literature and writing at a prestigious CCNY program alongside other famous writers. At night, however, he would gamble at the local casinos.

In an attempt to make sense out of his experience, Toback started writing The Gambler. Initially plotted as a novel, it then evolved into a movie script. This is how the 1974 film was born. Toback included in it a lot of original experiences and dialogues from his life as a casino gambler.

The Gambler: Frequently Asked Questions

Now that you have read our entire The Gambler review, you know the major details about the movie, the plot, and the characters. We have also included a few interesting facts to make your experience more fulfilling. In addition, you will find below a brief FAQ section containing the most important highlights.

1️⃣ When was The Gamber released?

The Gambler officially entered movie theaters on January 1, 2015. The film is a remake of the 1974 production of the same name. The Gambler review tells the story of literature professor Jim Bennett, who is a keen gambler and his passion is about to ruin his life.

2️⃣ What happens to Jim Bennett?

Jim Bennett, who teaches literature to talented young students, also likes to enjoy gambling at night. Unfortunately, this habit turns into more than a pleasant way to pass the time, and he falls into debt. Some dangerous people are after him, and he needs to escape them.

3️⃣ Who does the Gambler fall in love with?

The Gambler, or Jim Bennett, falls in love with the female character Amy. She is a college student who works as a cocktail waitress at night. Amy is employed by the casino that Bennett frequents, and has a crush on him. However, the couple is about to encounter some challenges.

4️⃣ Who are the famous actors in The Gambler?

The Gambler boasts a stellar cast. Mark Whalberg plays the Gambler himself, while Jessica Lange is his mother. The three supporting male parts are also played by top famous actors. The male cast includes John Goodman, Michael K. Williams, and Alvin Ing.

5️⃣ Is The Gambler based on a true story?