The Gambler is a hollow, overwrought and glibly cynical remake of a '70s drama about a self-destructive academic.

Mark Wahlberg stars as Jim Bennett, a college English professor with a penchant for high-stakes blackjack games. Bennett is so self-absorbed, unethical and unlikable that it's hard to care what happens to him as he dodges (and takes beatings from) men to whom he owes hundreds of thousands of dollars. He hardly seems to care, so audiences shouldn't either (* ½ out four; rated R; opens Thursday nationwide).

After his grandfather's funeral, Bennett heads for an illegal casino overlooking the Pacific, where he borrows $50,000 from Neville Baraka (Michael Kenneth Williams), a gangster he initially insults. He blows it on blackjack and roulette and gets further entangled by pitting Baraka against the guy who runs the casino (Alvin Ing). All told, he owes $240,000.

The grandson of one of the richest men in California, Bennett begs his wealthy mother (Jessica Lange) for money, then treats her hideously after she ponies up. Rather than paying his debts, he blows what she gives him on more gambling.

Before he began this destructive pattern, , Bennett wrote a well-reviewed novel. But that was then. Now the muse has been replaced by the devil on his shoulder. Perhaps because he comes from money, he can afford a reputation as "the kind of guy who likes to lose."

Just to make himself a notch more abhorrent, Bennett embarks on an affair with Amy (Brie Larson), one of his students. He wins her over by announcing in class that she's the only talented student in the room. But the movie doesn't bother to show Amy's smarts. The talented Larson is given little to do, other than react. This is a macho movie, after all: Women fall into two categories — nubile specimens made for bedding, or nagging harridans.

Bennett's the kind of teacher who exists only in movies — lying on his desk and blathering pompously, berating his students about the perils of mediocrity.

The film was inspired by the 1974 James Caan drama of the same name. Caan's Harvard-educated professor borrows cash from a girlfriend, his mother and bad guys to finance his gambling addiction. Here, Bennett comes off as bored and contemptuous more than addicted. Wahlberg is miscast, unconvincing as a depressed intellectual or a compulsive gambler.

Determined to rely on luck and wits, Bennett involves a struggling student, Lamar (Anthony Kelley) in a gambling scheme, risking the young man's basketball career. It's hard not to wish the college authorities would get wind of his unethical behavior and ruin his life.

John Goodman plays the only entertaining character, a bald, avuncular loan shark.

Larson's Amy astutely points out: "You're one of those guys who started out with no problems at all, and now you have all of them."

Bennett tossed his good fortune away and spends an inordinate amount of time soaking in a bathtub, in a none-too-subtle attempt to wash away his sins. The redemptive ending feels contrived. A bleak finale would at least have been consistent.