The Chinese Pavilion, or Kina slott meaning "China Palace" in Swedish, is located on the massive grounds of the Drottningholm Palace. It is a Chinese-inspired royal pavilion originally built between 1753 and 1769. The structure was designed by Carl Fredrik Adelcrantz using Chinoiserie style, a European interpretation of Chinese art and architecture popular with the wealthy in the so-called age of "Enlightenment." Many of the details in the pavilion were imported from East Asia, yet even more were manufactured in Europe based on imagination and exoticism rather than authenticity. Many of the faux Chinese characters painted on the walls and decorations are either fabricated jumbles of lines or actual characters, the ordering of which are meaningless gibberish.

Information from: en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_Pavilion_at_Drottningholm

Drottningholm Palace, Drottningholms slott in Swedish, or simply Drottningholm, is one of Sweden's Royal Palaces, situated near Sweden's capital Stockholm. It is the private residence of the Swedish royal family.

Located on Lovön Island in Lake Mälaren in Stockholm County's Ekerö Municipality, it was built in the late 17th century and was a regular summer residence of the Swedish royal court through most of the 18th century. The name Drottningholm (literally meaning "Queen's islet") came from the original renaissance building designed by Willem Boy, a stone palace built by Johan III of Sweden in 1580 for his queen, Katarina Jagellonica. This palace was preceded by a royal mansion called Torvesund.

The Queen Dowager Regent Hedwig Eleonora was head of the regency for the still-underage king, Karl XI of Sweden, from 1660 to 1672. Sweden had grown to be a powerful country after the Peace of Westphalia. The position of the queen, essentially the ruler of Sweden, demanded an impressive residence located conveniently close to Stockholm.

During the reign of the kings Karl XI of Sweden and Karl XII of Sweden, the royal court was often present at the palace, which was used for hunting. Hedwig Eleonora used the palace as a summer residence until her death in 1715, also when she had become the undisputed host of the royal court during the absence of Karl XII in the Great Northern War (1700-21).

Drottningholm Palace is a popular tourist attraction. In 1991, the Royal Domain of Drottningholm was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Information from: en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drottningholm_Palace