Very happy to catch up with LA BESTIA DEBE MORIR — (THE BEAST MUST DIE) — from the novel by Nicholas Blake. Now I’ve seen all the adaptations. Claude Chabrol’s French version quite sensibly removes the gentleman detective hero, Nigel Strangeways, and makes the murderer the protagonist, which he essentially is in the book. The recent Ridley Scott-produced miniseries retains Strangeways but makes him a boring policeman with boring PTSD, and you wish the focus was on the killer, who is now a woman (Cush Jumbo, magnificent) which works just as well.

(There’s no werewolf break in any of these, though. In my view, every movie deserves a werewolf break — a moment of silent contemplation when we consider which of the characters would be the werewolf, if only this were a werewolf movie.)

This Argentinian version comes from Román Viñoly Barreto, director of EL VAMPIRO NEGRO, a quasi-remake of Fritz Lang’s M which is quite impressive. This one might be even better, except for the unconvincing false beard you have to look at for most of the movie. But there are bravura moments, and the film retains the novel’s unconventional structure — there’s a looong flashback which breaks the movie kind of into thirds.

The revelation is that this works — Blake’s structure was sound, if you play it pretty much the way he intended. Surprisingly, the titular beast, the worst man in the world, George Rattery (Guillermo Battaglia), gets somewhat de-emphasized. Also surprisingly, he dies in the first scene, then re-appears in the flashbacks and is so awful you can’t wait for him to die again. One of our friends watching along with us remotely would have been quite happy for the guy to die twice, in the best Karloffian tradition.

The other weird thing is that the filmmakers retain the English setting and character names, though everyone speaks Spanish and many of the actors are very obviously South American. It’s possible that making the story happen in a far-off land diverted the censors from inferring any social critique.

Cameraman Alberto Etchebehere has developed the X-Files approach to night shoots, blasting a big light through the treetops to simulate moonlight, only there seem to be moons everywhere you turn. Whatever, it’s dramatic and beautiful. He gets the same effect with some strange streetlights, which certainly don’t look British, although the fog is authentic.

Also, lovely Hollywood-style hallucinatory dream-flashback montage.