Anne McCaffrey (1926-2011) was an American-Irish novelist of science fiction, fantasy and planetary romance. She is best known for her Dragonriders of Pern series and the novel The Ship Who Sang. She got the inspiration for another one of her well known novels, Restoree, when she saw how women were portrayed in science fiction, while their men would be the ones fighting the aliens, thus it was important to her to create a stronger female lead character. McCaffrey would receive dozens among dozens of awards for her work and was inducted into the Science Fiction Hall of Fame in 2006. She died at age 85 from a stroke.

Anne McCaffrey started writing short stories in the 1950s. Her first novel published was Dragonflight, which came out in 1968. Below is a list of Anne McCaffrey’s books in order of when they were originally published (as well as in chronological order):

Publication Order of Dragonriders of Pern Books

Chronological Order of Dragonriders of Pern Books

Publication Order of New Adventures of Pern Books

(with Todd J. McCaffrey)

Publication Order of Acorna Books

(with Elizabeth Ann Scarborough, Margaret Ball)

Publication Order of Acorna's Children Books

(with Elizabeth Ann Scarborough)

Publication Order of Brainship Books

Publication Order of Crystal Universe Books

Publication Order of Crystal Singer Trilogy Books

(with)

Publication Order of Dinosaur Planet Books

Publication Order of Doona Books

Publication Order of Freedom Books

Publication Order of Harper Hall of Pern Books

Publication Order of Petaybee/Powers Trilogy Books

(with Elizabeth Ann Scarborough)

Publication Order of Planet Pirates Books

Chronological Order of Planet Pirates Books

Publication Order of The Talent Books

Publication Order of Tales of the Barque Cats Books

(with Elizabeth Ann Scarborough)

Publication Order of The Tower and Hive Books

Publication Order of Twins of Petaybee Books

(with Elizabeth Ann Scarborough)

Publication Order of Three Women Books

Publication Order of Standalone Novels

Publication Order of Short Stories/Novellas

Publication Order of Short Story Collections

Publication Order of Non-Fiction Books

Publication Order of Legends Books

Publication Order of Graphic Novels

(with Brynne Stephens)

Publication Order of Brynne Stephens Graphic Novels

(with Brynne Stephens)

Publication Order of L. Ron Hubbard Presents: Writers of the Future Books

Publication Order of Anthologies

Notes: The Ship Who Won, The Death of Sleep and all Doona books except for Decision at Doona were co-authored with Jody Lynn Nye. Sassinak and Generation Warriors were co-authored with Elizabeth Moon. The Petaybee series, Twins of Petaybee, Barque Cats, Acorna’s Children and all Acorna books following Acorna’s Peoplewere co-authored with Elizabeth Ann Scarborough. Acorna: The Unicorn Girl, Acorna’s Quest and Partnership were co-authored with Margaret Ball. The New Adventures of Pern series was co-authored with Todd McCaffrey. The Ship Who Searched was co-authored by Mercedes Lackey. The City Who Fought was co-authored by S.M. Stirling.

DragonsEye was also published as Red Star Rising. The Lady: A Tale of Ireland was also published as Carradyne Touch.

Future Love also has stories by Jeffrey A. Carver and J. Hunter Holly. Space Opera was edited with Elizabeth Ann Scarborough. The Atlas of Pern was written with Karen W. Fonstad. Serve it Forth was co-authored by John Gregory Betancourt.

If You Like Anne McCaffrey Books, You’ll Love…

David Weber

Robin Hobb

Orson Scott Card

Jean M. Auel