The COPASI team announces the immediate availability of the stable release COPASI 4.41 (Build 283).

A new release of COPASI has been made available. Please visit our free download page to retrieve this latest development release. Please note this version is released under the Artistic License 2.0, which is an OSI approved license. This license allows non-commercial and commercial use free of charge.

Release Date: November 21, 2023

New Features

Simulation Engine

Species particle numbers are no supported as event targets.

Optimization & Parameter Estimation: It is now possible to run current solution statistics before adding any optimization parameters.

Bug Fixes

Graphical User Interface (CopasiUI)

Reduced COPASI’s start up time.

Fixed display of message boxes under Qt 6.5.

Improved functionality and stability of the plotting engines QWT & QCustomPlot

The output assistant suppresses now any check boxes which are not applicable to the current task.

Improved display of SBML imported units.

Fixed rare crash occurring when lading a new file while displaying a global quantity.

Simulation Engine

Utilize balanced Abstract Syntax Tree to avoid stack overflows.

Fixed loading of COPASI files containing parameter estimation created with COPASI 4.0 (Build 18).

The COPASI Version is now correctly displayed in reports.

Fixed an error message for trajectory method RK45 which was referring to LSODA.

Standards

SBML Import: Corrected function parameter classification which effected the UI parameter overview.

SBML Import: Avoid redundant division by log(10) when importing logarithm with base 10.

SBML Import (layout): Allow import of empty curves.

SED-ML Import: Improved import of SED-ML files with multiple task lists, falling back to SBML when all fail.

SED-ML Import: Create a warning message when referenced the SBML model is remote resource (unsupported).

API & Language Bindings

Added utility function CFunctionDB::purgeUnusedUserDefinedFunctions().

Added editing of constraints in optimization and parameter estimation tasks.