Version 4.16.104

Release Date: August 19, 2015

New Features since COPASI 4.15 (Build 95)

Graphical User Interface (CopasiUI)

The copy to next feature in the Experimental data description dialog is now able to handle the situation were the target experiment has less columns than the copied one.

Simulation Engine

The Gamma distribution and the Poisson distribution are now accessible in mathematical expressions and exported to SBML.

SBML

COPASI now exports the SBML L1V1 legacy format.

Bug Fixes since COPASI 4.15 (Build 95)

Graphical User Interface (CopasiUI)

The tool "Create Events For Time-series Experiment" does now handle ignored columns correctly.

Fix issue where deleting a reaction and running a parameter estimation afterward could cause the initial values to be corrupted.

Fixed problem in the tool "Convert to irreversible" which could lead to crashes if a reaction parameter of a reversible reaction was referenced out side the reaction.

Fixed handling of HTML entities like &mdash; in notes.

Improved performance of the "Update MIRIAM" tool.

Warning about unknown MIRIAM resources are now only issued when the resource is accessed.

All available tasks are now selectable as sub-tasks for the Optimization task.

Fixed issue where copying a compartment could lead to a crash in COPASI.

Simulation Engine

Fixed problem in the Linear Noise Approximation task which occasionally lead to crashes in COPASI.

Fixed issue in the Parameter Estimation Task where the un-normalized weight would not be calculated correctly.

The recently introduced Persistent Trigger flag for events was not correctly read from files causing the default value to be used.

Numerical instability issues in the Metabolic Control Analysis task result in a warning reported to the user.

Removed erroneous error messages caused by a premature function compile during when loading a file.

Fixed issue were HTML notes not save correctly when the user added the name space manually to the top level element.

Renaming an object triggers now an immediate update of the infix of all mathematical expression where the object is referenced.

Improved handling of experimental data files for parameter estimation which are not in the same directory as the the COPASI file.

Fixed issue where incorrect numerical values for parameter bounds in Optimization or Parameter Estimation would lead to an occasional crash.

SBML

The import of SBML files previously exported from COPASI does no longer create any warnings.

COPASI handles the export of log10 correctly.

The import of n-ary relational operators is now correctly handled.

Improved handling of incorrect SBML documents on import.

Fixed issue where COPASI could crash when loading and SBML file, which contains the same model name as the currently loaded model in COPASI.

Source package

The python example files are now also compatible with Python 3.x

Fixed problems compiling COPASI for the arm architecture.