Version 4.30.240

Release Date: February 24, 20201

New Features since COPASI 4.29 (Build 228)

Graphical User Interface (CopasiUI)

Added intensive reaction flux to the steady-state results relevant for small compartments.

Simulation Engine

Added Just In Time compilation of all user defined mathematical expression to assembler code significantly improving COPASI's performance.

Language Bindings

It is now possible to capture data generated from tasks directly without using a temporary file.

Bug Fixes since COPASI 4.29 (Build 228)

Graphical User Interface (CopasiUI)

Loading a model parameter set with a name already in the model is no longer silently ignored. Instead a new unique name is generated.

Fixed dragging an dropping of report items which may cause a crash in certain situations.

Improved layout of parameter estimation result widgets to better display Eigenvalues of the Fisher Information Matrix.

Fixed problem where the deletion of a just created parameter set could cause a crash.

Fixed update of local reaction parameters in the parameter overview, which was not correctly refreshed.

Fixed problem updating the separator when editing a report definition.

Improved display of Elementary Flux Mode results where some table rows were not correctly adjusted.

Improved object selection for Time Course Sensitivity task to include only and all relevant objects.

Fixed loading of XHTML comments including entities like π (&pi;).

Updated MIRIAM resources to correctly handle identifiers using https://.

Simulation Engine

Temporary Files for user with special characters in the name is now correctly handled.

Fixed issue with Hybrid LSODA integration method which was not correctly initialized on its initial use.

Fixed an issue where it was not possible to read extremely old COPASI files using user defined functions with recent versions.

Fixed file permissions for COPASI files which in some situation under Linux did not respect umask settings.

Fixed report output of Elementary Flux Mode task.

Fixed tracking of wall clock and CPU time in the Sensitivities Task.

Standards

SED-ML export of plots may have used non-unique IDs for a variable if that variable occurred in multiple curves.

SBML import no longer crashes if an event without a name and an id is encountered.

SBML unit import and export preserve the user specified volume unit instead of converting to liter.

SBML improved import of reactions with undefined stoichiometry which could crash COPASI.

Language Bindings

Fixed problem where bindings terminated if the environment variable HOME was not set.

Language bindings no longer crash when calling getStringValue from a non existing variable.

It is now possible to create parameters of type Common Name (CN) in language bindings.