The alternative country-rock band Reckless Kelly may have been named after a legendary Australian thief and highwayman, but it also is an apt description of their 21 year musical journey.

The band has its roots in Idaho, was formed in Oregon and now is based in Austin, Texas. Like its name, the musicians of Reckless Kelly have cultivated a reckless, outlaw spirit, according to guitarist, vocalist and primary songwriter Willy Braun.

Braun should know. He wrote most of the Reckless Kelly's self-released debut album while living in an abandoned school bus in Bend, Oregon.

"It had a wood stove, and the kitchen was pretty cool," Braun said. "It had a cool vibe to it and was good for the creative spirit."

Since 1997, Reckless Kelly has embraced its reckless nature with a catalog of songs that combine rock and country with a bit of bluegrass and Americana folk, along with a touring schedule that keeps them on the road more than 200 days a year. Since Braun formed the band with his brother Cody, who plays fiddle, mandolin and harmonica, he estimated they have played more than 3,000 shows and traveled more than 1,500,000 miles in 49 states.

"Touring has always been our bread and butter," he said. "We like giving people a good time with an upbeat and high-energy show."

Reckless Kelly will be in concert Thursday at the Stiefel Theatre for the Performing Arts, 151 S. Santa Fe.

Opening for the band will be the Brady Weston Band, a Salina-based country group who were closing performers at this year's Smoky Hill River Festival.

Since they were youngsters, the four Braun brothers of Stanley, Idaho — which included Willy, Cody, Micky and Gary — have been in the music business. The brothers toured the country as part of their father Muzzie Braun's western swing band, originally called Muzzie Braun & the Little Braun Brothers. The band became such a popular regional attraction they were invited to perform at the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville and on NBC's "The Tonight Show" twice.

The child musicians also shared stages with country music legends such as Johnny Cash, Glen Campbell and Merle Haggard.

"Our dad turned us into musicians, and he's still going strong," Willy Braun said.

After the boys grew up, Willy and Cody decided to form their own band, inspired by the country rock sound pioneered by Gram Parsons and the Flying Burrito Brothers, the Eagles and outlaw country performers such as Steve Earle, Billy Joe Shaver, Guy Clark, Joe Ely and Robert Earl Keen. They took their name from the legendary Ned Kelly, a 19th century Australian highwayman who Willy Braun said was "the Robin Hood of down under."

"We thought it was a really cool name, and then it just stuck," Braun said.

Since their 1997 debut release, Reckless Kelly has recorded numerous studio and live albums, including their latest, 2016's "Sunset Motel." Braun said his songwriting has become a "little smoother" through the years, but he often writes numerous songs before settling on a handful of the best for an album. "Sunset Motel" contains 13 songs taken from more than 30 Braun wrote and discarded.

"I just keep on working on the songs until they're good," he said. "A lot of the songs are about the road, some are a little political, and some are about love and heartbreak. There's always a deep well to draw from with heartbreak and love songs."

Braun said the band — which also includes drummer Jay Nazz, lead guitarist David Abetya and Kansas-bred bassist Joe Miller — plays about 140 shows a year and likes to switch up their sets depending on what kind of venue they're playing.

"When it's a more intimate theater like the Stiefel, we'll probably showcase more story songs and tell stories about the songs," he said. "We would like folks to really hear these songs, to be able to hear the lyrics and appreciate the musicianship that goes into the arrangements."

That's not to say Reckless Kelly won't give their "intimate" audiences a rocking show as well.

"It's always a pretty high energy show with us," he said. "We like to leave it all onstage, but we also try to sing songs that are a little smarter. We try to give people something to think about, something different than the mainstream country stuff."

EVENT: Reckless Kelly in concert, with opening by Salina's Brady Weston Band

WHEN: 8 p.m. Thursday

WHERE: Stiefel Theatre for the Performing Arts, 151 S. Santa Fe

TICKETS: $25, $35

INFORMATION: 827-1998 or stiefeltheatre.org

Just the Facts