“The austin-based band were americana before there really was such a term, combining roots, rock and country influences into an uncompromising musical approach that has earned the grammy-winning group a very steadfast and loyal following.”

– A Taste Of Country

“Reckless Kelly proudly carries the Americana/alt-country/Red Dirt torch. The Idaho-born, Austin-based group has been going for more than a quarter of a century now, but they remain as strong as ever live and in the studio."

- Americana Highways

“Reckless Kelly makes it easy by delivering songs with good hooks, fat melodies, and compelling stories and characters. ..Reckless can still make your heart bleed. But they’re also here to make sure you have a good time, which you do. You can put a Reckless Kelly album on cover to cover, and it just works for most any occasion.”

- Saving Country Music

Reckless Kelly has always been adept at pairing melodies and lyrics such that a song’s emotional impact is often felt that much stronger.

- No Depression

Reckless Kelly, the powerhouse Americana/Red-Dirt band, has been igniting stages with their electrifying fusion of rock and country music since their inception in 1996. Led by central Idaho natives Willy and Cody Braun, the brothers carry on a musical legacy spanning three generations.

Venturing from their Idaho roots, the Brauns made their mark in Austin, TX, twenty-nine years ago, teaming up with drummer Jay Nazz. Nazz's decision to join the band, just 5 credits shy of a college degree, marked the beginning of a journey that would forever alter Texas's musical landscape. Over nearly three decades, Reckless Kelly has not only become an integral part of the Americana music scene but has also earned prestigious accolades, including a coveted GRAMMY Award and the title of Outlaw Group of the Year at the 2024 Ameripolitan Awards.

The band's impact extends far beyond their acclaimed recordings. Their annual festival, The Braun Brothers Reunion, is celebrating its 40th Anniversary in 2024. The three-day event in Challis, Idaho, brings incredible artists to Cody and Willy’s hometown and raises a significant amount of money for the local community.

The band will be releasing their next studio album,The Last Frontier, later this year, and have embarked on the 2024 - 2025 tour of the same name. In addition to the band's core trio of Willy and Cody Braun and Jay Nazz, they are joined by Joe Miller on bass, and Geoffrey Queen on lead guitar and pedal steel.

At the end of 2025, the band will turn the page on a new chapter, stepping back from traditional touring. Members still plan to write, record, and release new music as Reckless Kelly during this hiatus. They will perform a handful of special live events while alsofocusing on exciting solo projects, visual art, record production, and management endeavors.

Lead singer Willy Braun offers insight into the band's decision, “It’s important to us that our fans know that we all still truly love playing with each other. At first glance, it looks like a full-scale ‘retirement,’ and that’s not exactly accurate. We’ll still continue to record music and perform live on occasion, but after 30 years on the road, we are looking forward to pulling back the reins a bit, spending more time at home, and exploring our other interests.” His big brother Cody agrees, adding, “The satisfaction of playing a great show to an enthusiastic audience is something that can’t be duplicated. We are inviting fans to come out and celebrate with us on this tour as we move in this new direction.”