Reckless Kelly are a Country Americana band. Originally formed in Bend, Oregon in 1996, they established themselves in Austin Texas as a well-regarded Roots music ensemble.

At the heart of the group are two brothers, Willy Braun lead vocals and guitar, and Cody Braun on vocals and fiddle, mandolin and harmonica. No surprise they started out as a Braun brothers’ quartet with two younger siblings.

Completing this present line-up are Ryan Engelman on lead guitar, Joe Millar bass guitar and Jay Nazz drums.

This is the tenth studio album since their debut in 1998, presented as a two-in-one package. Or an old-fashioned double album, the ones you could roll a herbal on. Wait for the vinyl release later this July.

Listening through the first few times, this may sound like soothing balm for the Heartland. The music is largely a homage to the American Dream and Myth, and it’s possible moral and spiritual decline. Heartland is Trump country but this not a rally to arms.

The songwriting is more in honour of the working class, a hunkering down in the howling gale of the political and viral plague with a reaffirmation of spirit and soul.

The music comes from the same bed occupied by The Flat Landers, Dwight Yoakam, The Band, The Blasters and Tom Petty.

Reckless Kelly (the name is cribbed off the Australian movie by Yahoo Serious from long ago) have performed in tribute shows to the Heartbreakers.

Tom Was a Friend of Mine is just that. Written after Petty’s death, the tune echoing He Was a Friend of Mine and surrounded by Outlaw Country music accompaniment.

North American Jackpot is the opener and sets the tone of the double album.

Sixty-six days on the Mayflower, just lookin’ for someplace where they could start all over again.

Then it’s the Great Migration West, planting on stolen land. This should have been the jackpot, being born in North America in the 20th century.

And as I walk these city streets/ I feel a stranger in my town/ I don’t mind so much the people/ As the landmarks coming down.

Prescient although this was the last track to be written.

42 is an old song in gestation and features some kinfolk. Muzzie Braun co-writes. He is an Uncle and also a musician and hugely influential on his nephews. A homage to baseball and built around the story of Jackie Robinson, the first Black American to break the the colour barrier for professional sport. Robinson also helped influence the cause of the Civil Rights movement. Papa Braun is also present on vocals.

Grandpa Was a Jack of all Trades is probably the best example of what the story here is all about. Salt of the earth. Fought in 1942. Thank God he came home. Raised a family, opinionated, gave people respect if they deserved it. Willy Braun said he could have written 30 verses but whittled it down to 3.

American myth territory again. A John Ford movie and a Steinbeck novel. Rosie Flores adds some Spanish guitar licks to this one.

Most of the songs do have a wistful, resigned and regretful tone but there are several upbeat tunes.

Don’t Give Up on Love is a Buddy Holly style country anthem. Willy Braun said he was pitching for a Ronettes sound. But a piano part coupled with chiming guitar puts it in Springsteen territory. So, he was right after all.

No Dancing in Bristol is of Irish rowdy folk roots and reminds me of the Pogues or the Drop-Kick Murphys. Twin fiddles and harmonica riffs.

Also, Another New Year’s Day. Starts Country, then segues into the Auld Lang Syne tune with the fiddles again.

Americana taken back to its Celtic, Irish and English sources.

Anyplace That Wild features Suzy Boggus on co-lead vocals in a beautiful song that sounds like an old traditional Cowboy song from the Sons of Pioneers, again with fiddle and harmonica.

Lost Inside the Groove is the only genuine Rock’n’Roller and belts along with a riff similar to Chuck Berry’s No Particular Place to Go. But Berry had a lot of traditional Country wound into the DNA of his music.

This one is co-written by Shawn Sahm, son of Doug Sahm and another legendary Texas musician.

Goodbye Colorado closes the American Jackpots half and really is the core of the emotions and feelings on this current release.

Mournful lyrics full of regret. But the bed of music rises up with twin fiddles again to give a Cajun sound, added to by harmonica and acoustic guitar.

I made my home in these ancient lands/ Yearning to breathe free.

The politics is of the ordinary life. The American Dream and Myth is being rubbed raw at the moment. This music may feel hurt and regretful, but it is also standing up and ultimately is life affirming.

At least that’s how it makes me feel.