lethargy

nowadays, edith is static

a shell in the absence

of craving. she used

to adore each sweet

fixation and learned

to unravel her thirst

like spools of thread but now confesses

that orchard pears bring the taste

of brine, their veins an estuary

of tangled webs pulsing, awaiting

expulsion from the tumid womb. edith

squeezes each naked ugly spine and

spits out each sightless eye like

fish flung back to sea, envies

their perfect breathlessness.

in her palm their bodies wither,

bare husks of dreams now

thought inglorious

By Amanda Huang

Biography:

Amanda Huang is a junior at Millburn High School, where she is a senior editor of her school’s literary magazine. Her work has been nationally recognized by the Scholastic Art and Writing Awards and JustPoetry, and has been published in TeenInk and in the Word magazine.

IN LAGOS, BODIES SWITCH MUSIC IN A TANKER FIRE

and the cloud opens hurriedly for

a prophecy of smoke. It opens like daybreak

and it’s so funny how bodies collate fire easily.

Everyone carried race all over their bodies,

black. black. black.

No one remained the same

no one knew how explosion borrow bodies to make embers

no one knew how fire opens a body

layer by layer until DNA becomes an

identification messiah.

Imagine seeing a boy dying outside a car

where you’re locked inside

while fire approaches you with the anger of light,

imagine a man in a praying position

on the steering before metals pleats his faith.

Bodies switch music and dirge is a solo

that sings a boy into silence. Water is a tenor of things too weak

to stay in a body full of darkness. A motor’s wiper

mimes death, and its full light dies into seconds.

Noises drown this city of brown bodies.

do not call this road a mortuary

do not say this body doesn’t resemble your father,

do not seep this broken news into your veins

like the desperate tweaking of injections into a body

veined with deaths,

do not switch on the T.V

for they won’t still be sure

the death toll till the cloud closes like memories.

By Mesioye Johnson

Biography:

Mesioye Johnson is a bird of many colors who writes to heal his darkness and the world around his waist. His works are featured or forthcoming in African Writer, Eunoia review, Sub-Saharan magazine and somewhere else. He is @mesioyejohnson on Twitter

I LOVE IN A WAY THAT TURNS ON THE HEAVENS

the smoke from the bodies of burning boys is accusative

i fear for the day i will burn because persecution foreruns fire

it continues to consume boys committing selves solely to boys

brave ones with eyes invaded by love taste smoke

i go to my lover’s arms set in the cover of darkness

they will come for me while dressed in light to name me rebel

any boy tongue-kissing another triggers the functionality of bombs

the dark gives up our position so i fucking run into corners unknown

i flee this madness because I carry a wild heart learning different ways to love

in this city & in all its houses, hate is mayor around these parts

scripture quoting warriors tread rudely on my name

fuck, i love my body enough to divorce reason & conformity

everywhere, a boy misses his lover & fear sharpens the blade he hugs as ally

i lose my soul when i am not loving or trying to decipher the language of hate

the words i locate weakens me when placed against mob mentality

i was not taught to hold my body like a gun or twist shape to become knife

like the one i pulled out from a boy’s back the night freedom caught fire

Jesus is the heaven preachers market alongside salvation

they sell ascension for obese bank accounts while the carpenter’s son tends to barren pockets

i walk with Christ & he cries, weeping ike that chapter drawn from Lazarus’ tomb

i exchange my lover for life & they crown him with burning

i pour my heart into Christ’s own to emphasize that kindness is sexy

i observe a minute’s silence for my lover while hate speech rains down

contained in the belly of sleepless nights, i listen for suicide’s call

Christ returns to hold & sing my grief to sleep

he waters my lips, eyelids & skin with kisses, tongue swirls in my favour

By Michael Akuchie

Biography:

Michael Akuchie is a Nigerian young adult writer. His work is on Barren Magazine, Anti-Heroin Chic, Neologism Poetry Journal, Mojave Heart and elsewhere. He is @Michael_Akuchie on Twitter.

tenebrosity

i have never gotten over my fear

of the darkness. instead i dream

that i have woken up

alone in the night forest, one eye

fluttered open in search of

the horizon and the other

turned downwards to the earth

it is quiet, still besides for

the shards of moonlight quivering

through the trees, and at home

they fear the nighttime too, when

the creatures cry in the woods

and mothers draw their curtains, hold

their sleeping babies close

to their chests to let their breaths

warm the dewy eyelashes of

their children and count

their heartbeats

leave the lights on. i am afraid

of the forest, the dark, of what cries

in the woods among the shadows

of my own breath

By Amanda Huang

Biography:

Amanda Huang is a junior at Millburn High School, where she is a senior editor of her school’s literary magazine. Her work has been nationally recognized by the Scholastic Art and Writing Awards and JustPoetry, and has been published in TeenInk and in the Word magazine.

Why do I still answer when you call?

While deleting snapchat I came across a glimpse

of us months ago hiking

in Arlington; SZA’s CTRL a silhouette

for sweltering heat that fried our faces

You had those goofy pink shades on and your bony

body lie against my wrinkled white tee

I was looking down at your face

watching you effortlessly project pretty

wondering what I did to deserve such

a Goddess. I zoomed closer to highlight

myself let the lie “I’m cute as hell”

roll like water off my tongue. I found myself

saving this video, even almost sending it

to you, but instead let it live in my phone for another

forever I can’t yet erase that color of time

from my mind can’t yet fathom him being

the warm body behind you to push against

can’t tell myself enough you fucked up, she’s gone

until The Weekend doesn’t make me

crack a dorky smile but then you call

for a kind of comfort I never provided

like a virus, I attack the opportunity

to let love in. You hear in my voice that I’m drinking

then the phone screen’s darkness fills

even when you hang up I have pictures

videos that do the best they can

to stray away my empty

By Nia KB

Biography:

Nia KB (they/them) is a Black queer nonbinary poet, editor, and educator. They are the recipient of fellowships and residencies from Lambda Literary, The Speakeasy Project, and UTSA’s African American Literatures and Cultures Institute. Their poetry appears or is forthcoming in Eleven40Seven, Z Publishing, Pamplemousse, Brown State of Mind, Lighthouse Literary, and elsewhere. When they’re not blessing stages or writing pages, they serve as Associate Poetry Editor for Fields Magazine, Production Assistant for the web series Gentrified, Curator/Host of the reading series Austin Interfaces, and Teaching Artist for Austin Library Foundation’s Badgerdog Creative Writing Program. If you got this far, they think you should follow them on twitter and instagram at nia_kb.

silent, treacherous

palm slashed and dripping,

i am seated on the bathroom floor, alone.

a fabric of darkness only i can see

is so close it could be the skin clinging to the immediacy of my bones.

there is the sun, too, breathing through the window

for a glimpse of this different kind of deflowering.

there is always a silent treacherous witness to these things.

sometimes,

it’s a song pouring out your computer on a starless night

sometimes,

it is the woman next door, whom you called mama,

who sprayed a song over your childhood like

scent over flowers

it is she, peeping as

a male body sheds trust like garment,

tries to pour into your 6 year old self that first night, one hand

back and forth on your back like the sound of many soundless things breaking.

other times, it is god watching. watching. from above.

there is always a silent treacherous witness to these things

today, it is the sun

By Hauwa Shaffii Nuhu

Biography:

Hauwa Shaffii Nuhu’s work has appeared on Ake Review, Brittle Paper, The Bitter Oleander, After the Pause journal, Eunoia Review, and elsewhere. She’s a 2018 fellow at the Ebedi Writers Residency in Nigeria, and is currently pursuing a law degree.

A BOY EATS HIS LOVER ON WATER

tethered to these shores, I bury my footprints forever,

racing to my lover’s erasure, nostalgia for warmth,

his heart is a life jacket for a drowning soul .

his ghost still walks the stretch of this beach,

calls me out for a leisurely dip into water.

I pile demise on my head as ashes & sprinkle evenly,

for droppings to gather round my feet.

I watch his ghost slowly ease into the sea,

returning to where death once plucked him.

I am here as witness to reunion with mother sea,

clasped hands accommodate acceptance,

tender about the past, he laughs off grief,

home is never a place to invest in pain.

I rejoin brother as his eyes linger around the sea,

for the coming of tides is how he proclaims movement,

like fleshed waves, he will slam into the deep.

I levitate his body, afloat with courage,

I bless this sacrifice by swallowing the entirety of his pain,

proclaiming his feet will kiss earth again,

we claw our way into a second loving.

By Michael Akuchie

Biography:

Michael Akuchie is a Nigerian young adult writer. His work is on Barren Magazine, Anti-Heroin Chic, Neologism Poetry Journal, Mojave Heart and elsewhere. He is @Michael_Akuchie on Twitter

Serotiny

I stand tall under the operating room lighting

of my father’s kitchen. Laid out as I am with

skin sterilized and cut back,

nerves and organs exposed, I tell him

I am bi.

I can smell our dinner beginning to burn.

He stands at the stove with his back to me and tells me

it will pass.

Do mountains come to pass?

I understand mountains.

Although their spines are strong,

they have been molded, smoothed;

caressed as they are by water

for millions of years.

Their worn-in bodies become homes

for so many animals, plants, trees.

I read once about a kind of pinecone that will

only grow after it has been

set on fire

Serotinous, they are called.

High in the same mountains, their parent trees

wait for wildfires to sacrifice themselves

for their seedlings.

I stand tall at your side, finally

playing myself in this grand opera.

Say I’m no longer acting.

Say the stage is on fire and I can feel

the wild heat of it,

can hear its lyric burning,

but I do not shy away like a frightened animal;

Instead, I take your hand and sing along

while the flames finally find me.

Biography:

Rachel Egly is a bi poet, engineer, and ecologist in love with all things water. Her work has previously appeared in Words Dance and Ghost City Review and is forthcoming in Vagabond City. She currently lives in Chicago with her partner and cat, where she catches crayfish, naps as much as possible, and spends most of her money on good food.

I sing of black boys, brown boys, sweet boys

—after Jussie Smollett

I make no apologies for the colour of my skin,

what I wear on my bones is not a plea. though

you call my body a dark house, unfitting for the light.

the song in my throat is not a request for your hate,

the flowers I grow on the earth inside me is not a debate with you.

I ask when it stops being sin for black boys

to be seen, when the time ripens enough for coloured boys

to walk the streets of America and not be walled,

and not be raised, and not be questioned, and not

be touched till touching itself becomes a synonym for

burning. I ask when the black, brown and red

blood of coloured martyrs becomes a bright-enough sign

on our doorposts to make the angels of death pass over.

but until then I sing.

I sing of black boys, brown boys, sweet boys.

I sing of boys who, though stretched and thorned

on all ends, though broken like slashed water, have

forged themselves a voice from the language of fear.

I sing of boys who like god, boys—gods, have

painted themselves into a rainbow in the sky,

this sky, you call it your sky,

to remind you that we are here, that

your hands around the neck of our voices is

not enough to tie our tongues, that

your palms slapping fire into our bones is

not death, it is a request for our singing.

By Ernest Ogunyemi

Biography:

Ernest Ogunyemi is an eighteen year-old writer from Nigeria. His stories and poems have appeared in Kalahari, Acumen UK, Litro UK, Literally Stories, The Rising Phoenix, and many more. His story was recently featured in Erotic Africa: The Sex Anthology, published by Brittle Paper, and he was recently selected to participate in the Goethe-Institute Afro Young Adult workshop. He has a short story collection and novel in progress.