SNP announces best second quarter ever after record results in 2023 and strong start to the year

Heidelberg, Germany, July 19, 2024 – SNP, a leading global provider of software for digital transformation, automated data migration and data management in the SAP environment, announces another remarkable business performance for the second quarter of 2024, according to preliminary figures. The company continues to grow across all regions and segments.

SNP Launches “Data Streaming for SAP”, a Snowflake Native App in the Data Cloud

Las Vegas, NV I Irving, TX I Heidelberg, Germany – June 28, 2023 – SNP, a world-leading provider of SAP-based software solutions for digital transformation processes, automated data migrations and data management in the SAP environment, today announced at Snowflake’s annual user conference, Snowflake Summit 2023, the launch of Data Streaming for SAP, a Snowflake Native App on Snowflake Marketplace. Data Streaming for SAP enables organizations to integrate SAP data streams seamlessly and cost-effectively with Snowflake.

New Software-as-a-Service version of SNP Glue elevates customer value in Cloud Data Integration

Heidelberg, Germany, November 29, 2023 – SNP Schneider-Neureither & Partner SE, a leading provider of software for digital transformation, automated data migration and data management in the SAP environment, has reached a significant milestone with the introduction of its new SNP Glue software as part of the CrystalBridge technology platform. This innovative SaaS-solution promises new capabilities in cloud data integration, offering unparalleled benefits to its customers.

Internal innovation drive: SNP launches innovation lab for artificial intelligence and the cloud

Heidelberg, August 1, 2023 – Heidelberg-based software and consulting company SNP Schneider-Neureither & Partner SE, a leading provider of software for digital transformations, automated data migrations and data management in the SAP environment, has launched an innovation lab for AI and the cloud. In the future, experts from various disciplines and SNP locations such as New Jersey, Buenos Aires and Heidelberg as well as the subsidiary Innoplexia will work together in the new lab. The unit “Innovation Lab AI & Cloud” is part of SNP’s development department. It enables the data specialist to combine valuable knowledge in the areas of AI and the cloud within its own organization and enhance its implementation expertise.