First successful go-live of United Tractors’ SAP S/4HANA on Azure cloud

SNP’s data transformation platform CrystalBridge® and BLUEFIELD™ approach selected for series of S/4 transformations for Astra Group’s automotive companies

Simultaneous implementation of multiple projects: New GL, Business Partner and Unicode conversion in a single step

Heidelberg, Germany | Singapore | Jakarta, Indonesia, October 29, 2021 – SNP Transformations SEA Pte Ltd., a subsidiary of SNP Schneider-Neureither & Partner SE (the SNP Group), a world-leading provider of software solutions for digital transformation processes and automated data migrations, has completed a successful SAP S/4HANA go-live with a move to the Azure Cloud for PT United Tractors Tbk, the largest heavy equipment provider in Indonesia, in collaboration with PT Astra Graphia Information Technology (AGIT). Following this success, the Astra Group has selected SNP and AGIT for multiple SAP S/4HANA transformation projects this year.

United Tractors, a subsidiary of PT Astra International Tbk (Astra), one of Indonesia’s largest and leading business groups, was gearing up to expand its business by implementing a synergy-based and diversified business model in various business units. The associated digitalization involving the migration to the new SAP S/4HANA business suite with lower cloud operating costs was identified as a priority to support business growth, influence the company’s ability to adopt next-generation business processes, and enable it to make informed decisions quickly based on real-time insights. The need of the hour was a reliable, time-efficient and cost-saving approach, accommodating the highest flexibility regarding the coverage of data transformation requirements and with minimal downtime.

Lie Gunadi, Corporate Strategic and Technology Division Head, PT United Tractors Tbk, says, “As part of United Tractors’ digital transformation journey, the company planned to upgrade its existing ECC 6.0 (on-premises) to significantly improve its operations via a host of optimization strategies. A rapid implementation to move the core business system to S/4HANA and the cloud was imperative to manage demand for innovation, customization and transparent real-time analysis, ensuring business agility – an essential aspect for staying at the top in today’s increasingly intense market environment. Apart from resolving the data transformation challenges, SNP’s CrystalBridge® and BLUEFIELD™ approach delivered as per United Tractors’ ambition for a leaner, higher-performance S/4HANA target system in Azure. A high degree of automation and reliability combined multiple projects simultaneously and reduced the data footprint with selective data migration, lowering TCO at minimal downtime and risk and achieving a single go-live within budgeted timelines. Thanks to SNP, we are on an accelerated path to becoming an agile intelligent enterprise.”

Gerald Faust, Managing Director and CEO, Asia Pacific and Middle East, SNP Transformations SEA Pte Ltd., adds, “SNP is delighted to be part of United Tractor’s strategic endeavor to become an intelligent enterprise with an automated and accelerated transformation to SAP S/4HANA as they transformed their data, business and systems from on-premises to Azure. In the wake of this success, SNP has been engaged to extend its proven expertise to more automotive and heavy equipment companies, dealing with Komatsu, Daihatsu, Toyota, Honda and others within the Astra Group. SNP’s approach supports business growth and paves the way for integrating emerging technologies including big data, embedded AI, in-memory HANA database and real-time analytics.”

Widi Triwibowo, President Director, AGIT, comments, “As a strategic IT arm of the Astra Group, we combined our expertise with SNP to significantly drive United Tractors’ operations, leading the industry through a host of digital, data transformation and cost optimization strategies with an outlook for business continuity and agility. SNP’s software-centric data transformation platform CrystalBridge® and selective data migration approach BLUEFIELD™, which flexibly combines the best of Greenfield (new implementation) and Brownfield (system conversion) approaches, offered a low-risk acceleration of the S/4HANA transformation to the Azure Cloud through automation and specialized data visualization. The proven, reliable methodology combined multiple projects – New GL, Business Partner and Unicode conversion – delivering clear advantages in terms of costs, system downtime and project runtimes.”

Together, AGIT and SNP are implementing a series of business-critical SAP S/4HANA transformation projects for the Astra Group of companies across the heavy equipment and automotive divisions in the region. Their collaboration focuses on business and IT transformation projects specific to SAP environments, providing a repeatable industry standard joint offering in the Astra Group and the Southeast Asian market.

To learn more download the Strategy Paper

About PT United Tractors Tbk

United Tractors is a subsidiary of PT Astra International Tbk (“Astra”), one of Indonesia’s largest and leading business groups with a network of services spanning various industries and sectors. Since September 19, 1989, United Tractors has become a public company by listing its shares on the Indonesia Stock Exchange (formerly the Jakarta Stock Exchange and the Surabaya Stock Exchange). Astra owns 59.5{aa282f308afcc222aaa21b0478c79e01a8fedd01972e2180867097bd93930f22} of United Tractors, with the remaining shares owned by the public. Today United Tractors has developed into one of the major players in the domestic sector and industry, through five business pillars, namely Construction Machinery, Mining Contractor, Mining, Construction Industry, and Energy.

The construction machinery business unit, known as United Tractors, is the largest heavy equipment provider in Indonesia. As the sole distributor of Komatsu, UD Trucks, Scania, Bomag, and Tadano, United Tractors provides heavy equipment, trucks, cranes, and busses used in industrial construction, energy, mining, agriculture, forestry, as well as material handling and transportation. For more information visit: United Tractors.

About SNP

SNP is a world-leading provider of software for managing complex digital transformation processes. Instead of traditional IT consulting in the ERP environment, SNP offers an automated approach using specially developed software: The Data Transformation Platform CrystalBridge(R) and the SNP BLUEFIELDTM approach allow companies to restructure and modernize their IT landscapes much more quickly and securely as well as migrate to new systems or cloud environments more securely. This gives customers clear qualitative advantages while at the same time reducing their time and costs.

The SNP Group has around 1,600 employees worldwide. The company is headquartered in Heidelberg, Germany, and generated revenues of around EUR 144 million in the 2020 fiscal year. It serves multinational companies in all industries. SNP was established in 1994, went public in 2000, and has been listed in the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange since August 2014 (ISIN DE0007203705). Since 2017, the company has been trading as a European company (Societas Europaea/SE). More information is available at www.snpgroup.com.

About PT Astra Graphia Information Technology (AGIT)

AGIT is a Digital Service Provider, presenting the concept of One Stop Solution on Digital Services. Since 1983, AGIT is part of PT Astra International Tbk Group, a conglomerate in Indonesia that currently has 238 subsidiaries and affiliated companies with 7 business fields (automotive, financial services, heavy equipment, agribusiness, information technology, infrastructure & logistics, and Property). AGIT itself is 100{aa282f308afcc222aaa21b0478c79e01a8fedd01972e2180867097bd93930f22} owned by PT Astra Graphia Tbk.

As a Digital Service Provider, AGIT has transformed its business not only focused on providing ICT infrastructure and application-related services but rather on what we refer to as One-Stop-Solutions on Digital Services, both in on-premises and cloud infrastructure models. We carry the concept of digitalize things, to help and assist our customers in digital transformation through the application of digital technology & digital solutions. We have four main pillars in our Digital Solutions Portfolio covering all the journeys required to undertake digital transformation ranging from Digital Strategy, Digital ICT Foundation, Digital Platforms and Digital Services. For more information, visit Astra Graphia Information Technology (ag-it.com).

This article is sponsored by SNP