SNP SE and Scheer GmbH Seal Agreement on Strategic Partnership

- SNP and Scheer join forces to enable customers to implement transformation projects quickly and flexibly using SNP's CrystalBridge(R) software

- The four-year contract focuses on migrations to SAP S/4HANA

Heidelberg and Saarbrücken/Germany, Oct. 20, 2020 - SNP Schneider-Neureither & Partner SE, a world-leading provider of software solutions for digital transformation processes and automated data migrations, and Scheer GmbH, an IT consulting firm focusing on business and process management in the SAP environment, have signed a contract for a strategic partnership. The cooperation agreement focuses on the use of the SNP software CrystalBridge(R) - The Data Transformation Platform by Scheer's customers, primarily in the DACH region and the Benelux countries. The Gold Partnership agreement was concluded at the end of September and has a term of four years.

With this strategic partnership, both IT companies want to enable customers to carry out complex transformation projects quickly and securely by harnessing SNP software for automated data migration. This particularly applies to migrations to SAP S/4HANA - also in conjunction with a cloud transition to Microsoft Azure. Scheer will provide process consulting and the system conversion "Easy Move to Azure" including subsequent cloud operation at a fixed price and will also utilize the new SNP software component "Cloud Move for Azure." The IT companies have developed a training plan together to train and certify Scheer employees to use CrystalBridge(R) and provide the best possible service to customers.

"A growing number of companies are currently facing complex transformation projects, especially as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic," says Michael Eberhardt, Chief Operating Officer (COO) at SNP. "The newly formed strategic partnership with Scheer allows us to provide fast and secure transformations for a large number of customers. Especially for migrations to SAP S/4HANA, we can offer particularly flexible and secure solutions by combining Scheer's extensive consulting expertise with our competence in automated data migration."

"Transformation projects for the move to SAP S/4HANA are a key issue on the agenda of SAP users for the next few years," confirms Mario Baldi, CEO at Scheer. "Thanks to the cooperation with SNP, we can offer our customers an even better basis for their transformation projects - ensured by the use of SNP solutions, successful implementation is delivered in the shortest possible time. The new technological basis enables us to apply our expertise to implement process optimizations more easily."

The strategic partnership between SNP and Scheer builds on their successful cooperation over the past nine years, during which they have already carried out several transformation projects together, including migrations to SAP S/4HANA.

About Scheer GmbH

Scheer GmbH is the flagship company of the Scheer Group, which has locations in various European countries as well as in the USA, Singapore and Australia.

A consulting company with proven process expertise, Scheer GmbH helps companies to develop new business models, optimize and implement efficient business processes, and operate their IT systems. The integrated architecture of consulting solutions and products from the Scheer Group companies offers reliable solutions for the end-to-end digitalization of business models and processes as well as for the use of new technologies in digital business. Scheer is the preferred partner of many well-known companies that are working towards using SAP and SAP S/4HANA effectively and efficiently. Its consulting on current developments in the fields of business process management and process mining also supports the process quality of innovative business models.

Customers benefit from in-depth industry and process expertise from a wide range of consulting projects, comprehensive IT expertise in implementation, and the option of having individual applications or entire IT architectures managed in the cloud by Scheer Managed Services experts.

More information is available at www.scheer-group.com/en/

About SNP

SNP is a world-leading provider of software for managing complex digital transformation processes. Instead of traditional IT consulting in the ERP environment, SNP offers an automated approach using specially developed software: The Data Transformation Platform CrystalBridge(R) and the SNP BLUEFIELD(TM) approach allow companies to restructure and modernize their IT landscapes much more quickly and securely as well as migrate to new systems or cloud environments more securely. This gives customers clear qualitative advantages while at the same time reducing their time and costs.

The SNP Group has around 1,500 employees worldwide. The company is headquartered in Heidelberg, Germany, and generated revenue of around EUR 145 million in the 2019 fiscal year. It serves multinational companies in all industries. SNP was established in 1994, went public in 2000, and has been listed in the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange since August 2014 (ISIN DE0007203705) and was admitted to the SDAX in March 2020. Since 2017, the company has been trading as a European company (Societas Europaea/SE).

More information is available at www.snpgroup.com

Contact person at Sheer:

Karsten Günther

Head of SAP Competence Center

Tel.: +49 681 96777-324

E-mail: Karsten.Guenther@scheer-group.com

Scheer GmbH

Uni-Campus Nord | 66123 Saarbrücken

Tel.: +49 (681) 96777-0

E-mail: info@scheer-group.com

Internet: www.scheer-group.com/en/

Contact person at SNP:

Nicole Huber

Executive Vice President Corporate Development

Tel.: +49 6221 6425-920

E-mail: Nicole.Huber@snpgroup.com

SNP Schneider-Neureither & Partner SE

Dossenheimer Landstraße 100 | 69121 Heidelberg

Tel.: + 49 6221 6425-0 | Fax: + 49 6221 6425-20