Sporting Kansas City announced on Tuesday that the club has mutually agreed to part ways with forward Claudio Bieler.

The 30-year-old contributed 16 goals and five assists in 54 appearances across all competition over the past two seasons.

“Claudio’s service here was a huge help, especially during our run to MLS Cup in 2013,” Sporting KC manager Peter Vermes said. “He was a professional since the moment he arrived and we are appreciative of his time in Kansas City. We wish him all the best.”

Bieler joined Sporting Kansas City prior to the 2013 season as a designated player. He was the team’s top scorer as he led all MLS newcomers with 10 goals during the regular season, the most by a designated player in team history.

He also became the fourth KC player all-time to score 10 goals in a debut season, and the first since Miklos Molnar in 2000, while also adding goals in the MLS Cup Playoffs and Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup.

In 2014, Bieler scored twice in a 3-0 victory over Real Esteli FC in the 2014-15 CONCACAF Champions League and recorded two goals during Major League Soccer’s regular season.

Sporting KC’s roster now has an available international roster spot and designated player spot.

– Story from Sporting KC

Accident reports

A Chrysler Pacifica was westbound on I-670 at 8:40 a.m. Jan. 19 when the driver fell asleep and hit a concrete rail, according to a Kansas Highway Patrol trooper’s report.

The accident happened just west of the Kansas-Missouri state line, according to the report.

The driver, a 36-year-old Kansas City, Mo., woman, had a possible injury and was taken to a hospital in Kansas City, Kan., the report stated.

Accident reported on U.S. 73

A 1997 Ford was northbound on U.S. 73 in the second lane at 139th Street at 7:12 p.m. Jan. 17 when an accident happened, according to a Kansas Highway Patrol trooper’s report.

The Ford tried to turn onto 139th Street westbound from the second lane and was struck by a 1998 Chevy Monte Carlo that was northbound on U.S. 73 in the first lane, the report stated.

The driver of the Ford, a 36-year-old woman from Robstown, Texas, was not injured, according to the report.

The driver of the Chevy, a 43-year-old man from Raytown, Mo., had a possible injury, and was taken to a hospital in Johnson County, the report stated.

Chain accident reported on I-35

Four vehicles were involved in a chain accident on I-35 northbound on the ramp to 18th Street in Kansas City, Kan., at 3:28 p.m. Jan. 17, according to a Kansas Highway Patrol trooper’s report.

A 2015 Kenworth truck failed to stop and hit the rear of a Toyota Sequoia, which then hit the rear of a Toyota Camry, which then hit an unknown passenger car that left the scene of the accident, the trooper’s report stated.

The Sequoia and Camry had been stopped on a ramp from I-35 to 18th Street when the accident occurred, the report said.

The driver of the Kenworth, a 48-year-old woman from Gardner, Kan., was not injured, according to the report.

The driver of the Sequoia, a 50-year-old man from Stilwell, Kan., had a possible injury, the report stated. A 55-year-old passenger in the Sequoia was taken to a hospital in Kansas City, Kan. A 19-year-old male passenger in the Sequoia was not injured, according to the report.

The driver of the Camry, a 32-year-old woman from Kansas City, Kan., was injured and taken to a hospital in Kansas City, Kan., according to the report. A 13-year-old girl and a 3-year-old boy in the Camry were not injured, the report stated.