After establishing democracy over three decades ago, Croatia has, along with joining the European Union, identified membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) as one of its strategic priorities in achieving national interests and establishing secure conditions for the continuous development and strengthening of the Croatian state and society. After the victory over the aggressor and the defense of freedom and democracy in the Homeland War, Croatia embarked on its path towards this political-military and defense alliance as a key factor of peace and security in the Euro-Atlantic area and as a community of free and democratic states sharing the same values. After the invitation for membership in April 2008 at the NATO Summit in Bucharest and brief accession negotiations, the Croatian Accession Protocol was signed in Brussels on 9 July 2008 and subsequently ratified in the parliaments of the Alliance's Member States. The national ratification instruments were deposited at the U.S. Department of State, the depository of the North Atlantic Treaty. Croatia became a member of NATO by depositing its ratification document on 1 April 2009. As a member, Croatia participated in the Summit on 3 and 4 April 2009 in Strasbourg and Kehl. The Croatian flag was raised in front of NATO headquarters in Brussels on 7 April 2009. By joining the Alliance, over the past 15 years, Croatia has strengthened its international position in terms of security, politics, economy and geopolitics. As a Central European, Danubian, Adriatic and Mediterranean country, Croatia represents an important link between these European regions with its geostrategic position. Croatia actively participates in shaping the policies of the Alliance and the collective decision-making system of NATO, the unanimous decisions of which also reflect Croatian national positions, priorities and interests. Over the past fifteen years, Croatia has asserted itself as a committed and reliable member of NATO. With significant contributions to NATO missions and operations, as well as participation in strengthening deterrence and defense on the eastern flank of NATO, Croatia invests in its own security and demonstrates solidarity. Croatia fulfills its international obligations in terms of stabilizing crisis areas, transfers previously acquired knowledge, especially knowledge gained during the Homeland War, develops the capabilities of its armed forces with technologically advanced, innovative solutions and strengthens its own defense industry. In the year when Croatia marks the 15th anniversary of its membership in the Alliance, NATO marks the 75th anniversary of its existence. This year's dual anniversary represents an important moment for both the Republic of Croatia and for NATO as a whole. The anniversary of Croatian membership is a confirmation of the strong and continuous Croatian presence within the Euro-Atlantic security framework, while the commemoration of 75 years of NATO is a chance to ponder the past accomplishments of the Alliance and the existing and future security challenges. The aggressive war Russia wages against Ukraine has endangered European stability and changed geopolitical relationships and the secure environment of the Alliance. Therefore, NATO has strongly steered towards an all-encompassing approach to security through its three main goals: defense and deterrence, prevention and management of crises and cooperative security. Today, perhaps more than ever before, NATO continues to strengthen its solidarity and unity, based on the strength of the Transatlantic relationship and shared democratic values, with the goal of preserving peace and security. Croatia as well will, through NATO, continue working on maintaining and strengthening its security and the stability of Europe in the wider sense, especially southwestern Europe, promoting the core values of democracy and liberty. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Croatia