Rick Moranis is most popularly known among fans for his scene-stealing performance as Louis Tully in the original two Ghostbusters films. Additionally, he also starred in other hit comedy films such as Spaceballs, Honey, I Shrunk the Kids, Parenthood, My Blue Heaven, and The Flintstones.

Advertisement

The actor has rarely been on screen since the 2000s. However, that almost changed when he was approached to do a brief cameo in 2016’s Ghostbusters starring Melissa McCarthy. However, the actor had no interest in reprising the role in the film because it made no sense to him.

Rick Moranis Refused to Appear as Louis Tully in 2016’s Ghostbusters

Rick Moranis has had a great career in Hollywood and was at the peak of his career in the 80s and 90s. His starring role as Louis Tully in the original two Ghostbusters made him a sensation among audiences. However, the actor rarely appeared on screen since the 2000s with many thinking he has retired as an actor.

Advertisement

While he has done some voice-over work for some animated films and TV shows, he has not appeared on-screen as an actor since 1997’s Honey, We Shrunk Ourselves. The actor/comedian almost returned in the 2016 reboot of his beloved Ghostbusters franchise which starred Melissa McCarthy, Kristen Wiig, and Kate McKinnon.

He was approached by the studio to reprise his role in the 2016 reboot but he declined to do so. In an interview with The Hollywood Reporter, Moranis stated that while he wished the actors and the film well, he was not interested in reprising his beloved role. He explained that it did not make sense for him to return for only one day of shooting for a role he did 30 years ago. He said,

“I wish them well. I hope it’s terrific. But it just makes no sense to me. Why would I do just one day of shooting on something I did 30 years ago?”

Stars from the original Ghostbusters film including Bill Murray, Dan Aykroyd, and Sigourney Weaver, appeared in the film much to the surprise of fans. However, Moranis seems to be uninterested in participating in the nostalgia train that the film had. Fans can watch 2016’s Ghostbusters on Amazon Prime Video.

Advertisement

Rick Moranis Spotted for the First Time in Over 3 Years Recently

Actor/comedian Rock Moranis has been living under the radar for many years. The Ghostbusters star has not been acting on-screen since the 2000s and people have also rarely seen him in public. The last time that the actor made headlines was when he was assaulted randomly by an ex-con named Marquis Ventura in October 2020. (via The New York Post).

The actor was recently seen taking a stroll in New York City. He seems to be in good spirits and is seen wearing a blue jacket, khaki pants, a pair of sneakers, and a multicolored beanie (via Yahoo Entertainment). The city was the same place where he was assaulted some years ago. He has since avoided being outside frequently after that incident.

Moranis is set to return to the screen with the new sequel to his Honey, I Shrunk the Kids film series titled Shrunk. It is not known when the project will start filming but fans are excited to see Moranis’ comeback to the big screen. It remains to be seen when Disney decides to start production on the film. Fans can watch him in the original Ghostbusters films on Amazon Prime Video.