RICK Moranis has been spotted during a rare outing years after leaving the spotlight.

The film star was seen taking a walk by himself in New York City on Sunday.

In new photos, Rick, 71, stopped at a farmers market near his apartment.

The actor seemed in high spirits, browsing the stalls and chatting with vendors as he listened to music through earphones.

Rick kept his look lowkey, hiding his face behind sunglasses and a baseball cap.

The Toronto native wore a navy polo shirt, layered with a jacket of the same shade.

He paired the navy look with gray pants, along with a brown leather belt and casual black sneakers.

HORRIFYING ORDEAL

Rick's outing came just three years after he was physically assaulted while walking in the city.

In October 2020, the star was attacked at 7:24 am on a Thursday morning as he walked through Manhattan's Upper West Side.

Security footage retrieved from the attack showing a man approaching Rick and knocking him to the sidewalk, before walking away as the actor remained on the ground.

"Rick Moranis was assaulted on the Upper West Side yesterday. He is fine but grateful for everyone’s thoughts and well wishes," a rep for Rick shared following the assault.

Rick went to a hospital after the attack, suffering from injuries to the head, back, and hip.

He then reported the attack to cops at the 20th Precinct, with the NYPD requesting aid in identifying the attacker.

"[An unidentified] male punched a 67-year-old male knocking him to the ground and causing substantial pain / injury," police said on X, formerly known as Twitter, at the time.

In 2022, a homeless man pleaded guilty to randomly attacking Rick, along with other attacks in the city, according to the New York Post.

BACK IN BUSINESS?

Rick has two children and stepped back from acting to raise them as a single father after the death of his wife.

The star's final film was in 2006, but he previously hinted that he'd be willing to get back on screen for a reboot of Honey, I Shrunk The Kids.

Rick signed up to reprise his role as Wayne Szalinski, but the project was ditched due to Covid restrictions and budget cuts.

Rick's co-star, Josh Gad, spoke about the cancelation, but hinted that the reboot could still be a possibility.

"Truth is, we were inches from starting and then Covid hit, inches from starting again & then my schedule exploded with conflicts, inches from starting again & budget got the best of us.

"If you want it, let your local @disney know," he wrote on X.