It feels strange to call an $85 million movie underrated, but I can’t help but think of 1993’s Last Action Hero in those terms. The people involved in the problematic production and even those who recall the insane marketing campaigns before the box office flop would likely disagree with me. The story behind the film - which Empire outlined in a great retrospective piece back in 2011 - is arguably more fascinating than what’s on the screen.

But, as a kid, all I saw was an incredible action movie that fired up my imagination. After revisiting the film via the new Blu-ray re-release, I’m happy to say that, in spite of its flaws, Last Action Hero still elicits a childlike sense of wonderment from me.

Here are six reasons to revisit Last Action Hero.

1. The concept is timeless.

Last Action Hero wasn’t the plot about someone entering a movie and/or a fictional character entering the real world (Purple Rose of Cairo, anyone?), and it certainly wasn’t the last. We’ve even seen it in the horror realm with the likes of New Nightmare and Midnight Movie.

The reason it works is because it’s a timeless concept. What kid hasn’t dreamed of joining forces with their favorite movie character? That’s exactly what Danny (Austin O'Brien) is able to do with a magic ticket he uses to see Jack Slater IV, entering the film and fighting alongside action hero Jack Slater (Arnold Schwarzenegger).

It’s noticeably difficult to balance the kid-friendly atmosphere with the over-the-top action while incorporating meta comedy, but Last Action Hero’s satirization of action genre cliches remains relevant as ever.

2. The cast is great.

It’s kind of amazing that Arnold Schwarzenegger agreed to star in a movie that essentially makes fun at his entire career, but he evidently got the joke, championing the script from the beginning. While Schwarzenegger is great as both Jack Slater and himself (I love the scene in which he shills Planet Hollywood), he’s surrounded by other talented actors, including a few friends.

The supporting cast includes F. Murray Abraham (Amadeus), Anthony Quinn (Lawrence of Arabia), Tom Noonan (Manhunt), Frank McRae (Batteries Not Included), Charles Dance (Alien 3) and Robert Prosky (Gremlins 2). Did I mention that Ian McKellen (The Lord of the Rings) portrays death and Danny DeVito voices an ill-advised animated cat named Whiskers?

Schwarzenegger brought in Robert Patrick and Sharon Stone for blink-and-you’ll-miss-it cameos as their respective characters from Terminator and Basic Instinct. You’ll also spot several celebrities at the Jack Slater premiere, including Jean-Claude Van Damme, Chevy Chase, Jim Belushi, Damon Wayans and MC Hammer.

3. It was directed by John McTiernan.

Last Action Hero is directed by John McTiernan, who previously directed Schwarzenegger in Predator and was also responsible for Die Hard and The Hunt for Red October. It was a bit of a questionable choice - he was partially responsible for creating some of the stereotypes at which Last Action Hero pokes fun - but you’d be hard pressed to find a guy who knows action as well as him (Rollerball remake not withstanding).

4. It was co-written by Shane Black.

I would be happy if Shane Black wrote every action movie. The guy’s resume includes Lethal Weapon, The Last Boy Scout, The Long Kiss Goodnight (which he also directed) and Kiss Kiss Bang Bang. Most recently, he wrote and directed Iron Man 3, and now he’s attached to the Predator reboot. He also penned one of my all-time favorites, The Monster Squad. He certainly knows how to meld action, emotion and humor into a punchy script. If you ever want to learn about screenwriting and have a good laugh at the same time, read some of his scripts.

The rest of the writing staff isn’t too shabby either. The original concept was co-conceived by Zak Penn (X-Men: The Last Stand). William Goldman (The Princess Bride) received a whopping $1 million for an uncredited rewrite. Even Star Wars megastar Carrie Fisher was reportedly brought in to give it a feminine touch.

5. It’s action packed.

When watching Last Action Hero, it’s impossible not to think about how extraordinarily expensive it was to create. In true Schwarzenegger form, it’s never too far between elaborate, over-the-top action sequences. There are countless explosions, gun shots, car crashes and other stunts. The constant barrage of big action set pieces should be enough to satisfy any action fan of the era.

6. It has an awesome metal soundtrack.

In addition to a score composed by Michael Kamen (Lethal Weapon, Die Hard, X-Men), Last Action Hero boasted a killer score of some of the top metal and hard rock acts of the time. The lead single was an AC/DC original titled “Big Gun.” Megadeth, Alice in Chains, Anthrax, Queensryche and Tesla are among the other artists who contributed original songs. The soundtrack also features Aerosmith and Def Leppard, among others.