History

Channel 40 had its beginnings in Fayetteville as WKFT-TV, the first independent station in eastern North Carolina. It received a construction permit on July 22, 1980, and went on the air less than a year later on June 1, 1981. It first operated from studios in the old First Union Bank on Donaldson Street in downtown Fayetteville and transmitted its signal from a 750-foot (229 m) tower in unincorporated Cumberland County on Cliffdale Road, with 1.54 million watts of power (the tower site has since been annexed into Fayetteville).

Fayetteville Television, a group of local businessmen organized by Robert Warren, a former Fayetteville reporter for then-ABC affiliate WRAL-TV (channel 5, now a NBC affiliate) in Raleigh, founded the station. Warren served as WKFT's first general manager, but was never an investor and was let go after only a month. WKFT offered a general entertainment format consisting of cartoons, westerns, religious shows, dramas and classic sitcoms. The station put a fairly decent signal into the southern portion of the Triangle, but was harder to receive in the more densely populated areas of the market.

In 1985, the original owners sold WKFT to SJL Broadcasting, which formed Central Carolina Television to manage the station. The new owners subsequently invested about $5 million to build a new 1,800-foot (549 m) tower in Broadway, near the Harnett–Lee county line. The new transmitter, activated in June 1986, operated with a full five million watts of power. It gave channel 40 a coverage area comparable to the established Triangle stations, and provided grade B coverage as far west as Greensboro. The station also rebranded itself as "Counterforce 40" and significantly upgraded its programming, filling a void left when WLFL, the Triangle's largest independent, joined the upstart Fox network. However, it operated on a low budget, selling advertising mainly in the southern part of the market. By 1989, WKFT was in dire financial straits, reportedly from debts owed to film studios for movies shown on the station.

In December 1989, WRAL's transmission tower was destroyed in a severe ice storm, forcing it off the air. Within three hours, WKFT picked up WRAL-TV's entire broadcast schedule. It simulcast WRAL entirely until October 1990, when WRAL's new transmission tower was erected. Additionally, WRAL purchased the WKFT tower at Broadway. It installed Electronic news-gathering microwave receivers vital to relaying Fayetteville coverage to the WRAL studios in West Raleigh. After the simulcast ended, WKFT resumed a general entertainment format that fall with stronger programming offering a blend of sitcoms, cartoons, movies, talk shows and reality shows.

SJL sold the station to Delta Broadcasting in 1991. By this time, the station was known as simply "TV 40." Delta then sold it to Allied Communications in 1994. WKFT lost bids for the UPN and WB affiliations to WRDC and WRAZ respectively, partly because those stations' owners were somewhat wealthier. It remained the only full-market general entertainment independent in the Triangle.

Bahakel Communications bought the station in 1996. As the 1990s went on, WKFT found it increasingly difficult to find stronger programming, in part because its main competitors—WLFL, WRDC, and WRAZ—had far wealthier owners and aired advertising that targeted the entire market. The station was forced to move toward more paid programming, though it briefly served as the over-the-air home of the Carolina Hurricanes. On March 14, 2002, WKFT's transmission tower was struck by a small aircraft. Although broadcasts continued on local cable systems via direct fiber feeds, the station remained off the air for a few months.