20.06.2024Dr. Gustav Mogull Receives the Karl Scheel Prize from the Physical Society of Berlin 2024

Dr. Mogull & Visualization of the scattering of two black holes including a wave profile

Dr. Gustav Mogull, a young researcher at the Department of Physics at Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin and associated with the Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute), is receiving the prestigious Karl Scheel Prize for his groundbreaking work in the field of general relativity and gravitational wave physics.

Since the first observation of gravitational waves in 2015, a new field of research has emerged to study black holes, neutron stars, and test general relativity in extreme gravitational fields. Dr. Mogull has created a novel theoretical framework called the Worldline Quantum Field Theory (WQFT), developed in the research group of IRIS Adlershof-member Prof. Dr. Jan Plefka, to compute high-precision analytical predictions for the classical two-body problem in general relativity.

Using WQFT, Dr. Mogull has derived important physical observables for the dynamics of black holes and neutron stars in a series of papers published in prestigious journals such as Physical Review Letters. His results are already being applied in modeling gravitational wave signals for data analysis of current and planned future gravitational wave detectors.

The prize honors Dr. Mogull's outstanding theoretical work on the two-body problem, which is of great importance for future high-precision tests of general relativity and our understanding of gravitational waves. The crucial advance of WQFT lies in the transfer of methods from quantum field theory, which usually describes elementary particle physics, to the interaction of black holes. In this sense, one replaces the theoretical description of the scattering of protons in particle accelerators with the scattering of black holes in our universe. The Karl Scheel Prize, endowed with 5,000 euros, is awarded annually by the German Physical Society of Berlin for outstanding achievements in physics.

Gustav Mogull studied at the University of Cambridge and received his PhD in Edinburgh with work on scattering amplitudes in quantum field theory. After a postdoc in Uppsala (Sweden), he has been a long-term postdoc at the DFG Research Training Group "Rethinking Quantum Field Theory" (Speaker: Prof. Dr. J. Plefka) since 2020, which was recently extended for a second funding phase. The award-winning work was carried out within the framework of this research project, and Mr. Mogull is also actively involved in co-supervising doctoral and master’s thesis students in the program. He has recently received a fellowship from the Royal Society, which will lead him to a lectureship at Queen Mary University London starting in the fall of 2024.

Contact: Dr. Mogull and Prof. Dr. Plefka, Department of Physics, GRK 2575.

19.06.2024Enhanced surface-to-bulk Raman signal ratio using a transferable porous gold membrane

Enhanced surface-to-bulk Raman signal ratio using a transferable porous gold membrane

In a recent collaboration of the Emmy Noether Research Group "Physics of low-dimensional systems" around IRIS Adlershof member Dr. Sebastian Heeg at HU Berlin, researchers from the Leibniz-Institut für Kristallzüchtung (IKZ), the Université Le Mans, and the ETH Zurich, realized a novel modality in Raman spectroscopy through the development of surface-sensitive Raman scattering. This new approach addresses a major limitation of conventional Raman spectroscopy, where signals from surfaces or thin films are often weak and obscured by dominant bulk signals.

Surfaces play a pivotal role in science and industry as they are where most environmental interactions occur, including chemical reactions, adhesion, friction, and light interactions. Surface properties may differ significantly from bulk properties in terms of chemical composition, atomic arrangement, and electronic structure, influencing technological advancements such as catalysts and solar cells. Raman spectroscopy, a powerful, non-destructive technique for analysing molecular vibrations, provides insights into a material's chemical composition, crystallinity, defects, and strain. It is particularly valuable for characterising nanomaterials, thin films, and biological samples where precise surface information is essential.

The application of conventional Raman spectroscopy to surfaces and thin films has been constrained by dominant bulk signals. However, using transferable porous gold membranes (PAuMs) allows for the study of surface-specific Raman signals with unprecedented clarity. PAuMs contain irregular, slot-shaped nanopores that act as plasmonic antennas. When placing PAuM on a surface or thin film of interest, the nanopores amplify the Raman signal of the surface directly below while the membrane itself suppresses bulk signals. Combining these effects improves the surface-to-bulk Raman signal ratio by three orders of magnitude and enables truly surface-sensitive Raman scattering.

The researchers used graphene as a model surface, observing that the nanopores in the membranes enhance the graphene Raman signal a hundredfold. Placing a spacer between graphene and the PAuM reveals that the Raman enhancement is confined to the first 2 – 3 nm of the material below the membrane, which demonstrates true surface sensitivity. A first prototypal application regards quantifying the strain in a 12.5 nm thin Si quantum well layer using PAuMs. The layer is part of a Silicon-Germanium heterostructure designed to use spin qubits as a promising and fast-developing technology for quantum computing.

In a second use-case, PAuMs are used to study the surface of thin LaNiO3 film, a metallic perovskite used as an electrode material. The electrical conductivity of LaNiO3 films is strongly coupled to its crystallographic structure and can be tuned by the film thickness. With PAuM placed on top of LaNiO3, the authors observed a Raman mode splitting arising from the film’s surface and indicating a difference in the surface structure compared to the bulk. This finding is consistent with theoretical predictions and observations from scanning tunnelling microscopy studies.

“Our work connects two separate fields” says Heeg, “Conceptually, we extend the field of plasmon-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, which is almost exclusively used to study and sense molecular compounds and nanostructures, to the field of solid states materials like Silicon quantum wells, thin complex oxides films, and related surfaces.” The team is now exploring the potential of the method with partners in Berlin and international collaborators. Dr. Pietro Marabotti, Einstein International Postdoctoral Fellow in Heeg’s group and co-author of the study, remarks that “our approach is not limited to crystalline surfaces, which we use as a showcase, but may also be used to study, for example, biological surfaces or surface-bound chemical reactions.” Researchers interested in the method are invited to get in touch with the team.

Bulk-suppressed and surface-sensitive Raman scattering by transferable plasmonic membranes with irregular slot-shaped nanopores

Roman M. Wyss, Günther Kewes, Pietro Marabotti, Stefan M. Koepfli, Karl-Philipp Schlichting, Markus Parzefall, Eric Bonvin, Martin F. Sarott, Morgan Trassin, Maximilian Oezkent, Chen-Hsun Lu, Kevin-P. Gradwohl, Thomas Perrault, Lala Habibova, Giorgia Marcelli, Marcela Giraldo, Jan Vermant, Lukas Novotny, Martin Frimmer, Mads C. Weber, and Sebastian Heeg

Nat. Commun. 15, 5236 (2024).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-49130-2 OPENACCESS

➔ Article on the paper in ETH News

➔ Article on the paper from Humboldt Innovation

Kontakt:

Dr. Sebastian Heeg

Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin

IRIS Adlershof & Institut für Physik

Tel.: 030 2093-82295

E-Mail: sebastian.heeg physik.hu-berlin.de

Website: https://www.physik.hu-berlin.de/en/pld

05.06.2024DFG extends the Collaborative Research Centre FONDA

The CRC ‘FONDA - Foundations of Workflows for Large-Scale Scientific Data Analysis’ has been extended by the German Research Foundation (DFG) for a funding period of four years. IRIS Adlershof member Prof Dr Ulf Leser from the Department of Computer Science at Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin is the CRC's spokesperson.

The SFB FONDA is dedicated to researching methods for increasing productivity in the development, execution and maintenance of data analysis workflows (DAWs) for large scientific data sets. In today's research, ever larger amounts of data are being generated in all scientific disciplines. These need to be analysed using complex DAWs running on distributed and parallel computing infrastructures. Traditionally, these workflows are optimised for speed, which leads to individual solutions that are difficult to reproduce and use for other researchers.

The aim of FONDA is to develop methods and tools that significantly reduce the development time and costs of DAWs. This is to be achieved through new abstractions, models and algorithms that can form the basis for a new generation of workflow infrastructures. The CRC is investigating the following questions, among others: How can DAWs be developed that run equally efficiently on different software and hardware infrastructures? How must these workflows be designed so that they can adapt to changing input data or requirements? And how can reliable data analysis systems be built that recognise and control their own requirements in order to increase the reliability of their execution?

22.05.2024Joachim Sauer receives the 2024 Blaise Pascal Medal in Chemistry

The renowned chemist and founding member of IRIS Adlershof, Prof. Joachim Sauer, has been awarded the 2024 Blaise Pascal Medal in Chemistry by the European Academy of Sciences (EURASC) for his pioneering research in the field of catalytic reactions based on quantum chemistry. The EURASC honours his innovative research methods, such as hybrid quantum mechanical calculations and Grand Canonical Monte Carlo simulations, which have raised the understanding of heterogeneous catalysis to a new level. With the award of the medal, named after the French mathematician, physicist and philosopher Blaise Pascal, Prof Sauer joins a list of people who have made outstanding contributions to science, technology and research education. The award ceremony will take place on 29 and 30 October 2024 at the Academia das Ciências de Lisboa in Lisbon.

We congratulate our founding member on this honour.

13.05.2024DFG extends Research Training Group 2575 “Rethinking Quantum Field Theory”

Quantum field theory (QFT) as a union of quantum mechanics and special relativity represents one of the most important intellectual achievements of the last century, in which a large part of modern theoretical physics culminates. In recent years, innovations have given rise to seriously rethinking the core concepts of QFT. These include the methodology of perturbation theory, the theory of Feynman integrals, dualities and hidden symmetries, the prominent role of effective field theories, and the gradient flow methodology in lattice field theory.

In the first funding period, the RTG 2575 (Spokesperson: IRIS Memeber Prof. Jan PLefka) made important contributions to this innovative research area. It aims to transform the theoretical foundations of the field, coupled with the development of new technologies for the phenomenology of particle physics and gravitational wave research. The proven qualification program is to be continued in the second funding period.

18.04.2024Exciting breakthrough in battery technology through innovative sulphur-based cathodes

A research team at Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin has achieved a major breakthrough in battery technology. Under the leadership of IRIS Adlershof member Prof. Dr Michael J. Bojdys, an innovative sulphur-based cathode has been developed that enables the use of more environmentally friendly and sustainable materials in lithium-ion batteries. The results of this groundbreaking study were published on 15 April 2024 in the renowned journal Angewandte Chemie.

Battery test circuit at bojdysLAB Battery cell manufacture at bojdysLAB

The new technology, which encapsulates sulphur in a special microporous imine polymer network, not only demonstrates increased battery performance and lifetime, but also addresses the critical problem of resource scarcity in conventional battery materials such as cobalt. "This development could fundamentally change the way we store and use energy and represents an important step towards a more sustainable future," explained Prof Bojdys.

Prof. Dr Michael J. Bojdys is an expert in the field of sustainable energy materials and, as part of the BMBF's "GreenCHEM" initiative, is helping to transform the chemical industry in the Berlin capital region by combining science and industry to create a circular economy based on sustainable resources.

For further information and details on the study, please contact Prof Dr Michael J. Bojdys and his team, Barbora Balcarova and Guiping Li, as scientific contacts. They can be contacted at michael.janus.bojdys hu-berlin.de or via bojdyslab.org.

28.03.2024Automated calculation of surface properties in crystals

The surface properties of complex crystalline materials can be calculated reliably and automatically using only the fundamental laws of physics, thanks to a new computer-based method. Writing in the journal npj computational materials, researchers from the University of Oldenburg in Germany outline how their method could speed up the search for new materials for important technologies such as photovoltaics, batteries or data transmission.

Computer-aided methods are becoming an increasingly powerful tooI in the search for new materials for key technologies such as photovoltaics, batteries and data transmission. Member of IRIS Adlershof Prof. Dr. Caterina Cocchi and Holger-Dietrich Saßnick from the University of Oldenburg’s Institute of Physics have now developed a high-throughput automatised method to calculate the surface properties of crystalline materials starting directly at the level of established laws of physics (first principles). In an article published in the journal npj computational materials, they report that this can speed up the search for relevant materials for applications in key areas such as the energy sector. They also plan to combine the method with artificial intelligence and machine learning techniques to further accelerate the process.

So far similar methods have focused on bulk materials rather than surfaces, the two physicists explain. “All the relevant processes for energy conversion, production, and storage occur on surfaces,” says Cocchi, who heads the Theoretical Solid State Physics research group at the University of Oldenburg. However, calculating the material properties of surfaces is far more challenging than for complete crystals because the surface facets often have a complex structure due to factors such as defects in the crystal structure or the uneven growth of a crystal, she explains.

This complexity poses problems for researchers in the field of materials science: “It is often not possible to clearly determine the properties of samples in experiments," says Cocchi. This motivated Cocchi and her colleague Saßnick to develop an automated procedure for high-quality screening of the characteristics of new compounds.

The result of their work was incorporated into the aim2dat computer programme, which only requires the chemical composition of a compound as input. The information about the crystal’s structure is extracted from existing databases. The software then calculates the conditions under which the surface of the material is chemically stable. In a second step it determines key properties, in particular the energy required to excite electrons into conduction states or detach themselves from a surface. This parameter plays an important role in materials that convert solar energy into electricity, for example. "We don't make any assumptions in our calculations; we use only the fundamental equations of quantum mechanics, which is why our results are very reliable," Cocchi explains.

The two scientists demonstrated the applicability of the method using the semiconductor cesium telluride. The crystals of this material, which is used as an electron source in particle accelerators, can occur in four different forms. “The composition and quality of the material samples are difficult to control in experiments,” notes Saßnick. Nevertheless, the Oldenburg researchers were able to perform a detailed analysis of the physical properties for the different configurations of the caesium telluride crystals.

Cocchi and Saßnick have embedded the software in a publicly accessible programme library so that other researchers can also use and improve the procedure. “Our method has great potential as a tool for discovering new materials – and in particular physically and structurally complex solids – for all kinds of applications in the energy sector," says Cocchi.

Originalpublikation:

Saßnick, HD., Cocchi, C. “Automated analysis of surface facets: the example of cesium telluride.” npj Computational Materials 10, 38 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-024-01224-7

Weitere Informationen:

https://uol.de/en/est

19.03.2024Markus Krutzik zu Quantentechnologie bei "Weiß der Adler"

It's magic! Wissenschaft und Magie, das schließt sich eigentlich aus. Nur, wenn Quantenforscher:innen über ihren Fachbereich sprechen, dann fallen schon mal diese Worte…

Für viele Staaten ist die Forschung an der Quantentechnologie der Schlüssel zur Zukunft. Wohl auch deshalb will der Standort Berlin-Adlershof hier ganz vorn mitspielen.

Wie das funktionieren und was Quantenforschung alles können soll, darüber spricht in dieser Ausgabe FluxFM-Podcaster Danilo Höpfner mit IRIS Adlershof Mitglied Markus Krutzik vom Ferdinand-Braun-Institut / HU Berlin sowie Gabrielle Thomas von Menlo Systems.

➔ Podcast-Folge auf FluxFM

07.02.2024New high-tech instrument for the nanospectroscopy research of Sebastian Heeg

Sebastian Heeg, junior research group leader at the Department of Physics and member of IRIS Adlershof, has now officially opened two laboratories. The centrepiece is the Porto Nanoscope from the Brazilian tech start-up FabNS, which was delivered in November 2023 after a two-year wait.

FabNS has thus set a milestone, as Brazil, which has historically been dependent on foreign technology, is now taking a different direction and starting to export cutting-edge scientific instruments itself. This freedom between import and export puts Brazil in a protagonist position in global technology. Sebastian Heeg's working group will be able to provide the start-up with valuable feedback as its first customer within the framework of a development partnership.

The Porto Nanoscope images the structure of nanomaterials using tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. This enables a 1,000-fold magnification compared to conventional microscopes and thus a resolution of structures in the sub-nanometre range. This allows the surfaces of 2D materials such as graphene, a layer of hexagonally arranged carbon atoms, to be analysed. Understanding and modifying the properties of 2D materials on these smallest length scales will be used in future for nanoscale photodetectors, flexible displays and transistors.

Sebastian Heeg is enthusiastic about the new measuring device. The Brazilians have created a device with high stability, efficiency and performance. It can do everything he needs for his research: "This system is the best system." The new system will also be available to other scientists, such as the Center for the Science of Materials Berlin (CSMB), for their research.

➔ TV report from the Brazilian News

Contact:

Dr. Sebastian Heeg

Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin

IRIS Adlershof & Department of Physics

Tel.: 030 2093-82295

sebastian.heeg physik.hu-berlin.de

30.01.2024Dr. Niklas Grabicki nominated for the Dissertationspreis Adlershof

On Tuesday, February 13, 2024, starting from 3:00 PM, three young researchers will present the topics of their dissertations at the Erwin Schrödinger Center. Among the three nominees presenting their work at the event is Dr. Niklas Grabicki. He completed his doctoral studies under IRIS member Prof. Dr. Oliver Dumele, who now teaches at Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg. Dr. Niklas Grabicki, as part of his dissertation, synthesized functional molecules that can be classified as new molecular sensors or light-responsive magnets. Potential applications of these new functional molecules range from targeted membrane transport to data storage.

Additionally, Dr. Andrei Bud (Farkas Group) and Dr. Lisa Kröll (Rolfs Group) were nominated. The award ceremony will also be broadcasted via livestream.

We wish Niklas the best of luck!

22.11.2023Kai Wegner and Dr. Ina Czyborra visited IRIS Adlershof

IRIS Adlershof welcomed a visit from the Governing Mayor, Kai Wegner, and the Senator for Science, Health, and Care, Dr. Ina Czyborra. IRIS-member Prof. Emil List-Kratochvil provided them with insights into our cleanroom laboratory, where our colleagues are actively researching new materials, and he explained ongoing projects with the distinguished guests.

Following the visit, our guests celebrated the 20th anniversary of Campus Adlershof, which they opened together with Prof. Julia von Blumenthal, President of Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Roland Sillmann, WISTA. The lively exchange and discussions during the festivites were complemented by engaging presentations from Prof. Elmar Kulke, IRIS-member Prof. Eva Unger, and Prof. Thomas Kosch.

IRIS Adlershof, as a part of this success story, congratulates the entire campus on the milestones achieved together.

(fltr:) Prof. Ulf Leser, Dr. Nikolai Puhlmann, Prof. Emil List-Kratochvil, Kai Wegner, Prof. Christoph Schneider and Dr. Ina Czyborra in front of IRIS Adlershof Prof. Emil List-Kratochvil explains ongoing research in new materials with Kai Wegner, governing mayor of Berlin Prof. Eva Unger looks forward to the next 20 years of energy materials research at the Festakt: 20 Jahre Campus Adlershof

01.11.2023Oliver Dumele is going to Freiburg

Dr. Oliver Dumele, member of IRIS Adlershof, received a call to the Albert-Ludwigs University of Freiburg and started his role as a Professor (W3) for Functional Organic Materials on November 1st.

Oliver Dumele studied chemistry at the University of Mainz and UC Berkeley in the USA. After his thesis at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz and an industrial internship at BASF in Ludwigshafen, he obtained his doctorate at ETH Zurich in Switzerland. In a subsequent postdoctoral phase, he conducted research at Northwestern University in the USA. Since 2019, he has been a junior group leader at the Institute of Chemistry at Humboldt University in Berlin, where he has been leading the BMBF group on "Organic Battery Electrodes from Framework Compounds" since 2022. His work has been honored with various awards, such as the Lecturer's Prize from the Foundation of the Chemical Industry, the Young Investigator Award from the European Chemical Society, and recently, the Ernst Haage Prize from the Max Planck Society.

He remains a member of IRIS Adlershof.

Congratulations!

19.10.2023Materialzing the future: CSMB's Opening Event

Sustainable batteries, novel catalysts, efficient solar cells, and 3D printing technology - all of this is set to emerge in the future at the new Center for the Science of Materials Berlin (CSMB) at Humboldt University in Berlin. The grand opening took place on Thursday, October 19th in the IRIS Research Building in Berlin-Adlershof. Not only the HU news page, but also the newspaper B.Z. (with a quarter-million readers) featured a noteworthy article on 'Berlin's new gem of research'.

"Many global challenges related to sustainable resource utilization can only be addressed through innovation in materials science," explains CSMB founding director Prof. Stefan Hecht. With the new materials research center, Humboldt University is consolidating the expertise available in Adlershof's science and technology hub for innovation processes and materials science. At CSMB, researchers are working on future materials aimed at achieving global sustainability goals. Scientists from various disciplines, both academic and non-academic institutions, as well as entrepreneurs, are working together. The development of innovative materials at CSMB will be accelerated using modern methods such as high-throughput synthesis and screening, in-situ synchrotron analytics, data science, and artificial intelligence.

Collaborative Research on Future Materials

In the labs at CSMB, 150 scientists are already working in jointly operated labs, known as Joint Labs. Here, researchers from chemistry, physics, and computer science collaborate with colleagues from the life and cultural sciences, each bringing their unique perspective on materials. Startup entrepreneurs also have access to the new labs. Together, they are researching highly efficient solar cells, sustainable sodium-ion batteries, novel catalysts for efficient green hydrogen production, and printable organ models for animal-free drug testing.

State-of-the-Art Research Building in Berlin-Adlershof

The state-of-the-art research building at CSMB provides researchers with excellent infrastructure, including electron microscopes for atomic-level material imaging, ultrafast spectroscopy for tracking chemical processes in femtoseconds, and innovative printing techniques.

CSMB is the logical extension of Humboldt University's first integrated research institute, IRIS Adlershof, which laid the foundation for interdisciplinary collaboration and a new, state-of-the-art research building.

Here are some impressions, gathered by our colleague Collin

19.10.2023Jan Plefka and Stefan Hecht among the 100 most prominent scientists in Berlin

The editorial team of the Berlin Science section of Tagesspiegel has identified the top 100 personalities in the Berlin research scene for the year 2023. These experts have significantly influenced the research region of Berlin throughout the year with their remarkable achievements and innovations. Some have enriched their respective fields with groundbreaking studies and innovative research methods, secured substantial research funding, and excelled in education. Others have actively participated in public discourse, shaped the urban community, and established international networks connecting regional research institutions with the world. These researchers all contribute to shaping the profile of the scientific community and laying the foundations for future discoveries and innovations. Among the selected scientists are two members of IRIS Adlershof.

Jan Plefka: Researching at the Heart of the Universe

One of the selected top scientists is Jan Plefka, a researcher at the Institute of Physics and the Integrative Research Institute for the Sciences (IRIS) at Humboldt-University in Adlershof, Berlin. His work focuses on fascinating questions related to the formation of black holes, the validity of Einstein's theories in strong gravitational fields, and the quest for signs of physics beyond known natural forces and particles. In his research, he employs quantum field theory, a mathematical description of the fundamental building blocks of our universe, to, for example, investigate gravitational waves.

Stefan Hecht: Innovations in Materials Science

Another outstanding scientist who made it into the top 100 is Stefan Hecht, a professor of chemistry and the founding director of the Center for the Science of Materials Berlin. Stefan Hecht is dedicated to materials science and conducts intensive research on light-controlled polymers. Particularly notable is his development of "Xolography," a method for highly precise 3D printing, which he has brought to market readiness. His commitment to promoting university-based startups was recognized this year with the prestigious Unipreneurs Award.

The inclusion of these two exceptional researchers from IRIS Adlershof among Berlin's top 100 scientists recognizes their significant contributions to research and their impressive achievements in their respective fields. Jan Plefka and Stefan Hecht utilize their expertise and dedication to answer critical questions and advance innovations that will shape our world of tomorrow.

13.10.2023IOP–HU early career researcher conference on condensed matter physics

The Institute of Physics (IOP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), and Humboldt-Universtät zu Berlin recently concluded their IOP-HU Early Career Researcher Conference on Condensed Matter Physics in Liyang, and it was hailed as a resounding success. The event, held from October 13th to 14th, offered a platform for early career researchers to present their groundbreaking research and engage with domestic and international experts in the field, including the director of IRIS Adlershof, Prof. Jürgen P. Rabe, and the IRIS professors Christoph T. Koch, Claudia Draxl and Mathias Scheffler.

Event Highlights:

Day 1 - Early Career Researcher Conference: On the first day, junior postdoctoral candidates, senior PhD candidates, and students took the stage to present talks and posters, sharing their innovative research findings. The participants also had the invaluable opportunity to learn about postdoctoral fellowship opportunities at IOP CAS and partner institutes, followed by stimulating discussions with principal investigators from both organisations.

Day 2 - PI Program and Discussions with Early Career Researchers: The second day of the conference featured stimulating talks from distinguished researchers on a range of topics, including theory and simulation, scanning probe and electron microscopy, and magnetism and quantum information. These sessions fostered intellectual exchange and collaboration between seasoned researchers and the next generation of scientists.

Day 3 - Participants had the exclusive opportunity to embark on an optional visit to Beijing, a modern city with profound history and marvelous culture, further immersing themselves in the world of scientific excellence.

13.10.2023The IOP–Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellowship in Physics

Nominations are open for postdoctoral fellowships between two cities, Berlin and Beijing, as part of a joint physics program between the Integrative Research Institute for the Sciences (IRIS Adlershof) of Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin (HU Berlin) and the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, (IOP) Beijing.

FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM

Established in 2020, the prestigious two-year research fellowships are intended for exceptional early-career scientists, in preparation for an independent career in research at the frontier of condensed matter physics, quantum materials or device physics. Successful candidates will spend one year in Berlin and one in Beijing at the research groups of their choice, supported by up to 4,500 EUR/month. The selected fellows are expected to be appointed in 2023 and 2024. A first networking event is scheduled in Berlin. Fellows will work at the Campus Adlershof of HU Berlin and the IOP Zhongguancun Beijing Campus. The fellows have the possibility to visit and interact with associated Partners at the Max Born Institute, the Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin and its Electron Storage Ring BESSY II, the Leibniz-Institut für Kristallzüchtung or the Fritz-Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society.The prestigious two-year research fellowships are intended for exceptional early-career scientists, in preparation for an independent career in research at the frontier of condensed matter physics, quantum materials or device physics. Successful candidates will spend one year in Berlin and one in Beijing at the research groups of their choice, supported by up to 4,500 EUR/month.

The selected fellows will be appointed from August 2022 onwards. A first networking event is programmed in Berlin. Fellows will work at the Campus Adlershof of HU Berlin and the IOP Zhongcuancun Beijing Campus. The fellows have the possibility to visit and interact with associated Partners at the Max Born Institute, the Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin and its Electron Storage Ring BESSY II, the Freie Universität Berlin, at the Leibniz-Institut für Kristallzüchtung or the Fritz-Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society.

A full list of participating groups can be found at HU Physics and the IOP website. Exemplary fields and participating groups include

Condensed Matter Theory

Prof. Claudia Draxl, Prof. Sheng Meng, Prof. Hongming Weng, Prof. Chen Fang, Prof. Xinguo Ren, Prof. Jiangping Hu, Prof. Zhong Fang, Prof. Tao Xiang, Prof. Matthias Scheffler

Ultrafast Laser Spectroscopy

Prof. Zhiyi Wei, Prof. Jianing Chen

Photoemission Spectroscopy and Surface Science

Prof. Norbert Koch, Prof. Tian Qian, Prof. Xingjiang Zhou, Prof. Jiandong Guo

Optoelectronic Devices and Quantum Transport

Prof. Emil List-Kratochvil, Prof. Thomas Schröder, Prof. Guangyu Zhang, Prof. Yongqing Li

Scanning Probe Microscopy

Prof. Jürgen P. Rabe, Prof. Carlos-Andres Palma, Prof. Kui Jin, Prof. Shuheng Pan, Prof. Hong-Jun Gao

Quantum Information

Prof. Tim Schröder, Prof. Oliver Benson, Prof. Li Lu

Electron Microscopy

Prof. Christoph Koch, Prof. Xuedong Bai

A full list of participating IOP groups can be found at the IOP website.

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA

Commitment to a one-year research stay at IOP followed by a further year at HU Berlin. Special travel preferences will be considered. A PhD degree in physics, chemistry, mathematics, or materials, obtained no more than five years prior to the application deadline. Previous international experience, such as conference talks and research abroad.

HOW TO APPLY

Applicants should send their CV and one publication (in PDF format), along with a cover letter and two reference letters to: fellowships physik.hu-berlin.de. Only candidates specifying two or more preferred host research groups in Berlin and Beijing will be considered.

Program closing date: November 15th, 2023.

DECISION

The decision announcements for the 2023 program are sent no later than 2 months after the closing date. Decisions will be made by a joint committee from IOP and HU Berlin. The HU Berlin and IOP specifically encourage qualified female scholars to apply.

25.09.2023Eva Unger on her research on perovskites in the Adlershof Journal

"Perovskite is a collective term for materials with a specific crystal structure," explains Eva Unger, chemistry professor at HU Berlin and member of IRIS Adlershof. As semiconductors, perovskites are ideally suited for use in solar cells. In the laboratory, small-area perovskite solar cells already achieve efficiencies similar to those of classic silicon solar cells. The potential is great, because perovskites can be produced cheaply and even combined with other solar cell materials. The new issue of the Adlershof Journal deals with the questions Eva Unger and her team still have to clarify on the way to the large-scale use of perovskite solar cells.

to the online article...

06.09.2023Prof. Stefan Hecht was honored by Minister of Education Bettina Stark-Watzinger for Entrepreneurial Commitment

The member of IRIS Adlershof, Professor Stefan Hecht, Founding Director of the Center for the Science of Materials Berlin (CSMB) at Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, was honored on September 6, along with 19 other university professors, with the #UNIPRENEURS Award for his dedication to university spin-offs.

The prestigious award ceremony was hosted by Federal Minister for Education and Research, Bettina Stark-Watzinger, and Dr. Anna Christmann, Commissioner for Digital Economy and Startups at the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action.

Stefan Hecht, a Berlin native, pursued his chemistry studies at Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. Following several academic stints he returned to his alma mater as an Einstein Professor and the Founding Director of the newly established Center for the Science of Materials Berlin (CSMB).

"When research addresses genuinely relevant issues, commercial applications naturally follow," says the patent holder. As a specialist in photoswitchable molecules, he found a way to cure liquid specialty plastics with two intersecting beams of light. He co-founded Xolo GmbH with two colleagues and is currently developing 3D printers of which the first ones are being used by researchers. He generously shares his expertise with other startups and collaborates closely with them in his labs.

As the founding director of the CSMB on Humboldt-Universität’s science campus in Berlin-Adlershof, he aims to realize his vision: "We want to be not only a place for enquiring minds but also for innovative minds. The center should attract researchers who not only answer questions but also translate their answers into practical applications." The ideal place to develop sustainable energy materials that are well thought out from beginning to end: from design and sustainability considerations to validation and implementation.

Minister Stark-Watzinger expressed enthusiasm:"We want to strengthen entrepreneurship at our universities. Professors play a pivotal role in this. They significantly contribute to the entrepreneurial culture at universities and are crucial drivers of Germany's innovation and future viability." (Original: "Wir wollen das Gründungsgeschehen an unseren Hochschulen stärken. Professorinnen und Professoren spielen dabei eine zentrale Rolle. Sie tragen maßgeblich zur Gründungskultur an Hochschulen bei und sind wichtige Impulsgeber für die Innovationskraft und Zukunftsfähigkeit Deutschlands.")

Commissioner Christmann also praised the professors' achievements: "The distinguished professors from UNIPRENEURS embody the outstanding combination of academic excellence and entrepreneurial spirit. Their contributions to transferring innovations to the business world are invaluable to Germany's innovation landscape and deserve the highest recognition."

(Original: "Die ausgezeichneten Professorinnen und Professoren von UNIPRENEURS verkörpern die herausragende Verbindung von akademischer Exzellenz und unternehmerischem Geist. Ihre Verdienste für den Transfer der Innovationen in die Wirtschaft sind von unschätzbarem Wert für den Innovationsstandort Deutschland und verdienen höchste Anerkennung.")

UNIPRENEURS is an initiative aimed at bolstering university spin-offs in German universities and awards the highest recognition in Germany for outstanding commitment to entrepreneurship at universities. The "Award for the Best University Professors for Entrepreneurs" by UNIPRENEURS seeks to honor entrepreneurial engagement at universities and raise the prominence of entrepreneurship within higher education. Out of nearly 700 nominations, 20 exceptional professors were selected by a prestigious board.

IRIS Adlershof congratulates its founding member Stefan Hecht very warmly on this wonderful award.

Contact:

Prof. Stefan Hecht

Humboldt University in Berlin

CSMB, IRIS Adlershof, & Department of Chemistry

Tel.: 030 2093-7365

sh hu-berlin.de

20.08.2023Prof. Dr. Valentina Forini back at HU

Dr. Valentina Forini has accepted the call to join Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin as a W2 professor for "Theoretical particle physics: Gauge fields and string theory" at the Department of Physics. The professorship is initially funded by the DFG within the framework of the Heisenberg Program.

With a background in theoretical physics, Valentina bridges the gap between mathematical and high-energy physics, particularly focusing on string and quantum field theory. She is known for developing advanced methods to quantitatively analyze their quantum behaviors and their relationship through the AdS/CFT correspondence, exploring the interplay between space-time and matter.

Currently serving as a Lecturer in Mathematics at City, University of London since 2018, Dr. Forini is also affiliated with Humboldt-Universität as a Principal Investigator and Guest Professor, supported by the Kolleg Mathematik Physik Berlin.

Her career includes roles as Project Leader in the European Network EuroPLEx, Principal Investigator in the RTG 2575 "Rethinking Quantum Field Theory”, as well as prestigious research grants like the Simons Emmy Noether Fellowship 2018/19 at Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics in Waterloo (CA), the Einstein Junior Fellowship from 2018 to 2021 at Humboldt-Universität. Here she also has served as Emmy-Noether Group Leader from 2012 to 2017. She became a IRIS Junior Member in 2018 and is a full member of IRIS Adlershof since 2021.

Her academic journey has encompassed diverse institutions, including the Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics in Golm and the University of Barcelona. Dr. Forini earned her PhD in Physics from the University of Trento in 2006 and habilitated in Theoretical Physics in 2017. Her qualifications also include a Laurea in Physics from the University of Perugia and a Diploma in Piano from the Perugia Conservatory of Music.

The announcement of Dr. Forini's appointment is met with the warmest congratulations, and she will begin in the upcoming winter semester.

Even if you were never really away:

Welcome back, Valentina!

04.08.2023Einstein International PostDoctoral Fellow at the Department of Physics and IRIS Adlershof

Dr. Pietro Marabotti

Pietro Marabotti obtained his PhD in Energy and Nuclear Science and Technology at the Politecnico di Milano in Italy. With the Einstein International Postdoctoral Fellowship, He will join the Emmy-Noether group "Physics of low-dimensional systems" of Dr. Sebastian Heeg at IRIS Adlershof and the Department of Physics at HU Berlin and conduct research on confined carbyne, which are linear chains of carbon atoms inside carbon nanotubes.

Pietro Marabotti will set up a near-field scanning optical microscope that performs infrared spectroscopy using entangled photon pairs at nanoscale resolution. He will study how structural non-linearities like defects, kinks or bends affect the optical and electronic properties of confined carbyne, and explore its potential for nanoscale light transduction. The Einstein Foundation funds Pietro Marabotti for 3.5 years with a total funding of 375,000 euros.

We look forward to working with Pietro and welcome him to IRIS Adlershof .

13.07.2023IRIS Summer Party 2023

Yesterday, 12 July, IRIS Adlershof and CSMB celebrated a summer party to which all researchers and staff were cordially invited.

The party was introduced with an inspiring and pathetic speech by Prof. Stefan Hecht. The festivities took place in front of the IRIS research building, allowing attendees to relish the beautiful weather while seeking refuge in the cool shade. Additional refreshment was provided by a wide range of drinks. Culinary delights in the form of grilled specialities and a variety of salads provided further enjoyment.

Many participants expressed their appreciation for the opportunity to connect with scientists from different groups and start-ups.

A sly but unregistered creature sneaked into the BBQ event, carefully assessing the surroundings for any remains of roasted chicken.

The festivities continued until 10:30 pm, with the last guests lending a hand to clean up, adding a final touch of camaraderie to the event.

10.07.2023Scientific insights into the record-breaking tandem solar cell

The world's best tandem solar cells, consisting of a silicon bottom cell and a perovskite top cell, can today convert about one third of the incident solar radiation into electrical energy. These are record values, especially for a potentially very low-cost technology. A team at HZB, including IRIS Adlershof member Prof. Eva Unger, now provides the scientific data for the first time and describes in the renowned journal Science how this development was achieved (DOI: 10.1126/science.adf5872).

The tandem solar cell, described in detail for the first time in the article, had achieved a world record in efficiency and generated headlines with it in December 2022: it converts 32.5% of the incident sunlight into electrical energy. The research field is very competitive, which is why many working groups are conducting research in this area. In recent years, there has been a continuous increase in efficiency values by various research institutions and photovoltaic companies worldwide. The KAUST research centre (Saudi Arabia) has therefore already surpassed the HZB record in the meantime. But, the HZB team has now presented a solid and scientifically rigorously peer-reviewed technical publication with exact data sets from the measurements as well as detailed information on the structure of the tandem cell.

A significantly improved perovskite compound and a novel molecule of piperazinium iodide were used to produce this cell, thus reducing losses. Using special measurement methods, the researchers were able to analyse the fundamental processes at the interfaces and in the individual layers of the tandem cell in detail and optimise them further. The production and development of the tandem cell was possible thanks to cooperation with groups from Potsdam, San Sebastian (Spain) and Kunas (Lithuania). Only the combination of all modifications made it possible to achieve maximum values for the photovoltage (open-circuit voltage), as well as the photocurrent and consequently in terms of efficiency.

With continued progress in the field, there is hope that this technology can make a major contribution to a sustainable energy supply in the fight against climate change in the coming years, because the upscaling and industrial production of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells is also feasible.

In the upcoming CSMB–IRIS colloquium on 25 July on "Chemical transformation processes in halide perovskite semiconductors", Prof. Eva Unger will further expand this topic.

01.07.2023Conclusion of the Highly Successful CRC 951 - Hybrid Inorganic/Organic Systems for Opto-Electronics (HIOS) after 12 Years

After an 12-year run, the Collaborative Research Centre CRC 951 - Hybrid Inorganic/Organic Systems for Opto-Electronics (HIOS) reached the end of its maximum funding period. Throughout these years, IRIS Adlershof has worked closely with the CRC 951, fostering a productive and symbiotic relationship. The connection between us went beyond just thematic alignment, as many members of IRIS, including aspiring scientists, actively participated in the CRC 951.

The CRC 951's headquarter was located within the IRIS Research Building, reflecting the deep integration and collaboration between the two entities. Together, we embarked on joint projects, including colloquia, workshops, conferences, celebrations, and publications. These endeavors were instrumental in advancing research and fostering innovation in the field of hybrid systems.

We extend our heartfelt gratitude to all those involved for their close and highly successful collaboration. The fruitful partnership between IRIS Adlershof and the CRC 951 has significantly contributed to the progress and achievements made in this interdisciplinary domain.

22.06.2023Prof. Yan Lu appointed to HIPOLE and the University of Jena

IRIS member Prof. Dr. Yan Lu will take up a professorship at the University of Jena in the winter semester. She will also become co-spokesperson of the "Helmholtz Institute for Polymers in Energy Applications" (HIPOLE), which will most likely be officially founded on 1 July 2023.

The aim of HIPOLE is to develop sustainable polymer materials for energy technologies that can be rapidly brought into use, in particular polymer-based batteries and perovskite solar cells with polymer additives. The founding director is Prof. Dr. Ulrich S. Schubert from the University of Jena, with whom Yan Lu has already conducted research in previous years.

more...

We offer our warmest congratulations!

19.06.2023Open Access textbook "Scattering Amplitudes in Quantum Field Theory" by Jan Plefka et al.

We are very happy to announce the new open access textbook "Scattering Amplitudes in Quantum Field Theory". Jan Plefka reviews the modern theory of scattering amplitudes together with Badger, Henn, and Zoia.

These lecture notes bridge a gap between introductory quantum field theory (QFT) courses and state-of-the-art research in scattering amplitudes. They cover the path from basic definitions of QFT to amplitudes relevant for processes in the Standard Model of particle physics. The book begins with a concise yet self-contained introduction into QFT, including perturbative quantum gravity. It then presents modern methods for calculating scattering amplitudes, focusing on tree-level amplitudes, loop-level integrands and loop integration techniques. These methods help reveal intriguing relations between gauge and gravity amplitudes, and are of increasing importance for obtaining high-precision predictions for collider experiments, such as those at CERN's Large Hadron Collider, as well as for foundational mathematical physics studies in QFT, including recent applications to gravitational wave physics.

These course-tested lecture notes include numerous exercises with detailed solutions. Requiring only minimal knowledge of QFT, they are well-suited for MSc and PhD students as a preparation for research projects in theoretical particle physics. They can be used as a one-semester graduate level course, or as a self-study guide for researchers interested in fundamental aspects of QFT.

more...

16.06.2023The IOP-HU workshop on condensed matter physics

The Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Humboldt-Universität Berlin (IOP–HU) Condensed Matter Physics Workshop 2023 is a two–day workshop which will take place on October 13th–14th in Liyang (near Shanghai & near Suzhou) with an optional visit to IOP Beijing campus on October 15th.

The workshop is directed at early career researchers looking to present their research and interact with domestic and international condensed matters physicists. Every year a few topics are chosen based on the speakers. Ten travel awards will cover travel and accommodation expenses for international early career researchers.

This year, the program will cover:

Density functional theory and simulation

Scanning probe and electron microscopy

Magnetism and quantum information

The workshop will consist of sessions of invited talks and contributed poster sessions. Young researchers are encouraged to participate in the workshop and present their work in the form of posters. The workshop is expected to be a highly exciting and stimulating event. We look forward to meeting you in Beijing in October, 2023.

more...

16.06.2023FCI-Lecturer Award for Oliver Dumele

The Lecturer Award (Dozentenpreis) of the Fund of the Chemical Industry (FCI) is one of the most prestigious and highly endowed awards in the field of promoting young researchers and is awarded to outstanding young scientists in the field of chemistry. The award winners are proposed by members of the Fund's Board of Trustees, former Lecturer Award winners or spokespersons of the review boards of the German Research Foundation and selected in a two-stage nomination process.

On 16 June 2023, it was awarded to Dr Oliver Dumele (HU Berlin, Inst. Chemie & IRIS Adlershof), Prof. Dr A. J. Barbara Lechner (TUM) and Dr Sabine Richert (U Freiburg). The prize money will also support further steps in their careers.

In his current research, Mr. Dumele is working on organic functional materials at the molecular as well as supramolecular level and in covalent-organic frameworks (COFs). Novel aromatic building blocks are incorporated into framework compounds and are thus intended to answer fundamental questions or contribute to new energy storage systems as battery electrodes. Furthermore, purely organic photomagnetic switches that can change their electronic spin state by light pulse are currently being developed in his research group for future applications in quantum information technology. more...

Congratulations on another great award!

23.05.2023The IOP–Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellowship in Physics

Nominations are open for postdoctoral fellowships between two cities, Berlin and Beijing, as part of a joint physics program between the Integrative Research Institute for the Sciences (IRIS Adlershof) of Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin (HU Berlin) and the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, (IOP) Beijing.

FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM

Established in 2020, the prestigious two-year research fellowships are intended for exceptional early-career scientists, in preparation for an independent career in research at the frontier of condensed matter physics, quantum materials or device physics. Successful candidates will spend one year in Berlin and one in Beijing at the research groups of their choice, supported by up to 4,500 EUR/month. The selected fellows are expected to be appointed in 2023 and 2024. A first networking event is scheduled in Berlin. Fellows will work at the Campus Adlershof of HU Berlin and the IOP Zhongguancun Beijing Campus. The fellows have the possibility to visit and interact with associated Partners at the Max Born Institute, the Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin and its Electron Storage Ring BESSY II, the Leibniz-Institut für Kristallzüchtung or the Fritz-Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society.The prestigious two-year research fellowships are intended for exceptional early-career scientists, in preparation for an independent career in research at the frontier of condensed matter physics, quantum materials or device physics. Successful candidates will spend one year in Berlin and one in Beijing at the research groups of their choice, supported by up to 4,500 EUR/month.

The selected fellows will be appointed from August 2022 onwards. A first networking event is programmed in Berlin. Fellows will work at the Campus Adlershof of HU Berlin and the IOP Zhongcuancun Beijing Campus. The fellows have the possibility to visit and interact with associated Partners at the Max Born Institute, the Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin and its Electron Storage Ring BESSY II, the Freie Universität Berlin, at the Leibniz-Institut für Kristallzüchtung or the Fritz-Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society.

A full list of participating groups can be found at HU Physics and the IOP website. Exemplary fields and participating groups include

Condensed Matter Theory

Prof. Claudia Draxl, Prof. Sheng Meng, Prof. Hongming Weng, Prof. Chen Fang, Prof. Xinguo Ren, Prof. Jiangping Hu, Prof. Zhong Fang, Prof. Tao Xiang, Prof. Matthias Scheffler

Ultrafast Laser Spectroscopy

Prof. Zhiyi Wei, Prof. Jianing Chen

Photoemission Spectroscopy and Surface Science

Prof. Norbert Koch, Prof. Tian Qian, Prof. Xingjiang Zhou, Prof. Jiandong Guo

Optoelectronic Devices and Quantum Transport

Prof. Emil List-Kratochvil, Prof. Thomas Schröder, Prof. Guangyu Zhang, Prof. Yongqing Li

Scanning Probe Microscopy

Prof. Jürgen P. Rabe, Prof. Carlos-Andres Palma, Prof. Kui Jin, Prof. Shuheng Pan, Prof. Hong-Jun Gao

Quantum Information

Prof. Tim Schröder, Prof. Oliver Benson, Prof. Li Lu

Electron Microscopy

Prof. Christoph Koch, Prof. Xuedong Bai

A full list of participating IOP groups can be found at the IOP website.

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA

Commitment to a one-year research stay at IOP followed by a further year at HU Berlin. Special travel preferences will be considered. A PhD degree in physics, chemistry, mathematics, or materials, obtained no more than five years prior to the application deadline. Previous international experience, such as conference talks and research abroad.

HOW TO APPLY

Applicants should send their CV and one publication (in PDF format), along with a cover letter and two reference letters to: fellowships physik.hu-berlin.de. Only candidates specifying two or more preferred host research groups in Berlin and Beijing will be considered.

First 2023 Program closing date: June 15th, 2023.

Second 2023 Program closing date: November 15th, 2022.

DECISION

The decision announcements for the 2023 program are sent no later than 2 months after the closing date. Decisions will be made by a joint committee from IOP and HU Berlin. The HU Berlin and IOP specifically encourage qualified female scholars to apply.

11.05.2023Joachim Sauer appointed member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences

Prof. Dr. rer. nat. Dr. h.c. Joachim Sauer, who is a Senior Researcher at the Department of Chemistry at Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, has been appointed a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences based on his research activities at the department, in two Collaborative Research Centres at Humboldt-Universität and in the Cluster of Excellence UNICAT. Admission to the Academy will take place in a formal ceremony on 30 September 2023 in Cambridge, Massachusetts.

The American Academy of Arts and Sciences is one of the oldest and most prestigious honorary societies in the US, founded in 1780. It honours excellence and gathers leaders from all fields to explore new ideas and address and collaborate on issues of importance to the nation and the world.

Congratulations to our founding member!

12.04.2023Prof. Eva Unger interviewed: "Only5mins! - Self-healing properties of perovskite solar key to industrial development."

IRIS-Mitgleid Eva Unger gave pv magazine a short interview and explained the viperlab projekt and the selfhealing of perovskite solar cells.

11.04.2023An important step towards the quantum internet

A cornerstone for 1000-fold improved communication rates to bridge long distances

Illustration: Defect centres in diamond nanostructures can be used as quantum bits. The quantum information can be stored in individual photons via quantumoperation and than be transmitted in optical fibres in the future quantum internet.

Diamond material is of great importance for future technologies such as the quantum internet. Special defect centers can be used as quantum bits (qubits) and emit single light particles that are referred to as single photons. To enable data transmission with feasible communication rates over long distances in a quantum network, all photons must be collected in optical fibers and transmitted without being lost. It must also be ensured that these photons all have the same color, i.e., the same frequency. Fulfilling these requirements has been impossible until now.

Researchers in the "Integrated Quantum Photonics" group led by Prof. Dr. Tim Schröder, member of IRIS Adlershof, have succeeded for the first time worldwide in generating and detecting photons with stable photon frequencies emitted from quantum light sources, or, more precisely, from nitrogen-vacancy defect centers in diamond nanostructures. This was enabled by carefully choosing the diamond material, sophisticated nanofabrication methods carried out at the Joint Lab Diamond Nanophotonics of the Ferdinand-Braun-Institut, Leibniz-Institut für Höchstfrequenztechnik, and specific experimental control protocols. By combining these methods, the noise of the electrons, which previously disturbed data transmission, can be significantly reduced, and the photons are emitted at a stable (communication) frequency.

In addition, the Berlin researchers show that the current communication rates between spatially separated quantum systems can prospectively be increased more than 1000-fold with the help of the developed methods—an important step closer to a future quantum internet.

The scientists have integrated individual qubits into optimized diamond nanostructures. These structures are 1000 times thinner than a human hair and make it possible to transfer emitted photons in a directed manner into glass fibers. However, during the fabrication of the nanostructures, the material surface is damaged at the atomic level, and free electrons create uncontrollable noise for the generated light particles. Noise, comparable to an unstable radio frequency, causes fluctuations in the photon frequency, preventing successful quantum operations such as entanglement.

A special feature of the diamond material used is its relatively high density of nitrogen impurity atoms in the crystal lattice. These possibly shield the quantum light source from electron noise at the surface of the nanostructure. "However, the exact physical processes need to be studied in more detail in the future," explains Laura Orphal-Kobin, representative of the junior scientist at IRIS Adlershof, who investigates quantum systems together with Prof. Dr. Tim Schröder. The conclusions drawn from the experimental observations are supported by statistical models and simulations, which Dr. Gregor Pieplow from the same research group is developing and implementing together with the experimental physicists.

Optically Coherent Nitrogen-Vacancy Defect Centers in Diamond Nanostructures

L. Orphal-Kobin, K. Unterguggenberger, T. Pregnolato, N. Kemf, M. Matalla, R.-S. Unger, I. Ostermay, G. Pieplow, and T. Schröder

Physical Review X (2023)

Contact:

Laura Orphal-Kobin, phone: +49 30 2093 82146, mail: orphal physik.hu-berlin.de

Prof. Dr. Tim Schröder, phone: +49 30 2093 82140, mail: tim.schroeder physik-hu-berlin.de

Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Department of Physics and IRIS Adlershof, Integrated Quantum Photonics Group & Joint Lab Diamond Nanophotonics, Ferdinand-Braun-Institut

30.03.2023Prof. Jan Plefka receives ERC Advanced Grant

Prof. Jan Plefka

Jan Plefka receives a prestigious Advanced Grant from the European Research Council (ERC). He and his team at the Department of Physics and IRIS Adlershof of HU Berlin will receive 2.2 million euros over the next five years for the GraWFTy project (High-Precision Gravitational Wave Physics from a Worldline Quantum Field Theory) to describe gravitational waves using quantum field theory. The predictions made possible in this way are needed for the wave detectors of the next generation to go online in the 2030s.

The ERC Advanced Grant

ERC Advanced Grants are endowed with up to 2.5 million euros and support excellent and self-initiated research projects of leading top researchers. It is the most highly endowed European research grant. The awardees are exceptional leaders who distinguish themselves through the originality and significance of their approaches.

About the awardee

Professor Jan Plefka is a renowned theoretical physicist and professor at Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. After studying physics and receiving his PhD from the University of Hannover in 1996, he was a postdoctoral researcher in New York, Amsterdam, and at the MPI Potsdam. He was a visiting professor at ETH Zurich and at CERN. His research is concerned with quantum field theory and its relation to gravity. Here, he made important contributions to questions of quantum gravity and string theory, in particular in the area of AdS/CFT correspondence and hidden symmetries in supersymmetric quantum field theories. More recently, he has developed together with his group an innovative quantum field theoretical formalism to answer questions in classical gravitational wave physics. The ERC Advanced Grant was awarded to him to fully unfold the potential of this quantum approach to classical physics. He is the spokesperson of the DFG Research Training Group 2575, "Rethinking Quantum Field Theory." Jan Plefka has received several awards, including a Feodor Lynen Fellowship from the Humboldt Foundation and the Lichtenberg Professorship from the Volkswagen Foundation.

The GraWFTy Projekt: High-Precision Gravitational Wave Physics from a Worldline Quantum Field Theory

Gravitational waves are tiny ripples of the space-time fabric that travel through our universe at the speed of light. They arise as soon as masses are accelerated. They are a direct prediction of Einstein's theory of relativity, which he established during his fruitful Berlin years as early as 1916. They were first directly detected only 100 years later in 2015 with the LIGO detector, emerging from a merger of two black holes and after a journey of billions of light years through our universe to us. There are currently three gravitational wave observatories in operation: LIGO, Virgo, and Kagra. They routinely detect gravitational waves emanating from such mergers of black holes and neutron stars. To date, about 90 such events have been detected. In the 2030s, a new generation of ground- and space-based gravitational wave detectors will come on-line that will significantly increase the sensitivities of these measurements. To match these sensitivities, theoretical physics must predict highly accurate waveforms from Einstein's theory that greatly exceed the current state of the art. The GraWFTy project will provide these predictions for the high-precision form of gravitational waves. With their help, fundamental questions in physics will be studied:

Is Einstein's theory correct in the strong gravitational field regime?

How are black holes formed, what is their population in the universe?

Can we see signals for physics beyond the known natural forces and particles?

Visualization of gravitational bremsstrahlung from the scattering of two black holes (BSc thesis O. Babayemi)

Jan Plefka explains his approach: "Together with my research group, we have been able to develop an innovative method since 2020 that addresses this problem of classical physics using methods from quantum field theory. Quantum field theory is the mathematical description of elementary particle physics, that is the smallest building blocks of our universe and their interactions. It is exceedingly fascinating that this language can also be applied to classical gravitational physics with high efficiency. In short, we replace the scattering of protons, as it happens in accelerators like the LHC at CERN, in our formalism by the scattering of black holes or neutron stars. There is, of course, the initial simplification that we can now neglect the quantum effects in the extensive calculations - which in the case of gravity are also still ill understood. Yet, this simplification is compensated by the complexity of Einstein's theory compared to the standard model of elementary particle physics relevant to proton scatterings.

The great advantage of our so-called "world-line" approach is that we can directly target the observable quantities in the detector, using the modern mathematical technology of quantum field theory, namely Feynman integrals. Another peculiar aspect of our approach is that the spin of black holes is described by a supersymmetry. Its existence has been speculated so far in elementary particle physics. We could show that it appears in the effective description of rotating black holes. The idea for this approach comes from string theory. For me, this project represents a crucial step in my career. So far, I have focused my research primarily on the question of quantum gravity and its relation to gauge field theories. This was primarily mathematical physics and far away from direct measurements. With GraWFTy, I am now applying these ideas priorly developed in an abstract setting to pressing, to pressing questions in gravitational wave physics. We have already been able to prove the efficiency of this approach. The ERC Advanced Grant will allow me to fully unfold the potential of our approach."

Contact

Prof. Dr. Jan Christoph Plefka

jan.plefka physik.hu-berlin.de

Department of Physik and IRIS Adlershof

Zum Großen Windkanal 2, 12489 Berlin

20.03.2023Multi-million-Euro funding for two collaborative quantum technology projects: The Institute of Physics and IRIS Adlershof of Humboldt-Universität are involved in both projects

Quantum technologies promise a variety of completely new applications. In addition to quantum computers, quantum sensing and quantum communication are among the areas of quantum technology in which the first, also commercially successful product developments are expected. The Federal Ministry of Education and Research is now funding Humboldt University Berlin (HU) in two new collaborative projects in the field of quantum technologies.

Researchers are working on the novel QEED microscopy for quantum-based early cancer diagnostics. Image: LaVision BioTec GmbH

The first funded project, QEED, deals with quantum sensing with entangled photons - for applications in medical research and cancer diagnostics. Funded as a BMBF "Lighthouse Project" for 5 years (project volume 11.9 million euros, HUB 1.7 million euros), the collaboration will jointly develop a very powerful microscope that can work in the mid-infrared (MIR). In order to transfer measurement information from the clinically relevant MIR to the near infrared (NIR), which can be detected particularly fast and with low noise, a novel, spectrally resolving imaging method based on entangled photon pairs will be used.

In the "Nonlinear Quantum Optics" group at HU and IRIS Adlershof, led by Dr. Sven Ramelow, who also serves as scientific director of the overall collaboration, high-performance quantum interferometer modules are being developed and the quantum sensing measurement techniques underlying the collaborative project are being optimized. The core innovation here is the significant increase in the rate of generated entangled photon pairs, as well as the significant extension of the MIR measurement range compared to the state-of-the-art.

Among the total of ten project partners are five research institutions - including three from Berlin: FBH-Berlin, Charité-Berlin, and HU-Berlin. Also five corporate partners are part of the team and will, in addition to their work in the project, after project completion promote a commercialization of the microscope and its components. The project officially started on 01.01.23.

The second funded collaborative project named "High Performance Light Sources for Quantum Communication" - MIHQU (project volume 5.3 million Euro, HUB 1.4 million Euro) is about quantum communication - an important building block for the future security of digital infrastructures in our society. In quantum communication, the exchange of cryptographic keys is based on the laws of physics, which means that security, in contrast to currently used encryption, remains fundamentally guaranteed - even in the event of attacks by novel, previously unknown algorithms or by powerful quantum computers.

Image: AIXEMTEC GmbH, Herzogenrath

The goal of the project is to miniaturize sources for photon pairs in such a way that their reproducible industrial production can be established in small series. At Humboldt-Universität, the group "Nonlinear Quantum Optics" is mainly working on the development of functional models of the sources as a basis for the subsequent integration.

In addition to the HU-Berlin (Dr. Sven Ramelow with his group "Nonlinear Quantum Optics"), the total of 5 project partners includes the Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt e.V., Berlin in the person of Prof. Janik Wolters, who will coordinate the project, as well as the Technische Universität Berlin, and two company partners – son-x GmbH, Aachen and AIXEMTEC GmbH, Herzogenrath. The project started on 01.03.2023.

Project profile QEED

Project profile MIHQ

Infobox: Nonlinear interferometers with entangled photons

Spontaneous parametric down-conversion (SPDC) in nonlinear optical crystals is a standard process for generating correlated or entangled photon pairs for quantum communication, quantum-assisted imaging or quantum sensing. If one now uses two identical SPDC processes that are coherently pumped and superimposes the emissions, one can observe simultaneous, identical interference for both photons of a pair - the so-called signal and idler photons. Such a setup as shown in the figure below represents such a so-called "nonlinear interferometer". (Chekhova, Ou, “Nonlinear interferometers in quantum optics“, AOP 8, 1, 104 (2016)).

Schematic of a nonlinear interferometer, here in Mach-Zehnder configuration

The essential point is that the entangled photon pairs interfere as a single quantum object! This means that a phase (or absorption) of the idler photons also affects the signal photons as an interference signal (and vice versa). The interference pattern - i.e. its phase position and contrast - thus depends on the transmission coefficients of pump radiation, idler and signal photons as well as on the total phase difference (ϕs+ ϕi - ϕp) that all three waves have accumulated in the interferometer. In particular, the phase and absorptions of the idler can thus be determined solely by measuring the signal photons. This effect is called "measurement with non-detected photons", since the actual "measuring" Idler photons never have to be measured themselves. If photon pairs are now generated with a large wavelength spread (e.g. signal in the visible, idler in the mid-infrared), the spectral information (absorption, dispersion) recorded by the idler photons in the MIR can be registered by measuring the wavelength-dependent interference in the signal with a silicon detector. These are particularly powerful and low-noise and thus enable a variety of very practical applications of this measurement principle.

Contact:

Dr. Sven Ramelow

Head of "Nonlinear Quantum Optics" at the Department of Physics and IRIS Adlershof at Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin

Phone: +49 30 2093-7799

sven.ramelow physik.hu-berlin.de

02.03.2023Lively interest at the second IRIS Junior breakfast

Today, at another breakfast with coffee and tea, fruit and bagels, the IRIS junior scientists were able to exchange views on scientific and other topics and get to know each other better. They met in the comfortably furnished common room in the IRIS house. After some appetizing short lectures, there were laboratory tours through the IRIS research building on the subject of materials science, in particular photovoltaics and OLED. Due to the great interest, the scientists were divided into three groups and guided separately through the laboratories. Scientists from the groups of Prof. Koch and Prof. List-Kratochvil showed their workplaces and explained their experiments. The participants from WIAS, HZB and the departments of physics and chemistry could see the instruments and understand how they work.

Dr. Edgar Nandayapa introduces the HyD group and explains solar cell printing.

We would like to thank Pablo and Laura, who organized the whole thing again!

24.02.2023xolo GmbH selected as the first investment of the 'Deep Tech & Climate Fonds'

V.l.n.r.: Dirk Radzinski (CEO, xolo), Prof. Stefan Hecht (CSO, xolo), Frank Cartsen Herzog (HZG Group), Dr. Elisabeth Schrey (DeepTech & Climate Fonds), Tobias Faupel (DeepTech & Climate Fonds), Dr. Anna Christmann (Bundesministerium Wirtschaft und Klimaschutz)

The Berlin-based company xolo was founded in Berlin in 2019 by IRIS Adlershof- member Stefan Hecht, Martin Regehly and Dirk Radzinski. With Xolography, they have developed a novel volumetric 3D printing technology that prints quickly and produces very smooth surfaces. Xolography uses two beams of light with different wavelengths that collide in the resin and harden it into the desired material. This enables a resolution of a few micrometers. The process is many times faster than previous methods and enables centimetre-sized objects to be printed in a few seconds instead of several hours as was previously the case. This makes printing cheaper and potentially more rewarding for mass production. It also does not rely on formative support structures and allows the use of materials previously unsuitable for 3D printing.

xolo Aneurisma Print

Source: xolo, youtube

Xolo has now received eight million euros from Deep Tech & Climate Fonds (DTCF), HZG Group, Onsight Ventures and Square One to enable the transition to industrial scale use. The first 10 devices were delivered specifically to research institutes to test different fields of application, e.g. in medical technology for the reproduction of organs or in optics for the production of high-precision lenses.

The investment is intended to help xolography achieve a breakthrough and strengthen Germany as a location for industry and research.

more...

16.02.2023Canadian delegation visits IRIS Adlershof

f.l.t.r.: Prof. Jürgen P. Rabe, Dr. Nikolai Puhlmann, Prof. Fred Wrona, Dr. Helge Neumann, Ms. Natalka Cmoc, Dr. Johannes Müller

A delegation from Canada visited us today to find out how the IRIS Adlershof is successfully networking with other institutes and companies at the science location Berlin-Adlershof. IRIS director Prof. Jürgen P. Rabe gave a brief insight into the institute. Helge Neumann from WISTA reported on Adlershof as a science location. A tour of the research building followed. Dr. Felix Hermerschmidt showed the network laboratory with the impressive glovebox cluster, followed by an explanation of the NION-TEM with its atomic resolution by Johannes Müller and a tour of the campus.

Ms. Natalka Cmoc, the Director General for Science & Policy at Public Services & Procurement Canada, was visibly impressed, and Prof. Dr. Fred Wrona (University of Calgary, Canada) was also highly interested and praised the many opportunities offered to top scientific research.

14.02.2023Dr. Jannes Münchmeyer receives 2023 Adlershof Dissertation Award

f.l.t.r.: Dr. Dominique Lungwitz, Dr. Jannes Münchmeyer, Dr. Julia Baum

On February 14, 2023, the Adlershof Dissertation Prize was awarded for the 21st time in a row. Dr. Jannes Münchmeyer received the EUR 3,000 prize, which is awarded annually by the research network IGAFA e. V., the Humboldt University of Berlin and WISTA Management GmbH.

Earthquake early warning is an essential step in avoiding major damage: There are often valuable seconds between the start of an earthquake and the occurrence of strong vibrations in which to take protective measures. But how early are warnings possible and where do the physics and the natural stochasticity of earthquakes set us limits? dr In his doctoral thesis, Jannes Münchmeyer showed how artificial intelligence can help to answer these questions and what effects his results can have on dealing with earthquake risks. He was mentored by IRIS member Ulf Leser.

Two other outstanding researchers made it into the final selection: Dr. Dominique Lungwitz (Humboldt University of Berlin) did her doctoral thesis in the group of Prof. Norbert Koch's, who is a member of IRIS Adlershof, on "Polymer semiconductors for the future: on the way to efficient and cost-effective OLEDs and solar cells" and Dr. In her dissertation, Julia Baum (Humboldt University of Berlin) examined “Defamation sticks: How “fake news” influence our judgments”. Both received prize money of 1,000 euros for their nomination.

IRIS Adlershof warmly congratulates on this wonderful success!

18.01.2023Stefan Hecht's visions of the CSMB in the Adlershof Journal

Chemistry professor and CSMB founding director Stefan Hecht is certain: Many global challenges related to sustainable resource use can only be mastered through innovation in the field of materials science. While achieving this, he hopes for successful interdisciplinary cooperation with other university and non-university institutions. The member of IRIS Adlershof explains the methods he targets to advance materials research in the new issue of the Adlershof Journal.

to the online article...

12.01.2023Straining of a suspended 2D semiconductor drives different energy states into hybridization, enabling single photon emission

By applying strain on WSe2 membranes with a high degree of control, Dr. Sebastian Heeg and colleagues characterized the different excitonic species present in the material according to their energetic dependence with strain. At certain strain levels, strain-independent defect states and strain dependent dark excitons became energy degenerated and their photoluminescence intensity increased an order of magnitude. “The high tunability of the hybridized state enabled by our device architecture will be likely key for the operation of single quantum emitters in WSe2” highlights Pablo Hernández López, a PhD candidate at Dr. Heeg’s group and co-author of the paper, “On the other hand, the characterization and tuning of the energy hierarchy of the excitons present on suspended materials using our electrostatic straining approach opens the door for more exciting discoveries in the future”.

more...

Strain control of hybridization between dark and localized excitons in a 2D semiconductor

P. Hernández López, S. Heeg, C. Schattauer, S. Kovalchuk, A. Kumar, D.J. Bock, J.N. Kirchhof, B. Hoefer, K. Greben, D. Yagodkin, L. Linhart, F. Libisch, K.I. Bolotin

Nature Communications, 13, 7691 (2022) OPENACCESS

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-35352-9

16.12.2022Prof. Michael Hintermüller elected speaker of the Math+ Cluster of Excellence

The annual MATH+ Day 2022 took place on November 18 with over 100 participants. The General Assembly elected Prof. Michael Hintermüller, who is a member of IRIS Adlershof, as chair for the next two years. The previous co-chair Hintermüller castles with Prof. Christof Schütte. The other newly elected board members also include Prof. Holger Reich as the new BMS chairman, replacing IRIS member Prof. Jürg Kramer.

Congratulations!

more...

13.12.2022X-mas party for Junior scientists

On 13.12. the young researchers celebrated a Christmas party at a common room in the IRIS research building. In keeping with the occasion, they were also asked science quiz questions related to Christmas, resulting in many interesting conversations. Of course, Christmas music was also not to be missed. Fortified by stollen and mulled wine, they thus celebrated the holiday season and share their love of science with their colleagues and friends.

24.11.2022First IRIS juniors breakfast and lab tours session

On Nov 21 2022 the IRIS junior scientists met for a breakfast and a lab tours session focused on quantum optics.

Pablo Hernández López, the juniors representative and organizer, explains: "Our colleagues Elisa & Martin (AG Markus Krutzik) and Julian & Jonas (AG Tim Schröder) showed their labs and introduced their fields of research. This event was the first one of a series of lab tours that will continue next year. Thanks to the presenters and to everyone who came. It was great to meet so many new colleagues and to discover some of the very interesting work done at IRIS Adlershof."

22.11.2022Humboldt-ProMINT-Kolleg erfolgreich in der Ausschreibung Interdisziplinäre Zentren der Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin

Das Humboldt-ProMINT-Kolleg wird ab 2023 ein Interdisziplinäres Zentrum der Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin.

Ziel des Interdisziplinären Zentrums Humboldt-ProMINT-Kolleg ist die exzellente Erforschung von Prozessen der wissenschaftlichen Erkenntnisgewinnung in der MINT-Lehrkräftebildung an der Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. Dabei stellen die Mitglieder des Kollegs die Themen „Technologiegestütztes Lehren und Lernen“, „Messprozesse und Umgang mit Daten“, „Problemlösen“ sowie „Modelle und Modellierungsprozesse“ in das Zentrum ihrer Arbeit.

Zukünftig widmet sich das IZ ProMINT-Kolleg der Stärkung der fachdidaktischen Forschung durch die Intensivierung der internationalen Forschungskooperationen, der Vernetzung von Fachdidaktik und Fachwissenschaft durch Innovation und Transfer sowie der Verbreitung von wissenschaftlichen Forschungsergebnissen durch Third Mission und Wissenschaftskommunikation.

Es schließt damit an seine über die Jahre gewachsene Struktur als ProMINT-Kolleg und sein Renommee innerhalb und außerhalb der Universität an und überführt dies in die sichtbareren, effizienteren und nachhaltigeren Strukturen eines interdisziplinären Zentrums.

Das Humboldt-ProMINT-Kolleg wurde 2010 auf Initiative der MINT-Fachdidaktiker*innen der HU und mit Unterstützung der Deutsche Telekom Stiftung gegründet. Ein zentrales Anliegen des Kollegs ist es seitdem, die wissenschaftliche Fundierung der MINT-Lehrkräftebildung inhaltlich und strukturell als eines der zentralen Tätigkeitsfelder an der HU auf- und auszubauen. Zwölf Jahre nach seiner Gründung gehört das Humboldt-ProMINT-Kolleg zu den wichtigsten und mit einem Drittmittelvolumen von ca. 2,7 Millionen Euro auch zu den erfolgreichsten Projekten der Lehrerbildung an der HU.

Weitere Informationen: https://www.promint.hu-berlin.de

27.10.2022Einstein-Professur für Chemiker Stefan Hecht stärkt Berliner Materialwissenschaften

Das Gründungsmitglied von IRIS Adlershof, Stefan Hecht, widmet sich zukünftig als Einstein-Professor der Heraus­forderung, neue Materialien mit verbes­serten Eigen­schaften zu entwickeln. Seit Oktober beschäftigen sich der Chemiker und sein Team mit der Ent­wicklung licht­ge­steuerter mole­kularer Materia­lien und volu­metrischer 3D-Druck­verfahren (Xolo­graphie) am Campus Adlershof. Insbe­sondere möchte er Material­ent­wicklungs­prozesse beschleu­nigen: „Neben einem um­fassenden Verständnis aller rele­vanten Para­meter, bei dem uns künstliche Intel­ligenz sicher­lich helfen kann, müssen wir vor allem anfan­gen zu ler­nen, evolutio­näre Prin­zipien zu nutzen. Dann wird sich das beste Material quasi von selbst durch­setzen.“

Neben diesem neuen wissen­schaftlichen Schwer­punkt möchte Hecht vor allem die Berliner Forschung im Bereich der Material­wissen­schaften weiter stärken und die insbe­sondere am Campus Adlershof vorhandenen Expertisen in einem neuen inter­diszipli­nären Material­forschungs­zentrum bündeln. „Durch intensive disziplinen- und institutionen­über­greifende Zusammen­arbeit können noch viele Synergien im Berliner Forschungs­raum gehoben werden“, so Hecht.

mehr...

27.10.2022Tandemsolarzellen mit Perowskit: Nanostrukturen helfen mehrfach

Tandemsolarzellen aus Perowskit und Silizium ermöglichen deutlich höhere Wirkungsgrade als Siliziumsolarzellen allein. Mehrere Arbeitsgruppen am HZB forschen daran, solche Tandemsolarzellen gezielt zu entwickeln und zu optimieren. Mit großem Erfolg, Tandemzellen aus dem HZB haben bereits mehrere Weltrekorde erreicht. Zuletzt erzielten HZB-Forschungsteams im November 2021 mit einer Tandemzelle aus Perowskit- und Silizium einen zertifizierten Wirkungsgrad von 29,8%. Dies war ein absoluter Weltrekord, der acht Monate ungeschlagen an der Spitze stand. Erst im Sommer 2022 ist es einem Schweizer Team an der EPFL gelungen, diesen Wert zu übertreffen.

An der Entwicklung der Rekord-Tandemzelle war unter anderem IRIS Adlershof-Mitglied Prof. Eva Unger beteiligt. Nun stellen die Wissenschaftler in Nature Nanotechnologie die Details vor. Die Zeitschrift lud sie darüber hinaus ein, ein so genanntes „Research Briefing“ zu verfassen, in dem sie ihre Arbeit kurz zusammenfassen und einen Ausblick auf künftige Entwicklungen geben.

„Unsere jeweiligen Kompetenzen ergänzen sich sehr gut“, erklärt Prof. Dr. Christiane Becker. Ihr Team hat eine nanooptische Texturierung in die Tandemzelle eingebracht: Eine sanft gewellte Nanotextur auf der Silizium-Oberfläche. „Überraschend war, dass diese Textur gleich mehrere Vorteile bringt“, betont Becker: „Die Nanotextur reduziert nicht nur wie erwartet die Reflexionsverluste, sondern führt auch noch dazu, dass sich der extrem dünne Film aus Perowskit deutlich regelmäßiger bildet.“ Außerdem reduziert eine dielektrische Pufferschicht auf der Rückseite des Siliziums die parasitäre Absorption bei Wellenlängen im nahen Infrarotbereich.

Als Fazit halten die Forschenden fest: Mit maßgeschneiderten Nanotexturen lassen sich überraschend vielseitige Verbesserungen erreichen. Diese Ergebnisse sind nicht nur für Tandemzellen aus Perowskit- und Silizium wertvoll, sondern auch für Leuchtdioden auf Perowskit-Basis.

P. Tockhorn, J. Sutter, A. Cruz, et al.

Nano-optical designs for high-efficiency monolithic perovskite–silicon tandem solar cells.

Nat. Nanotechnol. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01228-8

25.10.2022Federal Minister of Education and Research in Adlershof

The Federal Minister of Education and Research, Bettina Stark-Watzinger, was in Berlin-Adlershof today to visit the Catalysis Laboratory (CatLab). CatLab is a research platform of Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin and the Max Planck Society, dedicated to catalysis research that will deliver important innovations for achieving a green hydrogen economy. Upon her visit to the CatLab, the minister gained an insight into the latest technological advancements on producing and characterising thin-film catalysts and special methods for operando analytics and digital catalysis. The IRIS Adlershof of Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin is involved in this exciting project as a cooperation partner. IRIS Director Prof. Dr. Jürgen P. Rabe emphasized that significant synergies are realized through the interdisciplinary and cross-institutional cooperation of university and non-university research institutions.

more...

10.10.2022Interview mit Dr. Sven Ramelow zum Physiknobelpreis 2022

Dr. Sven Ramelow

Dr. Sven Ramelow leitet seit 2016 die Emmy Noether-Nach­wuchs­gruppe "Quanten-Bildgebung und Spektro­skopie im Mittleren Infra­rot". Zuvor hat er nach seinem Studium an der HU beim Ehrendoktor der HU, Prof. Anton Zeilinger, an der Universität Wien promoviert und als Post-Doc mit ihm an Experi­menten zur Ver­letzung der Bellschen Un­gleichung gearbeitet, für die unter anderem der diesjährige Physik-Nobelpreis verliehen wird. Weitere Statio­nen waren die University of Queensland (Brisbane, Australien) und die Cornell University (Ithaca, USA), bevor er zurück zur Humboldt-Universität kam. Er ist seit 2017 Mitglied von IRIS Adlershof.

Martin Bogner, IRIS Adlershof:

Lieber Herr Dr. Ramelow, der Nobelpreis in Physik 2022 wurde an Prof. Alain Aspect, Dr. John Clauser und Prof. Anton Zeilinger "für Experimente mit verschränkten Photonen, Nachweis der Verletzung der Bellschen Ungleichungen und Pionierarbeit in der Quanteninformationswissenschaft" vergeben. Hat es Sie überrascht, das Prof. Zeilinger den Nobelpreis erhalten hat?

Dr. Sven Ramelow: Jein. Es wurde ja seit über 10 Jahren immer wieder vermutet und man konnte online sogar darauf Wetten abschließen. Zu Recht! Aber wenn es dann tatsächlich passiert, ist das natürlich für den Moment eine sehr schöne, positive Überraschung.

Das Thema hört sich kompliziert an - was sind denn verschränkte Photonen und die Bellsche Ungleichung?

Wenn man die Eigen­schaften von zwei verschränkte Photonen jeweils an verschiedenen, weit entfernten Orten misst, können die Ergebnisse für bestimmte Mess­ein­stellungen immer gleich sein. Dies ist erst einmal auch nichts Besonderes. Es könnte ja einfach so sein, dass die Photonen einfach mit jeweils gleichen Eigen­schaften erzeugt und danach nur verteilt wurden.

Die beiden Photonen hätten sich also bei der Ent­stehung als verschränkte Photonen entschieden, welches z.B. Spin up und welches Spin down erhält?

Genau, das könnte man so vermuten. Man bezeichnet diesen Erklärungs­versuch als "lokale, versteckte Variablen" oder "lokalen Realismus". Und er deckt sich ja auch zu 100% mit unseren Alltags­er­fahrungen: Dinge hätten "an sich" Eigen­schaften, die unabhängig davon sind, ob ich diese messe oder anschaue. Allerdings wurde in den 1960er Jahren durch John Bell eine Art von Experiment vorge­schlagen, mit dem man diese Art der Erklärung sicher aus­schließen kann. Und genau solche Experimente - heute spricht man von Bell-Tests bzw. Ver­letzung der Bellschen Unglei­chungen - wurden von allen 3 Preis­trägern erfolg­reich durch­ge­führt.

Worin liegen denn die prak­tischen Heraus­forderungen bei einem solchen Versuchs­aufbau?

Zunächst einmal benötig man natürlich ein Quelle von verschränkten Photonen. Heut­zu­tage sind solchen Quellen bereits (für andere Zwecke - z.B. Quanten­krypto­graphie) kommerziell erhältlich, aber zum Zeit­punkt der Pionier-Arbeiten der 3 Preis­träger mussten diese aufwendig konstruiert und aufgebaut werden. Dann müssen die einzelnen Photonen an zwei möglichst weit entfernten Orten möglichst effizient gemessen werden - eine große mess­technische Herausforderung. Und zuletzt müssen die Mess­winkel sehr schnell und vor allem zufällig verändert, sowie die Daten sehr aufwendig statistisch analysiert werden.

Wo kann man mehr dazu erfahren?

Prof. Zeilinger hat dazu einige sehr gut erklärende Bücher geschrieben, die auch allgemein­verständlich sind. Zudem gibt es in jedem Sommer­semester seit ein paar Jahren am Institut für Physik die Vorlesung "Advanced Optical Sciences", bei der es bei einem der 2-3 Haupt­themen immer um solche Bell-Experimente geht.

Arbeiten Sie in Ihrer Nachwuchs­gruppe auch an verschränkten Photonen?

Ich würde eher sagen wir arbeiten MIT verschränkten Photonen. Im Moment versuchen wir diese für bestimmte neue Anwendungen und sogar mögliche Produkte im Bereich der Mikro­skopie und Spektro­skopie nutzbar zu machen. Zum Beispiel arbeiten wir an einem Gerät für die Erkennung vom Mikro­plastik-Partikeln in Abwasser, sowie einer neuen Art von Mikroskop für die Krebs­diagnostik. Die Grund­lagen­forschung dafür wurde übrigens erst 2014 in der Arbeit­sgruppe von Prof. Zeilinger gemacht - damals noch ohne jegliche Absicht einer möglichen Anwendung, sondern wirklich aus reiner Neugier.

Ab wann schätzen Sie werde ich mit meinem Handy quanten­verschlüsselte Text­nach­richten ver­schicken?

Ich glaube nicht, dass das eine Anwendung von Quanten­verschlüsse­lung sein wird. Aber viel­leicht wird es in den nächste 5-10 Jahren andere geben - in Bereichen wo extreme Daten­sicher­heit erforder­lich ist.

Vielen Dank für das interessante Gespräch!

09.10.2022Ist die Welt noch zu retten? - Prof. Dr. Eva Unger im "Köpfe der Nachhaltigkeit"-Interview

Dies Video kann in Ihrem Browser nicht wiedergegeben werden.

Eine Download-Version steht unter https://www.iris-adlershof./projects/IrisAdlershof/static/custom/media/KdN-Unger.mp4 zum Abruf bereit.

Welche Ideen Forscher:innen für eine nachhaltige Zu­kunft haben, stellt das Nach­haltig­keits­portal humboldts17 in der Rei­he „Köpfe der Nach­haltig­keit“ vor.

In der fünften Folge wurde Prof. Dr. Eva Unger, Mit­glied von IRIS Adlers­hof, vor­ge­stellt. Sie unter­sucht und ent­wickelt so­ge­nann­te Pe­row­skit-Halb­lei­ter, die in Solar­zel­len ein­ge­setzt wer­den können und aus Son­nen­licht Strom pro­du­zieren und gibt Ant­worten auf die Frage:

„Wie können wir als Wissen­schaft­ler­innen und Wissen­schaftler dabei mit­helfen, dass Pro­zesse und Techno­logien schnel­ler in die An­wendung kommen?“

05.10.2022Spitzen-Arbeitsbedingungen für die Spitzenforschung: Feierliche Eröffnung des IRIS-Forschungsbaus

Auf dem Campus Adlershof wurde der hochinstallierte IRIS‑Forschungsbau, gemein­sam finanziert von Bund, Land und Humboldt-Universität, während der Pandemie fertig gestellt und bezogen. Das Gebäude ist heute im Beisein der Senatorin für Wissen­schaft, Gesund­heit, Pflege und Gleich­stellung und von HU-Präsidentin Julia von Blumen­thal feierlich eröffnet worden. Der Forschungs­bau ist Sitz des IRIS Adlershof und bietet mit Labor-, Büro- und Kommunikations­flächen auf rund 4.500 Quadrat­metern optimale Bedingungen für die Zusammen­arbeit von Arbeits­gruppen aus Physik und Chemie der Humboldt-Universität sowie mit Kooperations­partnern aus außer­universitären Forschungs­instituten und der Wirt­schaft.

Wissenschaftssenatorin Ulrike Gote erklärt: „Der hochmoderne Forschungsbau liegt inmitten von zahlreichen Instituten und Unternehmen im Wissenschafts- und Technologiepark Adlershof. In dieser Lage und mit seinen weitläufigen Laborbereichen bietet er den rund 160 Mitarbeiterinnen und Mitarbeitern optimale Bedingungen für die Forschung und Entwicklung hybrider Systeme für Elektronik, Optoelektronik und Photonik. Der Forschungsbau ist ein wichtiger Baustein für die herausragende Wissenschafts- und Forschungslandschaft Berlins.“

„Der IRIS-Forschungsbau stellt eine herrausragende Verbesserung der Forschungsinfrastruktur auf dem Campus Adlershof und eine große Bereicherung für Wissenschaftlerinnen und Wissenschaftler, Studierende, sowie für unsere Partner am Standort Berlin-Adlershof dar“, sagt HU-Präsidentin Julia von Blumenthal anlässlich der Eröffnung.

„Durch die integrative Architektur mit Verbund- wie Speziallaboren werden physikalische, chemische, material- und ingenieurs­wissenschaftliche, sowie IT- und AI-Methoden hier zusammengeführt. Davon erhoffen sich alle Beteiligten vor Ort, wie auch unsere strategischen internationalen Kooperationspartner erhebliche Innovationsschübe“, sagt Prof. Dr. Jürgen P. Rabe, langjähriger Direktor des IRIS Adlershof.

Im IRIS-Forschungsbau lernen und forschen Mitarbeiterinnen und Mitarbeiter unterschiedlicher Disziplinen zusammen an der Entwicklung neuartiger hybrider Materialien. Hybrid bedeutet dabei, dass etwa anorganische Halbleitermaterialien mit organischen Materialien auf einer Nanoskala zusammengebracht werden, um neue Materialien mit besseren oder auch völlig neuen Funktionalitäten zu entwickeln.

Als Herzstück des Gebäudes hat das IRIS-Team ein großes Verbundlabor mit einem integrierten Reinraumtrakt errichten lassen. Hier werden Arbeitsmethoden aus Physik und Chemie zusammengeführt. Darüber hinaus verfügt das neue Gebäude über hochspezialisierte Labore, in denen Forschende die hier entwickelten, neuen Materialien auf Herz und Nieren prüfen. Ein Highlight ist ein elektromagnetisch abgeschotteter Raum mit entkoppeltem Fundament, in dem eines der modernsten Transmissions­elektronen­mikroskope der Welt steht.

Die Anordnung der Labore und Büros sowie die großzügigen Kommunikationsflächen im IRIS- Forschungsbau schaffen beste Voraussetzungen, damit die unterschiedlichen Disziplinen sich austauschen und voneinander lernen können. Der Bau befindet sich in unmittelbarer Nähe der Institute für Physik und Chemie der Humboldt-Universität. Er schlägt nicht nur eine Brücke zwischen unterschiedlichen Disziplinen, sondern auch zwischen Theorie und Experiment, verbindet Grundlagenforschung, anwendungsorientierte Forschung und Hightech-Unternehmen. Hier forschen auch Wissenschaftlerinnen und Wissenschaftler aus außeruniversitären Einrichtungen wie dem Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie (HZB) und dem Fritz-Haber-Institut der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft. Vergangenes Jahr haben das HZB, zwei Max-Planck-Institute und die HU begonnen, ein gemeinsames Forschungslabor für Katalyse, das CatLab, im IRIS-Forschungsbau aufzubauen. Im Fokus der Forschung des CatLab steht Grüner Wasserstoff.

Eine Aufzeichnung der Eröffnungsfeier können Sie auf Youtube abrufen:

16.09.2022FAIRmat in the Adlershof Journal

Physics professor Claudia Draxl coordinates the FAIRmat consortium, whose goal is to store not only the final results of materials science publications but also all other measurement data. In the current issue of the Adlershof Journal, she reveals why it is so important for materials researchers to process and exchange their measurement data with each other and what role the predecessor project NOMAD plays in this.

to the online article...

30.08.2022"Non-Standard Models" - an entertaining and informative Youtube-Channel

Ever wondered how physicists come up with new theories? How were theorists able to predict such complex phenomena, years before they were observed experimentally? Come with us and step into the world of theoretical physics!

Non-Standard Models is a YouTube channel that provides entertaining and informative answers to research questions beyond the Standard Model, like “do extra dimensions exist and why would we need them?” or “what if the Higgs boson is ac