Tank Girl is a 1995 science fiction action film based on the popular UK comic of the same name. Lori Petty stars as the titular character, who is part of a resistance movement against the forces of Water & Power (W&P), who control what is left of Earth's water supply following a cataclysmic event. The film was not a box office success in its original theatrical run, but has since gained a cult following.

The following weapons were used in the film Tank Girl:

Rifles/Carbines

Ruger AC556 Muzzelite Bullpup

Ruger AC556 assault rifles fitted with Muzzelite Bullpup stocks, flashlights, laser sights, forward vertical grips, and night-vision scopes are the main rifles seen in the film. The Rugers Bullpup would later be featured in the 1998 film Phantoms and in several episodes of Firefly.

Handguns

LASERAIM Series III pistol

LASERAIM Series III pistols fitted with laser sights are wielded throughout the film.

Submachine Guns

Kimel AP-9

A customized Kimel AP-9 fitted with a 20-round magazine is used by Tank Girl (Lori Petty) and Jet Girl (Naomi Watts).

Shotguns

Winchester Model 1300 Defender

A Winchester Model 1300 Defender wrapped in light blue tape with a flashlight taped to the barrel is seen in the hands of Sub Girl (Ann Cusack) before being taken by Tank Girl. Another unmodified one is mounted atop her custom tank.

12 Gauge Double-Barreled Shotgun

A 12 Gauge Double Barreled Shotgun also appears to be mounted atop her custom tank.

Machine Guns

M1919A4 .30 Caliber Machine Gun

The Browning M1919A4 .30 caliber machine gun is one of the weapons mounted on Tank Girl's custom tank.

Other

Mockup Cannon

A mockup heavy cannon is also mounted on Tank Girl's custom tank. This mockup appears to fire Acetylene Gas to simulate muzzle flash. This cannon resembles the one used by Col Trautman in the 1988 film Rambo III (both films were shot in Arizona).

Rotary Cannon

A W&P aircraft is armed with a custom rotary cannon. This mockup is an 'acetylene' gun, used to simulate the muzzle flash effect.

Tank Girl's Tank

The tank manned by Tank Girl appears to have been built upon the chassis of an M5 Stuart, though oddly when she first encounters the tank it is a T-54 or T-55 (recognisable by the large fume extractor fitted to the end of the gun barrel) and the next time she encounters it, it has become a PT-76 amphibious light tank. The Stuart version is customized to reflect the look of the original comic and is fitted with rocket engines, shotguns, machine guns and missile launchers. Additionally, the interior of the tank is shown to be far larger than any tank in reality, large enough for Tank Girl and Jet Girl both to stand straight up and walk around in at the same time.