Tank Girl (Dir. Rachel Talalay, 1995)

Composer and songwriter Cole Porter was born on this day in 1891. He was the toast of Broadway in the 1920s and 1930s and his catalog defined much of mid-20th century musicals, both on stage and in cinema. Like most musical fans, I'm a sucker for his work. However, I tend to assume there's only limited circumstances, retro styled circumstances, where his music comes up in post-1950s cinema.

So imagine my surprise when I saw "Tank Girl" for the first time and to humiliate and punish the madame (Ann Magnuson) of the Liquid Silver club and brothel Rebecca, the title Tank Girl, (Lori Petty) makes her sing "Let's Do It (Let's Fall in Love)" by Cole Porter. "Tank Girl" is a pretty bizarre '90s artifact, with its post-apocalyptic, queer, feminist, riot grrl narrative that plays like a long form music video of its era, intercut with bits of animation, and stars a protagonist who's equal parts Mad Max, Pippi Longstocking and Daffy Duck. So while derailing the narrative for a production number of a Cole Porter isn't totally out of character for the film, there was also no way to see it coming.

The thing that amused me most about the use of Cole Porter in "Tank Girl" though was everybody knew all the words to "Let's Do It" and everybody actually knew who Cole Porter was. Given how screwed the world is for water and power in the film's future, maybe it's not that weird that an artist whose work would exist on multiple analog formats survived the apocalypse. Still, for a film with Bjork, Devo, Hole and Veruca Salt on its soundtrack, Cole Porter is out of place. The sequence is fun as hell, especially because they get the whole brothel singing, and the prostitutes all take on the roles of chorus girls, doing choreography from golden age Hollywood musicals.

Sadly, the version of "Let's Do It" in the film isn't on the "Tank Girl" soundtrack, just the Joan Jett and Paul Westerberg version that closes the movie. However, that version is most excellent. The whole soundtrack is actually.

My fiance, and my coworker, who loaned me his DVD copy of "Tank Girl" so I could see the film, were legitimately surprised I hadn't seen this movie until this year. The cartoonish, violent and feminist narrative with a soundtrack featuring some of my favorite bands seems right up my alley. However, as I pointed out to my fiance, the movie came out in 1995, when I was ten, and the only person in my life then who would have recommended the film to me was my step-mom. I didn't even really know the movie existed until college when one of my friends mentioned it was one of her favorites--she even had a haircut like Tank Girl--yet we never watched it together. Well I know it exists now, and it's awesome.