LOS ANGELES — Academy Award-winning composer Jerry Goldsmith, who crafted a trove of scores for everything from films such as “Planet of the Apes” and “L.A. Confidential” to television shows like “Twilight Zone,” has died.

Goldsmith, 75, died in his sleep Wednesday night at his Beverly Hills home after a long battle with cancer, said Lois Carruth, his personal assistant.

A classically trained composer and conductor who began musical studies at age 6, Goldsmith’s Hollywood career spanned nearly half a century.

It included an astonishing number of TV and movie scores that have become virtual classics. From the clarions of “Patton” to the syrupy theme for TV’s “The Waltons,” Goldsmith sometimes seemed synonymous with soundtracks.

His hundreds of works included scores for “The Blue Max,” “Alien,” “Basic Instinct” and “Chinatown.”

Goldsmith took on action hits such as “Total Recall,” which he considered one of his best scores, as well as the “Star Trek” movies and more lightweight fare such as “Dennis the Menace.”

His last film score was for last year’s “Looney Tunes: Back in Action.”

“He was always an idol,” said composer Danny Elfman. “He had this balance in his music that was always an inspiration to me.”

*It’s that versatility that made him so outstanding,* Elfman said. *Even when he was doing low-budget television he was already putting this inventiveness into it and signature that stood out. … He had this way of going between romance melody and pure muscular orchestra that was so wonderful.

Carruth said Goldsmith preferred writing for character-driven, quiet films.

“Somehow they kept coming back to him for the action films,” she said.

In 1950, Goldsmith got a job as a clerk-typist at CBS and eventually got assignments for live radio shows, writing as much as one score a week. He later turned to television.

In the late 1950s he began composing for movies. His career took off in the 1960s with such major films as “Lonely Are the Brave” and “The Blue Max.” He was nominated for an Academy Award for his work on 1962’s “Freud” — the first of 18 nominations he would receive over the years, though he won only once, for best original score for 1976’s “The Omen.” He also earned five Emmy Awards.

Goldsmith was known for his versatility and experimentation. He added electronics to the woodwinds and brass of his scores. For 1968’s “Planet of the Apes,” he got a blaring effect by having his musicians blow horns without mouthpieces. With a puckish sense of humor, he reportedly wore an ape mask while conducting the score.

“He experimented a lot, and that’s what made him so popular with his fans,” Carruth said. “When he wrote, he got inside of the characters and he wrote what he felt they were thinking and feeling.”

Some of his motion picture scores were adapted for ballets. Goldsmith also composed orchestral pieces and taught occasional music classes at local universities.

Days after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, Goldsmith’s two-minute musical tribute to the victims was performed at the Hollywood Bowl.

He also conducted orchestras around the world, and particularly enjoyed working with the London Symphony Orchestra, Carruth said.

Goldsmith is survived by his wife, Carol; children Aaron, Joel, Carrie, Ellen Edson and Jennifer Grossman, six grandchildren and a great-grandchild.