1. INTRODUCTION

Over the past few decades, range shifts due to climate and land‐use changes have been reported in both plants and animals. Many are experiencing a poleward and/or upward shift in distribution, pushing their northern and upper range limit to higher latitudes and altitudes (Chen et al., 2011; VanDerWal et al., 2013; but see Kerr et al., 2015). However, there has been substantial variation in the degree and direction of range shift across taxonomic groups (Chen et al., 2011; Devictor et al., 2012; Lenoir & Svenning, 2015). This variation remains difficult to explain and necessitates a better understanding of the factors influencing species’ distributions (Buckley & Kingsolver, 2012; Devictor et al., 2012; Sgrò et al., 2016; Sunday et al., 2012).

A climate change‐driven range shift in insects is often attributed to the relaxation of a harsher poleward climate since temperature acts as a physiological limitation and as a phenological cue (Paradis et al., 2008; Logan & Bentz, 1999; Root et al., 2003). For those species with northern range edges associated with temperature clines, climatic warming has frequently resulted in the colonization of suitable areas in more northern latitudes (Parmesan, 1996; Parmesan & Yohe, 2003). For example, the northern range expansion of the deer fly (Lipoptena cervi) in Finland is due to warmer temperatures during the summer (Härkönen et al., 2010). However, for many other species, it remains unclear how climate change has led to range shifts (Chen et al., 2011; Sunday et al., 2012).

Low temperatures throughout the year can constrain the ability of insects to persist at northern range limits as they can influence any life cycle stage (Ungerer et al., 1999). Overwinter survival has been shown to be a key factor limiting the ranges of some insects (e.g., Southern pine beetle Dendroctonus frontalis, Crozier, 2003). Overwintering insects can adopt one of multiple physiological strategies for surviving winter (Williams et al., 2015); some insects can survive internal ice formation and are termed freeze‐tolerant, some physiologically suppress the temperature at which their body fluids spontaneously freeze (the supercooling point; SCP) and are termed freeze avoiding, while others remain susceptible to chilling (termed chill susceptible) and seek relatively warm microhabitats to overwinter (Denlinger & Lee, 2010; Overgaard & MacMillan, 2017; Sinclair, 1999).

While winter represents a considerable challenge (Robinet & Roques, 2010; Williams et al., 2015), insects are also likely to be particularly vulnerable to low temperatures during autumn. Autumn is when most insects are acquiring cold tolerance through physiological adjustments (acclimatization) and have therefore not reached their peak cold hardiness (i.e., the capacity to tolerate intensity and duration of cold exposure; Tauber et al., 1986). There is also a much higher frequency of cold temperature events in autumn than in the summer (Danks, 1978). Yet, no study, to our knowledge, has considered low temperatures during autumn as a limiting factor on the geographic distributions of insects.

Regardless of season, cold exposure can cause insects to cross physiological thresholds leading to sublethal effects. At a species‐specific low temperature, most insects lose the ability for coordinated movement (a critical thermal minimum; CTmin) after which they enter a state of complete neuromuscular silence termed chill coma (Gibert & Huey, 2001; MacMillan & Sinclair, 2011; Oyen & Dillon, 2018). Many insects can recover from this state with no immediate evidence of injury, but prolonged or severe cold exposure can cause behavioral defects, or slow or halt development (Asahina, 1970; Overgaard & MacMillan, 2017; Rojas & Leopold, 1996). Chill‐susceptible insects suffer from a loss of homeostasis at low temperatures well above their SCP, while those more tolerant to chilling survive such exposures (Overgaard & MacMillan, 2017). While freeze‐tolerant insects can survive freezing of the extracellular fluid at their SCP, they can suffer from ice‐related injuries below this temperature. By contrast, freeze‐avoidant insects cannot survive at temperatures below their SCP. Thus, the relationship between the SCP and injury/mortality is critical to determining the cold tolerance of these insects (Sinclair et al., 2015).

Cold tolerance traits, such as the CTmin, SCP, or survival following a cold stress, frequently correlate strongly with insect distribution (Andersen et al., 2015; Bozinovic et al., 2011; Gouveia et al., 2014). For example, the CTmin and CTmax of Drosophila species have been used to accurately predict their current distributions (Overgaard et al., 2014). However, given the limited number of taxa in which these relationships have been explored, we have little to no ability to generalize predictions about how climate influences species’ distributions via low temperatures to other taxa (Ouimette, 2018).

Species distribution modeling is a commonly used approach to evaluate recent range shifts and forecast future shifts due to climate change. Using correlations between georeferenced occurrence records and a set of environmental variables with geospatial data, these models predict a species’ suitable habitat (Elith et al., 2011). While the approach is useful for many applications, these models often violate key assumptions, such as predicting habitat suitability in novel conditions and omitting key biotic variables known to influence geographic distributions such as species interactions (Briscoe et al., 2019; Tingley et al., 2014).

One way that has been demonstrated to improve the accuracy of these models is to incorporate physiological variables or stress tolerance thresholds (e.g., metabolic needs, thermal limits; Kearney & Porter, 2009; Overgaard et al., 2014). By using variables derived directly from these physiological traits, the underlying processes explaining the species’ distribution are thought to be better incorporated into these “mechanistic” or “process‐based” models (Kearney & Porter, 2009). In some contexts, these models have been shown to be more accurate than (Peterson, 2011), or complement weaknesses of (Martínez et al., 2015), correlative models when modeling the fundamental niche and can strengthen predictions about future distributions (Buckley et al., 2011; Evans et al., 2016; Kotta et al., 2019; Martínez et al., 2015). However, these experimentally derived variables can be time‐consuming to develop and thus not feasible to do for large assemblages of species or over broad ranges (Evans et al., 2016; Peterson, 2011). It can also be difficult to find traits that are predictive and functional in the species’ environment (Kearney & Porter, 2009).

Here, we test the hypothesis that low temperatures during autumn are the limiting factor of the northern range edge of the widespread butterfly, the Giant Swallowtail, Papilio cresphontes (Cramer, 1777). Specifically, our two main objectives are to (a) find relevant cold tolerance thresholds of P. cresphontes collected in late summer; and (b) determine the relative importance of these thresholds on the geographic distribution of P. cresphontes. Simultaneously, we aim to determine the cold tolerance strategy of larvae at the northern range limit. Determining the species’ cold tolerance strategy improves our knowledge about the importance of low temperatures on P. cresphontes survival and helps identify which low‐temperature thresholds are likely to be most relevant at the species’ northern range. In this study, we focus on the pre‐overwinter life stage (i.e., larval stage), which is in contrast to most other studies that have determined the cold tolerance strategy of the life stage that overwinters (Radchuk et al., 2013). To determine the importance of low temperatures at a broad scale, we model the geographic distribution of P. cresphontes with the cold tolerance parameters we generated experimentally, as well as other factors hypothesized to limit the distribution of butterflies (Table S1).

Papilio cresphontes has undergone a rapid expansion over the past decade and now occurs as far north as Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Finkbeiner et al. (2011) hypothesized that the range expansion into New York state from 2000 to 2010 was due to the disappearance of frost (as defined meteorologically) in September. Based on an initial assessment from a few field observations, which were not drawn from commonly used thermal limits, they showed individuals could survive a single exposure to temperatures just below freezing (0°C). However, to effectively reject the hypothesis, a more in‐depth study of the impact of low temperature on P. cresphontes using measurements of thermal limits is warranted.

To establish the larval cold tolerance strategy, we measured three common cold‐induced physiological thresholds: SCP, CTmin, and survival following cold exposure. To gain a better estimate of the cold tolerance strategy, thresholds (SCP and low‐temperature survival) were measured for two generations and multiple sites across a latitudinal gradient at the northern range limit. Latitude has the potential to affect cold tolerance due to its correlation with climate (e.g., photoperiod, temperature; Sømme, 1982; Tanaka, 1996, but see Yoshio & Ishii, 2001). Therefore, latitude could affect when and to what extent organisms are cold hardy. Combined, these experiments were used to identify a potentially relevant low‐temperature threshold of larvae collected at the northern range edge. We examined the importance of low temperatures at a broad scale by comparing species distribution models of P. cresphontes based only on environmental data derived from other sources to models that also included the cold tolerance parameters generated experimentally.

4. DISCUSSION

Although insects are likely to be particularly vulnerable to low temperatures during autumn, no study, to our knowledge, has considered low temperatures during autumn as a limiting factor on the geographic distributions of insects. Here, we test this hypothesis at the northern edge of the distribution of the widespread butterfly, the Giant Swallowtail, P. cresphontes. Our study contributes three main findings that lead to a rejection of this hypothesis. First, given the survival of larvae to prolonged exposures to temperatures close to but not below their SCP, they are chill‐tolerant or modestly freeze‐avoidant at their northern range limit at this time of year. Their low survival below the SCP provides support that this species is unable to handle freezing before pupation and that they may use a freeze‐avoidant strategy. However, further testing for seasonal plasticity in the SCP is required to confirm a freeze‐avoidant strategy as we had limited power and were unable to directly compare the change in SCP between the two generations. An active depression of the SCP over the season would indicate that larvae are accumulating cryoprotectants and that the larval cold tolerance could be increasing, thus supporting a freeze‐avoidant strategy.

Our results demonstrate that ecologically relevant exposures to temperatures above the SCP are not lethal, but below the SCP are, thus providing a clear picture of the lower end of thermal tolerance for this species. This means that for P. cresphontes larvae, a single overnight exposure to temperatures near −8°C will impede their survival and could represent a potential lower lethal limit. Consequently, areas with early autumn temperatures that reach −8°C should be inhospitable for P. cresphontes. However, in the Ottawa region, which is at the northern range limit, there are only 0–3 frost episodes on average from September to October. Therefore, low temperatures (i.e., <−7°C) during early autumn are unlikely to be experienced by the larvae there or anywhere in its current range. This suggests that a single exposure to low temperatures in early autumn is unlikely to limit the current northern range of P. cresphontes through cold‐induced mortality. However, there may be sublethal effects of chilling (e.g., effects on developmental success), which could still impact overall insect fitness.

Second, we found that exposure to normal frost temperatures for this time of year in this area (i.e., −1°C to −2°C), which are above the SCP, did not affect larval survival. Therefore, it is also unlikely that frost in early autumn is a limiting factor of P. cresphontes northern range. This is in concordance with the field observations from Finkbeiner et al. (2011), which showed that P. cresphontes larvae can survive frost events. Since larvae had no problem reaching pupation after exposure to −2°C, the most common frost temperature, and the majority of larvae still successfully pupated (60%) after the low frost temperature test (i.e., −6°C), the cold tolerance of larvae at the current northern range limit seems sufficient to cope with the climate they experience. However, further testing in ambient conditions and with a proper control is needed to determine whether cold exposure on larvae have significant sublethal effects on eclosion as rates of eclosion in this experiment were less than 30%, but a control group was not included due to sample size constraints. It has been demonstrated elsewhere that the success of each life stage matters in the response of butterfly species to climate change (Radchuk et al., 2013).

Third, the species distribution modeling results were consistent with the experimental results: Cold‐related variables did not explain the distribution of P. cresphontes at a broad scale. Together, these results provide strong support that exposure to temperatures above −6.6°C during autumn does not limit the northern range of P. cresphontes. Instead, growing degree‐days and precipitation are the most important predictors, of those tested here, on the distribution of P. cresphontes at a broad scale. While other factors were not tested here, for example, biotic interactions (e.g., host plant occurrence; Filazzola et al., 2020), our results suggest that P. cresphontes depends on specific heat accumulation and water availability to complete its life cycle. These factors have also been identified as important in predicting the range of other butterflies (Eskildsen et al., 2013; Luoto et al., 2006). Evidence suggests there is a strong relationship between the number of growing degree‐days and the growth rate of larvae, and the foraging activities of adults (Kukal & Dawson, 1989; Ritland & Scriber, 1985; Schneider & Root, 2002). Our result is consistent with studies showing the constraints of growing degree‐days on size and voltinism for species with a longer larval development time in relation to growing season length (Blanckenhorn & Demont, 2004; Horne et al., 2015; Kivelä et al., 2016; Roff, 1980). Precipitation can limit the range of insects directly due to dehydration or indirectly by imposing limitations on primary productivity, which in return transposes to higher resource availability.

The full range model was more accurate at predicting the distribution of P. cresphontes than the northern range model. Similar results have been found for other species, with model accuracy and performance increasing with larger study extents (Connor et al., 2019; VanDerWal et al., 2009). This is likely a result of smaller environmental gradients in the northern range, which causes the model to have a greater difficulty detecting differences between presences and absences, and in turn leads to difficulties predicting presences and absences in novel areas (Smith & Santos, 2019). Prevalence can also decrease with larger study extents (Barbet‐Massin et al., 2012). However, the accuracy of the two models was still different using TSS, a metric that is not as sensitive to prevalence (Table S6; Figure ; Somodi et al., 2017). Nevertheless, even if model performance was lower in the northern range relative to the full range, the model was still valid and performed adequately across all metrics.

While growing degree‐days and precipitation explain a lot of the variation in habitat suitability for P. cresphontes, we may have underestimated the role of cold tolerance at the northern range edge for four reasons. First, low‐temperature thresholds, such as the CTmin, although not lethal, could still impact P. cresphontes survival in natural conditions due to the enhanced risk of predation or starvation linked with the loss in mobility at temperatures below 2°C. While a possibility, this hypothesis depends on a high likelihood of predation, which is unknown across P. cresphontes range (Hazel et al., 1998; McAuslane, 2009). Low temperature may also lead to sublethal effects on developmental success, energy status, and behavior. Second, it is also possible that more prolonged or repeated exposure to low temperatures could impact P. cresphontes larval survival or have sublethal effects at the northern range edge because we did not test for the effects of repeated cold injury or chilling. In Drosophila, multiple cold events could cause an accumulation of cold injuries resulting in larval death or in sublethal effects such as decreased feeding, fecundity, and dispersal ability (Marshall & Sinclair, 2012).

Third, the SCP estimated here is effectively a theoretical one. Since we could not collect and test the last emerging larvae of the season due to the difficulty in finding them, they might not have reached their peak cold tolerance, and therefore, in situ SCP could be lower (i.e., their cold hardiness may have been underestimated). Moreover, as we did not test the cold tolerance of the pupae, the life stage most likely to experience low temperatures in this region, their SCP could be lower. On the other hand, the in situ SCP may be higher since environmental factors in natural conditions, such as air moisture or exposure to ice nucleators, may further affect survival at temperatures above SCP. Nevertheless, because the low‐temperature thresholds derived experimentally in this study could be an underestimate, the mechanistic models may not have been optimized perfectly, thus underestimating the role of cold tolerance metrics at a broad scale. Fourth, the low sample size in our experiments may have limited our power; however, the overall conclusions of the study are unlikely to be affected. Since temperatures below the SCP (i.e., <−7°C) are very unlikely to occur multiple times before pupation, if at all, low temperatures during autumn remain unlikely to limit the northern range of P. cresphontes.

Given our lack of knowledge about the overwintering ecology and physiology of this species in its northern range, pupal overwinter survival may be a more important limiting factor for the species’ northern range limit. Unfortunately, it is unknown whether they overwinter in the leaf litter on the ground or tree branches above the ground. If on the ground, they would likely be covered in snow (average annual snowfall in Ottawa is 224 cm [Environment and Climate Change Canada]) and therefore buffered against low temperatures. The temperature 30 cm below snow cover is usually −4°C (Flin & Brzoska, 2008). This behavior would increase their chances of surviving the winter. Indeed, West and Hazel (1996) showed that in Virginia, P. cresphontes pupate 3–25 cm off the ground on dead branches. In the northern range, it is likely that even at these heights, chrysalids would be covered by snow. While ontogenetic variation in thermal tolerance is present in other species (Terblanche et al., 2006; Marais et al., 2009; MacLean et al., 2016; but see Ouimette, 2018) and only larvae were tested in this study, P. cresphontes larvae purge their food and liquids before pupation; thus, they are likely to be even more cold‐tolerant at the pupal stage. Other members of Papilio are more cold‐tolerant than what we determined for the larval stage of P. cresphontes. P. canadensis and P. glaucus are considered to be freeze‐tolerant at the pupal stage and have an SCP of −23°C to −27°C (Kukal et al., 1991). P. xuthus is freeze‐avoidant with an SCP of −25°C (Shimada, 1988). Therefore, the pupae of P. cresphontes are likely to have even greater cold hardiness than the larvae and thus be able to survive the winter at the northern range if they pupate at similar heights as the populations in Virginia. Nevertheless, future studies should determine which temperature conditions pupae experience in the winter and use these temperatures to guide the design of experiments to determine cold tolerance plasticity.

Finally, our study has implications for climate change‐driven range expansion in the species. First, our results suggest that the warming of autumn temperatures over the past decade is unlikely to have been the factor that led to the recent range expansion of P. cresphones into Eastern Ontario, at least via low‐temperature limits, as originally hypothesized by Finkbeiner et al. (2011). Instead, the warming of winter temperatures could have ameliorated overwintering survival, leading to an improvement in habitat suitability. Alternatively, warming autumn temperatures could have increased growing season length, increasing the time available for resource acquisition and development (Blanckenhorn & Demont, 2004), and increasing voltinism, as has been observed in other butterfly species in North America (Zografou et al., 2021). However, based on expert knowledge (i.e., Toronto Entomologists’ Association), P. cresphontes has been bivoltine since it first expanded into the Ottawa region so a change in voltinism is unlikely to have been the key factor that led to recent range expansion. Future northward range expansion beyond the Ottawa region could be constrained by the distribution, and response, of its main host plant in the area (Z. americanum) to climate change, which is unknown. Based on regional floras (Rousseau, 1974; Soper & Heimburger, 1990), the northern range limit of Z. americanum is thought to occur just north of Ottawa; however, recent vegetation surveys beyond the region have not been done.