Manchester Museum, Manchester (must see)

The Manchester Museum is the region’s largest museum dedicated to natural history and archaeology. Housed in a neo-Gothic building on Oxford Road, the building lies within the University of Manchester campus, south east of the city centre. The museum was designed by Alfred Waterhouse, who created the Natural History Museum in London, as well as Manchester’s famous Town Hall. Manchester Museum began life as a collection of artifacts, owned by a group of Mancunian industrialists. They set up the Manchester Natural History society in 1821, moving the collection to its current home in 1890.

The museum currently houses over six million historical and archaeological artifacts, housed in themed collections. The Ancient Egypt collection is one of the largest collections of its kind in the UK. It is currently being combined with the museum’s many archaeological items to create a new Ancient Worlds gallery, opening in 2012. One of Manchester Museum’s most unusual areas is the Vivarium, a rainforest area housing live amphibians, most notably Amazonian tree frogs. Admission is free, and the building is fully accessible to wheelchair users and visitors with sensory impairment.

Create Your Own Walk in Manchester

Creating your own self-guided walk in Manchester is easy and fun. Choose the city attractions that you want to see and a walk route map will be created just for you. You can even set your hotel as the start point of the walk.

Manchester Introduction Walking Tour

The seventh most populated city in England, Manchester is an important cultural, industrial and historic center.

The recorded history of Manchester began with the civilian settlement associated with the Roman fort established circa 79 AD on a sandstone bluff near the confluence of the rivers Medlock and Irwell. Having been a manorial township throughout the Middle Ages, Manchester enjoyed rapid... view more

Tour Duration: 2 Hour(s)

Travel Distance: 2.5 Km or 1.6 Miles

Edwardian Architecture Tour

A product of the Industrial Revolution, Manchester is noted for its warehouses, railway viaducts, cotton mills, and canals, reflecting the most ambitious and exciting phase of the city's history.

During the reign of King Edward VII, which spanned from 1901 to 1910, Manchester experienced a significant boom in architectural development. This period saw a shift towards more ornate and... view more

Tour Duration: 2 Hour(s)

Travel Distance: 2.6 Km or 1.6 Miles