On 10 July 1911 King George V formally approved the Permanent Naval Forces of the Commonwealth being designated the Royal Australian Navy (RAN). At the same time it was decreed that all ships and vessels of the Royal Australian Navy shall fly at the stern the White Ensign as the symbol of the authority of the Crown, and at the Jack Staff the distinctive flag of the Australian Commonwealth[1].

When warships are at sea it is customary to fly only an ensign to identify a ship’s nationality and for many years ships of the RAN risked being mistaken for those of the Royal Navy (RN) with which it proudly shared the White Ensign. This did not sit well with all, and it appears to have been one of the reasons for the introduction of a uniquely Australian national symbol appearing on RAN ships.

One of the first recorded examples of an RAN warship taking measures to make clear its nationality is that of HMAS Parramatta (I) during the First World War. Affixed to the top of her jackstaff was a bronze kangaroo in place of the more traditional naval crown. A move made to clearly identify the Australian character of her crew.

HMAS Anzac (II) adopted a similar practic during the Korean War in 1953. On that occasion a large sheet of brass was cut by Anzac's shipwrights to form the shape of a kangaroo, a symbol instantly recognisable as being uniquely Australian. The design is believed to have been taken from the reverse of an Australian penny which depicted a kangaroo 'in flight'. The brass kangaroo was burnished and subsequently mounted atop Anzac’s mainmast as a visible reminder to ships in company that she was very much an Australian vessel. Photographic evidence suggests that the appearance of a kangaroo style insignia was also used by Fairmile motor launches operating alongside US forces in New Guinea in 1945.

The first known instance of an RAN warship affixing a red kangaroo to her funnel/superstructure occurred in 1955 when HMAS Queenborough was attached to the Royal Navy 6th frigate Squadron operating from Londonderry, Northern Ireland. The 6th Frigate squadron had as its squadron insignia the 'Red Hand of Ulster'. In keeping with that squadron's tradition, Queenborough conformed to the practice but also added a red kangaroo to denote her Australian origin.

On 1 March 1967 the Australian White Ensign was introduced to replace the Royal Navy White Ensign and this went some way to alleviating ongoing confusion between British and Australian warships. By then, however, the RAN was operating US designed and built Charles F Adams Class guided missile destroyers (DDGs) that were serving alongside their US counterparts on active service in Vietnam. National pride again became a consideration when Australian DDGs were occasionally mistaken for American ships of the same class.