January 23, 2013

In light of the favorable comments concerning this execrable pulp novel I feel compelled to write a critique even though I have not read the book for many years and do not intend ever reading it again.

To underline a point that will be obvious to anyone who has read the the original: John Wyndham's 'The day of the Triffids' is not (contrary to the titular implication) about Triffids. The Monster plants are a McGuffin and play a distant secondary role to the main trope of disintegration/fragility and the main plot point of blindness.

Simon Clark's 'continuation' of the story is an 'adventure' story about monsters and as such is on the level with a child's cartoon show.

Plus, as I remember it the hero manages to sail from the Isle of Wight to America on a matt of floating moss.

D of the T was and is one of my favorite books and I was thus primed, indeed 'pumped' to read and enjoy the sequel when it came out- to say I was disappointed would be to misrepresent the depth of emotion I felt at being so let down

Avoid this poor drivel at all costs, if you want more Triffid action re-read the original

July 10, 2011

Clark does a pretty good job of maintaining the style of John Wyndham - it's not difficult to go straight from Wyndham's The Day of the Triffids to Night of the Triffids.

There are a few anachronisms - surprisingly more than in the original book, which you'd expect to be more dated. How on Earth can a Post-apocalyptic society, which doesn't even have a stable energy supply, develop reproductive technology that's not only decades ahead of what was possible at the time of Day of the Triffids, but ahead of what's possible in 2011?

The science is pretty sketchy: evolution is Lamarckian, rather than Darwinian; and fertility drugs lead to identical twins, triplets, etc; but on the whole it's a well-written sequel and an engaging story.

February 26, 2009

Written exactly fifty years after the release of John Wyndham's classic post-apocalyptic novel "Day Of The Triffids", the British horror writer Simon Clark brings you a sequel to the modern classic with "Night Of The Triffids".

The novel starts off mirroring that of Wyndham's book, throwing the reader into a now all too familiar sense of disorientation, with the first person perspective of David Mason (the now grown-up son of Bill Mason) seemingly waking up to a world of darkness. Clark from here on in sets down a loving homage to Wyndham's writing, utilising an eerie sense of unease to the atmosphere of the book.

As the plot develops, Clark picks up the pace in favour of a more action packed style of novel. The tale quickly develops its many storylines, moving the location from the Isle of White to that of New York.

Clark from here on concentrates on tackling the issue of mankind's need for war, where we see two separate colonies at war over the survival of humankind. Clark frequently references characters and passages from Wyndham's novel incorporating them within many of the chapters of this sequel.

A new host of characters are introduced with some careful characterization that develops throughout the book. The plot brings about frequent twists and turns within the storyline until Clark draws towards his dramatic conclusion. Unfortunately, for me, this is where the book is somewhat let down. All loose ends are quickly tied up and a grand finale does indeed take place, but it all seems a little rushed within the last few pages compared with the carefully built up nature of the previous pages.

All in all the novel was a thoroughly enjoyable read, that although not a touch on Wyndham's previous classic, does serve as a fitting sequel and a great homage to the Triffids. The book lasts for 406 pages and published through Hodder & Stoughton in 2001.

February 3, 2021

Що годе приличен fan fiction. Кларк е нацелил стила, но няма нито замаха, нито дълбочната на дядо Уиндъм. Там, където в оригинала умело се изследваха неудобни въпроси и ситуации, тук просто се разиграва повечко екшън за отвличане на вниманието. Много прилича на средностатистически постапокалиптичен американски сериал. Даже действието се развива в САЩ, 30 години след първата книга. Лошите бият добрите, после добрите - лошите, а отнякъде се извъдиха и едни 20-метрови трифиди с апетит на Годзила... Прелива от твърде много сапунен оптимизъм.

February 9, 2018

From BBC Radio 4 Extra:

Episode 1 of 5

After 25 years, a colony of survivors on the Triffid-free Isle of Wight are under attack once more...

Episode 2 of 5

David Masen becomes the first European to reach America since 'the blinding'. But all is not well in New York.

Episode 3 of 5

The more David Masen learns about Manhattan, the less he likes it. And the island's leader has a dubious past.

Episode 4 of 5

Valiantly trying to save Christina, back in Manhattan - David learns the extent of Fielding's megalomania.

Episode 5 of 5

David and the rebels must use desperate tactics to try and halt Fielding. But can they outfight the megalomaniac?

Simon Clark's 2001 novel is the sequel to John Wyndham's sci-fi classic. At the conclusion of 'The Day of the Triffids', scientist Bill Masen had escaped with his wife and four-year-old son to the island.

Now grown up, Bill's son, David wakes up one morning to a world plunged into darkness. Now, the Triffids have an advantage over humanity.

Stars Sam Troughton as David Masen, Nicola Bryant as Cerys/Marnie/Rowena, Paul Clayton as Bill Masen/General Fielding, Geff Francis as Gabriel and John Schwab as Sam Dynes.

Adapted by the author.

Producer: John Ainsworth.

Executive Producers: Jason Haigh-Ellery & Nicholas Briggs.

A Big Finish production.

http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07htd4f

January 16, 2015

Ugh.

When trying to express my subjective feelings about this book, I am simply speechless. Not in a good sense, though.

I do not know whether it was a result of a really horrible, terrible, no good, very bad Czech translastion, or actually a very bad writing, but right from the start I felt that this would be a disasterous blow to the story the original book brought up.

"Oh dear, just make it stop, make it STOP!"I kept saying to myself while reading and resolved to devour the book faster so that it could be done with quicker.

SPOILER ALERT!

Triffids evolving at the speed of overdosed Stankey Ipkiss?

An immune Indian who was JUNG's pupil?!JUNG's?!Seriously?

And most importantly...ok...the human population has been at the brink of extinction for over 30 years, but hey! let's go cross the Atlantic on a steamboat! What IF we find some people surviving?

Blimey.

I am sorry for hating, but I genuinely think that Windham's work is original, surprising, balanced and sensible. Simon Clark's thing, on the other hand, is a literary insult to the Day of the Triffids.

What do you think? Have you read it? Have you read Windham's book? I am more than willing to hear another opinion on this, so feel free to comment and let me know what you think!

September 14, 2009

It wasn't awful but it wasn't great either. Unfortunately (and this is equally Wyndham's fault) you should never name your maniacal mega-villain 'Torrence'. It's just way too hard to take a villain named 'Torrence' seriously. Also, Simon Clark was trying much too hard to make everything all nice for people at the end, thus taking out all the social commentary that Wyndham is trying to make with the original book. Also, Clark has succeeded in taking the apocalypse out of the whole thing, which pretty much ruins the concept as a whole. The book suffers from a terrible case of deus ex machina, I wouldn't recommend it.

February 7, 2017

Written beautifully, with a fantastic plot and compelling characters. Even better than the first.

April 10, 2024

Primero comentar que este libro es una segunda parte de una novela originalísima de otro autor. Como segunda parte de semejante obra... no está a la altura ni de lejos, en mi opinión.

Como novela en sí misma, está bien. Yo estaba interesada mientras lo leía aunque en ningún momento me mordí las uñas o estuve particularmente azotada con la trama, pero bueno... mantenía la curiosidad por ver en qué acababa la cosa, que no acabó, porque claramente habla de una continuación que parece que no se materializó.

Una distopía al uso con sus malos malísimos (reciclados del libro anterior, de lo más ecologico, y malificados aún más, que es una secuela), sus buenos absolutos, la inclusión de algunas variables nuevas de trífidos, vía rapidísima evolución porque sólo pasaron 30 años y eso en términos evolutivos no da ni para un grano, pero hay que ver los trífidos qué velocidades de evolución... en otra generación ya empiezan a pelear unas variantes contra otras😂😂😂 y se matan entre ellos.

La solución al problema de los trífidos fue sin embargo bastante lógica. Me gustó. No así la solución al Nueva York distópico, que fue un poco traída por los pelos. La idea no estaba mal pero no la desarrolló bien y se sintió un poco forzada.

Pues bueno, un libro que se deja leer sin mayores peros. En sí mismo no esta mal, pero presentado como continuación de "El día de los trífidos"... no. Juega en otra liga.

March 6, 2022

Inferior in comparison to Wyndham's original but a mostly fun and outlandish adventure and worth it just to progress the story of the Triffids. It's a pity that Wyndham didn't get around to writing a follow up himself. This has the support of the John Wyndham Estate Trust but that doesn't indicate its quality.

In this story a pseudo-blindess is caused by an enforced darkness which parallels the main blinding event of the first book. This was an interesting choice really, it seems a bit too samey at first glance, but this time every person is affected apart from those who were blinded thirty years prior and now they have the advantage of their experience, plus this time any advantage for the Triffids is countered by their need for sunlight.

I think that Clark tried to match Wyndham's cheeky wit but never succeeded. Wyndham had some dramatic lines about putting people out of their misery but somehow it came across better. In this book there was a potential rough landing (or crash landing) about to occur while a young lad was flying an aircraft and he thinks to himself that it may be kinder to shoot his elderly passenger in the head, rather than let him experience the landing and (get this), simply because the old guy has no previous flying experience. Wow.

Similar to the first book, there are some smart and strong female characters and as we should be able to expect by the time this one was written (2001), most of the casual chauvinisms seem to be gone (I'm aware that I may miss some quite unconsciously).

Unlike the first book, the racism present is mostly argued against. We find our main character in New York for a time and he discovers that people there have regressed to segregationists, shunning anyone who is not white and also anyone who is unsighted. The main character in this book does find the courage to vocalise that he does not approve of the behaviour.

Looking through Clark's books it seems that he usually writes horror with the occasional foray into a mystery (he has a handful of Holmes pastiches to his name). I suppose in a sense that's suitable for a story about dangerous plants, but a lack of scientific understanding was noticeable in the text. Wyndham's original had a more pro-science feeling about it.

In some ways this is a different book. The style and language are very different, which we could mostly put down to younger characters but it does also feel less refined. Still in other ways Clark did a faithful job of continuing Wyndham's approach. The Triffids get a bit more active, but still they play a background role and the real story is about the ways that people survive, the ways which other people take advantage of that and the ways which some people fight injustice. Wyndham's novel featured many different groups and so gave a broad account while Clark's book really settled on two or three different groups and mainly focused on the one American setup.

August 1, 2015

Back in 1963, I remember my Dad taking me to the theater to see a movie that has stayed with me for many years, THE DAY OF THE TRIFFIDS. The idea of predatory plants ravaging humanity (many of whom were blinded before the onslaught) was vividly etched in my mind, and I really got hot when I saw Janette Scott fight a Triffid that spits poison and kills. (Sorry. I couldn't help myself.)

Anyhow, years later, I read the book. This was so much more than an adventure thriller. It brought in many socio-political elements that the movie glossed over, and I was intrigued all over again. The murderous plants were still there in a blind society, but now tin gods rose up to use the disaster as an opportunity to exert their frustrated influence...and were often as much of a threat as the murderous plants.

The writer of THE NIGHT OF THE TRIFFIDS admits that he was also a huge fan of the original book. He couldn't believe that the story ended there and went on the lookout for the non-existent sequel. Now, as an accomplished writer, he has turned his attention to continuing the adventure...and it is definitely a doozey!

The story picks up a few decades after the original. Society has changed, but so have the Triffids. The result is a non-stop action thriller that moves from the Isle of Wight, across the high seas to New York City, and down into the southern United States. Along the way, we see how humanity has coped with the plant invasion, how the Triffids have mutated to become even more dangerous, and how a villain from the original novel is alive and well and still plotting domination over mankind.

The result is a fast-paced tale that I honestly was sorry to see end. My only criticism of the book is that it had a few moments that completely strained credibility or that tied up problems a little too nicely with a bow. However, these are minor complaints. If you are a Triffid fan, I highly recommend this continuation of the story. If you haven't already read THE DAY OF THE TRIFFIDS, please do so before starting this one. That background will greatly enhance your enjoyment.

January 3, 2015

It was OK. Just OK. Too much foreshadowing, too much "Little did I know...". Too much heavy handed explanation - we don't always need the " and so" and the story telling is more interesting without it. If you need to say "The pace of events was heating up", you are kind of admitting that, on the basis of the narrative, it pretty much isn't heating up. There is no escaping the jarring inconsistencies with the first - gone the soul searching related to the morality of life, death and reproduction - and in place of the touching descriptions of dead London, we have a New York still running skyscrapers and television - despite being reduced in size to downtown Manhattan. And if we have aquatic triffids off the coast of England and inland in the US, why are they not hopping the Hudson? The original made you think. Ordinary people reacting in a range of ways to extraordinary circumstances made for a rich narrative. This is an OK story about a group of people who are largely interchangeable (despite the number of times we are told Gabriel is black) and all " good guys" getting into the sort of grandstanding that requires no thought from the reader. By the end, I was speed reading and not feeling I was missing anything. My final thought - if Torrence did escape in the original, how, when and why on Earth did he go to the US, and on arrival, how fast did he have to work to go from a no name immigrant to Da Boss and father of thousands in the period from Masen's flight to then Isle of Wight - which was years after The Blinding?? The bits of this that don't make sense distract from what is an OK adventure story, but no more than that.

September 7, 2014

I hadn't read this since it was released and thought I'd remind myself of the contents before listening to the new audio version. I was rather impressed.

The book has to fit the scenario John Wyndham left behind then take it forward. The plot is well constructed and even if it does jump between locations this is no more than many other writers do. The world we share with the Triffids has moved on showing much of humanity in a bad light. The Isle of Wight is portrayed as rather idyllic and perhaps naive; action moves to New York and we get all that is good and bad of human nature.

Simon Clark evolves the threat of the Triffids and the use of cosmic events well and while he could have done a little less there is plenty of action and by the end I was thinking 'what next?'

May 15, 2012

A really good book.

Simon Clark really captured the spirit of the original book. There is a definite feel that this is a natural continuation of The Day of the Triffids. It feels like it could have been written by the same author.

You only have to compare the faithfulness of this book, to the bizarre departure taken by the BBC TV series (the one starring Dougray Scott and Eddie Izzard) to see how things could easily have gone awry.

I recommend it to Wyndham/Triffid fans.

February 10, 2018

This is an adventure story and cannot compare to its predecessor Day of the Triffids published in 1951 by John Wyndham. It's not a bad read, only takes a day or two, but has none of the creativity or thought-provoking concepts found in the original. It reminds me of those easy novels I read in grade school.

Read The Day of the Triffids, sleep during their Night.

February 1, 2015

Simon Clark is and remains one of the best when it comes to making the farfetched believable. I can't think of anyone who would have done the job of following up on the legendary DAY OF THE TRIFFIDS any better. A great story with a few very unexpected surprises along the way, and this when I was certain the story was finished and nothing more could be said. --James A. Moore, author of SEVEN FORGES

July 22, 2015

Hmmm, this book is a tricky one to rate. I wanted to give it more stars. It gives the impression that it may be a mutant plant/nature horror read but aside from the odd brief scenes the Triffids don't do much. It's more of an espionage / dystopian / action thriller book. Saying that though I did enjoy it somewhat and the ending leaves the story open....but please have more triffid action if another book is written haha.

January 30, 2016

So many sequels to the classics, written decades later by different authors, are just pathetic, but this one is great. This is the story of life among the triffids as seen by David, the son of the protagonist of DAY OF THE TRIFFIDS, all grown up now. In this one, the triffids master the waves and come to take over the island where David's group, a small pocket of English survivors of the previous book, are hanging on.

August 14, 2016

As much as I loved Day of the Triffids, I loved this book. It was very well narrated and a fantastic read. Much more action packed than it's prequel Day of the Triffids. It had so many exciting twists and turns that I just had to keep listening to it. Until way into the night. It's very long, but never boring.

April 8, 2020

Знам, че тук има фенове на фантастиката и съм абсолютно сигурна, че всички сте чели "Денят на трифидите" на Джон Уиндъм. Но съвсем неотдавна, за мой срам, разбрах, че съществува и книгата "Нощта на трифидите". Тя е от друг автор, Саймън Кларк. Бях много любопитна как ли са се получили нещата. Винаги е интересно да видиш как друг човек "дописва" история и изобщо се включва в чужд проект. Дали се е опитвал да подражава на предния автор, дали се опитал да преобърне нещата, дали хармонира с предходния текст или опитва да доминира и т.н, възможностите са толкова много. Любопитно е наистина. Но нямах и никакви предубеждения, виждала съм и друг път общи неща и впечатленията ми като цяло са положителни. И изобщо мисля, че вторият човек ясно разбира пред какво голямо предизвикателство се изправя и че ако иска да бъде харесан, не бива в никакъв случай да сваля летвата. :)

Конкретната история започва 25 години след тази в "Денят", което смятам за много добро авторско решение. Главният герой тук е Дейвид Мейсън, синът на Уилиям Мейсън (от "Денят") и на практика е една съвсем нова история. Злокобните трифиди все още заемат централно място на Земята и в човешкото полезрение и борбата с тях продължава. Но всичко се развива в едно по-близко за нас време. Няма да навлизам в детайли, за да не разваля удоволстивето на хората, които не са чели книгата, но ще кажа, че сюжетно е издържана в рамките на добрата стара класическа научна фантастика. Отдавна не бях чела книга, в която толкова голямо удоволствие да ми достави самата история. Разбира се, ясно е, че и най-добрата история, може да бъде порядъчно съсипана, ако липсват други писателски умения. Е, тук случаят не е такъв :) Но все пак акцентът не пада върху разни приключения, открития и пр., а върху човешките взаимоотношения. Много е интересно как изглеждат те, и в двете посоки, в една не-нормална обстановка. И сякаш за пореден път се убеждавам, че обществените ситуациите могат да са по-скоро катализатор, отколкото да имат някакво собствено влияние за качествени, отново и в двете посоки, промени у човека.

Впечатлението за класическа научна фантастика обаче, не се дължи само на постройката и сюжета, а също и на онова жизнеутвърждаващо и някак ведро усещане, което тя обичайно носи.

Романът е една чудесна приказка за малко по-пораснали, много леко четивен. Писателският стил е непретенциозен, но грациозно непретенцеозен, балансиран, нещо, което всъщност доста автори не успяват да постигнат. Прочитът му ми остави едно много приятно чувство в този малко шантав момент. Ако не сте я чели-препоръчвам я!

January 27, 2024

I just did not care for this one as much as the original The Day of the Triffids.

April 20, 2020

A sequel to a classic is a risky move, and not always needed. But if it's done right, it can be pretty damn good. This was. Clark filled in the future of Wyndham's world, and it's a grim place, but with a lot to be learned. The main character in the book is the son of the main in the last one, which was a nice touch.

We get a better idea how the world has progressed (regressed?) as the Triffids have essentially taken over Earth, with just a few places holding scattered human colonies. As often is the case in post-apocalyptic worlds, the real monsters are other people.

It's a great take on the world of a classic sci fi story.

December 7, 2012

An excellent continuation of the British SF classic. Simon Clark does a good job of capturing John Wyndham's calm, terribly English voice, whilst opening up the story onto a bigger international canvas. The fast evolving triffids remain one of fiction's most memorable monsters. Clark's ideas on how different human societies have evolved in this post-apocalyptic world are pulp yet believable.

I thought the resolution of the story was superb because it introduces a logical but still surprising twist. In short an exciting read.

December 4, 2014

Written by an entirely different author to the original work "Day of the Triffids", this book is a masterpiece of post-apocalyptic fiction. In this novel, Clark explores how the world might function in the wake of an invasion of killer alien plants. Part of this exploration hinges upon the darkness of the soul and how it can bring about horrible atrocities through the ignorance and complacency of others. But it is also a story of hope and of the resilience of the human spirit. Over all, it is a must read for the lover of realistic science fiction. It's gritty and real and yet, inspiring.

July 5, 2016

Hoogsalt kirja pandud seiklus, mis jooksis ladusalt peaaegu kuni lõpuni. Ehk isegi liiga ladusalt? Minuarust läks just suur lõpuvõitlus natuke liiga sirgjooneliseks ja etteaimatavaks. Kuna autor rääkis eessõnas, kuidas ta oli ikka palju-palju originaali üle mõtisklenud siis lootsin temapoolset lahendust sellele, et mis olid rohelised tuled ja kust pärinesid trifiidid. Aga kahjuks neid vastuseid tal polnud. Peategelane oleks võinud ka rohkem mitmeplaaniline ja värvikam olla. Aga ajaviiteks kõlbas lugeda küll.