Book Collection - Larry Niven

Gerrold, David and Larry Niven The Flying Sorcerors 1971 (August) Ballantine NY. Paperback first edition. Signed by Larry Niven on the title page. Spine creases, front cover 1/2-inch separation from spine, else fine in pictorial wrappers.

Kaveney, Roz (editor) More Tales From the Forbidden Planet 1990 (August) Titan Books UK. First edition. Signed on two limitation sheets by the authors and artists; Ian Watson, Oscar Zarate, Mick Farren, Savage Pencil, Jamie Delano, John Hicklenton, R M Lamming, Duncan Fegredo, Neil Gaiman, Simon Bisley, Storm Constantine, Steve Yeowell, Larry Niven, Don Lawrence, Dave Langford, Rian Hughes, John Clute, Dave Mckean, Mary Gentle, Charles Vess, and Roz Kaveney. Fine in slipcase.

Manson, Cynthia and Charles Ardai FutureCrime 1992 (January 28) Donald I. Fine NY. Uncorrected proof of the first edition. Anthology including stories by Robert Bloch, Orson Scott Card, Isaac Asimov, Larry Niven, Alan Dean Foster, John Varley, George Alec Effinger and others. Includes TLS from publisher to L.A. Times Book Review, and pink slip indicating Champlin as reviewer. Fine except for 'JAN' in black ink on the front of the printed wrappers.

Niven, Larry World of Ptavvs 1966 (August) Ballantine NY. Paperback first edition. Author's first book. Signed and dated '11/28/1982' by the author on the title page. Slight creases on covers, else fine in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry World of Ptavvs 1966 (August) Ballantine NY. Paperback first edition. Author's first book. Slight creases on front cover, else near fine in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry World of Ptavvs 1968 Macdonald UK. First British and first hardcover edition of the author's first book. Inscribed by the author on the title page. Purchased from Stuart David Schiff. Near fine in DW.

Niven, Larry World of Ptavvs 1968 Macdonald UK. Uncorrected proof of the first British and first hardcover edition of the author's first book. Purchased from Stuart David Schiff. Very good in green printed wrappers. Publication date "31 Oct 1968" stamped on the front cover.

Niven, Larry World of Ptavvs 1968 Macdonald UK. First British and first hardcover edition of the author's first book. Inscribed on the title page by the author. Near fine in DW.

Niven, Larry A Gift From Earth 1968 (September) Ballantine NY. Paperback first edition. Center SFBC advertisiment still bound in. Inscribed "To Mike" by the author on the title page. Price neatly blacked out, ink stamp 'SEP 5 - 1968' on bottom page edges, else fine in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry A Gift From Earth 1968 (September) Ballantine NY. Paperback first edition. Center SFBC advertisiment missing. Price neatly scratched out, soine slightly rolled, else very good in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry A Gift From Earth 1969 Macdonald London. First British and first hardcover edition. Signed by the author on the title page. Very fine in very fine DW save for the slightest bit of age-darkening to the spine and part of the back. A super copy.

Niven, Larry Neutron Star 1969 Macdonald London. First British and first hardcover edition. Signed by the author on the title page. Eight 'known space' stories. Title story won the 1967 Hugo. First collection of author's stories. Fine except for corner bumps, in very good DW with two small brown stains on rear panel, browning in the bottom area of the rear panel, rubbing to extremeties, and two red ink lines through price.

Niven, Larry Ringworld 1970 (October) Ballantine NY. Paperback first edition. Contains the famous 'sun rising in the West' error. Front cover separating from spine (re-inforced with tape), cover damaged horizontally by tape being removed, else good in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry Ringworld 1970 (October) Ballantine NY. Paperback first edition. Signed by the author on the title page. Contains the famous 'sun rising in the West' error. Slight spine and front cover crease, else fine in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry Ringworld 1970 (October) Ballantine NY. Paperback first edition. Contains the famous 'sun rising in the West' error. Inscribed "To Mike" by the author on the title page. Slight spine crease, else fine in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry Ringworld 1970 (October) Ballantine NY. Paperback first edition. Contains the famous 'sun rising in the West' error. All prices neatly covered with black ink, else very good in uncreased pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry A Gift From Earth 1971 Sphere UK. First British paperback edition. Very good in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry All the Myriad Ways 1971 (June) Ballantine NY. Paperback first edition. Collection of short stories. Three-inch corner crease on front cover, ink signature on title page, else fine in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry All the Myriad Ways 1971 (June) Ballantine Canada. Paperback Canadian first edition, issued at the same time as the American edition. Collection of short stories. Crease on front cover and along spine, slight spotting on bottom of page block, else fine in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry Ringworld 1972 Gollancz UK. First British and first hardcover edition. Ex-library (withdrawn from the North East Scotland Library Service], very thrashed, although the cloth covers are in very good shape; the dust jacket is very good, unclipped, and has no library markings.

Niven, Larry Inconstant Moon 1973 Gollancz UK. Uncorrected proof of the first edition. Purchased from Stuart David Schiff. Pencil notations on the copyright and table of contents pages, literary agency stamp of first free endpaper, dampstaining in the upper-right quarter of the rear cover, upper spine panel, and some staining to the front cover from what looks like a spill, otherwise very good in yellow printed wrappers.

Niven, Larry Inconstant Moon 1973 Gollancz UK. Uncorrected proof of the first edition. Bookseller's stamp on half-title page, slight concave spine roll, else near fine in DW with slight creases and edge bumps, else very good.

Niven, Larry Ringworld 1973 Editions Opta Fr. First French edition. Number 3076 of 5200 numbered copies. Slight spine slant, else fine in yellow cloth boards.

Niven, Larry Protector 1973 (September) Ballantine NY. Paperback first edition. Spine creases on front and back covers, book store stamp on top of page edges, else very good in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry Inconstant Moon 1974 Readers Union UK. Hardcover issued by the Science Fiction Book Club in the UK. Near fine in DW.

Niven, Larry A Hole in Space 1975 Futura UK. Paperback first British edition. Signed by the author on the title page. Fine in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry World of Ptavvs 1975 (December) Ballantine NY. Fifth U.S. printing. Signed and dated '11/28/1982' byt he author on the title page. Upper-right corner bumped, else fine in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry Protector 1976 Compton Russell UK. First hardcover edition. Signed by the author on the title page. Slight soiling to the bottom page edges, else near fine in fine unclipped DW.

Niven, Larry A World Out Of Time 1976 Holt, Rinehart and Winston New York. First hardcover, name corrected by artist (Rick Sternbach) on DW, signed by Niven on title page. Slight rubbing on bottom of spine, else fine in DW.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle Inferno 1976 (April) Pocket Books NY. Uncorrected proofs (tall galleys) of the first edition. Signed by the author on the title page. Pournelle is given first billing on the cover, although not on the published book. Fine is slightly sunned blue wrappers, with corner creases.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle Inferno 1977 Allan Wingate London. First British and first hardcover edition, signed by both authors on title page. Inscribed 'To Mike'. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle Inferno 1977 Allan Wingate London. First British and first hardcover edition. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle Lucifer's Hammer 1977 Playboy New York. First edition, signed by Niven on title page. Fine, book and DW have bumps and short tears on top and bottom of spine.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle Lucifer's Hammer 1977 Playboy New York. Signed by Niven and Pournelle on the title page, with a short inscription by Pournelle. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry Ringworld 1977 Holt, Rinehart and Winston New York. First American hardcover edition, signed by author on title page, signed by the artist on DW. Purchased from the author. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry Ringworld 1977 Holt, Rinehart and Winston New York. First American hardcover, signed on title page by author, signed on DW by cover artist Purchased from the author. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry Ringworld 1977 Holt, Rinehart and Winston New York. First American hardcover edition, signed by author on title page Purchased from the author. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry A World Out Of Time 1977 MacDonald's and Jane's UK. First British and first hardcover edition. Inscribed "To Mike" by the author on the title page. Rare. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry The Magic Goes Away 1978 Ace New York. First edition, signed by author on first flyleaf. One of 1000 unnumbered copies. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry The Magic Goes Away 1978 Ace New York. First edition, signed by author on first flyleaf. One of 1000 unnumbered copies. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle Inferno 1979 (June) Gregg Press NY. First American hardcover edition. Inscribed on the title page by both authors to fellow writer Robert Adams. Fine without DW as issued.

Niven, Larry The Patchwork Girl 1980 Ace New York. First ACE trade paperback edition, signed 'For Neil Citrin / Larry Niven 4/18/1981' on title page. Rear cover slight tear, some cover darkening, else fine.

Niven, Larry The Patchwork Girl 1980 (April) Ace New York. Advanced reading copy, signed by Niven on title page. Signed 910323. Good, front cover taped on, some pages dog-eared.

Niven, Larry and Steven Barnes Dream Park 1981 Ace NY. First trade edition, signed by Niven and Barnes on title page. Good.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle Oath of Fealty 1981 Timescape New York. First edition, except for limited edition, signed by Niven on title page 'To Mike Berro / Best Wishes / Larry Niven' (no date). Purchased from Niven. Remainder stamp on bottom page edges, else fine.

Niven, Larry The Integral Trees 1983 Del Rey NY. First edition, signed by Niven on title page. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry The Integral Trees 1983 Del Rey NY. First edition, signed by Niven on title page. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry The Integral Trees 1983 Del Rey NY. First edition. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry Niven's Laws 1984 PSFS PA. First edition. Ten Draco's Tavern stories plus a selection of essays. Published by the Philadelphia Sceince Fiction Society. Inscribed "To Mike" by the author on the title page. Fine wirthout DW as issued.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle Footfall 1985 Del Rey New York. Signed by Niven on the title page. Purchased from Niven. As new in DW.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle Footfall 1985 Del Rey New York. Signed by Niven on the title page. Purchased from Niven. As new in DW.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle Footfall 1985 Del Rey New York. Uncorrected proof of the first edition. Two staples through front cover, spine creases, else very good in glossy white printed wrappers.

Niven, Larry Limits 1986 Macdonald UK. First British and first trade hardcover edition. Signed by the author on the title page. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry Limits 1986 Macdonald UK. First British and first trade hardcover edition. Signed by the author on the title page, and by Steven Barnes (who co-wrote one story) on the title page of that story. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle and Steven Barnes The Legacy of Heorot 1987 Simon & Schuster New York. First edition, signed by Niven and Barnes on title page. Remainder stamp on bottom page edges, else unread.

Niven, Larry The Smoke Ring 1987 Del Rey NY. First edition, signed by Niven on title page. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry The Smoke Ring 1987 Del Rey NY. Photocopy of the typed mansucript, 354 single-sided pages, velo-bound. Title page is inscribed "for Edwin Austen / Larry Niven.". Fine, with no flaws.

Niven, Larry Ringworld 1988 Easton Press CT. Re-issue in full leather binding. Includes 'Collectors Notes' card as issued. Inscribed "To Mike" by the author on the title page. Fine.

Niven, Larry and Steven Barnes The Barsoom Project 1989 Ace NY. Uncorrected proof of the first edition. Sequel to "Dream Park". Signed by Steven Barnes on the title page. Cover proof included. Fine in blue printed wrappers.

Niven, Larry N-Space 1990 TOR New York. Advance reading copy, signed by Niven on title page, Steven Barnes inside. Trade paperback format. Fine.

Niven, Larry and Steven Barnes Achille's Choice 1991 TOR NY. First edition. Signed by Niven & Barnes on title page. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry and Steven Barnes Achille's Choice 1991 TOR NY. Uncorrected proof of the first edition. Signed by Steven Barnes on the title page. Fine in blue printed wrapers.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle The Mote in God's Eye 1991 Easton Press CT. Leather-bound reissue, with new introduction by Charles Sheffield. Inscribed "To Mike" by the author on the title page, with ink correction and initials on page 465. Fine sans DW as issued.

Niven, Larry Playgrounds of the Mind 1991 (October) TOR NY. First edition. Collection of stories and essays. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry and Steven Barnes The California Voodoo Game 1992 (February) Del Rey NY. First edition. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry and Donald Kingsbury Man-Kzin Wars VI 1994 (July) Baen NY. Uncorrected proof (advance reading copy) of the first edition. Novel by Kingsbury, and stories by Gregory Benford and Mark O. Martin. This ARC contains only the Kingsbury novel. Fine in pictorial wraps.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle and Steven Barnes Beowulf's Children 1995 TOR NY. Uncorrected proof (advance reading copy) of the first edition. Fine in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry Jerry Pournelle and Steven Barnes Beowulf's Children 1995 (November) TOR NY. First edition. Review sheet laid in. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry The Ringworld Throne 1996 (June) Del Rey NY. First edition. Signed by the author on the half-title page. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry The Ringworld Throne 1996 (June) Del Rey NY. First edition. Inscribed "To Mike" by the author on the half-title page. Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry Destiny's Road 1997 (June) TOR NY. Uncorrected proof of the first edition. Fine in orange printed wrappers.

Niven, Larry Rainbow Mars 1999 (March 19) TOR NY. Uncorrected proof of the first edition. Very good in red printed wrappers.

Niven, Larry Rainbow Mars 1999 (March 19) TOR NY. Computer printout. Purchased from Aldo Spadoni, who has worked with Niven for many years. Fine.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle The Burning City 2000 (March) Pocket Books NY. First edition. Signed By Niven on a special bookplate affixed to the ffep, "Sixty copies have been reserved for friends of Larry Niven.". Fine in DW.

Niven, Larry and Jerry Pournelle The Burning City 2000 (March) Pocket Books NY. Uncorrected proof of the first edition. Fine in pictorial wrappers.

Niven, Larry and Steven Barnes Saturn's Race 2000 (July) TOR NY. Uncorrected proof of the first edition. Fine in green printed wrappers.

Niven, Larry Scatterbrain 2003 (October) TOR NY. Uncorrected proof of the first edition. Fine in red printed wrappers.

Niven, Larry Ringworld's Children 2004 (July) TOR NY. Uncorrected proof of the first edition. Very good in green printed wrappers.

Pfeil, Don ed. Vertex-1 1973 Mankind Publishing NY. Vertex was a well produced effort in the early 70s to produce a professionally viable sf magazine featuring many top authors, quality art, and interesting science articles. This is the publisher's bound edition of the first 6 (1973) issues, black buckram with silver stamping and all covers included. Featuring authors such as Robert Heinlein, Larry Niven, George R. R. Martin, and A.E. Van Vogt. Fine sans DW as issued.

Sheffield, Charles (ed.) How To Save The World 1995 (September) TOR NY. Uncorrected proof of the first edition. Stroies by Larry Niven, James P. Hogan, Jerry Pournelle, Doug Beason, Kathe Koja and Barry N. Malzberg, Lawrence Watt-Evans and others. Very good in light-green printed wrappers.

Silverberg, Robert Three Trips in Time and Space 1973 Hawthorn NY. First edition. Original novellas by Larry Niven, John Brunner and Jack Vance. Fine in DW.

Silverberg, Robert Three Trips in Time and Space 1973 Hawthorn NY. First edition. Original novellas by Larry Niven, John Brunner and Jack Vance. Inscribed "To Mike" by Niven on the story title page. Fine in DW.

Silverberg, Robert (ed) Three Trips in Time and Space 1973 Hawthorn NY. First edition. Review slip laid in. Original novellas by Larry Niven, John Brunner and Jack Vance. Signed on the title page by Jack Vance, and on their respective story title pages by Niven and Brunner. Fine in DW.

Silverberg, Robert Three Trips in Time and Space 1973 Hawthorn NY. First edition. Original novellas by Larry Niven, John Brunner and Jack Vance. Fine in DW.

Silverberg, Robert Three Trips in Time and Space 1973 Hawthorn NY. First edition. Original novellas by Larry Niven, John Brunner and Jack Vance. Signed by Vance on the title page. Fine in DW.

Weis, Margaret (ed) A Magic-Lover's Treasury of the Fantastic 1998 (January) Warner Books NY. Uncorrected proof of the first edition. Includes stories by Card, Feist, Le Guin, Melanie Rawn, Jack Vance, Larry Niven, Bear, Bradbury, Kurtz, Silverberg, Stasheff, Norton, Cherryh, Zelazny, Leiber and others. Publisher's letter laid in. Fine in pictorial wrappers.

Number of items: 86

Number of authors: 8