Preface

When Fidel Castro appeared in Montreal in October 2000 for the state funeral of Pierre Trudeau, most Canadians were taken entirely by surprise. Few had any inkling of the depth of the two leaders’ mutual affection. Trudeau had visited Cuba as a footloose thirty-year-old in 1949 and again in 1964, just before he joined the Pearson Liberals as justice minister. During the October Crisis of 1970, he secretly asked Castro to take five Front de libération du Québec (FLQ) terrorists off Canada’s hands, and Castro obliged. Yet only in January 1976 did the two men meet face-to-face for the first time, and only in the 1990s, when Trudeau had retired from politics, did they place their friendship on a familiar footing. Margaret Trudeau famously called Castro one of the sexiest men in the world but, true to form, the intensely private Pierre said hardly a word about him. The result has been three decades’ worth of speculation, sycophancy and smear.

Three Nights in Havana chronicles the origins of the friendship between Pierre Trudeau and Fidel Castro, two world leaders whose fates were intertwined well before the Canadian prime minister stepped off his Armed Forces Boeing 707 at José Martí Airport in 1976. The Cold War stand-off between the United States and the Soviet Union made formal enemies of Canada and Cuba, just as surely as history had made them colonies of rival European empires. But neither Trudeau nor Castro was ever comfortable in the role of compliant ally, and by the mid-twentieth century the same could be said of many of their contemporaries. Canadians and Cubans may have little in common but they do share one important national characteristic—a determined refusal to exist merely as the satellite of some other power. Pierre Trudeau and Fidel Castro personified this refusal. It was what brought them to power. It was also what drew them to each other. This is their story.

A word on terminology. Fidel Castro has been called, at different stages of his political career, Dr. Castro (because he holds an earned law degree from the University of Havana), premier, prime minister and Maximum Leader. He is also first secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba, commander-in-chief of the Cuban armed forces, and, as of December 1976, president of the State Council. Ordinary Cubans call him El Jefe (the Chief) in casual conversation. In this book, I have opted for the more formal El Comandante, the term by which he is known to readers of Granma, the Communist Party newspaper, and other official publications. Of his many titles, this is the one in which he is said to take the greatest pride. It also has the practical advantage of distinguishing the Cuban leader both from (U.S.) presidents and (Canadian) prime ministers. I have adopted as well the Cuban convention of capitalizing the term Revolution.

This book could not have been written without the help of others. It gives me great pleasure to acknowledge them here. Research funding was provided by the Canada Council for the Arts and by the Symons Trust Fund for Canadian Studies, for which I am indebted. For putting themselves at my disposal early on in my research, I am grateful to Christian Lapointe, Kim Cowan, Ghislain Chaput and Greg Donaghy at Foreign Affairs Canada, and to Paul Gibbard at the Canadian Embassy in Havana. For their willingness to be interviewed for this book, I am indebted to Juan Antonio Blanco, Carlos Fernandez de Cossío, Tom Delworth, Mark Entwistle and William D. Rogers. James Hyndman took a keen interest in the project at every stage, sitting for long interviews, agreeing to an extensive e-mail correspondence and reading an early draft of the book in its entirety. For his unstinting generosity, I am deeply grateful. My thanks go out as well to Paulette Dozois at Library and Archives Canada, Jo-Anne Valentine and Ted Kelly at the Foreign Affairs Library in Ottawa, Paul Losch of the Smathers Library at the University of Florida, Trish Johns-Wilson and Pam Conley of the Bata Library at Trent University, and Karen Benacquista, Heather Gildner and Charlie Ewing of the Toronto Public Library. I am also grateful to Ann Louise Bardach, Curtis Fahey, John Kirk, Max and Monique Nemni, Andrew Potter, James Ron, David Sheinin, Tim Stapleton, Craig Walker, Dan Wright, R. K. Wright and Lana Wylie. Special thanks to my research assistants, Louise Taylor, Kyle Branch and especially Christine McLaughlin, and to my editor at HarperCollins Canada, Jim Gifford.

The standard author’s caveat, that the views expressed in his work are his alone, must apply tenfold to any book on Pierre Trudeau and Fidel Castro, so intensely have both men been deified and demonized over the years. I have tried to bring a historian’s balance and objectivity to this story, but where I have failed I have done so single-handedly.

As always, my greatest debt is to my wife, Laura, and my children, Helena, Anna and Michael. And as always, words cannot begin to express this debt. This book is for them.

PROLOGUE

Funeral for a Friend

"Viva Fidel!"

So shouted the crowd as Fidel Castro arrived at Montreal’s Notre-Dame Basilica for the funeral of Pierre Elliott Trudeau in October 2000.

Jimmy Carter was there. So were Prime Minister Jean Chrétien, poet Leonard Cohen, Prince Andrew and the Aga Khan. But it was Castro, clad in a sombre grey suit and maintaining a stoical silence, who captivated the fifteen thousand or so Canadians who had come to pay their respects to the late prime minister. In cheering for Castro—and in invoking the "¡Viva!" cheer with which Trudeau had endeared himself to the Cuban people a quarter-century earlier—Montrealers were paying tribute not only to the Cuban Comandante but also to the memory of a beloved Canadian prime minister. Castro’s presence at the funeral, an exceptional gesture of respect for a world leader who seldom travels outside his home country, symbolized the very qualities that Trudeau’s Canadian devotees had come to love in him: loyalty, fierce independence, the courage of his convictions.

Castro was one of only two sitting heads of state to attend the service. He had come not as a statesman but as a long-time friend of the late prime minister’s family. "The regard I felt toward [Pierre] was like that toward a member of the family, he later reflected. I didn’t just like him, I was very fond of him and his family."

As perplexing as it had been to their Cold War allies, Fidel Castro and Pierre Trudeau had enjoyed a warm personal relationship since the prime minister’s historic state visit to Cuba in 1976. The two leaders discovered early on that they were, as former Canadian ambassador to Cuba Mark Entwistle puts it, "intellectual soulmates." Both were educated by Jesuits and trained in the law; both were men of formidable intellect whose political idealism had inspired millions of their compatriots, infuriated millions of others and changed the course of their nations’ history. There were also traits in their larger-than-life personalities that set them apart, qualities that each man recognized and respected in the other: an indomitable passion for politics, an adventurous lust for life combined with an almost ascetic self-discipline, a shy demeanour paired with a notoriously stubborn will.

With the passing of Pierre Trudeau, Castro knew that he had lost a true comrade. He expressed his condolences to the Trudeau family in the warmest of terms. "I have come to Canada, in time of deep grief for the Canadian people, said Castro, to pay tribute to the undying memory of Pierre Trudeau, a world class statesman who was a close personal friend and one for whom I felt great admiration. I always considered him a serious political leader, sincerely interested in the world problems [sic] and the situation in the Third World countries as well as a consistent politician who made a transcendental contribution to the modern history of Canada. He was an upright and brave man who, regardless of difficult circumstances, fostered his country’s relations with Cuba."

Until the last years of his life, Trudeau had been an honoured guest in Castro’s house and a valued confidante. The two discussed everything from current events to their children’s milestones, snorkelling together whenever they got the chance. In marked contrast with Trudeau’s reputation in Canada as an aloof and dispassionate man, Castro revered him as "one of the most sincere men I have ever known, friendly and modest in his treatment of people. Pierre Trudeau may have been the representative of an important, large and rapidly developing country," the Comandante insisted, but he never believed himself superior, and it was this humility—his ideas and his personality always cheerful, always optimistic—that won us over. When news of Trudeau’s death reached Cuba, Fidel Castro decreed a three-day period of mourning across the island, ordering all flags to fly at half-mast.

Because of Castro’s fondness for Pierre Trudeau—and because of the extraordinary splash Margaret, Pierre and their son Michel had made in Havana in 1976—the former prime minister enjoyed a degree of celebrity and influence in Cuba that few Westerners could boast. A good word from Pierre Trudeau could go a long way toward inking a business deal between Canadians and Cubans, if only because he so rarely traded on his reputation.

As an ally of the Soviet Union and as an adversary of the United States, by contrast, it is fair to say that Fidel Castro had always been a political liability for Trudeau. Castro knew this, and so his debt to the former prime minister was that of a statesman as well as a friend. Trudeau’s 1976 state visit was the first by the leader of a NATO country since 1960, the year the United States imposed its crippling economic embargo against Cuba. Trudeau had intended the trip to signal an end to Cuba’s political isolation, but it did far more. When he arrived at José Martí Airport outside Havana, he was greeted by a thirty-foot poster of himself and then driven into the city in a motorcade flanked by 250,000 cheering Cubans. During his famous speech at the port city of Cienfuegos, delivered in Spanish to a crowd of 25,000, Trudeau cheered, "¡Viva Cuba y el pueblo cubano! ¡Viva el Primer Ministro Fidel Castro! ¡Viva la amistad cubano-canadiense!"¹ Such exuberance was a far cry from the quiet diplomacy for which Canada was famous, and it had pleased Castro greatly. A photograph of the two leaders made the cover of Time magazine. For a moment it looked as though Castro the communist pariah was on his way toward rehabilitation in the West.

As it turned out, Pierre Trudeau’s state visit to Cuba was never reciprocated. As improbable as it seems for a man who has been a head of state for almost fifty years, Fidel Castro has never visited Canada officially. By the time of Trudeau’s funeral in 2000, other than occasional refuelling stops at Gander or Vancouver, the Comandante had been to Canada only once, in 1959. This, in fact, was one of the reasons his presence in Montreal for the Trudeau funeral caused such a stir. It was the closest Fidel Castro has ever come to enjoying the pomp and ceremony of a state visit to Canada. It also marked his first meeting with a Canadian prime minister on Canadian soil.

Pierre Trudeau died on 28 September 2000. The official cause of death was prostate cancer but the former prime minister was also known to be suffering from Parkinson’s disease and pneumonia. Since retiring from politics in 1984, Trudeau had maintained an extremely low public profile, practising law at Heenan Blaikie in Montreal and devoting himself to the raising of his sons, Justin, Sacha and Michel. The only exception to his vow of political silence had been his angry pronouncements against Brian Mulroney’s constitutional accords in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Always a master of the political coup de grâce, Trudeau’s bold accusation that Mulroney was "ready to trade Canada’s soul for an electoral victory" had done a good deal to torpedo both the Charlottetown Accord and the Progressive Conservative Party. Afterwards, as unexpectedly as he had reappeared on the political scene, Trudeau again vanished into the shadows. Apart from his Memoirs project, which took the form of a CBC-TV documentary and later a book, he avoided the spotlight altogether in the Chrétien years.

The last time Canadians saw Pierre Trudeau on the public stage was in November 1998, and under the cruellest of circumstances. That month his son Michel was swept to his death in an avalanche. A seasoned outdoorsman like his father, the twenty-three-year-old had been returning from a ski trip in Kokanee Glacier Park in British Columbia. He was carried by the avalanche into the icy waters of Kokanee Lake, where, according to those who had been with him, he struggled for several minutes under the weight of his backpack and skiing gear, and then disappeared. Margaret later tried to put a brave face on the circumstances of Michel’s death, telling the press that he had not suffered. "Micha just actually put his head on his shoulder and fell asleep, she said, using his family nickname. In truth, the situation was far more macabre. We could see him, one eyewitness recalled. We knew it was going to be a slow and painful death. But we couldn’t reach him. He was in the middle of the lake." Some observers romanticized the wilderness death of Michel Trudeau, calling it a uniquely Canadian tragedy. For most Canadians, however, the loss was one of unmitigated sorrow.

Pierre Trudeau was visibly shattered by the death of his son. At the memorial service for Michel, he looked gaunt, almost ghostly, a man consumed with grief. As prime minister, Trudeau’s implacable will had been as much a political liability as a strength, leading to charges that he was arrogant and pitiless. But here, frail and inconsolable, was a Trudeau Canadians had never seen. Even the most hard-bitten of his adversaries shared in the outpouring of grief with which the nation mourned the loss of his son. There is no question that the death of Michel cast a pall over Pierre’s last years. Friends observed following the tragedy that he had grown even closer to his remaining children and also that he had become increasingly disillusioned with the world. Some said that his politics had drifted to the left, putting him ideologically closer to his friend Fidel Castro than ever. The prospect of a new international order dominated by corporations was said to be especially loathsome to Trudeau, hardly surprising for a man who spent the better part of a lifetime trying to advance social justice.

Michel’s death reunited Pierre Trudeau with Margaret, for whom the loss of a beloved son was equally cruel. Margaret had been subjected in the 1970s to a torrent of abuse from Canadians. And because she was, by her own admission, extremely thin-skinned, she suffered it only with great difficulty. With the death of Michel, however, Margaret, along with Pierre, elicited Canadians’ deepest sympathy. Those who could recall her sensitive temperament pitied her grievously. Few images from the memorial service for Michel Trudeau, held at Saint-Viateur Church in Outremont, were as searing for Canadians as that of Pierre and Margaret standing hand in hand and sharing a grief the depth of which only they and their surviving sons could fathom. Six months after Michel’s death, Margaret separated from her second husband, Fried Kemper. At about the same time, she broke the family silence on Michel’s death to offer her public support for the cause of avalanche awareness. "When you have such a horrific death of your beautiful child, she reflected, your sons’ brother, your husband’s son, it’s just so outrageously painful that in the healing process it’s so important to make the life you’ve lost live on in our hearts and make a difference. Micha would have loved that."

Fidel Castro was one of many sympathetic observers to lament that the deaths of Michel and Pierre Trudeau had come in quick succession. Presently, he said, in a short statement released prior to his arrival in Montreal in October 2000, "I share in the grief and sorrow of Pierre Trudeau’s family and of all Canadians. I cannot help but remember that only two years ago this family suffered another terrible tragedy with the passing of Michel Trudeau whom I had met at a very early stage of his life when as a four-month old baby his father took him on a visit to Cuba and I held him in my arms more than once. He added solemnly, I have brought with me some photos of those dearly cherished days, to leave to the family as mementos."

Castro’s sympathy for the Trudeau family was heartfelt. In a CBC-TV interview taped after the funeral, the Comandante reminisced about the many times Michel had accompanied his father on visits to Cuba after his trip as a newborn. "I met that little baby when he came here when he wasn’t even four months old, Castro recalled, and he won everyone’s heart, he went to the sea with us, because I invited [Pierre] to a key in the south of Cuba, south of the Zapata Swamp, at the edge of the really deep water—he really liked sports, he liked fishing—and it never crossed my mind that he would bring the baby, but he brought his family. Pulling out photographs of himself with the teenaged Michel, Castro thumbed through them with CBC journalist Paule Robitaille. Look, he said, I told you about this. Look at him here when he was already as tall as I am. How many years after? Fifteen years after, that was in 1991. Look, [Michel] is taller than I am. Next I am going to show you this one. He’s here, look, he’s here as well. He came to Cuba three times, Trudeau came four."

During Pierre Trudeau’s final days, it was Margaret who stayed by his side day and night. Riddled with cancer but still as lucid as ever, Pierre spent his last hours in bed, surrounded by his family and listening to Beethoven and Barbra Streisand records. He was, Margaret later recalled, at peace with the prospect of his own imminent death but still overcome with emotion at the end. "He was sad the last morning when he woke up and I was there, of course, on his pillow and he had tears rolling down his face, and that’s all right. We just cheered him up. I said, ‘You can cry all you want, I’m so glad you’re giving us another day.’ That it was Margaret by his side at the end spoke volumes, not only about the depth of their mutual affection but also about her strength of character—something for which far too few Canadians had ever given her credit. At the deathbed and again at the funeral of the former prime minister, Margaret at long last redeemed herself for the many faux pas and flights of fancy in which she had indulged as his flower child" bride.

There was an irony in the fact that Margaret had found herself again drawn to Pierre, and he to her. But it was an irony not lost on Fidel Castro. By January 1976, when the Trudeaus embarked on their state visit to Cuba, their five-year-old marriage was already disintegrating. Divided by their dramatically different ages and temperaments, and increasingly isolated from each other by the compartmentalization of life at 24 Sussex, Pierre and especially Margaret sensed that the status quo could not hold. Their 1976 visit to Cuba thus proved bittersweet. On the one hand, it brought them close together for one last time in an exotic locale and under circumstances that were unexpectedly exhilarating for both of them personally. Yet, on the other hand, it catalyzed Margaret’s inchoate yearnings for independence into a full-blown rebellion, after which any return to the lonely, scripted life of a prime minister’s wife would be impossible. Within months of their return from Cuba, Pierre and Margaret would separate. They would divorce in 1984.

Fidel Castro’s presence at the funeral of Pierre Trudeau cast this irony into sharp relief. His being there signified not only his abiding respect for the late prime minister but also his warmest condolences for Margaret, hearkening back to a pivotal time in her life, when friends were few, when allies were even fewer, and when Fidel Castro, of all people, had treated her with a tenderness and respect she had come to expect from no one. To this groundswell of nostalgia was added the equally touching fact that Castro had come to Montreal bearing the promised photos, which he presented as a gift to Margaret just hours before the funeral. Some of them showed Castro himself holding Michel as a baby—images certain to rekindle in Margaret the best and worst of memories. In 1976 Castro had unknowingly tapped some of Margaret’s deepest emotions and desires. He did so again at the funeral of Pierre.

Fidel Castro is a loquacious man, given to long formal speeches and elaborate monologues even in casual conversation. Two things were therefore striking about his role at the funeral of Pierre Trudeau. The first was that he did not speak publicly at all—a measure of respect for Trudeau that arose out of the certain knowledge that anything other than solemn silence would diminish the gravity of the situation. The second was that his public expression of condolence to the Trudeau family took the form not of words but of gestures. The press followed Castro’s every move because every move seemed so poignant.

Castro’s sentiments were not the only ones that mattered, of course, nor were they the most important. For the five days between Pierre Trudeau’s death and his funeral, Canadians from all walks of life, many of whom had had no great love for the former prime minister, were caught up in the high drama of his passing. Most agreed that the loss to Canada was enormous. To the generation of Canadians whose political loyalties had literally been forged in the crucible of his leadership, his death was epochal.

National media coverage the week before the funeral captured the solemnity with which Canadians first reacted to the news of Trudeau’s death and then, by the thousands, paid their last respects. An estimated seventy-five thousand people filed past the body of the former prime minister as it lay in state in Parliament’s Hall of Honour and later in Montreal’s City Hall. Thousands more lined the railway route between the two cities over which the casket was carried, accompanied by Justin and Sacha and Trudeau’s old friends Roy Heenan, Jacques Hébert, Roméo LeBlanc and Marc Lalonde. Fidel Castro made what Canadian officials later called a surprise appearance at Montreal City Hall the night before the funeral to pay his respects. It was the first of many spontaneous acts of homage to Trudeau’s memory that took the Comandante off his official itinerary and sent Canadian and Cuban security officials scrambling.

The day of the funeral, Trudeau’s casket was taken by hearse from Montreal City Hall to Notre-Dame Basilica in a ceremonial procession of such emotional intensity that even the normally reticent Mounties were choked up. The crowds were thick on Rue Notre-Dame and in Place d’Armes, the open square between the basilica and the stately old Bank of Montreal building to the north. Some onlookers burst spontaneously into choruses of O Canada as the cortège passed by. "The applause, the anthem—it was very hard not to cry," said Sylvain L’Heureux, one of the Mounties to walk beside the hearse. Elsewhere RCMP officers not lucky enough to be selected for the ceremonial procession were entrusted with the task of securing City Hall, the basilica and the two-block route between them. For days before the funeral, they had been supervising city workers as they welded down manhole covers, erected metal barricades and secured the church inside and out. A giant television screen had been erected outside the basilica for the thousands of people who were expected to show up, complicating security further. Sniffer dogs scoured the entire procession route the morning of the service. Armed Mounties stood watch on street corners and in front of the shops and restaurants along the street. Sharpshooters took positions on the roof of the art deco Aldred Building northeast of the basilica, where they could survey the crowds in front of the church’s main entrance. Along with the five hundred official guests of the Trudeau family, roughly fifteen hundred members of the public were carefully screened before being admitted through the west tower doors and into the church’s second balcony for the service.

As any visitor to Montreal knows, Notre-Dame is one of the most imposing architectural structures in Canada, and certainly its most historic. Designed by Irish-American architect James O’Donnell in 1823 and constructed between 1824 and 1841, the church was conceived on a grand scale. Capable of holding up to ten thousand worshippers, it could lay claim in the mid-nineteenth century to being the largest religious edifice in North America. Originally planned as a classical structure, to the casual observer today the main church seems Gothic in the extreme—cavernous, ornate yet austere, eerily dark even at high noon. The overall effect is to exaggerate the ethereal glow of blue light that frames the sanctuary and the pulpit, and to enhance the impact of the thirty-five hundred candles that flicker throughout the massive chamber.

It was fitting that Trudeau’s funeral proceedings took the form of a full-blown funeral Mass at Notre-Dame. As unlikely as it may have seemed for such a dyed-in-the-wool liberal, Pierre Trudeau had always remained the most devout of Catholics. Margaret later recalled that, when she met him, his faith was so profound that she decided to convert. Pierre loves ritual, she wrote in her 1979 memoir. To this day not a Sunday goes by when he does not assemble the children solemnly around him, and read aloud to them from his leather-bound family bible, handed down from generation to generation of Trudeau sons.

Security at the funeral service had to be tight. The ceremony had inevitably drawn a great number of the world’s powerful and famous. Prime Minister Jean Chrétien remained in the forefront of the proceedings from the moment the casket arrived in Montreal, his normally bon vivant face frozen with grief over the death of his political mentor. "Pierre Trudeau was what we wanted to be in Québec, Chrétien said solemnly. I am very, very privileged to have worked with him and to be his successor." The Liberal Party of Canada, past and present, was well represented at the funeral. Governor General Adrienne Clarkson was in attendance, as were former Canadian prime ministers Joe Clark, Brian Mulroney, John Turner and Kim Campbell. Quebec premier Lucien Bouchard, the nationalist who had helped orchestrate Mulroney’s twin majorities in 1984 and 1988 before deserting the federal Conservatives to form the separatist Bloc Québécois, was there, but he steered well clear of his erst-while federalist allies. Former U.S. president Jimmy Carter had come at the request of President Bill Clinton to head up the sizeable American delegation. Along with Castro, poet Leonard Cohen, Marc Lalonde and Jacques Hébert, Carter had been asked by the Trudeau family to serve as an honorary pallbearer.

Representing the United Kingdom was Prince Andrew, who had attended Ontario’s Lakefield College School in the 1970s and had been a great admirer of Pierre Trudeau’s outdoorsmanship, the British defence secretary, Geoffrey Hoon, the high commissioner to Canada, Sir Andrew Burns, and several lesser officials. The question of who would represent the queen ignited a minor controversy in the Canadian press, though not in England. The Globe and Mail ran an unusually combative editorial the day of the funeral, in which Queen Elizabeth II and her son Charles were accused of snubbing Canada by opting out of the funeral in favour of some minor ceremonial tasks in the United Kingdom. The National Post, taking the monarchist position on the issue, noted that the queen was not in attendance only because the government of Canada—and the prime minister in particular, from whom she is obligated to take instruction—did not invite her.

Among the best-represented regions of the world was the Caribbean. Pierre Trudeau’s concern for the developing world and his initiatives to modernize the Commonwealth had earned him great respect there. Edwin Carrington, secretary general of the Caribbean Community (Caricom) attended, as did Seymour Mullings, deputy prime minister of Jamaica, and Sir John Compton, a one-time prime minister of St. Lucia. Rounding out the Caribbean contingent was Castro himself. He arrived by limousine, surrounded by over a dozen bodyguards and Cuban officials—the usual entourage for a leader against whom death threats are continuous. To the crowd chanting "¡Viva Fidel!" he simply waved and moved quietly into the church.

For Margaret, the funeral was heartbreaking. She sobbed openly in the limousine that carried her and her sons to the basilica. Inside the church, she sat with Justin and Sacha, occasionally holding hands with her sons and hugging them for support. Of the two, Justin was the more visibly grieved, weeping occasionally alongside his mother. Sacha sat motionless for the most part.

Seated on the same bench as the Trudeaus was nine-year-old Sarah Coyne, Pierre Trudeau’s only daughter. Her mother, Deborah Coyne, a constitutional lawyer, sat beside her. Sarah, a pretty girl with her blond hair and blue velvet dress, was said to have been the apple of Pierre Trudeau’s eye in his later years. (It is surely a credit to Canadian journalism that she and her mother had until then been spared the media circus that often preys on the love lives of politicians.) In the row immediately behind the Trudeau families sat the honorary pallbearers. At one point during Communion, Margaret turned around to exchange a greeting with Jimmy Carter, who held her hand and, southern gentleman that he is, kissed it gently. Behind Castro sat a translator, who whispered into his ear during the spoken portions of the service. Some of the seats in the front row pews at Notre-Dame were empty, apparently causing a certain amount of confusion among Canadians watching the proceedings on television. The vacancies arose out of the arcane protocol of rank at state functions. By long-standing tradition, the governor general and the prime minister must occupy a pew to themselves, symbolizing their unequalled status. Even Prince Andrew, seated alone in the third row, held lower rank, since only the governor general may represent the queen in Canada.

Outside the basilica, thousands of Canadians watched the funeral ceremony on the giant screen, handkerchiefs at the ready.

The first ninety minutes of the two-hour service were taken up with the funeral Mass. Trudeau’s old friend and political ally Jacques Hébert then gave a moving tribute, stressing Trudeau’s personal virtues and his love for his children—a speech to which both Margaret and Justin reacted with audible sobbing. Prime Minister Jean Chrétien was visibly moved as well, his lip quivering and his eyes tearing.

Following Hébert’s remarks, Justin Trudeau regained his bearing and rose to