As the pomp and emotion peaked in Montreal yesterday, people in many corners of Canada paused to mark the death of a man who dominated the country's political scene for the better part of a generation.

IN VANCOUVER Television host Vicki Gabereau described an eerie stillness on the normally traffic-clogged Lions Gate Bridge during Pierre Trudeau's funeral. "Everything seemed so quiet. When they were singing the Kyrie hymn, you could hear it coming from all the cars on their radios."

Even so, the moment passed unnoticed in the TV section of the downtown Hudson's Bay department store, a traditional gathering-place during major televised events. During Justin Trudeau's farewell to his father, every screen was tuned to baseball coverage except two that showed a Disney video. "We didn't even think of it," a store employee said.

IN EDMONTON Where live TV coverage began at 8 a.m., Jim Seethram, 37, managed to catch scenes outside Notre Dame Basilica before leaving for work.

Mr. Seethram, who works at a computer consulting company, was a toddler when Mr. Trudeau entered federal politics and a young man when he retired as Prime Minister. He said it was important to mark the moment.

"We grew up from grade school to postgraduate with him at the helm. It's just a lasting influence, sort of a guardian of the country that's no longer here."

Crowds gathered through the day in the rotunda of the Alberta Legislature, where a television was set up along with a condolence book for people to sign. In offices in the building, workers turned TV sets to the funeral or ducked in and out of rooms with televisions to catch parts of it.

Tears streamed down Sylvia Kujansuu's face as she watched Justin Trudeau's eulogy from her desk. "It was almost as if Mr. Trudeau was speaking to us through his son," she said.

IN CALGARY People filed quietly through the McDougall Centre as the funeral was broadcast to sign a growing stack of books of condolence. "You've made me a more tolerant person," one woman wrote, wiping tears from her eyes as she left.

At city hall, workers paused to catch glimpses of the service when they could throughout the morning. A moment to reflect on Mr. Trudeau's life was observed at the Calgary Chamber of Commerce before a speech by the city's outgoing police chief.

Barb Blakemore watched the funeral from a government office where a crowd had gathered to sign a book of condolence. "Through [Mr. Trudeau's]vision, I began to have an understanding of who we are and our need to embrace a multicultural society," she said, her eyes welling with tears.

IN WINNIPEG Downtown streets seemed quieter than usual as many television sets were tuned to the funeral. Phones and fax machines stopped ringing in many offices, and traffic at city hall and the legislature slowed to a trickle.

The funeral was broadcast on a large television screen during a meeting of provincial health ministers in a downtown hotel.

The ministers were silent as the coffin was carried into the church. From time to time as the service proceeded, one or another would turn from the discussion to the screen. They gathered around it as the meeting adjourned and Justin Trudeau began to speak.

At Collège Pierre Elliott Trudeau, a French-immersion high school, students watched the funeral and were asked to write, in French, their thoughts about Mr. Trudeau's accomplishments.

IN TORONTO Many television monitors in Bay Street trading rooms, normally tuned to market news, were switched to the live broadcast. The usual din gave way to the sound of the basilica's organ as workers grouped from time to time to gaze up at the monitors.

"It certainly caught everyone's attention," said Mark Chandler, senior economist at Goldman Sachs Canada.

The Toronto Stock Exchange, the nation's busiest, showed a slowdown in trading toward noon, particularly around the time Justin Trudeau spoke. However, volume typically declines around midday.

At city hall, there was a single red rose at each place in the council chamber, as councillors arrived for a meeting. They observed a moment's silence and broke off the meeting to watch the funeral, shown on a large screen in the chamber and on another in the rotunda of city hall, where about 100 people watched.

Members of the the public were still lined up last evening to sign the condolence book in the rotunda.

Elsewhere, workers slipped out to restaurants with sets tuned to the funeral. "I was on the Internet and I decided I had to come down and see it," Brenda Bradley said. "I just wanted to see it. I didn't want to read about it in the paper."

IN SUBURBAN OTTAWA Nepean High School principal Irmela Murphy had to settle for a virtual assembly, because there was no place in the overcrowded school for the 1,261 students to gather.

At 11 a.m., as the service began, she spoke on the public address system, telling the students that the funeral of "a truly great Canadian" was under way in Montreal and said that she hoped they had had a chance to follow some of the coverage of his death in the newspapers over the past four days.

"I will remember Pierre Trudeau as a man of great vision who stood for a strong and united Canada," she said. She asked the entire school to stand and honour his memory with a minute of silence.

At St. Patrick's Catholic Elementary School, nine to 11-year-olds twitched and fidgeted in front of a big-screen television, but many seemed to sense Mr. Trudeau's funeral was important. "I know he put us on the map," said Adrian Kelly, 11, moments after watching the service.

IN HALIFAX The demand to sign a condolence book was so overwhelming that government officials extended the time it was to be left in place. Some messages covered more than half a page, as writers tried to express what Mr. Trudeau meant to them and the country.

"Your body was weakened by disease and loss but your spirit will spring eternal in the hearts of Canadians who loved you," Joyce La Chance of Halifax wrote.

Children enrolled in French-immersion courses also signed, praising Mr. Trudeau for his support of bilingualism. "Merci pour le programme d'immersion. Je parle anglais et français," eight-year old Emily Faulkner wrote.

"You were and always will be Canada to us," a message from the Murdoch family of Dartmouth said.

IN ST. JOHN'S Irene Gray and Georgina Eveleigh dabbed away tears at the Kelly's Brook Apartment seniors home after watching Justin Trudeau's eulogy. "Magnificent," said Ms. Gray, an 86-year-old grandmother of 14. It was "too bad it was so far away or we would have gone," she said.

Ms. Eveleigh, 82, said the speech convinced her that Canada will one day have another prime minister capable of inspiring the country. "We have a lot of young, intelligent men and women coming up . . . and I think that in a few years we'll probably have another Trudeau -- maybe better."