The former prime minister of Canada, Pierre Trudeau, who headed the Ottawa government for 15 years, died in Montreal yesterday at the age of 80, his children said in a statement.

"Justin and Sacha Trudeau deeply regret to inform you that their father, the Right Honourable Pierre Elliott Trudeau, passed away shortly after 3 p.m. today," they said in the statement. "In addition to Parkinson's Disease, Mr Trudeau suffered from prostate cancer."

Mr Trudeau had been ailing since he failed to make a complete recovery from a recent bout of pneumonia. He had also been severely affected by the death of his son Michel in an avalanche in 1998.

Mr Trudeau served as prime minister of Canada from 1968 to 1979 and again from 1980 to 1984.

The Canadian flag over parliament was lowered to half-staff as soon as news of his death became known.

The Canadian Prime Minister, Mr Jean Chretien, in Guatemala for a summit conference with Central American leaders, issued a statement from his office.

Mr Chretien, who held several cabinet posts in Trudeau governments, said: "Pierre Trudeau, the embodiment of the dream of a just society, has left us. He is gone, but his unfinished work remains - our country, Canada.

"Above all, the forces of change that he set in motion continue to shape the soul of his people. A people who, thanks to him, in ever greater numbers express themselves in both our official languages. A people who celebrate the diverse roots of our identity."

Mr Chretien described Mr Trudeau as "a political giant" and wrote: "Pierre, my friend, your dream is more alive than ever."

At the beginning of the month, his children had announced that he was "not well".

Since the announcement of his death, each of the Canadian television stations has interrupted its regular programming to broadcast portraits as well as reactions from Mr Trudeau's political allies and opponents.

Funeral services will be held in Montreal, according to reports from CBC television. Details "will be provided as soon as they are finalised", the family said.