MONTREAL, Sept. 28 -- Former Prime Minister Pierre Elliot Trudeau died in Montreal after a brief illness, a statement issued by his sons said Thursday. He was 80.

The family revealed that Trudeau was suffering from prostate cancer, in addition to Parkinson's disease, and was very weak during the last few months. In May, a doctor gave him four months to live.

In December, he had a bout with pneumonia, but was out of hospital after 10 days. He was last seen in his law offices in Montreal in July.

The family statement said, "Justin and Sacha Trudeau regret to inform you that their father, the Right Honorable Pierre Elliot Trudeau, passed away shortly after 3 p.m. today, September 28, 2000."

Preparations were being made for a state funeral, and detials would be announced later, the family said. Trudeau's former wife, Margaret, was apparently at his side at the time of his death, and was seen leaving the house shortly after her sons issued the statement.

Prime Minister Jean Chretien, who was on a state visit to the Caribbeans, issued an emotional statement through his office in Ottawa, saying, "Pierre Trudeau, the embodiment of the dream of a just society, has left us."

"Wherever we were in the world, he made us feel proud to be Canadians- proud to have the immense privilege of being part of this beautiful and great country," Chretien said.

"A political giant, he was also a man who, in his last days, suffered terribly from the loss of his youngest son, Michel. Today, they are together-in peace," he added.

Trudeau's youngest son, Michel, died in an avalanche in British Columbia in 1998. Trudeau was prime minister of Canada from 1968 to 1984, at the head of a Liberal government, except for a 9-month period in 1979-80, when Joe Clark headed a Conservative government.

Clark, who is once again leader of the Progressive Conservatives in Parliament, was one of the first political figures in Ottawa to express his sadness on hearing the news of Trudeau's death. He said his former adversary was "a great man."

One of Trudeau's greatest achievements was the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, which he enshrined in the Canadian Constitution. Moments after his death was announced, friends and neighbors began arriving at his home in Montreal to lay flowers at the door. Many just stood by with their heads bowed.

Earlier this month, consternation swept Canada when his sons issued a statement saying he was "receiving medical attention" at home. The statement came after rumors began circulating that the former prime minister was ill.

The following day, however, his sons said in a second statement that he was in stable condition, "and we do not anticipate imminent change." A member of the household said he was walking about. There had been no word from the family since the latest announcement, which came shortly before 6 p.m. on Thursday.

Several journalists who knew he was seriously ill preferred not to break the news until the family did. Trudeau was a Canadian icon, and considered one of the great prime ministers of Canada. His body is expected to lie in state before the funeral. Chretien has reportedly cut short his trip abroad and was returning to Ottawa.