Montreal - Former Canadian prime minister Pierre Trudeau, who led the country for 16 years with a passionate vision of a united country, died in Montreal at the age of 80, his family said in a statement on Thursday.

Erudite, suave and flamboyant to the point of arrogance, Trudeau was first elected prime minister in 1968 on a wave of "Trudeaumania" in a country that had been averse to political celebrities.

The charismatic millionaire from Montreal remained in power until 1984, except for a nine-month gap in 1979-80.

"Justin and Sacha Trudeau deeply regret to inform you that their father, the Right Honorable Pierre Elliott Trudeau passed away shortly after 3 p.m. today, September 28," Trudeau's sons said in a statement.

"In addition to Parkinson's Disease, Mr. Trudeau suffered from prostate cancer," the statement said.

A state funeral was expected to be held for Trudeau in Montreal.

Canada's national television networks interrupted their regularly scheduled programming on Thursday with special live broadcasts on Trudeau as tributes poured in for the former prime minister and international statesman.

The flag over Canada's Parliament was at half mast and people began laying flowers outside his home in Montreal.

Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien cut short a diplomatic visit to the Caribbean to rush back to Ottawa. A Liberal like Trudeau, Chretien and his wife Aline expressed condolences to Trudeau's family on behalf of all Canadians.

"Pierre Trudeau, the embodiment of the dream of a just society, has left us," Chretien said. "He is gone, but his unfinished work remains - our country, Canada.

"Pierre Trudeau dreamed of a society that afforded all of its citizens an equal opportunity to succeed in life - whatever their background or beliefs, whether rich or poor," Chretien added.

Trudeau's friends said he never fully regained his strength after a bout of pneumonia in January and remained devastated by the death of his son Michel in an avalanche in November 1998.

"A political giant, he was also a man, who, in his last days, suffered terribly from the loss of his youngest son, Michel. Today, they are together - at peace," Chretien said.

Governor-General Adrienne Clarkson, Queen Elizabeth's representative in Canada, said Trudeau dominated imaginations and spirits of Canadians for nearly 40 years with his often acerbic intelligence.

A sharp, energetic figure, he wore sandals to Parliament, dated celebrities such as Barbra Streisand and acress Margo Kidder, flashed an obscene handsignal to protesters and once did a pirouette behind the back of Britain's Queen Elizabeth.

Politically, Trudeau came to prominence at the height of the 60s revolution and his policies reflected changing attitudes. As justice minister in 1967, he liberalized laws on abortion and homosexuality, then continued to introduce new direction upon becoming Canada's 15th prime minister a year later.

A Montreal native, he made French an official language with English, promoted the metric system, led the fight against Quebec separatists, and in what was his most profound legacy, enshrined the Charter of Rights in a new Canadian Constitution in 1982.

He married Margaret Sinclair, a "flower child" half his age, in 1971 and they had three sons before their 1977 separation and eventual divorce that received the kind of media attention normally given film stars.

His ex-wife, since remarried and divorced again, and two adult sons survived him. The youngest son, Michel, died in an avalanche in 1998 at age 23, and Trudeau's grief was considered a factor in his hospitalization for pneumonia during the new millennium celebrations.

Despite Trudeau's celebrity, the changes he inspired brought inevitable opposition from some segments of Canadian society. The Quebec separatist movement gained strength in battling Trudeau's efforts toward federalism, and the Western-based Reform Party was created in part from lingering resentment in oil-rich Alberta over the National Energy Program imposed by the Trudeau government in 1980 that increased federal control over energy resources.

By the time he decided to quit while taking "a walk in the snow" on Feb. 29, 1984, Trudeau's popularity had dissipated, leading to a Liberal decline and successive Conservative Party governments.

"We were engaged, and frequently enthralled by this man who told us in his own words that 'in high school...I had already made up my mind to swim against the tide,'" she said.

Tributes also came from world leaders.

"He was a prime minister with vision, political courage and great personal style. We mourn his passing," British Prime Minister Tony Blair Blair said.

U.S. President Bill Clinton remembered Trudeau for opening "a dynamic new era" in Canada.

"As Prime Minister for nearly a generation, Pierre Trudeau opened a dynamic new era in Canadian politics and helped establish Canada's unique imprint on the global stage," Clinton said in a written statement.

Trudeau's health had declined rapidly in recent weeks as he battled cancer at his art deco home in Montreal's upscale Westmount district, his two remaining sons and ex-wife Margaret at his bedside.

Trudeau's long tenure included a gritty battle against Quebec separatists and the patriation of Canada's Constitution in 1982 from Britain with a groundbreaking Charter of Rights and Freedoms attached.

He also elicited strong reactions from those who knew him or crossed his path politically.

Joe Clark, leader of the Progressive Conservative Party, who defeated Trudeau in a 1979 election, only to lose power to a resurgent Trudeau and the Liberals nine months later said Trudeau "transformed our country and inspired it."

"While Mr. Trudeau and I had different visions of our country, I admired his intellect, passion and commitment to the public interest," Clark said.

In western Canada, tempers boiled over in 1980 when his government set domestic oil prices below world prices, slashing production revenues in oil-rich Alberta.

Peter Lougheed, Alberta's premier from 1971-1985, was one of Trudeau's greatest adversaries but on Thursday he called the former prime minster "the most remarkable Canadian of our generation."

In Quebec, Trudeau was archfoe of the French-speaking province's separatists, who have lost two referendums on independence. Quebec has never signed the constitution he brought home from London in 1982.

"He provoked a lot of reaction, a lot of hostility. There's such hostility that I don't think you'll find a street named after him in Quebec or a high school named after him in Quebec," Trudeau biographer Stephen Clarkson told CBC television.

Quebec separatist Premier Lucien Bouchard expressed his condolences to Trudeau's family, saying Trudeau took strong positions that provoked as much admiration among his friends as consternation among his adversaries.

"History will remember him as a man of willpower and intelligence," Bouchard said.

As news of Trudeau's death spread, common Canadians said Trudeau had an impact on their lives, whether or not they agreed with his politics.

"He certainly did make a mark on Canada, whether that is good or bad is another question," said Douglas Horne, of Vancouver.

Although 48 when he became prime minister, Trudeau exhibited a youthful exuberance and anti-establishment demeanor emblematic of the tumultuous final years of the 1960s as Canada seemed on the verge of finding its place among the world's great nations.

"With Trudeau it seemed like anything was possible. It was kind of cool to be Canadian," said Sheilesh Dave, a 33-year-old Calgary dentist.

The son of a French-Canadian millionaire businessman, Trudeau was a constitutional lawyer and dedicated to making Canada an equitable society with English and French as its official languages.

Disenchantment with him grew in the 1970s, a decade of burgeoning government budget deficits, uneven economic growth. The juggernaut of Quebec separation also became a more legitimate political movement through the election of separatists in the province.