Todd Woodbridge has moved from tennis star to tennis commentator to fame as the host of Nine's game show Tipping Point - and now his son Beau is also on the road to stardom without setting foot on the court.

The Grand Slam doubles champion's youngest child recently graduated from England's prestigious Royal Academy of Music after earning a master of arts degree, with his dad, mum Natasha and sister Zara all on hand for the big occasion.

After the event, Beau took to social media to post, 'I had an a-MA-zing time' - with his mum commenting, 'What a year you have had, so lucky that Zara, Dad and I are here to share that with you.'

Beau's Instagram is full of photos and videos of him acting and singing in various musicals, including Spring Awakening, which Todd called an 'incredible production' after his son's star turn.

His degree saw him trained in composing music and teaching as well as directing, leading Todd to comment, 'It's important to cover all your bases when you're young.'

The Channel Nine star regularly posts about his son's performances on social media, leaving comments like, 'Pretty special seeing @beau.woody up on stage.'

On the other hand, Beau's sister Zara has excelled at golf, being named the Royal Melbourne Women's Club champion in 2021 and the Cathedral Club champion in 2022. She also made Golf Victoria's state team as a 14-year-old in 2015.

While Todd is now throwing most of his energy into his TV hosting role, he still finds time to speak out about all things tennis.

Back in May he predicted Alex de Minaur would make a deep run at this year's French Open - and was proven correct when the Aussie made it to the quarter-finals after beating world No.5 Daniil Medvedev in a very impressive fourth-round match.

And in January this year he had a blunt message for tennis stars who were worried about rowdy crowds at the Australian Open.

He was reacting to concerns about the so-called 'party court' in Melbourne, which boasted two bars for fans.

'As a player I would have hated it, but as a broadcaster I love it,' he told Daily Mail Australia.

'Players will get used to it. Players get used to everything. If you're an up and coming player and you play at Wimbledon at an outside court, you've got people walking up and down the outside of the court all day long.

'It's noisier and it's different. And everybody will get used to that.

'What I do know now, as a former player that works on the other side, is that tennis is entertainment and sport is entertainment. And it's drama, it's unscripted and it's brilliant.'

Woodbridge's surprise switch to hosting Tipping Point was revealed in August last year.

The show took over from the country's longest-running game show, Millionaire Hot Seat, which was hosted by footy and TV identity Eddie McGuire.