TODD WOODBRIDGE won it all as one of the greatest tennis players of a generation.

But now his daughter is aiming to earn a wedge in golf.

Aussie Woodbridge, 52, made nearly £8million in prize money during his 17-year career - thanks in part to his illustrious collection of 22 Grand Slam doubles and mixed doubles titles between 1992 and 2004.

That included ten Wimbledon crowns, six at the US Open, four at the Australian Open and two French Opens - 11 of which plus an Olympic gold medal in 1996 came alongside legendary partner Mark Woodforde.

The ‘Woodies’ split up when Woodforde retired in 2000 and Woodbridge formed a successful partnership with Jonas Bjorkman.

Woodbridge did play singles as well, his best result at a major his run to the 1997 Wimbledon semis where he lost to Pete Sampras, but it was in doubles where he reached the world No1 ranking and won 83 titles.

That saw him inducted into the Hall of Fame in 2010 and then the prestigious Philippe Chatrier Award four years later.

Woodbridge retired in 2005 but remains actively involved in tennis as a commentator, pundit and broadcaster.

He has also dabbled in covering golf, presents Tipping Point Australia and has even hosted wine-tasting clinics.

But he is also a devoted family man.

Todd - who had a heart attack in 2022 - married wife Natasha in 1995.

They have two kids - daughter Zara, 23, and son Beau, 21 - as well as a poodle cross dog called Millie.

And while Beau is a rising star in the arts as a musician and stage performer, his older sister is an accomplished golfer.

Zara was crowned Royal Melbourne Women’s Club Champion in November 2021 and then Cathedral Club Champion 12 months later.

She has even done some caddying for tennis-star-turn-pro-golf-sensation Gabi Ruffels at the recent golf Australian Open.

Away from the golf course, Zara is also focused on greens - as a nutrition student.

She has her own Instagram page all about nutrition, health and fitness - including yummy recipes and dietary information.

Zara does enjoy her tennis, too, though.