PRESIDENTS MESSAGE

It is an absolute honour and privilege to be elected President of Shannon RFC

This year, the Club celebrates its 140th year in existence and 70 years as a Senior Club. In my capacity as President I am honoured to extend a warm welcome to all our visiting teams, their officials and supporters. I trust you will enjoy your visit with us and we are delighted to host you. I would also like to welcome our match day officials and thank them for their selfless commitment and assure them of our continued courtesy and respect.

Shannon RFC is deeply rooted in our local community and since our foundation we have drawn strength from the commitment and encouragement of those families and individuals who have sustained and supported us down through the years. On behalf of the Club I would like to thank all our players, coaches, volunteers and supporters for their continued hard work and dedication to our cause. We are extremely proud of all our players, not just those who represent us at interprovincial and national levels. It is very gratifying to see all our home grown talent progress and develop in playing terms, but also in their contribution to the wider community.

In order to develop and upgrade facilities and provide the best possible support to all our players we depend on the goodwill and generosity of our Sponsors. A sincere “thank you” to our main sponsors, Eirtech Aviation and International Aerospace Coatings, for their generous support. My thanks also to the legion of companies and individuals who through direct sponsorship or by way of participation in Club fundraising efforts, ensure that we are adequately resourced to address our financial needs. Our appreciation also for the continued sponsorship of the AIL by Energia.

I look forward to a busy and hopefully successful season. I offer my support and encouragement to the Officers and Executive Committee as they tackle the various challenges ahead of them. I wish the captains and coaches of our Men’s and Women’s teams the best of luck in their various competitions. I wish all concerned with our under age Boys and Girls teams the same best wishes. I encourage our members and supporters to attend as many matches as possible and in particular to show your presence at “away games”. I hope everybody who dons the Shannon jersey this season, from Mini level to Senior, finds it enjoyable and fulfilling, and irrespective of match day results will be enriched by the experience.

Fe Coimirce Mhuire

Tony Wallace

President