For more information, see the TalkOrigins Archive article:

For more information, see the TalkOrigins Archive article:

For more information, see the Wikipedia article:

Charles Darwin was one of the early founders of evolutionary theory. His book On the Origin of Species introduced natural selection as the primary mechanism of adaptive evolution, forming the foundation of modern biology.

Religious views[edit]

Initially convinced by Paley's watchmaker argument, his studies in biology led him to later reject it. Likewise his views on Christian morality were positive but after much thought he rejected Christianity as well. Here are some quotes from Darwin's autobiography:

Racism and social implications of evolution[edit]

While Darwinism is often misused, Chris Hedges accuses Darwin of dabbling in Social Darwinism in that he thought it was largely inevitable:

In the Descent of Man, Darwin wrote:

It is also worth considering that Darwin was socially forward thinking for his time, particularly in his opposition to slavery.[2]

On apologetics[edit]

On the subject of whether apologetics is effective:

Death bed conversion?[edit]

For more information, see the TalkOrigins Archive article:

Various rumours and anonymous claims have been circulated but there is no reliable evidence of a death bed conversion by Darwin. [4] [5]

Couldn't get a job[edit]

"Darwin couldn't even get a job", "his dad had to get him a job"[6] is Ad hominem, not to mention he came from a wealthy family and didn't require the money.[7]

References[edit]

[edit]

CA005.1. Darwin himself was racist, TalkOrigins archive.

CA002.2. Marx admired and corresponded with Darwin, TalkOrigins archive.

CA131 Darwin suffered from psychoneurosis, TalkOrigins archive.

v · d Science

v · d General science

Scientific method Scientific theory · Hypothesis · Evidence · Examining claims · Skepticism Scientific Disciplines Physics · Biology · Chemistry · Psychology · Medical Science · Mathematics History of science Heliocentrism · Quantum mechanics Champions of reason Carl Sagan · James Randi

v · d Biology

Evolution Natural selection Abiogenesis The Urey-Miller experiment Evolutionary straw men Life just exploded from nothing · So you think we came from monkeys · How did the first dog find a mate · Crocoducks · Banana argument · 747 Junkyard argument · Irreducible complexity · Chuck Missler's jar of peanut butter · What good is half a wing? Notable Biologists Charles Darwin · Richard Dawkins · PZ Myers Notable quacks William Dembski · Michael Behe · Geoffrey Simmons · Ken Ham · Michael Cremo

v · d Physics

Concepts Cosmology · Big bang · Relativity theory · Black holes · Quantum mechanics Physics straw men Fine-tuning argument · Anthropic principle Notable Physicists Isaac Newton · Albert Einstein · Richard Feynman · Stephen Hawking Notable Quacks Dinesh D'Souza · Ray Comfort

v · d Mathematics

Statistics Sample size · Selection bias · Standard deviation · Statistical significance · Statistical probability · Meta probability · Gambler's fallacy Mathematics and religion Biblical value of pi