Bali (; Balinese: ᬩᬮᬶ) is a province of Indonesia and the westernmost of the Lesser Sunda Islands. East of Java and west of Lombok, the province includes the island of Bali and a few smaller neighbouring islands, notably Nusa Penida, Nusa Lembongan, and Nusa Ceningan. The provincial capital, Denpasar, is the most populous city in the Lesser Sunda Islands and the second-largest, after Makassar, in Eastern Indonesia. The upland town of Ubud is considered Bali's cultural centre. The province is Indonesia's main tourist destination, with a significant rise in tourism since the 1980s. Tourism-related business makes up 80% of its economy.Bali is the only Hindu-majority province in Muslim-majority Indonesia, with 86.9% of the population adhering to Balinese Hinduism. It is renowned for its highly developed arts, including traditional and modern dance, sculpture, painting, leather, metalworking, and music. The Indonesian International Film Festival is held every year in Bali. Other international events held in Bali include the Miss World 2013 and 2018 Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group. In March 2017, TripAdvisor named Bali as the world's top destination in its Traveller's Choice award, which it also earned in January 2021.Bali is part of the Coral Triangle, the area with the highest biodiversity of marine species especially fish and turtles. In this area alone, over 500 reef-building coral species can be found. For comparison, this is about seven times as many as in the entire Caribbean. Bali is the home of the Subak irrigation system, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. It is also home to a unified confederation of kingdoms composed of 10 traditional royal Balinese houses, each house ruling a specific geographic area. The confederation is the successor of the Bali Kingdom. The royal houses are not recognised by the government of Indonesia; however, they originated before Dutch colonisation.

NASA Earth Observations Data Set Index (NASA)

Google Maps

Wikipedia

Images Gallery

Rice terraces

Subak irrigation system

Puputan monument

Bali bombings monument

Mount Agung eruption in November 2017.

Aerial photograph of Bali

An islet just south of Bali made of pillow basalt. Much of Bali is made of volcanic rock.

Bali myna is found only on Bali and is critically endangered.

Monkeys in Uluwatu

Wood carving

Kuta Beach is a popular tourist spot.

I Gusti Ngurah Rai International Airport

One of the major forms of transport is the scooter.

Balinese people

The Mother Temple of Besakih, one of Bali's most significant Hindu temples.

Holy Spirit Cathedral, Denpasar

Kecak dance

Balinese cuisine

Cremation in Ubud

Kapten I Wayan Dipta Stadium, the home of Bali United F.C.

So far there are no reviews about the location.

Share your experience with others and write the first comment about the location