By Ana Cordera

Review Special Writer

In her first-ever competition recently, Lake Orion native Emily Penrose, was awarded the Little Miss Pride of the Peninsulas title.

Emily is in sixth grade and attends Scripps Middle School. She competed in the Miss Pride of the Peninsulas Scholarship Program, a pageant in which she was judged based on talent, modeling, evening wear and a personal interview.

Twenty-four women and girls participated in this competition, seven of which were in Emily’s age division. For her first ever beauty pageant, Emily left victorious.

In order to participate in the competition, Emily first had to apply by sending in a r’sum?, a background statement, a biography and a photograph. After getting accepted, she practiced her talent, baton twirling, and prepared for the personal interview.

‘She normally practices her baton a couple of times a week so the talent aspect of it was already pretty well down,? mother Kim Penrose, said. ‘As far as getting ready for the private interview, we just talked to her and asked her different questions.?

At the competition, Emily performed a no-drop routine, meaning she did not drop her baton at all.

She also modeled and wore a blue party dress for the evening wear competition.

Emily became involved with pageants after she saw her older sister participate in them. Wanting to take part, she applied for the Miss Pride of the Peninsulas Scholarship Program.

‘We thought that one would be a pretty good fit because the title represents the entire state of Michigan,? her mother said.

As far as the experience, Emily described it as wonderful and said being on stage is fun.

‘When I’m doing my talent, I can’t stop twirling. I just have a lot of energy,? she said.

Now that she holds the crown and title of Little Miss Pride of the Peninsulas, Emily will compete at the state level for the title of Little Miss Michigan this Saturday in Muskegon. She said she’s preparing by practicing her baton twirling routine and her modeling walk.

No matter the outcome, Emily said she hopes to continue doing pageants and wants to help and persuade children into getting involved with them.

She also hopes to one day become a pediatric nurse. Currently, Emily volunteers at Kids Care in Rochester, an organization that helps with the educational and emotional needs of children.

She plans to will host a fundraiser at a Barnes and Noble store on December 7 organized by Kids Care.

As for now, Emily is focused on the upcoming competition. ‘I feel very confident,? she said. ‘I’m ready.?