I feel so fortunate to have been allowed to photograph Derby Lane a few weeks ago. In my documentary photographer role I seek out places that have historical meaning and speak to my past. Derby Lane dog racing has been a staple in this community for as long as I have been in Tampa. I was granted permission to bring cameras and record a typical day at the races. I had never been inside the gates. What a treat.

My visit feels nostalgic, as though I am walking back in time. There are photographs of less conflicted eras on the wall, where thousands of people took to the grandstands and crowded the fence line as races commenced. In the Derby Club photos of proud owners with their dogs and dignitaries who visited, including Babe Ruth and Mickey Mantle, line the walls. In 2001 scenes of the movie Ocean’s Eleven were filmed at the track with the likes of Brad Pitt, George Clooney, and Carl Reiner. Modifications from the movie, most prominently blue neon dog lights, are still in use here.

Races occur about every 20 minutes. The procession is very ceremonial. Dogs are brought onto the track with each having an individual leadout (handler), and stopped in front of the fans. The name of the dog is announced and they proceed to the start box. Leadouts have their own storied history, at one time dressing in formal uniforms for each race. It’s just part of the almost century-old history of Derby Lane.

As the mechanical chase bunny rounds the track it lets out a squeak the dogs clearly recognize, telling them that it’s go time. I hear excitement and barking in anticipation of the starting gate opening and all at once the doors fly open and those pups whiz down the track in a fury.

It is nostalgic. The track is a window to a simpler time. Pop music plays over the loudspeakers until race time when (recorded) trumpets blow and the ceremony begins. Excitement builds in the audience as the dogs are placed into their numbered boxes getting ready to race. The rush of energy from both the dogs and the people is palpable. Once the gate opens and the dogs sprint down the track, gamblers and dog owners yell out the names and numbers of the dogs, hoping their voice somehow influences a win. In a flash it’s over. In typical Hollywood style, some gamblers toss their losing tickets in the air and some cheer their win. Fifteen minutes later it all happens again.

I don’t care to delve into the controversy around dog racing. The animals I observe are treated with respect and love, and it looks as though they live to race. I am sure there have been instances of neglect and abuse throughout the 100 years of dog racing. None of that is evident today. I meet Donald Beck DVM, the track Veterinarian. He inspects every dog every race and is not afraid to DQ an animal not fit to run. He has been doing it for over 25 years. Throughout my time at the track several dog owners approach me and inquire about my project. They are friendly to me genuinely concerned about the welfare their animals.

No matter where you land on the dog racing opinion spectrum, do yourself a favor and go and watch these athletes in action. It’s free! And if you have a couple of extra bucks, pick a dog that you like and wager. If you care to luxuriate a little, have dinner in the Circa 1925 restaurant on the 6th floor of the Derby Club. It offers a panoramic view of the entire track while you dine. But don’t stay there. Walk down to the track and get a close-up view of these magnificent animals in action! Children are welcome to attend (but no wagering!) See it before it goes away.