Belleville’s Basement Waterproofing Authority

If you have a musty smell in your basement, walls that feel damp, or a basement that floods when there is heavy rain you are in the right place! Woods Basement Systems, Inc. has over 30 years of basement waterproofing experience when it comes to taking a wet basement and transforming it into the space of your dreams. Our goal is to identify the problem and formulate a custom solution that is right for your home, all for an affordable price. Each one of our certified basement waterproofing technicians will stand behind their work and they only use proven and warrantied products that we will customize to fit your home. Only trust the areas leading basement waterproofing company to ensure the absolute best for your home.

We Provide:

Basement seepage repair for wet basements

Wall crack & basement leak repair

Battery backup sump pump systems

Sump pump installation

Dependable Foundation Repair Experts

The foundation is arguably the most important aspect of your home. Without the strong base that the foundation provides the rest of your home is very susceptible to further problems down the line. Woods Basement Systems, Inc. is a trusted Foundation Supportworks dealer meaning we have the know-how and experience to tackle and resolve all types of foundation repair issues in the most effective way possible. We can provide your home with products available nowhere else, and all of our foundation repair crew members are fully trained. When you match incredible products with experienced professionals the results of our foundation repair work is ensured to be great! If your foundations is cracked, buckling, or has other signs of damage call us today to schedule a FREE foundation repair quote!

We Repair:

Bowing Walls

Settlement Sinking

Foundation Heave

Sagging Crawl Spaces

Fast and Effective Concrete Lifting and Leveling

The major flaw of concrete is that the ground that it was poured on top of will inevitably shift and sink over time. In the states of Illinois and Missouri sinking concrete is all too common which is why our company has gone to great lengths to develop fast and effective concrete lifting and leveling solutions. PolyLevel® is a revolutionary product that is minimally invasive and not only lifts and levels concrete but also stabilizes it. The concrete lifting and leveling process begins with a few small holes drilled in the slab, then the PolyLevel® polymer is poured into the holes. After only about 15 minutes the polymer is dry and the concrete is ready to be walked and even driven on. This concrete lifting and leveling technique is faster, less disruptive and arguably more effective than mud jacking which is the procedure PolyLevel® replaces. To removed tripping hazards, stabilize concrete, and lift it back to a level height nothing is faster or more effective than PolyLevel®. To schedule a FREE concrete lifting and leveling estimate contact us today!

We can Fix:

Sunken sidewalks

Sagging steps

Uneven patios

Sinking driveways

Crawl Space Repair Services in Belleville