Shaquille O'Neal is an global sensation. He was among the most dominant NBA players before retirement. Shaq helped his teams win many NBA Championships and Olympic gold medals. Since he has dated several women, fans are eager to know Shaquille O'Neal's girlfriend in 2023.

Shaq is one of the greatest basketball players ever. He only missed a few NBA playoffs and won many high-profile awards, including four NBA titles. This article reveals Shaq O'Neal's beef with other NBA legends, his career, family, businesses, and girlfriends.

Profile summary

Bronny James, Lebron James’ son: height, age, stats, offers

NBA

Shaquille O'Neal's biography

Lucille O'Neal and Joseph Toney (alias Joe Toney) welcomed baby Shaquille Rashaun O'Neal into the world on 6 March 1972. Phillip Arthur Harrison (a US Army officer who once worked at Wildflecken, West Germany) stepped in as father figure after Joe abandoned them.

Where was Shaquille O'Neal born?

The NBA legend was born in Newark, New Jersey, USA.

What happened to Shaquille O'Neal's father?

Shaquille O'Neal's father played high school basketball. He was an All-State guard and won a basketball scholarship at Seton Hall. Joe Toney fell into the drug world and became an addict. He left his family and ended up serving around six years in jail for illegal drug possession.

His wife and son did not know his whereabouts when they moved to Germany. They later returned to America and settled in San Antonio, Texas. After jail, Joe reformed and became a delivery truck driver supplying food and other necessities to homeless shelters.

What companies does Shaq own? Find out all the information here

NBA

Harrison (Shaq O'Neal's stepfather) forbade him from reuniting with his son and wife. He died of a heart attack on 10 September 2013. Three years after Harrison’s death, Lucille persuaded Shaq to meet Joe. Shaquille was 44 when they met at Vonda's Kitchen in Newark, New Jersey.

How old is Shaquille O'Neal?

Shaquille O'Neal's age is 51 years as of March 2023.

Does Shaq have any siblings?

He has three siblings, Ayesha, Jamal, and Lateefah O'Neal. They had great childhood memories in Germany and USA. Ayesha came into the limelight for battling cancer and died in 2019.

What is Shaquille O'Neal's ethnicity?

Shaq is an American citizen of Jamaican descent. Many people wrongly assume that his ancestral roots are in Africa.

Educational background

Shaq graduated from Robert G Cole High School in San Antonio, Texas, and went to Louisiana State University to pursue a business course. He played in numerous basketball tournaments and school matches and was severally named College Player of the year. O'Neal quit school in 1992 to pursue an NBA career.

Who is the highest-paid player in Nigeria's premier league 2023? Top 10 list

Football

Professional career history

The Orlando Magic selected O'Neal with the 1st overall pick in the 1992 NBA draft. He played for the following teams during his NBA career:

Shaq's stats

Shaq's regular season records show he achieved 28,596 points per game (23.7 PPG), 13,099 rebounds per game (10.9 RPG), and 2,732 blocks per game (2.3 BPG) in his entire NBA career.

Best footballers' tattoos: Which soccer player has the best ink?

Football

Did Shaquille O'Neal win any rings?

Since the 1976 NBA/ABA merger, O'Neal became one of the seven NBA players who won multiple championships with two different teams. He won four championship rings, two with the Los Angeles Lakers and the others with Miami Heat. Shaq received the Finals MVP award after leading the Lakers from a 3-1 series loss to defeating Philadelphia in 2001.

How many MVPs does Shaq have?

He got the 1999/2000 MVP award, 3 All-Star Game MVP awards, 3 Finals MVP awards, the 1992/93 NBA Rookie of the Year award, 15 All-Star game selections, 2 scoring titles, 14 All-NBA team selections, and 3 NBA All-Defensive Team selections.

Is Shaq married?

Shaq is not married as of March 2023 but has divorced once.

Who was Shaquille O'Neal's wife?

He had a child with his girlfriend Arnetta Yarbourgh, then married American television personality Shaunie Henderson on 26 December 2002. Shaq filed the first divorce on 4 September 2007, and she filed the second one on 10 November 2009. They finalized their marriage annulment process in 2011.

The top 20 best Barcelona legends of all time: profiles

Football

Between these two ladies, fans were more shocked when he parted ways with Shaunie. Shaq talked about the divorce in an interview with New York Post. He said:

I was bad. She was awesome. It was all me. We don't need to talk about what I was doing, but I wasn't protecting her and protecting those vows. Sometimes you live that double life and get caught up. I'm not going to say it was her. It was all me. She did what she was supposed to do, taking care of the kids, the house, and corporate stuff. It was just all me.

Does Shaquille O'Neal have kids?

Shaquille has five biological children. Arnetta Yardbourgh delivered his first child, Taahirah O'Neal, shortly after they broke up. Shaq got four more children, Shareef, Amirah, Sharif, and Me'arah O'Neal, with his wife, Shaunie. He also raised Shaunie's son, Myles B. O'Neal, from a previous relationship and occasionally looked after his nieces and nephews.

Top 15 famous footballers who went to jail as of 2023 listed

Football

Two of Shaquille O'Neal's children, Shareef and Amirah, are basketball players. Shareef played in college for the UCLA Bruins before transferring to LSU. Taahirah completed her Bachelor's degree in Sociology in 2019.

Who is Shaquille O'Neal's girlfriend?

Shaq's girlfriend is Nigerian-American actress Annie Ngozi Ilonzeh. The two were spotted having fun on several beaches in Spain. She was born on 23 August 1983 in Grapevine, Texas, to a Nigerian dad of Igbo descent and a white mother. Annette Ilonzeh made her TV debut in 2007 in a CBS sitcom, How I Met Your Mother.

O'Neal dated reality TV star Nicole "Hoopz" Alexander from 2010 to August 2012. They lived at his home in Sudbury, Massachusetts. Laticia Rolle and Shaquille O'Neal dated from early 2014 to March 2018. The model is a big basketball fan.

Who did Shaquille O'Neal propose to?

O'Neal Shaquille proposed to Memphis rapper GloRilla on Instagram Live in 2022, but they never married.

Black Stars fans jubilate as Baba Rahman is axed from squad to face Angola

Football

What is Shaquille O'Neal's net worth?

Shaq, the basketball player, is worth $400 million. He is among the world's wealthiest NBA players in history. The legend earned $292 million in salary and over $200 million from endorsements during his NBA career. Shaq's salary from his current endorsements and business investments is around $60 million annually.

He owns 50 brands in different economic sectors (fitness centers, restaurants, car washers, tech companies, etc.). The NBA legend has also acted in films with Hollywood stars like Kyrie Irving and Tiffany Haddish. One of Shaq's movies is Blue Chips with Nick Nolte. He also appeared in vehicle ads like Kazaam! and Steel.

Where is Shaquille O'Neal's house located?

Shaq's new 5,269-square-foot home in Dallas has six bathrooms, five bedrooms, a deluxe office with built-in shelving, a fireplace, and a tiered ceiling designed just for him. O'Neal bought his former home in Florida for $4 million in 1993 and sold it for about $16.5 million in 2021.

New Ghana coach Chris Hughton names strong team for AFCON 2023 qualifier against Angola

Football

The resort-like Florida mansion sits in the guard-gated Mulholland Estates, surrounded by magnificent soaring views. It oozes a resort-style feel and has a two-story entrance hall enhanced with marble floors and grand archways, a home cinema, a basketball court, and more luxuries.

Shaquille O'Neal's cars

Shaq's car collection has unique and exotic machines modified to fit his body size and taste. Some of his vehicles include:

Dodge Challenger

Lamborghini Gallardo

Vaydor

GMC Sierra Denali (wrapped in gold)

Polaris Slingshot

Sprinter Van

Play Big truck

Range Rover

Hoffa

Ferrari F355

Mercedes S550

Rolls Royce Phantom

Cadillac Escalade

Chevrolet G1500

Ram 1500

How many rookie cards does Shaquille O'Neal have?

There are seven Shaquille O'Neal's rookie cards, and one costs around $400.

How many Papa John's does Shaq own?

Shaq has been a brand ambassador and board member of this popular restaurant franchise since 2019. He bought nine Papa John's franchise units and allowed the company to use his image and voice for $8.5 million. Shaq has owned and sold 155 Five Guys Burgers restaurants and owns 17 Auntie Anne's Pretzels restaurants.

All you need to know about Dwight Howard's age, salary, net worth, stats, house and cars

NBA

Shaquille O'Neal and Kobe Bryant's rivalry

Kobe Bryant and Shaq first met in 1996 when the former joined Los Angeles Lakers. They teamed up, won three consecutive NBA championships (2000, 2001, and 2002), and appeared in the 2004 NBA Finals. O'Neal was named the NBA Finals MVP. severally

Fans began comparing them to determine the real GOAT. Personal differences over their respective roles on the team stirred verbal jabs through the media. It reached a time that Shaq made murder threats. He said:

I probably told him I was going to kill him, and I'm sure people all day say, 'oh my God, he didn't send me the email, 'I'm going to kill him.' So did I say I was going to kill him? Yeah. Did I want to kill him? No.

Shaquille O'Neal and Charles Barkley's feud

Shaquille would make fun of Barkley for never winning a title, and Barkley would hit back by claiming Shaq only won titles because of Kobe Bryant and Dwyane Wade. When Barkley was asked about his relationship with Shaq in a live podcast, he responded:

Josh Allen's net worth, stats, contract, girlfriend and Jaguars

NFL

First of all, he's awesome. He's got thin skin. And I'm old school, and you know if something bothers somebody, you have to keep poking the bear, and he gets mad at me sometimes. You know I'm going to keep poking the bear 'cause that's the best thing about sports—being in a locker room, on the bus, and on plane trips.

Shaquille O'Neal and Dwight Howard's rivalry

Dwight Howard and Shaq's feud began in 2008 when Howard wore a Superman costume to the NBA Slam Dunk Contest. Shaq claimed Howard tried to outshine him by taking on his title, Superman.

What is Shaquille O'Neal's height?

Shaquille was already 6' 6" (198 cm) tall at age 13. He is now 7' 1" (216 cm) tall, with black hair and dark-brown eyes.

How big is Shaquille O'Neal?

He weighs around 325 pounds (147 kg). Shaq's shoe size is number 22. He turned once down a $40 million deal with Reebok because his mother complained about his expensive shoes.

Who is Alperen Sengün? Height, age, nationality, current team, wingspan

NBA

How tall is Shaquille O'Neal's wife?

O'Neal's ex-wife, Shaunie, is about 1' 6" shorter than him. She is 5′ 7″ (170 cm) tall. However, people inquiring about Shaq's wife's height are not usually interested in Shaunie's height but Nicole Alexander's. O'Neal and Nicole's relationship went viral because of their huge height difference. He is 5 feet 2 inches taller than her.

Facts about Shaquille O'Neal

Shaquille comes from a tall family. His dad is 6'1" (185 cm), while his mum is 6'2" (188 cm).

He was raised by a Baptist mother and a Muslim stepfather.

Shaq associates himself with Muslim, Jewish, and Buddhist religions.

He made several appearances in World Championship Wrestling (WCW).

Shaq has 4 studio albums, 2 soundtrack albums, 2 compilation albums, and 1 unreleased album as of March 2023.

His TV show, Shaq Life, debuted in 2020. It airs on Hulu, Disney+, and ESPN+.

He owns an online radio station called Shaq Fu Radio.

Nina Earl, Russell Westbrook's wife: WNBA, age, family and net worth

NBA

News about Shaquille O'Neal's girlfriends always grabs the attention of tabloids and the public. It has been more than ten years since he and Shaunie divorced. Shaq has his reasons for not remarrying after this long.

READ ALSO: John Gibson's net worth, contract, Instagram, salary, stats

Sportsbrief.com published John Gibson's biography. He ranks among the top goalkeepers in the NHL. The Anaheim Ducks goalie has produced stunning performances and won numerous awards.

Gibson has made quite a fortune through ice hockey since his debut with the Norfolk Admirals of the American Hockey League (AHL) in 2013.