Shaquille O’Neal, born in New Jersey on March 6, 1972, is generally recognised as being among the most dominant basketball players in NBA history. O’Neal is a four-time NBA champion, a three-time NBA Finals MVP, the 2000 NBA Most Valuable Player, a two-time NBA Scoring Champion. Shaquille’s property is one of the most fascinating in Dallas, with its ‘gentleman’s lounge’, personal bar, and aquarium-style area with a freshwater triangular fish pond. His Dallas house has a very basic structure with a classic living room, patio, and kitchen. It is neither too fancy nor too dull, the classic Texas home with five bedrooms along with three open bathrooms attached to them gives off a simpler transformation to Shaquille’s Florida mansion. This amazing new home has vintage windows with European-style features making the house look more exotic and Texas-y.

Shaq’s Residence

O’Neal is no stranger to the state of Texas. He spent a portion of his youth in San Antonio, where he attended Cole High School and played basketball. The Lakers legend still loves his city. In April, he announced intentions to bring Shaq’s Big Chicken to San Antonio and other Texas cities.

According to the Dallas Morning News, the former NBA star still has a property in the Los Angeles district of Ladera Heights, as well as a 14.3-acre complex 48 km from Atlanta. However, the new Dallas house allows him to be near his family while he expands his food company in Texas.

The 5,269-square-foot structure which is Shaq’s house has five bedrooms and six bathrooms, as well as a luxurious office with built-in bookshelves, a fireplace, and a tiered ceiling.

The Location and Cost of Shaquille O’Neal’s Home

Shaquille O’Neal, a four-time NBA champion and businessman, purchased a house in a Dallas suburb in June. In an Instagram post, real estate agent Zac Gideo revealed how Shaq has returned to the Lone Star State. This Texas mansion was constructed in 2005 and Shaq bought the property in May 2022. The ultimate purchase price is unknown, even though it was advertised for USD 1.29 million.

Inside the Shaq House

Let’s have a look at his stone-quoined residence with five bedrooms and sharp edges/corners that has a European vibe to them. Four fluted columns of stone flank the door, with two more ornate Corinthian columns separating the entrance from the formal dining room. A polished wood panelled library and glossy beige marble flooring flow across the wide living area, which has a contemporary linear fireplace and windows overlooking the garden.

The biggest master bedroom has more columns, and the bathroom has an arched window for vintage magnificence. There seem to be four large bedrooms on the second floor, each of which has a private bath, as well as a modest home theatre featuring tiered seating in luxury cinema recliners.

There is also a gated motor court, a three-car garage, and two attic storage rooms. In the rear, an enclosed patio terrace encompasses a lagoon-style outdoor pool with something like a stone fountain, beach entry, and spill-over spa.

Also Read:- Biggest Houses in the World

Other Mansions and Properties Owned by Shaq

Shaq’s previous and present residences are in Florida, Georgia, Los Angeles, and Las Vegas.

Georgia

O’Neal has a soft spot for Georgia, where he owns three properties in the Atlanta suburb of McDonough. This particular stunner was purchased in 2016 for USD 1.15 million. The property is 7,400 square feet, with eight bedrooms and 10 bathrooms, and includes a second smaller house near the pool.

O’Neal, who said in an earlier interview that he wants to learn the fine equestrian art of dressage, also owns a three-stall stable with a workshop as part of the opulent house. A suite, a 12-seat home theatre, a crafts room, and an exercise room are all part of the completed basement.

Los Angeles

In February 2021, Shaq’s house was added to his portfolio, after spending USD 2.63 million for the seven-bedroom, seven-bath estate. The modern residence is 6,511 square feet in size and has a pool and home theatre, both of which seem to be regular fixtures in many of the baller’s houses.

O’Neal has lived in Los Angeles for about 22 years and owns a home there. He paid USD 654,00 for the five-bedroom, four-bath house with a pool in December 2000, which was a relative bargain at the time.

Finally, O’Neal sold two residences in the Los Angeles region, one in Beverly Hills for USD 6.4 million in 2004 and the other in the nearly-as-posh gated neighbourhood of Bell Canyon for USD 1.85 million in 2021.

Florida

O’Neal has also acquired and sold several residences. After playing for two Florida clubs in his notable career, the Orlando Magic and the Miami Heat, he was more inclined to acquire a mansion in Florida.

In October 2021, he eventually parted ways with his legendary “Shaq-apulco” residence. The Windermere estate was sold for USD 11 million after several price reductions over three years. The mansion, which has eight bedrooms and 12 bathrooms was previously listed for USD 28 million.

In March 2014, one of O’Neal’s smaller properties in Mount Dora, north of Orlando, sold for USD 240,000. The three-story 3,904-square-foot house contains five bedrooms and four washrooms.

Las Vegas

And if he wants to check in on his restaurants, take in a show, or try his hand at craps, he can do it at his Las Vegas property, which he purchased in 2021 for USD 1.9 million.

Shaquille O’Neal’s Career

Shaq played for the Orlando Magic and the Miami Heat. Throughout his basketball career, he has won multiple championships. A 15-time NBA All-Star, an eight-time All-NBA First Team selection, a three-time All-Star Game MVP, and the 1993 NBA Rookie of the Year. Shaq’s broader persona and extreme athletic prowess have earned him worldwide acclaim, as well as one of the largest fan bases in both entertainment and sports. He stands at 7 feet 1 inch tall and weighs 147.418 kg. In the year 2000, he graduated from Louisiana State University. Two seasons later, he won the scoring title and headed Orlando towards the NBA Finals against Houston Rockets. He acquired a reputation for fumbling big games after Houston’s sweeping the Magic. On the opposing end of the court, O’Neal’s large stature and strength made him extremely difficult to stop. He was, however, a bad free-throw shooter, and the opposition devised a strategy (titled “Hack-a-Shaq”) of fouling him deliberately, believing that he was much likely to take free throws than field goals.

He earned a gold medal as a member of the 1996 Olympic basketball team. That same year, he chose to join the Los Angeles Lakers, where he paired up with emerging basketball sensation Kobe Bryant. Despite O’Neal’s continued score supremacy, his teams struggled in the playoffs. He was named the team’s Most Valuable Player in 2000, along with new Lakers coach Phil Jackson. Jackson’s drive inspired him to become a team player, focusing on his defence, rebounding, and free-throw shooting. As a consequence, he led the Lakers to three straight championships, winning the MVP award each time.

He had modest recognition as a rapper and actor, starring in films such as ‘Blue Chips’ (1994), ‘Kazaam’ (1996), and ‘Steel’ (1997). Inside this animated The LEGO Movie, he portrays himself (2014). His outspoken personality and charm enabled him to become such a famous spokesperson throughout his career, and after retiring, he became a commentator on an NBA television studio show.

Conclusion

Shaq owns a marvellous stone-quoined European-style house in Dallas, Texas. It is 5,269-square-foot in size and has five bedrooms and six bathrooms. You can visit the neighbourhood if you live anywhere near his house. Read our blogs for more exciting articles.

Stories You May Also Like

FAQs

Where is Shaq's house?

Shaq bought a new house in the Lone Star State, near Dallas Suburbs, Texas. Shaq’s previous and present residences are in Florida, Georgia, Los Angeles, and Las Vegas.

How much is Shaquille O'Neal's house worth?

In an Instagram post, real estate agent Zac Gideo revealed that Shaq bought the property in May 2022. The ultimate purchase price is unknown, though it was listed for USD 1.23 million.

Where is Shaq's home in Orlando?

The 12-bedroom, 15-bath estate sits in the gated Isleworth community on Lake Butler.

Does Shaquille O'Neal live in Vegas?

Shaq owned a property in Las Vegas before purchasing the one in Henderson. He spends the vast majority of his time in Atlanta.

How many businesses does Shaq own?

Among other things, Shaquille O’Neal owns 155 Five Guys restaurants, 40 fitness centres, and one movie theatre.