The younger brother of Franz Joseph, Maximilian accepted the imperial Mexican crown at the urging of his ambitious wife, Charlotte of Belgium, in 1864, during a time of serious political conflict. After Maximilian had renounced all his claims in Austria, the couple set off for Mexico, which was riven by the civil war between conservative and revolutionary forces. Despite profound efforts on Maximilian’s part to bring the unrest under control and implement reforms in the country, it proved impossible to restore order. Eventually the emperor was taken prisoner by the revolutionaries under the leadership of Benito Juarez, court-martialled and shot.

Charlotte, who had hurried back to Europe to mobilise military support, was unable to cope with the loss of Maximilian and the crown. Suffering from a persecution mania, she became deranged and lived on at a château in Belgium until her death in 1927.

The bust in the right-hand corner is of Rear-Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff, who escorted the body of Maximilian to Vienna, where he was buried in the Imperial Crypt. Admiral Tegetthoff, who was a personal friend of Maximilian, was famous for his role in the naval battle of Lissa (Vis) in 1866, at which he gained a victory over the superior Italian fleet.

COOKIE SETTINGS

Here you can review and adjust the cookie settings used on the domain. Please note that we also provide cookies from US companies. If you allow these cookies, you are also consenting to possible processing of your personal data collected via these cookies in the USA (Art. 49(1)(a) GDPR).

This is relevant to the extent that, based on recent official decisions as well as case law of the Court of Justice of the European Union, the USA is evidenced as not having an adequate level of data protection (Case C-311/18, Schrems II). Here, it should be borne in mind that access by US authorities (FISA 0702) is not comprehensively restricted by law and does not require the approval of an independent body, and that no relevant legal remedies are available to data subjects in the event of infringements.

If you do not wish this to happen, please accept only necessary cookies.

Select all

Checkbox

Strictly necessary cookies

Cookies are a technical feature necessary for the basic functions of the website. You can block or delete these cookies in your browser settings, but in doing so you risk the danger of preventing several parts of the website from functioning properly.

The information contained in the cookies is not used to identify you personally. These cookies are never used for purposes other than specified here.

PHPSESSID: Necessary cookie for managing php sessions. Expiration: Session. Type: Typo3 Cookie.

cookieNoticeTech: Used to check whether the user allows technically necessary cookies. Expiration: Session. Type: custom.

cookieNoticeGA: Used to check whether the user allows analysis cookies. Expiration: Session. Type: custom.

cookieNoticeFunctional: Used to check whether the user allows social media cookies. Expiration: Session. Type: custom.

cookieNoticeAll: Used to check whether the user allows all cookies. Expiration: Session. Type: custom.

LanguageRecognizer: Used to recognize the language of the user. Expiration: 30 days. Type: custom.

Checkbox

Social Media Cookies / External Content (U.S. Provider)

When calling embedded videos from YouTube or Vimeo, a connection is established with the external providers. Further information can be found at https://policies.google.com/privacy?hl=de&gl=at or https://vimeo.com/cookie_policy

Checkbox

Matomo Analytics

We use Matomo to analyze the use of our website.

_pk_id: Recognises website visitors (anonymously – no personal information is collected on the user).

Type: First-party persistent cookie, duration: 13 months

_pk_ses: Identifies the pages viewed by the same user during the same visit.

(anonymously – no personal information is collected on the user).

Type: First-party persistent cookie, duration: 30 minutes

_pk_ref: This cookie contains information about the referrer (source) from which a user accessed our website.

It allows us to evaluate how the use of our website differs by referrer.

Type: HTML, duration: 6 months

_pk_cvar: This cookie transmits user-defined variables.

Type: HTML, duration: 30 minutes

_pk_hsr: This cookie transfers information about the use of heatmaps; it is optional.

Type: HTML, duration: 30 minutes