Roger Harry Daltrey is an English singer, songwriter, actor and film producer. He is a co-founder and the lead singer of the rock band the Who.Daltrey's hit songs with the Who include "My Generation", "Pinball Wizard", "Won't Get Fooled Again", "Baba O'Riley" and "You Better You Bet". He began his solo career in 1973, while still a member of the Who. Since then he has released ten solo studio albums, five compilation albums, and one live album. His solo hits include "Giving It All Away", "Walking the Dog", "Written on the Wind", "Free Me", "Without Your Love" and "Under a Raging Moon".

The Who are considered one of the most influential rock bands of the 20th century and have sold over 100 million records worldwide. As a member of the band, Daltrey received a Lifetime achievement award from the British Phonographic Industry in 1988, and from the Grammy Foundation in 2001. He was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1990, and the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2005. He and Pete Townshend received Kennedy Center Honors in 2008 and The George and Ira Gershwin Award for Lifetime Musical Achievement at UCLA on 21 May 2016. Daltrey has also been an actor and film producer, with roles in films, theatre, and television. Planet Rock listeners voted him rock's fifth-greatest voice in 2009, and he was ranked number 61 on Rolling Stone's list of the 100 greatest singers of all time in 2010.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Roger Daltrey has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Energetic, Intelligent, Charming, Passionate, Communicative, Intense, and Bold.

Soulful and Understanding

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Roger Daltrey is someone who is a soulful, understanding, and conscious person, who combines smarts with a deep talent for creativity and imagination. A person who is known for being fun and creative.

Strong and Resilient

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Roger Daltrey well know them as someone who can be strong, expansive, and stable like a big tree.

Ambitious and Forceful

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Roger Daltrey as someone who is ambitious, hard-working, determined, and intelligent.

A person who has a knack for identifying opportunities, has amazing concentration and focus, who can work independently, who likes starting new things, and who is somewhat of an intellectual.

Easygoing and Energetic

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Roger Daltrey is someone who has an easygoing nature and a healthy sense of humor, with a mind that requires constant stimulation in order to feel fulfilled.

They are also someone who is confident and creative, and who has a love for starting new projects, inventing new things, and giving back to the community.

Creative and Imaginative

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Roger Daltrey tends to be someone who is sensitive, imaginative, creative, and somewhat of a dreamer. Who is intuitive and compassionate, and who has a friendly, easygoing, calming and relaxing effect on people and for whom friends and family mean the world.

Some of Roger Daltrey's challenges

While Roger Daltrey has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Roger Daltrey can be Unrealistic, Indecisive, Hypocritical, Self-centered, Complicated, Brusque, and Relentless.

Indecisive and Unrealistic

One of Roger Daltrey's key challenges is that they are someone who can come across as indecisive and unrealistic.

Roger Daltrey must also exercise caution as they can have a hard time reconciling wants and needs, and can be short-tempered and aggressive, and can have difficulty dealing with responsibility, authority, or criticism.

Relentless and Inflexible

Roger Daltrey is someone who can be relentless, obsessive, and inflexible, who can be confrontational with work colleagues, can have difficulty communicating feelings and be somewhat reclusive, and who can be self-destructive, overindulgent, and extravagant.

Lethargic and Unrealistic

Finally, Roger Daltrey also can be too soft, lazy and lethargic, and who can have difficulty finding others who share a similarly dreamy outlook on life.