Today, the Washington Nationals announced the broadcast schedule for the 2024 season of Nationals Spring Training in West Palm Beach, Fla. The Nationals will open the Grapefruit League schedule at home at CACTI Park of the Palm Beaches against the Houston Astros on Saturday, Feb. 24, at 6:05 p.m.

Along with scheduled Grapefruit League games, fans will have opportunities to view top Nationals prospects during MLB’s Spring Breakout Series in Florida and during ON DECK: NATIONALS FUTURES GAME in D.C, where Washington Nationals prospects will face up-and-comers from the New York Mets on Friday, March 15, as part of MLB’s inaugural Spring Breakout Series, beginning at 3:10 p.m. from Port St. Lucie and available via radio broadcast streamed live on nats.com.

Additionally, The ON DECK: NATIONALS FUTURES GAME will conclude the club’s 2024 exhibition season, showcasing top prospects from across the organization’s Minor League system alongside current Nationals Major Leaguers. (First pitch for ON DECK: NATIONALS FUTURES GAME is scheduled for 12:05 p.m. on Tuesday, March 26, at Nationals Park and will be broadcast on MASN and 106. The Fan.)

In addition to game programming, 106.7 The Fan will host four editions of “Nats Spring Training Live!”, the 60-minute talk show hosted by Nationals radio voices Dave Jageler and Charlie Slowes.

“Nats Spring Training Live!” programs are free to attend and feature special guest appearances by Nationals players, coaches and personalities. The shows broadcast live on 106.7 The Fan from 7:00–8:00 p.m. on Sunday, Feb. 25, March 3 and March 10 from Duffy’s Sports Bar Clematis St., and on Saturday, March 16, from Duffy’s Village Blvd. The March 10 radio show will also stream live on nats.com.

Once again, Nationals fans will hear familiar voices throughout the Spring Training and regular seasons with the return of all five Nationals on-air broadcasters. MASN telecasts will feature color commentator Kevin Frandsen, while Bob Carpenter and Dan Kolko will split play-by-play duties. Jageler and Slowes will be on the call for all 16 radio broadcasts in addition to the “Nats Spring Training Live!” shows.

The Nationals’ full 2024 Spring Training broadcast schedule can be found below.

The Nats Report is a reader-supported independent project that offers free and paid subscriptions. The Nats Report is not affiliated with the Washington Nationals.

Those who opt for the paid edition are providing vital assistance to bolster our independent coverage of the Washington Nationals and Major League Baseball.