Like the rest of France, Paris uses the Euro (€) as its official currency.

The Euro is widely accepted throughout the city for all transactions, including purchases, dining, and transportation.

The Euro is the official currency of France and most other EU members.

You will find 7 denominations of Euro as legal tender in Paris, France, and all other areas where the Euro is the legal currency.

These 7 denominations, effective in the European Union, are €5, €10, €20, €50, €100, €200, and €500.

Euro Exchange Rates

Credit Cards/Debit Cards

Using Cash in France

Understanding Euro Exchange Rates

You can find the exchange rate by looking at the foreign exchange market and the currency's value.

The country’s economic and political conditions further affect these currency rates.

You will always study exchange rates in relevance, not independence.

You must know the exchange rate between your currency and the one you want to convert.

As of May 2024, the following exchange rates apply.

£1 equals approximately €1.16, and 100 GBP equals approximately €116. The value of the Euro tends to hover at around €1.05-€1.15.

$1 equals approximately €0.94, and $100 equals approximately €92. The overall value of the dollar tends to fluctuate between €0.80 - €0.90, and the euro has only recently fallen in value compared to the dollar.

₹100 equals roughly €1.12, and ₹1,000 is equal to around €112. The value of the Indian Rupee has remained largely consistent over the past 5 years, never increasing or decreasing by more than €0.04.

How to Use Credit or Debit Cards in France

Most shopping malls, restaurants, and hotels accept credit or debit cards including Mastercard, American Express, or Visa in Paris France.

So, it's better to carry your card with a small amount of cash in hand for urgent needs.

Payment method for credit or debit card in France:

In France, credit and debit cards primarily use a chip and PIN system for transactions.

So, you will be prompted to enter a PIN to authorize your card payment.

Make sure to memorize your PIN or set it up before your trip.

Fees associated with card transactions:

The fee associated with credit or debit card transactions or ATM withdrawals depends on your own bank.

Foreign transactions are typically higher than local ones. So, reach out to your bank to get the appropriate answer.

That said, you should expect to pay fees of around 1% - 3% of the transaction amount.

Using Cash in France

Why is keeping cash important in Paris? The answer is simple. Not every vendor will have card services.

You might want to join some free walking tours in Paris where numerous coffee shops, wine stores, or snack bars may not accept cards.

Hence, having some Euros in cash can be convenient in situations where card payments are not accepted or for transactions where cash is preferred.

Where can I find ATMs in Paris?

You can find ATMs known as DABs in Paris at Banks, airports, in towns and cities, and near shopping malls.

Locate your nearest ATM that provides foreign transactions through the given links:

Master Card

Visa

Maestro

American Express

Discover

Are Francs Still Accepted in France?

No, Francs are not accepted in France now.

The current currency in France is the Euro (€). As of 2000, Francs are no longer accepted as legal tender.

They introduced the Euro to reduce the costs and complications of exchanging currencies and promote stability and cohesion within the EU.

You can visit banks or currency exchange offices to exchange French Francs for Euros.

When it comes to France, this exchange option typically is not provided by banks unless you are a customer living in the country.

Instead, you'll have more luck at a Bureaux de Change office.

You can expect the value of this outdated currency to be far lower than the current legal tender.

Some sources indicate you can expect the value of 1 Franc to be $0.15-$0.20.

France in the European Union

France is a member of the European Union where 27 countries collaborate and work for economic and social prosperity and strive for global peace.

In 2002, the EU decided to make the Euro the general currency all over Europe.

Comparison of currency used in France to other EU countries:

Not only France, but most other EU countries such as Germany, Austria, Finland, Portugal, Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Netherlands, Italy, Malta, Luxembourg, and Belgium also use the Euro as their legal tender.

This standardization of currency throughout the EU helps these countries overcome the barrier of currency exchanges while traveling and trading throughout the EU.

Should I exchange money before I travel to France?

Keep a small amount of currency before traveling to cover immediate expenses upon arrival.

Yet, obtaining Euros upon arrival in France is often more cost-effective, as exchange rates and fees may be more favorable in local banks or currency exchange offices.

Can you use USD in France?

While some larger establishments, such as hotels or high-end retailers, may accept US dollars (USD) in France, it is not widely accepted as payment.

You can exchange US dollars for Euros at banks, currency exchange offices, or ATMs in France.

How much is $100 US in Paris?

As of May 2024, $100 US in Paris is 92 EUR.

However, the exact value of $100 US dollars in Paris would depend on the current exchange rate between the US dollar and the Euro.

Which is stronger euro or the dollar?

The exchange rate between the Euro and the US dollar is a key indicator of their relative strength, which can vary daily.

As of May 2024, the euro is stronger than the dollar, and this is usually the case.

What is the best way to exchange currency in France?

If you need euros in France urgently, the best method is to go to currency exchange booths at airports or exchange offices in major cities.

Though it's costly, this service provides you with urgently needed money.

If you have time to plan ahead, the online exchange is the better way for the current exchange in France.

Is it cheaper to use a credit card or debit card in France?

Generally, debit card transactions are cheaper and credit cards incur heavy fees while abroad.

So, keeping your debit card in France is a better option.

Yet, the taxes and withdrawal fees may vary from bank to bank.

It's advisable to check with your bank in advance and confirm if it's cheaper to use a credit card or debit card in France.