The currency of the European Union (EU) is called the euro. It was introduced as a noncash monetary unit in 1999, and in 2002 it became the sole currency of participating EU countries. At that time the national currencies of these countries—such as French francs, German deutsche marks, and Italian lire—ceased to be legal tender. The euro is represented by the symbol €.

The euro had its origins in the Maastricht Treaty, which established the European Union upon taking effect in 1993. The agreement called for the creation of the European Monetary Union (EMU) with a common currency, the euro, and set strict criteria for countries that wanted to participate. Countries were required, for example, to have annual budget deficits not exceeding 3 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) and public debt under 60 percent of GDP.

The EMU came into existence on January 1, 1999, with the participation of 11 EU members—Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain. The United Kingdom and Sweden delayed joining, and voters in Denmark narrowly rejected the euro in a referendum. Greece initially failed to meet the economic requirements but was admitted in January 2001 after overhauling its economy. In 2007 Slovenia became the first former communist country to adopt the euro. Other countries that adopted the currency include Malta and Cyprus (the Greek Cypriot sector) in 2008, Slovakia in 2009, Estonia in 2011, Latvia (2014), and Lithuania (2015). The participating countries are known as the euro area, euroland, or the euro zone. (The euro is also the official currency in several areas outside the EU, including Andorra, Montenegro, Kosovo, and San Marino.)

For its first three years, the euro was used only by financial markets and certain businesses. It was not introduced to the general public until January 1, 2002, when euro banknotes and coins appeared in participating countries. After February 28, 2002, the euro became the sole currency of those countries. There are seven euro banknotes, ranging in denomination from 5 to 500, and eight euro coins, ranging in denomination from one cent to two euros.

The euro is managed by the European Central Bank (ECB), which was established in 1998. Based in Frankfurt, Germany, the ECB is an independent and neutral body headed by an appointed president who is approved by all EU member countries to serve an eight-year term.