In honor of the life of Robert Michael Nesmith, who sadly passed one year ago on December 10, 2021, I made a Facebook cover photo banner for him. It features a photo I took of him, a photo from his past [taken from the set of the movie Head], lyrics of Michael’s, and some free stock photography.

Please feel free to use this image!

As I posted in the online Facebook group, Michael Nesmith Memories:

“As many of you know, I knew Michael Nesmith very well. We were very close. And before I knew Michael in real life, in person, I “knew” Michael through his music and his words–as many of you here also know him. I was a huge fan of all of his music, his albums marked whole chapters of my life, his music and energy gave me the tools to paint my own life with depth, his energy in his albums comforted me when I felt truly alone, his humility in his writing showed he often felt much of the same struggles… He gave me a divine beauty that came into my mind from his work that helped me find and believe in God: helped me believe in the higher, sacred order, believe in our souls, believe in love.

And so, I wanted to create something beautiful in his honor: and I will continue to try to create beautiful things as he inspires me. And I wanted to share it with you guys who also love his music, and his writing.

I have been creating more digital art lately, like desktop wallpapers [LOL I’m dating myself here, not sure how much people even still are on computers], so this time I decided to make something the dimensions for the Facebook cover photo. I put many of his lyrics in the photo, perhaps hard to read, but I’m sure you all know all his lyrics anyway. And if you don’t, I highly recommend you go on that journey.

I wasn’t sure where this art was going, but then, like so many things, it “came to me” as if a higher force was making it for me… And it came out like a burst of his spiritual energy, his light, his wisdom, his undying force.

Please enjoy. And let’s keep the light of Michael’s life alive. “