“The Nest” (107 min., Rated R for sexual content, some nudity, language, incessant smoking, teenage drinking, and drug references). Rating: 7 out of 10.

If you’re looking for a film that fictionalizes the breakdown of a family from overextending your investments and get-rich-quick schemes, then “The Nest” is it. Based on an original screenplay, and perhaps inspired by any number of real-life situations, and skillfully directed by Sean Durkin, “The Nest” is the perfect film on what NOT to do to stay solvent, use good judgment, and by all means…don’t count your chickens before they’re hatched. The grass is not always greener on the other side of fence.

I know, there’s a lot of mottoes in all of that…the sort of cautionary wisdom that goes into guiding your life – and family – to success and happiness. Just what is the measurement for happiness? Well, if you watch this movie, it’s all money. It’s a cautionary tale about an overly ambitious businessman, focused on the possible “what-ifs” on making tons of money, a loving husband and attentive father who simply cannot let go of trying to better himself and his family by making “more” money. He feels it leads to “more” happiness…a way to keep the family together. If he thinks material wealth is the answer, then he’s sadly mistaken…and this film is a perfect example of how good intentions can fall flat on their face.

Rory (Jude Law), wife Allison (Carrie Coon), 17-yr old daughter Samantha (Oona Roche) and 10-yr old son Ben (Charlie Shotwell) live a very comfortable life in the U.S. with Rory a successful commodities broker and Allison happy raising and caring for horses. At the outset, all seems to be well…there’s passion in Rory and Allison’s life…the kids seem well-adjusted…and they have plenty of money to basically do whatever they want, within reason. As a Brit who transplanted his family to the U.S., early scenes indicate something is troubling Rory. He’s restless and not satisfied with being moderately successful…he wants higher status. He contacts a former boss in London about coming back, which would mean uprooting the family for the 4th time in 10 years, a move he knows won’t be well received at home.

Before Allison can voice her vehement objections and demand they stay put where they’re happy – and the kids are content with school and friends – Rory has committed to the new job and already leased out a centuries-old estate in the idyllic countryside outside London. He fabricates a story to Allison, who as portrayed by Carrie Coon, is no easy pushover with spunk and plucky spirit that his former boss reached out to him with an offer he just couldn’t refuse. This is just one of many fabrications that Rory spins both at work with clients and at home, sending the delicate balance of the family into a downward direction.

Set in the mid-80s when global economies were just emerging and the financial climate far different than it is in today’s volatile and fragile markets – his fanciful desire to achieve the “American Dream” is severely severed by his obsession to find the golden egg at the end of the rainbow. Things between Rory and Allison quickly erode as she’s on to his lies and deceit, putting his needs ahead of theirs, and overextending their investments to the point of bankruptcy. The kids start exhibiting mistrust and anger at their mom, as if she’s to blame for letting dad lead them to misery. It’s unfair the treatment leveled by Samantha at her mother – a display of blatant disobedience and disrespect that’s off the charts nasty.

Rory’s job is in jeopardy because he’s overconfident his bosses will “buy” what he’s selling…Allison’s beloved horse gets sick…Ben becomes more distant and aloof…and Samantha explodes with resentment towards her mother. And, yet, with everything crashing down upon them, and the return to England deemed to be a miserable failure, it’s a lesson learned that big ideas don’t always result in big success – Rory still hasn’t learned his lesson as evident in the last shot of the film. He simply doesn’t have a clue on knowing his limitations, having brought his family to the brink of destruction – the family he truly loves.

Another lesson learned in this tale of woe is: don’t bite off more than you can chew (I know, another motto).

“The Nest” is being released via IFC Films, exclusively at selected theaters on September 18th.