Due to the location of Sri Lanka, within the tropics between 5o 55' to 9o 51' North latitude and between 79o 42' to 81o 53' East longitude, the climate of the island could be characterized as tropical.

The central part of the southern half of the island is mountainous with heights more than 2.5 Km. The core regions of the central highlands contain many complex topographical features such as ridges, peaks, plateaus, basins, valleys and escarpments. The remainder of the island is practically flat except for several small hills that rise abruptly in the lowlands. These topographical features strongly affect the spatial patterns of winds, seasonal rainfall, temperature, relative humidity and other climatic elements, particularly during the monsoon season.

The Climate of Sri Lanka is dominated by the above mentioned topographical features of the country and the Southwest and Northeast monsoons regional scale wind regimes. The Climate experienced during 12 months period in Sri Lanka can be characterized in to 4 climate seasons as follows,

First Inter-Monsoon Season - March - April

Southwest Monsoon Season - May - September

Second Inter-Monsoon Season - October - November

Northeast Monsoon Season - December - February

Best Time To Visit

The western and southern areas experience their monsoon season during May to September while the northern and eastern areas are affected by the monsoon between October to January. The island is certainly a year-round destination as while one area is might be off-limits due to poor weather, the other region is likely to be experiencing good conditions.

The recommended time for a Sri Lankan getaway is during either coast's dry season - April to November for the eastern coast and December to March for the west coast and central highlands. Christmas and the New Year are particularly popular times to go to Sri Lanka, while July and August represent festival season on the island – if travelling during either time it is recommended to book well in advance to guarantee accommodation.

Required Clothing

The weather in Sri Lanka can be unpredictable during any season so depending on where in the country you’re going, it’s best to take layers. The central highlands can be significantly cooler throughout the year, so you’ll need warmer clothes here. Lightweight rainwear is also recommended any time of year.