Philip Rivers approached the temporary podium, set up behind an end zone on a UC Irvine practice field, and started taking questions from a group of reporters. It was late in the afternoon on Aug. 3, and the Chargers and Rams had just wrapped up their second of two joint training-camp practices.

I had started on the Chargers beat less than two weeks earlier, and this was my first time at one of Rivers’ press availabilities. I noticed immediately that the quarterback had a favorite pet word. While most people say “um” or “like” when trying to gather their thoughts between phrases, Rivers, in his Alabama twang, prefers the word “shoot.”

Here is a sampling from that day’s media session, which lasted just shy of seven minutes.

On how the offense performed against the Rams’ defense: “Shoot, there’s a lot of good versus good out there. I mean, shoot, this team was in the Super Bowl last year.”

On the Chargers’ offensive line, which at that point was still shifting players around to find the right combination: “It’s a group, shoot, that we’re excited about.”

On facing former teammate Eric Weddle, who had signed with the Rams in the offseason: “Shoot, by the time you get to when we would play these guys, I think we both would know each other pretty well. So I don’t think there’s any secrets.”

On participating in a joint practice so early in training camp: “Shoot, we’ve been in a week. So when you practice, we’ve had six or seven practices against ourselves, plus the walkthroughs. I think it was right on time for us.”

On possibly eliminating preseason games, considering how productive joint practices are: “I feel like this is enough for me. But with other guys, shoot, you need to go out there and get a taste of it in the real, live deal. And guys have kickstarted their careers that otherwise may have never been known.”

On how he motivated himself going into his 16th NFL season: “Shoot, I mean, I love to play, I love to compete, and I think you want to be there for your teammates and chase that ultimate goal, which we’ve yet to accomplish.”

It was interesting, but I didn’t think about it again until after the Chargers opened their season with an overtime victory over the Colts. I was bouncing around the locker room and talking to different players. That’s when I realized that “shoot” was not just a favorite word for Rivers.

Everyone was using it.

I asked safety Adrian Phillips about the game-tying touchdown T.Y. Hilton scored late in regulation. “You never want to give up that play,” Phillips said. “But shoot, he made a play. He made a great play. That’s why he’s an elite receiver.”

I asked fullback Derek Watt about the speech Rivers gave to the team before overtime. “He thought maybe people were feeling like, shoot, it’s over,” Watt said. “No. We haven’t lost anything.”

I asked Hunter Henry about having to sit out the final few plays of the fourth quarter after he took hit to his knee (Henry ended up suffering a fracture on the play). “Shoot, I hated missing those last few snaps,” Henry said.

Henry also said the word when discussing Rivers’ speech: “Shoot, it’s a long game, especially when you got to overtime in the first game, with conditioning, getting back into it.” And he used it again when I asked about the crucial catch he made in the game-winning overtime drive. “Shoot,” Henry said, “I kind of just tried to tempo it down because I felt that safety there.”

A clear trend was developing, and I was fascinated.

Did any of these guys actually say the word “shoot” before meeting Philip Rivers? Or had Rivers’ unique lexicon infiltrated the vernacular of his teammates?

That week, offensive coordinator Ken Whisenhunt took the podium in the media room for his meeting with reporters ahead of the Chargers’ Week 2 matchup at the Lions.

He was asked about Detroit pass rusher Trey Flowers.

“Shoot, every week they have somebody,” Whisenhunt said. “That’s the way it is in this league.”

This had reached a breaking point. I was determined to find answers.

Whisenhunt talked on Thursday. I approached Phillips in the locker room Friday. He was kind enough to pause the Netflix show he was watching to indulge my completely ridiculous questions.

I told him he’d used “shoot” in an answer in the locker room after the win over the Colts.

“Did I???” Phillips said, flabbergasted. “I didn’t even realize it.”

Phillips went on to say that he thinks it’s prevalent primarily “because you don’t want to cuss.”

But then he paused to think about it for a moment. “You hear Philip say it a lot,” Phillips said. “So it probably sticks on.”

Rivers obviously says “shoot” all the time when talking to reporters. But in order for it to have spread to his teammates, he must also say it around them.

“The same person y’all see is the same person Philip is,” Phillips confirmed. “Ain’t no faking for the camera. No. ‘Shoot, daggum, come on, darn it.’ He says all that.”

As I was talking to Phillips, I mentioned some of the other players who said “shoot” after the Colts win, including Watt.

Watt heard his name and stopped at Phllips’ locker.

“Shoot!” Phillips said to Watt, who was standing behind me.

I turned around and told Watt what I’d noticed.

“All you guys say it now,” I said.

“Shoot, man,” Watt said, showing off his dry sense of humor. He gave us a wide-eyed look and walked away.

“It just rolls off the tongue,” Phillips said.

Phillips was helpful, but I was not satisfied.

The next week, I brought up the topic up with Austin Ekeler, another shoot connoisseur. The running back was intrigued. I asked if Rivers’ language had trickled down.

“Shoot, when I —” Ekeler started to answer and then caught himself.

“I just said it right now!” he exclaimed.

He laughed, and then continued.

“I feel like you’re just around a lot of guys, you just start to morph how you guys talk to each other,” Ekeler said.

Ekeler noted that Henry says it more than anyone else. Henry hails from Little Rock, Ark. So maybe this is a southern thing?

“I don’t know if it’s Alabama,” Phillips said. “That’s just Phil. That’s just how Phil is.”

Ekeler provided a more concrete answer. He was sure that he did not say the word “shoot” before he met Rivers as a rookie in 2017.

Ekeler agreed with Phillips that Rivers probably first started saying “shoot” to avoid swearing. Rivers, of course, is a devout Catholic.

“But it’s just been passed down,” Ekeler said. “It’s spread.”

Ekeler then got philosophical and started riffing on what he called “the social culture” in locker rooms.

“We’re just around each other so much, so we just start to become one in a weird way,” Ekeler said. “In our language, in the way we talk to each other.”

He mentioned another word that has permeated the locker room, a Henry special: “Beast.”

I asked Ekeler to use the term in context.

“‘What’s up, beast?’ Or, ‘Hey, beast,’” Ekeler said. “There’s probably a bunch more that we don’t even actually realize.”

But then there are the words that have not stuck. “Dadgummit” is another common Riversism.

He is the only Charger who says that.

“It’s not as rhythmic for people, I guess,” Ekeler postulated.

There’s still time. Maybe it will catch on.

Shoot, you just never know.

(Top photo of Philip Rivers: Jordon Kelly / Icon Sportswire via Getty Images)