The Boalkhali Upazila is one of the areas in the Chattogram District, which is located near the Karnaphuli River. To be precise, the upazila is located about 12 kilometers from the Chattogram Sadar and southeast of the Karnaphuli River. It is a developing and growing location right next to the Chattogram City Corporation localities, making it ideal for anyone looking into the Boalkhali area guide.

The land area of the upazila is 137.27 square kilometers, and it has a population of around 2,35,483, with over 42,500 families living there. That makes Boalkhali an averagely populated area. On top of that, since it is one of the areas connected to the Chattogram ports, Boalkhali is an important location for trade and business. That is also why it has several growing industrial zones and farms.

The old Kalurghat Bridge, which goes through Arkan Road and over the Karnaphuli River, is one of the main means of communication in the area. People can also travel to Boalkhali using the Shah Amanat Bridge and Chattogram-Cox’s Bazar Highway through Patiya. There are also several train stations in Boalkhali, one of which runs on the Kalurghat Bridge. Unfortunately, the bridge has been deemed old and risky, and it will be reconstructed soon to ensure safe transportation and communication facilities.

Boalkhali is a progressive area where you will likely come across many concrete and tin-shaded houses as well as a few straw houses. One government data shows that there are no landless or homeless people in the area. Many reputed public figures, including actress Kobori Sarwar, singer Shefali Ghosh, litterateur Atul Chandra Datta, and Liberation War Birangana writer Rama Chowdhury, are from Boalkhali.

Other than the Karnaphuli River or Boalkhali Canal, this upazila has several tourist attractions. Some of the oldest architects and locations in the Upazila are the Sreepur Shahi Bura Masjid, Sri Sri Kalachand Thakurbari Temple, Medosh Munir Ashram/Hermitage, Lalar Dighi, etc. Anyone who wants to enjoy its natural landscape should visit the Karnaphuli Riverview spot and the Sreepur Bangabandhu Riverview, Rangunia Bat Cave, Koroldenga Hill, etc.

The Boalkhali upazila is also religiously and culturally diverse, with Muslims, Hindus, Buddhists, and Christians living harmoniously. The government has taken various initiatives to improve and develop the lifestyle and communications in the area and add more amenities.