Geography

It has 45,775 households and a total area of 246.58 km². The two main rivers are Karnaphuli and Halda. Raozan is surrounded by Fatikchhari Upazila on the north, Boalkhali Upazila and karnafuli river on the south, Rangunia and Kawkhali(Rangamati) Upazilas on the east, and Hathazari and Fatikchhari Upazila on the west.

Demographics

According to the 1991 Bangladesh census, Raozan had a population of 274,344. Males constituted 50.58% of the population, while females constituted about 49.42% of the population. The average literacy rate is 52.5% (7+ years), above the national average of 32.4%.

Administration

Raozan has 1 municipality, 15 Unions/Wards, 68 Mauzas/Mahallas, and 76 villages. It has a fire station and two health complexes.

Notable residents

A. B. M. Fazle Karim Chowdhury, MP. Chairman of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on the ministry of Railways, president of the Inter Parliamentary Union (Ipo)

A. B. M. Mohiuddin Chowdhury, Former Mayor of the Chittagong City Corporation.

Abdullah Al Haroon, former Member of Parliament; Freedom Fighter; Forerunner of language movement in 1952; philanthropist

Abudullah Al Noman Ex-Minister, Bangladesh Nationalist Party

Benimadhab Barua, First D-Lit in Asia.

Fazlul Qadir Chaudhry - Former acting President of Pakistan,Former Speaker of Pakistan National Assembly, President of Muslim League.

Giasuddin Quader Chowdhury - Former MP, President of Chittagong BNP (North) of Bangladesh Nationalist Party

Saber Hossain Chowdhury, MP, Member of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on the Ministry of Environment, Former Deputy Minister, Former Political Secretary to the Prime Minister, Vice President of the Inter Parliamentary Union

Salahuddin Quader Chowdhury ex-Minister, Bangladesh Nationalist Party, recently hanged for proving to be a war criminal of 1971

Shabana (actress), Film actress, producer *

Surya Sen, anti-British revolutionary

Zia Uddin Bablu ex-Minister, Bangladesh Jatiyo party.

Rupankar Chowdhury Social Helper . Poet & Literature.

Natun Chandra Sinha Social Helper.

Nabin Chandra Sen Poet & Literature.