The Walking Dead’s Jeffrey Dean Morgan and former One Tree Hill star Hilarie Burton recently swapped life in Los Angeles for a more hands-on home life on Mischief Farm.

And just one look at their social media accounts is enough to make fans want to pack up and move to their own Dutchess County farm in upstate New York.

The couple and their two children – son Gus, 10 and two-year-old daughter, George – have called the idyllic farm home since 2018.

So far they’ve been pretty open about the twist and turns that come with being landowners in Rhinebeck.

In fact, Hilarie is now revealing all about living in Hudson Valley’s outdoors in her new memoir The Rural Diaries.

The book chronicles all aspects of farm life including chopping wood, making dandelion wine and building chicken coops.

Meanwhile, the star’s fans already know a bit about the large menagerie of animals being raised on the couple’s farm.

Highland cattle, miniature donkeys, dogs, chickens, ducks and even alpaca’s all call Mischief Farm home.

Oh, and let’s not forge the cows and Diane the emu as well.

Fans have been getting a better look at the pair’s home thanks to their new AMC show, Friday Night In with The Morgans.

But the world is still yet to get a full look at the farm in its entirety just yet.

What we do know is that the couple created a studio room to film the show because they are currently raising ducks in their living room.

And Hilarie has been busy making protective face masks for hospitals in their workshop room.

The White Collar star recently revealed how they came up with the name of the farm, writing: ‘So many years ago, when we first toured the farm, we stumbled upon a couple of pet headstones on the property. Hand carved. Both creatures named Mischief.

‘He’s for sure the animals whisperer, so I try my best to be a good apprentice. The alpaca and llama make it easy. These boys were our first farm babies.’

From the huge woodlands that they call a back garden to their quite cabin style kitchen, the Burton family are truly living that farm life.

The couple isn’t alone in their adventure either, they revitalized the town’s beloved candy store, Samuel’s Sweet Shop with actor Paul Rudd and his wife Julie.

Can we just move in now? Pretty please!

Got A Showbiz Story?