Hilarie Burton and Jeffrey Dean Morgan attended the AMC Networks UpFronts event in New York City on Tuesday evening.

The 40-year-old actress and her 56-year-old husband cut stylish figures as they posed for photos.

The actor - who supported his wife after she referred to Candace Cameron Bure as a 'bigot' - is currently preparing for the release of his upcoming series The Walking Dead: Dead City.

His wife Burton wowed in a bright orange jacket and matching wide-legged pants for the occasion, which was attended by a number of Morgan's current and former co-stars.

The One Tree Hill actress modeled a sexy black lace blouse with a plunging neckline that showcased her smooth décolletage.

She accessorized with several pieces of jewelry, including a choker necklace and gold earrings.

Her gorgeous gray-to-brunette hair fell onto her shoulders and contrasted well with the bright tones of her clothing.

Morgan opted for an all-black outfit that included a double-breasted jacket and leather shoes.

The Losers star also posed for photos with several of his former castmates, including Danai Gurira, Andrew Lincoln and Norman Reedus.

Burton and Morgan initially began dating in 2009, and their son Gus, aged 13, was born the following year.

The pair went on to bring their daughter George Virginia, aged five, into their lives in 2018.

The happy couple subsequently tied the knot during a ceremony that was officiated by Jensen Ackles in 2019.

Morgan began starring as Negan in The Walking Dead during its seventh season, having made his debut as the character during its sixth run of episodes.

The performer portrayed the character up until the show's final season, which concluded last November.

Burton guest starred as Negan's wife Lucille during the horror drama's tenth run of episodes.

Morgan is currently set to reprise his role as Negan in The Walking Dead: Dead City, in which he will star alongside Lauren Cohan, who will also remain in her old part as Maggie Greene.

Development on the spinoff program was revealed to the public in March of last year.

It was revealed that the actors were expected to return to their roles at the time.

The show will follow the characters as they head into a zombie-filled Manhattan in an attempt to find Maggie's kidnapped son Hershel.

Other members of the program's cast include Gaius Charles, Zeljko Ivanek and Michael Anthony.

Physical production took place from July to October of last year, with much of filming occurring in New Jersey.

The Walking Dead: Dead City's first season will run for six episodes, the first of which is set to debut on June 18.