Samuel West proud of his mother Prunella Scales

Samuel West has featured in a string of movies and TV series including Notting Hill with Hugh Grant, and Howards End with Emma Thompson.

But, for the past few years, he has played Siegfried Farnon in Channel 5 hit All Creatures Great and Small.

However, what many fans may not realise, is that Samuel was born into a very famous family.

He is the son of actress Prunella Scales and actor Timothy West. He was also the grandson of actor Lockwood West, who died in 1989.

His brother, Joseph West, is also a famous actor who he has worked alongside in various projects.

READ MORE: GB News host pays tribute to ‘brave’ Anne Diamond after ‘difficult’ diagnosis

Who are Samuel West's mother and father?

Samuel has a close relationship with his parents as he has appeared alongside them in a number of films.

Prunella is most famous for her role as Sybil Fawlty in the BBC comedy Fawlty Towers.

She also played Queen Elizabeth II in A Question of Attribution.

Later on in her career, the actress fronted a documentary series titled Great Canal Journeys, which featured her famous husband and sons.

Timothy West has also had an extensive career appearing in Coronation Street as Eric Babbage and Stan Carter in EastEnders.

He also starred in Not Going Out as the original Geoffrey Adams.

Don't miss...

Eamonn Holmes drops F-bomb live on air after another attack on Holly and Phil [VIDEO]

The Repair Shop expert opens up on loss as she pays tribute to co-star [INSIGHT]

Emmerdale death as Caleb Milligan is thrown off woodland ridge [LATEST]

Speaking about what it was like growing up with famous parents, Samuel said: “The problem with childhoods is that you only get one of them, so you never know what other peoples are quite like.

“At school, people used to say, 'What’s it like having famous parents?' because my mum was in Fawlty Towers when I was, well she did the first series when I was nine, she played Sybil.

“And my dad had just done Edward VII for ITV playing the King in a 13-part television series, and this was when they were only three channels, so if you were on television in the '70s, you were basically famous."

He added in the Welcome to Yorkshire, Talkshire podcast with Caroline Nickle: “There wasn’t a lot of other stuff to do, and people at school often said, ‘What’s it like having famous parents?’ and I thought, 'The trouble is I don’t really know what it’s like not to have the parents I’ve got.'

“I mean they were very nice to people when they said, ‘Can we have your autograph please?’ generally fulfilled those requests kindly and promptly.

“There were times when I wished I’d seen a bit more of them when I was young, they were quite often on tour, my dad did a lot of classical touring with a company called Prospect."

Invalid email

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. Read our Privacy Policy

Who was Samuel West's grandfather?

Samuel's grandfather made his debut on stage in 1926 before turning his attention to television.

He starred in the likes of Just William, No Hiding Place, and The Prisoner.

Later in his career, Lockwood appeared in numerous BBC productions and he played the role of Arthur Tyson in Waggoners' Walk.

The actor died of cancer on March 28, 1989.

Who are Samuel West's siblings?

Actor Joseph West is one of Samuel's siblings and they featured in the TV series Edward VII.

The pair played siblings as they were the sons of the title character, portrayed by their own father Timothy.

Joseph has also appeared alongside his father on Piers Morgan's Life Stories.

When speaking about their childhood, Samuel told The Guardian in 2011: "We are very close because we have similar tastes and he still makes me laugh like no one else.

"I don't think we were nightmare children, but I was certainly fairly hyperactive and a bit precocious – so we were a handful."

Samuel also has a half-sister called Juliet who decided to stay away from the limelight.

Juliet is Timothy's hairdresser daughter from his first marriage and came to live with his family when Samuel was just eight.