They surprised fans by secretly tying-the-knot earlier this month after 10 years together.

And Hilarie Burton revealed on Wednesday that she chose to marry fellow actor Jeffrey Dean Morgan as she 'didn't want to go another day by being inauthentic.'

The 37-year-old explained her decision to People at Lifetime's It's a Wonderful Lifetime Holiday Movie Press Junket.

'We had built this life together,' she said.

'We’d had kids together. I think there comes a point where you just don’t want to go another day by being inauthentic about it.'

Hilarie and Jeffrey are parents to son Gus, nine, and daughter George, 19-months.

She continued to explain that the family-of-four already don't live a conventional lifestyle so marriage was important to be a form of a 'concrete truth.'

'I have a book coming out in March with Harper One called The Rural Diaries, and it really is about the choices that we made leaving L.A. to go live on a farm in upstate New York,' she continued.

'It’s not a convenient lifestyle, certainly for our business, but those choices that we made to create that life have really forced us to be, yeah, more authentic with our choices, like the animals have to be fed, the wood has to be chopped, and so we wanted to be a concrete truth, like those things.'

Hilarie recently shared a time lapse video of her wedding dress fitting ahead of her big day.

She confessed in her lengthy social media post that she had 'never wanted a wedding dress' and was very nervous following a horrible past experience.

'I never wanted a wedding dress. “I don’t want a white dress and I absolutely dont want a strapless dress!" Then I met @carolhannahbride,' she began.

I’d come across her designs on one of those massive bridal sites, while I juggled my kids this summer. As I consulted with our outstanding stylist and all around genius advisor Jeanne Yang, I kept using Carol’s designs as points of reference. “Architectural. Asymmetrical. Not too girly.”'

She continued that her stylist went off and got in contact with Carol directly.

'I was nervous going into their salon. I’d tried wedding dresses on once before and it was a miserable experience. Pretentious. Pompous. But not this time.'

'Carol and her whole team knew what I wanted without me even having to say it. She led me to this dress right away and from the moment I tried it in it was a no brainer.'

Hilarie added that after everything she found that a white strapless number was perfect for her.

'I had been wrong. I did want a white strapless dress. I wanted THIS one.'

The One Tree Hill and Walking Dead star married during the first weekend of October.

The beauty shared the news on social media while dismissing all former speculation that they had wed beforehand.

'I just want to put it out there that WE GOT MARRIED! For real,' the actress began at the time.

'We’ve lived as husband and wife for a decade... For years, publications have reported that we got married in 2014 or 2015 and that I’ve been married and divorced before. All untrue.'