If you've got a favourite TV show, chances are that, at some point, Jeffrey Dean Morgan has been in it.

But why are we only now coming round to the fact that that actor one of the most alluring chaps on our radar?

Here's your need to know...

What are some Jeffrey Dean Morgan movies and TV shows?

SO MANY. Jeffrey is a busy chap. Movies include PS I Love You (WHAT A FILM) and TV shows include (deep breath) The Walking Dead, The Good Wife, Grey's Anatomy, Supernatural and EVEN an epsiode of The O.C. where he's a prisoner who gets a visit from one Sandy Cohen...

Who is Jeffrey Dean Morgan in The Walking Dead?

He's Negan! The new guy! The new bad guy for season seven that is. He's the leader of the Survivors and is described by Walking Dead fan pages as 'A physically imposing, charismatic, brutal, smart, ferocious, frightening, hilarious, inappropriate, oddly friendly, fun loving sociopath that is both a leader of men and a killer of men. He has both a practical and emotional intelligence, he's a brilliant strategist, he's pure, dangerous, murderous, is often gleeful, and yet still has both discipline and a code. He is known for having a temper that can mentally vaporize people. He truly has one of the strongest personalities ever.'

Is Jeffrey Dean Morgan actually Javier Bardem?

NO! But we can totally see where you're going with this. The two could be brothers. People also reckon Robert Downey Jr. looks like him too.

Who is Jeffrey Dean Morgan's wife?

Right this one kind of hurts. It's Hilarie Burton who played Peyton on One Tree Hill! She's 33 and he's 49. They got married in 2014 and have a six year old son. Called Augustus. They live on a farm in upstate New York and own a candy store. For reals. They also raise cows and alpacas.

Who is Jeffrey Dean Morgan in Watchmen?

He plays Eddie Blake, aka The Comedian. Fan Alan Moore describes Eddie as, 'to discuss Eddie Blake is to take the best and the worst of the 20th Century and stuff it into one man. No wonder he sees life as a joke, where the only punch line is there isn’t any punch line.'

What is Jeffrey Dean Morgan's height?

Ooh, he's nearly six foot two. That's nice isn't it?

Who is Jeffrey Dean Morgan in The Good Wife?

Definitely the best of Alicia's love interests over the seven seasons. Jeffrey plays investigator Jason Crouse, a dark, brooding man with a mysterious past and a knack for getting murky stuff done. He's everything Alicia needed the whole time. If you haven't seen the end yet we won't ruin it but..... Oh my gosh.

Jeffrey Dean Morgan's mum was crushed when The Good Wife came to an end, turns out she's just as big a fan as we are. 'She's real sad.' He told E News at the time. 'I talked to her on the phone…a couple of days ago and she's all kinds of upset and still, by the way, digging for clues. ‘What's going to happen now?'"

Who is Jeffrey Dean Morgan in Grey's Anatomy?

He was Denny! The heart patient that Izzie fell in love with whilst he was waiting for a life-saving heart transplant. If you haven't watched Grey's then look away now.....

....Denny dies. But don't worry, he comes back as a ghost in Izzie's hallucinations.

Sure.

What did Jeffrey Dean Morgan look like when he was young?

I mean he was OK (deep breath, keep calm). Dr. Kovac, is that you?

Like this? Then you might also be interested in:

Shameless Objectification: Will Poulter

Shameless Objectification: Sam Claflin

Shameless Objectification: Louis Theroux

Follow Jess on Twitter @Jess_Commons