Jeffrey Dean Morgan had penned a sweet tribute to his wife, Hilarie Burton, who celebrated her 39th birthday on Thursday.

The 55-year-old actor wrote his statement in the caption for a photo that was shared to his Instagram account, which showed the happy couple flashing a smile while taking a selfie.

The pair have been together ever since 2009 when they were initially set up by mutual friends, and they eventually went on to welcome a son and daughter named Augustus and George Virginia, aged 11 and three, respectively.

Morgan began his message by expressing how close he truly was to Burton, as he wrote: 'Happy birthday to my best friend.'

The Walking Dead actor continued and noted that his wife 'is a lot of things… I've been sitting here trying to figure out what words to use to describe her awesomeness… there are too many.'

The performer then told his followers about several of her spouse's admirable attributes and also spoke about her parenting skills.

Morgan wrote that his wife was 'perfect. The hottest. The smartest. Most thoughtful. Pretty damn funny. Easily the meanest according to our kids. Also hands down, the best mom… according to our kids…and me.'

The Watchmen actor went on to remark that he remained closer to Burton than to anyone else in her life and pointed out that, although her many attributes were positive, there was one description that he favored above all.

The producer specifically referred to his wife as 'my best friend. Every second of everyday she's many of the above things simultaneously, more. But ALWAYS, my best friend.'

Morgan also expressed regret over not being able to spend time with the actress on her special day, as he was off working on a project, and pointed out that he was planning on a big reunion when he saw his wife again.

'I'm not with her. I should be. I should never miss her birthday. Ever. So… after this year, I won't. I love you mrs morgan. I'm wishing you the happiest of days…. When I get home.'

The actor concluded by pointing out that his wife was still comparatively young, as he noted: 'Happy birthday. I'm real glad you were born… and SO recently too!'

Morgan and Burton initially met in 2009 after they were introduced to each other by mutual friends, and they eventually made things official between them in 2019.

Before becoming involved with his current spouse, the Rampage actor was married to his ex-wife, Anya Longwell, from 1992 until they dissolved their union in 2003.

Following his split from his former partner, the performer was engaged to his Weeds costar Mary-Louise Parker for just over a year, although they broke things off in 2009.

Morgan also welcomed a son with his ex-girlfriend Sherrie Rose and only met the child when he was in his early years, although he has expressed a desire to be involved in his kid's life.

The actor and Burton currently share Augustus and George Virginia, whom they raise on their farm north of New York City.