Steven Blake Hull

November 13, 1965 - September 19, 2020

Norman, Oklahoma

Steven Blake Hull, age 54, passed away Saturday, September 19, at his home in Norman, Oklahoma following a brief illness.

A private, family memorial and internment for Steve will be held at a later date by his family.

In lieu of flowers or other expressions of friendship, friends and family are urged to honor Steve's life by charitable giving to CAST For Kids Foundation, 2755 Commercial Street, Suite 101, Salem, OR, 97302, and to the Norman Regional Hospital Foundation (in honor of Dr. Elise Wiesner), 901 N. Porter, Norman, OK 73071.

Steve was born in Fort Worth, Texas to Don M. and Helen J. Hull. He graduated from Ponca City, Oklahoma High School in 1984, and was a graduate of the University of Oklahoma, earning his degree in Business.

He was an avid sportsman, notably fishing and hunting, and enjoyed countless trips with his son and family.

Steve made many friendships through his work with the Chickasaw Nation, Newcastle; at A.T. & T., Norman; and the Storm Lure Company, Norman.

He was a member of Bethel Baptist Church, Norman.

Steve is survived by his son, Blake Allen Hull and wife, Sarah, of Skiatook; his father, Dr. Don M. Hull of Ruston, LA; sister, Amy LeAnn Fisher and husband, Bobby, of Mesa, AZ; brother, Brooks Alan Hull and wife, Kerri, of Ruston, LA; nephews, J. J. Chazarreta, Hunter Hull, and Fisher Hull; plus extended family.

Published on September 30, 2020

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of StevenHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Steven

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree