Cinema icon Jason Mewes is perhaps best known as the potty-mouthed vocal half of JAY AND SILENT BOB, the on-screen comedic duo who first appeared in Kevin Smith’s seminal 1994 indie film, CLERKS. Mewes would reprise his role as the celebrated character five more times on the big screen from 1995 to 2006, in films including MALLRATS, CHASING AMY, DOGMA, ZACK AND MIRI MAKE A PORNO, and JAY AND SILENT BOB STRIKE BACK. His character would become a sort of James Bond of the mid-'90s low budget film – a fast talking, foul-mouthed, over-sexed, but ultimately harmless and likeable guy. For his successful and brow-raising portrayal, MTV honored him with 2007’s Dirtiest Mouth Award.

With cult-fans following his controversial antics, Mewes has captured audiences with his rebellious banter against his unspoken other half and longtime friend, Kevin Smith (Silent Bob). Since the beginning of the duo’s offbeat work together, Mewes and Smith have continued to build on their beloved character driven roles from the JAY AND SILENT BOB series. Most recently, the duo just wrapped JAY AND SILENT BOB REBOOT, an upcoming comedy film that is a spin-off of the lighthearted 2001 parody, JAY AND SILENT BOB STRIKE BACK. The duo returns to Hollywood to stop the reboot of ‘Bluntman and Chronic’ movie from getting made.

It’s the insanely popular award-winning podcast, Jay and Silent Bob Get Old, where Mewes truly shines. For over eight years, in what’s been described as “Lake Wobegon days with anal jokes,” Jay has told the story of his tumultuous life. To date, the podcast has completed over 235 episodes and has been named one of the best on iTunes. Jay can now be seen touring comedy clubs across the country with his solo show, “A-Mewes-ing Stories,” where he shares stories about his life and encounters over the years.

Outside of his work with Smith, Mewes has starred in the Wunderkind Pictures feature, NOOBZ, an indie “gamers” film about four friends and Gears of War players who embark on a quest to survive a road trip and win a Gamecon Championship. Mewes also appeared in the film, ROCK JOCKS, about a group of dysfunctional government employees who find themselves responsible for shooting down an asteroid on track for the Earth. In 2010, he appeared in the mobster comedy, THE LAST GODFATHER, alongside Harvey Keitel and Blake Clark. Most recently, he has guest starred on several television series including The Flash, Hawaii 5-0 and Z Nation.