From Dusk Till Dawn Credits Title: From Dusk Till Dawn Genres: Horror

Action Directed by: Robert Rodriguez Written by: Robert Kurtzman; Quentin Tarantino Produced by: Robert Rodriguez; Quentin Tarantino; Lawrence Bender; Gianni Nunnari; Meir Teper; Elizabeth Avellán; John Esposito; Paul Hellerman; Robert Kurtzman Music by: Graeme Revell Cinematography: Guillermo Navarro Edited by: Robert Rodriguez Production Distributed by: Dimension Films

A Band Apart

Miramax Films

Echo Bridge Entertainment Released: January 19th, 1996 (US)

May 31st, 1996 (UK) Rating: R Running time: 108 min. Country: USA Language: English Budget: $18,000,000 [1] Gross: $25,753,840 (US)

$59,253,840 (Worldwide) [1][2] Navigation Previous: — Next: From Dusk Till Dawn 2: Texas Blood Money

From Dusk Till Dawn is an American action/horror film of the vampire subgenre. It is the first in a series of three films and is followed by the 1999 direct-to-video sequel From Dusk Till Dawn 2: Texas Blood Money. The movie was directed by Robert Rodriguez and written by Rodriguez and longtime collaborator Quentin Tarantino (who also stars in the film). It was produced by Dimension Films and Tarantino's production company A Band Apart and released theatrically in the United States on January 19th, 1996. The movie stars Tarantino and former ER star George Clooney as sibling bank robbers Richard and Seth Gecko. The other cast members include Harvey Keitel, Juliette Lewis, Ernest Liu, Cheech Marin, Danny Trejo and Salma Hayek. After Richie breaks his brother out of prison, they survive a shootout with Texas Rangers and escape. They kidnap the Fuller family which consists of lapsed preacher Jacob Fuller and his children Kate and Scott. They force the Fullers to drive them in their RV across the Mexican border where they eventually come upon a late night hot spot called the Titty Twister. As the Fullers begin to actually form a slight bond with their captors, things erupt into chaos as both they and the Geckos discover that they are in a cantina overrun with vampires.

Cast[]

Actor Role George Clooney Seth Gecko Quentin Tarantino Richard Gecko Harvey Keitel Jacob Fuller Juliette Lewis Kate Fuller Ernest Liu Scott Fuller Salma Hayek Santánico Pandemónium Cheech Marin Border guard/Chet Pussy/Carlos Danny Trejo Razor Charlie Tom Savini Sex Machine Fred Williamson Frost Michael Parks Earl McGraw Brenda Hillhouse Hostage Gloria Hill John Saxon FBI agent Stanley Chase Marc Lawrence Old timer motel owner Kelly Preston Newscaster Kelly Houge John Hawkes Pete Bottoms, liquor store clerk Tito Larriva Titty Twister guitarist & vocalist Peter Atanasoff Titty Twister saxophonist John "Vatos" Hernandez Titty Twister drummer Aimee Graham Blonde hostage Heidi McNeal Red-headed hostage Ernest M. Grcia Big Emilio Gregory Nicotero Sex Machine's buddy Cristos Danny Mike Moroff Manny Michelle Berube Bar dancer Neena Bidasha Bar dancer Veena Bidasha Bar dancer Madison Clark Bar dancer Marla Diaz Bar dancer Rosalina Hayakawa Bar dancer Janine Jordae Bar dancer Jacque Lawson Bar dancer Houston Leigh Bar dancer Janie Liszewski Bar dancer Tia Texada Bar dancer John Fidele Monster Michael McKay Monster Jake McKinnon Monster Josh Patton Monster Walter Phelan Monster Wayne Toth Monster Henrik von Ryzin Monster Carlo Corazon Monster John Ponzio Monster Lawrence Bender Man in diner Victoria Lucai Woman outside of Titty Twister Robert Rodriguez Band member

Appearances[]

Characters

Carlos - Seth and Ritchie's contact.

Chet Pussy - Vampire; Doorman.

Earl McGraw - Texas ranger.

Frost - Bar patron; Vietnam vet.

Gloria Hill - Seth and Ritchie's hostage.

Jacob Fuller - Main character; Former priest.

Kate Fuller - Supporting character; Teenage girl.

Kelly Houge - Newscaster.

Pete Bottoms - Liquor stre clerk

Razor Charlie - Bartender

Richard Gecko - Main character; Bank robber.

Satanico Pandemonium - Exotic dancer; Vampire.

Sex Machine - Bar patron with crotch-gun.

Scott Fuller - Supporting character; Asian child.

Seth Gecko - Main character; Bank robber.

Stanley Chase - FBI agent.

Locations

Mexico

Texas

Titty Twister

Items

Holy water

Wooden stake

Creatures & animals

Snakes

Vampires

Organizations

Federal Bureau of Investigation

Vocations

Bartender

Bank robber

Biker

Musician

Sheriff

Injuries

Burn victim

Decapitation

Disfigurement

Exploding bodies

Exploding heads

Gunshot victim

Head injury

Heart ripped out

Impalement

Severed limbs

Shot in the head

Slit throat

Stabbing

Throat injury

Explicit content

Female partial nudity

Obscene finger gesture

Profanity

Miscellaneous

Hotel

Production[]

The tagline to this film is, "A terrifying evil has been unleashed. And five strangers are our only hope to stop it."

Production on From Dusk Till Dawn began on June 13th, 1995. Principal filming concluded on August 20th, 1995.

The movie was shot on location in Austin, Texas, Chihuahua, Mexico, Barstow, Lancaster and Los Angeles, California with some scenes being filmed in Redmond and Seattle, Washington. [1]

From Dusk Till Dawn ranked in at number 1 in box office receipts for the weekend of January 19th, grossing $10,240,805, averaging $5,110 per theater. At it's widest release, From Dusk Till Dawn was screened in 2,007 movie theaters. [2]

This film was remade by Robert Rodriguez in 2014 as the first season of the From Dusk Till Dawn television series on the El Rey Network.

Home Video[]

From Dusk Till Dawn was released on home video in VHS and Laserdisc format by Gativideo and Dimension Films in 1996. It was released to DVD by Miramax Films on June 17th, 1998. It was re-released with new box cover art featuring Salma Hayek as part of Dimension's "Collector's Series" on October 3rd, 2000. Special features on the disc include outtakes, deleted scenes and alternate takes as well as the Hollywood Goes to Hell featurette and the Art of Making the Movie documentary with commentary by Robert Rodriguez and makeup artist Greg Nicotero. [3]

From Dusk Till Dawn was released on Blu-ray format by Echo Bridge Entertainment on May 3rd, 2011. The movie was included with From Dusk Till Dawn 2: Texas Blood Money as a special Miramax Films double-feature Blu-ray edition on May 15th, 2011. [4][5]

Recommendations[]

Quentin Tarantino films

Django Unchained

Hateful Eight, The

Kill Bill: Vol. 1

Kill Bill: Vol. 2

Inglourious Basterds

Jackie Brown

Pulp Fiction

Reservoir Dogs

Vampire films

30 Days of Night

Count Yorga

Crimson Nights

Dracula (1931)

Dracula (1979)

Dracula (1992)

Fright Night

From Dusk Till Dawn

Horror of Dracula

Lost Boys, The

Mark of the Vampire

Near Dark

Nosferatu (1922)

Nosferatu (1979)

Return of Count Yorga, The

Son of Dracula

See also[]

From Dusk Till Dawn

From Dusk Till Dawn pages

From Dusk Till Dawn gallery

From Dusk Till Dawn images

From Dusk Till Dawn films

From Dusk Till Dawn locations

From Dusk Till Dawn characters

From Dusk Till Dawn miscellaneous

[]

From Dusk Till Dawn at Wikipedia