Quentin Tarantino is an American film director famous for his violent highly stylized and dialog driven crime films. He directed one scene from the Sin City film and is credited as a "Guest Director".

The One Dollar Deal[]

Tarantino is often credited as one of the strongest forces behind the rise of independent film-making during the 1990's along with his best friend and Sin City film director, Robert Rodriguez. The two have often collaborated before, most famously in From Dusk Till Dawn and Grindhouse. For Tarantino's second volume in his epic revenge saga Kill Bill, he had Rodriguez do the score and paid him one dollar. In return, he invited Quentin to do a scene for the Sin City movie and paid him one dollar. His scene was the conversation between the corpse of Jackie-Boy and Dwight McCarthy in The Big Fat Kill. Another lesser known contribution to Sin City of Tarantino's is one of Miho's swords was actually a prop in Kill Bill.

Stylistic Similarities[]

Tarantino and Rodriguez are famous for their collaborations with specific actors over their careers and are often known for featuring actors the other is known for collaborating with. Sin City is no exception and has many actors which have worked with Tarantino before. These include Bruce Willis (Pulp Fiction, Grindhouse), and Micheal Madsen (Reservoir Dogs, Kill Bill Vol 1 and 2, Hateful Eight, and Once Upon a Time in Hollywood). Also, Rosario Dawson would later work with Tarantino on Grindhouse.

There are also striking similarities between Pulp Fiction and Sin City. The film is divided into three parts. The three stories intersect at multiple points and both feature characters later in the film who died earlier. Most strikingly though is a scene in which Bruce Willis discusses the sensation of killing a man with a taxi driver. The scene is shot in a combination of black and white and color; which combined with the gritty neo-noir dialogue has the distinct feel of a Sin City yarn. Whether the similarity is intentional or merely coincidental has not been confirmed but Tarantino was a fan of the comic series before he was involved in the film.