McAfee has announced its intention to acquire Sentrigo, a privately owned provider of database security and compliance, assessment, monitoring and intrusion prevention solutions.

In addition, McAfee has also announced a comprehensive database security solution to protect business-critical databases without impacting performance and availability. McAfee's coordinated approach based on the Security Connected initiative launched in October 2010, involves protecting a company's most important data assets from network to server to the database itself, resulting in data being protected in every state (data in motion, data at rest, and data in use) via access controls, network security, server security, data protection and encryption - all centrally managed to minimize risk and maximize efficiency.

According to McAfee, it has had a successful partnership with Sentrigo through its Security Innovation Alliance (SIA) program and in 2010 entered into an OEM relationship with Sentrigo to offer McAfee Vulnerability Manager for Databases, McAfee Database Activity Monitoring, and McAfee Integrity Monitoring for Databases. Sentrigo offers a complete suite of database security technologies including vulnerability management, database activity monitoring, database audit, and virtual patching - ensuring databases are protected without impacting performance or availability. Through the acquisition, McAfee will be able to deliver best of breed solutions for vulnerability management of databases, protection of databases, and activity monitoring of databases.

"The integration of Sentrigo with McAfee will provide customers with the highest level of security across their database environments and allow companies to rapidly deploy a database security strategy in a cost effective manner," says Dave DeWalt, president of McAfee. "McAfee is continuing to broaden its security portfolio to now secure databases, as well as endpoints, networks, email and web. In addition to the acquisition announcement, McAfee is also announcing a complete database security platform which includes products across the McAfee portfolio."

"Every organization stores their most sensitive information in databases, either directly or through their key business applications," states Nathan Shuchami, CEO of Sentrigo. "The regular stream of public breach announcements is evidence that we must all do much more to protect mission critical database environments, and Sentrigo has been working for more than four years to develop a suite of products to best secure these assets. As part of McAfee, Sentrigo will be in a position to deliver these best of breed solutions to address a much broader range of customer's database security and compliance challenges."