McAfee, which was acquired by Intel last year, has announced the latest acquisition, Sentrigo, a privately owned database security company for an undisclosed amount. Sentrigo is leading provider of database security and compliance, assessment, monitoring and intrusion prevention solutions and will enhance McAfee’s database security portfolio.

The company has recently got a funding of $9.5 million from Benchmark Capital, Stata Venture Partners and Juniper Networks and provides a complete suite of database security technologies including vulnerability management, database activity monitoring, database audit, and virtual patching. This is going to be a good thing for McAfee as now it can offer the same solutions to its existing as well as prospective customers.

McAfee was already in an OEM partnership with Sentrigo, right from 2010 when it offered an assortment of products like McAfee’s own database security software, including McAfee Vulnerability Manager for Databases, McAfee Database Activity Monitoring, and McAfee Integrity Monitoring for Databases.

“Every organization stores their most sensitive information in databases, either directly or through their key business applications,” stated Nathan Shuchami, CEO of Sentrigo. “The regular stream of public breach announcements is evidence that we must all do much more to protect mission-critical database environments, and Sentrigo has been working for more than four years to develop a suite of products to best secure these assets. As part of McAfee, Sentrigo will be in a position to deliver these best-of-breed solutions to address a much broader range of customer’s database security and compliance challenges.”

Just to recap, Intel purchased McAfee in a $7.7 billion all-cash deal, as it meant a lot for the silicon giant. Giving her views on the acquisition, Intel senior vice president and general manager of the Software and Services Group, Renée James said,

“It became clear to us that security was going to be a very important feature to help us differentiate our silicon… Security market will consolidate because there will be a step-function change in how security is delivered. She further mentioned about the cloud, “In the long term security will be a differentiator for mobile devices. The cloud piece is a high-order bit. You can’t wake up and build it.”

As the security industry is becoming a strong acquisition interest, we also saw AVG Technologies getting a funding of $235 million as a part of new credit agreement with J.P Morgan and Morgan Stanley. The funding will be utilized by AVG to realize strategic growth opportunities and pay dividend to its shareholders.