Laura Wade: Wiki, Bio, Age, Playwright, Parents, Husband, Net Worth: Laura Wade is a popular British playwright. She was born on the 16th of October 1977 in Bedford, Bedfordshire, England, The United Kingdom. Laura is well-known for her playwriting. She is the winner of The Critics’ Circle Theatre Award for Most Promising Playwright 2005 for Breathing Corpses and Colder Than Here. Laura is also popular for being the long-term partner of Samuel West. He is a popular British actor, theatre director as well as a voice actor by profession. To know everything about Laura read this post!

Laura Wade’s Life and Education

The birthplace of Laura is Bedford, Bedfordshire, England, The United Kingdom. Laura belongs to the British nationality. Due to the lack of information, we were not able to find out the details of Laura’s parents on the internet at the time of writing this post. Similarly, it is also not known that Laura has siblings or not. Because Laura does not reveal any information about her family on the internet. She keeps it private.

According to the sources, Laura grew up in Sheffield. She is a British citizen. Laura’s current age is 43 years old as of October 2021. The zodiac sign of Laura is Libra as per her date of birth. Laura celebrates her birthday with her family on the 16th of October each year. Regarding Laura’s physical appearance, she seems to be quite tall but her exact height is not known. Laura is pleasing, decent, and charming.

Laura appears young. She is a popular playwright by profession. According to the sources, Laura completed her secondary education at Lady Manners School. After that, Laura enrolled herself at Briston University. Laura studied drama and graduated from Bristol University.

Laura Wade Career

Laura started her career after completing her studies at the University. According to the sources, Laura worked for the children’s theatre company Playbox Theatre in Warwick. After that, Laura started playwriting and pursued her career as a playwright. Later Laura became a popular British playwright with her unique skills. As a popular British playwright, Laura has written several plays. She has gained massive fame and success in her professional playwriting career. Laura has been a successful playwright. She has won awards for her playwriting.

Laura Wade Personal Life

Regarding Laura’s personal life, she is unmarried so far. But Laura has been in a long-term relationship with her partner, Samuel West. He is a popular British actor, theatre director as well as a voice actor by profession. According to the sources, Laura and Samuel met for the first time in the mid-2000s. They started dating. After that, Laura and Samuel moved together in 2007. The couple broke up in 2011.

Later Laura and Samuel reunited. Because they had not split up permanently. Laura and Samuel continued their relationship after sorting things out. Laura and Samuel have two beautiful daughters from their relationship. But the names of their daughters have not been disclosed on the internet and are hidden. Laura and Samuel welcomed their first daughter in 2014 and their second daughter in 2017.

Here is the full bio of Laura Wade, her family, mother, father, brother, sister, spouse, children, school, education, hometown, profession, nationality, body measurements, age, height, weight, eye colour, hair colour, gender, ethnicity, sexuality, cast, birthday, birthplace, hobbies, address, zodiac sign, date of birth, religion, net worth.

Laura Wade, Bio, Height, Weight, Profile, Net Worth

Name Laura Wade Nickname Not Known Gender Female Profession Playwright Height (approx.) in centimeters– Not Known

in meters– Not Known

in feet inches– Not Known

Weight (approx.) in kilograms– Not Known

in pounds– Not Known

Figure Measurements (approx.) Not Known Eye Colour Not Known Hair Colour Blonde Date of Birth 16 October 1977 Age (as in 2021) 43 Years Birth Place Bedford, Bedfordshire, England, The United Kingdom Zodiac sign/Sun sign Libra Nationality British Hometown Sheffield School Lady Manners School College/University

Bristol University

Educational Qualification Graduate Religion Not Known Ethnicity Not Known Caste Not Known Address Not Known Hobbies/Interests Not Known Marital Status Unmarried Affairs/Boyfriends/Girlfriends Samuel West Sexuality Not Known Parents Father: Not Known

Mother: Not Known

Siblings Brother: Not Known

Sister: Not Known

Husband/Wife/Spouse Not Known Children Not Known Net Worth Not Known

Social Media Accounts:

After doing a lot of research, we were not able to find any verified social media account of Laura Wade. It seems that Laura is not present on social media at the moment.

Some Lesser Known Facts About Laura Wade

Laura Wade is from The United Kingdom.

Laura’s bio is available on the official page of Wikipedia.

Laura is the mother of Samuel West’s two beautiful daughters.

Laura’s date of birth belongs to the Libra sun sign.

Laura’s main source of income is her professional playwriting career.

Laura’s birthday is on the 16th of October.

Laura is also recognized as a celebrity spouse.

Also Read: Lilian Nganga: Wiki, Bio, Age, Height, Career, Husband, Net Worth

Subscribe to us to get the latest updates about Laura Wade!