Known for playing eccentric Siegfried Farnon on Channel 5's All Creatures Great and Small, he's a famous face you're likely to have seen somewhere before.

Samuel West boasts an impressive resume with some favourable credits.

A Midsomer Murders veteran, he can also be spotted on Mr Selfridge, Waking the Dead and even The Crown.

For more TV and entertainment news, click here.

He's appeared in films such as Darkest Hour and also been in Death in Paradise.

Yet whilst these roles could easily make him a household name, his parents' own fame might possibly eclipse his own.

The son of Prunella Scales and Timothy West, he was always going to have big boots to fill.

To get the latest email updates from Yorkshire Live, click here .

Prunella, now 89, played the long suffering wife of Basil Fawlty, Sybil in Fawlty Towers.

The comedy is still among the most loved ever to air on British TV and Prunella was awarded a CBE for her lifetime of work, which has included becoming an ambassador for SOS Children's Villages charity.

Yet his dad is just as famous, with the same honour bestowed upon him.

Fans might recognise Timothy West from what was a short stint in Coronation Street in 2013, but he's also made appearances in shows such as Goodnight Sweetheart, Not Going Out and Gentleman Jack, which has recently been spotted filming in Yorkshire.

His son appeared to follow in his footsteps as Timothy also appeared on Waking the Dead and Midsomer Murders.

Samuel has a brother, and is married to playwright Laura Wade. He shares two children with her.

The family however, have had a difficult few years.

Timothy and Prunella hosted their own show Great Canal Journeys but were forced to step down as presenters after Prunella's Alzheimer's advanced.

She was originally diagnosed back in 2013, and as the pair continued to host Great Canal Journeys, reviews hailed the emotional journey, with one that featured in the Guardian saying: "Since the first instalment in 2014, the series has charted the long, slow goodbye that is living with dementia, cherishing every moment of precious normality and celebrating how an immersion in nature is the surest way to bring the old Pru back."

It's now been announced that All Creatures Great and Small is returning for its second season, featuring six episodes and a Christmas special.

Fans are looking forward to the return as the last episode left them hanging with will-they-or-won't-they couple James and Helen's 'almost a kiss'.

Samuel will be returning to the screen delighting fans and whilst there's no confirmed date yet, Channel 5 have hinted it will be very soon.