Clark Haggans, a former NFL linebacker who played for the Pittsburgh Steelers, Arizona Cardinals, and San Francisco 49ers has died at the age of 46, according to multiple reports.

While Haggans was with the Steelers, he won Super Bowl XL. In that game against the Seattle Seahawks, he recorded a sack and was second on the team in tackles. In that game, his defense held a very talented Seattle offense to just 10 points.

He later returned to the Super Bowl twice. In both cases, these were losing efforts with Arizona and San Francisco. That return to the Super Bowl with Arizona was in a game against the Pittsburgh Steelers. He was also on the Jim Harbaugh-coached 49ers team that lost to John Harbaugh and the Baltimore Ravens in the Super Bowl.

The Steelers drafted Clark Haggans in the fifth round of the 2000 NFL Draft out of Colorado State. He is a member of the Colorado State Athletics Hall of Fame and was First-Team All Mountain West in 1999. While at Colorado State, he majored in art.

Prior to going to Colorado State, Haggans was a standout high school player at Palos Verdes Peninsula High School in Southern California. Twice while playing in high school he was an all-league tight end and defensive tackle. He was also on multiple undefeated high school teams. In 1994, he led his high school to a league title.

In total, Haggans played in 13 NFL seasons, retiring after the 2012 season. He started opposite Joey Porter for the Steelers at outside linebacker. During his time with Pittsburgh, he collected 332 total tackles, 31 tackles for loss, and 32.5 sacks. He’s best known for this portion of his career. Haggans ended his career with 520 tackles, 49 tackles for loss, and 46.5 sacks.

Haggans played in 107 games for the Pittsburgh Steelers, starting in 61.

In 2012, Clark Haggans began to support the Black Out Child Abuse Campaign, which is run by the charity Black Out Child Abuse, Inc. He was the first NFL player to do so. Its goal is to bring education and assistance to families and organizations across the country in need. To support the campaign, he wore special blackout paint.

No cause of death has been released at this time. Clark Haggans leaves behind a son named Damon and a daughter named Alianna.