Every week we round up the biggest news items and gossip into one big post so you can be sure you’re fully in the know. Follow us on Twitter or Facebook for more to-the-minute updates or subscribe to the blog to ensure you get the weekly buzz!

American Psycho Officially Headed to Broadway

Duncan Sheik’s musical version of American Psycho is officially headed to Broadway. Directed by Rupert Goold, the production, which will star Benjamin Walker (Bloody, Bloody Andrew Jackson), will begin performances on February 19 at a Shubert theater to be announced. Opening night is scheduled for March 21.

R.I.P. Theodore Bikel

Broadway will dim its lights tomorrow in honor of Theodore Bikel, who passed away on July 21, 2015 at age 91. The accomplished actor originated the role of Captain Georg von Trapp in the 1959 production of The Sound of Music which earned him the second of his two Tony Award nominations (the first was for The Rope Dancers in 1958). Bikel appeared on stages around the world and is known best for the role of Tevye in Fiddler on the Roof, which he performed more than 2,000 times.

Marlee Matlin will Lead Spring Awakening

Oscar and Golden Globe winner Marlee Matlin will headline the upcoming Broadway revival of Spring Awakening. Directed by Michael Arden, the Deaf West Theatre version begins performances at the Brooks Atkinson Theatre on September 8 and opens on September 27. The limited engagement is currently set to end on January 9.

Dames at Sea Cast Announced

Matilda favorite Lesli Margherita, John Bolton, Mara Davi, Danny Gardner, Eloise Kropp and Cary Tedder have been announced as the stars for the Broadway premiere of Dames at Sea. Performances will begin on September 24 at the Helen Hayes Theatre, where it will open officially on October 22.

Taye Diggs is Now Hedwig on Broadway

Broadway and TV heartthrob Taye Diggs is now donning wigs and heels in Hedwig and the Angry Inch on Broadway. He’s set to star in the production through October 11, so don’t be shy – get your tickets now!

Amy Spanger to Return to Chicago