This individual has no known canonical name.

While the information presented is canonical, the individual described lacks an official name, thus the title is conjecture.

This article page is about the character in Sanctuary. For real-world person, see Wikipedia:H. H. Asquith.

The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom was a male human in the British Government.[1]

Biography[]

Season 3[]

Episode 3x08 - "For King and Country":

The Prime Minister had gathered the Five in 1908 to make them a unique offer: Helen Magnus and James Watson would receive all the funding they needed to for their Sanctuary, Nikola Tesla would be able to continue his work with electricity without legal hindrance, and both John Druitt and Nigel Griffin would each receive a full pardon for their crimes. In return, they agreed to hunt down and eliminate the dangerous criminal Adam Worth.

Notes[]

Trivia: The Five are offered the mission to terminate Adam Worth in 1908, during the late reign of King Edward VII, meaning the unnamed Prime Minister appearing in the episode is either Henry Campbell-Bannerman or Herbert Henry Asquith. Duncan Fraser, the actor playing him, resembles Campbell-Bannerman most.

If the timeframe of the flashbacks happened exactly 102 years in the past in ~April 1908, it is possible for both men to have been Prime Minister at the time. Campbell-Bannerman resigned on April 3rd, with Asquith succeeding him in office starting on April 8th.

Age: The Prime Minister, if indeed Asquith, would have been 55-years-old during the flashback scene set in ~April 1908; having died just short of twenty years later on the morning of February 15th, 1928 at the age of 75-years-old.

Name[]

In Episode 3x19 - "Out of the Blue", a psych worm puts Helen Magnus and Will Zimmerman into a psychoactive venom-induced dream state. During Magnus's time as Helen Druitt, her District Attorney husband John Druitt hands her a copy of his resignation letter [2] that he sent to the Governor. Considering that Druitt's resignation letter was filled in with name references from previous episodes, it may have given viewers the official name of the Prime Minister from Episode 3x08 - "For King and Country" based on 'Asquith Street' being the business address for the governor to whom Druitt sent his letter too. Herbert Henry Asquith was the British Prime Minister during King Edward VII's reign from April 8th, 1908 to December 5th, 1916.