Our most recent foodievent definitely got me walking on memory lane. So much so, it made me dig deep into my archives to find the photos above. (Hmm, might just go back to digicams or something low res. Check out how flawless looking our faces were then. *heehaha)

Let me tell you, July 29 was one of the most eventful days I’ve had as an eatsplorer. Right after we took the time snapping photos and taking little bites of what was laid out at the Foodie Bloggers Meet Up at the SM City Baguio FoodFest, we made a beeline for the new site of The Old Spaghetti House.

The Old Spaghetti House in Its New Location

That’s right. The Old Spaghetti House a.k.a. TOSH just moved. =D

Where the spaghetti house used to be, Ramen Nagi took over. While the foodies in and around the City of Pines were ecstatic that we finally have a closer universal noodle branch here, it was apparent that a number of food questers were saddened at the loss of The Old Spaghetti House.

Rejoice TOSH fans, this house isn’t lost to us forever. They just got a wider snazzier looking space, a floor up, in front of Cinema 4. Wee!

As soon as we settled down from the news and seeing the actual store with our own eyes, Ms. Trixie, our welcoming host, started another food fest for us, spaghetti house style. ^^,

In past visits, I recall I just had pasta. It’s a spag house after all. I had no memory of them serving other foodstuff. (Hello, remembery loss.) Boy, was I in for a treat seeing their menu. Time to make new TOSH memories. =)

Salads, little bites of appetizers, pizza, desserts and, yes, combo meals dubbed pasta meals on their food list, I was amazed at how TOSH has grown in the five, six years I haven’t been. Ms. Trixie related to us new developments such as adding breakfast treats, TOSH Cafe in specific locations, etc. #lookingforward

It’s a given we had pasta selections in our impromptu food fest, but get this, The Old Spaghetti House is where we actually had a pasta negra, true blue squid ink sauce. (“,) Impressive how every strand of spaghetti was coated in the sauce; we really thought that the pasta itself was black.

Each and every one of us quickly got full with the carb loading we did, but I tried my very best to get lots of bites from old … and new … TOSH favorites.

From the simple sardine pasta to the ultra savory taste bud tingling marinara pasta; from the tangy pizzas and beautiful fried rice paired with juicy meats like brisket and baby back ribs to the sweet endings of tiramisu and baked cookie dough a la mode, that was one scrumptious and sumptuous impromptu dinner with foodie blogging friends. \m/

We’re ever so grateful Old Spaghetti House … and also, so very happy to see that you’re still in food trip city, Baguio City.

The Old Spaghetti House (TOSH)

3rd floor, SM City Baguio (in front of Cinema 4)

Luneta Hill

Baguio City, Philippines

facebook.com/TheOldSpaghettiHouseBaguio/

***Thank you, Ms. Trixie, for inviting and welcoming us to the new spag home in Baguio! We’re grateful too for the takeout. My foodie lovies (and by extension, furry lovies) had a spaghetti house themed meal the next day.