When you were a kid, what did you think the future would look like?

For Kim Moyes and Julian Hamilton of The Presets, there were some big questions and exciting prospects.

"It’s like in the opening of Star Wars, 'A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away…'" Moyes offered as an example in a 2008 interview on triple j.

"That used to always do my head in! Like, how come a long time ago they had lightsabers?"

"A lot of the music we listened to when we were kids would be like science fiction soundtracks and movies like Blade Runner, where it was a 1980s look at what the future might be. I always thought that future was way cooler than what it’s ending up being," Hamilton explained.

It provided a compelling impetus to the pair to create their own sonic reality of an intergalactic dance party threaded with intimacy and reflection, but without the sentimentalism.

"I guess we do try to write things with the idea of nostalgia, or melancholy or memories and romance, without doing a romantic song or doing a nostalgic song.

"It’s just smoke and mirrors, trying to trick people into feeling certain things without having to go there."

It’s a trick beautifully executed on songs like ‘This Boy’s In Love’, ‘If I Know You’, ‘Anywhere’ and ‘Aeons’ a piece that wouldn’t sound out of place on the Blade Runner soundtrack.

The album title is a collision of extremes, an amalgam of apocalypse and calypso, which thrusts the dire and the deadly against the idea of the festive sounds of congas, horns and steel drums.

On their travels around the world in between the breakthrough success of their debut Beams, and the writing of Apocalypso, the duo found themselves experiencing a contrast of highs and lows.

They were having the time of their lives playing awesome shows at clubs and festivals, but also having to answer questions from people they’d meet about the Australian Government’s response to the asylum seeker crisis.

It inspired the pair to write some belters in the form of ‘Eucalyptus’ and ‘My People’, both bursting with equal parts aggression and jubilation, actively and purposefully defiant.

"That [the album Apocalypso] was written in the very end of the Howard era, and it did feel like the end of the world sometimes on the TV with some of the shit that was going on," Hamilton told triple j.

"But our shows were always a fun party, so there’s a juxtaposition of the kind of world that we lived in…so it did feel like the end of the world, or a dark place, but such a fun time to be had in it.

"So I guess Apocalypso kind of works like that, even though we didn’t consider that at the time that we named it, we were just looking for a stupid, catchy album title."

More than just a crazily catchy album name, Apocalyspo remains a wonderfully warped vision of nostalgia, seduction, frustration, regret and rage delivered with dense, tough beats and surging synths.

They’re tempered by a delicacy that’s evident in the sleek melodies, the chimes of hand bells as well as the soaring melancholic falsettos that feature across these songs.

The future mightn’t have turned out as wonderfully (yet) as we’d fantasised as kids, but there’s still time for that to change.

One thing that won't change is this record's ability to help you grasp hold of your younger self filled with those fantasies and dreams, and dance like old friends to new horizons.