WHEN Kim Moyes was a young man, essentially half the 36 years of age the drummer and keyboardist for the Presets is now, he would spend his days in heaven and then return home to dash through hell.

The teenage Moyes was studying at the Sydney Conservatorium of Music, where in his first year he'd met and befriended fellow student Julian Hamilton, who has become his partner in the Presets. But at the end of each school day he'd travel back to Narrabeen in Sydney's northern beaches district, where his contemporaries were not so welcoming.

"I used to be chased up the street by the surfies when I was coming home from music school," Moyes recalls, with a laugh. "Everyone in Narrabeen was convinced I was gay, or 'a fag', as they so delicately put it."

Vindication has made Moyes sanguine about the experience. Not only have the Presets become one of the country's leading electronic music acts, with an enviable profile in Europe and the US, but their rise in this country was built in part by seducing and subverting the very hyper-masculinity Moyes and Hamilton were never comfortable with.

"We always felt like arty music boys," Moyes notes, but the Presets channelled hardened, propulsive backbeats that were as much an invocation as anything the beer and sweat-peaks of pub rock produced in this country. Even as their debut album, 2005's Beams, lusciously referenced the sexual totems of gay male culture, Moyes was coming back to the northern beaches for gigs that turned the tables.

"There was definitely a point where we were in control of making really aggressive music for people to lose their shit to," Moyes says. "We would play shows in Mona Vale on a Sunday night with all these guys on ecstasy acting bi-curious, and they were the same guys who once chased me up the street."

That embrace of hedonism, both as an inspiration and a reward, which stemmed from a shared youth discovering dance music and their own creative powers, peaked for the Presets in the years after Beams. Their intense touring segued into the recording and release of 2008's Apocalypso, an album that would sell more than 200,000 copies in Australia on the back of the churning, defiant My People, an inclusive hit single that combined the dance floor and refugee detention centres.

Ghosts, the first single from the duo's third album, last September's Pacifica, may use the structure of a sea shanty to haunting effect, but the lyrics suggest a protagonist looking back on past excess. In many ways, both sonically and thematically, Pacifica is a starting point for a new version of the Presets.

"There's definitely that feeling of indulging, but not being too caught up in the things you did in the past and not letting them define your future," Moyes explains. "The conscious decision going forward was to sever a lot of things from the 2007 and 2008 period. After the success of Apocalypso, we wanted to take the reins and make something that existed on its own."

The eclectic new record hasn't enjoyed the overwhelming success of Apocalypso, but bands rarely duplicate the intensity of their breakthrough period. Even with two singles - the brutal techno of Youth in Trouble and then Ghosts, which scared off commercial radio - the pair have sold more than 30,000 albums locally and added second nights at sizeable venues on their national tour. The record, Moyes believes, is ultimately just another link in his partnership with Hamilton.

"We have a really deep and rich relationship that runs through the whole gamut of emotion. There are times we're pretty sick of each other, but we have a very special connection," he says. "Having grown up together in a sense, we have a shared sense of shared musical life. The further down the road you get with someone like that, the better it can be."

Both Moyes and Hamilton have similar, settled lives. They both own homes with attached studio set-ups in Sydney's inner-west, and both became fathers in 2010. Even as many of their contemporaries and the acts they helped inspire are making plans to move to the US, where EDM (electronic dance music) is a belated behemoth of a genre, the Presets are happy to stay put and build on what they have, even if they occasionally regress.

"Sometimes you look at this other person and just think about how the way that we relate to each has changed so much over the time we've known each other," Moyes admits.

"We've gone from stupid little uni students to men, although sometimes you're in the studio working together, making music, and then the jokes start, and suddenly we're stupid little uni students again."