North by Northwest is a 1959 American spy thriller film directed by Alfred Hitchcock, starring Cary Grant, Eva Marie Saint, and James Mason.

The screenplay was written by Ernest Lehman, who wanted to write "the Hitchcock picture to end all Hitchcock pictures."

The film is about mistaken identity, with an innocent man pursued across the United States by agents of a mysterious organization trying to prevent him from blocking their plan to smuggle microfilm out of the country.

It is one of several Hitchcock films to feature a music score by Bernard Herrmann and an opening title sequence by graphic designer Saul Bass.

North by Northwest is often listed among the greatest films of all time and is listed among the canonical Hitchcock films of the 1950s.

It was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress in 1995.

The film was made in Paramount's VistaVision widescreen process, and only two VistaVision films were made at MGM, the other being High Society.

The crop-duster scene in the film was ranked as the "greatest movie moment" of all time by Empire magazine in 2009.

Cary Grant's gray suit worn throughout the film was named the best suit in film history by a panel of fashion experts in 2006 and has been copied for other films.

North by Northwest was released on Blu-ray Disc in 2009 as a special 50th-anniversary edition, restored and remastered from original VistaVision elements.

The film grossed $209,000 in its opening week at Radio City Music Hall, setting a record opening week at the theater, as well as its record non-holiday week gross, and went on to gross a record $404,056 in two weeks.

Hitchcock's cameo in the film is seen getting a bus door slammed in his face, just as his credit is appearing on the screen.

The film's opening title sequence features extended use of kinetic typography.Summary of "North by Northwest":

The film earned theatrical rentals of $5,740,000 in the United States and Canada and $4.1 million elsewhere, resulting in a profit of $837,000.

It holds a "Certified Fresh" 97% rating on the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, based on 113 reviews, with an average rating of 9.3/10.

In 1998, Time Out conducted a poll, and North by Northwest was voted the 12th-greatest film of all time.

The Village Voice ranked North by Northwest at No. 49 in its "Top 250 Best Films of the Century" list in 1999.

The Writers Guild of America ranked the screenplay No. 21 on its list of 101 Greatest Screenplays ever written.

The film was voted at No. 28 on the list of "100 Greatest Films" by the prominent French magazine Cahiers du cinéma in 2008.

In the British Film Institute's 2012 Sight & Sound polls of the greatest films ever made, North by Northwest was ranked 53rd among critics.

North by Northwest was ranked 13th in BBC's 2015 list of the 100 greatest American films.

The film was nominated for three Academy Awards—Best Film Editing, Best Art Direction – Set Decoration, Color, and Best Original Screenplay—at the 32nd Academy Awards ceremony.

In 1995, North by Northwest was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the United States Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."

The film is considered to be a masterpiece for its themes of deception, mistaken identity, and moral relativism in the Cold War era.

The title North by Northwest is a subject of debate.