A reproduction of the American movie poster for the 1959 original release of, arguably Alfred Hitchcock’s most popular film, North by Northwest. It is a 1959 American spy thriller film produced and directed by the master of Suspense, and stars Cary Grant, Eva Marie Saint, and James Mason. The screenplay was by Ernest Lehman, who wanted to write “The Hitchcock picture to end all Hitchcock pictures”.

North by Northwest is listed among the canonical Hitchcock films of the 1950s and is often listed among the greatest films of all time. It was selected in 1995 for preservation in the National Film Registry by the United States Library of Congress as being “culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant”.

North by Northwest film poster

Description

North by Northwest film poster – US Half Sheet – 1959

Our Vintage travel posters are our passion. We take the time to digitally enhance most of our poster prints. This ensures they look great on the walls of your home or office. We print them on high-quality, 300gsm silk art paper using fade-resistant inks. All of our vintage posters and wall art are offered in a variety of sizes. Our most common sizes include A1, A2, 50×70, A3, and A4. Some of the posters we offer will not fit into these standard frame sizes. In these cases, we offer size variations in the ratio of the original format. So, whatever space you have available, we’re sure there will be a size to suit your needs.

We know you love your posters. It’s why we aim to get them to you quickly and safely. We send them out in hard-backed envelopes, clearly marked ‘Do Not Bend’ or in a sturdy postal tube. We also want you to be able to enjoy your poster prints as soon as possible. To deliver them to you as efficiently and cost-effectively as possible, we send them out by Royal Mail 2nd class post (unless, of course, you’ve paid for another postal service).

Picture Frames are not included… yet!

Some of the images on our website feature our fabulous posters displayed in picture frames. And yes, we know they look great mounted in frames and displayed on walls, but at the current time, the prices shown are for poster print only.

We have created many of our posters in a 50x70cm size option. Frames of this size are now easily available in most stores for under £20. Ikea currently sells one in the Fiskbo range for under £10.

Fun, affordable poster reproductions

Our posters are carefully and professionally created from vintage originals. We take great care with the production of our poster prints. We also feel it is important that they maintain a vintage feel. This is why we leave some small imperfections or marks that were part of the original poster to enhance the vintage feel. These will be visible on the larger views of the item on this listing.

The originals of many of the posters we offer can cost many thousands of pounds. Our reproduction posters certainly look great! They look even better when they’re framed and mounted on a wall. It’s important to remember that we offer our prints as fun, affordable reproductions, not as fine art prints.