In the early 1990s, many publications listed Mary-Louise Parker as one of the promising new actresses in Hollywood. Parker had just started her career on Broadway, and she had quickly transitioned to TV and film acting within one year. Several years later, she ruled the Box Office and became a series regular on several television shows. And after three decades of working in the entertainment industry, Parker is not showing any signs of backing down.

Mary-Louise Parker is an American stage screen, and television actress known for her Broadway dramas like Prelude to a Kiss and Proof. Her success as a theatrical actress led her to the world of TV, where she won many followers, especially in her performance as Nancy Botwin in Weeds (2005-2012).

Parker subsequently made her foray into feature films and made an impression when she played Helen Grace in The Spiderwick Chronicles (2008). Because of her acting talent, she has won many awards, including Primetime Emmy Awards, Satellite Awards, and Golden Globe Awards.

Mary-Louise Parker’s profile summary

Full name: Mary-Louise Parker

Gender: Female

Date of birth: 2 August 1964

Birth sign: Leo

Place of birth: Columbia, South Carolina, United States

Age: 57

Nationality: American

Ethnicity: White

Eye colour: Dark Brown

Hair colour: Dark Black

Weight: 55 Kilograms

Height: 1.73 metres (5 feet 8 inches)

Body measurements: 35-25-35 inches

Sexual orientation: Straight

Religion: Christian

Father: John Morgan Parker

Mother: Caroline Louise

Siblings: 4

Marital status: Divorced

Education: Marcos de Niza High School, University of North Carolina School of the Arts

Profession: Actress

Years active: 1988 - Present

Net worth: $16 Million

Early life

The actress was born on 2 August 1964 (age 57) in Columbia, United States. She is the daughter of Caroline Louise (mother) and John Morgan Parker (father). Parker’s father used to work as a judge and served in the US Army.

Mary-Louise Parker is the youngest child in a family of four children. Her family is of mixed ancestry since her maternal grandfather was of English, Swedish, Scottish, Dutch, Irish, and German ancestry. Although she was born in Columbia, she only spent a small part of her childhood in South Carolina.

Her father was in the military, and his career forced him to move from one place to another. As a result, Parker lived in Tennessee, Arizona, and Texas in the United States. She also spent most of her childhood outside America in France, Germany, and Thailand.

Despite moving a lot, Parker attended Marcos de Niza High School in Tempe, Arizona. After high school, she joined the University of North Carolina School of the Arts to major in drama. Parker graduated from the institution in 1986 and quickly started her film and TV career in 1988.

Husband and children

Mary-Louise Parker has had a long dating history. The actress has dated at least seven men throughout her lifetime and has never been married. In 1990, Parker dated actor Timothy Hutton famously known as the youngest recipient of the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, at 20. Timothy and Parker were in a relationship for two years and ended it in 1992.

After Hutton, Parker started dating Pat Mannochia, a celebrity trainer and head of La Palestra. The two dated for three years, between 1992 and 1995. Two years later, rumours emerged that Parker was dating Adam Duritz, the Cutting Crows Frontman. However, the relationship was not confirmed by the two, and it did not last long either since it ended only a year later.

After Adam Duritz, Parker found a new relationship with actor Billy Crudup. Parker and Billy started dating around 1996, even when rumours emerged she was dating Adam Duritz. The two dated for seven years, between 1996 and 2003. They also welcomed a son named William Atticus (born 7 January 2004).

Billy ended the relationship in 2003 when Parker was still pregnant with his son. Three years after separating from Billy Crudup, Mary-Louise Parker started dating Adam Guettel, an American composer-lyricist of musical theatre and opera. The two were in a relationship for one year, briefly split in 2007, reconciled in 2008, and announced their engagement.

Adam could have been Mary-Louise Parker's husband, but she broke off their engagement. In 2009, Parker dated musician Charlie Mars. The two dated for four years and ended the relationship in 2003. Charlie is ten years younger than Parker.

Does Mary-Louise Parker have children? Yes. Mary-Louise Parker's children are William Atticus Parker and Caroline Aberash Parker. William is Parker’s child from her relationship with Crudup. The actress adopted Caroline from Africa in 2007.

Professional career

Mary-Louise Parker started her career in 1988. Her first role was in the soap opera Ryan’s Hope. She then landed another role in the TV film Too Young the Hero portraying Pearl Spencer. In 1989, Parker moved to New York to become a stage actress.

She appeared on many Broadway plays, including The Art of Success (1989-1990) and Prelude to a Kiss (1990-1991). While working as a stage actress, Parker also got several roles in films, including Fried Green Tomatoes and Grand Canyon.

Parker did not have many lead roles in film and television shows throughout the 1990s. However, in 2000, she played Amy Gardner in the TV show West Wing. In the early 2000s, Mary-Louise Parker worked on movies like Red Dragon and The Best Thief in the World.

In the mid-2000s, Parker started having lead roles in films and TV shows, including The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford and The Spiderwick Chronicles. In 2005, she played Nancy Botwin in Weeds until 2012.

Since 2012, Parker has worked on many projects, switching between TV, film, and stage. As of 2021, Parker has played Teresa Kaepernick in Colin in Black & White and will be appearing in a lead role as Nancy Botwin in Weeds 4.20.

Mary-Louise Parker’s net worth

Mary-Louise Parker has a net worth of $16 million in 2021. She has made her money from her work as a stage, TV, and film actress since 1988. At the box office, her movies have generated $1,252,508,355 in worldwide sales.

Mary-Louise Parker’s fast facts

What is Mary-Louise Parker known for? Parker is well known for her stage plays, especially in the drama Prelude to a Kiss and for portraying Nancy Botwin in the TV series Weeds.

Who is Mary-Louise Parker's sister? Unfortunately, she has not offered any information about her sister's name. However, she is the youngest of four children.

What does Mary-Louise Parker do now? She works as a film, stage, and television actor. In 2021, she took on the role of Teresa Kaepernick in the TV series Colin in Black & White.

Is Mary-Louise Parker gay? No. However, she has consistently supported the gay community and even starred in a gay rights drama series titled When We Rise (2017).

Is Sarah Jessica Parker related to Mary-Louise Parker? No. Sarah Jessica Parker was born in Nelsonville, Ohio, the United States, to parents Barbara Parker (née Keck) and Stephen Parker.

How many awards has Mary-Louise Parker won? Since her acting debut, Parker has won ten awards, including two Tony Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, two Primetime Emmy Awards, and four others.

Mary-Louise Parker is an American stage, screen, and television actress. She has appeared in many films, theatrical plays, and movies, including Weeds (TV series), Prelude to a Kiss (theatrical play), and The Spiderwick Chronicles (film). At 55 years of age, Parker is not married after divorcing her husband. However, the actress has two children, one biological and one adopted.

Tuko.co.ke published an interesting article about Leigh-Anne Pinnock husband, net worth, children, and parents. Pinnock is an award-winning singer, songwriter, and actress. The sultry honey-voiced singer has amassed a sizeable fanatical fanbase since she hit the limelight.

Leigh-Anne Pinnock is one of the fastest rising personalities in the entertainment industry. She began her career as a singer in a group band before embarking on a solo career. She has also ventured into the film industry with her debut film in 2021.

Source: TUKO.co.ke