Mary-Louise Parker is sending her best to Billy Crudup and Naomi Watts.

The “Weeds” star, whose relationship with the “Almost Famous” actor ended in 2003 amid a cheating scandal, said in a new interview that she wishes the newlyweds “well.”

“I honestly, of course, wish them every happiness because that’s my son’s father,” Parker, 58, told the Guardian Wednesday, referencing 19-year-old William.

“So I’m happy for them,” she continued. “I’m happy they found each other.”

The “Angels in America” star’s relationship with Crudup, 54, began in 1996 and ended seven years later when the “Morning Show” star left her for Claire Danes.

Parker, who was pregnant at the time, wrote about the scandal in her 2015 memoir, “Dear Mr. You.”

“I realize now that whatever I was walking through was part of my life, one piece of a bigger story that is mostly beautiful,” she shared at the time.

Danes, for her part, addressed her dalliance with her “Stage Beauty” co-star in an interview with Howard Stern that same year.

For more Page Six you love…

Listen to our weekly “We Hear” podcast

Shop our exclusive merch

“I was just in love with him and needed to explore that, and I was 24,” the “Fleishman Is in Trouble” star, now 44, said at the time. “I didn’t quite know what those consequences would be.

“[The backlash] was a scary thing. That was really hard. I didn’t know how to not do that. It’s OK. I went through it. We’re friendly — we’re friends.”

Danes and Crudup broke up in 2006, with the “Homeland” alum going on to marry Hugh Dancy. By that time, Parker had adopted her daughter, Caroline, while in a relationship with Jeffrey Dean Morgan.

In 2017, Crudup moved on with Watts following her and longtime partner Liev Schreiber’s split.

The couple sparked engagement speculation six years later when the “Twin Peaks” alum, 54, was spotted with a ring on that finger.

Watts played coy when asked about the rumors on the “Today” show in April, saying she had “brain fog.”

But earlier this month, she and Crudup got “hitched” in a New York City courthouse ceremony, which the bride documented via Instagram.