Prabhakar Name Meaning in English

What does the name Prabhakar mean? What is the meaning of the name Prabhakar, lucky number, lucky stone, origin and religion.

Prabhakar Name Meaning. Indian (southern states): Hindu name from Sanskrit prabhakara 'light maker' (from prabha 'light' + -kara 'causing'), an epithet of the sun. This is found only as a male given name in India, but in the U.S. it has come to be used as a family name.

Prabhakar Name Meaning, Origin & Details

Meaning: The Sun Details: Sun Hindi: सूरज Gender: Boy Origin: hindi Religion: Hindu Suitable for: Boys / Male / Guys Hardness: Hard to pronounce Uniqueness: Rare / It is unique name Short & Easy: No Syllables: 4.5 Syllables, 9 Letters and 1 Words

Prabhakar Name Meaning in Hindi ⟶

Related or Similar Names

If you like the meanings or synonyms of name Prabhakar; we have created list of popular names that can be considered as alternative of the name Prabhakar.

Below names are with similar meaning as The Sun. Explore the list below for names that not only share a similar meaning to "The Sun" but also encapsulate the essence and significance associated with the name "Prabhakar."

Need Sibling Names For Prabhakar?

Brothers sibling names for Prabhakar can be chosen from the list below.

Hindi Name Birth Star (Janam Nakshatra), Rashi & Syllables

Prabhakar Name Lucky Number 4

Prabhakar Name Numerology And Personality

Prabhakar has the numerology 6. The gender of this name Prabhakar is Boy. These people are very good at keeping a nice balance between everything. They do not really over do anything rather they know how do they need to keep limits in everything.

Those who have numerology 6 are thought to be one of the most mature people because they are extremely responsible for their things and they are also very protective of the people around them. The religion is hindu.

The meaning of this name is The Sun.These are people who believe that they can only move forward in their lives if they have sympathy in their hearts and that is how they believe in nurturing. They are known to be the most sympathetic and kind towards the people around them no matter if they know them personally or not.

Prabhakar Ethnicity Distribution

Popular personalities with Prabhakar Name.

Prabhakar Name Wallpaper

Prabhakar name 3D wallpaper and writing styles, Write Prabhakar name on photo online, Prabhakar name writing style online, Write Prabhakar name on image online, Write Prabhakar name pic & wallpaper, Prabhakar 3D name wallpapers editing, Prabhakar new wallpaper, Prabhakar 3d name creator online, Prabhakar name background maker, Create my name in style for Prabhakar

See Prabhakar Name Wallpaper ⟶

How People Search Prabhakar