This is an annotated list of men primarily known for their work as Catholic priests. Catholic priests who are mostly known for their non-priestly work should be placed on other lists. Further men known for being bishops, archbishops, and other positions above the priesthood should be placed elsewhere. This is to avoid redundancy with the List of cardinals, List of popes, etc.

Priests[]

Roman Church[]

Cristóbal Diatristán de Acuña – Jesuit explorer

Alger of Liège – History

Abraham Armand – Missionary to Hawaii

Alexis Bachelot – Missionary to Hawaii

Mary Bastian – Murdered activist in Sri Lanka.

Father David Bauer – Hockey player turned priest.

Father Josef Bisig – Formerly of the Society of St. Pius X, currently of the recognized Priestly Fraternity of St. Peter.

Martin Adolf Bormann – Son of Nazi Martin Bormann who works against Holocaust denial.

Francisco Fernández Carvajal – Author and Opus Dei priest.

Solanus Casey – Declared venerable by Pope John Paul II.

William Joseph Chaminade – Faced persecution for being a priest during the French Revolution

Daniel Comboni – Missionary to Africa, canonized.

John M. Corridan – Anti-corruption activist.

George DeCosta – Catholic priest in Hawaii known for the Big Island Liturgy and Arts Conference.

Horacio de la Costa – Filipino Jesuit and writer.

Les Costello – A founder of the Flying Fathers exhibition hockey team.

Peter Coudrin – Faced persecution during French Revolution, later became a missionary to Hawaii.

James Coyle – Catholic priest killed by the Ku Klux Klan.

Father Damien – Canonized, worked with lepers.

Chandra Fernando – Murdered human rights activist.

Joseph Freinademetz – Missionary to China, canonized.

Georg Gänswein – Secretary to Pope Benedict XVI

Lionel Groulx – Nationalist and Anti-Semite.

Ignatius of Loyola – Founder of the Society of Jesus

Mancio Ito – First official Japanese emissary to Europe, after that he became a Jesuit priest.

Saint Arnold Janssen – Missionary

Mychal F. Judge – Chaplain, 9-11 victim.

Georg Joseph Kamel – Jesuit botanist of whom the Camellia is named after. Compiled works on Philippine medicinal plants, which is well known in pharmacology

Georges Lemaître – Physisct and Astronomer. Proposed what would become known as the Big Bang Theory.

Georges-Henri Lévesque – Sociologist.

Father Eustaquio van Lieshout – Did work in Brazil

Michael J. McGivney – Founder of the Knights of Columbus

Columba Murphy – Involved in gaining an Edict of Toleration for Hawaiian Catholics

Hugh O'Flaherty – World War II hero.

Nemesi Marqués Oste – Rector in Andorra and political figure there.

Jean-Baptiste de la Salle – A founder of the Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools

Abraham a Sancta Clara – Catholic preacher in Austria.

Francis Xavier – Jesuit missionary to Japan

Eastern Catholic Churches[]

Ghevont Alishan – Priest of the Armenian Catholic Church who designed Armenia's first modern flag.

Walter Ciszek – Byzantine Rite member of the Society of Jesus who was imprisoned at Lubyanka (KGB).

Eddie Doherty – Ordained a priest in the Melkite Greek Catholic Church.

Ed Evanko – Actor who became a Ukrainian Catholic priest.

Nimattullah Kassab Al-Hardini – Catholic saint.

Louis Massignon – Scholar of Islam who transferred to the Melkite Greek Catholic Church after converting to Catholicism and later became a priest.

Alphonse Mingana – Chaldean Catholic Church priest and Orientalist.

Youakim Moubarac – Maronite Church – priest and scholar.

Joseph Raya – a Melkite Greek Catholic priest (later archbishop) active in the U.S. civil rights movement and advocate of Israeli Christian Arabs.

Catholic exorcists[]

Father Ernst Alt

Father Candido Amantini

Gabriele Amorth – Founder of the International Association of Exorcists

Corrado Balducci

Father Raymond J. Bishop

William S. Bowdern – Case he did became basis for film The Exorcist

Jeremy Davies

Pellegrino Ernetti – Music scholar and writer

Father Angelo Fantoni

Father Jose Antonio Fortea

Giancarlo Gramolazzo – Current president of the International Association of Exorcists

Walter Halloran

Father Peter Heier

Father Edward Hughes

Lawrence Kenny – Involved in case linked to the film The Exorcist.

Father Alfred Kunz

Father Matteo La Grua

James J. LeBar – New York exorcist consulted with regards to films.

Malachi Martin – Writer on unusual subjects as well as an exorcist.

Rufus Pereira – VP of International Association of Exorcists and Indian Catholic.

Father Theophilus Riesinger

Father Rosario Stroscio

For more exorcists see Category:Catholic exorcists.

Criminals[]

John Geoghan – pedophile sex abuser

Oliver O'Grady – pedophile sex abuser and subject of the 2006 documentary, Deliver Us From Evil

Barry Ryan – pedophile sex abuser

Athanase Seromba – convicted of genocide and crimes against humanity in the Rwandan genocide.

Brendan Smyth – pedophile sex abuser

For more priests who committed crimes see Category:Roman Catholic Church sex abuse scandal.

See also[]

List of Roman Catholics

[]