Diego López de Zúñiga y Velasco, 4th Count of Nieva was the fourth viceroy of Peru, from April 17, 1561 to his death on February 20, 1564.

Diego López de Zúñiga, 4th Count of Nieva was born on January 1, 1510, in Burgos, Castille and León, Spain. His birth geographical coordinates are 42° 20’ 28” North latitude and 3° 42’ 7” West longitude. Diego López de Zúñiga, 4th Count of Nieva passed away at the age of 54 in 1564.

Astrologically, Diego López de Zúñiga, 4th Count of Nieva falls under the Sun sign of Capricorn, with Aries as his Ascendant, Taurus as his Moon sign, and Leo as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Capricorn Moon Taurus Mercury Capricorn Venus Aquarius Mars Libra Jupiter Capricorn Saturn Libra Uranus Aries Neptune Aquarius Pluto Sagittarius Ceres Pisces Chiron Scorpio Eros Aries Hygiea Sagittarius Juno Libra Pallas Pisces Vesta Sagittarius Ascendant Aries Black Moon Lilith Leo Midheaven Capricorn North Node Sagittarius South Node Gemini Part of Fortune Virgo Vertex Libra

Sunin Capricorn10° 21’ 46”

The Sun in Capricorn in a Natal Chart is a placement associated with patience and reliability. You are consistent and preserve tradition. You look to […] Read more »

Moonin Taurus27° 59’ 33”

The Taurus Moon in the Natal Chart makes you sensual and reasonable. You are empathetic and can be rational and down to earth. You are […] Read more »

Mercuryin Capricorn14° 39’ 33”

Mercury in Capricorn in the Natal Chart makes you eager to express your ideas about money, finance, and career. You often think of investments and […] Read more »

Venusin Aquarius14° 2’ 41”

Aquarius Venus in the Natal Chart makes you unusual and brilliant. You value people who inspire breakthroughs. You love epiphanies that help you understand the […] Read more »

Marsin Libra16° 26’ 9”

Libra Mars in the Natal Chart makes you long for balance. You are motivated to express your unique fantasies and find the passion and motivation […] Read more »

Jupiterin Capricorn2° 34’ 26”

Capricorn Jupiter in the Natal Chart indicates a practical approach to accomplishing your dreams. Your generation sets a cautious and steady foundation for success. You […] Read more »

Saturnin Libra7° 56’ 16”

Yet, when you face challenges, you can be a staunch advocate for others. You have a feisty side and can be passionate about your mission. […] Read more »

Uranusin Aries2° 7’ 32”

Aries Uranus in the Natal Chart brings strength and independence. You are rebellious and can be enthusiastic. You are optimistic and can be playful and […] Read more »

Neptunein Aquarius5° 43’ 54”

Is Neptune in Aquarius rare? Neptune spends fourteen years in each sign. Neptune in Aquarius occurs every one hundred and sixty-eight years. Aquarius Neptune in […] Read more »

Plutoin Sagittarius17° 27’ 41”

Pluto in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart makes you part of a generation ready to delve deeper to discover new beliefs. Your generation is fascinated […] Read more »

Ceresin Pisces7° 6’ 0”

Ceres in Pisces in the Natal Chart indicates a loving and mystical generation. You are part of a cohort that follows your ideals and can […] Read more »

Chironin Scorpio7° 41’ 6”

Chiron in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you eager to gain the power and perspective to conquer your past traumas. Your desire for healing […] Read more »

Erosin Aries4° 49’ 18”

Eros in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you passionate and strong. You are excitable and have a spicey and adventurous sex life. You are […] Read more »

Hygieain Sagittarius0° 25’ 12”

Hygiea in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart makes you eager to explore your health by embracing multicultural practices. You expand your horizons and can accept […] Read more »

Junoin Libra28° 36’ 49”

Juno in Libra in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for romance and marriage. You are eager to settle down with your partner and […] Read more »

Pallasin Pisces13° 59’ 8”

Pallas in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you a generous and compassionate leader. You mentor others and can help create a path to success. […] Read more »

Vestain Sagittarius0° 21’ 15”

Vesta in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart brings passion and energy. You are excited about adventure and freedom. You can be loving and devoted to […] Read more »

Ascendantin Aries18° 5’ 7”

Aries Ascendant in the Natal Chart indicates a dramatic personality. You have a passionate appearance and often go to extremes to show your individuality. You […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Leo5° 14’ 33”

Leo Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you spontaneous and impulsive. You are dramatic and use your creative gifts to compensate for fears […] Read more »

Midheavenin Capricorn9° 19’ 6”

The Capricorn Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you stoic and observant. You are patient and down to earth. You have a practical and determined […] Read more »

North Nodein Sagittarius2° 10’ 50”

Sagittarius North Node in the Natal Chart makes you determined and headstrong. You overcome being scattered and develop a passion for your mission. Your destiny […] Read more »

South Nodein Gemini2° 10’ 50”

Gemini South Node in the Natal Chart indicates you have the potential to lead others as a creative and independent thinker. You are comfortable with […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Second House Mercury Tenth House Venus Eleventh House Mars Sixth House Jupiter Ninth House Saturn Sixth House Uranus Twelfth House Neptune Eleventh House Pluto Eighth House Ceres Twelfth House Chiron Seventh House Eros Twelfth House Hygiea Eighth House Juno Seventh House Pallas Twelfth House Vesta Eighth House Black Moon Lilith Fifth House North Node Eighth House South Node Second House Part of Fortune Sixth House Vertex Sixth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 18 major aspects, alongside 17 minor aspects, as well as 10 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Jupiter Square Uranus Mars Sextile Pluto Sun Square Saturn Mercury Square Mars Venus Trine Mars Saturn Trine Neptune Venus Sextile Pluto Sun Conjunct Mercury Moon Sextile Uranus Uranus Sextile Neptune Moon Quincunx Jupiter Jupiter Square Saturn Sun Square Mars Venus Trine Saturn Saturn Opposite Uranus Mercury Square Saturn Sun Conjunct Jupiter Moon Trine Neptune

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Diego López de Zúñiga, 4th Count of Nieva’s life journey.

Sun Square Saturnorb: 2°

The Sun square Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you feel stifled and restricted. You struggle to adhere to rules and practical routines. With work, […] Read more »

Mercury Square Marsorb: 2°

Mercury square Mars in a Natal Chart typically indicates that a person will struggle with decision-making, feelings of frustration, impulsivity, and arguments caused by their […] Read more »

Venus Sextile Plutoorb: 3°

Venus sextile Pluto in a chart typically indicates a person is highly passionate about expressing love and affection. They are devoted friends and partners, though […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Mercuryorb: 4°

Sun conjunct Mercury in the Natal Chart can make you bright, playful, and talkative. Your intellectual gifts are among your best characteristics. You can be […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Uranusorb: 4°

When the Moon is sextile Uranus in a Natal Chart, this typically means that a person is free-spirited, unique, and a bit rebellious. Someone with […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Jupiterorb: 5°

The Moon quincunx Jupiter in a Natal Chart creates an intense clash between a person’s inner sense of safety and emotional expression and their sense […] Read more »

Sun Square Marsorb: 6°

The Sun square Mars can make you restless. You have an anxious personality and may be energetic and hyper. You find motivation to overcome insecurities, […] Read more »

Saturn Opposite Uranusorb: 6°

Saturn opposite Uranus in a chart creates an eccentric, aggressive, and arrogant personality. There is often outer confidence with this opposition, but an inner insecurity […] Read more »

Mercury Square Saturnorb: 7°

Mercury square Saturn in a Natal Chart can be an incredibly challenging square to work through. Many lessons can be learned from this aspect, but […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Jupiterorb: 8°

The Sun conjunct Jupiter in the Natal Chart amplifies your greatest strengths. You are generous and compassionate toward people in need. You can be the […] Read more »

Moon Trine Neptuneorb: 8°

The Moon trine Neptune in a chart typically indicates that a person is caring and compassionate. They are sensitive and friendly, and it is probably […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Jupiter Quincunx South Node Saturn Conjunct Vertex Uranus Trine North Node Uranus Sextile South Node Neptune Opposite Black Moon Lilith Neptune Quincunx Part of Fortune Sun Conjunct Midheaven Moon Quincunx Juno Mercury Sextile Pallas Saturn Quincunx Ceres Saturn Square Midheaven Neptune Sextile Eros Pluto Trine Ascendant Mars Opposite Ascendant Uranus Trine Hygiea Uranus Trine Vesta Neptune Trine Vertex

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Diego López de Zúñiga, 4th Count of Nieva’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Jupiter Quincunx South Nodeorb: 0°

Jupiter quincunx the South Node in a chart can make it difficult for someone to move on from the past and expand their worldview. They […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Vertexorb: 0°

Saturn conjunct the Vertex in a chart can teach maturity, responsibility, and diligence. It has a sense of fate when the Vertex is activated, but […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 1°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Junoorb: 1°

The Moon quincunx Juno in a chart typically creates a desire for commitment and long-term relationships but trouble finding satisfying and fulfilling partnerships. People with […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Ceres Quincunx Vertex Eros Trine Black Moon Lilith Hygiea Conjunct Vesta Ceres Trine Chiron Ceres Opposite Part of Fortune Eros Quincunx Part of Fortune Hygiea Conjunct North Node Hygiea Opposite South Node Vesta Conjunct North Node Vesta Opposite South Node

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Diego López de Zúñiga, 4th Count of Nieva’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Vesta Conjunct North Nodeorb: 2°

Vesta conjunct the North Node in a chart connects purpose and destiny. The spiritual path someone follows will align with the traits they are growing […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.