A highly anticipated musical about performing drag artists is rolling into the West End. Karen Price speaks to Welsh leading actor Oliver Thornton about outrageous outfits, lavish sets and mastering the make-up

OLIVER Thornton admits he’s gained a newfound respect for women – and it’s all down to high heels. For weeks he’s been easing his feet into pairs of stilettos and trying to learn how to walk without toppling over.

But there’s good reason for his attempts at wearing women’s shoes – he’s one of the leading actors in Priscilla Queen of the Desert the Musical.

The new West End production, which opens next week, is based on the hit 1994 Australian film about two drag queens and a transsexual who get a cabaret gig in the middle of the desert.

When I call Thornton, it’s the day before it opens for previews at London’s Palace Theatre.

So how have rehearsals been going?

“It’s probably not the right day to ask me. It’s a very stressful day,” he admits.

But at least he’s got the hang of his footwear.

“I’m getting used to the high heels,” laughs Thornton, who is playing drag queen Adam.

“I started off dancing from a young age so that makes it a little bit easier,” he says referring to his calf muscles.

“I had a couple of weeks of pain and did a little bit of practising but I’d feel a wally walking around the house making scrambled egg while wearing stilettos. But I’ve had six weeks of rehearsals so now it feels natural. It’s cliched to say you get a newfound respect for women but you really do.”

The Welshman is starring opposite Jason Donovan as Tick and Tony Sheldon as transsexual Bernadette.

And he says the costumes are completely outrageous.

“I have amazing costumes,” says Thornton, who is originally from Abergavenny. “I can’t even begin to describe the budget that the costume department must have.

“It’s like the film times 10 but it’s well known that the film had a really small budget and they had to throw things together from old clothes.

“I have feather back packs and too many thongs to talk about. There are bits of nudity on stage but you get used to it. But coming off stage and walking to your dressing room in just your thong and high heels you feel a bit more vulnerable.”

Priscilla Queen of the Desert the Musical received its world premiere in Sydney in 2006. It has since been seen by more than a million people in Australia and New Zealand and is the most successful Australian musical of all time.

Sheldon played Bernadette in Australia and he’s now looking forward to reprising his award-winning role in the West End alongside Thornton and Donovan.

Thornton, 29, who trained at the Mountview Academy of Theatre Arts in London, saw the film when it was released and says he wanted to audition for it when he heard it was coming to the West End.

“I think when you first watch it you’re taken by the fact it’s a crazy film with amazing costumes and amazing characters,” says Thornton, whose credits include Starlight Express, Les Miserables and Phantom of the Opera.

“But the thing that’s really great is they have an emotional story. You can go and enjoy it for what it is – the costumes, make-up and dancing – or you can enjoy the fact it has a really good story. The film is so powerful because it’s more than just a romp – it has a bit of heart.”

Thornton, who developed his acting skills while at Abergavenny Amateur Operatic and Dramatic Society, says people often describe his character Adam/Felicia, famously played by Guy Pearce in the film, as “catty”.

“But it’s important that people like him,” he says. “What’s nice about him is that he has really got a good sense of fun. He doesn’t mean to upset people, he just does it by accident. It’s lovely playing a role like that. In my normal life I wouldn’t have the courage to sit on top of a bus and lip synch to arias so it’s good fun to step into his shoes.”

Ah yes, the lip synching. The musical is packed with songs but the leading actors don’t actually sing. Instead there is a trio of surrealistic super-charged ladies called The Divas, played by Zoe Birkett, Kate Gillespie and Emma Lindar, who fly in from all over the stage to provide the live singing that the drag queens and transsexual mime to.

It’s just all part of the overall spectacle that makes up the show, which features a giant moving bus called Priscilla as its central character.

“It’s all programmed by a computer,” says Thornton of the bus. “It’s a little bit scary when you first get on it but it’s a phenomenal piece of technology the way it lights up and moves.”

Thornton is full of praise for his co-stars.

“It’s really good to work with Tony. I feel sorry for him really because we call upon him for everything. He is our Oracle. When costume changes aren’t happening we ask him why and he usually has the answer. He’s so good in the show and brings weight to it. When you’re flapping around he’s calm.”

He describes former Neighbours actor Donovan as “wonderful”.

“He’s going to be fantastic in the show. The thing that’s great about Jason is he’s a lovely man and really approachable. I remember him from my childhood watching Neighbours but as so often is the way when you meet famous actors, he’s just a normal person and not like a celebrity.”

With months of hype leading up to the opening performance, you couldn’t blame Thornton for feeling a little nervous about finally stepping out onto that stage but he says he doesn’t suffer from stage fright.

“I always try to think to myself that there’s not an audience there. You have to treat it like a rehearsal. At the end of the day it’s a job.”

Although he’s carved out a career in musicals, Thornton says that in the future he would to do some film.

“It’s a genre I love. I love going to the cinema and have a huge DVD collection. It’s just making that crossover really. But I have been lucky enough to be in the West End.”

As we end our call, Thornton says he’s about to apply his eye shadow.

“I’m doing very subtle smoky eyes. Our make-up designer is a phenomenal drag queen from Australia – he goes through it and then we practise. It’s almost like art. But at the moment mine still looks like face paint.”

After mastering those heels, I’m sure getting the make-up just right will be a piece of cake for Thornton.

Priscilla Queen of the Desert: The Musical is at the Palace Theatre, London from Tuesday. Bookings are currently open until September 26. For details, call 0870 154 4040

Oliver Thornton, Tony Sheldon and Jason Donovan star in Priscilla Queen Of The Desert: The Musical