Oliver Thornton, 30, first fell in love with the theatre when he was still a schoolboy in Monmouthshire.

But he has gained national recognition for his talents by winning the What’s On Stage Award for best supporting actor in a musical. He stars as Adam/Felicia in Priscilla, Queen of the Desert at the Palace Theatre, alongside Jason Dovovan and Tony Sterry.

Oliver said: "It’s an honour to be awarded a What’s On Stage Award as it reflects the public’s choice.

"I want to thanked everyone who voted for me and all my fans who went online to show their support. This of course includes all the support I received from everyone back home in Wales and members of the Abergavenny Amateur Operatic and Dramatic Society.

"A huge thank you to all my friends in Abergavenny and the surrounding areas. You have helped me achieve my dreams and for that I am forever grateful."

Oliver, a former King Henry VIII School pupil, gained acting experience as a youngster with the Abergavenny Amateur Operatic and Dramatic Society and studied classical ballet from an early age at the Geraldine Harris School of Dance, also in Abergavenny. He trained as a musical theatre actor at Mountview Academy of Theatre Arts and graduated in 2001.

Oliver was given his big break playing the role of Rusty in the 2006 UK tour of Andrew Lloyd Webber’s Starlight Express and has not looked back since, appearing on TV on The Paul O'Grady Show and as a celebrity contestant on The Weakest Link.

Other notable roles he has played include Harrison in Chicago at the Adelphi Theatre, Enjolras in Les Miserables at the Palace and Queen’s theatres and Raoul in The Phantom at the Opera at Her Majesty’s Theatre.

Oliver's leading industry award was presented to him by Christopher Biggins and Melanie Giedroyc at the ceremony on Valentine's Day. The awards are the only ones voted for by members of the public – and this year more than 46,000 people voted across 26 categories.

Other winners on the night included Jude Law, Sir Ian McKellan and Rachel Weisz.