Oliver Thornton

‘The Taming of the Shrew’

Through June 26

Shakespeare Theatre Company

Sidney Harman Hall

610 F St., N.W.

202-547-1122

After 14 years of doing musical theater in London’s West End, Oliver Thornton set his sights on Broadway and moved to New York.

“I arrived two years ago without knowing a single person, but I felt it was time to shake things up with a big life challenge. And I was right.”

The out actor’s most recent challenge is playing Bianca, the younger, fairer sister in the Shakespeare Theatre Company’s all-male production of “The Taming of the Shrew.” While it’s not Thornton’s first time in heels — in London he donned drag for “Priscilla Queen of the Desert” and as Frank N Furter, the sweet transvestite in “The Rocky Horror Picture Show “ — this time it’s different.

“Here I’m portraying an actual woman,” Thornton says. “Audience members say they can quickly accept that the male cast members playing female parts are women. What I find so interesting about doing an all-male is that the lines of gender blur. You see characters as people.”

One of Shakespeare’s earlier comedies, “Shrew” with its treating of women as commodities isn’t the easiest of works.

“It’s misogynistic,” says Thornton, 36. “There are lines and themes that make us wince. Because the cast is all male, it alters the perspective to some degree without changing the content. It doesn’t feel as bad.”

Staged by out director Ed Sylvanus Iskandar, the production is immersive, which means the actors interact with the audience before the play begins and during the intermission. He’s also added music to the classic. The score is from the back catalogue of singer songwriter Duncan Sheik.

“Rehearsing the show was absolutely epic,” Thornton says. “Learning songs in addition to the play was a lot. I’m from musical theater background, but hadn’t sung this type of pop music. Fortunately the music lends itself to theater. The lyrics are story telling driven and something that I could get into.”

Thornton’s Bianca is a willowy blonde model circa 1950s la dolce vita. More precisely, she’s the face of the family’s fashion house and her father’s favorite. Suitors are in no short supply. But the hitch is that Bianca cannot marry before her older angry sister Katherina, played by Maulik Pancholy (best known as Jonathan from TV “30 Rock”), ties the knot. Sweet and demure, Bianca makes the perfect foil to her hellcat sibling. The cast also features out actors André de Shields, Rick Hammerly and Tom Story.

Prior to studying theater in London, Thornton trained in classical ballet in his native Wales.

“I’m convinced that dance sets anyone up for life better than anything else. It definitely makes getting the physicality of a part easier. Understanding the body and how physicality tells a story helps an actor immensely. With Bianca I wanted to create lightness in her character and give a finish and polish to her. My dance background made that possible.”

Thornton is admittedly smitten with the vastness and variety of the American theater world.

“In London,” he says, “the scene is smaller and productions must turn a profit unless they’re at one or two of the government-funded theaters. West End shows have to make money. Consequently everyone is reluctant to take risks. In the U.S., the focus is on what’s the hot new ticket. Everyone wants to create the next new thing like ‘Hamilton.’ If you land it, it’s going to be huge.”

For now, he’s enjoying being Bianca.

“Some actors like to bury themselves in research. I find it a bit stifling. It took time to relax into Bianca. It was a bit trickier than I expected. But as time went I’ve gotten to know her, and I like her a lot.”

This year marks the centennial of James Baldwin and it’s not going unnoticed.

Born in New York City on Aug. 2, 1924, Baldwin was a 20th century literary titan. Not only was he tremendously prolific and talented, the novelist/poet/playwright/ and essayist par excellence, fearlessly wrote works exploring core identity topics including masculinity, race, class, and sexuality.

Baldwin was also Black, openly gay (long before Stonewall) and an activist. With the ubiquitous cigarette in hand, a quick mind and courageous heart, he was a regular on popular talk shows, and a leading voice in the civil rights movement, unreservedly addressing social inequities and Black oppression.

In recognition of his greatness, Baldwin centennial celebrations have been popping up all over. In North Bethesda, the Strathmore has already embarked on two months of commemorative programming, including live musical and theatrical events celebrating the late writer’s genius.

On Saturday, Sept. 7, at The Mansion at Strathmore, Howard University’s Department of Theatre Arts students will perform select scenes from Baldwin’s dramatic works: “The Amen Corner” (1955) and “Blues for Mister Charlie” (1964). Directed by Dr. Khalid Y. Long, the presentation will also include a scholarly overview of Baldwin’s contributions to African American Theatre.

And on Saturday, Oct. 5, The Music Center at Strathmore presents queer singer/songwriter Meshell Ndegeocello doing “No More Water/ The Gospel of James Baldwin.” Inspired by the way Baldwin empowered others through the written word, the Grammy-winning artist uses music as her vehicle to engage others in the challenge and promise of Baldwin’s work.

A famously versatile performer, Ndegeocello enjoys a devoted fan base who follow her on “sojourns into soul, spoken word, R&B, jazz, hip-hop, and rock, all bound by a lyrical, spiritual search for love, justice, respect, resolution, and happiness.”

Since Baldwin’s death from cancer at 63 in 1987, his reputation hasn’t dimmed. In fact, it’s grown in some ways. E. Ethelbert Miller, the D.C.-based literary activist, memoirist and poet, credits Baldwin’s ongoing relevance in part to queer studies and a flurry of films including Raoul Peck’s 2017 Oscar nominated documentary “I Am Not Your Negro.”

Miller adds, “Baldwin is an is important writer who speaks to his time. He explains what it means to be an American. He speaks to things outside of sexuality. Personally, I read Baldwin to understand what the Civil Rights movement was about.”

And while he doesn’t claim to be a Baldwin expert, Miller has delved deeply into the legendary author’s life and work, describing Baldwin as a sort of prophet: “He comes out of the Black church. There’s no Baldwin without the Black church. He was a child minister. It’s not surprising that within his work [his semi-autobiographical first novel ‘Go Tell It on the Mountain,’ the gay-themed ‘Giovanni’s Room,’ etc.] he struggles with sin and the devil.”

His early life in Harlem wasn’t easy. Baldwin’s stepfather, a stern storefront minister, was severe and unkind. In search of himself, Baldwin headed downtown to Greenwich Village where he found a formative lover/mentor in Beauford Delaney, the great modernist painter who, by example, taught his protégé how to be Black, gay, and an artist.

Before turning 30, Baldwin was already a famous author brimming with energy in terms of youth, vision, and hope.

And though he lived and flourished in France and Turkey for a time, Baldwin found it difficult to comment on what was happening in America from afar: Miller says, “He couldn’t. Because he comes out of the church, he has to be a witness. He needs to testify. So, he joins the civil rights movement in the South.”

In later years, Baldwin settled in the French town of Saint-Paul-de-Vence where he continued to write until his death.

For Miller’s money, Baldwin’s most exciting works are his essays. He wholeheartedly recommends ‘Price of a Ticket,’ a compendium of nearly 50 years of Baldwin’s powerful nonfiction writing, mostly focusing on the experience of race and identity in the United States.

On Thursday, Sept. 26, Miller is slated to join the party with a lecture titled “James Baldwin at the Crossroads” at Eaton House, a co-working space at 1203 K St., N.W., where, from a 2024 perspective, he’ll reexamine Baldwin’s 1976 book about film, “The Devil Finds Work.”

‘The Colored Museum’

Through Aug. 18

Studio Theatre

1501 14th St., N.W.

$50-$119

Studiotheatre.org

Snap, snap. Sitting in a New York gay bar named the Bottomless Pit, Miss Roj snaps their fingers as they read the local scene and the club’s clientele.

Snap, or “The Gospel According to Miss Roj,” is just one of about a dozen sketches hop-scotching through the Black American experience in Charles C. Wolfe’s “The Colored Museum,” now playing at Studio Theatre.

Miss Roj, searingly played by Matthew Elijah Webb, talks about what it means to be queer and Black. Dressed to impress in spangly top, striped pants, and white vinyl boots inspired by Annette Funicello circa “Beach Blanket Bingo,” Roj hopes to dance their demons out rather than drink them out. That’s the plan anyway.

Before winning awards for direction (including Tonys for “Angels in America” and “Elaine Stritch at Liberty”) Wolfe, who is gay and Black, wrote “The Colored Museum.” The scathing, subversive work premiered in 1986, and though slightly dated around the edges, it remains funny, hard-hitting, and provocative today.

At the top of the show, we’re greeted by Miss Pat (Ayanna Bria Bakari), a bouncy, pink-uniformed flight attendant who welcomes us aboard Celebrity Slave ship. She reminds us to buckle our shackles and warns that there’ll be no drumming, a caution that’s quickly and wonderfully disregarded by musician Jabari Exum who drums throughout the 90-minute play with music.

The immersive revival is directed by Psalmayene 24, a Studio Theatre stalwart. Collaborating on the production is Natsu Onoda Power. She’s designed the set and setting for the play turning the Victor Shargai Theatre into a sort of museum of Black history. The space is fitted with roughly hewn benches and humble cushions; its walls are covered with art.

Power’s serviceable set makes a terrific backdrop for projections of famous Black Americans including Oscar-winning actor Hattie McDaniel best known for playing Mammy in “Gone with the Wind” and current vice president and perhaps soon to be commander-in-chief Kamala Harris.

Somewhere I read that hair is power. Whether that’s true or not, I don’t know. But there’s a clever scene where a woman wearing a wig cap (Kelli Blackwell) is bookended by talking wig heads who advise her on what’s the most successful hair to wear to an important meeting. One of the heads sports a natural Afro look while the other is giving long straight hair that affords a well-timed hair flip gesture. It’s a humorous yet meaningful dive into Black beauty culture.

The hair scene transitions to a fascinatingly drawn satirical homage to Lorraine Hansberry’s “A Raisin in the Sun” with Blackwell changing into grey-wigged Mama. William Oliver Watkins is marvelous as the hardworking young man of the house whose mother repeatedly insists that he wipe his feet before entering. It’s a Black writer’s sly take on a lot of 20th century theater made with Black audiences in mind.

Another sketch focuses on Lala (Iris Beaumier), a southern Black woman who had to cross the pond to find the appreciation and respect her huge song and dance talent deserved — shades of Josephine Baker and Eartha Kitt.

The versatile ensemble cast is talented and fetching, more than adept at both singing and acting. They play multiple roles convincingly, benefiting in part from the labors of designer Moyenda Kulemeka whose costumes help bring to life characters ranging from raggedly dressed slaves arriving in Savannah, Ga., to smartly attired style mavens on the glossy pages of Ebony magazine.

At the end of the play, Miss Pat and the players return to the stage to see us travelers off with an upbeat adieu. Whatever baggage we take or leave behind is up to us.

‘Beautiful: The Carole King Musical’

Through July 25

Olney Theatre Center 2001 Olney-Sandy Spring Road, Olney, MD 20832 $31 -101Olneytheatre.org

As Bobby Smith describes it, “not too long ago, some things tripped me up.”

In late 2023, the celebrated, out actor was involved in two very serious car accidents and suffered severe injuries. And then May brought the unexpected death of his beloved Vizsla hound Mabel, named for the heroine in Gilbert and Sullivan’s “Pirates of Penzance.”

So, for much of 2024, Smith had been spending time healing at his farmhouse in Ellicott City, Md. Until now. Currently, he’s back on the boards at Olney Theatre Center playing record producer Don Kirshner in “Beautiful: The Carole King Musical,” a fun juke box musical about the early career years of singer/songwriter King from her Brooklyn roots to writing hits from an office in Times Square with her lyricist husband Gerry Goffin and on to Los Angeles solo-stardom.

WASHINGTON BLADE: Hey Bobby, you’ve been through a lot since we last spoke.

BOBBY SMITH: It’s been a whole lot. I spent the last seven or eight months either at home or going to doctor visits.

BLADE: How is it being back on stage?

SMITH: To be honest, it’s like learning to walk again.

BLADE: And playing the famously deadpan Don Kirshner?

SMITH: It’s good. I don’t do an imitation. Instead, I’ve created a character who’s not over the top; otherwise, it would become the Don Kirshner show and we don’t want that.

But because there’s not a lot of drama with Carole King, she’s a really kind, nice person, Don serves as a sort of catalyst. He pushes the story forward. He prods Carole to write more songs, to try different things. He doesn’t like her boyfriend. Don the character doesn’t sing much but he’s always barking at people.

BLADE: Sometimes you forget just how many familiar songs King wrote: “Take Good Care of My Baby,” “Up On the Roof,” and “Will You (Still) Love Me Tomorrow” for acts like the Shirelles and The Drifters. And later songs like “It’s Too Late,” “You’ve Got a Friend,” “(You Make Me Feel) Like a Natural Woman,” and of course “Beautiful.”

SMITH: Yeah, it feels like she wrote every song known to mankind; the show tells you that, and we sing most of them.

BLADE: You experienced a highpoint during the rough times. In May, you won a Helen Hayes Award for playing Bruce, the complicated, manic depressive, closeted father in Studio’s production of Alison Bechdel’s “Fun Home.”

SMITH: I did, but unfortunately, I couldn’t make it to the ceremony.

Bruce is a sympathetic but difficult character. Ever since being born, people of a certain age, have had to fight our way into the struggle of being gay. It’s not so much a struggle anymore, or I should say not as much as it used to be, but now there are a whole lot more signposts that didn’t exist when I was growing up.

Over the years, people have randomly attacked me for not talking more about my sexuality. I’m not closeted but I don’t feel I have to tell everyone. I don’t share it with my land lady. I don’t need to say “I’m here and I’m queer. Here’s your rent.”

BLADE: You have been in show biz for decades now. What keeps you going?

SMITH: I’m not sure, sometimes I ask myself what was I thinking when I decided to be a professional actor? I feel like I’m making a bigger contribution teaching at Catholic University than I did my entire acting career.

Now that I’ve taken over the tap department, I’m full time at Catholic. I’m also teaching Acting the Text, Directing for Musical Theatre, and in the fall, I’ll add Musical Interpretation.

BLADE: In this summer of so many theatrical choices, why see “Beautiful”?

SMITH: Well, if you don’t already know Natalie Weiss who plays Carole, you should. She’s an amazing compelling, vocalist with one of the healthiest singing voices you’ll ever hear, no straining, perfect placement.

Also, there’s nothing about “Beautiful” that’s going to make you feel bad, or put you in a place where you might think you need to talk to your therapist. That’s not going to happen. And it’s because Carole King is a positive human being; from an actor’s perspective, you feel great by the end of the show, and the audience gets that. The happiness is infectious.