Oliver Thornton News

BEN, VIRGINIA AND ME: THE LIBERACE MUSICAL Gets Concert at National Arts Gallery

The new musical Ben, Virginia and Me: The Liberace Musical will get a special concert presentation at theNational Arts Gallery (15 Gramercy Park South) on Monday, April 17 at 7:30 pm, before debuting a fully staged production at this year's New York Musical Festival (NYMF). Ben, Virginia and Me: The Liberace Musical has a book by Roger O. Hirson (Tony Nominee for Pippin) and music and lyrics by Barbara Carole Sickmen and will be directed by Paul A. Stancato (National Tours: Flashdance, The Lion King, The Wedding Singer) and Music Director Jesse Warkentin (National Tours: Wicked, Cinderella). Ben, Virginia and Me: The Liberace Musical is produced by Ron Sickmen. Tickets are FREE to the public but reservation are necessary, they can be made by emailingtheatre@thenationalartsclub.org.

BWW Review: SIDE BY SIDE BY SONDHEIM at Kansas City Repertory Theatre

recollects the early section of an unbelievable catalog of work.

Stars Set for SIDE BY SIDE BY SONDHEIM at KC Rep This Winter

Kansas City Repertory Theatre has announced the cast of this mid-season addition to its 2016/2017 season. Artistic Director Eric Rosen will direct a starry cast in the acclaimed musical revue Side by Side by Sondheim featuring actors Jenny Ashman, Shanna Jones, Orville Mendoza and Oliver Thornton.

Stars Set for SIDE BY SIDE BY SONDHEIM at KC Rep This Winter

Kansas City Repertory Theatre has announced the cast of this mid-season addition to its 2016/2017 season. Artistic Director Eric Rosen will direct a starry cast in the acclaimed musical revue Side by Side by Sondheim featuring actors Jenny Ashman, Shanna Jones, Orville Mendoza and Oliver Thornton.

Mary Bridget Davies, Christine Ebersole, BROADWAY PRINCESS PARTY and More Will Warm Up 54 Below This January

This January, Feinstein's/54 Below, Broadway's Supper Club & Private Event Destination, presents some of the brightest stars from Broadway, cabaret, jazz, and beyond. Scroll down for more details!

Farah Alvin, Devin Ilaw and More to Sing Favorite BROADWAY'S GUILTY PLEASURES at Feinstein's/54 Below

Feinstein's/54 Below, Broadway's Supper Club, presents 'Broadway's Guilty Pleasures' on January 2nd, 2017 at 9:30 PM.

Stars Set for SIDE BY SIDE BY SONDHEIM at KC Rep This Winter

Kansas City Repertory Theatre has announced the cast of this mid-season addition to its 2016/2017 season. Artistic Director Eric Rosen will direct a starry cast in the acclaimed musical revue Side by Side by Sondheim featuring actors Jenny Ashman, Shanna Jones, Orville Mendoza and Oliver Thornton.

BWW Review: CAMELOT at Capital Repertory Theatre

Beautiful melodies fill Capital Repertory Theatre with director Maggie Mancinelli-Cahill's staging of Frederick Loewe and Alan Jay Lerner's "Camelot." The musical's score is composed of lush, romantic, and memorable tunes that help to move along the somewhat flawed book.

BWW Review: Shakespeare Theatre Company Presents a Bold New THE TAMING OF THE SHREW

What a time for THE TAMING OF THE SHREW. It's a brave choice given its divisive, misogynistic text, but Shakespeare Theatre Company pulls it off under the bold direction of Ed Sylvanus Iskander. With an all-male cast, and featuring the contemporary pop music of Tony winner Duncan Sheik, this is Shakespeare with a decidedly modern sensibility.

Ed Sheeran, James Bay Among Ivor Novello Awards Nominees; Full List!

BASCA, in association with PRS for Music, announce the nominations for the 61st Ivor Novello Awards [The Ivors]. The Ivors will take place on Thursday 19th May at the Grosvenor House, Park Lane, London.

Broadway at the Cabaret - Top 5 Picks for February 9-16, Featuring Kyle Dean Massey, Matt Doyle, and More!

Broadway's 40 theatres aren't the only places to catch performances from your favorite stars! Well after Broadway orchestras begin their overtures, ensemble members take their dance breaks, and performers belt out their eleven o'clock numbers, the party continues at various cabaret venues throughout New York City. Below, BroadwayWorld brings you some cabaret highlights for this week as picked by our theatre editors, including: The Songs of Tor & Lisa, ft. Brandon Victor Dixon, and more; New Musicals at 54: Fallout by Kyle Jarrow and Nick Blaemire; Kyle Dean Massey at 54 Below; Jasper In Deadland CD Release Concert; and Broadway Couples Sing I Do! I Do! For Valentine's Day.

Liliane Montevecchi, JASPER IN DEADLAND & More Set for Feinstein's/54 Below Next Week

Next week, FEINSTEIN'S/54 BELOW, Broadway's Supper Club, presents some of the brightest stars from Broadway, cabaret, jazz and beyond. To purchase tickets or for more information, visit www.54Below.com/Feinsteins or call (646) 476-3551.

BWW Interview: Tor Hyams and Lisa Rothauser Preview 'The Songs of Tor and Lisa'

'The Songs of Tor and Lisa' is about to hit the Feinstein's/54 Below stage on February 8, 2016, but before that BroadwayWorld sat down with Grammy-nominated songwriter? Tor Hyams and veteran Broadway performer Lisa Rothauser to chat about their upcoming concert.

STAGE TUBE: They Got Life! Watch Highlights from HAIR at Music Circus

To round out its 65th season, Music Circus presents HAIR, the groundbreaking musical that defined a generation and introduced rock 'n' roll to Broadway. Set against a backdrop of the Vietnam era, a group of late 1960s youth join a social revolution and 'Let the Sun Shine In.' Featuring hit songs such as 'Aquarius,' 'Let The Sun Shine In' and 'Easy To Be Hard,' HAIR is an exhilarating and emotionally intense ride. Click below to watch highlights from the show!

Photo Flash: First Look at Stephanie Mieko Cohen, Laura D'Andre, Peter Saide, Oliver Thornton and More in HAIR at Music Circus

To round out its 65th season, Music Circus presents Hair, the groundbreaking musical that defined a generation and introduced rock 'n' roll to Broadway. Set against a backdrop of the Vietnam era, a group of late 1960s youth join a social revolution and 'Let the Sun Shine In.' Featuring hit songs such as 'Aquarius,' 'Let The Sun Shine In' and 'Easy To Be Hard,' Hair is an exhilarating and emotionally intense ride that Variety calls 'a rock musical that communicates viscerally with its audience. The score's vigorousness and variety are remarkable.'

Stephanie Mieko Cohen, Laura D'Andre, Peter Saide, Oliver Thornton and More Bring HAIR to Music Circus Tonight

To round out its 65th season, Music Circus presents Hair, the groundbreaking musical that defined a generation and introduced rock 'n' roll to Broadway. Set against a backdrop of the Vietnam era, a group of late 1960s youth join a social revolution and 'Let the Sun Shine In.' Featuring hit songs such as 'Aquarius,' 'Let The Sun Shine In' and 'Easy To Be Hard,' Hair is an exhilarating and emotionally intense ride that Variety calls 'a rock musical that communicates viscerally with its audience. The score's vigorousness and variety are remarkable.'

WAKE UP with BWW 8/20/2015 - WAITRESS Opens in Cambridge and More!

Good morning, BroadwayWorld! Because we know all our readers eat, sleep and breathe Broadway, what could be better than waking up to it? Today's big news: WAITRESS brings pie and the sounds of Sara Bareilles to Cambridge tonight!

WAKE UP with BWW 8/18/2015 - INFORMED CONSENT Off-Broadway, FULL HOUSE in Toronto and More!

Good morning, BroadwayWorld! Because we know all our readers eat, sleep and breathe Broadway, what could be better than waking up to it? Today's big news: INFORMED CONSENT and A DELICATE SHIP start up off-Broadway, FULL HOUSE gets the musical treatment in Toronto and more!

Stephanie Mieko Cohen, Laura D'Andre, Peter Saide, Oliver Thornton and More to Bring HAIR to Music Circus This Month

To round out its 65th season, Music Circus presents Hair, the groundbreaking musical that defined a generation and introduced rock 'n' roll to Broadway. Set against a backdrop of the Vietnam era, a group of late 1960s youth join a social revolution and 'Let the Sun Shine In.' Featuring hit songs such as 'Aquarius,' 'Let The Sun Shine In' and 'Easy To Be Hard,' Hair is an exhilarating and emotionally intense ride that Variety calls 'a rock musical that communicates viscerally with its audience. The score's vigorousness and variety are remarkable.'