Calling all aspiring actors - We’re excited to announce auditions for our upcoming production of Jekyll & Hyde, the Musical! Set to take the stage this September at Seahawk Cultural Center, Hilton Head High School, this thrilling musical promises to captivate audiences with its unforgettable characters and powerful songs.

The Lowcountry’s best and brightest come out to shine for a good cause as 11 local celebrities will be taking the stage for Dancing With the Stars 2024 at Seaquins Ballroom in Bluffton, SC.

Calling all aspiring actors - We’re thrilled to announce auditions for our upcoming production of Oliver! Set to grace the stage this June in Hilton Head, this award-winning musical promises to captivate audiences with its unforgettable characters and timeless songs. Click through for complete audition information.

JULY 8-12 & JULY 15-19 - Theatre Broadway Summer Camp - Join us for one or two weeks of musical theatre training. Each week will be filled with amazing classes taught by a professional staff of working artists from New York City, along with virtual lessons and Q&A sessions with current Broadway stars!

We are pleased to announce auditions for the Spring 2024 production of "Our Town!" Join us in bringing Thornton Wilder's classic to life on our stage. This Pulitzer Prize-winning play explores the beauty of everyday life and the connections that bind us. Whether you're a seasoned actor or new to community theatre, we invite you to audition.

Main Stage Community Theatre is thrilled to announce a new partnership with Sea Glass Stage Company! This collaboration is a total win-win and further helps our arts community to bring even more opportunities for creativity and diversity. The three-year partnership includes providing space for multiple MSCT shows at Coligny Theatre.

Under the mentorship of Michelle McElroy-Cox who is Hilton Head Christian Academy’s Theater Director and a frequent MSCT Director, Millie Gilbreath and Emma Kate Dalzell are two high school students that have taken on the challenge of being co-directors for the musical as part of a very special school project.

During the 2023 Football season, WHHI-TV's Community Leader Award is presented to someone within the local community who has demonstrated outstanding leadership efforts. As the award presenter, Main Stage Community Theatre will be hand-selecting one worthy organization or individual to honor each week.

Now auditioning! Get ready to be spellbound this November as Main Stage Community Theatre proudly presents its magical production of Into The Woods, Jr. This show is directed by Amelia Gilbreath and Emma Kate Dalzell with mentorship from Michelle McElroy Cox. All actors interested in this production must be between ages 9 and 18 years of age.

Now auditioning for The Wedding Singer! April 26th and 27th. Please prepare a brief comedic monologue and 1 minute of a song of your choice to sing with a backup track you bring, OR acapella. Also, be prepared with the dance combination we provide. Read through for complete audition details.

Community theatre is an incredible opportunity for local youth to explore their creative talents, build confidence, and develop important life skills. Main Stage Community Theatre believes that every young person should have the chance to experience the joy and fulfillment of performing arts.

Auditions will be held Wednesday, December 14 6pm - 8pm, and Thursday, December 15 6pm - 8pm. Performances dates are March 3,4,5 at The Seahawk Cultural Center at Hilton Head Island High School.

Main Stage Community Theatre invites you to audition for Neil Simon’s hilarious classic, The Odd Couple. Directed by Ron Ruckle. Casting 6 men and 2 women - 18+. Show dates are the weekends of Feb. 17th, 18th, and 19th and Feb. 24th, 25th, and 26th.

We are pleased to announce the cast of Footloose- The Musical, taking the stage in Hilton Head on November 11-13 & 18-20, 2022. Full of high-energy dancing and singing, this is a show you don’t want to miss! Bursting to life with music, romance, and dance.

We are pleased to announce the 2022 cast of The Sound of Music! Show dates are June 24-26, and July 1-3, 2022. Join the family Von Trapp in the true-life telling of one of history’s most thrilling and inspirational stories. Featuring the Tony, Grammy and Academy Award-winning Best Score, including “My Favorite Things,” “Do-Re-Mi,” “Climb Ev’ry Mountain,” and more!

The Island Packet’s “Best of Awards” are back, and we need your support. Nominate the Main Stage Community Theatre as “Best Live Theatre” by going to https://www.votelowcountry.com. After you fill out the information, go under category for "Things to Do", and select "Live Theatre". With your help, we’re hoping to receive the 2022 distinguished award for Best Live Theatre in the Lowcountry!

Help keep the hills alive with “the sound of music” this Spring! The Main Stage Community Theatre is casting a variety of roles of all ages, actors, dancers, and singers for another amazing production. Schedule an in-person audition for The Sound of Music on stage this May.

MARCH 11 - 13, 2022, TICKETS ON SALE NOW - Join us for dinner and the hilariously popular, off-Broadway performance of, “I love you. You’re perfect. Now change.” Following the highs and lows of first dates, first loves, marriages, babies, in-laws, and growing old together, this hilarious and poignant show pays tribute to those who have loved and lost and to those who have dared to ask someone out on a date.

Birdies for Charity is a fast, easy and fun way to donate to Main Stage Community Theatre. 100% of your donation goes directly to support the theatre. Heritage Classic Foundation will contribute an extra 10% on top of your donation. It’s like a walk-a-thon, but instead of donating per mile, participants either make a pledge for every birdie made during the tournament or make a flat donation.

Local Community Theatre is here to stay! Some claim that the theatre and the art of performance is dying, but we could not disagree more. There are many ways in which local Lowcountry community theatre is important, ranging from furthering education to self-expression, introducing change, and so much more. Read on for 5 reasons we think community theatre is so important.