The Symbian Foundation has announced its long-anticipated restructuring, ending its role in the development and governance of the platform in order to “become a legal entity responsible for licensing software and other intellectual property, such as the Symbian trademark.” Nokia, now solely responsible for the development of the OS, has committed to adopt an “alternative direct and open model” in its efforts. According to Tim Holbrow, Executive Director of the Symbian Foundation, “There has since been a seismic change in the mobile market but also more generally in the economy, which has led to a change in focus for some of our funding board members. The result of this is that the current governance structure for the Symbian platform – the Foundation – is no longer appropriate.” As expected, the first phase of the restructure will see “a reduction in operations and staff numbers,” and by April 2011 it will be governed by a group of non-executive directors tasked with overseeing the organisation’s licensing function.

Meanwhile Nokia has “reaffirmed” its commitment to Symbian OS, stating that it “plans to continue to invest its own resources in developing Symbian, the world’s most widely used smartphone platform, and expects to deliver a strong portfolio of Symbian-based smartphones to people around the world.” Jo Harlow (pictured), the company’s senior VP of smartphones, said: “The future of Symbian as a platform does not depend on the existence of the Foundation. The changes announced by the foundation have no impact on Nokia’s Symbian device roadmaps or shipping commitments.” Since the departure of Samsung and Sony Ericsson from the Symbian OS device vendor community in recent months, the platform has effectively become a Nokia-only shop, apart from Fujitsu and Sharp in Japan who are offering devices powered by a variant of the operating system. As such, with Nokia the sole vendor funding development of the platform and without the need for a formal external governance structure, the Symbian Foundation effectively became an unnecessary cost and management overhead, and its future has seemed bleak since the exit of chief Lee Williams late in October 2010.