Birgit started her career in the high tech industry after her studies at the University of Chemnitz, Germany from which she earned a Master in Technical Cybernetics and Control Technology. She was the co-founder and CEO of SIMEC GmbH and Co KG (founded in 1992), a company developing innovative simulation software, which was acquired by ANSOFT Corporation in 2001. She moved to Pittsburgh, PA for the integration during which time she earned her MBA from the University of Pittsburgh with a focus on strategy and marketing.

After consulting for Transim Technology Corporation she accepted the position as VP of Engineering and moved to Portland, OR. After a management buy out she became the CEO and led the fast growing company in the development of an innovative Internet platform for Engineering Design Tools serving the semiconductor industry. The Company was acquired by Arrow Electronics in 2010 and Birgit stayed through the successful integration in 2014.

Birgit has a passion for developing actionable strategic plans to manifest innovative visions. She has over 20 year of experience in project and product management and combines practical and theoretical knowledge. Colleagues often commend her strength as a team builder and mentor and her ability to bring visions into practical reality. She has proven success working with international customers and worldwide distributed multi-cultural teams.

Reiki has been a part of Birgit's life for a long time. She is a Reiki Master in the Usui Shiki Ryoho System. Reiki has taught her to better understand energy and how systems work together. Her approach to consulting work is based on regenerative practices.

Reiki has had a major impact on her personal and business life. As she discovered energy work and became an active member of the Reiki Community she discovered that she is a "Highly Sensitive Person" and empath. She understands the challenges and stresses in the work environment and how overwhelming they can be for sensitive people.

Through her own healing she discovered ways of how to thrive joyfully and successfully in the world, and also how to tap into ones intuitive gifts.

She offers classes and coaching sessions using Soul Realignment®, Reiki, meditation and body/mind techniques. Her passion is to help professionals to be successful while leading a full and balanced life.

Birgit also brings her expertise to non-profit organizations and served on the board of Virginia Garcia Memorial Foundation, the Reiki Foundation International (Reiki Home) and is currently president of the NW Reiki Gathering..

Regenerative practices are at the core of her work, so it only seems natural that she has a huge garden and is growing much of her own food.