Joint Women in Microwaves (WiM) and Young Professionals (YP) Event

Chairs

Ana Ines Inacio (YP), TNO, Netherlands

Cristina Andrei (WiM), Brandenburg University of Technology, Germany

Jasmin Grosinger (WiM), Graz University of Technology, Austria

Room: Beta 6

Get Together

The joint WiM/YP event will take place on Tuesday afternoon, September 19th, 2023, starting at 1 pm with lunch boxes.

Panel Session

The main event is a 90-minute moderated panel session with female industry representatives (1:30–3:00 pm). They will share insights into their careers, companies, and industries and provide tips for young professionals pursuing a career in the industry.

Panelists

Wendy Shu, CEO at Eravant (formerly known as SAGE Millimeter)

Wendy Shu is CEO at Eravant (formerly known as SAGE Millimeter), an engineering firm that designs and manufactures hardware for millimeter wave and sub-THz applications. In this capacity, Wendy oversees the organization’s business development and operational excellence. She is passionate about the owner-operator experience and has seen how technology can be a powerful equalizer.

Wendy earned her B.A in International Relations from the University of Southern California and her J.D. from the USC Gould School of Law. She is a member of the State Bar of California and serves as Board President of the Torrance Cultural Arts Foundation.

Sherry Hess, Sr. Group Director, Product Management at Cadence

Sherry Hess is Sr. Group Director, Product Management at Cadence. She is responsible for the company’s multiphysics analysis products that span signal and power integrity to electromagnetic and thermal analysis and into the microwave/RF domain. Before joining Cadence, Sherry held various technical and managerial roles at National Instruments (NI), AWR Corporation, Ansoft Corporation (Ansys), and Intel Corporation. In addition to her responsibilities at Cadence, Sherry has long supported and promoted IEEE MTT-S. As a past elected member of the IEEE MTT-S Administrative Committee (AdCom), Sherry has served and continues to serve on the MarCom, MGA (WIM), and M&S committees. She regularly contributes blogs and articles on women in technology and is on the Microwave Magazine, Microwave Product Digest, and High-Frequency Electronics editorial boards. Sherry holds BSEE and MSIA (technical MBA) degrees from Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Anouk Hubrechsen, Co-founder and CEO of AntenneX

Anouk Hubrechsen received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from the Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, in 2017 and 2019, respectively, where she is finishing a Ph.D. degree. She was a Guest Researcher with the National Institute of Standards and Technology at Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA, in 2018 and 2019. There she was involved in reverberation-chamber metrology for Internet-of-Things applications. She is co-founder and CEO of AntenneX B.V., a company that develops over-the-air measurement instrumentation for 5G-and-beyond applications. Anouk received the Regional and District Zonta Women in Technology Awards in 2019. From 2020 to 2021, she was the Vice-Chair of IEEE Benelux Women in Engineering.

Mayazzurra Ruggiano, Thales Nederland B.V.

Mayazzurra Ruggiano received her Master of Science in telecommunications engineering at the University of Florence, Italy, in 2005. She was granted Marie Curie Fellowships within the Sixth Framework Programme of the European Union. These applied to three years at Thales Nederland in Delft, The Netherlands, and one year at Nottingham University, United Kingdom. In 2011 she completed her Ph.D. in radar signal processing at the Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands. Since 2006 she has been working for Thales Nederland B.V. and holds the position of radar architect within the Technical Directorate. Her interests include radar, integrated and reconfigurable sensor suites, and electronic defense domains. Dr. Ruggiano received the best paper award at the European Radar Conference in 2008. She also received Agilent’s University Innovation Award in 2008. She chaired the European Radar Conference 2020 and has been a member of the technical program committee of international conferences dedicated to radar.

Irene Selvanathan, Neurospace

Irene Selvanathan founded the NewSpace company NEUROSPACE GmbH based in Berlin in early 2020, where she and her team are developing rovers for the moon. Irene has eight years of experience in space as a senior engineer for what is now the largest launch provider for small satellites. She developed key technologies, conducted several missions and launches, and was on-site at the Baikonour Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, and Vostochny, Russia. As a project manager at a CubeSat company, Irene drove the development of standardized, fast on-orbit hardware verification in space. She worked as a systems engineer and project manager for more than two years in an aviation company. Irene has a scientific background in GaN electronics from working at a renowned semiconductor institute. She graduated from the Technical University of Berlin with a degree in electrical engineering.

Anna Miskiewicz, Apple

Anna Miskiewicz is leading the Cellular RF Systems teams at Apple, driving the development of future wireless and cellular technologies. Being located in Munich, Germany, Anna joined Apple in 2019 and has more than 15 years of experience in building RF systems. Anna has a Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from Friedrich-Alexander University in Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany.

Sightseeing Tour

Following the panel, we will have a unique sightseeing tour of Berlin (16:00 - 18:45). Guided tours by Berliner Unterwelten will entertain us: From Flak Towers to Mountains of Debris & Bunkers, Subways, and the Cold War.

The tour is restricted to 50 people. If you want to attend, please sign up here: https://www.termino.gv.at/meet/en/b/c791172b8f8382a896a357f81ce77fe4-214164.

We will return to the conference center before 18:45 to attend the Welcome Reception. A bus will take care of transportation.