Alan Rudolph is back to work as writer-director of Orion’s “Love at Large,” a contemporary romantic comedy that he describes as “a detective story about love.” Tom Berenger stars with Elizabeth Perkins, Anne Archer and Annette O’Toole--but no one wears a badge. Filming starts in February with David Blocker producing. . . .

Mary Steenburgen plays wife to Steve Martin in Imagine’s “Untitled Parenting,” Ron Howard’s directing assignment come February. Dianne Wiest is Martin’s sister; Tom Hulce is frere to Steenburgen and Martha Plimpton is Wiest’s daughter. The Universal release marks Howard’s fourth collaboration with writers Babaloo Mandel and Lowell Ganz.

Director Donald Petrie’s (“Mystic Pizza”) next is also for Imagine/Universal. He’s just been tagged to rein “Opportunity Knocks,” a comedy of mistaken identity to mark Dana Carvey’s (“Saturday Night Live’s” Church Lady) first major film role. Mitch Catlin and Nat Bernstein wrote the script. Mark Gordon and Chris Meledandri produce next April. . . .

Dolph Lundgren tracks a ruthless intergalactic drug dealer in Vision’s “Dark Angel,” a mid-February start in Atlanta. Jonathan Tydor and David Koepp wrote the science-fiction thriller, which Craig Baxley directs. Jeff Young produces for exec producers Mark Damon and David Saunders.

Actor-director Robert Ginty has an early January start for Trans World’s “The Orange Curtain,” about a Vietnam vet-turned-priest who learns he has a 17-year-old daughter. “Karate Kid II’s” Tamlyn Tomita plays the girl, with Tim Thomerson cast as Ginty’s former combat buddy and Bert Remsen and Richard Masur in support roles. . . .

Similarly, Motion Picture Corp. of America’s “Minister of Vengeance” has John Schneider also cast as a Vietnam vet who’s joined the clergy. But when his family is killed by terrorists, he finds himself caught between his religious training and the search-and-destroy tactics he learned in the jungle. Ned Beatty, David Carradine, Peter Lupus and Appolonia Kotero co-star for director Peter Maris next month.

“I think we have something in common,” quips June Foray to Sally Kellerman on screen in MCEG/Orion’s “Boris and Natasha in Our Boy Badenov.” The link: Foray was the voice of Natasha Fatale in the Jay Ward cartoon; Kellerman is now cast as the flesh-and-blood equivalent.