Infobox soap character

series = Verbotene Liebe

caption = Claudia Hiersche as Carla von Lahnstein

first = Episode 2060

19 September 2003

residence = Lahnstein Penthouse

Düsseldorf, Germany

gender = Female

parents = Johannes von Lahnstein

(father; deceased)

Francesca von Lahnstein

(mother; deceased)

siblings = Ansgar von Lahnstein

(brother)

Leonard von Lahnstein

(maternal half-brother)

Sarah Hofmann

(paternal half-sister)

Nico von Lahnstein

(paternal half-sister)

Constantin von Lahnstein

(maternal half-brother)

spouse = Bernd von Beyenbach (divorced)

Susanne Brandner (divorced, 2006-2008)

children = Sophia von Lahnstein (daughter, with Lars)

romances = Evelyn Thoma (affair)

Hanna Novak

Anke Hoffmann(affair)

Marion (affair)

Frederike von Traunitz (one-night-stand)

Marina Felix (affair)

cousins = Sebastian von Lahnstein

(paternal cousin)

Rebecca von Lahnstein

(paternal cousin)

relatives = Julius de Maron

(nephew, via Leonard; deceased)

Hannes von Lahnstein

(nephew, via Ansgar)

occupation = Executive at 'Lahnstein Holding'

Manager of the Lahnstein auctioneers

Artist

portrayer = Claudia Hiersche

Carla Sophia von Lahnstein is a fictional character on German soap opera "Verbotene Liebe" ("Forbidden Love"). The character has been portrayed by actress Claudia Hiersche since September 19, 2003.

Carla is the sister of Ansgar (Wolfram Grandezka) and the half-sister of Leonard (Lars Korten), Sarah Hofmann (Sina-Valeska Jung), Nico (Verena Zimmermann) and Constantin (Milan Marcus). She was married to Bernd von Beyenbach (Ron Holzschuh), but this was purely a marriage of convenience that Carla concluded to conceal from her father Johannes (Thomas Gumpert) that she was a lesbian. Carla is currently married to Susanne Brander (Claudia Scarpatetti), but they have filed for divorce.

Character's background

Carla is the oldest daughter of Johannes von Lahnstein, an aristocrat. She is a smart businesswoman and very sure of herself. Carla is a lesbian, but kept this a secret for a long time. Only her younger brother, Leonard, knew it all along. When Carla met Hanna Novak (Katharina Dalichau), she very quickly fell in love with her. However, Hanna was straight and in a relationship with Lars Schneider (Herbert Ulrich), who had split up with Hanna's sister to be with her. Carla and Hanna eventually developed a romance and Hanna ended her relationship with Lars, but died of a stroke after a kidney failure a few months later.