EL CERRITO — It’s obvious that Joady Guthrie has seen some hard traveling, something his father, Woody Guthrie, the folk troubadour, political activist and rambling man, certainly could appreciate if he were alive today.

As the world celebrates what would have been the 100th birthday of Woodrow Wilson Guthrie, author of “This Land Is Your Land,” on July 14, his legacy is a not unmixed blessing for Joady, 63, a singer, songwriter, carpenter, house painter and guitarist who moved to the Bay Area from his native New York in 1970.

“By the time I was old enough to know what was going on, he (Woody) had Huntington’s disease. He looked like a drunk and slurred his words when he spoke,” said Joady, who lives in El Cerrito. “I was scared of him.”

Woody Guthrie died in 1967 at the age of 55 of Huntington’s disease, a progressive genetic neurological disorder.

But his father’s musical legacy has sustained Joady over the years, starting with guitar lessons as a youth and extending throughout his life, encompassing countless gigs in New York and the Bay Area and an album, “Spys on Wall Street.”

Joady is the second of four children the folk giant had with his second wife, Marjorie. His brother Arlo became a folk star in his own right in the 1960s with his hit song “Alice’s Restaurant.”

Joady Guthrie was named for Tom Joad, the hero of John Steinbeck’s novel “The Grapes of Wrath,” because his father, himself a political activist and an Oklahoman, or “Okie,” was sympathetic to the plight of 1930s farmers of the Great Depression. Many of Woody Guthrie’s songs championed Dust Bowl migrant workers and working people.

Growing up in New York in Queens, Joady seldom saw his father, who took up nearly permanent residence in the hospital when Joady was 5 or 6. It was Marjorie, mom to Arlo, Joady, and sisters Cathy and Nora, who held the household together, making a living with a successful modern dance studio.

“My mother provided for us pretty well,” said Joady. She saw to it that her children had music lessons, keeping alive the flame of musical genius that burned so brightly in her husband.

After graduating from Goddard College in Vermont, Joady moved to the Bay Area with his then-girlfriend Eileen. He performed steadily at open mics and made a living teaching guitar at a music store, Tree Frog Music, in San Francisco in the 1970s, also working as a carpenter and house painter.

At Tree Frog, he met Steve Baker, now executive director of Berkeley’s Freight & Salvage Coffeehouse, where Joady has played quite a bit over the years.

“Joady’s a strong singer and songwriter. He has a nice baritone,” Baker said. “We worked together as guitar teachers at Tree Frog Music. I’ve known him for 30 years. He’s a great guy.”

Baker attended Joady’s wedding when he married Eileen (the two are now divorced) and their son Damon, 32, sometimes helps out at the Freight these days.

The Guthrie legacy lives on in Damon, who plays guitar and graduated from UC Santa Cruz with a degree in community organizing.

While playing at the Julia Morgan Theater in Berkeley in the 1980s, Joady bumped into Country Joe McDonald, a standout folk singer from Berkeley famous for his anti-Vietnam War song, “Feel Like I’m Fixin’ To Die Rag.” The chance meeting led to McDonald putting out an album of Joady playing and singing his original songs, “Spys on Wall Street.”

“Joady plays a country Americana style. His flavoring and his melodies and style are more jazz-oriented than either Woody or Arlo’s,” McDonald said in a phone interview. “It has a musical richness to it that I particularly like, and that’s why I wanted to make an album.”

The self-effacing Joady could not be persuaded to tour behind the album, McDonald said. “He is very talented but he is not going to blow his own horn. He doesn’t self-promote.

“It must be a strange cross to bear, being the son of a famous person. He looked exactly like Woody when I met him 30 years ago,” McDonald said. Because Huntington’s is inherited, Joady worried for years that he might end up like his father, a worry that finally was put to rest when he tested negative for the gene 15 years ago.

Joady now lives at El Cerrito Royale, an assisted living facility in El Cerrito, because it’s “convenient,” he said, with three meals a day and laundry service. He spends a lot of time on health-related pursuits: “I do homemade yoga and other exercises, and eat a healthy diet,” he said.

He no longer plays guitar or performs.

Joady plans to celebrate his father’s centennial by attending a celebration at the Freight & Salvage, 2020 Addison St. The coffeehouse is holding a free open house July 14 to celebrate Woody’s 100th birthday.

The event will feature the first public display of letters Woody wrote to a group of elementary school children from his hospital bed. It will also feature singers from the musical “Woody Guthrie’s American Song,” which is running as a concert performance through July 22 at the Freight (www.thefreight.org).

As Joady muses about his life sitting on a couch in the lounge of the El Cerrito Royale, the memories are bittersweet. Throughout it all, the creative force has seen him through. He says of his family, “We put a brave face on it. We stuck together and focused on Woody’s talent rather than his disease.”

“Joady’s his own person. His dad was like that,” McDonald said. “A raging individualist. Arlo didn’t get that gene as much as Joady.

“Woody’s song, ‘This Land is Your Land,’ is an unofficial national anthem for Americans,” McDonald added. “Woody is an embodiment of the American dream. He led a very hard life but he certainly did make his dreams come true, and if he was alive today, I think he would be proud of the legacy he has left.”