Something about Woody Guthrie seems to attract interesting, unexpected biographers. Pre-eminent among these is Guthrie himself, whose "Bound for Glory" may be the only autobiography less faithful to the truth than the movie based on it. Joe Klein, the political reporter and author of "Primary Colors," also wrote a well-regarded life of Guthrie. And last year, Elizabeth Partridge won a California Book Award for her excellent Guthrie bio for young adults, "This Land Was Made for You and Me."

But all these surprising Guthrie chroniclers have nothing on Ed Cray. A journalism professor at the University of Southern California, Cray's capacious bibliography includes a book on Chief Justice Earl Warren, an account of psychopath Juan Corona's trial and three volumes on erotic poetry. In retrospect, these mismatched bona fides turn out to be just the right equipment for telling the story of Woodrow Wilson Guthrie: a man who, like Warren, overcame his own small-mindedness to speak up for the rights of voiceless Americans; and whose dark moods briefly drew police suspicion during the Black Dahlia murder case.

It's an amazing story, never less than well-told here, on occasion considerably more. Cray's interviewees usually get the best lines, as when he gets Guthrie's Pampa, Texas, childhood librarian to say, "If he had had a better education and been guided a little differently, probably he could have gone places."

Cray typically lets this remark pass without comment, which is either a missed opportunity or evidence of Herculean self-restraint. Gone places! Where would that librarian have him go? Here are just a few of the places Guthrie managed to go -- even without a better education and different guidance: He went to California, where the fertility of the land and the exploitation of the families who worked it awoke a lifelong sympathy for a class of Americans to which he did not, from birth, belong. He went to war as a messman in the merchant marine and repeatedly ventured below decks, not only to rescue wounded comrades but also to integrate hitherto racially divided sailors with his music. And he went to Manhattan, where in a cheap room he wrote the great song that too many people know only at the expense of hundreds of others almost as good: America's folk national anthem, "This Land Is Your Land."

Not that Cray makes Guthrie out to be some kind of plaster saint. The folksinger we meet in these pages is at times alcoholic, philandering, restless, abusive and downright disgusting, as when he once dried a dish with the nearest soiled diaper that came to hand.

Apologists for Guthrie's less savory behavior don't have far to look for excuses. Guthrie inherited from his fragile mother, Nora, not only the Huntington's chorea that incapacitated him for the last decade of his life -- unlike hers, diagnosed, for all the good it did him -- but also a kind of weirdly contagious pyromania. In her short, sad life, Nora suffered the death by fire of her daughter, the severe burning of her husband, and various house fires, some of which she may have either helped cause, or at least failed to douse. Woody himself lost his beloved daughter, Cathy, to an electrical fire, and gravely impaired his own dexterity in a fluke blaze in Florida.

Cray bends over backward not to overstate Guthrie's genius. And where most biographies end with the funeral and a few obit clips, Cray sticks around for a chapter called "Woody's Children," trying to assess Guthrie's legacy in as clear-eyed a way as possible. He decides that Guthrie's lasting reputation probably rests more on his lyrics than on his melodies, a claim it'd take a better musicologist than I to dispute.

As Cray quotes folksinger Pete Seeger, who emerges during the book as a kind of moral chorus, "I can't stand (Woody) when he is around, but I miss him when he's gone." Him and America both.