Hans Schweikart was a German film director, actor and screenwriter. He directed 28 films between 1938 and 1968. He wrote for the film The Marriage of Mr. Mississippi, which was entered into the 11th Berlin International Film Festival.

Hans Schweikart was born on October 1, 1895, in Berlin, Berlin, Germany. His birth geographical coordinates are 52° 31’ 28” North latitude and 13° 24’ 38” East longitude, with an altitude of 74 meters above sea level. Hans Schweikart passed away at the age of 80 in 1975.

Astrologically, Hans Schweikart falls under the Sun sign of Libra, with Sagittarius as his Ascendant, Pisces as his Moon sign, and Pisces as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Libra Moon Pisces Mercury Scorpio Venus Virgo Mars Libra Jupiter Leo Saturn Scorpio Uranus Scorpio Neptune Gemini Pluto Gemini Ceres Capricorn Chiron Libra Eros Leo Hygiea Aquarius Juno Capricorn Pallas Sagittarius Vesta Aquarius Ascendant Sagittarius Black Moon Lilith Pisces Midheaven Libra North Node Pisces South Node Virgo Part of Fortune Taurus Vertex Cancer

Sunin Libra8° 1’ 4”

The Sun in Libra in the Natal Chart makes you compassionate. You are artistic and sincere, making others comfortable. You can be friendly and attract […] Read more »

Moonin Pisces10° 50’ 2”

The Moon in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you expressive and inspiring. You are sensitive and understand other people’s needs. You are gentle and […] Read more »

Mercuryin Scorpio3° 36’ 3”

Mercury in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you intense and focused. You are thoughtful and communicate your strategic ideas. You are determined to succeed […] Read more »

Venusin Virgo19° 37’ 12”

Virgo Venus in the Natal Chart makes you helpful and innocent in relationships. You seek ways to nurture others. You are charming and can be […] Read more »

Marsin Libra11° 15’ 28”

Libra Mars in the Natal Chart makes you long for balance. You are motivated to express your unique fantasies and find the passion and motivation […] Read more »

Jupiterin Leo4° 37’ 8”

Leo Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you open about your ideals. You pursue your desires and can be creative and expressive. You are charming, […] Read more »

Saturnin Scorpio6° 14’ 9”

Is Saturn in Scorpio good or bad? Scorpio Saturn in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with security and power. […] Read more »

Uranusin Scorpio17° 45’ 51”

Uranus in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you eager to pursue your higher mission. You are focused and obsessed with rebelling against the status […] Read more »

Neptunein Gemini18° 2’ 1”

Gemini Neptune in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation with a desire to find unity through communication. You are part of […] Read more »

Plutoin Gemini12° 41’ 41”

Gemini Pluto in the Natal Chart makes you part of a generation born to change how people communicate. Your generation shifts the power and helps […] Read more »

Ceresin Capricorn2° 41’ 45”

Ceres in Capricorn in the Natal Chart indicates a generation committed to making others comfortable. You are sensitive to others’ needs and can be compassionate […] Read more »

Chironin Libra14° 5’ 1”

Chiron in Libra in the Natal Chart makes you devoted to helping society embrace healing and balance. You bring harmony to the world by showing […] Read more »

Erosin Leo18° 58’ 35”

Leo Eros in the Natal Chart makes you an intense lover. You crave attention in the bedroom and find admiration arousing. You are excited to […] Read more »

Hygieain Aquarius16° 19’ 40”

Aquarius Hygiea in the Natal Chart makes you stand out from the crowd for an unusual take on healing and wellness. You follow strange habits […] Read more »

Junoin Capricorn13° 39’ 21”

Juno in Capricorn in the Natal Chart makes you a supportive partner. You prioritize your family and work diligently to provide for your loved ones. […] Read more »

Pallasin Sagittarius18° 8’ 50”

Pallas in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart makes you determined and focused. You are generous and can be a natural leader who inspires others to […] Read more »

Vestain Aquarius25° 48’ 30”

Vesta in Aquarius in the Natal Chart indicates a unique perspective. You can be rebellious and devoted to breaking tradition. You are passionate about your […] Read more »

Ascendantin Sagittarius8° 40’ 46”

Sagittarius Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you daring and passionate. You are intense and can be determined to succeed. You can be enthusiastic and […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Pisces11° 25’ 36”

Pisces Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you daring and excitable. You are rebellious in relationships and can be dreamy and erotic in […] Read more »

Midheavenin Libra9° 4’ 34”

The Libra Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you an ideal marriage and relationship counselor. You are imaginative and help others express love and beauty. […] Read more »

North Nodein Pisces11° 22’ 15”

Pisces North Node in the Natal Chart makes you more open to your spiritual mission. You are influenced by your moods and can be prone […] Read more »

South Nodein Virgo11° 22’ 15”

Virgo South Node in the Natal Chart indicates you are a humble and comforting person. You have a grounded personality and can be gentle and […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Taurus11° 29’ 44”

Taurus Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you genuine and trusting. You are transparent and can be reliable and patient. You are grounded […] Read more »

Vertexin Cancer23° 53’ 10”

Cancer Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you affectionate and loving. Your instincts can bring you closer to your purpose. Your destiny relies on your […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Ninth House Moon Third House Mercury Tenth House Venus Ninth House Mars Tenth House Jupiter Eighth House Saturn Eleventh House Uranus Eleventh House Neptune Seventh House Pluto Seventh House Ceres First House Chiron Tenth House Eros Eighth House Hygiea Second House Juno First House Pallas First House Vesta Second House Black Moon Lilith Third House North Node Third House South Node Ninth House Part of Fortune Fifth House Vertex Eighth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 19 major aspects, alongside 21 minor aspects, as well as 8 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Moon Quincunx Mars Uranus Quincunx Neptune Mercury Square Jupiter Mars Trine Pluto Moon Square Pluto Venus Sextile Uranus Venus Square Neptune Jupiter Square Saturn Sun Quincunx Moon Sun Conjunct Mars Sun Sextile Jupiter Mercury Conjunct Saturn Sun Trine Pluto Moon Trine Saturn Neptune Conjunct Pluto Moon Trine Mercury Moon Trine Uranus Venus Square Pluto Mars Trine Neptune

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Hans Schweikart’s life journey.

Moon Quincunx Marsorb: 0°

When the Moon is quincunx Mars in a Natal Chart, there will be many inconsistencies in how this person expresses their emotions. Emotional outbursts are […] Read more »

Uranus Quincunx Neptuneorb: 0°

Uranus quincunx Neptune in a chart creates conflict between Neptune’s idealism and Uranus’ eccentricity. They may feel they are being pulled back and forth by […] Read more »

Mercury Square Jupiterorb: 1°

Mercury square Jupiter in a Natal Chart can create the desire to succeed but an inability to follow through and do the necessary work. Someone […] Read more »

Moon Square Plutoorb: 2°

The Moon square Pluto in a Natal Chart can bring a lot of challenges, but it also comes with huge benefits if a person can […] Read more »

Venus Sextile Uranusorb: 2°

Venus sextile Uranus in a chart typically indicates that a person is open-minded, artistic, and innovative. They are likely noticeably unique or different in some […] Read more »

Sun Quincunx Moonorb: 3°

The Sun quincunx Moon pulls you in conflicting directions. In the Natal Chart, this aspect can challenge you to be true to yourself. You have […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Marsorb: 3°

Your Natal Chart aspects describe your personality and individualistic qualities. These placements create a lifelong influence on your personality. When the Sun is conjunct Mars […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Jupiterorb: 3°

The Sun sextile Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you idealistic and expansive. You are outgoing and love meeting new people and can be thoughtful […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Saturnorb: 3°

Mercury conjunct Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you a practical and traditional thinker. You are stoic and hold firm beliefs. You are not adaptable […] Read more »

Sun Trine Plutoorb: 5°

The Sun trine Pluto in a Natal Chart makes you self-assured and intense. You have a magnetic personality and exude charm. You may be mysterious […] Read more »

Moon Trine Saturnorb: 5°

The Moon trine Saturn in a chart typically indicates that a person is self-reliant, emotionally mature, and calm. They express their emotions instead of hiding […] Read more »

Neptune Conjunct Plutoorb: 5°

Neptune conjunct Pluto in a chart typically creates the energy for intense evolution. This transformative aspect can connect someone to the unconscious mind and allow […] Read more »

Moon Trine Mercuryorb: 7°

When the Moon trines Mercury, there is a strong connection between the mind and the heart. It is not difficult for a person with this […] Read more »

Moon Trine Uranusorb: 7°

The Moon trine Uranus in a chart typically brings a free, innovative, and unique energy. Someone with this aspect in their Natal Chart might be […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Mars Quincunx Black Moon Lilith Mars Quincunx North Node Mars Quincunx Part of Fortune Neptune Opposite Pallas Sun Sextile Ascendant Sun Conjunct Midheaven Moon Conjunct Black Moon Lilith Moon Conjunct North Node Moon Opposite South Node Moon Sextile Part of Fortune Mercury Sextile Ceres Venus Square Pallas Uranus Square Eros Uranus Square Hygiea Neptune Sextile Eros Pluto Trine Chiron Pluto Quincunx Juno Pluto Square Black Moon Lilith Pluto Square North Node Pluto Square South Node Neptune Trine Hygiea

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Hans Schweikart’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Mars Quincunx Black Moon Lilithorb: 0°

Mars quincunx Black Moon Lilith in a chart indicates that Mars’ passion and assertiveness are not aligned with Black Moon Lilith’s desire for freedom, expression, […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx North Nodeorb: 0°

Mars quincunx the North Node in a chart creates tension between the ambitious nature of Mars and the life path the North Node sets a […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Part of Fortuneorb: 0°

Mars quincunx the Part of Fortune in a chart can cause a disconnect between Mars’ confidence, assertive, and driven side and the Part of Fortune’s […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Ascendantorb: 1°

The Sun sextile Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you friendly and entertaining. You have a gift for sharing your creative talents. Being around friends […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 1°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Moon Conjunct Black Moon Lilithorb: 1°

The Moon conjunct Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you dramatic and expressive. You are intuitive and can be frightened by your inner […] Read more »

Moon Conjunct North Nodeorb: 1°

The Moon conjunct North Node in a Natal Chart gives you a soul-level urge to push through barriers and pursue your mission. You strive to […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Chiron Square Juno Ascendant Sextile Midheaven Black Moon Lilith Conjunct North Node Black Moon Lilith Opposite South Node Black Moon Lilith Sextile Part of Fortune North Node Sextile Part of Fortune South Node Trine Part of Fortune Eros Trine Pallas

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Hans Schweikart’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Black Moon Lilith Sextile Part of Fortuneorb: 0°

Black Moon Lilith sextile of the Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you ambitious and determined to succeed. You are true to your […] Read more »

North Node Sextile Part of Fortuneorb: 0°

The North Node sextile of the Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you open to embracing your destiny. You face growth and advancement […] Read more »

South Node Trine Part of Fortuneorb: 0°

The South Node trine the Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you comfortable and secure with your past. You avoid change and seek […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.