VH1 is the den of reality TV shows featuring Black women behaving badly and they stay on-brand with Sorority Sisters. The show has been receiving backlash ahead of its premiere because it is chronicling women from four historical Black Greek-Letter Organizations. They all live in Atlanta and every woman on the show is either a part of Delta Sigma Theta, Alpha Kappa Alpha, Sigma Gamma Rho and Zeta Phi Beta. People have been raising hell because it’s obvious they their scholarship and greater womanhood is not the reason they will be featured.

I had to watch it and write this post because if I don’t, I’d need to reply to 35 emails from y’all asking if I saw the foolishment. I did. So here’s my thoughts about it.

April the AKA has a nose so contoured that I see the line straight down her nose. She runs a boutique called “House of Couture” and can be seen rocking lycra dresses in the middle of a Tuesday. Just because.

Priyanka the Delta and is rocking a really offensive Snuffleupagus weave and I want to understand why she would even do that. That hairhat looks like it lives on her dresser at night.

Cat the SGRho reminds me of Porsha from Real Housewives of Atlanta. She was trying to bring extra sass to her confessionals, possibly to prevent us from realizing that she probably has the personality of a peanut.

Adrene the Delta also owns a fashion business called “House of…” and she’s the one who is on the show to be considered “The Bitch.” She’s owning this and it works for her because at the end of the show, she’s the only one whose name I remembered without having to look at my tweets from the beginning. She is also a fan of highlighting and contouring.

Veronica the Zeta is adorable but I do wish she would blend her eyeshadow, doe. Every scene she was in, I could see a strong line and I just wanted to sweep a MAC brush past her eyelids to set things right. She’s a dancer who also does fashion consulting. Because let Atlanta tell it, everyone is either a designer, a fashion consultant or a makeup artist. That city must have the highest rate of shoetiques and boutiques per square mile in any city. And Instagram designers.

Shanna the white Delta was for diversity’s sake, clearly. I did wonder if she was passing before she spoke. And of course, her arc this season is going to be about folks judging her for being a melanin-deficient member of a BGLO. I’m bored already.

Speaking of bored, this show was that. I’m used to formulaic TV, but this one was so tired that 20 minutes into it, I was already itching to change the channel. I care so little about these people and this show that I just wanted it to be done so I could say I did it. With 10 minutes left to go in the episode, I just turned off my TV. I figured I had enough to write this post.

Lawd. These women on this show. Do they get ex-communicated after this show? All my Greek friends are PISSED. Deltas everywhere, especially, should be burning flags with VH1’s logo on it right now. They REALLY got set up for the okey doke with this because there are like 6 Deltas on the show and one women from every other sorority.

Honestly, the gimmick of them being Greeks wasn’t even necessary because the mess associated with them isn’t even BECAUSE of their Greekdom. But they definitely dropped the names of their sororities too murch. And there was the time when Adrene and another lady named MeToya were walking down the street and just OO-OOPED randomly. CHILE BYE.

People are calling for the boycott of this show and I can understand why. I don’t plan on boycotting because I wasn’t even planning on watching this season. That’ll be like me saying I won’t be shopping at Versace this Christmas. O_O

I’m basically at my reality TV show with sassy Black women limit right now. I always leave room for RHOA and whatever Love & Hip Hop franchise is on but I’ve been so busy that I’ve actually missed every episode of both in the last 2 months. This show ain’t even INTERESTING enough. It’s the formula of RANDOM BLACK WOMEN WHO LOVE FAKE HAIR + HAVE BAD ATTITUDES + WEAR NIGHTTIME MAKEUP AT NOON + ENJOY LOOKING SQUOZED IN ALL THEIR ALPHETS + WANT QUICK FAME + WILL FIGHT FOR DUMB SHIT. Again, I’ve hit my quota on that.

In short, VH1 is taking no risks here. And these women who are on the show think the Nene Leakes Model for Success will work for them too. But using their letters to do it might lose them the sisterhood. Maybe they’ll get some weave brand ambassadorships from it, doe. HEY NOW!

Did you watch? Got thoughts? Let a G know. To my BGLO readers, I really wanna hear how you feel about this show.