Yahoo Finance (biz.yahoo.com) has issued the following report:

Dee Snider, known worldwide as the front man for the telegenic 80s metal band TWISTED SISTER, is headed back to television. This time, he will be an on-air host on VH1 Classic, the channel now in 33 million homes that plays "none of today's hottest music" by artists of the 60s, 70s and 80s.

One of Snider's first assignments for VH1 Classic will be on-site reports from The Legendary Buffalo Chip Campground in Sturgis, South Dakota for the All Roads Lead To The Chip. This annual event attracts thousands of motorcycle enthusiasts who will gather this year to hear such classic rock acts as ZZ TOP, HEART, STYX, REO SPEEDWAGON and BLUE OYSTER CULT, as well as Twisted Sister. VH1 Classic will air highlights of the week-long festival during Labor Day Weekend (Saturday, September 4 - Monday, September 6).

Snider will also participate again in VH1 Classic's annual A Classic Thanksgiving where classic rock and soul artists gather over a gourmet holiday feast and share memories of Thanksgivings past. His other duties include hosting VH1 Classic's For The Record, on-air segments featuring classic artists who reveal their thoughts about their successful careers and what they've learned along the way.

"Dee has been a long-time friend of VH1 Classic having hosted our Halloween video marathon last year as well as joining our first A Classic Thanksgiving," said Eric Sherman, Senior Vice President, General Manager, VH1 Classic. "In addition to being an enormously talented music artist, Dee has an incredible on-air presence and a vast knowledge base about music that we'll tap into as we expand our original programming efforts at VH1 Classic."

Dee Snider is best known as the lead singer for Twisted Sister, the heavy metal band that became an MTV staple with the music videos for their hit songs ‘We're Not Gonna Take It’ and ‘I Wanna Rock.’

Since then, Snider has had a national radio show, written, produced and acted in the 1998 horror film Strangeland, starred as himself in the VH1 Original Movie Warning: Parental Advisory and has toured with the reunited Twisted Sister.

In addition to touring with Twisted Sister, Snider has a new Halloween- themed music project called VAN HELSING’S CURSE, which he describes as "TRANS-SIBERIAN ORCHESTRA for the Halloween season."

Launched in May 2000, VH1 Classic is a 24-hour network that presents music videos, concerts and music specials all day long, featuring the best rock, soul and pop artists from the 60's, 70's and 80's, including THE BEATLES, THE ROLLING STONES, TINA TURNER, LED ZEPPELIN, MARVIN GAYE, THE WHO, STEVIE WONDER, THE POLICE and many more. Learn more at http://www.vh1classic.com.