The Russians have been on the back foot since Germany and Austria-Hungary launched the Gorlice-Tarnów offensive. Under the command of Germany’s General Mackensen the offensive has proved a far greater success than expected. As well as recapturing the fortress of Przemysl, the Austro-Hungarians have also returned to Lemberg (also known as Lwów, Lviv, Lvov, etc.), the fourth largest city of the Habsburg Empire. The Germans and Austro-Hungarians are now beginning to cross the Dniester. It will not be long now before all of Galicia is back in Austro-Hungarian hands. The Germans meanwhile are overrunning much of Russian Poland.

In Galicia the returning Austro-Hungarian army receives a warm welcome from the local Jewish community. They had been suffering harsh treatment under the Russian occupation.

In recognition of his triumph, Mackensen is awarded Germany’s highest honour, the Pour le Mérite, and promoted to Field Marshal.

image source (Rechtes Regensburg)

Generals Hindenburg and Ludendorff, Germany’s commanders on the Eastern Front, have long argued that if they are given the men they can inflict a decisive defeat on Russia, knocking it out of the war. Erich von Falkenhayn, Germany’s supreme military commander, is sceptical. He thinks that victory must first be secured on the Western Front before forces can be concentrated against Russia. Despite changing circumstances he is still wedded to the France-first strategy of Germany’s pre-war plans.

However, the run of victories Hindenburg and Ludendorff achieved with the limited forces at their disposal have made their arguments hard to resist. Falkenhayn has given them Germany’s reserves, with which Mackensen, their subordinate, has launched an offensive between Gorlice and Tarnów in Galicia. Mackensen is also commanding large numbers of Austro-Hungarian troops. The hope for the offensive was that the Russian threat to the Hungarian heartland would be eliminated and also that still neutral Bulgaria and Romanian might be encouraged to enter the war on Germany’s side.

The Gorlice-Tarnów offensive is succeeding beyond the wildest dreams of its planners. The teutonic juggernaut has completely smashed the Russians in front of it, who are now either in headlong flight or else surrendering to the victors. Since the offensive was launched last week, some 100,000 Russian prisoners and 100 artillery pieces have been captured.

And today Austro-Hungarian forces cross the San river. Their target is the fortress city of Przemysl, which fell to the Russians in March after a long siege. Its recapture would be a great symbolic victory for the Habsburg Empire.

image sources:

Hindenburg and Ludendorff (Wikipedia)

Russian prisoners (Wikipedia)

Germany’s Mackensen is commanding a combined Austro-Hungarian and German offensive on the Eastern Front, attacking the Russians in Galicia between Gorlice and Tarnów. On the first day of the offensive the Russian line was shattered. Now the Russians throw an entire corps at the enemy in a counter-attack, desperately hoping to stabilise the line.

The counter-attack fails. The Russians are thrown back and many of their units start to disintegrate. The Germans and Austro-Hungarians have achieved a breakthrough: they are now advancing through open country.

German forces are still attacking at Ypres, but the fighting there is a diversion. Falkenhayn has been persuaded to send Germany’s mobile reserve east. It has been decided to attack the Russians between Gorlice and Tarnów in Galicia. Germany’s Mackensen is to lead the attack, commanding German and Austro-Hungarian armies.

The attack begins with a devastating artillery bombardment: some 700,000 shells fired in just a few hours. Then the Germans and Austro-Hungarians surge forwards. In some sectors the artillery bombardment has so shaken the Russians that the attackers find them to have already fled. In others they put up more resistance but are thrown by the strength of Mackensen’s assault. Either way the Russian defenders collapse. This is already looking like another striking victory for German arms on the Eastern Front.

image sources:

August von Mackensen (Wikipedia)

Gorlice-Tarnów map (from a Polish language website which I think is for First World War cemetaries in Poland)