"Stay (Faraway, So Close!)" - U2

Promotional Release

Track Listing:

"Stay (Faraway, So Close!)" (Studio Version) - U2 (04:58)

"I've Got You Under My Skin" (Studio Version) - Frank Sinatra and Bono (03:33)

"Lemon" (Bad Yard Club Edit) - U2 (05:20)

"Lemon" (The Perfecto Mix) - U2 (08:58)

"Slow Dancing" (Studio Version I) - U2 (03:21)

"Bullet the Blue Sky" (Live from Dublin, Aug. 28, 1993) - U2 (05:36)

"Love is Blindness" (Live from New York, NY, Aug. 30, 1992) - U2 (05:58)

Background Information

“Stay (Faraway, So Close)” was the final single released to promote “Zooropa”. It was released in November 1993, and was released in conjunction with Frank Sinatra releasing his duet with Bono titled “I’ve Got You Under My Skin”. Both songs featured on either side of the first promotional item, a 7-inch vinyl juke box release. This was produced in France for circulation throughout Europe. The labels on this release are injection moulded with track information and the like, and are not the more traditional paper labels. Both “Stay (Faraway, So Close!)” and “I’ve Got You Under My Skin” are the album versions of the tracks. A 12-inch vinyl single was also produced for promotion in France. This was a one sided vinyl which just included “Stay (Faraway, So Close!)”. The B-side also featured a unique label even though there was no track on that side. This 12-inch is quite rare, and was released in a generic Island Records sleeve.

A promotional single on 5-inch CD was pressed in the UK. It featured an image of the Siegessäule (Victory Column) repeated four times in different colours on a unique cover sleeve, hosted in a slimline jewel case. This UK CD featured only one track, the album version of the title track. Another promotional release in the UK featured the digipack case from the commercial single which would hold two CDs released with a sticker on the front that read “Promo Copy – Not for Resale”. As this was the commercial single digipack, it did feature a UPC on the back of the sleeve, and in some cases these were covered. This was released with both CDs in place, and each CD has a small print on the surface of the CD that says “Promo Only – Not for Sale”. The CDs other than this marking were the same as the commercial UK released CDs, and even contained the same catalog number.

In the US a one disc 5-inch CD promo was released, just containing the album version of the title track. In most cases the CD was distributed in a plain jewel case without inserts, however a smaller number did contain both a front and a back unique insert. The CD featured an interference pattern in blue which matched other CDs released including “Zooropa” (purple), “Numb” promotional CDs (orange and red), “Lemon” promotional CD (yellow) and a “Zooropa” promotional CD (green). A promotional single for “I’ve Got You Under My Skin” was also released as a 5-inch promotional single, and has it’s own entry in the discography.

Liner Notes

Stay (Faraway So Close) (Album Version):

Words by Bono. Music by U2. Produced by Flood with Brian Eno and the Edge. Engineered by Flood and Robbie Adams. Mixed by Flood.

I’ve Got You Under My Skin:

Music and lyric by Cole Porter. Produced by Phil Ramone. Co-Produced by Mark Cattaneo. From the Frank Sinatra album Duets.

Lemon (Bad Yard Club Edit):

Words by Bono. Music by U2. Produced by Flood with Brian Eno and The Edge. Remix and Additional Production : David Morales for Dex Mix Productions. Engineer : David Sussman. Keyboard Programming : Satoshi Tonii for Dex Mix Productions. Percussion : David Morales.

Slow Dancing:

Words and Music: U2. Recorded by Flood. Mixed by Robbie Adams. Engineered by Robbie Adams.

Bullet the Blue Sky (Live):

Words by Bono. Music by U2. Recorded at the RDS, 28/08/93. Mixed and engineered by Mike Robinson and Robbie Adams. Radio Producer: Jeff Griffin.

Love is Blindness (Live):

Words by Bono. Music by U2. Recorded at Yankee Stadium, 30/08/92. Mixed and engineered by Robbie Adams.

Related Promotional Videos

Stay (Faraway, So Close!) (Wim Wenders) (05:25)

Stay (Faraway, So Close!) (Mark Neale and Wim Wenders) (04:58)

Related News