Island Records is a British record label owned by Universal Music Group. It was founded on July 4, 1959 by Chris Blackwell, Graeme Goodall, and Leslie Kong in Jamaica. Island and A&M Records, another label recently acquired by PolyGram, were both at the time the largest independent record labels in history, with Island having exerted a major influence on the progressive music scene in the United Kingdom in the early 1970s. Island Records operates four international divisions: Island US, Island UK, Island Australia, and Island France (known as Vertigo France until 2014). Current key people include Island US president Darcus Beese, OBE and MD Jon Turner. Partially due to its significant legacy, Island remains one of UMG's pre-eminent record labels. Some of the artists who have signed with Island Records are Bob Marley, Queen, Ariana Grande, The Cranberries, Janet Jackson, etc. Madison Beer worked with Island Records from 2013 to 2015.

History with Madison Beer[]

Beginnings (2013)[]

Madison's history with Island Records starts back in 2012, year in which she was discovered by Canadian singer Justin Bieber. On July 17, 2012, Justin tweeted a link to Madison's cover of the song "At Last" by Etta James.[1] This single tweet made Madison go immensely viral as many of Justin fans started to follow her account. All of this caused her to gain gain substantial media coverage. The very next year, Justin signed Madison to Island Records[2], record label to which he is also signed to, and at the time she was managed by Bieber's manager Scooter Braun. That same year, Madison went to release a handful of songs under Island Records. On June 6, 2013, Madison partnered with the franchise Monster High and released the song "We Are Monster High" as the new theme song for the franchise. She later released a remix of the song "Valentine" by Cody Simpson, which was uploaded to her Youtube Channel and was played on Radio Disney. This remix however was never officially released on any streaming platforms. On September 13, 2013, Madison released her long-awaited debut single titled "Melodies". The music video for the song was released the same day and featured a special appearance by Justin Bieber.

Debut album & termination (2014-2015)[]

Madison went to release multiple songs under Island Records, such as "Unbreakable", "Something Sweet" & "All for Love", featuring music duo Jack & Jack. All of this songs were most likely intended for her original debut album. Madison talked about this album in an interview back in 2013.[3] She described the album to have a R&B pop vibe. She shared with Teen Vogue:

"There will be slow songs, sad songs, happy songs, songs about boys, and songs about being who you are. I'm making sure I'm happy with all of the songs, because if I am not happy with them, I can't expect anyone else to be, you know?"

Madison recorded several songs around this period of time, a handful of these eventually leaking as years went by. Songs like "If I Could Read Your Mind", "Hit Me Back", "Shooting Star" & "Clumsy" are just some examples of songs that were recorded while Madison was working with Island Records. All of these songs had a strong Teen-Pop approach, an approach that Madison later revealed she was not satisfied with and was forced to do by the label at the time. In other words, Madison expressed she felt silenced by older men on what direction her music should go.[4] She told E! News:

"When I was younger, I felt silenced in almost every room I would step into (...) Everyone was like, 'Oh sweetheart, we know better than you–you don't know what you're talking about.' And that didn't feel good at all."

Songs like "Magic" were also registered around this time and are believed to be from her original debut album. For a long time, Madison worked thoroughly on recorded songs for her debut album until late 2015, after she got dropped from the label due to multiple disagreements between Madison and her team.

Work with Madison Beer[]

Released[]

"All for Love"

"Melodies"

"Something Sweet"

"Unbreakable"

"We Are Monster High"

Unreleased[]

"(Don't You Tell Me) You're The One"

"Clumsy"

"Do It Like That"

"Hit Me Back"

"If I Could Read Your Mind"

"Magic"

"Possy"

"Shooting Star (Just A Plane)"

"Smile"

"Valentine" (Remix)