Santa Maria Urban Ministry was founded in 1983 to provide emergency food to impoverished families in downtown San Jose, California. Santa Maria has provided a food pantry continuously for 40 years.

Since our beginnings, we have listened to the community needs and started many new services that not only address immediate necessities but to also empower families and individuals to transform their circumstances. To address the increasing numbers of homeless, our Warm Hearts Initiative provides unhoused members of our community with bagged lunches, hygiene kits and in the winter sleeping bags and other resources.

An outreach ministry of the Episcopal Diocese of El Camino Real, Santa Maria welcomes people of all faiths or none and does not discriminate on any basis.

Monday-Friday & every First and Third Saturday: 9:00am - 11:45am

Santa Maria's Food Pantry provides bi-monthly groceries for neighbors in need in San Jose. Produce is bagged fresh by volunteers. We pride ourselves of providing a balanced collection of protein, staples, vegtalbles and fruit.

Summer Camps for:

Elementary students grades 1st through 4th

For early teens spomsorship to Camp Saint Andrew's

For information on camp, contact alfonso.mendez@santamariasj.org

or give us a call at 408-292-3314

Santa Maria's four-week long summer camp is a fun program and weekly field trips to open horizons and keep our community's kids safe, learning and engaged. Santa Maria also partners with Camp Saint Andrew's to sponsor youth to this high sierra camp experience.

Santa Maria Urban Ministry is grateful for the work of its Board of Directors.

The Board is currently dedicated to accomplishing the many goals they have set for Santa Maria. Our current Board Members include:

Laura Bravo

Mike Orlando

Lewis Pollard

Kenneth Rousseau

Susan Stanat

Peter Troop

We are actively seeking volunteers committed to our mission to join our board. Please contact us for more information.

Here's what our clients always need and appreciate:

- Canned foods (especially protein-rich foods like peanut butter and tuna)

- Fresh Fruits & Vegetables (from your garden, perhaps?)

We greatly appreciate the generosity of all of our donors. You keep our doors open, our clients fed, our children happy and better educated, our adult students fulfilled...and our many volunteers fully engaged too!