SAN JOSE, California (October 24, 2011)—Singer-songwriter David Berkeley will perform at the San Jose Museum of Art on Sunday, November 6, 2011, at 6 p.m. Acclaimed as a “musical poet,” (San Francisco Chronicle), Berkeley will perform music from his latest studio album, Some Kind of Cure, and draw inspired connections between his music and the art on view. He will also read from this companion book of short stories, 140 Goats and a Guitar. A book-signing will follow at 7:30 p.m. Tickets are $18 ($12 for members) and are available online at artsopolis.com.

Berkeley has appeared on This American Life and was a finalist in the 2010 Mountain Stage’s New Song Contest. His original song “Fire Sign” was featured on the CBS TV show Without a Trace. He has opened for or toured with such artists as Dido, Don McLean, Ben Folds, Billy Bragg, Rufus Wainwright, Ray Lamontagne, Nickel Creek, Colin Hay, Guster, Rhett Miller, and Rachael Yamagata. Critics have hailed Berkeley’s “lustrous melancholy voice” (New York Times) and his “emotional story-telling lyrics, charismatic stage presence, and hilarious anecdotes (Boston Globe).

Berkeley wrote the music on Some Kind of Cure while living in a tiny village on in Corsica. The result, his fourth studio album, is rich with the images of that Mediterranean island and incorporates the sound of the village church bell and Corsican singers. The songs on the entirely fan-funded album range from the heartbreaking father-son ballad “Winter Winds” to the roadside romance of the uptempo “Parachute.”

The concert will take place in the Museum’s Central Skylight Gallery. Doors open at 5:30 p.m. and seating is first-come, first served.

SAN JOSE MUSEUM OF ART

The San Jose Museum of Art is located at 110 South Market Street in downtown San Jose, California. For more information, call 408-271-6840 or visit www.SanJoseMuseumofArt.org.

# # #

Programs at the San Jose Museum of Art are generously supported in part by an award from the National Endowment for the Arts, by operating support from the David and Lucile Packard Foundation; the James Irvine Foundation; the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation; the Adobe Foundation; and the Koret Foundation; the MetLife Foundation; and a Cultural Affairs grant from the City of San Jose.