The Council through our foundation LEAF, Inc. supports members by providing exceptional opportunities to expand and enrich their expertise and knowledge in the area of educational administration through statewide annual events. The Winter Institute offers keynote addresses by national experts in the fields of leadership, education, advocacy and related areas; opportunities for members to share best practices with colleagues through smaller sessions; an interactive discussion with the Commissioner of Education about New York State issues and initiatives; and networking for support and collegiality among members through social interaction, group discussions, meetings and workshops. The event also hosts an exhibit hall where companies, associations, organizations and foundations can connect with school leaders from across New York State.

2024 Winter Institute & Lobby Day

Cultivating a Culture of Excellence for ALL Students

March 3-5, 2024

Albany Capital Center

Albany, NY

Thanks to Title Sponsor Utica National Insurance Group!

Thank you for joining us for the 2024 Winter Institute. This year’s Winter Institute was all about “Cultivating a Culture of Excellence for All Students.” The concept of ALL permeated the opening session from the impassioned message delivered by keynote speaker Dr. Anthony Muhammad to the lyrics in the songs presented by students from the Windsor High School American Bluegrass band, the Butterbeans. If you weren’t able to make Sunday’s keynote, here’s what you missed!

NYSCOSS Executive Director Chuck Dedrick welcomed attendees to this year’s event and then we kicked things off with an absolutely awesome performance from the Butterbeans. The students played instruments steeped in Americana such as the mandolin, accordion, banjo and even a washboard as they delivered rousing renditions of hits like “Jolene” by Dolly Parton and “Brand New Key” by Melanie.

NYSCOSS President, Dr. Jason Andrews was visibly proud of his students as he welcomed attendees and then handed the floor over to Hank Grishman, Superintendent of Jericho Schools, to introduce the recipients of the 2024 NYSCOSS Appreciation Awards, Dr. Phyllis Harrington, Superintendent of Schools, Oceanside USFD, and Dr. Cosimo Tangorra, Superintendent of Schools, New Hartford CSD.

Keynote Speaker Dr. Anthony Muhammad, a renowned International Thought Leader and CEO of New Frontier Consulting, spoke to the crowd about their role in mining NYS’s most valuable natural resource - young minds. He explored the history of the field of education and examined why the ideas and concepts behind the professional learning communities process were important before the global pandemic and why they are even more important as we learn and grow post-covid. He touched a lot on the concept of “all” and the need to work together to ensure that all really means all.

A lyric from the Butterbeans performance of “Brand New Key” rings true as we contemplate the meaning of collaboration and working together to serve every last one of our students:

“I'm okay alone, but you've got something I need”

We’ve all got something that our colleagues need and our Winter Institute was a great time to share that something and learn from each other.

Watch our Councilgram newsletter for upcoming articles on education sessions from the Winter Institute.

Winter Institute Recordings

Sunday Opening Keynote - March 3, 2024

- Appreciation Awards with Thanks to Sponsor Mosaic Associates Architects

- Student Performance - Butterbeans, Windsor CSD

- 2023-24 NYSCOSS President Jason A. Andrews, Windsor - Opening Remarks

- Thanks to Opening Keynote Sponsor Energia

Monday Morning Keynote - March 4, 2024

- Student Performance - Albany Marching Falcons Play the National Anthem

- 2024 NYS Superintendent of the Year - Dr. Joseph S. Famularo, Bellmore UFSD

- Thanks to Monday Ignite Keynote Sponsor zSpace

- Winter Institute Ignite Presentation - Dr. Barbara Mullen, Superintendent, Rush-Henrietta CSD

- Winter Institute Ignite Presentation - Dr. David O’Rourke, District Superintendent, Erie2-Chautauqua-Cattaraugus BOCES

- Winter Institute Ignite Presentation - Dr. Terry L. Ward, Superintendent, Cato-Meridian CSD

- Friend of The Council Award – Derek McManus, Vice President Business Development, Day Automation and Thanks to Custom Computer Specialists

Tuesday Closing Keynote Presentation - March 5, 2024

- 2023 Raymond R. Delaney Scholarship – Michael T. Carlson, Ass't Superintendent, Hampton Bays Public Schools and Thanks to Utica National Insurance Group

- 2024 Past Presidents’ Scholarship – Sarah Cioffi K-12 Academic Administrator, World Languages and English as a New Language, Shenendehowa CSD and Thanks to Edjuncture

- 2024 Dr. Mary Barter Scholarship – Franky Simmons, Principal, OHS, Castleton, Oceanside UFSD and Thanks to Energia

- Special Announcement with Dr. Aurelia Henriquez, Superintendent, Port Chester Rye UFSD

- Thanks to Closing Keynote Session Sponsor Keenan Pharmacy Services

Call for Proposal

Our Education Session Call for Proposal opens in late April 2024 for our 2024 Fall Leadership Summit and late November for our 2025 Winter Institute & Lobby Day.

Save the Date for Future Events

2025 Winter Institute & Lobby Day

March 2 - 4, 2025

Albany Capital Center

Albany, NY

2025 Fall Leadership Summit

September 28 - 30, 2025

Saratoga Hilton & Saratoga Springs City Center

Saratoga Springs, NY

2026 Winter Institute & Lobby Day

March 1 - 3, 2026

Albany Capital Center

Albany, NY

2026 Fall Leadership Summit

September 27 - 29, 2026

Saratoga Hilton & Saratoga Springs City Center

Saratoga Springs, NY

2027 Winter Institute & Lobby Day

March 7 - 9, 2027

Albany Capital Center

Albany, NY

2027 Fall Leadership Summit

September 26 - 28, 2027

Saratoga Hilton & Saratoga Springs City Center

Saratoga Springs, NY

2028 Winter Institute & Lobby Day

March 5 - 7, 2028

Albany Capital Center

Albany, NY

The Council is committed to providing experiences and environments that are welcoming, inviting and user-friendly for all attendees. We recognize that some individuals may required specific accommodations to ensure their full and equal participation in our Winter Institute. Please contact us at 518.449.1063 should you need assistance.