lyris miu

Born and raised in Hong Kong, Lyris identifies as a Hong Konger. She sees how the city is rebuilding itself by centering on humanity, connections, and freedom of self-expression. She wants to play a part in making Hong Kong home to everyone from different walks of life.

Growing up almost exclusively around women, she learned not to confine herself to society’s expectations. She is devoted to creating a society for everyone to be in control of their lives, and becoming whoever they want to be- instead of what others tell them to be. Through people who are close to her, including her close friend with hearing impairments and her grandmother who moves using a wheelchair, Lyris gets to see the world very differently in snippets. She sees how small but meaningful steps can positively affect the lives of people with disabilities.

Lyris is keen to dedicate her life to building a platform for people who are excluded from society. In her social justice journey, disability education for children and animal therapy for people with disabilities have been her two focal points. With a view to create an educational program targeting younger children in local schools, she hopes to widen the mainstream narrative that excludes people with disabilities, racial and sexual minorities, and beyond.

Lyris recently graduated from the University of Hong Kong, with a major in Comparative Literature and minors in American Studies and Gender Studies. Her academic experiences have trained her to reflect deeply, and consider issues from different perspectives. As a humanities student, she wants to transform her knowledge into actions and meet like-minded people. This is why she joined Resolve’s Social Justice Fellowship Program: to have a support system with people who have similar visions and values, as well as gaining leadership skills and confidence.

Lyris is currently working at Arttea Global, following a project in collaboration with Arts With the Disabled Association Hong Kong’s social enterprise ADAM, which aims to create job opportunities and income for artists with disability in Hong Kong. With plans to open up an inclusive coffee shop that showcases artwork from artists with disability, Lyris hope to help build an equal and inclusive chance for everyone to create and participate in the world of art, while allowing the society to appreciate and understand the unique perspectives and talents of artists with disability. Lyris also volunteers as an Animal Assisted Intervention (AAI) dog handler, where she brings therapy dogs to attend occupational or behavioural therapy sessions for people with disabilities a few times a week. Starting as a foster family for guide-dog in training with the Hong Kong Guide Dog Association, she witnessed first-hand how small gestures of assistance and love go a long way for people with disabilities to be independent and achieve what they want in life.

Dancing and singing take up most of Lyris’s time; she is a big fan of musical theatre.