The 924 Gilman Street project, alternately the Alternative Music Foundation, is the Berkeley, California street address and official business name of the all-ages, non-profit, collectively organized music club usually referred to by its fans simply as "Gilman." It is located in the West Berkeley area about a mile and a half west of the North Berkeley BART station and a quarter-mile west of San Pablo Avenue, at the corner of 8th Street and Gilman.

History[]

In April 1986, the founders located the building at 924 Gilman Street and signed a lease. In the following months, the founders, including Tim Yohannon of Maximum Rocknroll, held weekly organizational meetings and posted flyers to increase involvement. On December 31, 1986, the club held its first show. Since then, 924 Gilman Street has been one of the longest-running independent music venues in the United States. 924 Gilman opened several months after the closing of two important San Francisco punk venues - the Mabuhay Gardens and The Farm - and was started in part because of the lack of punk venues in the San Francisco Bay Area during this era, particularly all-ages venues.

Founding Principles[]

924 Gilman Street operates on Do It Yourself (DIY) ethic.

A 924 Gilman Street member (which is anyone who buys a $2-per-year membership card), has the ability to make decisions and work for the improvement of the club as a whole. Membership meetings occur at 5 pm on the first and third Saturdays of each month.

There are three main rules for patrons:

No drugs

No alcohol

No violence

The staff will not book or support racist, misogynistic, anti-homosexuality, or major-label bands for performances. For a band to be booked there, they must first send in a copy of their lyrics to the venue.

Music[]

Gilman showcases mostly punk rock, specifically pop punk and hardcore punk acts. Some of the most influential bands that have played at Gilman include: Template:Columns-start

Soup (the first band to ever play there)

AFI

Allegiance

Assfort

Bad Religion

Bl'ast

Blatz

Born Against

Chumbawamba

Crimpshrine

Die Kreuzen

Econochrist

Fifteen

Filth

The Forgotten

Fugazi

Template:Column

Gauze

Go!

Green Day

Guttermouth

GWAR

Hijinks

His Hero Is Gone

Indian Summer

Isocracy

Jawbreaker

L7

Link 80

MDC

The Mentors

The Mr. T Experience

Third Eye BlindTemplate:Fact

Neurosis

Template:Column

NOFX

No Use for a Name

The Offspring

Operation Ivy

Rancid

Samiam

Screeching Weasel

Screw 32

The Singularity

Spitboy

Sweet Baby

Submission Hold

Tiger Army

Tilt

Victim's Family

Youth of Today

Template:Columns-end

A history of the club "924 Gilman: The Story So Far," was written and edited by Brian Edge collecting memories and anecdotes from many of the seminal contributors to the club's day-to-day operations from 1986 through publication in 2004. The book is available through AK Press and also contains a full list of Gilman's shows from 1986 through early 2004.

A few of the bands listed above, such as AFI, Rancid, Third Eye Blind and Green Day, are no longer booked to play the venue due to major label contracts. Many of the other bands are defunct. The venue still serves the East Bay and Northern California hardcore scene by bringing local, national and international acts to the East Bay.

Green Day, however, performed a set after fellow punk band The Influents in 2001. The show was taped and put on DVD for sale on the Influents web store. (1) Green Day was not officially booked; they went on stage without consulting Gilman staff. The Influents decided to cut their set short to let Green Day perform.

Jello Biafra incident[]

Despite the fact that the club is meant to be a non-violent environment, on May 7 1994 audience members attacked former Dead Kennedys singer Jello Biafra, claiming he was a sell out (per club rules however, Biafra had never signed to a major label). Biafra claims that he was attacked by a man nicknamed Cretin, who crashed into him while slamdancing. The crash injured Biafra's leg, causing an argument between the two men. During the argument, Cretin pushed Biafra to the floor and five or six friends of Cretin assaulted Biafra while he was down, yelling "Sellout rock star, kick him".[1] Biafra was later hospitalized with serious injuries.[2]

References[]

↑ Goldberg, Michael. "Jello Biafra Attacked". Rolling Stone. July 14, 1994 & July 28, 1994.

↑ According to Allmusic [1], having had both his legs broken. A 1994 issue of Rolling Stone also claimed that his injuries included "extensive damage to the ligaments of one knee as well as a superficial head wound".

[]

Venue Official Website

924 Gilman Artblog

Gilman Event Calendar

Template:Coord missing

it:924 Gilman Street simple:924 Gilman Street fi:Gilman Street sv:924 Gilman Street