Our Song Index is a collection of over 270 books of sheet music indexed by song title.

It allows title searches to find lyrics and music to many popular, folk, jazz, Broadway, and religious songs.

Find songbooks, lyrics, sheet music, and scores in our collection. Don't forget to access our online streaming music services!

Historic newspaper clippings and ephemera related to Berkeley artists, architects, athletes, cultural institutions, and more are available to browse in the Berkeley History Room by appointment.

Download a list of the file headings for the A&M Clip Files to see what topics are available, and call 510.981.6148 or email to make an appointment.

More than 670,000 tracks from all genres of music are available to stream!

Music Online is divided into 5 collections for easier browsing:

American Song,

Classical Music Library,

Contemporary World Music,

Jazz Music Library, and

Smithsonian Global Sound for Libraries.

NOTE: Music Online from Alexander Street Press is not available through our OPAC terminals. Check out a Chromebook at any branch to use this resource.

Streaming access to 2.2 million tracks of classical music, Jazz, Access to a large music library. Currently, it offers streaming access to more than 100,000 CDs with more than 1,500,000 tracks of both standard and rare repertoire. Over 800 new CDs are added to the library every month.

Naxos Jazz Music Library here and Naxos World Music Library here.

(NOTE: BPL does not have an access code for the NAXOS app.)

NOTE: Naxos is not available through our OPAC terminals. Check out a Chromebook at any branch to use this resource.

Enjoy thousands of titles –books, music, audiobooks, and films - available to borrow for instant streaming or temporary downloading to tablets, computers and Android and IOS smartphones.

To begin, go to hoopladigital.com and:

1. Follow the fast and easy sign-up process using your library card.

2. If you want hoopla on the go, install the free mobile app on your iOS or Android device.

That's it! No holds, no waiting! You can borrow up to 10 items per month. Borrowing times are 21 days for audiobook, eBook and comics, 7 days for music, and 3 days for videos.

Questions? Check out https://www.hoopladigital.com/feedback

NOTE: Hoopla is not available through our OPAC terminals. Check out a Chromebook at any branch to use this resource.