It’s the 1930’s! We have transported ourselves to ninety years ago, and are now well enough into the talking picture era that filmmakers have found ways to bypass the struggles with sound recording technology. After enough years of silent pictures, this new lease on cinematic life granted artists the abilities to retell the same stories but with a whole new angle. This meant revisiting literally the same films that one before, and remaking them with sound (like Hitchcock, Ozu, Lang, and other filmmakers would do). There were many other avenues, though: seeing what certain genres seemed like when translated into talkies, figuring out how music could now be utilized, and figuring out the time changes without the use of inter-titles and with sound. Of course, films also became much shorter for the most part, since many studios and filmmakers were abiding by the limitations of how much sound recording one would have (and, naturally, films became as long as their audio). The 1930’s contain the shortest average runtime of all of the decades I’ve researched by far (even the ‘20s had much longer films in general); many ‘30s films that I watched were an hour and a half, and even less.

However, silent films weren’t gone for good just yet. Some artists wanted to explore the era now as a style done by purpose, and not because it’s all that was available like it was once before. Some nations, like China and Japan, didn’t have the recording or theatrical technology yet, and so their silent eras carried on for a little bit longer. Other filmmakers were taking their silent films and dubbing over them, turning them into pseudo-talkies. Either way, a lot of movement was made, and I haven’t even discussed anything outside of sound, yet. This includes censorship that the Production Code enforced after enough pre-Code gems rocked one too many boats. There’s also the mastering of Technicolor that some directors and studios were getting comfortable with. The ‘30s was the Golden Age of Hollywood, but that Golden Age wasn’t really of one specific nature, particularly because of the many moving individual parts. It was, however, collectively a time of inspiration and wonder.

Here are one hundred films of the 1930’s, and picking out the best of the best, as usual, wasn’t easy. Which one hundred works best defined the most impressionable time in film history, when everyone was figuring out this medium again? Which features breathed new life into the rebirth of visual storytelling? Who made the big cross from silent pictures into the talking era? There are so many marvels of this time, and yet many pictures are tethered to key historical moments: the Great Depression, the lingering effects of World War I (in response to the rising tensions that would eventually cause the second World War), and other major events. I think these are the best candidates to illustrate all of the above; they’re also flat out the best films of these times. Here are the best one hundred films of the 1930’s.

Disclaimer: I am including documentaries and shorts — anything shorter than forty minutes or not labelled as a “featurette” (which were common around this time) — on another list, and they won’t be featured here.

Be sure to check out my other Best 100 lists of every decade here.

1. L’Atalante

One of cinema’s largest crying shames was the short life of Jean Vigo, who passed away at twenty nine from tuberculosis. He was just getting started when he released what was his only feature-length film (excluding featurettes) L’Atalante, early in the decade in 1934. He died a month after the theatrical release of this film. There wasn’t even a chance for us to see what he could do next. He redefined poetic realism, aesthetic filmmaking, and cinema altogether in the span of an hour and a half. All he needed was a newlywed couple, the titular boat, and for life to take its course. Then came magic, and L’Atalante certainly feels like one of the medium’s most mesmerizing achievements.

Capturing all of the elements of marriage (happy, toxic, successful and failed, all at once), L’Atalante feels like life has sped by us, even though there is no indication of this, judging by the characters and their realistic states. Still, Vigo crafted entire lifetimes and rebirths in this heavily metaphorical journey, full of silly laughs, heavy woes, and all of the oddities in between that make life the greatest experience. If that weren’t enough, there’s the flashes of Vigo as a visual artist, utilizing filmmaking tricks and techniques to pull off the kinds of prettiness and celebration that only this art form could fulfill.

Jean Vigo clearly could do it all; as sad as it is that we only had his short filmography, it’s a testament enough that we could tell his brilliance with so little. L’Atalante is unquestionably the definitive cinematic poem: a love letter from a careless, jealous husband to his freedom loving wife. It doesn’t take much for the greats to make their mark, and Vigo single handedly made the greatest film of the 1930’s while barely seeming like he tried; this feels like it was second nature to him, and he was ready to really get going with his capabilities. If only he lived long enough to see how much his masterpiece has affected countless audiences for decades.