Modeling what makes an advertisement persuasive, i.e., eliciting the desired response from consumer, is critical to the study of propaganda, social psychology, and marketing. Despite its importance, computational modeling of persuasion in computer vision is still in its infancy, primarily due to the lack of benchmark datasets that can provide persuasion-strategy labels associated with ads. Motivated by persuasion literature in social psychology and marketing, we introduce an extensive vocabulary of persuasion strategies and build the first ad image corpus annotated with persuasion strategies. We then formulate the task of persuasion strategy prediction with multi-modal learning, where we design a multi-task attention fusion model that can leverage other ad-understanding tasks to predict persuasion strategies. Further, we conduct a real-world case study on 1600 advertising campaigns of 30 Fortune-500 companies where we use our model’s predictions to analyze which strategies work with different demographics (age and gender). The dataset also provides image segmentation masks, which labels persuasion strategies in the corresponding ad images on the test split. We publicly release our code and dataset.

Explore Dataset

Distribution of Persuasion Strategies

Sample Segmented Images

Pitt Ads Dataset

Pitt ads dataset contains an image dataset of 64,832 image ads, and a video dataset of 3,477 ads. This data contains annotations encompassing the topic and sentiment of the ads, questions and answers describing what actions the viewer is prompted to take and the reasoning that the ad presents to persuade the viewer. The Pitt Ads dataset can be donwloaded from here.

Get the Dataset

Images

Train Image Annotations

Test Image Annotations

Explore the Dataset with Category Wise Examples

Segmentation Masks

Model

Read the Paper

Dataset Statistics

Persuasive Strategies No. of Class Sample Definition Anchoring and comparison 48 A product’s value is strongly influenced by what

it is compared to. Reciprocity 186 By obligating the recipient of an act to repayment in

the future, the rule for reciprocation begets a sense

of future obligation, often unequal in nature Concreteness 1007 Using concrete facts, evidence to appeal to the

logic of consumers Social Impact 103 Emphasizes the importance or bigger impact

of a product Guarantees 45 Guarantees reduce risk and people try out

such products more often. Trustworthiness 157 Trustworthiness indicated honesty and integrity of

the source through tropes like years of experience,

“trusted brand”, numbers and statistics Authority 65 Authority indicated through expertise, source of power,

third-party approval, credentials, and awards Customer Reviews and Stories 28 Informational influence by accepting information

obtained from others as evidence about

reality, e.g., customer reviews and ratings Social Identity 126 Normative influence, which involves conformity with the positive

expectations of “another”, who could be “another person, a

group, or one’s self” (includes self-persuasion, fleeting attraction,

alter-casting, and exclusivity) Scarcity 64 People assign more value to opportunities when they are less

available. This happens due to psychological reactance of losing

freedom of choice when things are less available or they use

availability as a cognitive shortcut for gauging quality. Foot in the Door 18 Starting with small requests followed by larger requests to

facilitate compliance while maintaining cognitive coherence. Reverse Psychology 15 Overcoming resistance (reactance) by postponing consequences

to the future, by focusing resistance on realistic concerns, by

forewarning that a message will be coming, by acknowledging

resistance, by raising self-esteem and a sense of efficacy. Anthropomorphism 37 When a brand or product is seen as human-like, people will

like it more and feel closer to it. Unclear 148 If the ad strategy is unclear or it is not in English Emotion 238 Aesthetics, feeling and other non-cognitively demanding

features used for persuading consumers Amazed 141 Feeling surprised, astonished, awed, fascinated, intrigued Fashionable 443 Trendy, elegant, beautiful, attractive, sexy Feminine 173 Womanly, girlish Active 256 Feeling energetic, adventurous, vibrant, enthusiastic, playful Eager 540 Feeling of hunger, thirsty, passion Cheerful 223 Feeling delighted, happy, joyful, carefree, optimistic Creative 402 Inventive, productive