Seaside Heliotrope, Salt Heliotrope, Wild heliotrope, Monkey Tail, Quail Plant, Nena;

ID request, flowering wild plant from Haryana (090509SS-1-3) – indiantreepix | Google Groups

Heliotropium curassavicum from Panipat : Attachments (3). 8 posts by 4 authors.

Heliotropium curassavicum var. obovatum from Thermal Power Station Panipat

Yes … Another American weed that is fast spreading in India.

Yes Sir but you will be happy to know this plant is not found around Kolkata only H indicum is found in plenty.

For that … you will have to reduce rainfall in Calcutta and create saline soils.

It is not possible sir !! ha ha ha

Thank you …, Heliotropium curassavicum var. obovatum is new to me. As … revealed in our area (M.P.) also H.indicum is recorded so far.

H indicum (Hathisundi) is a useful herb as per my knowledge is used in traditional herbal medicine in epilepsy. For H curassavicum i may send seeds to you if you like it !!!!!

… We are already in very much trouble with Parthenium hysterophorus and now one more American weed is spreading like KUKURMUTTE in Baarish!!

Any way thanks for the info

Ohhh!! Yes Indeed if you can !! I will love to see the plant closely as i have not seen them

Flora of Panipat District- Heliotropium curassavicum var. obovatum : Attachments (4). 4 posts by 3 authors.

Heliotropium curassavicum var. obovatum

Yes … A recent introduction from America, slowly spreading in Delhi also, mostly along Yamuna banks.

It can be seen most of the places in North and Central Haryana now. Very Common Weed along roadside

Sir Ji was it introduced purposely or as a weed it got introduced ?

Seaside/salt heliotrope : Attachments (2). 4 posts by 3 authors.

Heliotropium curassavicum var. obovatum

Common name: Seaside/salt heliotrope

At Tal chaper WLS Rajasthan

04 Dec,2010

I think this an invasive weed from North America

Yes … I collected it from one place in Delhi, about 30 years back. Now it is well spread along banks of Yamuna

I hope I am correct in identifying this one as…. Heliotropium curassavicum Linn., Sp. Pl. 1: 130, 1753, a small spreading herb with succulent, lanceolate, leaves, flowers in terminal long, curved cymes. Shot from near Panipat, in April 2012.

Looks good forHeliotropium curassavicum

Yes … It is Heliotropium curassavicum. Nice photographs.

Photographed from Delhi growing on sandy soil along road sides.

190713 ASP 122 : Attachments (1). 2 posts by 2 authors.

Please ID this succulent that grows along brackish water coast. Photo was taken in Sri Lanka in Dec 2011.

Looks like one of the salt Heliotropes (Heliotropium curassavicum ?). Send close ups of the flowers and foliage for proper ID. Your postings in general suffer from clarity.

efi page on Heliotropium curassavicum

Heliotropium curassavicum

(250309SCS1) – Heliotropium ovalifolium : 3 posts by 2 authors. Attachments (1)

Heliotropium ovalifolium

Sonepat, Haryana, March 09.

Here is a link:

http://www.zimbabweflora.co.zw/speciesdata/image-display.php?species_id=148370&image_id=2

I think it should be Heliotropium curassavicum L. as per images herein

Is it Heliotropium curassavicum ? : 4 posts by 4 authors. 2 images- around 900 kb each.

First of all I would like to thank everyone for such prompt response on my previous post and helping me out.

I have attached two pictures of a species which I believe is Heliotropium curassavicum. Please confirm.

Location : Delhi

Type : Saline marshy area

Height : 55 meters

I also think so as per images at

I think yes.

Most likely. A few years ago … had a case, and I was baffled because its supposed to be a coastal plant : but … said it was recently introduced weed and seen in YAMUNA sandy soils.

we have a page at efi site

I noticed it this year and its all over the place on our project site.

References: