Frank Herbert, Author of Classic Novel “Dune”

A community movement successfully established the naming of a waterfront park trail in Tacoma after author and favorite son Frank Herbert (1920-1986), who was born in Tacoma and whose family lives in the area. Read about Frank Herbert here: https://www.britannica.com/biography/Frank-Herbert.

Frank Herbert Trail

In addition to the Frank Herbert Trail, which meanders through a waterside field, the park features amphitheaters, views of Puget Sound and Mount Rainier, small stages for live performances, a contemporary sculpture symbolizing a chemical factory that the park replaced, and stone sculptures of dunes at the perfect height for photo opps. (Read about the naming here: https://www.geekwire.com/2018.) The 40-acre park was completed and opened to the public in the summer of 2019.

Author Adventures filmed this short video on location at the park:

Herbert is best known for writing the classic and award-winning science fiction Dune series. Science fiction readers often think of Dune as the foundation of many science fiction books that followed it decades later. Published in 1965, the futuristic book is philosophical, touching on politics, psychology, ecology, and other fields. It has sold more than 12 million copies in at least 14 languages.

Dune was adapted into two feature films, one released in 1984 and the other in 2021. Fans considered the 1984 film a major departure from the book and it flopped. The 2021 feature was more successful. The 2021 film version starred Oscar-nominated actor Timothée Chalamet and several other major celebrities. Read about it here: https://winteriscoming.net. The story was also adapted for several television series through the years.

Read about Frank Herbert’s adventurous life and writing career and drop by King’s Books (218 St. Helens Avenue) for great conversations about local literature. Plan ahead by clicking here: https://www.kingsbookstore.com.

“Something cannot emerge from nothing,” wrote Frank Herbert.

Visit https://dunenovels.com for current information about the popular Dune series.

Also See

Tacoma residents are proud of the connection to Herbert. A local independent bookstore, King’s Books, once named its resident cat after him. The shop keeps as many editions of Dune available as they can find. King’s Books also enjoys popularity through clever social media posts.

This stop in Tacoma is part of our Washington Author Adventures Trail in the same southern area of the state as the Meeker Mansion in Puyallup. If traveling north-south, it can easily be a last stop. The timing of your visit will depend on whether you plan to attend an event or simply want to enjoy a relaxing walk and view.

Patricia Smart