Listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places, the Mountain View Grand Resort & Spa is one of the last remaining wilderness getaways of America’s Gilded Age. Its story started rather unusually, as the building became a vacation hotspot by accident. In 1865, a stagecoach traveling north toward Montréal overturned just three miles outside of the neighboring town of Whitefield. Exhausted and soaked with rain, the passengers sojourned further up the road, while their driver attempted to fix the vehicle. Eventually, they stumbled upon the farmhouse of the William Franklin Dodge and his wife, Mary Eastman. The two immediately took the weary travelers into their home, providing them with a warm place to stay for the night. Mary even went out of her way to cook a great feast in their honor. Needless to say, the stagecoach passengers were incredibly impressed by their hospitality. They were especially enchanted with the farmhouse itself, as well as the picturesque landscape that surrounded the location. The visitors never forgot their trip to the Dodge home. In fact, the group actually returned later that summer, spending several weeks at the farmhouse for a long vacation. This moment marked the beginning of the Dodge family’s 113-year venture into the hospitality industry—one of the longest in American history to date.

Encouraged by their success, the Dodges quickly built a special annex onto their farmhouse that would provide exclusive guestrooms for their future patrons. The family then began advertising the new space within several Boston newspapers, referring to their farm as the “Mountain View House.” The marketing strategy proved to be a great success. Hundreds of guests made the trip high up into the White Mountains to experience the Dodges’ wonderful refuge. They were not only captivated by the area’s stunning scenery, but the delicious home-cooked meals made with ingredients collected from the family’s farm. Mary wound up managing the daily operations of the retreat, while William supervised the farm and toured guests throughout the countryside. Interest with the Dodge family farm soared across New England over the next few years. As the number of visitors increased, so too did William and Mary’s ambitions to expand upon the business. In 1872, the two constructed a massive manor to replace their farmhouse, which they continued to grow in size. By the 1890s, the farm could accommodate up to 140 guests! But the Dodge family estate no longer looked like the simple country homestead it had once been in the years after the American Civil War. Instead, the grounds now resembled the layout of a modern resort.

Business remained strong for the Dodge family and their Mountain View House heading into the 20th century. The ever-growing popularity caused the Dodges to expand the retreat yet again, adding three new wings onto the structure throughout the first few decades of the 1900s. Nevertheless, the construction did not exclusively involve building new guest accommodations. On the contrary, the family developed a number of structures that ranged from staff dormitories to recreational facilities. Soon enough, the Mountain View House was capable of entertaining some several hundred overnight guests! By this point, William and Mary’s descendants—Herbert Van Dodge and Franklin Schyuler Dodge—had inherited the retreat. Their stewardship saw the Mountain View House gain a national audience, as it began hosting some of America’s most illustrious citizens. Many prominent intellectuals explored their creative energies at the destination, including the likes of Robert Frost and Norman Rockwell. Prominent business figures, such as John D. Rockefeller, also escaped the tumult of city life by staying at the Mountain View House, too. Even Hollywood celebrities like Bette Davis and Betty Grable made the trip north to the Mountain View House. Perhaps the greatest guests to arrive were former U.S. presidents, including Theodore Roosevelt, Warren G. Harding, and Calvin Coolidge.