Dynasty is commonly regarded as the album on which the wheels began to fall off the Kiss bandwagon: The new emphasis on pop music (as well as the disco-ish lead single) and pop production alienated much of the band's core fanbase: the album's May release was followed by an extravagantly conceived tour, which began in June and ended in December - though attendances were lower than usual and one date had to be shifted to a smaller venue. At the end of the year, the notorious Tom Synder interview graphically illustrated the division in the band (though by this time, none of them were speaking to each other in private) and the tour revealed the extent of Peter Criss's decline as a performer (he barely played on the album).

In reality, though, 1978 was the beginning of the band's decline: the much-vaunted solo albums had not done the expected units and, by puncturing the band's mystique, the film 'Kiss Meets The Phantom Of The Park' also did them damage. A third, subtler factor may have been Gene Simmons' very public relationship with Cher, which allegedly didn't go down well with the fans.

In reality, the problem may have been that Kiss had, by 1978/9 achieved everything they had set out to do: ie, got rich. Being a market-led group, they had no reason to go on, unless it was to get even richer. Ahead of them lay the misfires of Unmasked, The Elder, the panicked return to hard rock of Creatures Of The Night and then the (inevitably) removal of the make-up and a long period as a superannuated hair metal band.

Did anyone on here see the 1979 tour? Or was anyone a fan of the band in the late 70s - if so, how did you react to Kisstory during 1978/9?

Yes, my transition from grade school to junior high lead to the end of my interest in Kiss. They were certainly not cool at all in the early 80's.

I kind of remember that happening with a lot of the older fans, by older I mean 16, and it started before "Dynasty". The original fan base who were developed from the early live shows either moved on or didn't want to be associated with a band that sold dolls and lunchboxes.

I give Simmons and Stanley credit for finding a way to remain viable throughout the 80s as a pop-metal band, even if it was on a more modest scale than in the 70s. Then once the hair-metal fad died down they were able to capitalize on the retro/nostalgia market. I don't think anyone in 1980 thought that KISS would still be selling records or playing arenas for the next 32 years.

My last KISS album was Alive II. When my little brother and his buddies started to be fans it was time for me to stop.

I agree with the OP that Dynasty was the result of starting to listen to too many outside voices and trying to keep the money machine coming in, rather than follow a path of being they started out as. But I also agree that since the point of the band was to make money and meet girls, going the pop route was the best way to go.

Every band I believe loses their way at some point after becoming popular. It's a natural thing that once you've been fighting to reach a certain level and you get there, you're not sure what to do next. Plus, add Peter and Ace's substance abuse issues and you no longer have a cohesive vision.

It's easy to play the "should have" game, but as a poster said above, who thought this band would still be playing big-production shows in sheds 33 years later? As for Dynasty, the record? I thought it was solid power pop with some fine songs on it. I thought Unmasked was the worst Kiss record, and still do, but Dynasty was solid.

'Cool' teenagers will always want to put as much distance between themselves and 'kiddies' as they possibly can - I think this factor in Kiss's decline is very potent.

Kiss have never meant very much in the UK, and my first awarness of them came via imported copies of the Howard the Duck comic (Steve Gerber was a big fan): when I finally got to hear their music - IWMFLY was the first thing I heard - I was mystified as to how a band's music could be at such odds with its image.

I don't think you were typical. Did you have an older brother or sister? When you go a concert and there's a whole bunch of little kids running around dressed up in KISS makeup with their parents it's certainly not a very cool place to be when you're a senior in high school. Check out the crowd picture on the back cover of Alive! I'm sure if you took the same picture a few years later you'd see a lot of little kids there. BTW that picture was taken at Cobo Hall in Detroit and I knew several people who went to that show in 1975. They certainly weren't KISS fans in 1980.

Well, that's true. But when I dropped Kiss it was more than just a matter of cool or trendy. As I grew up and became aware of more music (I was an oldest child with thoroughly unhip parents and had to discover these things for myself), Kiss simply did not measure up.

However, their strong appeal to the grade school set remains intact. My kids really like them

It's clear by this point they were phoning it in. Love Ace's stuff on the album, and Paul certainly had some real fine tunes on it, but it was clearly not made by anything remotely resembling a band. Gene's two songs completely stink, and Peter was hardly involved.

It's always struck me as incredibly hypocritical that Gene has always criticized Ace for his perceived lack of participation -- saying Ace was too drunk or too lazy -- yet on this album and the followup, Ace is seemingly more involved than Gene, who clearly wasn't carrying his weight, since he was too busy being Cher's boyfriend and whatnot.

I've always felt "Dynasty" was one of Kiss' finest albums. I did as a 9 year old when the album was released and still do. Actually, these days, my favorite era of Kiss is from 1979-82. That's right, I belong to The Cult of "The Elder".

As far as the decline of the band, I guess maybe it depended on who you were. I was pretty young and didn't have to worry much about the lack of coolness in the high school halls. Kiss were still pretty darn popular from what I remember in 1979. "I Was Made For Lovin' You" was a pretty big hit, each individual member had released a solo album barely a year before (had to put all four interlocking poster murals up on my pre-teen wall to the consternation of my parents) and most of my friends were still listening to them. For me, it was a couple of years later when it became uncool to like Kiss and I got rid of most of their music...only to rebuy everything later in life!

Great thread..I was 4 years old in 1980. Apparently Kiss was my favorite band then because of their numerous tv apperances. My brother had just given me my first vinyl; Kiss Alive which was a door prize at his prom. For my birthday I was given a copy of Dynasty on vinyl, an iron-on Destroyer t-shirt and a plastic Kiss guitar (which I recently saw at a vintage toy shop in NYC going for $350).

And I actually have the pics to prove it. A year later I was given Unmasked on Vinyl but must have lost interest after that because the next music I was getting was The Beach Boys, Monkees and Who.

I did see Kiss in 1996 on the reunion to fulfill a part of the childhood still inside me.

well Dynasty was their first stinker of a studio album. yes its got a couple of good songs, but its far from a great Kiss album. but the start of the decline was really the studio side of Alive II in 1977. guest musicians everywhere, a bad cover. it was the beginning of the guys recording their own songs with other people (or in Paul's case, mostly himself)

the thing that makes me laugh is Gene's "playing" on the Sure Know Something video clip. he clearly hasn't been taught the song yet.... he's making it up as he goes along!

(and not doing a very good job of it)