KISS CLASSIC ALBUMS

celebrate the 40th anniversary

of the band’s game changer

– ‘Dynasty’

.

.

.

Forty years ago on 23 May, 1979, the rock group Kiss released its 11thalbum, Dynasty. Produced by R&B icon Vini Poncia, the ‘pop’ production and the inclusion of a (god forbid) disco track confused their US fanbase.

Australia however, was now set to feel the full effects of Kissmania with the album and lead single, “I Was Made For Lovin’ You” – their highest charting and biggest selling single /album ever and their only multi-platinum album in this country.

The Paul Stanley track, co-written with Desmond Child (who later co-wrote other #1 smashes for Bon Jovi, Aerosmith, Ricky Martin, Alice Cooper and many others), Dynasty also spawned another top 5 single in “Sure Know Something” and other favourites such as Kiss’ cover of The Rolling Stones’ “2,000 Man” with vocals from Ace Frehley, bassist Gene Simmons’ disco track “Charisma” and drummer Peter Criss’ R&B fused disco track, “Dirty Livin’” which would be Criss’ final recording with Kiss before he departed the band in May 1980.

Kiss Classic Albums’ players have celebrated the 40thanniversaries of Kiss’ catalogue at sell out after sell out at the famed Cherry Bar and now at The Corner Hotel, Melbourne on Thursday 23 May, 2019 – 40 years to the day – a slick line up of rock’s finest players will recreate the album track by track along with a second set of Kiss classics from ’74-’77 to round out the evening.

A bigger venue for Kiss’ biggest album.

Dave Leslie (The Baby Animals), Stu Rudd (The Superjesus),Travis Dragani (The Superjesus), Mat McAuliffe (Bruce Kulick and Mike Tramp band), Paul Drennan (Bruce Kulick and Mike Tramp band) comprise the band that will take the audience back to the Hard Times of the late ‘70’s.

Just announced today, the red-hot band will be fronted by some of Melbourne’s real rock and roll voices:

Justin Murphy (One of Australia’s hardest working, gutsiest vocalists who’s opened for everyone from The Screaming Jets, Jimmy Barnes and Rose Tattoo. A singer, songwriter in his own right too, Justin is going to have a blast belting out some of these classic songs)

Jimmy Cupples (A finalist on The Voice and one of the finest rock vocalists in Melbourne, who’s released several original albums of his own. He’s one of the real deal, original rock and roll singers that are so hard to find these days)

Laura Davidson (Notorious rock vocalist and frontwoman for ACD/She– as authentic as you’re gonna get from ANY AC/DC tribute band male OR female and most recently, rocking out fronting The Dave Leslie solo band)

Matt Bradshaw (Matt’s been featured on internationally released Kiss Tribute albums and is one of the hardest working rock vocalists on the circuit having just MD’d the Adelaide Fringe Bowie show “Rebel” and regularly writing and recording for himself, others and even Dracula’s Restaurant’s shows! Of course he’s the logical choice to be in this show!). He’s also sung with Kiss member Bruce Kulick.

Mat MacAuliffe who anyone has ever seen with Bruce Kulick, Jaded Cats, Dinnisty (the original Ace impersonator!) back in the early 90’s and with Six Hours, Mat’s got a Zep feel and lives and breathes classic rock and roll.

Supported by Australia’s only all acoustic Kiss tribute, Dressed to Chill, (featuring the talents of Matt Bradshaw, Rhys Lett and Rav Thomas) performing Kiss classics from across all eras as you’ve never seen or heard them before. Unplugged. Unmasked. Unexpected.

It’s a night of Kiss goodness.

Tickets are on sale NOW

from The Corner HERE

FACEBOOK

.

.

AMNPLIFY – DB

My nickname is “The Amnplifier”. Why? Because around here my focus is on being a conduit for providing greater outcomes that people come here for. My day to day “work” is living in the moment, and I love helping others concentrate on finding their connection to themselves through their experiences.

Why start a music environment? The truth is I love music, I love writing, and I love life. I work with musicians every day, and I feel certain that I will be until they put me in the ground. I have been managing people in businesses of some sort for over thirty five years so along the way I have developed some “wisdom” from my regular and constant “observations”.

Amnplify your experience. That is what we want you to do here, and if you want to let me know why you do, or don’t, shoot me a message on Facebook.

Hope you enjoy yourself here and find something that hits you somewhere.

May 17th, 2019||

Related Posts