In 1556, the cardinal Alessandro Farnese begins the building of the Palazzo Farnese in Caprarola, a village north of Rome. Its decoration attests of his wealth and his power by showing his family’s glorious deeds and his role in the defense of the Catholic Church. Loren Partridge, the specialist of the Palazzo Farnese, has noticed such a discourse in the room of maps and the room of Farnese deeds among others. This paper will show that the cardinal’s private chapel has a part in this panegyric. Since the Palazzo Farnese is located outside urban centers, the mass, attended by the cardinal, his famiglia and his guests, is celebrated in its chapel on a regular basis. Consequently, the chapel’s architecture and iconography are used as a display of Alessandro Farnese’s papal ambitions. In the first place, the circular form of the room and the parallel between the altar and the tomb of Christ recall the Church of the Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem. This analogy is part of the cardinal’s plan to establish Caprarola as a new Jerusalem. At the same time, Pope Gregory XIII applies the same allegory to Rome, in order to assert its power over Christianity and to enhance his own qualities. By recuperating the papal strategy, Alessandro Farnese shows his guests his ability for the papal throne. In the second place, the Eucharistic symbolic is really important in the global iconography of the chapel. This prominence shows the filiation between Alessandro Farnese and his grandfather, the pope Paul III, who made the defense of the sacrament his main concern in the fight against Protestantism. This could be a strategy to present the former as worthy of the papal tiara as the later. In fact, this example shows that private chapels in countryside palaces are not so private and can be used as a public display of the political ambitions of their owner.

Just out with Officina Libraria! Chapels of the Cinquecento and Seicento in the Churches of Rome, edited by Chiara Franceschini, Steven F. Ostrow, and Patrizia Tosini, Milano: Officina Libraria, 2020 Nine studies of early modern private chapels as multimedia “laboratories” for social and devotional display and for artistic invention and innovation in 16th- and 17th-century Rome. Roman church interiors throughout the Early Modern age were endowed with rich historical and visual significance. During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, in anticipation of and following the Council of Trent, and in response to the expansion of the Roman Curia, the chapel became a singular arena in which wealthy and powerful Roman families, as well as middle-class citizens, had the opportunity to demonstrate their status and role in Roman society. In most cases the chapels were conceived not as isolated spaces, but as part of a more complex system, which involved the nave and the other chapels within the church, in a dialogue among the arts and the patrons of those other spaces. This volume explores this historical and artistic phenomenon through nine examples involving the patronage of prominent Roman families such as the Frangipane, Spadas, Caetanis, Cybos and important artists and architects such as Federico Zuccari, Annibale Carracci, Giacomo della Porta, Francesco da Volterra, Carlo Maderno, Alessandro Algardi, Carlo Maratta. Table of Contents: Chapels: An Introduction Chiara Franceschini, Steven F. Ostrow, and Patrizia Tosini Map of the Churches The Frangipani Chapel in San Marcello: Farnesian Devotion, Antiquarian Taste, and Municipal Pride Patrizia Tosini Between all’Antica and Acheiropoieton: The Cappella Gregoriana in the Ekphrases of Lorenzo Frizolio (1582) and Ascanio Valentino (1583) Fabio Barry Caetani’s Blood: Magnificence, Lineage, and Martyrdom in the Family Chapel of Santa Pudenziana Enrico Parlato “A Gem Set in Most Resplendent Gold”: Girolamo Rusticucci’s Confessio Chapel in Santa Susanna Steven F. Ostrow A Splendid Shrine for an Ugly Image: Visual Interactions in the Salviati Chapel at San Gregorio al Celio Chiara Franceschini Carving Out Identity: The Boncompagni Family, Alessandro Algardi, and the Chapel in the Sacristy of Santa Maria in Vallicella Guendalina Serafinelli The Angelic Balustrade of the Spada Chapel in San Girolamo della Carità Louise Rice The Arm Relic as Index of the Body: The Chapel of Francis Xavier in the Gesù Alison C. Fleming and Stephanie C. Leone A Chapel in Dialogue: The Cybo Chapel in Santa Maria del Popolo Fabrizio Federici List of abbreviations Bibliography Contributors Index of Names Index of Places Photo Credits

Parma, the capital of the lands ruled by the Farnese family, was one of the most active centres in Italy in the design of architectures for shows. A proposal for an approach to the history of Italian scenography during the Seicento is presented here – a some what in depth view is presented as it is not very well known in Spain – using iconological and semiotic analyses of the decorations for the staging of the libretti, beginning with the scenographic creations of Giovan Battista Aleotti, and finishing with Carlo Pasetti, one of his most fruitful heirs, focusing on his work with the opera La Filo overo Giunonerepacificata con Ercole, created by Francesco Berni (1631), a preserved copy of which can be found in the Library of the El Escorial Monastery (Madrid), a rare fact amongst the works with Florentine origin collected in Spanish document repositories, even though it became, with other scenographies of the same author, a powerful inspiration for several courtesan parties (theatre shows, choreographed dance or carousels) in Spain during the XVII and XVIII centuries.