Bangaru PapaFile:Bangaru Papa.jpgDirected byB. N. ReddiWritten byB. N. Reddi

Palagummi PadmarajuStarringS. V. Ranga Rao

Kongara Jaggaiah

Krishna Kumari

Hemalatha

Jamuna

Ramana ReddyMusic byAddepalli Rama RaoCinematographyB. N. Konda Reddy

Production

company

Release date

19 March 1955

Running time

183 minutesCountryIndiaLanguageTelugu

Bangaru Papa (English title: Golden Baby; Telugu: బంగారు పాప) is a 1955 Telugu film directed by B. N. Reddi. It is based on the 1861 English novel Silas Marner by George Eliot.[1] B. N. Reddi personally considered it as his best cinematic work.[2] It showcased the acting skills of S. V. Ranga Rao. This film introduced the famous writer Palagummi Padmaraju to the cine-world.

Plot[edit]

Kotayya (Ranga Rao) is a kind man. He marries Rami. She succumbs to pressure from Gopala Swamy and elopes with him, leaving her husband. Rami and Gopala successfully plan and send Kotayya to jail. After returning from jail, Kotayya becomes a rowdy drunkard. He plans to take revenge and kill Gopala Swamy.

During the fateful night when he prepares to implement his plan, he hears a little child's cries. His humanity overtakes his thirst for revenge. He takes the child, a girl named Papa, under his wings. Papa is the daughter of Manohar (Jaggaiah) and Santa (Jamuna). The child's mother has died after giving birth to her. Manohar, the father, remarries.

Kotayya begins a new life in taking care of the child. He leaves rowdyism and drinking. The grown-up Papa is loved by Sekhar, the nephew of Manohar. Learning this, the landlord (Zamindar) calls Kotayya and shows anger with him. Then Manohar announces that Papa is his daughter. The landlord agrees to Sekhar's marriage with Papa and makes Kotayya happy.

Cast[edit]

S. V. Ranga Rao as Kotayya

Krishna Kumari as Papa

Kongara Jaggaiah as Manohar

Hemalatha

Jamuna Ramanarao as Santha

Ramana Reddy

Vangara Venkata Subbaiah

Ramanna Pantulu

Rama Sharma

Vidyavathi

Crew[edit]

Director: B. N. Reddy

Story: Palagummi Padmaraju and B. N. Reddy

Dialogues: Palagummi Padmaraju

Original Music: Addepalli Rama Rao

Cinematography: B. N. Konda Reddy

Art Direction: A. K. Sekhar

Lyrics: Devulapalli Krishnasastri and Balantrapu Rajanikanta Rao

Playback Singers: A. M. Rajah, Ghantasala Venkateswara Rao, P. Susheela, Madhavapeddi Satyam

Soundtrack[edit]

Four of the songs including Harikatha were written by Devulapalli Krishnasastri.[3]

"Harikatha" of Seeta Apaharanam (Lyrics: Devulapalli Krishnasastri)

"Kanna Devaki Vantu Kanneere Kaani" (Lyrics: Devulapalli Krishnasastri)

"Kanulakokasaraina Kanapadani Naa Talli" (Lyrics: Devulapalli Krishnasastri; Singer: P. Susheela)

"Tadhimi Takadhimi Tolubomma" (Lyrics: Devulapalli Krishnasastri; Singer: Madhavapeddi Satyam)

"Vennela Pandirilona" (Singers: A. M. Rajah and P. Susheela)

"Vennela Velalu" (Singer: P. Susheela)

"Yavvana Madhuvanilo" (Lyrics: Devulapalli Krishnasastri; Singers: A. M. Rajah and P. Susheela)

Awards[edit]

1955 - National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Telugu[4]

References[edit]

[edit]

Bangaru Papa on IMDb