As the year comes to an end, the Spanish brand is once again challenging eyewear codes by teaming up with the most iconic of soccer clubs: FC Barcelona. The Anatomy collection is an ode to sport and art, and a meeting of two greats, in an intriguing collaboration that aims to redefine the rules of the game.

After BOLD, a line full of audacity and DREAM, a collection that smelled like summer, the prolific eyewear brand is gaining ground with a collab that’s remarkable but maybe not so surprising: it’s the label’s declaration of love for its city. With the energy of the Catalan capital inspiring each design, an association with club Blaugranas – one of the main emblems of Barcelona – seems natural. Anatomy is not two separate worlds colliding, but rather coming together with a campaign and frames that share a single goal: to represent sport as art.

A golden year

The mythical soccer club FC Barcelona was founded in 1899, and teams still thrill fans around the world. Only the best players have walked out onto the pitch at Camp Nou stadium; Johan Cruyff, Xavier Hernández, Ronaldinho, Samuel Eto’, Zlatan Ibrahimović and the legendary Lionel Messi. Thanks to them, Barça has racked up 26 victories in the Spanish Championships and five Champions League trophies.

With such an impressive track record, the Etnia Barcelona x FC Barcelona collab had to offer exceptional design and it’s a bet that paid off, with the chic black stand-out 1899 Gold frames referencing the top trend for the new season, with subtle gold accents hidden in the hinge. Strikingly, the FC emblem – a cross and horizontal lines – is on the left arm, and a football on the right.

The Blaugranas explosion

Blue and maroon, the signature colors of the Catalan club, take center stage in the second drop, in The Colors of our History collection. Six pairs of sunglasses celebrate the club’s most historical moments, resulting in frames with vintage accents in midnight blue and brown tortoiseshell, with arms bearing the colors of the players’ jerseys – just like the fans who will no doubt love this collab.

More than a collection

With a well-known commitment to the aesthetics of its campaigns, Etnia Barcelona once again offers captivating visuals. With Anatomy, art is, as always, at the heart of its inspirations and the frames are revealed in a series of photos by Biel Capillonch, in a colorful fresco by Dutch painter Pascal Möhlmann. The 1899 Gold design is the center point of the painting, seen as a celestial figure surrounded by celebrating supporters. This image emphasizes the power of the connection between the football club and its fans.

In other visuals, models are preparing for the match in Barça kit, their arms tattooed with the two teams’ emblems, wearing the new frames. Their movements are intense and athletic, they are ready to push themselves ever further for victory. Art sublimates sport, and as this collection proves, the opposite is also true.

Available here