Estonia will hold the presidency of the Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS) from 1 July 2024 to 30 June 2025, notably concentrating on resilience and sustainability in the Baltic Sea Region.

“Estonia takes over the CBSS Presidency during a challenging period. For the first time, all democratic countries surrounding the Baltic Sea are NATO members,” said Margus Tsahkna, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Estonia, who leads the CBSS Presidency.

“However, we must continue to increase resilience and sustainability in so-called soft security areas in our daily cross-border co-operation between institutions around the Baltic Sea,” he added.

In civil protection, Estonia is set to prioritise practical cooperation, raising crisis awareness, involving volunteers, and improving early warning systems. Special attention will be given to mass evacuation and sheltering challenges.

Estonia will also tackle online child trafficking, including developing guidelines and exploring AI tools to counter online recruitment. To address the general issue of trafficking, the CBSS will cooperate with Central Asian and Balkan anti-trafficking networks, focusing on prevention, investigation, and victims’ assistance.

Regarding sustainability, the CBSS under Estonian leadership will continue its work on creating green shipping corridors and start preparations for a digital twin of the Baltic Sea to simulate marine processes.

Efforts will also focus on preserving cultural heritage, improving energy efficiency in heritage buildings, safeguarding heritage in crises, and preventing the illicit trafficking of cultural goods.

The Baltic Sea Region Youth Forum and CBSS Summer University in Tallinn will continue to involve young people in regional decision-making in a meaningful way.

Under the Estonian Presidency, the CBSS will also continue its strong support for Ukraine, focusing on civil protection, anti-trafficking in human beings, border guard cooperation, heritage protection, and youth engagement.

Estonia has taken over the rotating presidency of the CBSS from Finland, aiming to build on the latter’s achievements, maintaining a principle of continuity and long-term focus.

*** END ***

Estonian CBSS Presidency and Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Estonia media contacts:

Mr Tõnis Nirk

Ambassador-at-Large for Baltic Sea Cooperation

Estonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

E-mail: [email protected]

CBSS media contacts:

Dominik Littfass

E-mail: [email protected]

Tel: +46 76 116 67 53

Notes to editor: