The NYT's leaked innovation report highlights its inability to listen to its users; publishing its stories late evening while readers browse the site mostly in the morning; saving hard-hitting stories for the weekend papers when online traffic is at its lowest. This story, on the other hand, is about a publisher learning how to listen.

The Health Service Journal's (HSJ) new Intelligence tool combines journalistic insight with public and private datasets to give insight into the inner workings of the NHS. HSJ is part of Top Right Group's EMAP division of B2B titles (disclosure – Guardian Media Group (GMG) owns a stake in Top Right Group) and hopes the tool will service private suppliers in the newly-liberalised NHS. What can other publishers learn from its creation? Get closer to your audience and involve them in product development.

Rebecca Clayton, CMO at EMAP, recently discussed the benefits of getting customers involved early on. After sitting down and talking to a range of customers from the different sub-sectors of their industry, the idea for a business intelligence product to serve law firms, management consultants and other private health suppliers emerged. Once the idea was pursued, the same customers that had helped identify the need for a product like this were then consulted on a regular basis throughout the build process. The worry that public consultation would inform competitors about the plan was, in their opinion, negated by the importance of producing something that perfectly met its users' needs.

"There were eight partners so that added up to about 50 hours of collaborative time. [After their initial participation] the product wasn't unrecognisable but it was certainly significantly better in quality, content and deliverability," said Clayton. "Also the usability of the product for the business development directors it was targeted to was significantly improved … [This was] better than any process I've been involved with in other organisations." HSJ Intelligence delivers "ten times the value" (probable translation: revenue) compared to the typical HSJ subscriber.

Digital products of this kind represent a natural progression of the B2B services traditionally offered in print, with Estates Gazette's EGi, part of Reed Business Information, being another notable example. But the UK sector overall could struggle to find growth. PwC forecast stagnation in the business information sector from 2013–17, but the same research predicts 3% compound annual growth rate in the US. Gigaom, a predominantly US-based media company which GMG also has a stake in, says 55% of its revenue comes from market research and business intelligence services. The company recently raised another $8m in capital to invest more in its research business.

How does this impact its journalists?

While there are instances in the business information industry where journalists become less important when a software service serves their market, HSJ's analysis is a major selling point for new customers. They admit that their editorial teams are having to adapt, though: whereas they're used to reporting on what's already happened, they're now asked to "stick their neck out" and make forward-looking statements to provide analysis of the complex market and the opportunities that may emerge. Andy Baker, EMAP's managing director of public sector and environment, says they're referred to as "market experts" instead of reporters.

The data is sourced from a multitude of publicly available sources and through the use of Freedom of Information requests. Their "FOI machine" gives them access to unique data to draw on for their customers. "An FOI from HSJ is part of the furniture for a health organisation and they're happy to help because of our reputation as a trusted source of information," said Baker. But data is then processed and uploaded the site by a team based in India.

"We used to be quite UK-centric," says Baker, describing the company's attitude towards staffing. "Any content-related role had to be based in the UK, or so we used to think." EMAP changed tack with this new product and decided to outsource the responsibility for updating and maintaining the database of information to a team in India. The same goes for the technical architecture of the website HSJ and HSJ Intelligence product, for which the development team is situated in the Ukraine.

So while "co-creation" and "agile" are two strategies that are loosely kicked around at media conferences across the western world, EMAP has found a way to make them work in practice.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your inbox, sign up free for Media Network membership.