Nobel Laureate Professor Sir John Sulston will today call for clearer provision against workplace discrimination based on a person's genetic makeup.

Speaking to scientists at The University of Manchester, the pioneer of genomic research and winner of the 2002 Nobel Prize will warn that rules governing insurance companies and genetic inheritance must also be examined.

"Since the discovery of the key molecular principles of life over the last half century, biology has grown from a largely academic discipline into one of great social and industrial value," said Sir John, former Director of the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute in Cambridgeshire.

"This shift has brought obvious benefits in terms of investment but it has also brought the need to balance profitability with the demands of social justice.

"One example of this is genetic equity - safeguarding the right to non-discrimination regardless of one's genetic inheritance.

"In the UK, equitable access to healthcare is provided by the National Health Service but in other spheres, particularly employment and insurance, there is a serious need for clearer provision against unfair discrimination."

Sir John, who with colleagues Sydney Brenner and H Robert Horvitz won the Nobel Prize for mapping the entire genome of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, will make his comments during the Faculty of Life Sciences Annual Lecture.

During his Manchester address, entitled 'Genetic Equity and Global Medicine: what is science for anyway?' Sir John will also make the case for a global strategy on healthcare in order for science to satisfy the need for greater social justice.

"Global medicine has a pressing significance for humanity's collective future," said Sir John, who currently serves on the Human Genetics Commission and the Royal Society working group for intellectual property.

"In developing countries, neglected diseases are rife; even in developed countries sufferers of rare diseases are disadvantaged because most research and development is resourced by investment aimed at maximising financial return.

"New funding mechanisms are needed to ensure that everyone benefits from advances in knowledge; our aim should be nothing less than global healthcare."

Sir John's lecture takes place at the University's Whitworth Hall tonight (April 24) at 6.15pm.

Ends

For further information contact:

Aeron Haworth

Media Officer

Faculty of Life Sciences

The University of Manchester