Personality of the Month

Rabbi Yidele Horowitz

Other famous people whith our lastname:

Adam Horovitz, AKA Ad-Rock, a musician and member of the Beastie Boys.

Alex Horovitz, former NeXT and Apple Inc. software engineer and author.

David Horovitz (1962- ), author and political commentator.

Frances Horovitz (1938-83) Poet, Broadcaster & Performer of Poetry.

Israel Horovitz (born 1939), U.S. playwright and screenwriter.

Joseph Horovitz, Austrian-English composer.

Michael Horovitz & Frances Horovitz

Robert Horovitz, a medical biologist and nobel prize winner.

Adam Horowitz, American TV show writer

Anthony Horowitz, British author and television scriptwriter

Cindy Horowitz, maiden name Cynthia Palmer, author and mother of Winona Ryder.

Daniel Horowitz, legal analyst and attorney

David Ish-Horowicz Fellow of the Royal Society.

Dolek Horowitz, played by Pawel Delag in Schindler's List

Donald Horowitz, political scientist

Rebbe Yankev Yitzchok fun Lublin (Horowitz)

Isaiah Horowitz, Czech-born German and Palestinian rabbi, cabbalist, and author

Shabtai Sheftel Horowitz, Volhynia-born Austrian Rabbi and Talmudist, son of the Isaiah

Israel Horowitz, American chess master

Jerome Horowitz, American scientist

Michael Horowitz, American author and father of Winona Ryder.

Moses Yitzchaq ha-Levi Horowitz, Yiddish playwright

Norman Horowitz, American geneticist and space biologist

Paul Horowitz, U.S. physicist and electrical engineer.

Robert B.G. Horowitz, American intellectual property lawyer

Shmelke Horowitz of Nikolsburg, Poland-born Chief Rabbi of Moravia and cabalist

S. Horowitz & Co. (a law firm in Israel founded by the late Shalom Horowitz)

Winona Ryder (Horowitz), American actor

Yidele Horowitz, Hasidic Rebbe of Dzikov

Wayne Horvitz

H. Robert Horvitz

Richard Steven Horvitz

Bernhard Horwitz

Brian Horwitz, baseball player

Maksymilian Horwitz aka Henryk Walecki (1877-1937), was a leader and theoretician of the Polish communist movement

Morton Horwitz (born 1938), legal historian and law professor

Louisa Gross Horwitz Prize

Steven Horwitz, American economist.

William Horwitz, Scientist Emeritus, formerly an analytical chemist at the Food and Drug Administration, USA

Aaron Hurwitz, musician, see Live on Breeze Hill

Adolf Hurwitz (1859-1919), German mathematician

Henry Hurwitz Jr., Nuclear Physicist

Emanuel Hurwitz (1919-2006), British violinist

Jon Hurwitz (born 1977), American screenwriter best known for Harold & Kumar Go to White Castle

Yosef Yozel Hurwitz (1849-1919), the Alter of Navardok

Matt Hurwitz, American NBA public address announcer

Mitchell Hurwitz, American television writer and producer best known for his work on Arrested Development

Routh Hurwitz

William Hurwitz, American pain management physician

Yair Hurvitz, Hebrew language poet.

Igael Hurvitz

Yigal Hurvitz, Israeli former finance minister

Aharon Gurevich (2007-present), Chief Rabbi of Russian Army

Aron Gurwitsch (1901–1973), Lithuanian-American philosopher.

Georges Gurvitch (1894–1965), Russian-French sociologist.

Fedor Dan (born Gurvich) (1871–1949), Russian revolutionary and Menshevik

Leib Gurwicz (1906–1982), influential Orthodox Rabbi

David Gurevich, Russian writer

Mikhail Gurevich (chess player) (b. 1959), Ukrainian chess grandmaster

Mikhail Gurevich (1893–1976), Soviet aircraft designer

Valery Solomonovich Gurevich is Vice-chairman of Russia's Jewish Autonomous Oblast (the highest ranking Jewish politician in the oblast).