Abidemi Sanusi wants those who pick up her book, Eyo, to go on a journey which continues to unfold long after they have stopped reading the last sentence.

Ms Sanusi is one of a new crop of Nigerian writers trying to make a mark in the literature world together with the likes of Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, the author of Purple Hibiscus.

She has decided to a take on a social evil, human trafficking, in Nigeria which more often than not involves children.

It tells the story of Eyo – the ten-year old protagonist, and takes the reader through the worst kind of human experiences.

“My two passions in writing are fiction and current affairs and this gives me the opportunity to marry the two by exploring certain themes in my books,” she says.

The ex-human rights worker says that she did not make a conscious decision to be an author but had always been writing and reading as a child.

In this interview with Business Daily’s Abyssinia Lati, She says that the world is a fascinating place and writers are privileged to be able to write about it.

She wants to make readers think differently, explore life differently and even make positive decisions for the good of others. The book will be in local bookshops by February next year.

How long have you been working on “Eyo”?

I had the initial idea around 2002 then I wrote it between then and 2008. I rewrote it and developed the story about 7 times. On several occasions, I got to the 15,000 word count and deleted everything because I wasn’t happy with the way the story was going. Then finally, around 2008, I realised I’d been trying to tell the story I wanted to tell and not necessarily the story the character wanted to tell which was why it wasn’t working. Once I got over this hurdle, everything fell into place.

You divided ‘Eyo’ into five parts; African flower, African Lolita, Jungle girl, The emancipated and Home. Why did you decide to break it down in this way?

Because I wanted to show Eyo at different stages of her life. In African Flower, she was in Nigeria which ofcourse is in Africa, although her personal environment then wasn’t the best. I was also inspired in some part by a UNICEF campaign on child trafficking which featured some young African girls and they were called ‘African Flowers’.

In African Lolita, Eyo’s is a child sex slave and in Jungle Girl, she’s working as a prostitute and on it goes.

At some level, you are calling the readers to play a part in stopping human trafficking. Do you see yourself as a crusader against society’s evils?

I am not a crusader, I am a writer. I write and people take from my work what they will. Having said that, Eyo was inspired by my work in the field as a human rights activist.

A very high percentage of children trafficked to the UK are Nigerian.

Nigerian women have also been trafficked in Turin, Italy, as prostitutes for about 20 years now. Being Nigerian and knowing all these things doesn’t make for comfortable reading. On a personal level, Eyo is about African children and the demands and sacrifices we extract from them on the pretext of poverty. It’s not right. They’re children, let them be.

When you start a book or story at what point do you decided to finish it?

Well, that depends on the book. I’ve been known to start working on a book and get sidetracked by another. And that’s the beauty of publishing contracts.

You have a manuscript completion deadline and nothing less than Armageddon would do for a reason not to meet it.

How did you select the subject for the book? And how are you planning to engage the reader until the end?

Like all artistes, I’m inspired by the things I see. It could be something as simple as an object I see in a shop or a conversation I have with someone. The job of the writer is to turn that seemingly minute glance, conversation or object into a compelling story that people will want to read.

Who are your favourite authors and how do they influence your writing?

I haven’t really got any. I read voraciously but that’s because I don’t read like normal people. I study the books I read because I’m always looking for ways to perfect my craft so I guess that’s how other authors influence my writing.

I’ve just finished World Without End by Ken Follett.

A cracker of a book. I couldn’t put it down, all 1,250 pages of it. It’s the second book of his I’ve read and it didn’t disappoint.

Sometimes writers suffer from writer’s block, how do you “unblock” yourself? What is your advice to writers who are suffering from this?

Keep writing, even if you feel it’s complete nonsense. Most of the time, it isn’t. And no piece of writing is ever wasted. There is always an idea, a character, something that can be developed from a page of seemingly rubbish writing.

Write. Write. Write. Writing is not about how you feel. Sometimes, it’s about gritting your teeth and just getting on with it. I know this is at odds with the romantic notion of writing but it’s the truth.

You’re working on your next novel, what is it about? And when will it be out?

It’s a collection of 10 short stories with 10 characters all connected by a series of minor, random events. It’s a satire and a homage to the city in which I was born; Lagos, Nigeria.