Naughty by Nature is an American hip hop group from East Orange, New Jersey. The trio consists of lead rapper Treach, rapper Vin Rock and DJ/producer Kay Gee. They are known for being one of the few rap acts who were able to balance success on the pop charts with hardcore rap credibility.

After debuting in 1989 with the album Independent Leaders under the name The New Style, the group was mentored by fellow New Jersey native Queen Latifah and subsequently changed their name. After releasing their self-titled second album, the group received their first hit with "O.P.P.", which peaked at #6 on the Billboard Hot 100 and became one of the most successful crossover songs in hip hop history. Between albums, the group also scored a major hit with the Juice soundtrack song "Uptown Anthem".

Later, the group had multiple hits from their next two albums, 19 Naughty III and Poverty's Paradise, with both albums reaching #1 on the R&B/Hip-Hop charts. The latter won the Grammy Award in 1996 for Best Rap Album. In 1999, the group released their fifth album, Nineteen Naughty Nine: Nature's Fury. The album was their least successful at the time, but still spawned the popular song "Jamboree". After the release of the album, a dispute regarding finances developed between Treach and Kay Gee. Due to the disagreement, Kay Gee left the group in late 2000. The remaining members of the group released IIcons in 2002, but it received a moderate reception from critics. The group officially broke up that same year.

In 2006, all three members of the group reunited. Five years later, they released their first album in nine years, Anthem Inc.. In 2013, Treach "fired" Vin Rock from the group because he was not putting the same amount of energy into the group as himself and Kay Gee. Two years later, Treach announced he and Vin Rock had resolved their issues, but now their relationship is strictly business. Naughty by Nature still tour, but Treach has said that another album by the group is unlikely.

Discography[]

Studio albums[]