Sir Paul Stephenson said today he was "hugely proud" to be appointed the new Metropolitan Police Commissioner.

The acting commissioner was unveiled as Britain's most senior police officer by Home Secretary Jacqui Smith and London mayor Boris Johnson.

The announcement marks the end of a race to head Scotland Yard that began with the resignation of Sir Ian Blair last October.

Sir Paul said: "I am just such a hugely proud policeman today, to be asked to lead the Met in bringing safety to millions of Londoners, millions of visitors and lead the Met's national efforts.

"I am just enormously proud and I understand the challenge that awaits me."

Ms Smith indicated that Sir Paul had been the choice of both her and Mr Johnson.

She said: "In the last few years, as Deputy Commissioner in London, Sir Paul has been at the heart of policing the capital.

"His understanding of what is needed to combat terrorism and serious and violent crime will be invaluable in his role.

"Sir Paul also has a strong record in driving neighbourhood policing as Chief Constable in Lancashire and he brings his experience from Merseyside and Northern Ireland to the job as well.

"I believe therefore that Sir Paul offers the expertise and the leadership needed to inspire confidence across the entire police service and most importantly amongst the people of London.

"I know that he has won the confidence and support of everybody during this interview process and I wish him all the best in his new job."

Speaking outside New Scotland Yard, Ms Smith said she was delighted with the new appointment.

She said: "It is a real pleasure for me to be able to announce Sir Paul Stephenson as the new Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police.

"In an extremely strong field of candidates, Sir Paul stood out at every stage in a long and testing process.

"He impressed me with his strong vision and approach to tackling the challenges that lie ahead for the Met and the police service across the country at a time of significant reform."

Sir Paul went on: "I think my job in the coming years is clear. I think what we've got to do is continue to cut crime and deal with crime.

"We've got to convince all the communities of Londoners that we are on their side in doing what they want us to do.

"We have to be intolerant of violence, no matter where that violence comes from.

"We've just simply got to make sure we are delivering. That's our job, it's my job to lead that delivery.

"I'm hugely confident of the ability of the Met to do it, maintain what we do well and make a lot of improvements in the process.

"And I'm just looking forward to the challenge and I thank the people who have appointed me and show the faith that they have in me."

Mr Johnson said: "I want to plant my flag very firmly in Jacqui Smith's remarks and stress this was a matter of almost glutinous cross-party consensus.

"There was agreement in the police authority, there has been agreement in large measure across the board that Sir Paul was the outstanding candidate.

"What Londoners need is a man who is going to produce commonsense policing, who is going to deliver results, who is going to focus on driving down crime in the city and instil trust in communities across London.

"Above all, he must inspire confidence in Londoners that their city is getting safer.

"That is what Londoners need and that is what they are going to get in Sir Paul Stephenson.

"I am sure he will get off to a flying start."

Sir Paul, 55, has considerable experience at the top of the Met as Sir Ian's deputy and as acting commissioner.

He was hot favourite for the role when Sir Ian resigned but his chances were thought to have taken a knock because of the arrest of Tory frontbencher Damian Green over leaks from the Home Office.

The resulting furore catapulted Sir Paul into the media spotlight and gave the straight-talking Lancastrian an opportunity to show his mettle.

Sir Paul pipped Northern Ireland chief constable Sir Hugh Orde to the role from the final shortlist of two.

The two candidates took turns in the hot seat in front of Ms Smith and Mr Johnson on Monday, the final stage of a gruelling selection process.

The role combines regional and national responsibilities and the new man will have responsibility for a staff of more than 50,000 and a £3.5 billion budget.

Sir Paul will be expected to continue the fight against terrorism, lead police strategy nationwide and secure the 2012 Olympic Games.

In London, the new commissioner faces spiralling youth violence, a potential recession-fuelled crime wave and low morale as budget-tightening looms large.

Shadow home secretary Chris Grayling said: "We congratulate Sir Paul on his appointment and wish him well as the new Commissioner.

"His big challenge will be to restore the reputation and independence of the Metropolitan Police."