The British Horseracing Authority (BHA), the sport’s governing and regulatory body, today announces that former Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police Service Sir Paul Stephenson has been appointed to its Board.

Sir Paul will take up his role as an Independent Regulatory Director on 1 July, and will replace Ben Gunn in this capacity. Gunn, who has been involved with the BHA and its predecessor bodies since 2002, is to stand down from the BHA Board on 30 June.

Sir Paul had a highly distinguished career as a police officer over more than 35 years, holding senior command positions in Merseyside, Lancashire and London. In his roles with the Metropolitan Police Service – where as Commissioner he was the most senior officer in the UK – he advised governments on issues ranging from counter terrorism to serious organized crime and national police improvements, with a focus on modern, transparent and collaborative policing.

Sir Paul has served as Trustee for a number of charities, and is currently a Trustee of Crimestoppers UK. He will lead the BHA Board’s efforts in its priority areas, ensuring that British Racing is regulated to the highest standards, and seen by all to be fair and clean.

The appointment completes a set of changes to the BHA Board designed to position the sport for future growth and the next step in its modernisation. Individuals with a broad range of expertise and backgrounds have been recruited, with regulation remaining core to the BHA’s responsibilities.

Sir Paul Stephenson said:

“I am greatly looking forward to taking up this role, at a hugely important time for a sport which clearly makes a significant contribution to British life. The regulation of British Racing, as with any sport, is critical to its future success, and I hope that my experience can help the BHA build on its reputation in this area.”

BHA Chairman Steve Harman said:

“I am delighted that we have been able to recruit Sir Paul to our Board, showing again that we are able to attract individuals of the highest calibre. Sir Paul will build on the good work of his predecessor Ben Gunn, and bring further focus and professionalism to this area. I believe that his leadership will be hugely valuable in delivering step changes for our sport.”

BHA Director of Integrity, Legal and Risk Adam Brickell said:

“At the BHA we strive to ensure that people bet on and follow British Racing because they know that the sport is fair, and that we are committed to deterring, identifying and investigating any breaches of the Rules. My team and I are also committed to evolving and enhancing our ways of working, utilising modern sports regulatory best practice and taking further steps to ensure that we are in touch with our participants and the racing and betting public, and transparent in the way we operate. I am very much looking forward to working with Sir Paul and drawing on his considerable expertise and counsel as we take the sport forward, and help to underpin its future growth.”