SSA Global Technologies, Inc, a worldwide enterprise solutions and services provider, today announced it has acquired the supply chain management, financial management and human resource management product lines of interBiz, the e-business applications division of Computer Associates International, Inc.

The acquisition adds proven enterprise resource planning (ERP) solutions to SSA Global Technologies` already strong and well-recognised offerings to the industrial sector. Financial terms of the agreement were not disclosed.

Through the acquisition, SSA Global Technologies is on a path to regain a leading position in its target markets by solving industry-specific business challenges and creating a heterogeneous application environment that works seamlessly with other backend applications. The combined company will serve more than 9 000 longstanding, market-leading companies in over 90 countries from more than 70 offices worldwide.

"We are dedicated to providing new products and enhancements that continually increase our customers` returns on investment," said Michael Greenough, president, chairman and chief executive officer of SSA Global Technologies. "We see value in these existing brands and will continue to invest in these products."

Transaction highlights include:

. Offers customers added support through an expanded global network; additional revenue to spend on research and development and expanded Global Guide Groups to understand customer, industry and market demands;

. Provides the critical mass to re-position SSA Global Technologies as a leading vendor in specific vertical markets, expanding its global capabilities, resources and customers;

. Leverages the company`s global service and support functions;

. Underscores SSA Global Technologies` business model, and financial viability;

. Strengthens organic growth in its key vertical markets - automotive, fast moving consumer goods (including food, beverage and electronics), general manufacturing and pharmaceutical industries;

. Expands SSA Global Technologies` commitment to deliver more opportunities for customers` e-commerce and collaboration initiatives; and

. Adds experienced management and IT professionals in the US and international markets.

"CA`s strategy is to focus on our industry-leading positions in enterprise management, security, storage, application development and integration, business intelligence and portals," said CA President and CEO Sanjay Kumar.

"The interBiz offerings are superb solutions for the customer base served by SSA Global Technologies. We believe this agreement will ensure the continued development and evolution of the interBiz products and provide existing interBiz customers with the best long-term support and technology roadmap. We will work closely with SSA Global Technologies to ensure a smooth transition for our customers and employees."

Over the past year, SSA Global Technologies has been reengineering its company to deliver a solution strategy that involves e-commerce and collaboration with BPCS, its core ERP product. SSA Global Technologies will apply its business model and solution strategy to the newly acquired products. For customers utilising the interBiz brands, this strategy will give them new opportunities to benefit from e-business and collaboration solutions.

"This acquisition provides SSA Global Technologies with new market share and added revenue which, in turn, allows us to invest more in research and development. This ensures we can provide customers with ever increasing functionality to meet their specific industry challenges," said Greenough. "In the first six months of our fiscal year, we have experienced solid growth in a tough market, generated stellar profits and signed more than 750 contracts. We have proven our ability to deliver on our strategy and are now planning for the long-term."

Products covered under this transaction include CAS, interBiz Logistics, interBiz Online, interBiz Reports, KBM, MANMAN, Masterpiece/Net, MasterPiece/Net HRMS, MAXCIM, MK Logistics, MK Manufacturing, PRMS and Warehouse BOSS.

A fully integrated organisational structure is in place for SSA Global Technologies where employees are being integrated, service offerings are being coordinated and cross-selling opportunities pursued.