WALTHAM, Mass. — Jason Terry has one number on his mind heading into Wednesday night’s critical Game Five playoff game against the New York Knicks.

That number is 90, as in scoring 90 points. If the Celtics can find a way to reach 90, Terry feels the Celtics can post the major upset and bring the series back to TD Garden on Friday.

poll goes here

“We just know that if we score 90-plus points, we have a chance to win,” said the veteran guard.

Getting to 90 has been a major challenge for the Celtics. After averaging 96.5 in the regular season thanks to five different double-figure scorers, the Celts have hit the skids in the playoffs. As the Knicks built their 3-1 series lead, they did it with heavy duty defense that’s limited the Celtics to a mere 80.5 points a game.

The key has been the Knicks’ scrambling, trapping defense that’s repeatedly frustrated the Celtics whenever they’ve settled into their half-court offense. This is why Doc Rivers is always stressing the running game and attacking when the Knicks don’t have their defense set.

But as any NBA fan knows, playoff basketball is much more about executing under the pressure of the 24-second clock.

“We need to keep being aggressive," said Kevin Garnett. "Being more consistent with being aggressive is something that I would point out that needs to be (done).”

The numbers show that the Celtics must avoid a scoring skid that’s crippled the team’s attack in every game this series.

In Game One the Celts were outscored, 18-8, in the fourth quarter and mustered just 25 second-half points in a 85-78 loss.

In Game Two in New York, the Celts led, 48-42, at the half and then scored just 23 second-half points to lose going away, 87-71.

Game Three in Boston began promisingly, but an 13-point second quarter dug the home team a 47-31 halftime hole that proved impossible to escape from. That 90-76 win gave the Knicks a 3-0 series lead.

In Game Four on Sunday, Boston rolled to a 54-35 halftime lead but again stopped scoring and let the Knicks back in the game. This time a second half of 30 points resulted in the Knicks outscoring Boston by 19 points and forcing overtime.

The reasons for the offensive issues are quite clear. Without Rajon Rondo to run the point, his replacement, Avery Bradley, hasn’t been able to create any offense for his teammates. That’s reduced the Celtics to lots of isolation sets in the half-court offense and placed an uneven load on the shoulders of Garnett (11.3 ppg), Paul Pierce (21.3 ppg) and Jeff Green (20.8 ppg). The Celts have one more assist than turnovers (68-67) in the series, with Pierce leading in both categories.

“It’s clear that when we get into the halfcourt and slow the ball down we’re not that hard to stop. That’s obvious,” Rivers said. “When our defense lets up as well, that doesn’t help. They are connected.”

Rivers said that when the Knicks scramble their defense and are able to trap Pierce and Garnett, they cause major problems. The antidote to that attack is simply better ball movement.

“It’s no secret: they’re going to trap Paul and they’re going to trap Kevin,” Rivers said. “All year we’ve done a great job of really attacking traps, to the point where teams stopped trapping. And for whatever reason we haven’t made the open shots.”

The Celtics worked on those issues, and more, the last few days with the wind of a 97-90 overtime victory puffing their sails.

“We’re still confident, we’re still riding high from last game. Hopefully we can take that into (New York) and continue to play the way we did.”

The Celtics will need to beat a Knicks team that didn’t have its confidence dented in the least from the Game Four loss. Consider the remarks of guard J.R. Smith, the team’s second-leading scorer who was suspended for the loss after a flagrant foul to the chin of Terry in Game Three. Asked by reporters Tuesday if the Knicks would have swept the Celtics if he had played the last game in Boston, Smith didn’t hesitate.

“Oh, yeah, it would’ve been over,” he said. “I would’ve been playing golf today.’

Smith said he watched the Knicks lose on TV and “wasn’t pleased with it.” After the game, Terry said he used Smith’s flagrant elbow as motivation not only for himself but his teammates not to see the Knicks celebrate in Boston. Smith likely heard those words. When asked repeatedly about Terry, Smith said, “Who? I don’t even know who that is.”

On Twitter: @KevinMcNamara33