NEW YORK — There was room to chuckle a bit this week when Knicks wingman J.R. Smith graciously collected the NBA’s Sixth Man of the Year award.

After all the time he spent complaining about various things and lobbying for a starting job, the fact he has become one of the more dangerous players in the league off the pine is enough to make coaches everywhere smile and nod. Every mentor who has tried to get a talented player to color within the lines and be more a part of a team now has a story to tell the next such misdirected type that joins his club.

Jason Terry doesn’t necessarily understand why coming off the bench should be a problem for anyone.

“It wasn’t hard for me,” said the Celtics guard, who won the Sixth Man honor with Dallas in 2008-09, “But I guess for some guys it could be. It’s whatever the team needs you to do to win. That’s how I feel.

“It goes back to college (at Arizona) for me. When I accepted the role, we ended up winning the national championship, so from that time forward, it was easy for me. For some guys, it’s a little harder.”

When it was suggested that all NBA players are competitive — they wouldn’t be in the league if they weren’t — and that part of the problem comes from a desire to be one of the best five on the team and thus, a starter, Terry shook his head.

“You can be competitive all you want, but to me, it ain’t who starts. It’s who finishes,” he said. “I’ve always believed that, and as long as I’m on the court when the game is on the line, then I have no problem with coming off the bench.”

Knicks coach Mike Woodson, in fact, told Smith he would be playing in crunch time while trying to convince him to accept the role. And whether it was embracing the job or simply the maturation process of a 27-year-old who came to the NBA directly from high school, there can be no denying Smith’s ability to affect the outcome of games for the Knicks.

“He seems to have done well in it,” Terry said of Smith as a sixth man. “He’s been playing that role for a few years now, and he looks comfortable.”

And one would have to admit the job is perfect in many ways for a player like Smith, who loves to jack up shots. When coaches reach for subs, they most often are looking for an injection of offense. Smith fits.

“I believe so,” Terry said. “You know your role is to come in and provide that spark, and offensively more times than not, that’s what it’s going to be. It’s suited for a scorer.”

In historical terms, the role is most commonly associated with the Celtics. Red Auerbach began the emphasis on the job when he had Frank Ramsey fill it. John Havlicek then gave the position its best early attention.

“That’s my guy,” Terry said when Havlicek’s name came up in the discussion yesterday morning at Madison Square Garden. “That’s one of my dad’s favorite players — Hondo. It was cool to meet him.”

Terry wasn’t able to let Havlicek know at the time of his dad’s affection.

“I didn’t have the opportunity to tell him that,” he said. “I just met him in passing. I just shook his hand and told him it was an honor to meet him. Some guys didn’t even recognize, but shoot, I knew who he was.

“Him and Don Nelson were my pop’s favorite two players. I have no idea why he was a Celtics fan. Everybody else up (in the Seattle area) was a Lakers fan from the time before the Sonics started, but he was a Celtics fan.”