Jason Terry is one of the most articulate NBA players. He has a way with words. So when DIME asked him about J.R. Smith guaranteeing a championship for the Knicks, he was ready ... so ready.

JT: They would win what? What did he guarantee? They would win what? I didn’t hear that.

Dime: The championship.

JT: They would win the championship?

Dime: Yeah, he said 100 percent guarantee.

JT: The NBA championship?

Dime: Yup.

JT: Right. Maybe the Rucker Park Championship. I don’t know, not the NBA championship. I don’t see how they could guarantee that, at all. I’m not buying it, so…

And off we go ... again. Terry and Smith, of course, have a history.

Terry was pumping his new sneakers, the Reebok Pumpspective when DIME caught up with him. Besides the rivalry, he spoke about how he and Paul Pierce are back in the gym.

"You would think that we would just show up at training camp and then kind of figure it out. But this year, we’ve already been in L.A. with the entire team training for a week. Now myself and Paul, we’re back in Brooklyn now, early September, you know gettin’ it in, putting in that hard work that’s going to be needed when the season comes. So the chemistry is going to be amazing."

Personally, Terry said for him, this season is about a legacy.

At this point in my career, it’s all about championships and solidifying my legacy and so I’m able to do that in Brooklyn. The fans are excited. It’s a new era, a new day in basketball out here in New York. The Brooklyn-New York rivalry is going to be even crazier this year but everybody knows to win a championship you have to go through the champs and Miami’s definitely on the target list.

Dime Q&A: Jason Terry On The New Reebok Pumpspective Omni - Matt Gibson - DIME

Terry: 'Maybe the Rucker Park' title - Mike Mazzeo - ESPN New York

Jason Terry says Knicks could win the championship at Rucker Park - Zach Harper - CBS Sports

Quote of the Day: Jason Terry thinks Knicks could win title this year… at Rucker Park - Kurt Helin - NBC Sports

Nets' Jason Terry mocks title guarantee by Knicks' J.R. Smith - Ben Golliver - Sports Illustrated