On September 17, 2003, Premier Wen Jiabao held talks with Mari Alkatiri, Prime Minister of East Timor at the Great Hall of the People. The two sides exchanged views on bilateral relations and issues of common concern in a warm and friendly atmosphere.

Wen said that the Chinese people have supported and respected the choice of the East Timor people, and the relations between the two countries have been progressing remarkably since the two countries forged their diplomatic ties over a year ago. The governments, parliaments and parties in power of both countries have built up good relations, and the two countries have cooperated on oil and gas exploration, agriculture and fishing. China has offered funds and technical aid for the economic rebuilding of East Timor. China-East Timor relations have a good start. China is willing, in the spirit of maintaining friendship and partnership with its neighbors, and according to the principles of mutual benefits, to continue to provide aid to East Timor within its capacity, actively participate in East Timor's economic reconstruction and work to consolidate and develop the existing traditional friendly relations and cooperation between China and East Timor.

Wen set forth a three-point proposal to promote bilateral relations between China and East Timor. It includes beefing up efforts to increase political trust between the two countries through high-level contacts, exploring economic and trade cooperation of mutual benefit through strengthening institutional building of bilateral economic cooperation and trade and implementing bilateral cooperation projects in key areas, and enhancing the coordination in the regional and international affairs to support each other.

He also appreciated East Timor government's adherence to the One China policy, and voiced his belief that East Timor would continue its support on China's stance on the Taiwan and Tibet questions. Wen said China would continue to play a positive role in the UN Mission of Support to East Timor and the UN peace-keeping operations in East Timor.

Wen also introduced China's achievements and experiences since its reform and opening-up.

Prime Minister Alkatiri said China was among the first countries to recognize and send ambassador to East Timor when the country was founded over a year ago. This fully embodies the Chinese people's friendship with and support to the people of East Timor. Since the establishment of diplomatic relations, bilateral cooperation has been progressing smoothly, with good results. East Timor will continue to staunchly support the One China policy. As a new country, East Timor would like to draw on China's experience in the course of its development, and is ready to enhance bilateral cooperation in the political, economic and trade, oil and gas exploration and health fields. He also welcomed Chinese enterprises to invest in his country in such fields as agriculture, fishing and tourism sectors so as to further the bilateral relations between East Timor and China.

Both Wen and Alkatiri attended a signing ceremony for a trade agreement and five other cooperative documents after their talks.

Before the talks, Premier Wen Jiabao held a welcome ceremony in honor of the East Timor prime minister.