East Timor among largest recipients of U.S. aid

By Jane Morse, Washington File Staff Writer

Washington - The Bush administration is working diligently with the international community and the United Nations to address the immense challenges confronting East Timor, says Eric John, deputy assistant secretary of state for East Asia and the Pacific.

"Our goals are clear," John said at a June 28 hearing before the House International Relations Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific, "we want to work with the international community and the U.N. to help East Timor overcome its immediate challenges and assist the young nation in becoming a stable and prosperous democracy in Southeast Asia."

On a per-capita basis, John said, East Timor has been one of the largest recipients of U.S. aid. The United States, he added, also has contributed almost $500 million to the country via the U.N. mission in the East Timor.

East Timor, after a great deal of destructive violence and bloodshed, won its independence from Indonesia in May 2002, but the fledgling nation continues to be plagued by political instability, John said.

Earlier in 2006, the country suffered more upheaval when the commander of East Timor's Defense Force dismissed 591 striking soldiers who were protesting alleged discrimination within the military ranks by soldiers from the eastern parts of the country against those from the west.

As the situation deteriorated, President Xanana Gusmao took control of the Timorese military and police forces and, after consulting with the Council of State, the government of East Timor invited security forces from Australia, Portugal, Malaysia and New Zealand to re-establish order in the country. There are now approximately 2,700 foreign military and police forces in East Timor, mostly under Australian command. These forces substantially have restored order to the country, John reported.

The events exacerbated tensions between Gusmao and then-Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri, who was forced to resign for mishandling the security crisis, as well as allegations that he had authorized the distribution of arms to "militants" of the ruling FRETILIN Party, John said.

Alkatiri resisted calls for his resignation, but submitted a letter of resignation June 26. Gusmao is expected to name a transitional government within the next few days, John said. The mission of the peacekeeping forces in East Timor has been extended until August 20, he said.

"The U.S. is working with East Timor's numerous bilateral donors and friends to determine how best to assist it during this crisis," John said. "We are consulting with them on the mandate of a successor U.N. mission requested by the government of East Timor."

According to John, a U.N. successor mission should include "a robust electoral assistance program, a strong police component and civilian and human rights advisers."

Proper police training, he said, will be important because only a professional and impartial police force can obtain the support of the Timorese people.

The United Nations has dispatched a team to East Timor to assess the country's needs and make recommendations to U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan. After receiving a report from the secretary-general, U.N. Secretary Council members will determine the mandate of a proposed successor-UN mission, John said.

The U.S. Agency for International Development has an office in East Timor and is focused on building democracy and good governance, economic growth and development, and health care. "We will need to take a fresh look at these programs in light of the weaknesses exposed by the current instability in East Timor," John said.

John's testimony (PDF, 3 pages) is available on the House International Relations Committee Web site.