Info about Helgoland, Schleswig-Holstein (Germany)

Helgoland region is Schleswig-Holstein, Kreis Pinneberg, in Germany (DE).

Helgoland is also called HGL, Helgoland, Khel’goland, Хельголанд, latitude is 54.1814300, and longitude is 7.8863000.

With a population of 1.265 inhabitants, Helgoland timezone is Europe/Berlin (Europe/Berlin_cet).

Popular things to do in Helgoland are kitesurfing, islands, kiteboarding, desert, geological formations in Germany.

.

More details about Helgoland in Germany (DE)

It’s official name is Helgoland (AG).

It’s time zone is UTC+01:00 (valid for standard time).

Population of Helgoland is 1.265 inhabitants, if we consider 2019 census. You need to have a call local people? You can use 4725 as local dialing code for calling local phone numbers. It’s zip code is 27498, for this reason, if you want to send anything to your friends by post on your travel you can use the zip code as per description above.

Helgoland size is 1 square km., so it is quitely relaxing area nice travel destination for people that are searching for quiet cities as their base location on a trip, a quiet place without distractions that you find in large cities. If you stay here you can find cheap hotels due to Helgoland economic hotel rates, so for this reason you and your friends may use it like a base in order to visit all Germany and Helgoland near places.

Its elevation above mean sea level, basically meters above mean sea level (MAMSL), should be about 37 meters. Because of this this city is a perfect trip destination if you and your beloved ones like flat areas to go to in your next trip.

For water lovers in a trip you will be happy to know that there are this lakes or rivers or sea near Helgoland. Bodies of water like Heligoland Bight must be seen if you want to visit destinations with a lot of water.

If you want extra info about Helgoland check Helgoland website http://www.helgoland.de.

Helgoland things to do and activities: best trip destination for: