David Farland, an American author of fantasy fiction, is the pseudonym of Dave Wolverton. Dave Wolverton, who is well known as an author of science fiction, lives in Utah with his wife and five children.

He was a budding author during his college years but it was in 1987 that he came to prominence when he won the "Writers of the Future" L. Ron Hubbard Gold Award On My Way to Paradise. In 1991 he himself became a judge and in 1999 co-authored A Very Strange Trip with L. Ron Hubbard himself.

Dave Wolverton has achieved much renown in the science fiction field. Science fiction fans would know him best as the author of Star Wars novels; The Courtship of Princess Leia was met with acclaim from critics and readers alike and became a New York Time bestselling novel.

It is as David Farland that this site takes an interest in him as an author and in particular the Runelords series. Beginning in 1998 with The Sum of All Men the series continued a year later with Brotherhood of the Wolf and Wizardborn in 2001. Following the release of The Lair of Bones in 2003, Farland has brought out the fifth novel in the series Sons of the Oak (2006). Worldbinder, the sixth novel is due out in 2007.

As a teen I wanted to be a wildlife biologist, following in my brother's footsteps. At sixteen I wrote my first book: a text on mammalogy. I used to skip classes in high school and go to Oregon State University to attend classes on marine biology. So, for me, creating new creatures is a blast. Basically, you have to adapt the creature to its environment.

David Farland on monsters when interviewed by SFFWorld.com

As is the case with many authors, before becoming a full time writer he had a myriad of jobs. These included prison guard, pie maker and missionary! David Farland is now able to dedicate (no pun intended) himself to writing. He lists fishing and raising dogs as his favourite activities and plans to set up his very own kennel.

The Runelords series is currently being converted into screenplays and Dave Wolverton is also working on such diverse projects as video games and comic books. Anther videogame project is The Young Olympians which will also be a comic and young adult novels.

"That rare book that will remind you why you started reading fantasy in the first place" Amazon.com on the Runelords series

"Offers sweep, much bloodstained action and interesting characters" SFX on the Runelords series

"Highly recommended" Starlog on the Runelords series

"Treat yourself to an adventure you won't forget" Terry Brooks on the Runelords series

All David Farland Reviews

The Sum of All Men (Runelords: Book 1)

Brotherhood Of The Wolf (Runelords: Book 2)

Wizardborn (Runelords: Book 3)

The Lair Of Bones (Runelords: Book 4)