The Almanac - 1998_03_25.biz17.html

Issue date: March 25, 1998

People in business

Magdalena Yesil has joined U.S. Venture Partners, a Menlo Park-based venture capital company. "Magdalena's experience in electronic commerce and the Internet is dead on target with one of our strategic focus areas," said Phil Young of U.S. Venture Partners. She started her 18-year career as a semiconductor design engineer at Advanced Micro Devices, and recently founded two electronic commerce companies, CyberCash, which provides electronic payment systems, and MarketPay, a software company. She holds two degrees from Stanford, a master's in electrical engineering and a bachelor's in industrial engineering. U.S. Venture Partners has raised approximately $700 million in five venture capital funds since it was founded in 1981.

Brent Townshend of Menlo Park, a founder of the Menlo Park-based Ordinate Corp., announced the company has introduced PhonePass, a testing method for assessing proficiency in spoken English. Developed by Mr. Townshend and co-founder Jared Bernstein, the service is a computer-administered test that takes place in a 10-minute phone call. The test, which costs about $50 to take, uses Ordinate's voice-recognition technology. It is designed to help industry and educators determine the level at which a person can speak and understand everyday English.

Digby Macdonald has been named vice president of the Chemicals, Energy and Materials Division of SRI International, the Menlo Park-based research and consulting organization. In this position, he will lead SRI's work in pure and applied physical sciences, said William P. Sommers, CEO of SRI. Mr. Macdonald's appointment marks his return to SRI, which he first joined in 1977 as a senior metallurgist. He later became director of the Chemistry Laboratory and the Materials Research Laboratory. He left in 1991 to serve as a professor and the director of the Center for Advanced Materials at Pennsylvania State University.

Beth Steckman, 37, has won an award for best marketing director by the National Association of Home Builders, in part for her work in marketing and selling homes at Vintage Oaks in Menlo Park. Ms. Steckman is sales and marketing director for The O'Brien Group of San Mateo.

© 1998 The Almanac. All Rights Reserved.