Notes Inscribed by artist 'To B.C.B. from E.H.N. Decr. 1920' in pencil to lower left margin.

An uncommon large-scale panorama of London, from Temple to Tower Bridge, with a key to all the principal buildings depicted. For this view, Hort New revisited Wenceslaus Hollar's famous panorama of London, updated it and embellished it with Arts & Crafts motifs. At the centre, a large garlanded roundel features a Medieval depiction of St Paul, guardian of the city. Below, the city is a hive of activity. Steamships and vessels of all kinds sail the river Thames. Factories and cranes line the banks. The bridges and roads of the city are populated by omnibuses, carriages, and trains, while the skyline above the city is host to numerous hot air balloons.

This impression was intended as a gift from Edmund Hort New to his friend Benjamin Consitt Boulter. Boulter (1876-1960) was a British school master and illustrator. Born in Hull, Yorkshire, Boulter attended and graduated from Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1895. He became a school master at Mercers' School, Holborn, where he taught languages. Alongside this Boulter worked as an illustrator illustrating religious works and travel guides in a style greatly reminiscent of Hort New's.

Edmund Hort New (1871-1931), known as EH New, was an English artist and illustrator. He was born in Evesham, the son of an important lawyer, and attended the Birmingham Municipal School of Art. He began painting landscape and later devoted himself to illustration. Early in his career he worked with Ruskin and other associated Arts and Crafts artists. He later went on to work for William Morris's Kelmscott Press. The influence of these experiences is evident in his prints, with their decorative borders, armourials, and elegant typefaces.

In 1905, Edmund Hort New moved to Oxford, and over a period of years, produced a series of drawings of the Oxford Colleges, based on David Loggan's 1675 aerial perspectives. New took Loggan's format and enriched his prints with many fine details of and about the colleges. The series was printed and published by Emery Walker, who marketed them appropriately as 'New Loggan Prints.' New's college views were attractive to collectors because of their high level of detail, and were in most cases a far closer representation of the colleges than the original Loggan views. These prints were made through photogravure, a relatively new process at the time. For a photogravure, the print was made by transferring a photo to a copper plate and then printing from it. With the EH New prints, a contact print of New's pen and ink drawing was made and the large negative attached to a plate which was then exposed in an acid bath, the acid only biting where the negative was clear, creating an engraved plate of the drawing.

Emery Walker (1851 - 1933) was a British master-printer, typographer and engraver. He was one of the leading figures in the Arts and Crafts Movement, and the revival of engraving. Walker helped to found the Kelmscott Press and was later a partner of Cobden-Sanderson in the Doves Press, where he was responsible for much of the successful work produced.

Condition: Printed on two sheets and joined, as issued. Light toning from previous framing. Framed in a black box frame.