Katie Boulter described herself as 'devastated', while for Kyle Edmund winning a match at Wimbledon was the fulfilment of a childhood dream.

So just another day early in The Championships, when the home players had their hopes piled high on what most try, but fail, to approach as just another tournament of their season.

At the end of it there were four British losses compared to one home win – and that was Edmund finally opening his account at SW19 by beating compatriot Alex Ward, the lowliest qualifier in the draw.

It means that by the second round there are five GB players still left in, which represents what is becoming, in golf parlance, about par for the course. It is the same number that have made it past the initial stage for the last three years now.

This is not a disaster along the line of 2010 (when only one got through) but nor is it time to hang out the bunting. The English Patient remains sickly, but there are enough of Britain's cosmopolitan bunch good enough to offer hope that purely domestic interest can be sustained for several days yet, possibly even a week and a half.

While there will be groans about the failure of British wildcards it is the same most years in that the results largely follow the rankings. Four GB winners (Andy Murray, Jo Konta, Edmund and Heather Watson) beat players ranked below them while others lost to those ranked higher.

The exception was Aljaz Bedene, who knocked out 21st seed Ivo Karlovic on Monday and has the chance of further progress on Wednesday against Bosnia's Damir Dzhumur.

The bottom line is that Britain's tennis culture does still not produce sufficient numbers of good players, and there are no imminent signs that it is about to do so.

Those that are good enough to be representing GB at Wimbledon will have one thing largely in common, which is that they will have parents, or at least one of them, who have understood what it takes to excel in tennis.

On Tuesday, one leading British coach was bemoaning how too many mothers and fathers think their talented offspring will soar through the lower tiers of the tour and make it the top level with minimum fuss. If only.

Edmund and his family have always grasped what is required and on Thursday the Yorkshire 22 year-old will face France's 15th seed Gael Monfils after seeing off Ward, the admirable qualifier, 4-6 6-3 6-2 6-1 after a nervy start.

'I guess it's the one tournament you want to do well in more than any other, from your heart' said Edmund. ' To actually say that I've won one now is nice to say. But it's just one match. It's important not to get so high from the win.'

He has now won at least a round at the last four Grand Slams.

Boulter, 20, pushed world number 60 Christina McHale impressively close on her Wimbledon debut but lost 3-6 7-5 6-3 after having an early break in the deciding set.

Her future will be determined by how she copes with pushing her way up through the far smaller events to which she will now return.

Fellow wildcards Brydan Klein and James Ward both lost in straight sets. Ward was not embarrassed in losing 6-4 6-4 6-3 to ex top tenner Marcos Baghdatis while Klein fell away 7-6 6-3 6-0 to Japan's Yuichi Sugita.

The losers were all outranked, so until fundamental issues in British tennis are successfully addressed there should not be any great surprise at the high attrition rate against a strong field.