The Jerusalem Quartet will play a varied program of works at the Tel Aviv Museum of Art on January 12.

By BARRY DAVIS

Behind the seamsVisitors to the Beit Maierov Gallery in Holon will be able to enjoy a new angle on the history of the Israeli film industry at the “Movie Seamstress” exhibition. The retrospective looks at the work of local costume designer Rona Doron, who was responsible for creating clothes worn by leading actors in many of our most memorable bigscreen productions. The exhibition, curated by Merritt Parkhomovsky, opens on January 14 and will run until March 7. It features designs put together by Doron for such Israeli blockbusters as Aviya’s Summer (1988) and Under the Domim Tree (1994) – both of which starred Gila Almagor – Turn Left at the End of the World (2004) and Lost Islands (2008). To date, Doron has provided costume designs for more than 60 productions. She has been nominated for 21 Ophir Awards, winning six. Admission to the gallery is free. For more information: (03) 651- 6851 Images of Ethiopia Glick’s work oscillates between photography and painting, as the digital processing veers towards the latter. She edits what she sees and separates and joins elements and forms in a seemingly random manner. The result spawns landscapes of consciousness that offer the observer images that can be interpreted as she or he sees fit. Glick’s monochrome creations naturally accentuate line and form but also tend towards the amorphous. For more information: http://artisthouse.co.il Cross-border dance creation Spanish dancer Domingo Ortega will join forces with Israeli flamenco professionals Netta Sheizaf, Sharon Sagi and Sahara Piksie in an emotive performance of flamenco work called Minotauros. The foursome will perform the work from January 11 to 15 in Ashdod, Jaffa, Jerusalem, Upper Nazareth and Ramle. The work is the result of an encounter in October between flamenco dancers Sheizaf and Sagi with tribal fusion performer Piksie and international megastar Ortega at a multidisciplinary dance convention in Malta. Minotauros feeds off a wide range of emotions and sentiments, including physical strength, tenderness and fragility, which combine to produce an all-conquering power. The performers use flamenco, dance, song and instrumental music to tell the tale of the fabled eponymous hybrid creature. Musical accompaniment is provided by flamenco singer Yael Horowitz, in addition to Spanish guitarist Fyty de Triana, Israeli guitarist-singers Yehuda “Shuki” Shveiki and Ofir Atar, and percussionist Hagai Leshem. For tickets and more information: (08) 956-8111 (Performing Arts Center, Ashdod); (03) 902- 1563 (Warehouse 2, Jaffa); (02) 560-5755 (Jerusalem Theater); (04) 646-7468 (Heichal Hatarbut, Upper Nazareth); and (08) 923- 2542 (Heichal Hatarbut, Ramla) and www.choreographers.co.ilJerusalem sounds in Tel AvivThe Jerusalem Quartet will play a varied program of works at the Tel Aviv Museum of Art on January 12 (8:30 p.m.). The repertoire takes in Mozart’s String Quartet No. 14 in G major K. 387; Five Pieces for String Quartet by Jewish Czech composer Erwin Schulhoff, who perished in the Holocaust; and Schumann’s String Quartet No. 3 in A major Op. 41. The Jerusalem Quartet, which comprises violinists Alexander Pavlovsky and Sergei Bresler, violist Ori Kam and cellist Kyril Zlotnikov, performs a wide repertoire that includes works by Haydn, Schubert and Shostakovich. They have toured extensively worldwide, and three of their recordings have won BBC Music Magazine Awards. The concert will be preceded by a 30-minute talk by Anat Sharon about the concert repertoire (7:45 p.m.). For tickets and more information: 053-941-9337 and www.tamuseum.org.il