Gururaj “Desh” Deshpande came to the US via Canada in 1984. He moved here to be an entrepreneur, he said. Armed with a Ph.D. in data communications and a few years’ experience at a Motorola subsidiary, he started a series of companies that helped build the plumbing of the internet. The first, Coral Networks, made routers, and sold in 1993 for $15 million. Cascade Communications followed, making network switches; it sold for $3.7 billion in in 1997 to Ascend Communications. A third, Sycamore, is the company Deshpande is best known for. It went public at an $18 billion valuation in 1999.

That string of successes is long past; Sycamore shut its doors in 2013 after a long decline, helped along by the 2008–2009 economic crisis. Deshpande today is better known for his support of social enterprise — for-profit companies that have a mission for social good. He describes his best skill as “envisioning things.”

“You look at things and then you say it doesn’t have to be this way,” he said, “envisioning something that can be better, whether in an economic sense or a social sense.”

Deshpande said that it’s not enough for him to have ideas. In order for communities to turn around and solve their problems, those solutions must come from within. Deshpande’s nonprofit efforts since Sycamore have focused on supporting entrepreneurial efforts to solve social problems in India and in Massachusetts. If they are successful, he said, they will bring about a “cultural shift” that will breed more innovative problem solving.

“There are three types of people in this world. Some are oblivious to anything; some see a problem and complain; and some see a problem and get all excited about it,” he said. “And the only difference between a thriving community and an impoverished community is the mix of all those.”

For a would-be entrepreneur in the 1980s, coming to America was inevitable. This was the only place in the world you could start with an idea and build a business, Deshpande said, and those who did would come home to awed receptions in places like Beijing or Bangalore. In some ways, he said he thinks Americans took that spirit of entrepreneurship for granted. Now, with economies changing, we can’t afford to. The US needs job makers, as opposed to job seekers, he said.

Deshpande believes that comes down to the ability to see things different from what they are, and that’s something, he said, that those who travel to new places are especially good at. “It’s a question of ability to see both what you have and what you don’t have,” he said. “And that comes naturally to outsiders. And the US has done it better than anybody else, so far.”

Written by: Galen Moore

If you’d like to share your story, please get in touch with us at info@newenglandvc.org