Action Flick Chick Katrina met Lloyd Kaufman, head of Troma Entertainment (home to The Toxic Avenger, Class of Nuke ‘Em High, Tromeo and Juliet), during this year’s San Diego Comic-Con International. “Speaking of action CHICKS,” Kaufman asked later, “have you reviewed the Brown Ray DVD of POULTRYGEIST? Or even the 35mm print?”

Who could refuse? So Katrina invited Erica Ash, the biggest POULTRYGEIST fan we know, to share her love of the Troma horror-comedy POULTRYGEIST: NIGHT OF THE CHICKEN DEAD.

Sites:

* http://www.lloydkaufman.com

* http://www.troma.com

Erica’s previous ActionFlickChick.com post:

* Interview: Writer/Director Ray Griggs (Super Capers, Project Lucifer)

Reasons to Love Poultrygeist: Night of the Chicken Dead

by Erica Ash (guest writer)

Poultrygeist: Night of the Chicken Dead could easily take the cake for “Most Memorable B-Movie.” One of the main reasons why I liked the movie so much is because it is so unique. The best way I can describe it is that it’s like Dr. Horrible’s Sing Along Blog, crossed with Return of the Living Dead, crossed with a softcore lesbian porno (not that I’m into that kind of thing, but I’m sure it’s an added boner, er, bonus for at least half of the potential viewers out there).

Another reason why Poultrygeist is so great is because it’s a comical satire on the fast-food industry and the dirty side of capitalism. So, in a way, its like A Modest Proposal – without the modesty. And instead of eating babies, the characters eat evil chicken fetuses. I never would have thought that this type of movie could turn out to have such a serious message, but there are little things that accurately evoke strong feelings about the fast food industry. For instance, I really had to think about what has actually been put into the things I’ve been served when a college protester is given a piece of fried chicken with a radioactive green colored bump on it that explodes like a pimple on the face of an acne-ridden sixteen-year-old – you know, the type that usually works at places like these. Speaking of which, Poultrygeist also touches on the fact that in-store employees are usually barely paid enough to stay alive while the higher-ups make money faster than they can spend it.

Arbie, the main character, lands a job at American Chicken Bunker after graduating high school. At one point, he runs into his sixty-something future self who still works at ACB and tries to convince young Arbie to go to college. Young Arbie is fearful of going into debt by enrolling in school and thinks that his job is the greatest thing on Earth because it allows him to support his father and mother, who are blind and retarded, respectively.

Finally, Poultrygeist is a great party movie. Despite the satire, the movie has some hilarious and shocking moments. You may find yourself laughing harder at your friends’ reactions than at some of the comedy.

All in all, Poultrygeist is a very creative movie with both humor and serious themes. The fact that it is a diverse film makes it easy for many to love.

Description:

When a fast food chicken restaurant is built on the site of an ancient Native American burial ground, the displaced spirits unite with the ghosts of exterminated chickens and transform into Indian chicken zombies seeking revenge! Now, it’s up to a dim-witted counter boy, his lesbian ex-girlfriend, and a burqa-wearing fry cook to put an end to the foul-feathered menace once and for all. Poultrygeist: Night of the Chicken Dead, a fromage to Takashi Miike in Troma Entertainment’s thirty-plus-years-long tradition of wildly successful low-budget, high-concept, one-of-a-kind cinematic creations designed to satisfy the hunger for reel entertainment.

Director: Lloyd Kaufman

Writers: Daniel Bova, Gabriel Friedman, Lloyd Kaufman

Cast: Jason Yachanin, Kate Graham, Allyson Sereboff, Robin L. Watkins, Joshua Olatunde, Caleb Emerson, Rose Ghavami, Khalid Rivera, Joe Fleishaker, Ron Jeremy, Faith Sheehan, John Karyus, Tessa Lew, Brian Cheverie, Anna Gabriella Olson, Kristin Kinnaird, Kailin Smith, Lauren Michelle Watts, Lori Schuler, Melanie Syph, Tina Crapsi, Martin Victor, Ira Kortum, Karen Tuccio, Mary Ann Reisdorf, Paul Gusmann, Andrew Monkelban, Ron Mackay, Cathy Mackay, Chris Sciuto, Simon Savory, Elisabeth Sobocinski, A. J. Verel, Debbie Rochon, Elske McCain, Ruth Phelps, Arvid Cristina, Zack Beins, Tyler Dolph, Joshua Samuel Strauss, Glenn Lasky, Maria Gismondi, Theresa Ferrara, Tracy Janis, Nicolas Pellissier, Kiel Walker.

Addendum: Review of the review