Whether you’re an adrenaline junky or a scaredy cat, it’s almost Halloween, which means it's time for scary movies.

So, grab your pillows, blankets, popcorn, a human shield, your chicken of a best friend or whatever else you need to survive ... and try one of these choices.

Each movie has one thing in common: There’s a Buffalo connection.

"Dwelling" (2016). Horror. A woman returns to her haunted childhood home to face her fears in this surprisingly taut horror movie from young area filmmaker Kyle Mecca. The movie was strong enough to land a distribution deal through Sony Entertainment and was available exclusively at Walmart earlier in the summer before it was made available to various retailers including Amazon, Best Buy and Barnes & Noble.

Buffalo director’s much-buzzed horror film arrives on DVD

"Poultrygeist: Night of the Chicken Dead" (2006). Comedy/horror/musical. In case you want a more mild scary movie experience, this option provides some comic relief ... put to song. It's from Troma Entertainment and directed by friend-of-Buffalo Lloyd Kaufman so you know what you're getting.

Filmed at an old McDonalds on Bailey Avenue, this movie’s plot involves fast-food workers, a restaurant built on an ancient burial ground and zombified chickens. Need I say more?

"Prison of the Psychotic Damned" (2006). Horror. Imagine having to spend a spooky night in the Buffalo Central Terminal.

These filmmakers certainly think it had a spooky-enough atmosphere. That’s where this movie was made, as five ghost hunters spend the night there, where over 200 people died, according to the film’s plotline. They are tormented by the psychotic dead.

You might think twice when passing the Central Terminal after watching this one.

"Slime City" (1988). Horror. Ah, old horror movies. Although this one may not be a classic like “Silence of the Lambs” or “The Shining,” it’s still got that great old scary movie vibe. It was filmed in Buffalo by local director and writer Greg Lamberson.

Listen now and subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Google Podcasts | Spotify | RSS Feed | SoundStack | All Of Our Podcasts

The main character, Alex, moves into a new apartment, is seduced by his neighbor and is transformed into an evil slime killing machine. The only way to return to normal is to continue his killing spree.

Meanwhile, his girlfriend must uncover the secret of their apartment.

In 2010, Lamberson directed and wrote the sequel "Slime City Massacre."

"Shadow Creature" (1995). Horror. This movie was filmed in Buffalo, including at Buffalo State College, specifically.

A detective investigates a slew of gruesome murders, only to get tangled up with a group of colorful characters all vying for a mysterious secret formula. This concoction could lead to immortality ... and the total destruction of all living things on earth.

If that captures your attention, give it a try.

Now here's a bonus film to watch next Halloween:

"Purge: The Island." Thriller/horror. Recently, crews have been filming in Buffalo for the next movie in “The Purge” thriller series called "The Purge: The Island," set to be released July 2018.

Newest 'Purge' movie is filming entirely in Buffalo

This will be the fourth movie of the series, which already includes “The Purge” (2013), “The Purge: Anarchy” (2014) and “The Purge: Election Year” (2016). The key tie to each movie is that in a future America, there is a 12-hour window of time where all criminal acts, including murder, are legal.

To prepare for the movie and to support the Buffalo film industry, lock all your doors and windows, and watch one of the first three "Purge" movies.

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

Subscribe to our Daily Headlines newsletter.

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.