Bad food, zombies, sex, obscene obesity, shit, mindless violence, musical numbers and extremely malicious poultry. Sounds like Mc Donald's on a Friday night, but no it is in fact a brief description of Poultrygeist: Night of the Chicken Dead (2006, Lloyd Kaufman).

I have watched a lot of bad exploitation films in the past and never before have I seen one so offensive and obscene as this one, but like most of Troma Entertainments productions, strangely and hilariously fun to watch. Poultrygeist is a musical, dark comedy exploitation film and when I say dark, I mean the kind of humour that even lovers of dark humour would cringe at. It is a truly crazy experience and I cannot get enough of it!

The title of this review may be 'Well that was a mistake', but if you're like me and watch bad movies for fun on a regular basis, then it is certainly not a mistake and you will truly love this film. It is by far the craziest horror comedy that I have ever seen. Imagine if Shaun of the Dead (2004, Edgar Wright) was a musical, was set in a KFC and included incredibly dark and most potentially offensive humour, along with highly grotesque, obscene and amazingly well crafted practical effects. That is this movie.

Like one of my favourite Troma films, The Toxic Avenger (1984, Lloyd Kaufman and Michael Herz), Poultrygeist presents a great deal of truly absurd moments designed to shock and offend its audience to truly epic proportions. This film takes it ten steps further. In the first scene alone we have a couple having sex on an Indian burial ground and zombie hands coming up from the ground and molesting them while they take part in impassioned copulation. Yes, that is only the first scene! There is even more absurd what the fuckery to go around throughout the entirety of this movie.

Like every typical Troma film it does not pull any punches in order to shock and offend you. Though I'm describing this film as absolutely crazy, and it is, the films story is not entirely without point. It effectively acts as a highly gross satire of the corruption of the fast food industry. You'll not walk into a Mc Donald's the same way again after watching this absurd experience on screen.

If you're a bad movie fan like myself and intend to watch this, be prepared for the most incredible ironically bad film ever put to screen. However, if you're not a committed bad movie fan, be prepared. As you may not be able to handle the casual, potentially satirical racism, borderline pornographic lesbian overtones, potential necrophilia, a characters dead poultry fetish, gore effects that would make the Saw franchise blush, chicken violence that would make Colonel Sanders close all the slaughter houses and the most intense dispersal of fecal matter ever put on the cinema screen.

If you are, however, someone who is offended by the tiniest detail in a film and easily offended by most things within modern culture and cannot even handle even the tiniest element of violence or gore, even in a non-exploitation film, then do not watch this movie. You will be unable to survive it and that may potentially spoil it for the rest of us. So heed this warning and stay away! For everyone else, see it as soon as you can! For a highly offensive, musical, gross, obscene and disturbing, poultry filled exploitation film, it is certainly a fun experience. You will be mentally scarred in both a good way and bad way. There is no in-between with this film!