Benjamin Franklin Laidlaw

OBITUARY.

Benjamin Franklin Laidlaw was born in Edwards, St. Lawrence County, New York, on June 6, 1823. He was united in marriage to Florilla Buck on June 10, 1846. To the union were born five children, two of whom died in infancy. The only daughter, Mrs. Ada I. Garlick, died in Cresco in September 1891. Two sons are living, William Edwin, of Cresco, and Frank E. of Lowell, Massachusetts.

Of a family of thirteen children, Mr. Laidlaw and a sister, Mrs. Martha Green, were for years the sole survivors. Mrs. Green passed away in Wykoff, Minn., on August 14, 1915.

The wife of Mr. Laidlaw, Florilla, died on November 24, 1877. In September, 1901, he was united in marriage to Mrs. Phoebe Jones who died in June, 1904. Since that date he has made his home with his son, W. E. Laidlaw.

In March, 1913, Mr. Laidlaw fell, fracturing a hip bone, which confined him to his bed for some time and to his room ever since. He died at 4:10 Thursday afternoon, December 2, 1915.

The funeral services were conducted from the home of Mr. W. E. Laidlaw on Saturday afternoon, December 4, 1915, Dr. D. T. Robertson, pastor of the Congregational Church, officiating and the body was laid away in the Oak Lawn Cemetery.

Fred T. Lambert

[Source: Oregonian (Portland, OR) April 17, 1931] tr. by mkk

Fred T. Lambert, 57, bridge engineer, who superintended construction of railroad bridges in this section several years ago, died March 17 at Rochester, Minn., of injuries sustained in a fall from a bridge under construction at Preston, Minn. His home was at Young America, Minn., for many years and funeral services were held there. He was a bridge inspector for the Minnesota state highway department at the time of his death.

After his graduation from the University of Minnesota school of engineering in 1904 Mr. Lambert came west and was in charge of bridge building for the Northern Pacific and Spokane, Portland & Seattle railways in the Cascade and Rocky mountains.

William Layton

Source: Duluth News-Tribune (Duluth, St. Louis County, Minn.) Thursday, 10 July 1913; transcribed by FoFG mz

VIRGINIA, July 3. – William Layton, 44 years old, proprietor of the hotel at Gheen, died at a local hospital this morning. He leaves a bride of two months. Layton came here from Spring Valley, Minn. He was formerly at Duluth. Mrs. Frank Lefavor

[Source: Minneapolis Daily Tribune (MN) Aug. 30, 1870] tr. by mkk

- Mrs. Frank Lefavor, a young married woman in Pilot Mound township, Fillmore county, died on the morning of Aug. 23d, from the effects of an abortion produced by the administration of medicines, as is alleged, at the hands of Mr. Thomas McIntire, on whose farm she and her husband were living as tenants. Her age was fifteen years, and the marriage took place in March last. An investigation is to be had. Morris Lewis

[Source: Mower County Register (MN) May 9, 1867] tr. by mkk

SUDDEN DEATH. - We are pained to learn of the death of Morris Lewis, of Turin, Lewis Co., New York, which occured on Saturday last at Foreston Fillmore County, Minnesota. The deceased was on a business visit in the West and had only a few weeks since bought considerable property in this place among which was a third of the Bank Block. He was a robust healthy looking man but caught a very severe cold which settled on his lungs and caused pneumonia of which disease he died as above stated. He was an old acquaintance of Mr. C. J. Paddock, of the firm of Paddock Bros, of this place; was strictly honest and a man of considerable wealth and influence, and had he lived would no doubt have been a permanent resident of Austin. Catherine Link

Source: Duluth News-Tribune (Duluth, St. Louis County, Minn.) Thursday, 18 Apr. 1907; transcribed by FoFG mz

PRESTON, Minn., April 17. – Mrs. Catherine Link, widow of John Link, died at the home of her son, Albert Link, at this place on the 14th from old age. Mrs. Link was 93 years of age, and was born in Germany, settling in Preston township in 1866. Litchfield Boy

[Source: Minneapolis Daily Tribune (MN) June 11, 1871] tr. by mkk

- A little boy, son of Mr. Litchfield, of Etna, Fillmore county, died suddenly on the night of June 3d. The physician thought it a case of sun-stroke, but it is possible that inhaling the fumes of slaughtered potato bugs was the cause of death; the boy had been thus engaged in the field.