The Devil’s Own is an American motion picture, directed by Alan J. Pakula and released in 1997. It stars Brad Pitt as Frankie McGuire, Harrison Ford as Tom O’Meara, Margaret Colin as Sheila and Treat Williams as Billy Burke.

The film opens with a flashback to 1972, when eight-year-old Frankie sees his father shot to death by masked gunmen. Twenty years on, Frankie is serving with the Provisional IRA and engaged in shootouts with the army in Belfast. Frustrated by British helicopters, the IRA sends Frankie to the United States to purchase anti-aircraft missiles on the black market.

Travelling under the name Rory Devaney, Frankie is given accommodation by Tom O’Meara, a New York policeman of Irish extraction. Frankie befriends O’Meara and his family while secretly completing his mission. The O’Mearas become embroiled in the arms deal, however, and Tom learns of Frankie’s real identity and mission. Tom seeks to bring Frankie to justice, while saving him from British agents who wish to kill him.

Like many Hollywood films The Devil’s Own is long on action but short on history. Its screenplay gives almost not attention or insight into the political and social tensions that plagued Northern Ireland.

The opening scenes aside, we see few visual representations of the Troubles. We know virtually nothing about McGuire’s political background or motives, other than the killing of his father. McGuire’s criminal activities are portrayed sympathetically, while British intelligence agents are depicted as ruthless and immoral.

Film critic Roger Ebert was scathing of the movie’s lack of depth, declaring that “audiences will be able to watch this movie in total ignorance of the history of Northern Ireland and be none the wiser at the end”. Co-stars Brad Pitt and Harrison Ford have also criticised The Devil’s Own, claiming that filming began without a screenplay.

Pitt and Harrison make The Devil’s Own watchable as an action-thriller – but as a representation of the Troubles or the IRA it is virtually worthless.

© Alpha History 2017. Content on this page may not be republished or distributed without permission. For more information please refer to our Terms of Use.

This page was written by Jennifer Llewellyn and Steve Thompson. To reference this page, use the following citation:

J. Llewellyn and S. Thompson, “The Devil’s Own (1997)”, Alpha History, accessed [today’s date], https://alphahistory.com/northernireland/the-devils-own-1997/.