PRESS CONTACT

PRESS CONTACT

Stephanie Schopp

Tinsley-PR

stephanie@tinsley-pr.com

(323) 660-2163

For Immediate Release

Florida State University Athletics First to Unveil Branded Desktop: Stardock Corporation’s Newly Formed Stardock Design Launches “My Colors” Desktop Branding Initiative

- To Focus Fans on the Brands, Stardock Design Teams Up With Florida State University and Unleashes Stardock’s Theme Manager™ Technology in an Entirely New Way -

Plymouth, MI, Tallahassee, FL and Lexington, KY - (November 13, 2006) – Stardock Corporation’s new creative division, Stardock Design (www.stardockdesign.com) launched “My Colors” today with Florida State University Athletics to the delight of Florida State University fans everywhere. Currently, no other professional sports league or college has implemented custom desktop branding solutions to their students, faculty, fans or alumni. Stardock Design pioneers this effort with Florida State University Athletics from long-standing expertise in the desktop enhancement arena, showcasing seven of the top 10 desktop enhancement programs on CNET’s Download.com. Stardock Design’s My Colors provides Florida State University fans a complete custom desktop for the PC that includes:

A complete “Florida State University Athletics” visual style that will change the entire user interface

Icons and buttons in FSU colors and logos

An animated FSU Football Media Player

An FSU gadget that delivers updated information directly to you

Customizable Florida State University Athletics audio

Several FSU wallpapers to choose from

“The formation of Stardock Design is an entirely strategic move for Stardock,” stated Stardock President and CEO Brad Wardell. “Corporations are looking to further their presence on the desktop as traditional advertising and marketing wanes in its effectiveness on the consumer and we have provided a one-stop-shop solution to all desktop branding needs.”

Stardock Design is offering the desktop package for $19.95 on the Stardock website http://mycolors.stardock.com and through www.seminoles.com. The program is downloadable and available now for Florida State fans, alumni, staff and students.

Phil Madis, director of business development for Stardock stated, “We’re proud to launch this division and program with Florida State University. Utilizing Stardock’s Theme Manager technology, we have cultivated years of experience to deliver the best desktop enhancement products on the market. Florida State Athletics has a proud tradition and an exceptional brand. Loyal fans, students and alumni will thoroughly enjoy having their favorite school colors showcased proudly on the desktop. This is a perfect fit and we’re excited to have them on board.”

“Alumni, fans, students and staff will now be able to showcase our school and their team loyalty with the FSU branded desktop,” stated Kay Scott, general manager of Seminole Athletics Marketing for Host Communications Inc. “We are excited to be the first sports property nation-wide to launch Stardock Design’s My Colors program as are always attempting to stay on the cutting edge of technology. Our themed desktop will provide Seminole fans everywhere with a fun, unique way to support our institution.” Lexington, Ky.-based Host Communications manages the multimedia rights programs for Florida State University’s athletics department.

Stardock Design’s Vice President Angela Marshall said, “We are in discussions with several other professional sports organizations and college level educational institutions and plan to implement numerous of these designs in the next quarter. We’re on the verge of a major trend in shifting branding to the desktop in increasing numbers.”

To find out more about Stardock Design, please visit www.stardockdesign.com.

###

About Florida State University Athletics

Florida State University boasts an intercollegiate athletics program that is among the very best in the country. FSU fields teams in 19 different sports that compete at the very top of the NCAA 1A structure. Seminole student-athletes have gained international recognition for their accomplishments in combining world-class competitive athletics, outstanding academic performance and remarkable dedication to community service. Florida States athletics programs have won 12 national championships since the university became co-educational and started intercollegiate competition in 1947.

About Stardock Design

Stardock Design provides the desktop branding solution companies or individuals need to compete in today's advanced marketing arena. Providing a custom, unique branded look and feel for the PC makes branding the desktop fun for consumers and keeps your brand on top where it should be. Stardock Design is the only company with the expertise to fully transform the entire user experience of Windows 2000, Windows XP and Windows Vista. Stardock Design is the creative division of Stardock Corporation, the world’s leading developer of Windows customization technology and a Microsoft Gold Partner. Learn more about Stardock Design at www.stardockdesign.com, where unique technology meets breakthrough design.

About Stardock

Stardock is the world's leading developer of Windows enhancement utilities. Its software is used by over 10 million people worldwide and has been licensed by trendsetting companies like NVIDIA, ATI, Alienware and Microsoft, plus in movies and TV. Stardock operates WinCustomize.com, the premier portal for Windows enhancement drawing more than 3 million unique visitors each month, in addition to one of the world's largest blogging communities, JoeUser.com. Stardock is a Microsoft Certified Gold Partner. The company's website is www.stardock.com.

About Host Communications Inc.

In 2006, HOST was named by the SportsBusiness Journal as one of America’s top three sports marketing agencies. Founded in 1972, HOST holds multi-marketing rights at the University of Arizona, Florida State University, University of Kentucky, University of Michigan, University of Nebraska, Oklahoma State University, University of Tennessee, University of Texas, the Southeastern Conference, NCAA Football, and the National Football Foundation and College Hall of Fame.

The Lexington, Ky.-based company also manages five associations, more than 30 Web sites and has a printing and publishing division that produces more than 700 publications annually including all of the NCAA championship game-day programs. Additional information may be found online at www.hostcommunications.com.

HOST is a subsidiary of Triple Crown Media, Inc. TCMI owns and operates six daily newspapers with a total daily circulation of approximately 120,000 and owns and operates GrayLink, a wireless communications company based in Tallahassee. TCMI is a public company traded on NASDAQ and based in Lexington, Ky. Additional information can be found online at www.triplecrownmedia.com.

###