What's the game about?

The Story (wiki)

Stardock is a developer and publisher of PC games and desktop software founded in 1991 by nationally recognized technology expert Brad Wardell. Located in Plymouth, Michigan, Stardock is a powerful leader in the video gaming and software development world. Its PC games include Sins of a Solar Empire, the critically acclaimed Galactic Civilizations series, and the highly anticipated upcoming Ashes of the Singularity and Offworld Trading Company. Stardock puts the user experience first through software that enriches the Windows experience for everyone from casual computer users to highly technical professionals.

In The Beginning

Man created strong AI, and it was good. The name given to her: Haalee.

With her help, humanity's potential blossomed. The pace of technological advancements increased exponentially, leading to a singularity, an irreversible transformation of human life.

Post-Humans

Human action was soon replaced by the work of armies of machines. These microscopic devices, called "nans", could construct anything desired, including larger machines, called constructs (descendents of what 21st century humans would call "drones"). In addition, under the guidance of Haalee, the ultimate computing material, Turinium, was invented. This resource became the foundation of a new generation of computer networks, allowing humans to completely overcome the limits that biology had placed on them.

Nearly Unlimited Capability

With intelligence augmented by Turinium, humans could master ever more sophisticated technologies, and manage massive armies of constructs. Feats that were at the edge of human imagination in the 21st century soon became routine. Post-Humans mastered quantum technologies so thoroughly that they could manipulate matter at a distance, opening the stars to human expansion.

The Rise of the PHC

This did not go orderly. Though their capabilities had evolved beyond all conceivable limits, these were still fundamentally human. And they didn't share well. By this point the most capable Post-Humans wielded more power than entire nation states of the previous century, and in their rush to the stars a horrific amount of material was lost due to in-fighting. It was only after much bitter conflict that the most powerful Post-Humans agreed to the formation of the Post-Human Coalition (PHC). Post-Humans who had completed their neophyte training could now reserve worlds to expand to, allowing the PHC to spread in a somewhat more civilized fashion. Literally, in this case. For is not the endless consumption of resources the sole hallmark of human civilization?

A New Threat

As the PHC's relentless expansion continued, a new threat emerged. Splinters, Post-Humans corrupted by some unknown force, began breaking away from the PHC, seizing resources from Post-Humanity's grasp. Anarchic by design, the PHC has struggled to respond to this threat in an organized fashion. But it will have to do something.

“Stardock and Oxide are doing great work taking advantage of Windows 10 with DirectX 12 features such as asynchronous compute and multiple GPUs,” said Kevin Unangst, Senior Global Director, PC Gaming at Microsoft. “Their new DirectX 12 benchmark lets gamers see how their systems perform with actual gameplay.” In addition, Beta 2 also greatly improves on the already well received artificial intelligence (AI) first scene in Beta 1. “Ashes of the Singularity isn’t just a battle, it’s a war across an entire world,” said Brad Wardell, Executive Producer of Ashes of the Singularity. “As visually stunning as the game can be, the success of the game is dependent on the gameplay. That’s why we’re investing so much into making sure the computer opponents are such worthy adversaries.” Beta 2 is now available in Early Access on both Steam and GOG.