Stardock

Get Quote

Need help deciding?

Talk to one of our software experts for free. They will help you select the best software for your business.

Get A Quote

First Name *

Last Name *

Business E-mail *

z

Phone *

Company *

Job Title *

I understand by clicking on "GET QUOTE" below I am agreeing to the SourceForge Terms of Use and the Privacy Policy which describe how we use and share your data. I agree to receive quotes and related information from SourceForge.net and our partners via phone calls and e-mail to the contact information I entered above. I understand that I can withdraw my consent at anytime. Please refer to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy or Contact Us for more details.

JavaScript is required for this form.

Submitting...

Alternatives to Stardock Fences

Claim this page

Flowbar

Instantly save all your tabs, free up memory & speed up your computer. Create groups and folders from saved tabs and drag them around to organize. Keep important things always visible. Marked items are always visible on the right side of the screen for quick access. Double-click on a group to open it in a new window or bring that window forward. No more getting lost between several windows. Top bar for quicker access to your links. Save, close, move tabs between windows from your Flowbar dashboard, and it will update in real time. Don’t get lost between multiple windows and tabs. Never lose your tabs again, reach your saved tabs on any computer. Instantly save all your tabs, free up memory & speed up your computer. Create groups from saved tabs and move them around to organize. Search saved tabs to quickly find what you’re looking for. Import your OneTab links with one click. Everything is saved and synced on the cloud.

Learn more

OneTab

Whenever you find yourself with too many tabs, click the OneTab icon to convert all of your tabs into a list. When you need to access the tabs again, you can either restore them individually or all at once. When your tabs are in the OneTab list, you will save up to 95% of memory because you will have reduced the number of tabs open in Google Chrome. OneTab is designed for privacy. Your tab URLs are never transmitted or disclosed to either the OneTab developers or any other party, and icons for tab URL domains are generated by Google. The only exception to this is if you intentionally click on our 'share as a web page' feature that allows you to upload your list of tabs into a web page in order to share them with others. Tabs are never shared unless you specifically use the 'share as a web page' button.

Learn more

Bookmark OS

Bookmark manager, tab manager, task manager, notes, and files together in one elegant, customizable desktop. Existing bookmark managers always end up cluttered mess. Mac and Windows are still the best at organizing your files. Bookmark OS uses Mac / Windows-inspired UI to help you organize your bookmarks. Bookmark OS is a responsive website. Use it on your laptop, phone, or tablet. Choose from over 10 themes. Customize icon sizes, folder colors, list columns and more. Organize, sort, and browse your bookmarks just like files on your desktop. Save bookmarks to the correct folder with one click. Save all current tabs from one session to a "session" folder. Web page screenshots are used as icons, giving you a useful way to visualize your bookmarks. Sync a backup copy of your bookmarks to Dropbox on weekly basis. Save a full-text searchable copy of your bookmarks so you will never lose them. Quickly delete any duplicate bookmarks.

Learn more

Audience

Solution for anyone wanting to automatically organize their desktop shortcuts icons and running tasks

About Stardock Fences

Fences helps you organize your PC by automatically placing your shortcuts and icons into resizable shaded areas on your desktop called fences. Its many customization features are what make Fences the world's most popular Windows desktop enhancement. Eliminate clutter from your desktop - but keep your Fences where it's easy to find them - with our roll up feature. Double-clicking on a Fence's title-bar will cause the rest of the Fence to "roll up" into it, saving you valuable space. To reveal your fence, you can move your mouse over the title-bar or double-click it again to view the title and all of its icons as normal. Create multiple pages of fences on your desktop and quickly swipe between them. To change to a different desktop page, just take your mouse cursor to the edge of your screen and click and drag. Then a new page of fences will be displayed.

Pricing

Starting Price:

$10.63 one-time payment

Free Trial:

Free Trial available.

Integrations

No integrations listed.

Ratings/Reviews

Overall 0.0 / 5

ease 0.0 / 5

features 0.0 / 5

design 0.0 / 5

support 0.0 / 5

This software hasn't been reviewed yet. Be the first to provide a review:

Review this Software

Company Information

Stardock

Founded: 1993

United States

www.stardock.com/products/fences/

To-do Lists

To-do Lists application provides you with simple but powerful interface for tasks and checklists management. Unlike other to do management applications with complicated single-window interface we love simplicity. Within our app you have unlimited amount of stickies-like lists with checkboxes and text. Each to-do list can be customized in a number of ways. Easily choose background color, tasks text color and font. You can even put the picture on the background in case you need it. Just right click on list’s title or choose corresponding item from the main menu to see all of the customization options. And of course lists are resizable and movable around the screen. There are numerous ways to quickly activate To-do Lists application and start typing tasks: do it via the global shortcut, menu bar application’s icon, integration via System Services or right-clicking on application’s Dock icon. The same global shortcut can be used to quickly take a look on your lists.

Learn more

FastStone Capture

FastStone Capture is a powerful, lightweight, yet full-featured screen capture tool and screen video recorder. It allows you to easily capture and annotate anything on the screen including windows, objects, menus, full screen, rectangular / freehand / fixed regions as well as scrolling windows / web pages. It also allows you to record all screen activities including onscreen changes, speech from microphone, audio from speakers, mouse movements and clicks into highly compressed video files. You can choose to send captures to editor, file, clipboard, printer, email, OneNote / Word / Excel / PowerPoint document or upload them to your website. Editing tools include annotating (texts, arrowed lines, highlights), resizing, cropping, sharpening, watermarking, applying edge effects and many more. Other features include image scanning, global hotkeys, automatic filename generation, support for external editors, a color picker, a screen magnifier, a screen crosshair and a screen ruler.

Learn more

ZetaWare Trinity

We most likely do not know the thickness (and other properties) of the source rock in the kitchen area, nor do we know the heat flow in the kitchen, or secondary migration losses. The only way to rank prospects is to run different scenarios of these parameters. The prospects that are charged in most scenarios will have the lowest risk, and vise versa. Other parameters that can be risked are top seal capacity, unconformity, source rock facies, even different interpretations of the seismic and the list goes on. Invoking multi-component kinetics while we do not even know the thickness, TOC and HI of the source rock is ridiculous. Drag and drop your interpreted surfaces into Trinity and interactively draw cross sections through them. The cross section can be moved with the mouse to movie through the data and in 3D the cross sections look like fence diagrams, except the fences can be moved! This will reveal much more geology than looking at static maps.

Learn more

Firework by Startpack

Firework turns web applications and sites into desktop applications. Instant loading time, pinned to the taskbar, easy to switch between. Open your web destinations as desktop applications in a dedicated window. You’ll never lose them again among the dozens of open tabs of a web browser. Pin your favorite web applications to the taskbar to keep them at hand. Instantly switch to your favorite web applications just by clicking on corresponding icons within the taskbar or by using hotkeys. Access your web applications and websites with ease and be more productive saving your time. Web applications go desktop! Quickly switch between them, move windows side by side as you want, use shortcuts for the fastest access. Don’t get distracted by random websites anymore, stay focused on your tasks and achieve more. Firework is an application based on Chromium, there’s nothing either heavyweight or complex in there. Firework is just a convenient tool for time-saving.

Learn more

You Might Also Like

ManageEngine Endpoint Central for IT Professionals

A one-stop Unified Endpoint Management (UEM) solution

ManageEngine's Endpoint Central is a Unified Endpoint Management Solution, that takes care of enterprise mobility management (including all features of mobile application management and mobile device management), as well as client management for a diversified range of endpoints - mobile devices, laptops, computers, tablets, server machines etc. With ManageEngine Endpoint Central, users can automate their regular desktop management routines like distributing software, installing patches, managing IT assets, imaging and deploying OS, and more.

Product Details

Platforms Supported

Windows

Training

Videos

Support

Phone Support

Online

Stardock Fences Frequently Asked Questions

Q: What kinds of users and organization types does Stardock Fences work with?

Stardock Fences works with these users and organization types: Mid Size Business, Small Business, Enterprise, Freelance, Nonprofit, Government, and Startup.

Q: What languages does Stardock Fences support in their product?

Stardock Fences supports these languages: English.

Q: What kind of support options does Stardock Fences offer?

Stardock Fences offers support via phone support and online.

Q: What type of training does Stardock Fences provide?

Stardock Fences provides training in the form of videos.

Q: Does Stardock Fences offer a free trial?

Yes, Stardock Fences offers a free trial.

Q: How much does Stardock Fences cost?

Pricing for Stardock Fences starts at $10.63 one-time payment.

Stardock Fences Product Features

Productivity

File Sharing

Database Creation

Notes Management

Collaboration

Team Chat

Office Suite

Task Management

Presentation Tools

Project Management

Document Creation