By Miranda Hernandez and Whitney Williams

Introduction

When Hairspray (2007) first premiered in the movie theaters, starring Zac Efron, Amanda Bynes, etc., it was a big hit with audiences. For the first time watching for my 9-year-old self, I thought it was such a powerful and fun movie highlighting what times were like for teens in the 1960s. Music and dancing brought people together because who could stop their feet from moving to groovy tunes. However, the original 1988 film written by John Waters and all of its adaptations center around a white main character, Tracy Turnblad, who enforces the attitude that integrating white and black people is just as easy as saying it, leading to an inherently flawed story. In the creation of future adaptations, the writers even faced high criticism from higher executives when trying to adapt the story to prominently feature more Black actors. While Hairspray (1988) was not created as a historical film, John Waters neglects to fully delve into the real social and political issues of 1960s Baltimore that are vividly seen in the background, and as a result the film misses out on a chance to document and represent the efforts of people of color during the civil right movement.

The Buddy Deane Show

Image: Baltimore Magazine

The Buddy Deane Show aired from 1957 to 1964 and grew to be one of top-rated local television shows in Baltimore during the 1960s. It had appearances from the biggest names in rock ‘n’ roll, Buddy Holly, Bill Haley, etc. The after school special would air six days a week for 2 hours a day, and it would highlight a new dance move every episode, like the bug, the madison, and more. Since there was a new dance move every episode, teens would feel obligated to watch the show every day to keep up with the new dance moves that their friends would have been doing.

Image: Dance Party

The show was airing during the heart of the civil rights movement, and there were many efforts made for integration on the show. The Buddy Deane Show committee, which appeared every episode as the recurring cast, was exclusively white teens, though the show did feature Black dancers once a month, later changed to once a week. “This weekly time slot became known as ‘Special Guest Day’ by the Deane Show’s white performers and “Black Monday” by Baltimore’s Black teens.” (Barnard,1) Protesters of the civil rights movement wanted more than a day of the week for Black performers; they wanted the show to fully integrate White and Black dancers to perform together. Deane offered more days of the week for the Black performers to dance, but it did not satisfy the protesters. When trying to come up with a solution, there was push back from the White performers’ parents.

Image: Flickr

“At frantic meetings of the Committee, many said, “My parents simply won’t let me come if it’s integrated,” and WJZ realized it just couldn’t be done. “It was the times,” most remember, “This town just wasn’t ready for that.” There were threats and bomb scares; integrationists smuggled whites into the all-black shows to dance cheek-to-cheek on camera with blacks, and that was it. The Buddy Deane Show was over.” (Waters 107)

On January 4, 1964, The Buddy Deane Show ended without ever achieving integration.

John Waters’ Hairspray

Image: Author’s Screenshot (YouTube)

Fortunately, the concept of the teen dance show would not be lost to local Baltimore history with the death of The Buddy Deane Show and its counterparts. John Waters wrote the film Hairspray in the mid-1980s after a decades-long obsession with his favorite childhood show.

“Hairspray was an autobiographical film of sorts for Waters, who based much of it on his own experiences growing up in Baltimore in the 1960s and his time on ‘The Buddy Deane Show.’ a local take on Dick Clark’s ‘American Bandstand.’ (Lopez, 1)

Image: Author’s Screenshot (YouTube)

Our protagonist, Tracy Turnblad, is growing up in Baltimore, Maryland in the 1960s. Tracy’s life starts when the school bell rings for her to run home to watch the Corny Collins Show, and through her journey to get featured on the show she learns an important lesson about segregation and racial inequality in her hometown. As she grows in popularity amongst the other fans of the Corny Collins Show, she uses her newfound local fame to advocate for integration. John Waters repeatedly described the film as an anti-message movie, choosing to “depoliticize political history” and “pursue stylistic instead of historical authenticity” when portraying the civil right movement (Benson-Allott, 143). This act is clear in the decentering of the civil right movement throughout the plot as well as the very basic choice of which character’s perspective to follow. Waters has clearly stated that he relates to his protagonist, Tracy, and for good reason – he “went to all the integration rallies” and therefore chose to write the film from a perspective very similar to his own (Alter, 1). She is looked down upon by her peers and experiences what it’s like to be discriminated against for her body type when chasing her dream of being a dancer on the Corny Collins Show. In an oft-overlooked scene, Tracy even expresses a desire to change her race and become a part of the black community, believing that her own experience being marginalized is equivalent to and synonymous with the racism experienced by her black peers. Having a white creator and a white protagonist, this film naturally adopts a “dominant gaze”, as coined by Laura Mulvey. Margaret Russell later expanded the term, defining it as “the tendency of American popular cinema to objectify and trivialize the racial identity and experiences of people of color, even as it purports to represent them” in the manner that Hairspray does (Russell, 244). Hairspray portrays black characters in a positive light but leaves them nearly two-dimensional; the existence of black characters in the film is reduced to a cause for Tracy to fight for.

Racial Escapism

Image: IMDb

Despite having a white protagonist, there are several black characters at the center of the story, and their struggle for equality and integration is acknowledged in the plot more than most popular films made in the eighties. However, the scope of segregation in Baltimore is made to seem much smaller than reality when viewed through Tracy’s white gaze. While protesting with Motormouth Maybelle, Tracy is arrested and therefore disqualified from the Miss Auto Show competition she desperately wanted to win. Fortunately, the governor pardons Tracy just in time, and Tracy takes home the crown. The problem is easily solved thanks to her connections and power, and the protestors successful integrate of the Corny Collins Show. This satisfying ending leaves every loose end tied up, and Tracy’s efforts give the black dancers an equal and integrated space to dance on TV. Tracy finds an issue in her community then leverages her privileges as a white woman to solve it. Some view this as a compelling escapist plot point, presenting “a slice of the world the way it should have been”, and effectively re-writing the true time frame of desegregation to give the audience a gratifying conclusion (Curry, 168). Sadly, this story diminishes the efforts of the countless people of color who led the American civil rights movement that the story is based around. The audience is encouraged to celebrate the growth and achievements of a privileged character doing the right thing rather than focusing on the characters whose lives are directly affected by a flawed legal and social system.

Musical Adaptations

With the success of the 1988 film, the legacy of Hairspray was only just beginning. Margo Lion began conceptualizing the stage musical a decade after the film’s release, bringing on Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman to write the music and lyrics.

Image: OnStage Blog

While Marc Shaiman denied the label of a message musical just as Waters had years before, he stated that the addition of Motormouth Maybelle’s powerful ballad, I Know Where I’ve Been was their “proudest achievement of the entire experience” despite the push back they faced from almost everyone involved in the show (Smith, 1). Fearing loss of box office success if the show became fully centered around the civil rights movement, many were advocating before the musical’s release that the number should be sung by Tracy rather than Motormouth Maybelle. Shaiman and Wittman stood their ground, not wanting “to be yet another showbiz version of a civil rights story where the black characters are just background”, and through this active decision to prominently feature two important songs performed by black actors, the musical took on a new meaning and gaze (Smith,1).

Image: Author’s Screenshot (YouTube)

The musical is certainly not perfect, with Tracy becoming the organizer of the protest and taking some of the agency from the black characters during this critical plot point. Additionally, it wasn’t until the film was adapted further into a 2007 movie musical of the same name that the character of Little Inez rightfully wins the award at the climax of the film. With these two new adaptations, the film maintains its flawed perspective but expands the role of the black characters exponentially to counter the negative effect of the dominant gaze inherently present within the story structure.

Conclusion

While the original Hairspray was not intended to send a particular message, themes of racial equality and acceptance rang throughout the film and its setting. The success of Waters’ stylistic nostalgia film opened the door for two adaptations that featured black characters in more complex and memorable roles, though the story is incapable of denying its erroneous core and a dominant gaze. Primarily due to his decision to follow a white protagonist’s activist efforts, John Waters’ handling of a civil rights story was unsuccessful in highlighting the critical accomplishments of people of color.

Works Cited

Alter, E. (2023, June 8). John Waters explains why “Hairspray” is his “most devious” movie: “even racists like it!” Yahoo! https://www.yahoo.com/entertainment/john-waters-hairspray-anniversary-ricki-lake-divine-drag-queens-racism-145321235.html

Barnard , N. O. (2022, August 8). “buddy Deane Show” was huge hit for young viewers in the late 1950s. Northwest Arkansas Democrat-Gazette. https://www.nwaonline.com/news/2022/aug/08/buddy-deane-show-was-huge-hit-for-you ng-viewers/

Benson-Allott, C. (2009). Camp integration: The use and misuse of nostalgia in John Waters’Hairspray. Quarterly Review of Film and Video, 26(2), 143–154. https://doi.org/10.1080/10509200600737804

Curry, R. R. (1996). “Hairspray”: The Revolutionary Way to Restructure and Hold Your History. Literature/Film Quarterly, 24(2), 165–168. http://www.jstor.org/stable/43796715

Lopez, K. (2023, October 12). John Waters celebrates “Hairspray” at 35: “racists like it, but they don’t realize it’s making fun of them” (digital cover). TheWrap. https://www.thewrap.com/john-waters-interview-hairspray-35th-anniversary

Russell, M. M. (1991). Race and the dominant gaze: narratives of law and inequality in popular film. Legal Studies Forum, 15(3), 243-254.

Smith, J. (2011, August 23). When “I know where I’ve been” almost didn’t get there. San Diego Reader. https://www.sandiegoreader.com/weblogs/out-and-about/2011/aug/23/when-i-know-where-ive-been-almost-didnt-get-there/