Warner Music Group explained

Written by the ERIC team.

Let’s set the scene. Peering through the shiny windows of the WMG entrance (before covid), your eyes are met by those that are rather 2D in nature. As you gaze at the billboards of Cardi B and Ed Sheeran that embellish the foyer, you can’t help but ask yourself ‘what kind of sorcery are they performing in there?’

'Warner Music Group' - a well-known and respected name in the music industry, but that’s just it. Warner may be on the tip of your tongue but what If we mentioned the names Atlantic, Parlophone or Warner Bros. Records… would you know that they’re all labels that are part of this major?

We breakdown for you the different departments and labels within Warner music Group:

Warner Music Group

Without WMG, we may not have Rhino Entertainment, Reprise Records or Atlantic Records. Within 60 years this music powerhouse has developed a stronghold of over 4,500 employees and now operates in over 50 countries. And In the process has helped launch the careers of some of the most legendary artists in the business, thus solidifying the brand as a major player in the world of music.

The Flagship Labels

As briefly mentioned above, Warner Music Group acts as the ‘umbrella’ company for its subsidiaries. Let us introduce you to some of their flagship labels:

Atlantic Records Group

Atlantic Records - Founded in 1947, it didn’t take long for the Jazz and R&B label to stock up on superstars with the likes of Aretha Franklin, Ray Charles and Otis Redding all signing on the dotted line.

Asylum Records - Launched in 1971, with a primary focus on hip-hop and alternative metal, home to artists and particularly popular songwriters such as Ed Sheeran and Charli XCX, you know it’s a highly credited label in the Warner Music family.

Big Beat Records - A dance/electronic artist's dream label no doubt, once had humble beginnings itself, being conceived in the bedroom as many of us were, by no other than Craig Kallman the current CEO of Atlantic Records. With signings such as Skrillex, Martin Solveig and Galantis you know this label means business in the electronic music scene.

Canvasback Music –Joining the Atlantic Records family in 2009. With an eclectic range of Indie-rock bands including: Frightened Rabbit, Alt-J and Grouplove. Any fan of alternative rock should recognise this label. If not – call yourself and indie-rock fan?!