Snapshot

Denomination: Non-Denominational

Weekly Attendance: 200 (Carillon Campus)

Location: Plainfield, IL

The Role: Campus/Teaching Pastor 55+

Meet Community Christian Church:

For the past 35 years, COMMUNITY has been passionately committed to the Jesus mission of helping people find their way back to God. This singular focus has not changed…nor will it. As we navigate new challenges in our world and culture, we believe new opportunities have emerged for us to mobilize more Christ followers and expand our current ministry model to help even more people find their way back to God. We are presently One Church with Four Expressions reaching people who are far from God: COMMUNITY Online, COMMUNITY Freedom, COMMUNITY Micro Churches, and seven physical COMMUNITY locations.

COMMUNITY’S Carillon Location was the second physical location for COMMUNITY and was planted more than 25 years ago with a rich tradition of helping people find their way back to God. Today our Carillon location is one of our seven physical locations with about 200 active adult attenders meeting in the Club House of the Carillon community. Midweek our Carillon team boasts of having more adults participating in small groups than a Sunday Celebration Service! Carillon is an active adult resort community that is conveniently located one mile south of I-55 on Weber Road in Plainfield. Just 35 minutes from downtown Chicago. With over 5,000 residents and endless activities, this is an incredible place to live and be on mission to help people find their way back to God.

This is an exciting time to join an established and larger team committed to the success of our location in Carillon and to see the Jesus Mission move forward. If you are 55+ and have the experience and qualifications required, we’d love for you to consider joining our team.

About the Campus/Teaching Pastor 55+:

The ideal Carillon Campus and Teaching Pastor for Community Christian Church will advance the mission of helping people find their way back to God by providing point-leadership for the Carillon location. This individual will have a growing relationship with Christ; be in full agreement with COMMUNITY’s leadership expectations and the belief statements; have experience in building alignment around COMMUNITY’s mission; vision, values; be a highly collaborative leader, and have good public speaking skills.