Kastamonu Entegre, Turkey’s global player of the wooden panel sector, put into operation the 2nd MDF line of its Tataristan production facilities in order to increase their global production capacity. The factory which is located in the Alabuga Industrial Zone in Tataristan, is known as the MDF production facility with the biggest capacity in Europe.

Kastamonu Entegre Agaç Sanayi which has been producer in the wooden panel industry since more than 45 years, started the investments of the 2nd MDF line of the Tataristan factory in the scope of the Project which took start in April 2015. This MDF line of which the transportation and installation was completed in almost one year, was put into operation in a rather short time for such an investment and is expected to increase the production capacity of the factory by 10 percent, fact which would naturally increase the yearly global capacity of Kastamonu Entegre from 4.55 million cubic meters to 5 cubic meters, the laminate parquet production capacity to 70 million square meters, which are levels rather difficult to achieve.

With a total investment of 400 million euros, Kastamonu Alabuga Industrial Zone facilities reached a total capacity of 1.05 million cubic meters of MDF and 35 million square meters of Floorpan brand laminate parquet in one single location and became one of the biggest MDF production facilities in the world.

Factory with environment award

The Kastamonu Entegre Tataristan investment is carrying a significant importance from the point of view that its realization was facilitated by the existence of the Alabuga Free Economy Zone, the logistic convenience of its location, the existence of sufficient raw material and energy sources and the close interest and support, primarily of the President of Tataristan and also of all Tataristan authorities. At the same time, this factory was awarded for their sensitivity concerning the environment cleanliness in the “Forest and Wooden Products Industry” branch at the “EKO Lider – 2014” competition organized in Kazan, the capital of Tataristan.

“Our scope is to produce for the entire world”

We are the first and only company Turkish company in the sector with investments abroad. Kastamonu Entegre, will continue to make our investments mainly abroad in order to provide our sustainable growth and achieve the regional leadership. The fact that the Turkish market reached a certain saturation level and the scarcity of wood raw material have directed us to make investment in this area. As Kastamonu Entegre, the target of our investments in new markets and raw material sources for securing a sustainable growth, is to supply not only the Turkish market but the global market, as well. The Tataristan factory where we invested 400 million euro is a part of this target.

About Kastamonu Entegre