Kastamonu , is an eye attracting holiday and travel location with it's rich plant cover, all green plateaus and green rich forests and with it's amazing shores surrounded by Kure Mountains on the shore of Black Sea Region, Ilgaz Mountains on south.

There are numerous beaches on it's 135 km long sea shore. Best sandy beaches of Kastamonu are in Ginolu and on Ginderus Bays. It is a great , peaceful and a quiet place for sea tourism and is an ideal place for those who would like to have a trip right in nature itself.

Ilgaz Mountains has quite nature rich opportunities for the visitors especially for winter tourism.

There are quite nice racecourses and available places for some outdoor sports and activities such as scuba diving in Cide Bay, Gideros Bay and Catalzeytin Ginolu Bays, wind surfing in many spots on Black Sea Shore, sprotive fishing line in Devrekani Beyler Dam, mountaineering and mountain climbing in Ilgaz Mountains, Hacet Hills, Kure , Ipsine Hills and Ersizler Dere Tepesi locations, cliff climbing and jogging , paragliding in Ortalica Town,Boyali Valley and on Gulpu Mountain, and ideal available racecourses for trekking and jeep safari on it's plateaus and in it's large green forests.

Rifat Ilgaz (a famous Turkish Poet) was bown in Cide. Gideros Bay that was also named as Kyotros Bay in Iliad of Homer / Homeros. The area is famous with it's yellow hand painting clothes.

Inebolu Town is attracting people with it's architectural structures at least as much as with it's natural beauties and great beaches. There are roughly 350 historical old houses have been under protection.

Places to visit in Kastamonu

Museums; Kastamonu Archeological and Ethnography Museum

Kastamonu Castle; .The work was established during Byzantine Time and was located on a 112 meter high hill.

Kastamonu Houses; There are historical houses taking interest of visitors with their traditional structures and architectures located in city center, Hepkebirler, Akmescit and in Atabey districts. Those old wooden made houses can also be found in Inebolu Town, Taskopru, Kure and in Arac Towns.

Historical houses and buildings; Konyali House, Sirkeli Mansion, Tahirefendi Mansion, Cumhuriyet House, Osmanli Palace, Mazlumcuoglu Pavilion, Livapasa Mansion and Eflanili Pavilion are only some of the important historical houses and buildings of the area.

Ilgaz Mountain Winter Sports Center; The center located on Ilgaz Mountain Chains takes attractions of nature lovers with it's natural beauties as much as with it's ski centers.

Ev Rock Tombs; The Rock tombs belonging to 7.Th century B.C. are located on the south of city center.

Zimbilli Hill Mounds (Pompeipolis); The antique city established in 64 B.C. is located near Taskopru City Centre.

Historical mosques and religious buildings; Ismail Bey Mosque, Atabey Mosque, Mahmut Bey Mosque and Ibni Necar Mosque.

Ilgaz Mountain Winter Sports Center; The center located on Ilgaz Mountain Chains takes attractions of nature lovers with it's natural beauties as much as with it's ski centers.

Ev Rock Tombs; The Rock tombs belonging to 7.Th century B.C. are located on the south of city center.

Zimbilli Hill Mounds (Pompeipolis); The antique city established in 64 B.C. is located near Taskopru City Centre.

Historical mosques and religious buildings; Ismail Bey Mosque, Atabey Mosque, Mahmut Bey Mosque and Ibni Necar Mosque.

Pavilions and palaces; Ismail Bey Pavilion, Gokceagac Han, Urgan and Deve Pavilions.

Hamams (Turkish Baths); Dede Sultan Hamam, Cifte Hamam, Bey Bath, Frenksah Bath, Saray Bath, Araba Pazari Hamam, Yeni and Fethatpasa Baths / Hamams.

Inebolu Bazaar; The bazaar was established in 1885 and is preserving it's original and natural structure in our present days.

Beaches; Abana Public Beach, Catal Zeytin Ginolu Shore, Inebolu Boyranalti Beach, Akbayir Village Coast, Cide Gideros Village with it's natural beauties and being a natural SIT area and Cide Town Sandy Beach.

National parks and protected areas; Ilgaz Mountain National Park, Kastamonu Nature Monuments and Kure National Parks.

Caves; Kuyluc Cave in Senpazar, Ilgarini or Ilvarini Cave in Pinarbasi and Sarpunalinca Cave in Kure Town.

Springs and thermal spas; Flume of Fatma in Yuvalca Plato, Giricik Suyu, Sira Gomu Plato Sarilik Spring, Aci Su Thermal, mud in Mendik Village and in Muratbasi Village and Ayazma Thermal Spa.

Provinces of Kastamonu

Seydiler, Abana, Senpazar, Agli, Taskopru, Azdavay, Bozkur, Tosya, Cide, Pinarbasi, Catalzeytin, Kure, Daday, Ihsangazi, Devrekani, Hanonu, Doganyurt and Inebolu.