Neighbours Update

Spoilers Ahead- just incase you don't want to look

Hi everyone,

Bree had placed a ad in the newspaper for her parents, but she got a note back saying from her biological mother that she wants nothing to do with her.Janae is married now to Boyd.Robert framed cameron for the plane crash and gave him self away when he tried to kill by putting him in a mineshaft.Gail robertson (elle & the twins mother)found paul and he loves both Izzy & Gail now and can't decide between them.They planned a fake wedding to bring robert out of hiding and he shot paul and then got caught. Meanwhile he held Katya kidnapped for several days until the shooting and toady and susan found her.Susan & Karl are back together, while Rachel has been sneaking around with stingray.They all got caught now rachel & zeak are mad and they think that there dad didn't matter to susan and want nothing more to do with her. Sky is pregnant with what we thought was dylan's baby, but as it turns out is stingrays because the timing for dylan's is all wrong.It is not JP's as he had a vastestomy, so it's not his. As you can tell Janelle is pleased that there will another Timmins coming into the world, but doesn't know that it's stingray she still think's it's dylan baby.Elle & Dylan are an Item.

I'll write some more at the end of the week, so I can give you the up to date goss.

I used to watch it in the 80's but lost interest.

as per requested ;D

Rob has been found out and is in prison,Cam is now there with his family. Dylan confused his love about sky via a documentary that stingray is filming in relation to the birth, as sky & dylan have had a test done and there not sure if they baby will be born with abnormalties.Dylan was about to make up with sky and elle and her dad have made up this illness where she coud die( paul paided the blood work guy to fake the results) as she doesn't want to lose dylan, now dylan is sticking with elle.

did I tell you carmella is now a nun? They still haven't found out if connor is alive or dead. atm don't know the full details yet, katya falls in love with max(stephs husband) and they kiss , but that's all I've seen on the ads as it hasn't aired yet. But looks very interesting thou.

I'll let you kow some more next week when I find out what's happening with the max - katya thing.