TURCOTTE, Eva - 1925 - 2016 The family announces her passing at the Timmins and District Hospital on Tuesday, March 8, 2016 at the age of 90. Predeceased by her first spouse John Fediuk and by her late husband Earl Turcotte. Dear mother of Ken Fediuk (Sue), Shirley Berge (Cliff), Diane Levesque (Jacques), Kris Long, Lorraine Mankiss (Michael), Sandra Turcotte-Weaver (Carl), Nancy Lebrun (Lawrence), Shawnese Turcotte (Pete) and Brian John Miller. Loving grandmother of Amanda, Keith, James, Janelle, Jennifer, Todd, Robert, John, Sheila, Victoria, Deanna, Jason, Stephen, Kevin, Timothy, Trina, Travis, Danielle, Samantha and Caitlyn; beloved great-grandmother of 19. She is also survived by her brother Richard Lahti (Denise). She was predeceased by her 2 daughters Lillian and Mary Fediuk and by her siblings Ellen, Elsie, Arvo, Arvi, Irene, Edith and Esther. The family would like to thank the staff at the Timmins Extendicare as well as Dr. Kim and the nursing staff at the Timmins and District Hospital for all their care and compassion. A memorial service will be held at 10:30 am on Monday, March 14th in the Funeral Home Chapel. The family will receive friends on Sunday, March 13th from 7-9 pm at LESSARD-STEPHENS Funeral Home 705-268-4488 Remembrance donations made to the Ontario Heart and Stroke Foundation or to the charity of your choice would be appreciated. Online donations or condolences can be made at

Published online March 11, 2016

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of EvaHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Eva

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree