1993 film by Jim SheridanTemplate:SHORTDESC:1993 film by Jim Sheridan

In the Name of the Father is a 1993 biographical film co-written and directed by Jim Sheridan. It is based on the true story of the Guildford Four, four people falsely convicted of the 1974 Guildford pub bombings, which killed four off-duty British soldiers and a civilian.[2] The screenplay was adapted by Terry George and Jim Sheridan from the 1990 autobiography Proved Innocent: The Story of Gerry Conlon of the Guildford Four by Gerry Conlon.[3]

The film was positively received by critics, and received seven Academy Award nominations, including Best Actor in a Leading Role (Daniel Day-Lewis), Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Pete Postlethwaite), Best Actress in a Supporting Role (Emma Thompson), Best Director, and Best Picture.

Plot[]

Gerry Conlon is shown in Belfast stripping lead from roofs of houses when security forces home in on the district with armoured cars, and a riot breaks out. Gerry's father, Giuseppe Conlon, later saves him from IRA punishment, and he is sent off to London to stay with his aunt, Anne Maguire, for his own good. Instead, he finds a squat, to explore, as he puts it, "free love and dope". In October 1974, Gerry happens to gain entry to a prostitute's flat and he steals the £700 he finds there and chats briefly with a man sitting in a park. On that evening in Guildford, southwest of London, there is an explosion at a pub that kills four off-duty soldiers and a civilian, and wounds sixty-five others.

While Gerry has returned to Belfast to show off his stolen money, one of the squat residents talks to the authorities and the Conlon home is raided by the British Army and Royal Ulster Constabulary, who arrest Gerry as part of the Guildford Four and immediately place him on a military flight to the UK mainland. Gerry and his friend, Paul Hill, are interrogated by police who torture and threaten them until both finally agree to sign a confession after being held for up to seven days under the Prevention of Terrorism Act. Giuseppe, who goes to England to help his son, is staying with his Maguire family relatives in London when they are all arrested in December 1974. In the subsequent trial, the family (known as the Maguire Seven, including Conlon's father) are convicted of supporting the Guildford bombing on the basis of nitroglycerin traces, receiving long terms of imprisonment. The confessed Guildford Four, including Gerry, are sentenced to life imprisonment.

Gerry's time in prison shows a progression from a bitter son who rails at his father until an awakening when he is approached by new inmate Joe McAndrew, the real perpetrator of the bombing. McAndrew tells the Conlons that he had confessed the truth to the police, who then withheld the information to avoid official embarrassment. When McAndrew leads a prison protest and then sets a hated prison guard on fire, Gerry is the one who saves the guard with a blanket. Gerry takes over the fight for justice himself when his father dies in custody. His case becomes public, gaining support from Dublin, Belfast, Liverpool and London. A common slogan used by his supporters is "Free The Four".

Gareth Peirce, a campaigning lawyer who has been investigating the case on behalf of Giuseppe, has a breakthrough when she tries to see Giuseppe's file and is able to look instead at Gerry's. She finds vital police documents in the file that are marked "Not to be shown to the Defence". During the course of their appeal, the production of these documents leads to a triumphant scene in court when Peirce produces the evidence that the police have been lying throughout about the existence of a witness who had provided Conlon with an alibi during their initial investigation. This leads to the overturning of the verdict and immediate release of the Guildford Four.

The film ends with a triumphant Gerry revealing his story to the media and proclaiming his father's innocence. Title cards reveal the current activities of the Four, the exoneration of the Maguire Seven, that the police were acquitted of any wrongdoing and that the real perpetrators of the Guildford Bombing have not been charged with the crime.

Cast[]

Model, now actress, Saffron Burrows made her feature film debut in the film, as Gerry Conlon's free love-interest at a commune/squat in London at the time of the bombings.

Production[]

To prepare for the role of Gerry Conlon, Day-Lewis lost over 50 pounds in weight. To gain an insight into Conlon's thoughts and feelings at the time, Day-Lewis also spent three days and nights in a jail cell. He was prevented from sleeping by a group of thugs, who would bang on the door every ten minutes with tin cups through the night, then was interrogated by three different teams of real Special Branch officers for nine hours. He would also insist that crew members throw cold water at him and verbally abuse him. He also kept his Belfast accent on and off set.

Day-Lewis has stated in an interview that he went through all this as "How could I understand how an innocent man could sign that confession and destroy his own life."[4][5]

Reception[]

The film received very positive reviews from most critics. The review aggregator websites Rotten Tomatoes and Metacritic both scored the film very highly, with Rotten Tomatoes giving it 94% and a 'certified fresh' rating, while Metacritic has given it 84% and a 'universal acclaim' rating.[6][7]

The film was the second highest-grossing film ever in Ireland behind Jurassic Park and the highest-grossing Irish film beating the record set by The Commitments in 1991.[8]

Year-end lists[]

2nd – James Berardinelli, ReelViews[9]

Top 10 (not ranked) – Dennis King, Tulsa World[10]

Honorable mention – Dan Craft, The Pantagraph[11]

Accolades[]

Award Category Subject Result Australian Film Institute Awards Best Foreign Film Jim Sheridan Nominated Academy Awards Best Picture Nominated Best Director Nominated Best Adapted Screenplay Nominated Terry George Nominated Best Actor Daniel Day-Lewis Nominated Best Supporting Actor Pete Postlethwaite Nominated Best Supporting Actress Emma Thompson Nominated Best Film Editing Gerry Hambling Nominated ACE Eddie Best Edited Feature Film – Dramatic Nominated BAFTA Awards Best Adapted Screenplay Jim Sheridan Nominated Terry George Nominated Best Actor Daniel Day-Lewis Nominated Berlin International Film Festival Golden Bear[12] Jim Sheridan Won BSFC Award Best Actor Daniel Day-Lewis Won DFWFCA Award Best Film Nominated David di Donatello Awards Best Foreign Actor Daniel Day-Lewis Nominated Best Foreign Film Jim Sheridan Won European Film Award European Film of the Year Nominated Evening Standard British Film Award Best Film Jim Sheridan Won Golden Globe Awards Best Motion Picture – Drama Nominated Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama Daniel Day-Lewis Nominated Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture Emma Thompson Nominated Best Original Song

("You Made Me the Thief of Your Heart") Bono Nominated Gavin Friday Nominated Maurice Seezer Nominated Humanitas Prize Feature Film Category Terry George Nominated Jim Sheridan Nominated Nastro d'Argento European Silver Ribbon Nominated Kansas City Film Critics Circle Awards Best Supporting Actress Emma Thompson Won LAFCA Award Best Actor Daniel Day-Lewis 2nd place NBR Award Top Ten Films Won NSFC Award Best Actor Daniel Day-Lewis 2nd place NYFCC Award Best Actor 3rd place PGA Award Best Theatrical Motion Picture Jim Sheridan Nominated PFS Award Exposé Won Human Rights Nominated Peace Nominated WGA Award Best Adapted Screenplay Jim Sheridan Nominated Terry George Nominated

Controversy[]

Upon its release the film proved controversial for some historical inaccuracies and for fictionalising parts of the story and Jim Sheridan was forced to defend his choices. In 2003, Sheridan stated: "I was accused of lying in In the Name of the Father, but the real lie was saying it was a film about the Guildford Four when really it was about a non-violent parent."[13] In the film we see Gerry and his father Giuseppe (in the closing credits, the name is misspelled 'Guiseppe') sharing the same cell, but this never took place and they were usually kept in separate prisons. The courtroom scenes featuring Gareth Peirce were also heavily criticised as clearly straying from recorded events and established English legal practices since, as a solicitor and not a barrister, she would not have been able to appear in court as shown in the film. Furthermore, Peirce did not in fact represent Giuseppe Conlon. Investigative journalist David Pallister wrote, "the myriad absurdities in the court scenes, straight out of LA Law, are inexcusable."[14]

Soundtrack[]

The soundtrack of the film includes the song "You Made Me the Thief of Your Heart" performed by Sinéad O'Connor and written by Bono, Gavin Friday, and Maurice Seezer. It also includes "Voodoo Child (Slight Return)" performed by The Jimi Hendrix Experience. However, the Bob Dylan Song "Like a Rolling Stone" was not included on the album due to licensing restrictions.

The soundtrack featured these songs:

Bono and Gavin Friday - "In the Name of the Father" (5:42)

The Jimi Hendrix Experience - "Voodoo Child (Slight Return)" (5:09)

Bono and Gavin Friday - "Billy Boola" (3:45)

The Kinks - "Dedicated Follower of Fashion" (3:00)

Trevor Jones - "Interrogation" (7:11)

Bob Marley and the Wailers - "Is This Love" (3:51)

Trevor Jones - "Walking the Circle" (4:42)

Thin Lizzy - "Whiskey in the Jar" (5:44)

Trevor Jones - "Passage of Time" (5:52)

Sinéad O'Connor - "You Made Me the Thief of Your Heart" (6:21)

Filming locations[]

South Lotts, Dublin, Ireland (used for opening Belfast scenes)

Sheriff Street, Dublin, Ireland (Sheriff Street flats complex (now demolished) used for riot scene)

Kilmainham Gaol, Dublin, Ireland (as Park Royal Prison)

Liverpool, England (used for many London scenes)

See also[]

Birmingham Six

List of films featuring hallucinogens

References[]

[]

Page Module:Side box/styles.css has no content.

Expression error: Unrecognized punctuation character "[". In the Name of the Father on IMDbExpression error: Unrecognized punctuation character "[".

In the Name of the Father at Rotten Tomatoes

In the Name of the Father at AllMovie

In the Name of the Father at Box Office Mojo

In the Name of the Father at the TCM Movie Database

In the Name of the Father at Metacritic

Template:Jim Sheridan Template:Golden Bear 1980-1999