SALINAS

Friday last day for China trip registration

The registration deadline for the Salinas Valley Chamber of Commerce”s business trade mission to China from March 10-18 has been extended to Friday.

For information, call the chamber at 424-7611.

MONTEREY

Banana Republic ribbon-cutting today

The Monterey Peninsula Chamber of Commerce will host a ribbon-cutting ceremony for Banana Republic at 5:30 p.m. today at Del Monte Center, 1410 Del Monte Center. The event is open to the public.

For information, see www.mpcc.com.

PACIFIC GROVE

Home network topic

of PC group meeting

Richard Allen of PC People will discuss how to set up a home network at the Friday meeting of the Monterey Bay Users Group-PC.

The group meets 7 to 9 p.m. at the Pacific Grove Adult Education Center, 1025 Lighthouse Ave. Meetings are free and open to the public.

For information, contact Allen at 649-5900 or rcallen@pcpro.net.

WATSONVILLE

Local ag groups to host holiday potluck dinner

Local sustainable agriculture groups will host a holiday potluck dinner from 5 to 9 p.m. Friday at Gizdich Ranch, 55 Peckham Road.

Participating groups include Community Alliance with Family Farmers, California Certified Organic Farmers, Ecological Farming Association, Wild Farm Alliance, Center for Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems, Organic Farming Research Foundation, California FarmLink, and Agriculture and Land-Based Training Association.

For information, call Sam Earnshaw at 722-5556.

LOS ANGELES

Apply caution when

giving business gifts

When it comes to holiday shopping for corporate vendors and clients, it may be tempting to buy a pair of tickets to a sporting event and call it a day.

But expensive, corporate-paid gifts are often impersonal, said Dov Seidman, chief executive officer of business ethics company LRN and author of “HOW: Why HOW We Do Anything Means Everything in Business (and in Life).”

“You want to give something that is meaningful in the context of your relationship, and not something just of monetary value that might have very little authentic connection to your experiences with them,” Seidman said. “You also don”t want to make them feel indebted to you.”

Extravagant gifts, like gluttonous dinners or a new set of golf clubs, could be perceived as inappropriate and may even worsen the business relationship. Instead, Seidman suggests buying gifts that will spark conversation and are not as costly, such as books. If you do want to buy front-row seats to a game or concert, attend it with the client.

The same caution should be applied to accepting gifts. There is often a fine line between what a company”s policy will allow and what is appropriate, Seidman said. If a gift is too lavish, motives should be evaluated.

“Gifts are vague and often can be deceptive in terms of what they are intended to do and whether they will result in a conflict of interest, a bribe or appearance of impropriety,” Seidman said.

|— Staff and wire reports