It’s that time of the year again. The shift in the seasons when the local music scene’s mightiest go toe to toe on the field in the name of sporting glory and charity sponsorship.

The details of the annual “take-no-prisoners traditional clash” between community radio stations Triple R 102.7FM and PBS 106.7FM’s Megahertz and the Rockdogs is here, with the face-off for the Community Cup 2014 set to take place at Elsternwick Park on Sunday 22nd June.

This year, the traditional theme will see the community match paying homage to the much loved, late, great Lou Reed, with the catchphrase of ‘Such A Perfect Day’, based on the iconic New York maverick’s song of the same name. The theme doubly pays tribute to an even that is cherished by sports loving, fun loving and music loving patrons alike and has been proudly grass roots from its very inception, annually promoting a ‘Perfect Day’.

The footy match between the community broadcasters and the Melbourne rock fraternity remains the centre piece of the day, but the entire day promises to be huge. Once again, a family friendly day of entertainment is assured, carrying on a tradition that is now over two decades long. There’ll be food, fun, and best of all – live sets from Australia’s best bands and artists throughout the day. The traditional theme will see the community match paying homage to the much loved, late, great Lou Reed

(Vince Peach & Paul Kelly with the coveted trophy. Photo: Jay Hynes. Source: Supplied)

From its origins as a tidy little AFL match amongst the local music scene, the Community Cup has blossomed over the years. Last year, the event saw over $100,000 raised for Reclink Australia, who use sport and the arts to enhance the lives of people experiencing disadvantage and targets some of the community’s most vulnerable and isolated people – those experiencing mental illness, disability, homelessness, substance abuse, addiction, and social and economic hardship.

It also saw the Community Cup’s biggest crowd attendance to date, with over 10,000 people turning out for the clash between the Rockdogs and the Megahertz, confirming it as an essential part of the fabric of Melbourne music culture and the sporting event calendar.

The Community Cup 2013’s result saw – for the second year running – the match ending in a draw in the final minutes, with both teams finishing on 28 points. Who will take the honour of winning the 2014 Reclink Community Cup? Or controversially, will it be another draw?

(Maddy McFarlane of the Megahertz and Dan Sultan of the Rockdogs Photo: Jay Hynes. Source: Supplied)

The day also delivered live sets from the Beasts of Bourbon, a half-time show from King Gizzard And The Lizard Wizard, as well as performances by Super Wild Horses (R.I.P.), The Rebelles, and Justine Clarke. The Community Cup 2014 lineup is yet to be announced, but rest assured it will be kicking a few goals of its own.

Food and beverages will be available on the day, and there will be kids activities. Entry is $10 for adults, and $5 for kids under 16.

Check out all the action of last year’s Community Cup in our 2013 Reclink Community Cup Photo Gallery

2014 Reclink Community Cup

‘Such A Perfect Day’ theme

Sunday 22nd June

Elsternwick Park

PBS 106.7FM / Triple R 102.7FM Megahertz VS Rockdogs