Vince Peach has marked 30 years hosting, arguably, the world’s longest-running soul music radio show, Soul Time, on Melbourne community radio.

The show started in 1984, two years after Mr Peach migrated from Liverpool and he has been behind the microphone each Wednesday on 106.7 PBS FM since then.

A train component moulder by trade, Mr Peach migrated to Australia after leaving Britain during a period of turbulent industrial relations disputes.

"Margaret Thatcher seemed to have a thing in the '80s about getting rid of the trade unions and the [amount of] say the working classes had in the running of the country," he said.

His inspiration for the radio show came from spinning the tuning dial one Sunday morning in his newly adopted country.

"I heard a Tyrone Davis track on the radio so I found the guy and said, ‘hey, you got any northern soul?’

"Next thing you know I’m invited along to PBS, do a demo tape and, you know, the rest is history."

Music has always been a huge part of Vince’s life and it was the radio that kicked off his lifelong obsession.

"When I first started, became aware of radio, it was a BBC light program - The Billy Cotton Band show, Two-Way Family Favourites and things like this," he said.

Vince’s specialty music genre is northern soul, neatly described by him as "up-tempo soul music".

The name comes from a London journalist’s description of heading to Manchester to listen to some "northern soul". It stuck.

To describe soul music is more difficult.

"I don’t know if there’s a true definition. Basically it’s black American rhythm and blues," he said.

There are similarities to be drawn between the arguable home of soul music, Detroit in the United States, and Liverpool.

"It [Liverpool] is full of working-class people living mostly in commission houses or council houses as they’re called over there.

"Everybody works five days a week and come the weekend you want to get your glad rags on and go out and party," said Mr Peach.

"And the best music to party to is soul music."

He says there's one thing he's trying to do when he plays music on the radio.

"I make people dance... and that’s the sole aim."