Not only that, but Poland is one of the most affordable European countries for studies (PhD degrees are actually offered for free!) and Polish cities like Warsaw and Krakow are voted among the top student-friendly cities, offering a lively atmosphere, a great study environment and low cost of living.

With 16 UNESCO World Heritage Sites satisfying even the most demanding traveller and a rich history spanning over centuries, Poland is a country that combines everything from high mountains, picturesque cities and villages, lakes and national parks. Did you know that Poland is the home of the largest castle in the world, the Castle of the Teutonic Order in Malbork? Plus, Poland is the world’s biggest amber exporter!

Curious to learn more about studying abroad in Poland? If you want to learn more about university fees, language, culture and visa regulations, read through our study in Poland guide below to find out why this European gem will offer you a fascinating study experience like no other!

Poland - Quick facts & figures

More about studying abroad in Poland

Why study in Poland? It’s an excellent choice you can make for your career due to the country’s excellent higher education system. The Polish system is characterized by affordability, accessibility and specialized focus. Poland has more than 450 HEIs (Higher Education Institutions) and is the home country of the second oldest university in Europe.

The Jagiellonian University was founded by King Casimir III the Great in 1364 and teaches continuously until today with notable alumni like Nicolaus Copernicus, John Paul II or Bronisław Malinowski. Other globally accredited universities in the country include the University of Warsaw, Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań, Łódź Film School, College of Europe Natolin (Warsaw) and the Fryderyk Chopin University of Music in Warsaw.

The Polish Commission of National Education, established in 1773, is considered the first Ministry of Education internationally. Nowadays, higher tertiary education in Poland is administered by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education. In order to maintain their high status, Polish universities are regularly evaluated by the Polish Accreditations Committee, the General Council of Higher Education and the Conference of Rectors of Academic Schools.

In Poland you can find more than 500 institutions to choose from, 16 of them included in the QS World University Rankings and 25 of them in the QS EECA University Rankings. Polish universities are the alma mater of 18 Nobel laureates and the Polish education system offers three types of degrees: licencjat or inżynier (first cycle qualification), magister (second cycle qualification) and doktor (third cycle qualification).

Plus, the lack of entrance exams to Polish universities makes this study destination much more attractive to international students. You will just need a certificate of secondary education, a financial viability certificate and English or Polish language proficiency!

Still not convinced on why study in Poland? The PISA (Program for International Student Assessment) program, coordinated by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), revealed that students in Poland perform better academically than in most OECD countries.