Although Chauncey Billups is among the more intriguing names on the Indiana Pacers’ list of coaching candidates, he won’t participate in Zoom calls scheduled this week to begin the process.

If the Pacers want to talk with him, it’ll have to be in person, a league source with direct knowledge of the negotiations told IndyStar on Sunday.

Mike D’Antoni also has interest in the job, another league source with direct knowledge of the negotiations said, after Nate McMillan was fired when the Pacers were swept from the first round of the playoffs for the second year in a row. D’Antoni is a free agent after the Houston Rockets were eliminated in the West semifinals this weekend.

The Pacers are looking for two key qualities in their next coach: A 21st century players’ coach and a modernized offense.

D’Antoni runs a 5-out offense that would be 180 degrees from how the Pacers have played with two starting bigs (Domantas Sabonis and Myles Turner) and playing inside-out.

Expected to talk: Reported possibilities for Pacers coach

Doyel: Prehistoric Pacers aiming to avoid asteroid, join rest of the NBA in modern game

The Pacers attempted the fewest 3s per game in the NBA (28.0). The Rockets led the league in attempted 3s (45.3).

D’Antoni is 69 and has been an NBA coach for 16 years. Billups, 43, hasn’t even served as an assistant coach.

A widely respected 5-time All-Star and NBA champion after playing 17 seasons, Billups been a TV analyst for the L.A. Clippers and ESPN but he'll “definitely transition” into another role for the 2020-21 season, a league source said.

There'll be competition for his services. Billups has received overtures for coaching and front office roles already. He has previously interviewed for front office jobs with the Atlanta Hawks, Minnesota Timberwolves and Cleveland Cavaliers.

Billups’ interest in coaching was sparked by Clippers coach Doc Rivers, who allowed the analyst to attend coaches’ meetings. Rivers offered Billups a position on his staff as an assistant, a league source said.

Pacers president Kevin Pritchard inquired about Billups joining the organization before the current vacancy. What he lacks in bench experience can be compensated for by having experienced assistants who can coach with him while he works with the players.

Billups has a strong relationship with Turner, and also with Malcolm Brogdon and Victor Oladipo.

He has worked with Boston Celtics guard Marcus Smart, one of the league’s most improved scorers and playmakers, to improve his game in the offseason.

The Pacers want more than a game coach. They want a stronger voice for the franchise than McMillan, who was reluctant to get involved too deeply with players and their issues on and off the court.

While being swept out of the first round by the Miami Heat led to McMillan's firing, his lack of relationships with his players -- especially Brogdon -- was as big of a factor in the decision, multiple league sources told IndyStar.

Billups, who resides in Denver, has family in Indianapolis. Like D'Antoni, he has a strong interest in coaching the Pacers.

After sitting out this first round of Zoom interviews, he'll find out just how strong the Pacers feel about him.

Follow Pacers insider J.Michael on Twitter @ThisIsJMichael.