The “Malice at the Palace” brawl between the Indiana Pacers and Pistons on Nov. 19, 2004, in Auburn Hills, Mich., also contributed to the NBA’s decision to implement a dress code. The rule went into effect with the one-year anniversary of the brawl on the horizon to counter image problems that hampered its then recent history. “That brawl gave the NBA a huge black eye,” Billups said. “Nobody can say that it didn’t. The dress code was just one of the things that the league tried to do from a marketing standpoint. It put ice on that black eye from the fight to bring down the swelling.”

What did you take away from working with Chauncey Billups this summer? Fredette: That was awesome. Chauncey is such a great guy. I was grateful that he took the time to come out and to help me work on some different things. Mainly little things he’s learned throughout his career that could just help me that much more to help my career overall.

Q: What made you decide to drop weight? Kyle Lowry: It started during [last] season, and even before that. I was talking to my wife, and she said “You were always your best at your college weight.” The saying is, the older you get, the lighter you’ve got to be. I thought Ray Allen did a great job of that, and Chauncey Billups too. I’m getting to the point where I’m a little bit older. I’m still young, but I’m a little bit older, and I can pick and choose how I want my body to look and feel. It’s good to understand your body. I want to be special. At the end of the day it’s all about me and how I feel and what I can provide for my team and my family.

Q: Do the Nuggets have to move on from Ty Lawson? Chauncey Billups: Yes. I think so. I mean, well, one, Ty, he has not demonstrated what you want from the leader of your team and a guy who they’ve handed the keys to. He’s not demonstrated the kind of leadership that you want. And you have a young kid named [Emmanuel] Mudiay coming in who I think has a chance to be a star in this league. Right now the best player on the team is Ty Lawson. As a young player in the league, you come in 19-20 years old, you oftentimes try to emulate some of the actions on the floor and off the floor of the best player because that’s one day what you want to be. So I think just from the standpoint of the welfare of Mudiay and the well-being and the growth of Mudiay, you have to get Ty Lawson and you have to move him along.

Storyline: Ty Lawson Trade?

Q: What would you take for Ty? How desperate are you to make that move? Chauncey Billups: It’s tough. You know, I think he just needs a change of scenery. Obviously you gotta get proper value for him because he is still a very good player and I think in the right situation Ty can be good for somebody. But Ty can’t be the leader of your basketball team. I thought they knew that, but you find out how you find out. But I think you try your best to move him but you don’t want to get beat over the head for him. At the moment right now, he’s not giving everybody a good snapshot of what he is, with the immature things that he’s doing, whether it’s social media, the things that he’s saying. So you’re looking from the flips side and you’re saying, ‘Yeah, the guy’s a good player, but do I really want him on my team with all of that?’ You know what I mean? So it’s not just him as a player and what he can do. This is a guy that’s gonna come there, he’s not coming to be nobody’s backup. He’s a starter. He’s a good player. So it’s tough what he’s doing right now.

Storyline: Ty Lawson Trade?