Carlos Osorio/Associated Press

The Indiana Pacers are reportedly scheduled to interview former Sacramento Kings and Memphis Grizzlies head coach Dave Joerger, former All-Star guard Chauncey Billups and New Orleans Pelicans associate head coach Chris Finch about their head coaching vacancy.

ESPN's Adrian Wojnarowski reported the update Friday, noting those three names in particular amid a "roster of interviews."

Billups' name started to gain traction in the coaching carousel after the Brooklyn Nets hired Steve Nash, a fellow standout point guard with no formal coaching experience, in early September.

The Detroit Pistons legend has worked in the media since his retirement from the NBA in 2014, including stints with ESPN and the Los Angeles Clippers' broadcast team.

In April, he told Kendra Andrews of The Athletic he'd had an eye on either coaching or an executive role in the NBA since late in his playing days.

"Probably my last two or three years is when I really started thinking about, 'OK, this is my last year, so what am I going to do?'" Billups said. "I started to prepare myself for three different avenues. One was being a coach, one was working in a front office and the third was TV. Basketball is my first love, so I knew I wanted to stay in the game in some capacity."

As a player, he was named NBA Finals MVP while helping lead the Pistons to a title in 2004, and he earned five All-Star selections in a row beginning in 2006.

Joerger has compiled a 245-247 regular-season record across six years (three apiece with the Grizzlies and Kings) as an NBA head coach. His teams posted a 9-13 mark in the playoffs, winning just one series in three appearances.

Finch spent 14 years as a head coach in Europe before taking his first stateside coaching job with the G League's Rio Grande Valley Vipers. He was named the G League Coach of the Year in 2010. He's since worked as an assistant with the Houston Rockets, Denver Nuggets and Pelicans.

The Pacers are searching for a replacement for Nate McMillan, who was fired in August. He guided the team to the playoffs in all four years he was in charge, but it failed to advance beyond the first round, posting a 3-16 record in the postseason.