The Adventures of Maya the Honey Bee

TV Show | Japan | 05/01/1975 | Animation | For babies

Maya the Bee is an anime television series produced by Zuiyo Enterprise in Japan. The series consisted of 52 episodes and was originally telecast across Japan from April 1975 to April 1976 on the TV Asahi network. Based on the classic children's book Maya the Bee by Waldemar Bonsels, the anime series has become extremely popular in Europe and has been rebroadcast in countries and languages all around the world since its premiere. Two English-dubbed versions of the series exist, a British version, using a translated version of the original theme tune, and featuring British accents for the characters; and a United States version with an entirely new theme tune, produced by Saban Entertainment, which was broadcast from January 1, 1990 to December 31, 1992 on the children's television channel Nickelodeon. Maya the Bee aired alongside other juvenile-targeted anime such as Adventures of the Little Koala, Noozles and The Littl' Bits as part of Nickelodeon's Nick Jr. block of programming for young children. A second Maya the Bee series, Shin Mitsubachi Maya no Boken, was a co-production made in 1979 by Wako Productions and Austrian/German Apollo Film, Wien. The second series first premiered in Germany from September 1979 to September 1980. The very different and cartoon-like second series, which lasted for 52 episodes, wasn't very popular and did not premiere in Japan until October 1982, on TV Osaka, and aired through September 1983. Ten episodes from this series were added to 45 from the original for the U.S. broadcast run, bringing the total of Maya episodes aired on Nickelodeon in the U.S. to 55.

4.4/10

Sharkdog

TV Show | United States | 09/03/2021 | Netflix | Animation | For babies

10 year old Max and his best friend Sharkdog - half shark, half dog, all appetite. Blissfully unaware of his own strength, stealth and general sharkiness, Sharkdog often leaves a trail of chaos in his wake.

6.0/10

100%

2,497

Adventure Time

TV Show | United States | 04/05/2010 | Animation | For babies

Adventure Time is an American animated television series created by Pendleton Ward for Cartoon Network. The series follows the adventures of Finn, a human boy, and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake, a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will. Finn and Jake live in the post-apocalyptic Land of Ooo. Along the way, they interact with the other main characters of the show: Princess Bubblegum, The Ice King, and Marceline the Vampire Queen.

8.6/10

100%

12,134

Mickey Mouse Clubhouse

TV Show | United States | 05/06/2006 | Animation | For babies

Mickey Mouse Clubhouse is an American animated television series, that premiered in prime time on Disney Channel on May 5, 2006. The program was originally part of the Playhouse Disney daily block intended for preschoolers. On February 14, 2011, it was moved to the Disney Junior block, serving as Playhouse Disney's replacement. It is the only Mickey Mouse program to be aimed at preschoolers. The series was co-developed by Bobs Gannaway, who is also responsible for Jake and the Never Land Pirates. Production of the show was put on a four-month suspension in the spring of 2009, due to the death of voice artist Wayne Allwine, the longtime voice of Mickey Mouse. Production resumed when Bret Iwan has been cast as the fourth performer of Mickey's voice. On June 23, 2013, Bill Farmer, the voice actor for Goofy and Pluto, confirmed on his official Twitter account that Mickey Mouse Clubhouse would cease production after 7 years of episodes. However, reruns will still continue on the Disney Junior 24/7 service.

5.8/10

174,185

The Penguins of Madagascar

TV Show | United States | 04/10/2009 | Animation | For babies

The Penguins of Madagascar is an American CGI animated television series airing on Nickelodeon. It stars nine characters from the DreamWorks Animation animated film Madagascar: The penguins Skipper, Kowalski, Private, and Rico; the lemurs King Julien, Maurice, and Mort; and Mason and Phil the chimpanzees. Characters new to the series include Marlene the otter and a zookeeper named Alice. It is the first Nicktoon produced with DreamWorks Animation. A pilot episode, "Gone in a Flash"

7.6/10

90

Chip 'n Dale Rescue Rangers

TV Show | United States | 03/05/1989 | Animation | For babies

Chip 'n Dale: Rescue Rangers is an animated series produced by Walt Disney Television Animation. Created by Tad Stones and Alan Zaslove, it featured the established Disney characters Chip 'n' Dale in a new setting. The series premiered on the Disney Channel on March 4, 1989, after a preview episode was aired on August 27, 1988. The series premiered with a two-hour movie special, Rescue Rangers: To the Rescue, which was later broken up into five parts to air as part of the weekday run. The final episode aired on November 19, 1990. On September 18, 1989, the series entered national syndication. From 1998 to 1999, reruns of the show were aired as a part of the Disney Afternoon line up.

7.6/10

150

Bob the Builder

TV Show | United Kingdom | 04/12/1999 | Animation | For babies

Bob the Builder is a British children's animated television show created by Keith Chapman. In the original series Bob appears as a building contractor specializing in masonry in a stop motion animated programme with his colleague Wendy, various neighbours and friends, and their gang of anthropomorphised work-vehicles and equipment. The show is broadcast in many countries, but originates from the United Kingdom where Bob is voiced by English actor Neil Morrissey. The show was later created using CGI animation starting with the spin-off series Ready, Steady, Build!. In each episode, Bob and his group help with renovations, construction, and repairs and with other projects as needed. The show emphasizes conflict resolution, co-operation, socialization and various learning skills. Bob's catchphrase is "Can we fix it?"

5.6/10

5

The Fungies!

TV Show | United States | 08/20/2020 | Animation | For babies

Long ago on prehistoric Earth lived a bustling town of colorful mushroom folk - The Fungies! Seth, a science-minded 10-year-old Fungie kid, is fascinated by how the world works and wants to tell Fungietown all about it. With a little help from his artistic older brother, Pascal, Seth stirs up trouble for Fungietown, leading him to hilarious and heartwarming emotional discoveries. The Fungies have their own unique biology - they can pop their limbs off and on, trade limbs, and even combine their bodies! Like any kid, Seth goes to fungie school and hangs out with his fungie friends. Whether it’s planning an epic show-and-tell presentation, trying to find his dinosaur friend Pam a job, or replacing his arm with a snake so he can be better at sports, Seth is always excited for something new!

6.4/10

1,169

Grizzy & the Lemmings

TV Show | France | 11/07/2016 | Animation | For babies

The forest ranger's house is the only area of human civilization in the middle of untamed wilderness in a vast natural reserve in Canada. When the ranger is away, a bear named Grizzy feels that the ranger's house is his territory, given that bears sit at the top of the food chain. After making his way inside the home, Grizzy takes advantage of all the modern conveniences there, including a comfortable sofa, air conditioning and fully equipped kitchen. He's not alone, though, because a group of small creatures called lemmings also populate the ranger's house when he is away. Because Grizzy and the lemmings are not civilized enough to live together in peace, it becomes an atmosphere of madness when the two sides try to outdo each other with tricks.

7.2/10

11,189

Paw Patrol

TV Show | United States | 08/12/2013 | Animation | For babies

A group of six rescue dogs, led by a tech-savvy boy named Ryder, has adventures in PAW Patrol. The heroic pups, who believe no job is too big, no pup is too small, work together to protect the community. Among the members of the group are firedog Marshall, police pup Chase, and fearless Skye. All of the animals have special skills, gadgets and vehicles that help them on their rescue missions. Whether rescuing a kitten or saving a train from a rockslide, the PAW Patrol is always up for the challenge while also making sure there's time for a game or a laugh.

6.1/10

113,402