Howard (Moose) Alan Harris, 78 Years of Singer Island, FL and Chadds Ford, PA passed away on May 16, 2024. His final moments were spent just as he would have wanted them, at home, surrounded by his family and his fuzzy best girl, Stella.

He was the beloved husband of Sara Dillaman Harris of Butler, PA.

Born April 10, 1946, in Pittsburgh, PA, he was the son of the late Bernard J. Harris and Annette Miller Harris.

Howard grew up in Squirrel Hill, Pittsburgh, and graduated from Taylor Allderdice High School. He attended college for a moment but decided playing pool was much more fun. That choice kicked open the door for a life of adventure and opportunity when in 1966 he got a laborer position and began working on a Robinson Pipe Cleaning crew. Accepting that position turned out to be the opportunity of a lifetime. Over 54 years he worked hard and climbed the ranks to retire as the President of Carylon Corporation. While his expertise got him far, he attributed much of his success to Sara’s unwavering support and the dedication of his Carylon Corporation colleagues, many of whom he counted as his closest friends.

Howard spent years with his best friend, partner in crime, and wife, Sara. They met as youngsters at Gimbels in Pittsburgh and built a lifetime of epic adventures. They lived every moment of their time together to the fullest, finding new places to explore, eating delicious meals, talking about current events, and enjoying their enduring companionship. Together for 57 years, they tackled life’s ups and downs as a team. Howard adored Sara and wanted to do everything he could to give her the best life. Their mutual love, respect and admiration for each other was a joy to behold.

Howard loved it most when the whole family was together. He and Sara built a home that served as a welcome landing pad for their cherished family. They gathered regularly, laughed loudly, and toasted nearly every meal with gratitude for the opportunity to be together.

Howard was known for his generosity - regularly curating unforgettable experiences for Sara and his family. From Venice to Disney to a Safari in Kenya and Tanzania - it filled his heart to travel to these locations with those he loved the most.

This generosity extended to his community as well. When their kids were young, Sara and Howard established the importance of giving back and over the years they worked together without fanfare to develop a philanthropic legacy that supports good works and lifts communities.

Howard's contagious laughter and joy will be missed. In addition to his wife, Sara, he is survived by his daughters Kim Harris, Jen Harris and Christa (Chris) Maruzzi, his grandson Nick Harris, brother Gary Harris and sister Ilene Harris Leven.

He was preceded in death by his parents Bernie and Annette Harris.

Relatives and friends are invited to his visitation on Thursday, June 13, 2024 from 9:30 am - 10:45 am at DellaVecchia, Reilly, Smith and Boyd Funeral Home, Inc. 410 North Church Street West Chester PA 19380; followed by his Funeral Service at 11 am.

Interment will be held privately in the future.

In lieu of flowers, contributions may be made to Planned Parenthood of Chester County, Penn Medicine Hospice or The Abramson Cancer Center Chester County Hospital.