>>Weather by month // weather averages Leicester Forest East

>>Climate graph // Weather by Month Leicester Forest East

>>average temperature by month Leicester Forest East

>>Weather Leicester Forest East

The climatic conditions prevailing in Leicester Forest East are characterized by a warm and moderate temperature. There is significant rainfall throughout the year in Leicester Forest East. Even the driest month still has a lot of rainfall. As per the Köppen-Geiger classification, the prevailing weather conditions in this region are categorized under Cfb. The average annual temperature is 9.9 °C | 49.9 °F in Leicester Forest East. Annually, approximately 748 mm | 29.4 inch of precipitation descends.

Leicester Forest East are in the northern hemisphere. Summer starts here at the end of June and ends in September. There are the months of summer: June, July, August, September.

Climate graph // Weather by Month Leicester Forest East

In terms of precipitation, the month with the lowest amount of rainfall is February, recording a mere 48 mm | 1.9 inch in its entirety. This denotes an exceptionally dry period within that particular time frame. Most precipitation falls in July, with an average of 73 mm | 2.9 inch.

average temperature by month Leicester Forest East

The month that experiences the highest temperatures throughout the year is referred to as July, where an average temperature of 16.7 °C | 62.1 °F prevails. In January, the average temperature is 4.2 °C | 39.6 °F. It is the lowest average temperature of the whole year.

Weather by month // weather averages Leicester Forest East

<>

Avg. Temperature °C (°F) Min. Temperature °C (°F) Max. Temperature °C (°F) Precipitation / Rainfall mm (in) Humidity (%) Rainy days (d) avg. Sun hours (hours)

January February March April May June July August September October November December

Data: 1991 - 2021 Min. Temperature °C (°F), Max. Temperature °C (°F), Precipitation / Rainfall mm (in), Humidity, Rainy days. Data: 1999 - 2019: avg. Sun hours

There exists a variation of 25 mm | 1 inch in precipitation levels between the month with the least rainfall and that which experiences maximum downpour. The average temperatures vary during the year by 12.5 °C | 22.5 °F.

The month with the highest relative humidity is December (86.80 %). The month with the lowest relative humidity is July (71.93 %). The month with the highest number of rainy days is July (12.43 days). The month with the lowest number of rainy days is September (10.43 days).

Leicester Forest East weather and climate for every month

Airport close to Leicester Forest East

The closest Airports of Leicester Forest East are: East Midlands Airport (EMA) 23.98km,Birmingham Airport (BHX) 39.54km,Doncaster Sheffield Airport (DSA) 96.60km

You can reach Leicester Forest East from this Cities by Plane: Glasgow (GLA), Copenhagen (CPH), New Delhi (DEL), Islamabad (ISB), Paris (CDG), Edinburgh (EDI), Lyon (LYS), Hamburg (HAM), Newcastle upon Tyne (NCL), Cologne (CGN), Inverness (INV), Aberdeen (ABZ), Alicante (ALC), Málaga (AGP), Faro (FAO), Funchal (FNC), Porto (OPO), Stockholm (ARN), Gothenburg (GOT), Gdańsk (GDN)