Leicester weather in February (Leicestershire, United Kingdom)

How does the weather in Leicester usually fare in February? Use this page to get an overview of the month’s weather conditions.

Temperatures

In February, the weather in Leicester generally includes low temperatures and moderate rainfall. February marks the winter season. Daytime temperatures are expected to be around 9°C, cooling off to about 2°C at night.

Precipitation

Leicester in February usually receives moderate rainfall, averaging around 52 mm for the month. According to historical climate patterns, there are usually around 14 days days of rain.

Average sunshine

The month has fewer sunny days, with around 61 hours hours of sunshine, suitable for those who prefer less sun.

If you're looking for dry conditions and comfortable temperatures, February may not be the ideal month to visit Leicester. June, July and August typically offer the most agreeable circumstances. On the other hand, January, February and December tend to be characterized by conditions that may not be as optimal.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized Leicester climate page with graphs.

Leicester, monthly averages in February

Min Temperature 2°C

Max Temperature 9°C

Chance of Rain 47%

Precipitation 52 mm

Rainy days 14 days

Sunshine 61 hours

Percentage Sunshine

Where to go in the United Kingdom in February

Find out more about the weather in the United Kingdom and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

Wear a base layer in cold weather; this is the #1 thing you can do to increase your overall body temperature.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Swimming 4/10

Cycling 4/10

Walking 4/10

Camping 4/10

Outdoor sports 4/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in Leicester.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to the United Kingdom? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in the United Kingdom. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.