>>Weather by month // weather averages Leicester

>>Climate graph // Weather by Month Leicester

>>average temperature by month Leicester

>>Weather Leicester

The climatic conditions in Leicester are characterized by a warm and temperate atmosphere. The precipitation levels in the city of Leicester are noteworthy, as there is a considerable amount of rainfall even during months that typically experience dry weather. The climate here is classified as Cfb by the Köppen-Geiger. The average annual temperature is 9.9 °C | 49.8 °F in Leicester. Precipitation here is about 707 mm | 27.8 inch per year.

Leicester is in the northern hemisphere. Its north to the equator line The onset of summer commences towards the conclusion of June and culminates by September. The months that constitute this season are referred to as June, July, August, September.

Climate graph // Weather by Month Leicester

The month characterized by the lowest precipitation levels is February, exhibiting a mere 45 mm | 1.8 inch of rainfall. On average, the highest amount of rainfall occurs during July with a mean value of 69 mm | 2.7 inch.

average temperature by month Leicester

On average, the month of July experiences the highest temperature with an average value of 16.7 °C | 62.1 °F. On average, the month of January is considered to be the coldest time of year with temperatures averaging at around 4.2 °C | 39.6 °F.

Weather by month // weather averages Leicester

<>

Avg. Temperature °C (°F) Min. Temperature °C (°F) Max. Temperature °C (°F) Precipitation / Rainfall mm (in) Humidity (%) Rainy days (d) avg. Sun hours (hours)

January February March April May June July August September October November December

Data: 1991 - 2021 Min. Temperature °C (°F), Max. Temperature °C (°F), Precipitation / Rainfall mm (in), Humidity, Rainy days. Data: 1999 - 2019: avg. Sun hours

There is a notable fluctuation in precipitation, with 24 mm | 1 inch variance observed between the month of least rainfall and that of highest downpour. The fluctuation of temperatures across the seasons is referred to as 12.5 °C | 22.6 °F.

The month that sees the most relative humidity is December (71.80 %). The month with the lowest amount of relative humidity is July (71.80 %). The month with the highest amount of rainfall is January (12.00 days), whereas the one with the lowest precipitation level is September (9.97).

Leicester weather and climate for every month

Hours of sunshine in Leicester

avg. hours of sun

Total hours of sun

In the region of Leicester, it has been observed that July is the month which experiences maximum daily sunshine hours, with an average duration of approximately 8.23. The total number of sunlit hours during this period amounts to a staggering sum of about 255.14.

The location of Leicester experiences the least amount of daily sunshine hours during January, with an average duration of only 3.45. The total number of sunlight hours recorded in this month is equal to 106.99.

It has been estimated that the total annual sunshine duration in Leicester is approximately 2036.47 hours. This translates to an average monthly value of roughly 66.84 hours for each month, on a consistent basis.

Airport close to Leicester

The closest Airports of Leicester are: East Midlands Airport (EMA) 24.95km,Birmingham Airport (BHX) 45.57km,Doncaster Sheffield Airport (DSA) 94.21km

You can reach Leicester from this Cities by Plane: Glasgow (GLA), Copenhagen (CPH), New Delhi (DEL), Islamabad (ISB), Paris (CDG), Edinburgh (EDI), Lyon (LYS), Hamburg (HAM), Newcastle upon Tyne (NCL), Cologne (CGN), Inverness (INV), Aberdeen (ABZ), Alicante (ALC), Málaga (AGP), Faro (FAO), Funchal (FNC), Porto (OPO), Stockholm (ARN), Gothenburg (GOT), Gdańsk (GDN)