Average high temperature in February: 6.8°C

The warmest month (with the highest average high temperature) is July (20.5°C).

The month with the lowest average high temperature is January (5.8°C).

Average low temperature in February: 1.3°C

The month with the highest average low temperature is August (12.3°C).

The coldest months (with the lowest average low temperature) are January and February (1.3°C).

Average snowfall in February

Leicester, United Kingdom

Average snowfall in February: 28mm

The month with the highest snowfall is February (28mm).

The months with the least snowfall are April, May, June, July, August, September and October (0mm).

Average snowfall days in February

Leicester, United Kingdom

Average snowfall days in February: 3.7 days

The month with the highest number of snowfall days is February (3.7 days).

The months with the least snowfall days are May, June, July, August, September and October (0 days).

Average daylight in February /

Average sunshine in February

Leicester, United Kingdom

Average daylight in February: 9h and 5min

The month with the longest days is June (Average daylight: 16h and 48min).

The month with the shortest days is December (Average daylight: 7h and 42min).

Average sunshine in February: 3h and 4min

The month with the most sunshine is August (Average sunshine: 7h and 30min).

The month with the least sunshine is February (Average sunshine: 3h and 42min).

Average UV index in February

Leicester, United Kingdom

Average UV index in February: 2

The months with the highest UV index are May, June, July and August (UV index 4).

The months with the lowest UV index are January, February, November and December (UV index 2).

Average visibility in February

Leicester, United Kingdom

Average visibility in February: 9km

The months with the highest visibility are February, March, April, May, July, August, September, October and December (9km).

The months with the lowest visibility are January, June and November (8km).