Zagreb, Croatia

Rail Guide to Zagreb

Introduction

Croatia’s capital, Zagreb, is a vibrant city of around a million people. The charming medieval 'old city' is full of impressive architecture and the cobbled streets are reminiscent of Vienna, but mixed with an Italian influence. Zagreb is rich in historical monuments, museums and galleries. It offers a huge variety of shops, restaurants, sport and recreation facilities and a good transport system.

Having largley put the grim period of the early 1990s behind it, Croatia's flourishing economy and its inward investment, has enabled the country's capital to be restored to its former glory. From the visitor's point of view this has brought about the knock-on benefits of an ever increasing range of accommodation options, new and trendy bars and restaurants, and following heavy investment in the public transport system, the chance to travel in brand new tram rolling stock whilst viewing the city's restored sights.

Things to do

Andautonia Archaeological Park lies close to Zagreb, near the village of Scitarjevo. Here lie the remains of the ancient Roman town of Andautonia, which used to be a prominent economic, cultural and religious centre about 400 years ago. Although archaeologists are still excavating the site, visitors can view a 2,500 sq m area of the site. You will see parts of the main street, city baths, colonnades and side streets.

The Croatian National Theatre building itself is a national treasure. Inside, you’ll find world-class theatre, opera, music and ballet productions. The construction of the building began in 1894. The ceremonial curtain was painted by Croatian painter Vlaho Bukovac while Viennese artist Alexander Goltz decorated the ceiling of the auditorium. The building was opened by Austro-Hungarian emperor Franz-Joseph I in 1895.

The Croatian History Museum is situated in the historical town centre, in the beautiful Baroque palace that Vojkovic-Orsic-Rauch built at the end of the 18th century. It used to be the private residence of the baronial families. In the 1930s the palace became the residence of Zagreb’s mayors, later it was designated as a repository for the historical relics of the city. It currently houses more than 140,000 exhibits, from stone monuments to fine art, religious artefacts to heraldry.