Mr. Jason Butterley from Codemasters came to Limkokwing University on 24 October 2017 to share his expertise in Substance Painter with multimedia students through a live demonstration. He was accompanied by Codemasters’ Studio Manager, Mr. Andre Stiegler and Production Manager, Ms. Karen Chua.

Codemasters is an award-winning game developer and publisher based in WarwickShire, United Kingdom. It also operates in Birmingham and Runcorn, Cheshire. Founded in 1986, Codemasters has been one of UK’s most successful game developers and for the past 30 years the company has consistently created innovative and award-winning racing games.

MUST READ: “Substance Painter is the new industry standard”

Its leading brands include DiRT and Race Driver GRID. It also retains the elite worldwide video game rights to FORMULA ONE and released 6 related F1 titles. Codemasters’ office in Kuala Lumpur was opened in 2006 and it has since provided high quality content exclusively for Codemasters’ Triple-A game titles.

With Codemasters having set up in Malaysia for ten years, Mr. Stiegler mentioned that this was a testament to its success, because Malaysia is an excellent hub for tourists. “I have been with Codemasters for the last 10 years and I had the pleasure for working in Malaysia for the last 7 years now.”

He recounted that this is not the first time Codemasters visited Limkokwing University, “We’ve been here a couple of times, but we really felt it’s time to be engaged with Limkokwing and rekindle the relationship, and I’m pleased to say the event today was absolutely amazing. I’m very impressed at how professional it was, it was very organised.”

On why it’s important for universities to work with industry professionals he said, “Us coming and talking to the students gives us a chance to tell them new trends happening in the industry and what skills they might need to learn. It’s really good to keep everyone up to speed with what’s going on in the industry. At the same time, it’s very important for us to engage with students early on so they have an advantage of opportunities there are in the games industry and, more specifically, Codemasters.”

Ms. Chua pointed out that industries are always seeking for talent and that Limkokwing University is providing students with an excellent opportunity to network with industry professionals. “This networking is beneficial on both sides, because students get to know the industry side of doing things and industries can seek out great talent,” she added.