Codemasters, the leading developer and publisher of critically acclaimed video games, has further expanded its senior management base with the appointment of experienced industry executive Barry Jafrato as Senior Vice President of Brand.

As Codemasters strengthens its position for its next growth phase, Mr Jafrato will lead and build on the company's worlwide brand activities. In this newly created position within Codemasters, Mr Jafrato will report to Tony Williams, Codemasters' COO.

Commenting on the appointment, Rod Cousens, Codemasters' CEO said:

"Barry brings a wealth of experience in successful brand and publishing management to Codemasters. His appointment is another significant move for the organisation as we integrate a more defined structure to facilitate our growth strategy. As we move to the next generation of game platforms, we will embrace Codemasters' strengths and build on its renowned product portfolio."

Mr Jafrato joins Codemasters with over 15 years management experience in the interactive entertainment industry. Prior to joining Codemasters, Mr Jafrato was Managing Director of International Publishing for Acclaim International, where he introduced such brands as Turok, ATV Quad Power Racing and Burnout.

With a background in publishing, Mr Jafrato began his career in the interactive entertainment industry in 1989 as International Director at Virgin Mastertronic, where he set up European distribution for both PC hardware and Sega's Game Gear and MegaDrive. From Virgin, Mr Jafrato went on to become International Managing Director of Hasbro Interactive where he grew the business from inception to a $200 million operation.

"With such power brands as Colin McRae Rally, TOCA Race Driver, LMA Manager, Brian Lara Cricket and Operation Flashpoint, Codemasters has an immensely successful foundation to take it forward as a major global player," says Barry Jafrato.

"As this industry enters a new generation of hardware that will reach an even greater consumer base, there are many opportunities for Codemasters worldwide. I'm immensely pleased to be joining such a well-respected operation and look forward to being part of the team that will lead the company's future growth."

Codemasters has a successful track record with more than 60 No.1 hits and a distribution network covering over 70 countries worldwide. The company earned a reputation for delivering quality interactive entertainment product through major blockbusting gaming brand. Codemasters employs 400 people and is headquartered in Warwickshire, UK. The company also maintains European operations in Germany, France, Spain, and Benelux and has its US headquarters in New York. Further information about the Codemasters and its product portfolio is available at www.codemasters.com

- ENDS -