A renowned Warwickshire gaming company is preparing its latest high-octane assault on the digital world - and it's advertising for new recruits too.

Codemasters, which is headquartered in Stoneythorpe, Southam, is set to release its much-anticipated 2020 Formula One World Championship title in early July.

Lewis Hamilton features prominently in promotional material for the F1 2020 game, including in a pulsating trailer which comes at a time when the real-world motorsport is in hiatus due to the coronavirus outbreak.

The shutdown in response to the pandemic has failed to put the brakes on the region’s gaming industry, which is centred in and around 'Silicon Spa'.

As well as gearing up for the big release, Codemasters is advertising for more than 50 positions across its international operations. The vacancies include openings for a senior tools programmer and a lead lightning artist, both based in Southam.

The advert for the physics post reads: “This role will offer a high level of autonomy to really ‘push the envelope’ regarding all things physics based and represents a genuinely exciting opportunity when it comes to creating complex, uncompromising and quality code.”

Celebrating the 70th anniversary of Formula One, the upcoming game features “intense racing” against the backdrop of a thumping score written by composer Brian Tyler.

Stunning cars designed for the current season take their place alongside some of the classic models from the history of the series.

Players can choose from finely-honed machines such as the (2010) Red Bull RB6, (2007), Ferrari F 2007 and (1988) McLaren MP4/4.

Lee Mather, F1® Franchise Game Director at Codemasters, said: “Each season we raise the visual benchmark, and with more circuits and teams getting new liveries, we can’t wait for the season to start and for players to be able to race.”

The game is billed as having “adrenaline-fuelled action” and “stunning visuals” in the pre-release publicity. F1 2020 will be available from Friday, July 10, 2020 for the PlayStation 4, the Xbox One family of devices including the Xbox One X, Windows PC (DVD and via Stream) and Google Stadia.

Players who purchase the Michael Schumacher Deluxe Edition will receive exclusive content and three days’ early access.