Click LOGO for website.

American Association for Respiratory Care (AARC)

Since 1947, the American Association for Respiratory Care (AARC) has been committed to enhancing the professionalism of respiratory care practitioners, improving performance on the job, and helping to broaden the scope of knowledge essential for success. With more than 47,000 members nationwide, the AARC is the only professional society for respiratory therapists in hospitals and employed with home care companies, as managers of respiratory and cardiopulmonary services, and working educators who provide respiratory care training. This website provides a comprehensive list of affiliated organizations, AARC state societies, government, and health care organizations.

American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST)

The American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST) is the global leader in advancing best patient outcomes through innovative chest medicine education, clinical research, and team-based care. With more than 18,700 members representing 100+ countries around the world, our mission is to champion the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of chest diseases through education, communication, and research.

American Lung Association (ALA)

American Lung Association (ALA) is the oldest voluntary health organization in the United States. Founded to fight tuberculosis, the ALA now fights lung diseases in all forms, with emphasis on asthma, tobacco control, and environmental health.

American Thoracic Society (ATS)

The American Thoracic Society (ATS) supports and educates healthcare professions in the areas of pulmonology, critical care, sleep medicine, infectious disease, pediatrics, allergy/immunology, thoracic surgery, behavior science, as well as environmental and occupational medicine.

North Dakota Society for Respiratory Care (NDSRC)

As a professional society for respiratory care in the state of North Dakota, our mission is to promote the advancement and continued development of the profession by: providing educational programs, adopting uniform standards of practice, representing the profession to all communities, and serving as the resource for matters related to cardiopulmonary care to all communities of interest.

National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI)/Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS)

This is a website for the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI)/Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) research groups, which sponsored the landmark ARDS low-volume ventilation study published in the New England Journal of Medicine in 2000.

American Respiratory Care Foundation (ARCF)

The American Respiratory Care Foundation (ARCF) is dedicated to promoting respiratory health through the support of research, education, and patient-focused philanthropic activities in respiratory care.

Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America http://www.aafa.org/page/asthma.aspx

National Heart, Lung, and /Blood Institute https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/asthma

American Lung Association/Asthma http://www.lung.org/lung-health-and-diseases/lung-disease-lookup/asthma/

Alpha-1 Foundation https://www.alpha1.org/

Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease https://goldcopd.org/

Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine https://www.mdedge.com/ccjm

Reference