American professional organization

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: \"American Association for Respiratory Care\" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

American Association for Respiratory Care Type

Non-profit organization

Industry

Health care

Predecessor

American Association for Respiratory Therapy

Founded

March 16, 1947

Founder

Edwin R. Levine

Headquarters

Irving, TX, United States

Area served

United States

Website

http://www.aarc.org/

The American Association for Respiratory Care (AARC) is a non profit organization and is the only professional organization supporting Respiratory Care in the United States. In addition to attempting to help lobby for beneficial legislation nationally and locally, the AARC is trying to promote the profession as a whole to increase interest and membership. The AARC began in 1943, as the Inhalation Technician Association and has evolved rapidly and repeatedly since.

See also: Timeline of respiratory therapy

The University of Chicago Hospital forms the Inhalation Therapy Association (ITA) in 1946 and in 1947 the ITA is chartered as a non-profit entity in the state of Illinois.

The ITA was renamed American Association of Inhalation Therapists (AAIT) in 1954, and changed its name again in 1966 to American Association of Inhalation Therapy (still AAIT).

The AAIT was renamed the American Association of Respiratory Therapy (AART) in 1973 and finally took the current name of American Association of Respiratory Care in 1986.

Affiliations

This section contains embedded lists that may be poorly defined, unverified or indiscriminate. Please help this article to clean it up so that it meets Wikipedia\'s quality standards. Where appropriate, incorporate items into the main body of the article. (September 2011)

The AARC has several organizations with which they have an affiliation; some of these include:

AMA Allied Health Careers

American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology

American Academy of Pediatrics

American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation

American Association of Critical-Care Nurses

American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology

American Heart Association

American Hospital Association

American Society of Anesthesiologists

American Society for Testing and Materials

American Thoracic Society

Campaign for Tobacco-Free kids

Canadian Society of Respiratory Therapists

COARC, The Committee on Accreditation for Respiratory Care

Council on Licensure, Enforcement, and Regulation

Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations

Lambda Beta Society

National Association for Medical Direction of Respiratory Care

National Association for the Support of Long Term Care

National Board for Respiratory Care

National Coalition for Health Professional Education in Genetics

National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards

National Lung Health Education Program

Neonatal Resuscitation Program

Respiratory Therapy Society of Ontario

Society of Critical Care Medicine