Join the International Council for Respiratory Care

The International Council for Respiratory Care is an organization established in 1991 in partnership with the American Association for Respiratory Care (AARC) and currently consists of 25 member countries. The strategic intent of the ICRC is the globalization of quality respiratory care for all patients and is accomplished by addressing issues affecting educational, medical and professional trends in the global community. The Mission Statement, Strategic Goals and Code of Ethics of the Council are available.

Each country holding membership on the Council may be represented by two Governors. A Governor serves a two year term and must represent a professional health-related constituency association/society in their home country. There are two classes of membership on the Council: Candidate Status and Full Membership. Country membership to the ICRC requires an Executive Committee recommendation and a two-thirds majority vote of the Council. Acceptance of Governors for country representation also requires a separate Executive Committee recommendation and a two-thirds majority vote of the Council.

For those interested in exploring a country membership on the ICRC an electronic letter of intent should be directed to the ICRC Executive Committee through the Council President. The letter should address the status of respiratory care in the specific country and the professional societies involved in the advocacy of respiratory care. The letter should also nominate individuals affiliated with professional, health-related constituencies to potentially serve as Governors to the ICRC on behalf of their country. A Governor shall be qualified by experience and credential and should have demonstrated an interest in the provision of quality respiratory care to patients. The position of Governor is open to those providing respiratory care in their home country and may include; physicians, respiratory therapists, nurses, physical therapists, clinical engineers, medical assistants, clinical scientists and others.