Join our Team! Leadership Harrisburg Area has an immediate opening for a Part Time Administrative Specialist. We offer extreme flexibility, unlimited opportunity for growth, and integration with our awesome alumni network! If you would like to receive a copy of the job description and application details, please email an inquiry to LHA@leadershipharrisburg.org.

LHA has a new HQ! Looking forward to hosting alumni & friends at an Open House in September. Please update your records with our new address and stay tuned for more info!

The July edition of the Community Caller is ready for you to browse and share! Take a look at the many local opportunities to get involved, give back, and grow: https://conta.cc/3WkEicm

After more than 20 years of operations housed at 3211 N. Front Street, Leadership Harrisburg Area will be relocating its headquarters as of July 1, 2024. A new era will begin for #TeamLHA on the Harrisburg Campus of HACC! https://conta.cc/3zgTFL7

Since 2003, Leadership Harrisburg Area's T.E.A.M. Projects have been providing community groups and nonprofit organizations with much-needed and necessary help to complete efforts that they don’t have the capacity, resources, or staffing to complete on their own. We are seeking more organizations we can help! If you know of an organization that would benefit from a T.E.A.M. Project, please click on the link below to access the application. Applications are due by June 28, 2024. https://conta.cc/3RzpQLN

Can you spot LHA's President & CEO, Una Martone in this picture from the Opening Retreat of the Community Leadership Series Class of 2007? Recognize anyone else? If you're ready for a life-changing experience that extends well beyond community service and professional development, be sure to submit your application for the CLS Class of 2025 due next Friday, June 7. Scan QR code for more.

Applications for the Community Leadership Series Class of 2025 will be accepted through Friday, June 7. Those who are interested in joining an amazing group of people for the experience of a lifetime - please visit the LHA website at this link for full details and to apply online. You will never regret making the decision to participate! https://lnkd.in/dPTRBer

The May edition of the Community Caller is ready for you to browse and share! Take a look at the many local opportunities to get involved, give back, and grow: https://conta.cc/3yxuRxR

For Mike McHenry, his experience in the Community Leadership Series was all about the people. From forming friendships with his fellow class members, to learning from the panelists and presenters throughout the program, to building relationships with the LHA alumni, board, and staff, Mike has leveraged hundreds of relationships through CLS. Now as Vice President, Mid Atlantic for North American based Ainsworth, Inc., Mike advocates for members of his team to experience the Community Leadership Series benefits for themselves! Be Like Mike! Encourage your team members to apply for the Community Leadership Series Class of 2025. Check out this short video to hear Mike’s take on why!