Chris Bosh is a former NBA power forward for the Toronto Raptors and Miami Heat. Originally from Dallas, Texas, Bosh was drafted with the 4th overall pick in the 2003 NBA Draft by the Toronto Raptors, after playing his college basketball at Georgia Tech. Over his 13 season, Bosh was an 11x All-Star and a 2x NBA Champion.

While in Toronto, Bosh was a five-time NBA All-Star and played for the U.S. national team (with whom he won a gold medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics), and became the face and leader of the Raptors franchise. In the 2006–07 season, Bosh led the Raptors to their first playoff appearance in five years and their first-ever division title. He left Toronto in 2010 as the franchise's all-time leader in points, rebounds, blocks, and minutes played.

In 2010, after seven seasons with the Raptors, Bosh entered into a sign-and-trade deal whereby he was traded to the Miami Heat. In Miami, he joined fellow stars Dwyane Wade and LeBron James; the trio became known as the Big Three. Bosh spent the second half of his career with Miami, appearing in the NBA Finals each year from 2011 to 2014 and winning NBA titles in 2012 and 2013. He made the NBA All-Star team every year during his time in Miami.

His career later was cut short by a blood clotting condition that the NBA ruled to be a career-ending illness. This forced Bosh into a profound period of self-examination, as he grappled with his identity outside the game that had provided more than just a livelihood. Basketball had imparted invaluable lessons, and he wondered how he could distill this wealth of experience into something meaningful.

From this introspective space, Bosh wrote Letters to a Young Athlete, a departure from the typical memoir. While it does feature captivating accounts of basketball legends like LeBron and Kobe, as well as insights into influential figures like Pat Riley and Coach K, it transcends the genre, resembling a wisdom book.

Drawing inspiration from works such as "The Inner Game of Tennis," Wynton Marsalis's "To a Young Jazz Musician," and Rilke's "Letters to a Young Poet," Bosh offers profound insights not only about basketball but also about life itself. Letters to a Young Athlete delves into the pursuit of a purpose that is profound and intrinsic rather than superficial and external and explores the nuances of success and failure, revealing them as fleeting illusions. Bosh's narrative encourages readers to transcend fear, ego, and fatigue, to reach a state of pure, sustained achievement in harmony with teammates who share the same dedication. Chris Bosh achieved this sublime state and maintained it at the highest level. While he still deeply misses basketball, he harbors no regrets. Honest, profound, and unwavering, this book extends a helping hand to those following their own pursuits, whatever they may be.