Christopher Bosh is a former professional basketball player. A Texas Mr. Basketball in high school, Bosh played one season of college basketball for Georgia Tech before declaring for the 2003 NBA draft. He was selected fourth overall by the Toronto Raptors.

While at Toronto, Bosh became a five-time NBA All-Star, was named to the All-NBA Second Team once, played for the U.S. national team (with whom he won a gold medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics), and supplanted former fan favorite Vince Carter as the face and leader of the Raptors franchise. In the 2006–07 season, Bosh led the Raptors to their first playoff appearance in five years and their first-ever division title. Bosh was nicknamed "CB4" by then-Toronto Raptors play-by-play commentator Chuck Swirsky, a combination of Bosh's initials and then jersey number and a reference to the film of the same name. He left Toronto in 2010 as the franchise's all-time leader in points, rebounds, blocks, and minutes played.

In 2010, after seven seasons with the Raptors, Bosh was traded to the Miami Heat where he joined fellow stars Dwyane Wade and LeBron James; the trio became known as the Big Three. Bosh spent the second half of his career with Miami, appearing in the NBA Finals each year from 2011 to 2014 and winning NBA titles in 2012 and 2013. He made the NBA All-Star team every year during his time in Miami. His career was cut short by a blood clotting condition that the NBA ruled to be a career-ending illness. Bosh played his final NBA game on February 9, 2016. Notwithstanding the NBA's ruling, Bosh fought to resume his playing career for three years before announcing in February 2019 that he intended to retire. The Heat retired his #1 jersey and in 2021, Bosh was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame.

Reflecting on all he learned from a long list of basketball legends, Bosh saw that his important lessons were not about basketball so much as the inner game of success -- the right attitude, right commitment, right flow within a team. He shares his journey in "Letters to a Young Athlete," offering a proven path for taming one's inner voice and making it an ally, through the challenges of failure -- and success alike.

Seeking to promote sports and education amongst youths in Dallas and Toronto, Bosh set up the Chris Bosh Foundation and regularly speaks to youths about the benefits of reading. He is also the founder of Daddy Jack Records, an independent record company.