Chris Bosh might be as close as Canadian basketball fans will get to Beijing.

It's a tenuous link, considering the Toronto Raptors star was born, and still makes his off-season home, in Dallas. But with the red and white still reeling from an unsuccessful qualification attempt, hoopheads north of the border can turn their lonely eyes to Bosh when the Olympic basketball tournament kicks off Aug. 9 (Day 2).

His hometown notwithstanding, Canucks could do a lot worse than pulling for the likable Bosh, whose multifaceted game could make him a star for the U.S. team at his first Olympics.

"He's the perfect international player," Leo Rautins, a Raptors colour man and the head coach of Canada's ill-fated national team, told CBCSports.ca. "He's inside, outside, he shoots the ball, he can put it on the floor, he runs.

"The U.S. team knows [that] and that's why they're thrilled to have him."

Bosh, a 24-year-old power forward, is coming off his fifth season with the Raptors. Canada's only NBA team selected him fourth overall out of Georgia Tech in the banner 2003 draft that also produced superstars LeBron James (picked first overall by Cleveland), Carmelo Anthony (third by Denver) and Dwyane Wade (fifth by Miami).

Bosh was an immediate success in the pros, using his sinewy 6-foot-10 frame, deft shooting touch and arsenal of power and finesse moves to beat opponents for an average of 11.5 points per game as a rookie.

YouTube sensation

Bosh broke out in 2005-06, his third season, averaging 22.5 points and 9.2 rebounds, and picking up his first all-star nod. That served as a prelude to the finest campaign of his career, 2006-07, when Bosh set new highs in points (22.6) and rebounds (10.7) to lead the surprising Raptors to their first-ever Atlantic Division title.

Bosh's first playoff appearance, though, ended in disappointment as Toronto fell to vilified ex-Raptor Vince Carter and his New Jersey Nets in the first round.

Bosh rebounded in 2007-08 for another breakout - this one off the court. As a means of lobbying fans to vote him an all-star starter for the first time, Bosh starred in a short video in which he played a slick-talking Texas car salesman.

The spot-on spoof became a YouTube sensation, getting hundreds of thousands of hits and garnering Bosh international media attention (alas, the fans picked LeBron James and Kevin Garnett to start at forward for the Eastern Conference, though Bosh was later added as a reserve).

"It has become bigger than I could have imagined," Bosh told Sports Illustrated during the clip's heyday. "The Internet is the most powerful tool in the world. It's everywhere."

Things didn't go quite as swimmingly on the hardwood, as Bosh's averages dipped slightly to 22.3 points and 8.3 rebounds as he missed 15 games due to groin and knee injuries. Not coincidentally, the Raptors also struggled to find a rhythm, sputtering down the stretch before capitulating in five games to the Orlando Magic in the first round.

Bosh was outplayed for much of the series by his counterpart, Magic centre Dwight Howard, who is also a member of the U.S. Olympic team.

"He is a phenom," Bosh said, ever the good sport. "He is the best centre in the league."

The Redeem Team

Their playoff battle now far in the rearview, Bosh and Howard turn their attention to restoring the fallen U.S. men's basketball team to glory.

The erstwhile Dream Team heads to Beijing looking to rebound from a series of disappointing - some might say embarrassing - defeats (hence its new moniker - the "Redeem Team").

After breezing to Olympic gold medals in 1992 (Barcelona), 1996 (Atlanta) and 2000 (Sydney), the U.S. and its roster of high-paid NBA stars lost their lustre at the 2002 world championships in Indianapolis and again at the 2004 Summer Games in Athens. The U.S. squad finished sixth at the worlds and then suffered three defeats in Athens before rebounding to beat Lithuania in the bronze-medal game (Argentina beat Italy for the gold).

The U.S.'s failure to reach the top of the podium - unthinkable when the likes of Michael Jordan, Larry Bird and Magic Johnson joined forces for the original Dream Team in Barcelona - caused much hand-wringing about the state of American basketball. Some pundits deemed the U.S. game too individualistic to succeed against more team-oriented international foes.

In response, USA Basketball director Jerry Colangelo asked potential national-team members in 2005 to make a three-year commitment to the program. Bosh was one of the players who agreed, and in 2006 he helped the U.S. capture bronze at the world championships in Japan by averaging 6.8 points and 4.0 rebounds.

A sore foot kept Bosh from competing in the 2007 FIBA Americas tournament, but this June he was among the 12 players selected to play in Beijing under legendary collegiate coach Mike Krzyzewski. Motivated by restoring national pride, and with a revamped roster featuring NBA MVP Kobe Bryant, all-world point guard Chris Paul, imposing centre Dwight Howard, and electrifying Bosh draftmates James, Anthony and Wade, the U.S. is heavily favoured to recapture the Olympic title.

"First and foremost, when I think about the Olympics, I think about when I was a kid and watching the '92 Dream Team win it all, winning the gold medal," the first-time Olympian told Toronto radio station The FAN 590. "It's the prestige of the gold medal, the prestige of the Olympics that is so big to me.

"It's about that before anything else, just competing with the USA on my chest, that's like a dream come true for me."