Slovakia, also called the Slovak Republic, is a country in the heart of Europe. The people who live there speak Slovak. It borders the Czech Republic (whose people speak Czech), Poland (whose people speak Polish), Ukrainian Republic (whose people speak Ukrainian), Hungary (whose people speak Hungarian), and Austria (whose people speak German).

Iowa borders Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota, South Dakota, Nebraska, and Missouri. These are just different states in the same country. Can you imagine what it would be like if they were completely different countries and spoke different languages?

FACT: The capital is Bratislava (brä’ti-slä’v ). There are 441,453 people living in that city.

What is the capital of the United States? Do you think it is about the same size as Bratislava? What is Iowa’s capital? How many people live there? Is it larger or smaller than Bratislava?

FACT: The President of the Slovak Republic is Ivan Gasparovic. The Prime Minister is Iveta Radicova.

Who is the President of the United States? Does the United States have a Prime Minister?

FACT: The Slovak Republic has a parliamentary democracy. The constitutional system includes:

1. Constitutional and legslative power (National Council of the Slovak Republic)

2. Executive power (President of Slovakia and government of Slovakia)

3. Judiciary power (Constitutional court and courts)

What type of government does the United States have?

FACT: At one time, the Slovak Republic was part of a larger country called Czechoslovakia. On January 1, 1993, Czechoslovakia became two countries: the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic.

When did the United States become an independent country?

FACT: In the Slovak Republic, if you go shopping, you need to have Euros to buy stuff.

When you go shopping in the United States, what kind of money do you use?

FACT: In the Slovak Republic, farmers grow wheat, rye, corn, potatoes, and sugar beets. They also raise cattle, pigs, chickens, sheep, and goats.

Slovak National Anthem: Nad Tatroů sa blỳská

(There is Lightening on the Tatras)

The Slovak Republic has a national anthem. The words on the left are Slovak.

The English translation is on the right.