Slovakia is located in Central Europe, bordering Austria, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Poland, and Ukraine.

Slovakia has a unique nature. More than 40% of Slovakia's territory is covered by forests.

The Tatra Mountains are a concentration of beautiful places. Deep valleys, pine forests, rocky peaks, high altitude lakes. Tourists from all over the world come here.

The population of Slovakia is 5.5 million people. Today there are 150 000 foreigners living in Slovakia, which is 5 times more than in 2006. The loyal treatment of migrants by the government, the location in the center of Europe, and the EU membership make life in Slovakia attractive for more and more foreigners.

The state language of the country is Slovak language. Also in Slovakia Czech, Hungarian and German languages are widely spoken.

As for the political system, Slovakia is a democratic country. It is a parliamentary republic with the head of government, the Prime Minister, and the head of the country, the President. The current president is Zuzana Čaputová, the first woman in that position in Slovak history.

The official currency of Slovakia is euro.

The undisputed advantages of living in this small, hospitable and clean country for foreigners are the following:

free travel across the EU

large number of opportunities for leisure time in the country: national parks, tourist centers, thermal springs, ski resorts and lakes.

low prices in comparison to the rest of Europe

very peaceful atmosphere and stable political situation

low housing prices

A stable economy and low prices help to maintain a decent standards of living in Slovakia. The main income items of government budget in Slovakia at this time are services, tourism, household chemicals, electronics and automobiles.

Slovakia has seen economic growth over the past few years. According to the WGEO (World Green Economy Organization), Slovakia is ranked 36th in terms of standards of living (ahead of Poland and Lithuania). Over the past 10 years there has been a significant increase in the welfare of Slovak citizens. Experts predict further economic growth of Slovakia.