Alan Rudolph is ecstatic that people are going to see his latest film, "Ray Meets Helen," when it opens around the country this weekend.

He's not quite as thrilled that people are going to see him.

"I've sort of been a recluse for a while," said Rudolph, the fiercely independent director and screenwriter whose films include "Welcome to L.A.," "Choose Me," the filmed-in-Seattle "Trouble in Mind" and "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle."

"Ray Meets Helen," his first film in 15 years, will open in limited release May 4 in Los Angeles, New York, and ... Bainbridge Island. The Lynwood Theatre will show the film for a week, and perhaps two. Rudolph will attend the May 10 screening and take questions from the audience.

Rudolph said he discovered Bainbridge early in his career, on a trip to Seattle working as an assistant director on a TV movie, but didn't satisfy his desire to move here until after 1985's "Trouble in Mind."

"While we were filming, I thought I might just sneak away and look for a place to live," said Rudolph, "but I didn't get a chance, and I was kicking myself. A couple of years later, I just snapped, flew up here and bought a cheap house. My wife, Joyce (a successful still photographer for movie production companies), was working. I did it without telling her.

Joyce, who was working on the set of "Major League" in Milwaukee when she unknowingly became a Bainbridge Islander, was "furious with me at first," Rudolph said. "But once she saw the place, she loved it from the beginning. Now she's more settled than I am.

"Everyone knows Joyce," he continued, chuckling. "I never go downtown with her, because it takes three hours to go anywhere. I like being Captain Anonymous."

As he chatted on the phone during last week's idyllic stretch of late-April sunshine, Rudolph said he was miserable. And he wasn't joking.

"I prefer rain," he said. "It's life's greatest liquid. Blue skies are an anathema to filming interesting movies."

He said he's had an "adverse reaction" to sunshine ever since he was a kid growing up in L.A. He noticed, perusing the weather map in the newspaper, that the Northwest "always had the hashmarks" (the symbol for precipitation). When I was 18, I took my brother's car and drove up to Seattle. And I kept going back. I wanted to move, but I didn't know how to pull it off."

"Ray Meets Helen," which stars Rudolph's friend and frequent collaborator Keith Carradine, is the director and writer's first film since 2002's "The Secret Life of Dentists." While he did some writing jobs, he was largely on hiatus from cinema — which he blamed on his bucolic new Bainbridge environs.

"I got hired to write a few things, but they never got made," he said. "I was just so happy, I didn't want to leave. We had just built a house, and I just decided not to pursue anything for a while."

Jeff Brien of Faraway Entertainment, the Lynwood's mothership company, said the film's distributor, Moonstone Entertainment, contacted him about being part of the film's opening.

"They called a couple months ago and asked if we would be interested in doing a screening," said Brien. "We said, ‘We should do a week, and hold it over if it's doing well, which I think it will.

"I've seen (Rudolph) at the Lynwood several times," Brien said. "It'll be exciting, showing his new one."

"Ray Meets Helen" was a script Rudolph had written years earlier, and simply decided it was time to make it.

"At some point I had given it to Keith, and he said, ‘Yeah, I'd like to do this some day.’ I put it aside, and then it just sort of happened. We shot it in L.A., on an ultra-low budget." He brought it back to Bainbridge for editing, working with Jason Erickson of Vehicle Films.

He took up painting "to scratch the creative itch" and fell in love with it, but never with any intentions of being a commercial success. There have been several shows of his work as benefits, all of which sold out.

"Somebody told me, ‘Your paintings look like your movies,'" he said, "which I agree with."

As much as he enjoys painting, Rudolph said it will never replace filmmaking, which is "my oxygen."

The opening of "Ray Meets Helen" in New York, which he'll attend, will include a retrospective of his career. The retrospective will be fun, he said. The hoopla, not so much.

"This whole going public thing (in New York), I'll be counting the days until I can come back here."

Information: 206-842-3080, farawayentertainment.com.