Ghost is powered by an editor built from the ground-up for professionals. Calm by design, with advanced workflows by default. No more suffering through clumsy toolbars or drag & oops. Immerse yourself in the story with an interface that's invisible until you need it, and powerful when you do. Below are examples of Ghost’s expansive editing toolset designed to accommodate the extensive needs of modern creators.

Bookmarks

When using a URL with the right meta information, it can show the page title, excerpt, author, publisher and even a preview image. This is a great way to share links from sites that don't have automatic embeds.

Headers

Make a statement with bold section headers in your posts and pages. Insert a header card to add a full width divider that can include a title, subheading, accent color or image background, and a button.

Quotes

You can make quotes stand out with two types of blockquote styles that can be applied directly in the editor.

The way to get started is to quit talking and begin doing – Walt Disney

The only impossible journey is the one you never begin — Tony Robbins

Audio

It's possible to upload audio files directly to your posts! This means you can share audio content with your audience, with a beautiful media player that nests into your posts and emails seamlessly. Music by Zen_Man from Pixabay.

Videos

Embed videos from platforms like YouTube and Vimeo, or you can now upload videos to your content in Ghost. Once uploaded, your video content renders in a beautiful video player. Videos can be set to loop, have their own custom thumbnails, and display in three different widths using the editor toolbar.

Images

Once you start mixing text and image cards creatively, the whole narrative of the story changes. Suddenly, you're working in a new format.

Normal width

Wide width

Full width

Lists

Our main focus in building the Ghost editor is to try and make as many things that you hope/expect might work: actually work.

You can copy and paste raw content from web pages, and Ghost will do its best to correctly preserve the formatting.

Pasting an image from your clipboard will upload inline.

Pasting a social media URL will automatically create an embed.

Highlight a word in the editor and paste a URL from your clipboard on top: Ghost will turn it into a link.

You can also paste (or write!) Markdown and Ghost will usually be able to auto-convert it into fully editable, formatted content.

Gallery

As it turns out, sometimes pictures and a thousand words go together really well. Telling people a great story often has much more impact if they can feel, even for a moment, as though they were right there with you.

Toggles

Use the Toggle card to create collapsible sections of text in your posts and pages. Great for creating distinct sections in your content, or adding an FAQ section.

Callouts

Ever find yourself wanting to add extra styling to important information in your posts? Well, now you can with callout cards. Each callout card can include an emoji, any length of text with styles and links, and a custom background color.

Products

Display products beautifully with custom content including an image, description, button or rating, so you can add your favorite recommendations to any post...

Embeds