The experience of colour underwent a significant change in the second half of the nineteenth century, as new coal tar-based synthetic dyes were devised for the expanding textile industry. These new, artificial colours were often despised in artistic circles who favoured ancient and more authentic forms of polychromy, whether antique, medieval, Renaissance or Japanese. However faded, ancient hues were embraced as rich, chromatic alternatives to the bleakness of industrial modernity, fostering fantasized recreations of an idealized past. The interdisciplinary essays in this collection focus on the complex reception of the colours of the past in the works of major Victorian writers and artists. Drawing on close analyses of artworks and literary texts, the contributors to this volume explore the multiple facets of the chromatic nostalgia of the Victorians, as well as the contrast between ancient colouring practices and the new sciences and techniques of colour.

Abstract: Between 1496 and 1505 Andrea Mantegna painted four remarkable representations of the Madonna in a yellow turban. In a historic period where yellow markers in the form and badges and headdresses were imposed on Jews, the choice is an enigma. With this accessory, Mantegna curiously identifies Mary as a Jewish woman. Yet, any stigma aligned with legislated dress codes is manifestly absent. According to color historians, yellow was considered a false gold; the color of treachery and excrement. This negative interpretation of yellow, however, ignores conspicuous contradictions in its application in both Christian and Jewish imagery. A painter’s costume choices and palette are chosen carefully, like those of a costume designer’s, help viewers recognize characters to support a narrative. This paper traces the misinterpreted use of yellow in Renaissance art to provide insight into commonly used styles of dress and their long forgotten application. Worn by Jews for centuries before it was imposed, the color was more likely adopted to self-identify with pride rather than self-deprecation. Both many examples of Hebraic manuscripts and Christian art, the color yellow is employed to facilitate the recognition of Jewish characters. As with Andrea Mantegna’s yellow-turbaned Madonnas or Haggada with illustrations of similarly clad Jewish characters, a maligned significance would have been inappropriate and confusing for patrons and viewers. Contrary to common thought, yellow, instead, provided a historic and cultural context in what the symbolism of the period. As in a theatrical production, the color was a recognizable motif to help audiences read the drama depicted. Andrea Mantegna’s choice to adorn his Madonnas in a yellow turbaned may seem paradoxical today, yet the visual trope was a masterful communication device in presenting Mary in her pivotal role as a Jewish woman in the Christian narrative.

A journey through 5,500 years of history of the color blue, its general use, its production, its symbolism and application in art, architecture and daily life. In particular, the use of blue in historical shipbuilding will deepen the subject. A comprehensive arc is spanned here from the ships of antiquity to the first half of the 19th century, structured according to the navies of the individual European nations and other cultures. Food for all those who have already dealt with the controversial subject of the colour blue in shipbuilding. In addition to artefacts, many sources from texts and documents, architecture and art are used. This results in 18 pages of source and literature references that speak for themselves. Good, varied and continuously coloured illustrations underline the corresponding text information. Not only interesting for those interested in historical shipping. Book as hardcover edition with 200 pages of high-quality colour printing and thread binding. More details: www.modellbau-muellerschoen.de

Costume albums and books depicting the diverse peoples of the Ottoman Empire were produced by Ottomans and Europeans respectively as early as the sixteenth century, defining geography, ethnicity, religion, occupation, and gender in the Ottoman Empire through costume. Mobile objects, costume collections circulated through transimperial networks in the Mediterranean. Long understood as an enticing example of cross-cultural exchange, these costume compendia have nonetheless been interpreted in a lopsided way. Despite the early appearance of Ottoman produced costume miniatures, most of the still embryonic writing on images of Ottoman costume assumes the priority of European print examples. But European artisans of the book were not without knowledge of Ottoman work: Ottoman-produced costume miniatures circulated in Europe beginning already in the sixteenth century, and increasingly through the seventeenth and especially eighteenth centuries. My essay explores how a consideration of the materiality of the costume book and album – specifically texture, touch, and the practice of hand-coloring – shapes a cross-cultural reading of them, a reading that is reinforced by early modern cultural constructions of color, especially in relation to textile and dress. This investigation defines cultural mediation as layered, discontinuous, and resulting from a multiplicity of points of contact and exchange.