President Stjepan Mesic, who took his second oath of office yesterday, has admitted Croatia has failed to deal fully with war crimes issues now casting a dark cloud over its European Union membership bid.

"I believe our membership talks will start on March 17 as planned, despite all the pressure. But we obviously haven't done all that was necessary," he told state-owned daily Vjesnik after EU member Poland warned talks would not start before retired General Ante Gotovina was handed over to the UN war crimes tribunal.

The threat to Croatia's EU ambitions marred inauguration day for Mr Mesic, who won his second five-year term in January on a pledge to help Croatia join the EU in 2009.

Mr Gotovina, seen by many Croats as a military hero of the 1991-95 independence war, disappeared in July 2001 to evade an imminent indictment for the killing of Serb civilians in 1995.

Tribunal chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte blasted Croatia this week for stalling instead of arresting Mr Gotovina, saying there was strong evidence he was hiding in Croatia.

Mr Mesic said he was confident no one currently in authority was sheltering Mr Gotovina. But nationalist governments after the war made the tribunal's suspicions understandable, he said.

"Croatia had covered up other war crimes suspects in the past. We gave them places and jobs and in the end none of their helpers were brought to trial although we knew who they were.

"Therefore, it is easy to conclude: They've done this before, who can say they are not doing it again. We must do our utmost to locate Gotovina or find evidence that he is not in Croatia," the 70-year-old president said.

The tribunal confirmed yesterday Mr Gotovina had been convicted of crimes in France. A Croatian newspaper said Mr Gotovina, who left home at the age of 16 to join the French foreign legion, had been convicted of robbery, kidnap and extortion.

"The timing of the report is no coincidence. This is a clear signal the authorities are preparing to do what needs to be done although it also confirms that political will (to arrest Gotovina) was not there before," said analyst Davor Gjenero.