Former Croatian President Stjepan Mesić will file a submission to the Constitutional Court.

Former two-term president Stjepan Mesić announced on Thursday that he would ask the Constitutional Court for its opinion about the amendments to the Law on Special Rights of Former Presidents which abolished his office, reports Jutarnji List on May 19, 2016.

“There should be a rule of law in this country, I fought for it and its institutions, I have appointed many to high positions in this country and expect them to follow the rule of law. These amendments are unconstitutional”, said Mesić at a press conference, adding that he would remain active in politics.

Parliament on Wednesday adopted MOST’s proposal that will leave Mesić without his office, personal driver and official car, while he will still have physical protection provided by the state. The new law will take effect on 1 June.

Mesić said that, if the Constitutional Court does not decide in his favour, he would send the case to the European Court of Human Rights. Until then, he expects the office to continue to function. “I am a legalist, but the question is whether everybody is legalist. Anyway, I will not defend this space with weapons”, he added.

He confirmed that he had received numerous offers for relocation of his office, from various associations, foundations and political parties.

Mesić reiterated that one of the reasons for his removal was the fact that he was an antifascist. “This is a simple political retaliation. You can see the structure of the Patriotic Coalition, and of Božo Petrov and his associates, why they criticize me. They are criticizing me for my antifascism, but they do not dare say it”, he said.

He also commented on current events related to the First Deputy Prime Minister Tomislav Karamarko, describing the affair as “a new Fimi Media”. “Imagine if my wife were representing an entity that was in conflict with the state. Can you imagine what kind of campaign would be led against me”, asked Mesić.

Asked if Karamarko should resign, Mesić replied that this was a question for Karamarko, and not for him. “I cannot say it, since he was my chief of staff. To say something against him, I cannot do that”, said Mesić.

Commenting on his possible trip to Syria “at the invitation of certain Syrian stakeholders” related to former INA’s oil fields near Palmyra, Mesić said that it would be good for Croatia to get back the oil fields. “But, since the government and Parliament do not have confidence in me, I hope that Ivan Tepeš (HSP AS) and Božo Petrov (MOST) will go, since they are influential in the world, so I hope they will be influential with the Syrian government as well”, said Mesić sarcastically.

He concluded that he would continue with his political activities. Mesić has not ruled out running for President again. “Well, you gave me a good idea, it would be interesting”, he said to reporters.

Subscribe to our newsletter

the fields marked with * are required