Rocky Mountain University of Health Professions (RMU) celebrated a momentous achievement in its 25-year history with the grand opening of its state-of-the-art tower headquarters in Provo, Utah, today. The ribbon-cutting ceremony, held at 1800 S. Novell Place, drew more than 200 esteemed guests, including local dignitaries, healthcare educators, and community members.

A Hub for Advancing Healthcare

“The opening of our headquarters marks a significant milestone in our history,” said Cameron Martin, PhD, President and CEO of RMU. “This state-of-the-art facility has been designed and built to provide first-class education and training. Moreover, it serves as a hub where education, healthcare, and the community come together.”

Present at the ceremony were the three co-founders of RMU, Richard (Rick) P. Nielsen, PT, DHSc, ECS, Michael (Mike) Skurja Jr., PT, DPT, ECS, and Larry Hall, PhD, who collectively expressed their delight at witnessing the institution’s growth and success.

RMU was founded in 1998 with the mission to educate and prepare healthcare professionals with a focus on outcomes-oriented, evidence-based practice. Over the years, RMU’s academic programs have been designed to address the evolving needs of the workforce, both within the local community and across the nation. More than 3,700 healthcare professionals have received a first-class education at RMU and are making a positive impact on people’s lives throughout the nation.

RMU Health Clinics Serve Utah County

RMU has further expansion plans, with construction underway in Building 3 at the Timpanogos Tech Campus, which is located on the same campus. This building was RMU’s former headquarters and will now be home to four of the five RMU Health Clinics: the RMU Eye Institute, the Center for Communications Disorders, the RMU Counseling Clinic, and an Occupational Therapy clinic which will also help augment patient load at RMU’s Community Rehabilitation Clinic, which is located at 587 S State, Provo, UT in partnership with Utah County. Additionally, RMU will have an Electrophysiology Lab and expanded research capabilities in Building 3 by adding a wet lab in partnership with the Noorda College of Osteopathic Medicine. The construction of Building 3 is well underway and is projected to be finished by this August. Once completed, these state-of-the-art clinics will further enhance RMU’s ability to deliver high-quality healthcare and support the diverse needs of the community.

“When you gaze out of our windows, it becomes evident that Rocky Mountain University truly embodies its name,” said President Martin. “With our new headquarters, a visionary leadership team, expanded clinical care, and boundless possibilities on the horizon, RMU is poised to carve an even brighter path forward dedicated to improving the human condition.”