PROVO — Internet services software giant Novell Inc. said Tuesday it will break away from industry tradition by offering its eDirectory free to equipment manufacturers, independent software vendors and developers.

The idea is that those people will build applications based on the directory technology. Novell believes that development will drive adoption of directories on the Internet as manufacturers, vendors and developers offer directories free to customers as part of their e-business, according to a press release.

Novell then would make money by selling programs that run on eDirectory. It already has more than 1,800 applications built on its eDirectory, which it said is twice as many as any other directory vendor.

The directories allow businesses to centrally store, manage and secure user identities and information wherever it resides on a network.

"Directories will play a central role in the future of the Net because of their ability to manage and secure user identities as well as bridge access between intranets, extranet and the Internet. The directory is the foundation for Novell's Net services software," said Carl Ledbetter, chief technology officer and senior vice president of business and corporate development.

"By giving eDirectory away for free to our key equipment and development partners, Novell is furthering directories as the basic underlying infrastructure of the Net. As the most open, robust and cross-platform directory service on the market, Novell eDirectory is the only directory available today that can realistically play this role, providing a proven, robust framework for developers to build solutions."

The company's new strategy was unveiled at NetWorld Interop in Las Vegas.

Novell has been hurt by a downturn in sales of its NetWare operating system that began in the mid-1990s. Once the unrivaled leader, NetWare is now No. 3, behind Microsoft Windows and Linux.

While Novell has not given up on NetWare, the company has focused on software that helps companies do business on the Net. EDirectory is the foundation for its Net services product line.

Novell developed eDirectory in 1993 to manage the internal networks of corporations running NetWare. As the Net emerged, the directory was modified for Windows, Unix and other operating systems.