By John Preston Wudel

Novell, one of the largest computer networking firms in the world, has made its home in Utah Valley for over 20 years.

During the 22 years Novell has been in business, it has not only impacted world technology and computer software in a large way, but it has also played a significant role in Utah County.

Novell has a solid relationship with its local community, said Novell public relations manager Shawn Dickerson.

“Economically it is a significant contributor to the community,” Dickerson said. “Novell is the 15th largest employer in Utah.”

At its headquarters in Provo, Novell employs almost 2,000 regular employees and close to 700 temporary employees, said Cheryl Pagen, director of community relations.

Novell also participates in Brigham Young University career fairs, and hires several interns and graduates each year, Pagen said.

In addition to providing Utah County with thousands of jobs, Novell contributes to the community in other ways.

Dickerson said Novell is also actively involved in community charity activities.

Novell gives to the Provo community through two programs designed to help the disadvantaged, enhance cultural arts and education, and improve the environment.

One of the programs, Corporate Giving, helps nonprofit organizations reach their goals through the power of technology.

Some of the recipients of Novell”s Corporate Giving are the United Way of Utah County, the Utah Symphony, Timpanogos Storytelling Festival and many other local groups.

Through Employee Giving, Novell matches employee contributions to the United Way”s general fund. Novell matches up to $520 per employee with a maximum of $100,000 company-wide per fiscal year.

Novell employees also participate in an annual food drive, with all food and cash donations being matched by Novell.

Campaign manager for the United Way of Utah County, Amanda Stott, said representatives from Novell participate on the United Way”s Full Board and volunteer on its allocation panels.

Novell also offers the United Way payroll deductions and an annual corporate gift.

Stott said Novell has contributed to the United Way for more than eight years.

Pagen said Novell also sponsors and encourages employee participation in events like the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Walk for the Cure and the local 4H.

“Novell is a major employer in Utah County, and as such, is a significant contributor to the economic vitality of our community,” said Leland Gammett, Provo City economic developer.

He said Novell also actively contributes to the community through a number of community initiatives, and several spin-off businesses that contribute to the local economy have come from Novell.

Gammett said Novell will continue to be vital to the local economy.