I’ve mentioned Craig Burton before. (He’s the “Lord Craig Burton” to those of us who know him well.) In addition to being someone with a “sixth-sense” ability to see the potential of technology right down to its core, he is a personal friend and a professional mentor. He was also the founder and SVP of Novell who was responsible along with SVP and co-founder Judith Clarke Burton (who passed away in January of last year) for giving me my professional start in the Communications department of Novell some 27 years ago. Look what they started.

On a global scale, Burton was responsible for the strategy of hardware independence in the early days of PCs. His role in creating the network computing industry’s foundation via Novell made it possible for the equipment from disparate providers to combine and connect. It’s a concept we take for granted today, but the technology world we know would be a much different place without that foundation.

Without hardware independence, the Internet we take for granted as a ubiquitous resource, available to all, would have been constrained for a much longer time (and potentially even forever) to private silos with much more limited power.

So he’s a revolutionary, of sorts.

He’s also a “brilliant mind” kind of guy who doesn’t see the world as it is, but seems to be equipped with a lens into the technology future that becomes progressively more honed over time. “Prescience” is the word I use to describe his innate gift. “Clairvoyence, insight, prophesy, prediction,” the thesaurus says about my definition of choice. Yes, it fits.

This weekend I had the chance to share several hours with Burton, reminiscing, laughing, sharing Novell stories, and getting his thoughts on the ways to turn a prescient idea into a strategy and business that can change the course of the world.

But first I wanted to hear how he came upon the idea of hardware independence that rocked the network technology world.

“It was the beginning of PC networking,” he recalls. “We had this Novell operating system and there were some 200 internet adapter choices. Ray Noorda [Novell CEO] even owned stock in one of them. There was ArcNet, GNet, Ethernet, ‘Ad Infinitim’ Net. He asked me which one we should choose.”

This, in a day when the most popular network adapter cost $900. “Do you know how much they cost now?” he asked me. I did. They are free. “Every product has an 802.x interface build into it these days,” he tells me. “Without it, they’d never be able to sell.”

Back to the Novell decision: “I remembered the words of my dad,” Burton said. “I guess he was prescient as well. He told me the story of a guy with a little shoe store in Manhattan. There he was, next to Macys, Bloomingdale, all these high-end stores. How would he ever compete? Then he had a brilliant idea. He put a sign above his door that said simply ‘Main Entrance’.”

“I realized, as I thought about it, that was our answer. We should choose all of them. We should stop making the conversation be about the adapter. We would put the focus on the operating system instead of the wire.”

Burton took his idea to Novell’s lead programmer Drew Major. Another “beautiful mind,” legends abound of Major’s ability to calculate the data overhead of program ideas in his mind, on the fly. He could code as fast as he could think. But hardware independence? “It can’t be done,” he replied.

However, the idea had been planted. This was on a Friday, Burton recalls. Monday morning arrived and Major walked in with a smile. “Done.”

The rest was history, as the little company from Utah became a network industry juggernaut at velocity speed.

Here’s Burton’s advice to other entrepreneurs facing difficult competitive challenges: Prescient thinking is a gift, but only when a prescient innovation is coupled with infinity thinking can it help a company rise to the speed of escape velocity. (You know the issue spaceships face as they reach the edge of the atmosphere? Escape velocity is the extra power it takes to break through the barrier that binds them to the Earth’s gravitational pull.)

Regardless of the innovation, scarcity mentality causes great ideas and companies to fail, Burton says. But with no limit thinking, companies such as Microsoft, Apple, IBM and, of course, the early Novell have been able to break the velocity barrier and change the technology world.

Burton points out that high velocity companies eventually fail when they lose their infinity thinking. He names some examples: IBM – Microsoft – and yes, eventually even Novell.

“When a company achieves a certain level of greatness they start to feel invincible,” he said. “They lose their perspective. They flap their arms and they think they’re flying.”

Of course Burton’s definition of fail may vary a bit from your own – these are companies that continue to exist, to have balance sheets, to produce profit and to create many jobs – and in some cases even re-learn the ability to innovate -- but generally they are no longer relevant as forces with the ability to shape and enact change upon the technology world.

What else did we talk about?

Burton shared a few humorous behind-the-scenes memories of some notable times. There are many such stories I know (I was Novell’s Director of PR from the company’s early days until mid 1988), but these three tales I did not:

A deal between database great Ashton-Tate and Novell went south minutes before the press conference to announce it at a NetWorld tradeshow event. (Ashton-Tate was eventually acquired by Borland in 1991.)

“They hadn’t mentioned the deal to Microsoft,” Burton recalls. Microsoft, of course, was provider of competing database SQL. “They were putting it off until the last minute, dreading the conversation. So they told Bill Gates right before the announcement. He went ballistic. In public. Completely ballistic. People were wondering what had happened. Reportedly, he told them if they dared to go forward with the deal he’d squash their company out like a gnat. So they backed out.”

Another historic moment took place when Burton was sent, last minute, to a broadcast interview in Phoenix that also included Bill Krause, the CEO of Novell’s then arch-rival 3Com. “It was supposed to have been Ray [Noorda] who would do the interview, but he asked me to go at the last minute. So I packed in a hurry, flew to the airport, and when I got to Phoenix realized that the only shoes I had were the white high-tops I was wearing.”

Not a problem. The interview was a broadcast, so his feet would remain under the table, unseen. The interview started. In response to a question about dealing with competition, Krause began to tell in great detail the allegory about two guys in the woods who suddenly encounter a bear. The first guy famously says, “I don’t have to worry about the bear—I just need to worry about outrunning the other guy here.”

As the story progressed, Burton realized opportunity had knocked. He silently propped one leg and then the other on the top of the desk. Running shoes. He’d topped his carefully rehearsed competitor without saying a word.

One last story took place at another NetWorld trade show event in the Dallas Infomart. With 2,000 or so people in attendance, Burton was making a keynote address. When the Q&A began a particularly ardent and unhappy fellow began to harangue him about why the NetWare operating system didn’t incorporate TCP/IP (a decision that would have laden the software with what Burton jokingly described as ‘”about a 10x” burden in the size of its code).

The guy’s fervor was rising. Other heads in the audience were beginning to nod. Burton let the fellow talk on, and then allowed the silence to hang in the air for a moment while he looked the guy in the eye. “So how are things going at home?” The guy looked stricken, then humbled, then he began to laugh in a bit of embarrassment. (The audience, of course, roared.) Burton’s sixth sense had conquered a tense moment with comedic timing again.

Not every day in the early Novell was a good one. Most notably, Burton’s relationship with CEO Ray Noorda, whom he had both loved and hated with the same intensity as his love/hate relationship with his own father, abruptly came to an end with his dismissal by Noorda in 1989. Judith Burton (then Judith Clarke) resigned shortly thereafter. The two married and co-founded The Burton Group with Jamie Lewis, who later became The Burton Group’s CEO as Craig and Judith departed to Phoenix and consulted as they cared for her elderly mother. (The Burton Group was later acquired by the Gartner Group in early 2010.)

More recently, Burton has contributed to the strategy of Kynetx, the next-generation web technology company created by Dr. Phil Windley and Stephen Fulling. He has continued to collaborate with the Internet’s “great thinkers” such as Drummond Reed of XDI.org, Microsoft Identity Architect Kim Cameron and the iconic author and Open Source expert Doc Searls, author of The Intention Economy, who leads the ProjectVRM (Vendor Relationship Management) initiative for the Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard. (I interviewed Searls for a previous article here.) And Burton has done a great deal of writing about the API Economy in his most recent stint as an identity analyst for Kuppinger Cole.

What will he do next? We do not yet know (or with Burton’s ever-present sixth sense he may have simply not told me). This is a story to be continued. In the meantime, the moral of the story for leaders of every current and future technology-based company is this: focus your efforts on infinity thinking and moving at escape velocity speeds.

Finally, for those of you old enough to have participated in the early days of PC network technology (or even participated at Novell), feel free to add your own stories in the comment section below.

Disclosures: While I have no current business relationship with anyone I have spoken to for this story, my agency has provided PR representation for Kynetx and also for The Burton Group in the past. I have also previously been an employee of Novell where I was selected and hired by Judith Burton (then Judith Clarke) and Craig Burton.