Novell Software Provides Washington D.C. Schools With Communication and Learning Infrastructure; School-to-Work Program Prepares Inner-City Students For One of Today's Fastest Growing Careers

PROVO, Utah -- October 1, 1997 -- Novell, Inc., today announced a $100,000 donation in software to the Foundation for Educational Innovation (FEI), an institution focused on providing both technology literacy and life skill preparation to students in the Washington, D.C. area. The donation includes Novell's IntranetWare, GroupWise and ManageWise products and supports the expansion of FEI's programs into Washington, D.C. area schools.

"Novell has been a key supporter of FEI initiatives and was one of the first companies to step up to the plate to improve education in the D.C. area," said Archie Prioleau, President of FEI. "Novell wants to make a systemic change in public education, not put a band-aid over it."

Earlier this year, Novell sponsored a program initiated by FEI at Ballou High School, located in the Washington, D.C. area. As a Novell Education Academic Partner (NEAP-secondary) site, Ballou is able to provide real-world, leading-edge training and Certified Novell Administrator (CNA) certification to prepare students for the job market and allow them access to well-paying careers. To assist Ballou in becoming a Novell Education Academic Partner (NEAP), Novell sponsored all the necessary teacher training, software and materials. As a result of these efforts, several Ballou High School graduates today have jobs managing computer networks.

"Over the last several years, Novell has taken an active part in sponsoring state and federal initiatives to connect schools to the Internet and provide them access to high-tech products and skills for use in the workplace," said Bob Puissant, vice president and general manager of Novell Education. "The schools in Washington D.C., the heart of our nation's capital, should be at the forefront of technology, not ignored by it. Ballou is an ideal example of how Novell, is addressing that need and providing schools with the materials to continue the programs and training year after year."

Created in 1992, the NEAP program was Novell's and the entire information technology industry's pioneer training program for bringing vendor training to colleges, universities, and trade schools. The NEAP-Secondary program enables participating non-profit secondary schools to offer Novell-authorized classes, providing high school students an opportunity to prepare for Novell's globally recognized technical certification, the CNA. Since the programs inception in February, 1996, Novell Education reports 183 high schools currently enrolled in the program, with a projected 500 schools participating by the end of the 1998 academic year. This accounts for approximately 25,000 students who will take the NetWare 4 Administration course in a high school environment in the coming academic year. There are currently over 335 NEAP organizations worldwide offering training to over 40,000 students per year.

The pioneer in information technology education programs, Novell Education has been certifying industry and network professionals since 1986. Worldwide, there are currently 180,000 CNAs; 120,000 Certified Novell Engineers (CNEs); 7,000 Master CNEs; and 5,000 Certified Novell Instructors (CNIs).

Founded in 1983, Novell (NASDAQ: NOVL) is the world's leading provider of network software. The company offers a wide range of network solutions for distributed network, Internet, Intranet and small-business markets. Novell Education and technical support programs are the most comprehensive in the network computing industry. Information about Novell's complete range of products and services can be accessed on the World Wide Web at http://www.novell.com.