Anita Hill made history in 1991 when she testified before Congress about the sexual harassment she said she had experienced while she was an aide to Clarence Thomas, a Supreme Court nominee who had been her supervisor at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. With the advent of the #MeToo movement, she has been speaking out again. She most recently made news when she criticized presidential candidate and former Vice President Joe Biden for his handling of the Thomas hearings. She spoke with Jessica Bennett, gender editor at The New York Times, at the New Rules Summit on Women & Power last week. The excerpts from her conversation have been edited and condensed.

JESSICA BENNETT You need no introduction, but I wanted to tell a little back story of mine, which is that I was 10 years old when you testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee. I don’t remember really understanding what was happening, but I do remember my father insisting that we leave the television on. It wasn’t until many years later, when the documentary about you came out, that I really truly learned your story. But I want to ask you, how did 1991 change the course of your life?

ANITA HILL Well, you know, it’s almost impossible to know. It’s been almost 30 years now, so it’s hard to even remember exactly what was going on in my life before. This is the new normal for me. I had not planned to be sitting in front of an audience talking with The New York Times 30 years ago. But I will say that I am still a teacher, and I do teach at a university; it’s my career. I maintain that. Although the content of what I teach now is different.

The emphasis that I now have on equality was not the emphasis that my work was taking back in 1991. I was actually a contracts professor — a contracts and commercial law person. I did some work around equality issues, but it wasn’t the focus of my life. But the thing that I have to say is that what I have done is I’ve combined the old with the new. So when I look at equality I look also at economic inequality. And so the background is always there in terms of my profession. In terms of being a public figure, absolutely no. I would have rather spent my life in front of my computer or in a library.