Mary (Sunseri) LaBuda, age 96, formerly of Johnstown, died Saturday, March 23, 2019 in Omaha NE where she had lived with her daughter and son-in-law, Donna and Bernard Lichvar. For many years they took care of her with love and compassion. Our Mom was a devout Catholic who said thousands of rosaries in her lifetime. She will be remembered as a selfless Mother who always sacrificed her needs to the good of her family. The love she had for her children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren was special to us all. She loved music and anything sweet.

She is the daughter of the late Marianna (Piazza) and Dominic Sunseri. She is preceded in death by her husband Michael (Spike) LaBuda and her loving daughter, Michele DeRosa. Her brothers and sisters, Michael Sunseri, Frank Sunseri, Samuel Sunseri, Anna Ciaravella, Marianna Cassat, Angela Sakmar, Rose Luden and Josephine Murphy preceded her in death.

Her surviving children are Barbara Gibson, Donna Lichvar and Michael LaBuda and her grandchildren, Nicole Bennett, Jessica Castro, Bruce Lee Derosa and Michael DeRosa. She was blessed with 8 great grandchildren.

Memorial Mass will be held at 10:00am on Tuesday, August 13, 2019 at St. Francis Church, 120 Barron Ave., Morrellville. A gravesite service will immediately follow at St. Stephen's Cemetary.

Published on August 1, 2019

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of MaryHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Mary

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree