Abbie Cornish (born August 7, 1982) is an Australian actress who first worked with Cruel and Unusual Films on their first animated film, Legend of the Guardians: The Owls of Ga'Hoole, in which she played the minor character, Otulissa. She was brought back for Sucker Punch, in which she was given the lead role of Sweet Pea, one of the Lennox House for the Criminally Insane inmates who plot their escape.

Biography[]

Abbie Cornish was born on August 7, 1982, in Lochinvar, New South Wales, Australia; the second of five children and first of two girls, to Barry and Shelley Cornish. Her younger sister, Isabelle Cornish, is also an actress.

Abbie's career began at age 13 when she began modeling, which led to a TV role in 1999 on Wildside, and her feature debut in The Monkey's Mask. Abbie was part of several acclaimed TV projects Down Under, piling up award nominations. These awards include:

1999 Australian Film Institute, Young Actor's Award (Wildside)

2004 IF Awards, Best Actress (Somersault)

2004 Australian Film Institute, AFI Award, Best Actress in a Leading Role (Somersault)

2004 Film Critics Circle of Australia Awards, FCCA Award, Best Actor Female (Somersault)

2006 Film Critics Circle of Australia Awards, FCCA Award, Best Actress in a Lead Role (Candy)

2008 Australians in Film Awards, Breakthrough Award

Trivia[]

Abbie plays the guitar and piano.

A vegetarian since she was 13, Abbie was voted "Australia's Sexiest Vegetarian" in 2008.

She was ranked No. 33 in Ask Men's Top 99 Most Desirable Women of 2011.

She was ranked No. 89 in FHM's (Australia) 100 Sexiest Women in the World for 2011.

Abbie has a younger sister, Isabelle Cornish, who starred in the Australian TV series Puberty Blues.

During an interview, Emily Browning stated that Abbie was the toughest out of all the girls when they first started training. Abbie said that she saw part of her strength coming from her mother, who was a national women's full contact karate champion as well as a brown belt in karate.

Roles[]

Cruel & Unusual Films roles[]

Selection of other roles[]

Expand!

This section is incomplete.

Gallery[]