ABBIE CORNISH on 'ELIZABETH: THE GOLDEN AGE'

Contributed by Michael J. Lee, Executive Editor

for Radio Free Entertainment

September 15, 2007

In the wake of its 1998 release, Elizabeth rocked the movie awards scene, scoring a slew of nominations across the board for both its performances and its myriad of technical achievements. Ultimately, Cate Blanchett walked away with several Best Actress recognitions for her role as the title ruler, including a Golden Globe and BAFTA Film Award, and sparked an international film career for herself in the process. Since then, she has starred in everything from independent features to epic blockbusters like the Lord of the Rings trilogy and the upcoming Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull.

Now, nearly ten years later, award-winning director Shekhar Kapur and stars Cate Blanchett and Geoffrey Rush have reunited for an uncharacteristic sequel, Elizabeth: The Golden Age. This historical thriller focuses on the later years of the Queen's reign and England's conflict with King Philip II of Spain, and zeroes in on the contrast between Elizabeth's seemingly empty personal life and her attempts to use marriage as a political tool. Caught in a love triangle with her trusted lady-in-waiting Bess (Abbie Cornish) and adventurous explorer Walter Raleigh (Clive Owen), Elizabeth sees her own private affairs becoming twisted and entangled, even as she deals with conspirators who would threaten her sovereignty.

The scope and tone of Elizabeth: The Golden Age is markedly different from its predecessor, and with the exception of the returning cast and crew and the overall setting, it doesn't feel like a sequel at all. For audiences needing more than personal relationships gone awry and 16th century political intrigue, the movie also features an unexpected amount of action: Elizabeth herself rallies the troops Braveheart style, while the navies of England and Spain clash on the high seas in a sequence that could have been out of Pirates of the Caribbean.

In this interview, actress Abbie Cornish getting into character, working alongside Cate Blanchett and Clive Owen, and taking her career beyond the confines of her native Australia.

The Interview

MEDIA: In creating your character, how important was it to do research on the real Bess?

ABBIE: I really wanted to know about the real Bess. I felt that it was very important to create some sense of connection to her and her life. And it's difficult, because not an extensive amount is written about Bess. But I gathered the bits that I could. And also talking to [our historical consultant Justin Pollard], and just questioning him about little things. How do I stand? When she walks in, does she kneel? How far down does she bow? And all of these little things. But the most interesting thing, and the most creative insight for me into Bess, came in a portrait. I found this portrait of her in a book which just pushed through the image and went straight through me. And it's difficult because there's no real photographs of the person around that time, and so you have to rely on an artist's interpretation. But there was something I felt was coming through this portrait, and so I got it blown up really big--this big [demonstrates with hand gestures], and put it in my trailer. And so I would see her when I came in, when I left, and I would check in with her. [laughs] There were little keys into, I felt, who she was. She had these very (Bess didn't have blue eyes in the film) blue, very open, almost ocean-like eyes, and there was this slight smile on her face, but the lips were pursed. So there was a happiness, a contentment, a sort of a givingness to the moment, but a constriction. And that was the profession I felt coming in, you know? And there was something about her that was dreaming of something outside of that moment. And so that, I felt, affected me the most.

Does the elaborate costume design have a major impact on your ability to get into character?

I think it does make a difference. I found, unexpectedly actually, that the costumes for me became a key to who Bess was, or more so in a sense, how she was feeling about her life at that particular point in time. The first week on set of wearing the corset, I felt very restricted and I felt that I couldn't breathe properly. I didn't have my full lung capacity. And I actually felt a little bit miserable, and I started to wonder, "Wow, this woman has one of the most prestigious jobs in the court and she has these beautiful clothes, beautiful jewelry, and yet she can't breathe properly." There's a lack of freedom. And so it got me thinking, "How does she feel?" There's an exterior, and then there's an interior, which is quite constrained--there's a feeling of constraint and restriction there.

What was your favorite costume?

My favorite is the pink costume, but you don't see it for very long. [It's] at the very end where the Queen comes in and says, "Are you with child?" and she says, "Yes, my husband's child." The pink one, I just loved.

Is that the scene in which Cate smacks you?

Yes. [laughs]

How did the two of you get along as actors?

Well, Cate's an incredible woman and an incredible actress, first of all. She's very focused at what she does. And I felt in working with her that she had this tremendous amount of work to do in relation to her own character and her own role in the film, but she was always aware of everyone else around her. And particularly for me, I felt that there was a watchful eye over my character, over scenes, over dialogue. And it was nice to have that there, you know? So there was a very comfortable feeling from me towards Cate, both professionally and personally. And I think Shekhar just did such an amazing job at expressing his thoughts on that relationship and encouraging exploration of that relationship, because it's so intricate and difficult. And you can't sum it up in one sentence. You really can't. And so to have the ability to do that with people like Cate and like Shekhar was just a pleasure.