Sofía Vergara doesn‘t really care if people think her Modern Family character is a stereotype of Latina women. In a cover story for Hola (which she shares with husband Joe Manganiello), the actress batted away concerns that her portrayal of housewife Gloria on the ABC sitcom is problematic.

“What’s wrong with being a stereotype?” she says in the interview. “Gloria’s character is inspired by my mom and my aunt. They are both Latina women who grew up in Colombia, like me. They love color, prints and shoes. I’m like that too: a voluptuous, intense, happy woman, who wants to get involved in everything with her partner to help.”

It‘s not the first time Vergara has had to defend her portrayal of the high-strung housewife, which some believe propels the stereotype of Latina women as loud and fiery. Back in 2014, she used the same defense, saying she plays the character “the way I see my mom and aunt behave as Latin women.” Controversy aside, Vergara owes much of her success to Modern Family and the popularity of her character. She‘s been the highest paid actress on TV for the last five years, pulling in a sharp $43 million last year.

However, Vergara has been accused of propelling stereotypes off the show as well. At the 2014 Emmy Awards, she did a bit where she literally was put on a pedestal and spun around like a sexy prop, which irritated viewers for its sheer objectification.

And at this year‘s Golden Globes, she did something similar, poking fun at her accent while presenting the Misses Golden Globes. “The Hollywood Foreign Press Association has an anal tradition,” she started. “I didn’t mean . . . they have an anus tradition. They have a tradition that they do every year of choosing a second-generation performer to assist in the presentation of the awards.”

Her faux-flubbed words sparked backlash from viewers, who wondered why Vergara‘s moment centered on her way of speaking. “The Latinx who always mispronounces English words joke is stale. Stop it,” one viewer tweeted.

Vergara didn‘t seem to mind, though. Later that night, she posted an Instagram photo of herself backstage with this caption: “I look lonely back stage but I was just trying to come up with my an*s joke hahhahha!!!!#goldenglobes2017#itsallaboutentertaining.”

Instagram content

This content can also be viewed on the site it originates from.

Nuptials

Watch Joe Manganiello Serenade Sofia Vergara at Their Wedding Rehearsal

The Magic Mike XXL dance moves, sadly, were not captured on-camera.

Spotlight

Extended Portfolio: Sofía Vergara

Jim Windolf and Norman Jean Roy spotlight Colombian sensation and Modern Family star Sofía Vergara, busting out all over.

Politics

Can Kamala Harris Make Joe Biden’s Campaign Her Own?

The vice president has inherited her boss’s sprawling 1,300-person campaign apparatus. Some insiders are worried that Harris needs stronger allies. “She basically has Biden’s team right now,” one says. “She needs some people in that room who are her people.”

Politics

Joe Biden Drops Out of the 2024 Presidential Race

“It has been the greatest honor of my life to serve as your President,” said Biden in a statement on Sunday.

Business

Rupert Murdoch’s Family Battle Proves He’s Losing Control

The media mogul is scrambling to protect Fox News from three of his politically moderate heirs. It’s a sign of Rupert’s waning influence. “Murdoch is no longer the pope,” one political vet says.

Politics

All Eyes on Kamala Harris as Joe Biden Drops Out

The president immediately endorsed his VP after exiting the 2024 race.

Royals

The Royal Family and Land Rover, a Love Story

To celebrate the royals’ longstanding association with the luxury SUV, a collection of 10 Land Rovers used by Queen Elizabeth during her 70-year reign will be on display in Northern California.

Politics

Joe Biden’s Dignified Exit Gives Democrats a Fighting Chance Against Trump

After resisting calls to step aside, the president’s painful decision—and swift endorsement of Kamala Harris—has energized the party and preserved the moral high ground for the grueling campaign ahead.

Politics

Nancy Pelosi Got Joe Biden to Quit. Will She Get Democrats to Rally and Win?

Though the former House Speaker has had a tepid relationship with Harris, she offered a full-throated endorsement on Monday. “My enthusiastic support,” she said, “is official, personal, and political.”