Sofía Vergara, who is starring in the new Netflix miniseries Griselda, reminisced about Modern Family while appearing on Watch What Happens Live!

There are countless great episodes of Modern Family over the course of its 250-episode run that it's nearly impossible to pick the best.

However, Sofía Vergara was recently asked for her favorite, and she chose an early episode for a truly special reason.

Sofía starred on the hit ABC series for all 11 seasons from 2009 to 2020 and received four Emmy nominations for her work as Gloria Delgado-Pritchett.

Sofía appeared on the Jan. 24 episode of Watch What Happens Live! to talk about her new Netflix miniseries, Griselda, and host Andy Cohen asked her for her favorite Modern Family episode.

"There's one that always, we as the costars, we always remember when we are together," Sofía said, before discussing Season 2, Episode 6.

"We did a Halloween episode, and it was all in the Dunphy's house. We all had costumes, and for some reason, we couldn't get it together," she said.

The episode follows Gloria's stepdaughter Claire Dunphy (Julie Bowen) hosting a Halloween party that does not go as planned.

"Ed O'Neill was dressed as a gargoyle. I was a witch. So we would ruin [the takes]," Sofía told Andy. Ed played Jay Pritchett, Gloria's husband and Claire's father.

"The producers and the directors, everyone wanted to kill us because we could not hold it together. We would laugh. We couldn't do a scene looking at Ed..." she said before accidentally swearing.

"...at Ed freaking dressed as a gargoyle," Sofía continued. "You know, it was like crazy."

Sofía isn't the first Modern Family cast member to reminisce fondly on this particular episode.

Last July, Sarah Hyland, who played Claire and Phil (Ty Burrell)'s eldest Haley Dunphy, pointed to the episode as one of her favorite days on set during an interview with BuzzFeed. She specifically highlighted Sofía and Ed while filming.

"It was one of the only times where I kept breaking character alongside everybody else, we all were just laughing all day," she said. "It took so long to film that scene — which, normally, it would be super, super fast for us, but we all kept laughing hysterically."

Well, I think it's time for a Modern Family rewatch! You can stream the show on Peacock.

Share This Article