Edited Text

Wesleyan University

Ambient Music

by

Eliot Bates

A thesis submitted to the Faculty

of Wesleyan University in partial fulfillment of

the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts

Middletown, Connecticut

May 7, 1997

Table of Contents

Introduction and Acknowledgements

.

.

.

.

3

Part 1: trajectories and composers

Introduction .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

13

1. trajectories .

.

.

.

.

.

.

14

2. ambient composer personalities .

.

.

.

61

Chapter

Part 2: listeners and experiences

Introduction .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

97

3. the ambient community .

.

.

.

.

98

4. the ambient experience .

.

.

.

.

122

Part 3: analysis

Introduction .

.

.

.

.

.

154

5. the compositional process

.

.

.

.

156

6. self-reflective case study .

.

.

.

.

180

Afterword

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

204

a. bibliography

.

.

.

.

.

.

208

b. discography

.

.

.

.

.

.

213

c. glossary

.

.

.

.

.

.

219

d. selected Internet articles .

.

.

.

.

226

Appendix

.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

2

The Ambient Belief System

an Introduction

I wanted to make a kind of music that existed on the cusp between melody and texture,

and whose musical logic was elusive enough to reward attention, but not so strict as to

demand it. (Brian Eno, from the liner notes to Neroli, 1993)

Brian Eno and many other composers work in a style that fans call “dark

ambient music.” As a commercial category, it enjoyed widespread recognition

only in the last few years, but it dates back to 1972 and Eno’s and Robert Fripp’s

No Pussyfooting, the first self-described ambient album. Contemporaneous with

Eno’s experiments with “sonic wallpaper” (his term for ambient music), the

industrial culture movement in England was underway, experimenting with

noise, shock, and auto-destructive art, and British progressive rock and

psychedelia were breaking down the traditional rock band format and moving

beyond the three-minute pop song format. What ties these three movements

together is that they all came out of the British art schools of the late 1960’s and

early 1970s; that they were intellectual and highly planned; and that the artists

involved worked in isolation -- from each other and their fans.

Dark ambient music, which I will simply call “ambient” or “ambient

music” hereafter, thus has a rich twenty five-year history of theory and

philosophy, a reflection of the varied visual, sonic and written art of the art

schools. Not all of ambient’s developments originated in Britain, however. In

© 1997 Eliot Bates

3

Germany, the U.S. and Canada, the source of key experimental rock groups, the

genre known as “space music” developed in tandem with ambient. In New York

City, minimalist composers were integrating concepts from Indian raga,

experimental intonation systems, and electronic synthesis into long meditative

performances.

As the compositional form of ambient music continues to evolve, there

have been changes in the way fans discuss the music. Debates over what works

are ambient have led many fans to conceive of the genre as a way of listening to

music, rather than an established canon of compositions. In describing this,

some fans mention listening rituals, altered states of consciousness, and firmly

held theories about the power of the music to communicate visual imagery. In

addition to studying ambient music as a compositional form, I will also present it

as a belief system, and my term “ambient belief system” refers to the rituals,

beliefs, and sacred history that surround ambient music.

First, I attempt to make some sense of the musical origins of ambient

music, which are broader than what I described above. Chapter 1 defines six

“trajectories,” which start from a cluster of musicians working in a subcultural

music scene and trace their paths and ideas as they are transformed into a

component of the ambient belief system. Here I also trace the history of music

recording, looking critically at issues such as Walter Benjamin’s concept of

musical “aura,” the debate over sampling and musical theft in other musical

forms; this sets the stage for ambient composers’ justification for their

compositional techniques. Chapter 2 profiles six major composers, selected

© 1997 Eliot Bates

4

primarily because of the significant amount of information on them in print.

The mystique surrounding their work and personal lives mirrors their

compositions and creative techniques, and to understand their appeal to fans I

have suggested how each represents a certain “archetype.” In chapter 3 I look

at the fan base of ambient music, including a basic ethnography and the results

of surveys conducted on the Internet. A detailed profile of one ambient listener

is also included.

A tantalizing mystique surrounds the possibility that ambient music

induces altered states of consciousness, particularly those thought of as

“waking dreams.” Chapter 4 explores the rituals that listeners engage to attain

these experiences as well as ambient music’s affinity with fantasy and science

fiction literature and role playing games. As nothing exists in print on the

structure of ambient music or the studio techniques that are used to create it, in

chapter 5 I propose why it is so difficult to analyze and offer six sample analyses

of important pieces. Much of the production is hush-hush, so I can work only

with my anecdotes and my own knowledge of the recording studio. Chapter 6 is

a case study of my own music, which I believe parallels some of the

compositional structures of better known ambient composers.

This thesis is the most recent work in a lineage of subcultural studies of

postmodern popular music genres, although, as I will demonstrate, ambient

music relates differently to the mainstream than other better-studied

subcultures do. The main studies referenced for the construction of this work

are Sarah Thornton’s Club Cultures, a look into the British underground club

© 1997 Eliot Bates

5

scenes of the 1980’s; Simon Frith and Howard Horne’s Art Into Pop, which gives

an excellent history of the British art school scene and the emergence of punk

rock from these roots; and David Toop’s Ocean of Sound: Aether Talk, Ambient

Sound and Imaginary Worlds, conceived as an aural history of the twentieth

century and which includes a number of interviews with ambient, dub, and jazz

musicians.1 A major inspiration for my composer profiles were the excellent

examples of cross-cultural micromusics and the studies of bimusicality in Mark

Slobin’s Subcultural Sounds: Micromusics of the West.

One way in which this work differs from the works listed above -- and the

main problem in organizing this thesis -- is that the ambient music scene is not

dead yet. In fact, it probably has not even peaked! Thornton’s work is an

invaluable study of the trendy club scene of London and how localized

movements such as acid house come -- and go. The retrospective Art Into Pop

looks at the already passé British punk rock movement, and many of the

composers profiled in Ocean of Sound are no longer alive but live on in print and

CD re-issues. At the point of publication of this thesis, almost all the artists are

still composing ambient music, and they continue to work (as do their fans) in

an anarchistic and non-deterministic environment. It is still possible to see the

incongruities of the ambient music belief system. For example, there is the

tricky relationship between the purported non-commercialism of the artists and

1

Two other popular music monographs consulted as sources in subcultural studies were

Robert Walser’s Running With the Devil: Power, Gender, and Madness in Heavy Metal Music and

© 1997 Eliot Bates

6

the fact that they make their living by selling CD’s; there is also the discrepancy

between the living naturalistic experiences that happen in bedrooms around the

world and the mass-produced disc of binary information that is created in an

artificially inseminated recording studio. I imagine that as ambient music fades

into memory these discrepancies will be erased. This thesis, in part, delights in

the chance to witness the unpredictable evolution of a living musical form.

Personal history with ambient

As this thesis is in part a personal reflection on the aspects of life that

have inspired me to compose and listen to ambient music, it is appropriate to

describe something of my background in it. My initial musical impulses were

fired by my parents’ passionate interest in Scott Joplin ragtime and Bartok

string quartets. We went to many ragtime and new music concerts, and at age

nine I remember writing my first piano composition -- a crude piano

representation of a hummingbird sound. The ambient sounds of nature

interested me intensely from an early age, and living close to a large national

forest and the expansive Pacific Ocean provided an vast array of natural sounds.

I first heard composed ambient music in the late 1980’s, on the college

radio station KCSB. They broadcast several space music shows and also the

syndicated “Music From the Hearts of Space,” featuring space music, new age,

Martin Stokes’ The Arabesk Debate: Music and Musicians in Modern Turkey, which are about

heavy metal and Turkish pop music, respectively.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

7

and the ambient music of Brian Eno and David Sylvian. By the time I was a

student at the University of California at Santa Barbara in 1990, I had heard a

great deal of music in this vein and was interested in composing music based on

“natural” structures. A chance roommate assignment in my sophomore year

paired me up with my good friend Alex Donahue, who introduced me to the

music of Jon Hassell, Steve Roach, and others. Together, we spent large

portions of our college budgets on new ambient music CD’s and devoted all our

free time to listening in a dark room, on headphones. We found out about

interesting CD’s from two sources: tracing the musical lineages of ambient

composers to see if they had collaborated on some rare recording with other

interesting artists, creating complete collections of several artists’ work; or

through the miraculous Internet, an oasis for obscure taste cultures such as the

ambient music subculture. A simple query on the ambient newsgroup about

peoples’ “favorite ambient albums that sound like Brian Eno” could generate

dozens of eager responses.

After much listening and two years of music composition lessons at

U.C.S.B., I gained access to the electronic music labs and began working on

several tape pieces. In one, I simulated various atmospheric phenomena,

creating artificial representations of rain, thunder, hail, and the like. Other

pieces, composed with the computer program “cmusic,” explored manipulations

of the timbres of sampled trumpet and ambient sounds. I structured most of the

pieces on existing models of Jon Hassell and Robert Fripp but used different

timbres to construct the pieces. The culmination of my west coast involvement

© 1997 Eliot Bates

8

in the ambient music scene was as a performer in an industrial band with

ambient leanings. We performed on KCSB radio shows on several occasions

and produced the soundtracks to two underground films. Our sound sources

were mostly amplified gamelan instruments and electric guitar feedback,

though we used distorted vocalization, too. These radio shows broadcast late at

night and once ran past dawn, attracting a surprising number of listeners, most

in altered states (either music-induced or drug-induced, we don’t know which).

Their phone messages, quite incoherent in content, became excellent sound

material for the radio show. The producer of the show, Jason Brown, has run an

ambient program at KCSB for six years, and I am indebted to him for the

insight he has provided in interviews, personal conversations, and musical

collaboration.

Since 1996, I have worked as an ambient DJ for the local radio station,

WESU Middletown. I have also been hard at work in the electronic music

studio at Wesleyan University, composing a number of pieces with samples of

commercial recordings. The summer of 1996 in California was productive, as I

discovered the music of dozens of obscure ambient groups, many of whom I am

writing about in this thesis. I also made many recordings of ambient sounds,

both “natural” (insects and frogs) and “industrial” (hums from factories, road

construction noises) that will be incorporated into my next phase of

compositions. I also began codifying the notions of the musical interest I find in

ambient spaces, and I began intellectualizing about the unique nature of

ambient music in terms of listenership and the listening “technique.” My

© 1997 Eliot Bates

9

interest in writing this thesis is largely in refining my personal beliefs about the

ability of ambient music to communicate through the subconscious; I also have

a keen interest in how people perceive music and in how “nonmusical” sounds

can become “musical.”

Acknowledgments

First I would like to thank Mark Slobin, my advisor, who has made this

thesis happen in more ways than I can possibly recount. The intellectual

questions he posed, the philosophy, popular music, and sociology texts which

he introduced, and his tact in steering me away from dead-end issues were my

inspiration to pursue ambient music to the end. I also thank three other

Wesleyan professors who have given considerable help: Gage Averill, Peter

Hoyt, and Ron Kuivila. Professor Hoyt coached me on romantic theory and

tuned me in to the Memoirs of Berlioz, and Professor Kuivila’s course on

recording raised some difficult questions of copyright, theft, authenticity, and

aura.

I am indebted to my mother, Caroline Bates, for the extensive editing

and questioning she did of my first complete draft. Without her insightful

critique and help on writing style, the ideas I had would have never gotten

across. She was also always there to hear about some new “discovery” I had

made (even when my discovery was really old hat). My father, too, offered

© 1997 Eliot Bates

10

some excellent suggestions, particularly concerning theft (which concerned

him greatly from a legal standpoint).

In Santa Barbara, I wish to thank my U.C.S.B. teachers Scott Marcus and

Joann Kuchera-Morin. Professor Marcus, with his courses in Arab music and

tuning systems, opened my ears to non-equal tempered musics. Professor

Kuchera-Morin was my primary composition mentor, and with the courses in

electronic music began my interest in the timbre of sounds. From her I also

learned all the basics of the recording studio, the physics of acoustics, and most

importantly how to organize sounds into a coherent piece of music.

Additionally, thanks go to Jonathan Kessler and Beth Moscov for their help in

lucid dreaming (studying and practicing).

The summer of 1996 in Santa Barbara was when I began formulating

theories about ambient music and the potential of the music to invoke images of

landscapes; it was also when I pondered the attributes of fans which distinguish

them from pop music fans. Many of these ideas were worked out in

conversations with Alex Donahue and Jason Brown, both whose ideas appear

later in this thesis in interview format, but who deserve credit for much more.

Additionally, I acknowledge the Internet community, whose never-ceasing posts

provide bountiful food for thought, and who made the ethnographic survey

possible.

Finally, I wish to thank Jim Farrington in the music library of Wesleyan,

who located a number of essential ambient recordings and helped with my

initial search for articles and books, and the whole staff of the interlibrary loan

© 1997 Eliot Bates

11

department, who endured one hundred and thirty article requests without

flinching. Last but not least are the charming employees of Klekolo’s World

Coffee, who provided me with the hundreds of Aztec Breakfast Blends that

stimulated my creative flow.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

12

Part 1

trajectories and composers

Ambient music is the product of such a striking collision of music genres

and ideologies that no one mode of analysis is sufficient. These two chapters

provide two modes of analysis. The first is the trajectory, tracking the evolution

of genres, artists, and fans. The second is the archetype, distinguishing the

most important affinities that unite composers and listeners. Though I mention

a large number of musicians who might not be familiar to the reader, I hope that

the writing alone is able to convey a sense of the different backgrounds of

composers and listeners. Appendix b is a selective discography, both of

ambient music and of major recordings in several of the trajectories, and it is

intended to be used in conjunction with a reading of chapters 1 and 2. In the

second part of appendix c, the bibliography, are additional readings on select

artists, which offer the reader more detail on the compositional practices and

ideologies than was feasible to reprint here.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

13

Chapter 1

trajectories

To describe the complex musical background of even one ambient artist

would be impossible. David Toop’s Oceans of Sound connects developments in

ambient music with the changing soundscape of the noisy twentieth century

that has seen hundreds of musical genres come and go. Walking through a

shopping mall, one hears different soundtracks in each store, along with the

sounds of thousands of man-made machines, and in honor of the cacophony

that fills our day-to-day lives, ambient composers create soundtracks to

imaginary worlds.

To make some sense of the sources of ambient music, I will profile six

“trajectories,” that originate in an established music scene or a cluster of related

musicians and travel through musical spaces to arrive at the site of ambient

composing and compositions. They show not only the musical origins of key

ambient albums, but also the progress of musical sensibilities and affinities

experienced by composers and fans alike. The trajectories all start in

countercultural scenes, and though not in all cases, the pre-ambient works are

“programmatic” (they have a subtext, either of political ideology or narrative

© 1997 Eliot Bates

14

mythology) while the ambient derivatives are like the romantic notion of

“absolute music.”2

The trajectories I propose in this chapter are by no means an exhaustive

set of influences, musical or philosophical, but guide the reader toward

recognizing key concepts of the ambient belief system: first, that ambient is

more than a set of musical compositions or musical roots; second, that it has

innumerable contradictions built into its philosophy and musical structures; and

third, that it reflects the fragmentation of society into “bedroom cultures,” with

the values of the music representing the recent interiorization of America and

Europe.

The first and most important trajectory comes from British industrial

culture in the early to mid-1970’s. Groups such as Throbbing Gristle, Non, SPK,

and Z’ev, and performance artist Mark Pauline experimented with noise, timbre,

shock, occult imagery, and altered states of consciousness while espousing

attitudes on work and isolationism that form the core of current ambient

philosophy. These artists grew up in the British art school scene of the 1960’s

and 1970’s, where they were exposed to the writings and art of 1950’s “danger

musicians,” 1930’s futurists, and 1910’s surrealists. Many of the current artists

on the labels distributed by World Serpent (Charrm, Staalplaat, Soleilmoon,

2

This distinction is described by Lydia Goehr in a passage which references Weber and

Dahlhaus: “Composers found another resolution [to the dilemma of individual genius versus

spiritual enlightenment] when they began to describe their music either as absolute or as

programmatic. Their descriptions rested heavily on the romantic terms that had given

instrumental music its autonomy.... In both, meaning was achieved through the unique

qualitites of instrumental sound, though whether the music embodied ‘transcendent’ content of

© 1997 Eliot Bates

15

Grey Area of Mute, Cold Meat Industries) are these industrialists, working in

the similar milieus of industrial and ambient music, while many others are the

generation of artists who grew up listening to industrial music.

The second trajectory describes two individuals who essentially created

“ambient music,” at least as a label for their work. Brian Eno and Robert Fripp

released No Pussyfooting in 1972 and collaborated on several other works with

their tape loop compositions. Eno went on to gain fame as a record producer

(for U2 and David Bowie) and for his seminal ambient works Ambient 1-4,

Apollo, and Music for Films, which texturally inspired most of the subsequent

ambient music. Fripp adapted the ambient music work he created with Eno into

a one-man show by keeping the same old Revox tape units but performing live

with his electric guitar. Eno and Fripp are important not just for their albums

but as cultural icons and as writers able to articulate the philosophy of ambient

music.

New York minimalism is the focus of the third trajectory. Jon Hassell

and Harold Budd were students of Terry Riley and La Monte Young, and amidst

this scene we see a clear example of ethnic music appropriation in ambient

music. All were students of Pandit Pran Nath, the famous North Indian singer,

and, following these studies, Hassell experimented with innovative

compositional structures based on raga, African drumming, and Malaysian

music. I will show that only certain attributes of these musics are of interest to

a spiritual, religious, or even a political sort was believed to make all the difference.” (Goehr

1992: 212)

© 1997 Eliot Bates

16

ambient composers; particularly, how modality and pitch are conceived of in

ambient compositions.

Many of the fans I have interviewed first heard ambient music on the

syndicated radio show, “Music From the Hearts of Space,” the starting ground

for the fourth trajectory. Though much of the set list was what is now termed

“space music” or “space rock,” the idea of exploring artificial landscapes was

present in all the works from the beginning. Two space musicians, Vangelis

and Tangerine Dream, through their immensely popular stadium shows,

reached out to many musicians, particularly in Southern California, where a

number of musicians created a space ambient scene.

Many rock groups from the late 1960’s on experimented with different

ways of interacting with their audience, and the result was the breakdown of the

rock band and a new set of sensibilities about timbre and instrumentation. Less

of a scene than a general “way of thinking,” the fifth trajectory looks at bands in

three countries that inspired a new set of instrumental hierarchies, moving away

from traditional melodic or rhythmic patterns. Some of these groups produced

ambient albums, too, though their main impact was to change the way people

heard music.

The final trajectory, and the most contentious among fans with different

musical preferences, is the club music scene, where the deconstruction of

techno and acid house became the soundtrack of the chill-out room (an

exclusive listening space for ambient music). Some artists, such as Richard

James, have crossed the lines between trip-hop and ambient and work

© 1997 Eliot Bates

17

comfortably as producers and DJ’s in both genres. Some of the first techno

musicians were also among the first industrial musicians, complicating the web

of connections even more.

After the six trajectories I give a brief analysis of ambient in relation to

the seminal articles of Walter Benjamin (“The Work of Art in the Age of

Mechanical Reproduction”) and Theodor Adorno (“On the Fetish Character of

Music and the Regression of Listening”). Sarah Thornton offers an alternative

view of “authenticity and the recording,” and following this appraisal are

examples of how the issue has become muddled with the evolution of recording

studio and artist relationships, the change of the DJ’s role, and characteristics of

ambient music listening and consuming. The last two issues, which I only

briefly touch upon, are the packaging of ambient CD’s (which come wrapped in

modern art) and the possibility of considering many of ambient music’s unique

features in Deluzian, rather than post-Weberian, terms.

1st Trajectory -- Industrial Culture

“Industrial Culture” spawned probably the most significant trajectory in

the formation of ambient. The oxymoronic label perfectly captures the mixture

of feelings for and against increased industrialization in England, reflecting the

anxiety many youth felt about the perceived efforts of the government to

promote longer work days, change the focus of schools from a liberal education

© 1997 Eliot Bates

18

to vocational training, and alienate people from each other. These misgivings

were infused with the philosophical treatises of Nietzsche, Baudrillard, Sartre,

and others. Contrary to much of the pop press coverage of the industrial

“movement,” it was not simply about making music with power tools and

distorted amplification; rather, it was a highly intellectual, planned, and wideranging movement that embodied performance media of many forms,

provocative videos, body art and literature. Though warehouses were a popular

venue for performances, art schools, concert halls, and commercial television

were also used as spaces for industrial art. This section will focus on the lives of

several prominent industrial artists, several of whom went on to be founders of

the ambient music scene, and show which philosophical tenets of the industrial

movement were transferred to the ambient movement, and which were not.

As early as 1969, the group Coum Transmissions were performing their

sonic experiments in British art schools. Along with Rhythm and Noise,

another art school group, they represented the initial forays into noise

exploration. By 1976, Throbbing Gristle had emerged as the band-structured

incarnation of Coum Transmissions, and the performances had expanded from

the guitar noise and percussion experiments of the early 1970’s into a highly

provocative performance art group that would routinely cause physical harm to

the musicians -- and the audience. It was probably through these performances

that the underground scenes of bondage, body scarification, body piercing, and

other practices that today are part of the “modern primitive” way of life were

© 1997 Eliot Bates

19

exposed to the world. Although the bands didn’t invent any of these forms of

shock treatment, their extensive research in forensic pathology, the occult

traditions of cultures past, tomes of mental illnesses, and the psychology of such

disparate figures as Charles Manson and Adolph Hitler, and their treatment of

such subjects in performance art gave fuel to the modern primitives and the

skinheads.

Such images and performance manners were not completely new to

industrial music; in fact, much of the imagery and performance mannerisms

resemble events during the futurist art movement (1910-1930) and the beat

generation and the danger music scenes of the 1950’s. The reason for the

resurgence of ideas in the early 1970’s is fairly clear: The 1970’s industrialists

were taking classes with the 1950’s beat artists, who in turn had been inspired

by futurist manifestos such as those of Luigi Russolo, or the canonized works of

Lèger and other French surrealists. A common subtext of industrial music is

the dehumanization of mankind as people begin to emulate the machines and

factories they create, as depicted in 1928 with the vivid images of the popular

cult film Ballet Mècanique.3 It is likely that such films were shown in art school

classes. Industrial artist references to cut-up art and non-intentionality can

surely be traced back at least that far.

3

The name “industrial” was not an accidental label for this genre. In keeping with the

philosophy of Lèger, the performance artist Monte Cazzazza coined the term “Industrial Music

for Industrial People” in 1976, suggesting a group of people who had become aware of their

interaction with the industrialized world. (Juno and Vale 1983)

© 1997 Eliot Bates

20

The importance of the art school education on the industrialists has

received little attention from the music press, even in such sophisticated

monographs as the Industrial Culture Handbook. But if the anecdotes Simon

Frith describes in his Art Into Pop about the classes of Gustav Metzger (one

class on electric bass disassembly during performance; others on autodestructive art) are any indication of what these artists were exposed to, it

seems to be a natural progression from classroom to performance space. The

image of industrial musicians is different from that of pop musicians because of

the emphasis on philosophical and intellectual art,and there is evidence of this

in the large amount of space the Industrial Culture Handbook devotes to the

libraries of artists, and their interpretations of major philisophical tomes.

Several of the artists on the Sub Rosa label released a two-CD tribute album to

the French philosopher Gilles Deleuze, citing his concept of rhizomes (from his

book Mille Plateaux) as the premise of the recording studio concept of the

remix.4

Genesis P-Orridge, a constant member of Throbbing Gristle and later

one of the founders of the acid house and other dance music scenes, is an

excellent example of the industrial philosopher. Although his bibliography is

filled with heavy writings of many European anthropologists, fascist scholars,

4

Deleuze’s work Mille Plateaux devotes considerable space to the development of the

rhizome and the desiring machine. For a brief description, I cite the popular Deleuze primer of

Achim Szepanski. “Their movements [streams of desires] - linking, coupling, are defined

through forces that repeatedly construct new networks. The rhizome is such a labyrinth, a rich

ensemble of relations; diversity, connection and heterogeneity, breaks and unexpected links.

They show the vision of a life that opens the ways of production of subjectivity to art, and allows

© 1997 Eliot Bates

21

social darwinists, and existentialists, his specialty is the occult, and he reserves

his highest praise for the writings of Alistair Crowley, from whom he gained

inspiration for his work with conspiracy theories and personal spiritual life. In

an interview in the Industrial Culture Handbook,

Interviewer:

You place extremely high value on work -- don’t you work all the time?

Genesis:

Yes. But then you get somebody like Crowley -- who wrote all those

bloody books! And he goes mountaineering, and has lots of sex; he does paintings, he

travels, he does magazines, he gets books published as well as writing them, he

organizes magickal societies, he has political in-fighting going on, he’s drugging it -how the hell did he do it all? (Juno and Vale 1983: 15)

In the same interview, Genesis shows pure contempt for the music press, who

use the word “industrial” merely to mean noisy music, in ignorance of the

original basis of the movement. In describing Throbbing Gristle’s departure

from the performances of the parent group Coum Transmissions, Genesis says

Now we’re going to try and do that [performance art] with a sort of philosophical,

mystical magick, so non-dogmatic and non-authoritative -- people who’ve been brought

up to despise anything that smacks of “religion” -- maybe we can remind them that

there are useful structures; that spiritual values aren’t necessarily to be despised or

ridiculed. (ibid.., 16)

Another mistake the music industry makes is to assume that industrial music is

merely another pop-like tradition. All the interviewees in this excellent book

say that except for rare collaborative performances, all the artists lived and

worked in complete isolation from other people and particularly from the music

world. It was not a “fun social activity” in the manner of a garage band, and

the horizon of resistance to light up.” (Achim Szepanski, quoted from his Gilles Deleuze

© 1997 Eliot Bates

22

there were no post-concert parties, press functions, or hordes of adoring fans. A

great deal of personal risk was involved in the performances and the way of life,

to some degree from the drug use that occasionally accompanied performances

(though most of the artists I am highlighting despised addicts and junkies). But

there were far greater risks in the way industrial musicians acquired

instruments (theft of metal parts from factories); in the dangers to themselves

and the audience as they performed with flame-throwers, dart guns, and vile

liquid substances; and in the potential for arrest for the production of videos

containing material of an offensive nature. For unknown reasons, Genesis is in

exile in America, unable to return to Britain.

To summarize the original philosophical motives for the “industrial

movement,” Genesis writes:

All of us were working before it became “industrial,’ and discovered each other and

recognized that kindred spirit, that driving force, and that’s what made us all, if you like,

“industrial culture.” It’s just that we wanted to have some kind of alliance, because we

felt like we were all a kind of outlaw -- but we all had some basic motivation and drive in

common... it didn’t even matter whether we thought each other was good -- that had

nothing to do with it... What was interesting was the people involved.... and that we’d

arrived at the same alienated, cynical point, and somehow found a way, a method to

rationalize it and integrate it back. (ibid., 16)

An American musician, Z’ev, made considerable contributions to

industrial and ambient philosophies. In the late 1970’s, he gained worldwide

renown for his fifteen-minute-long performances of intense drumming, that

were often amplified to the threshold of pain. His interview in the Industrial

Culture Handbook succintly describes many of the main beliefs of the industrial

Internet homepage)

© 1997 Eliot Bates

23

movement, particularly concerning the noise-producing sound sources, risk,

and the links between industrial music and “primitive” cultures.

I’ve always been very committed to low-tech as opposed to high-tech! In Europe, a lot

of bands are starting to use metals in percussion, to get a richness and variety of texture

and timbre that one would normally go to a synthesizer for. Whereas in America

there’s still this concept in people’s heads that a $5000 synthesizer is going to make

them a better musician. (ibid., 109)

Z’ev performs under many stage names and stage personae, though there is a

common link between all his performances:

The real crux of it all is -- it’s all coming from this basis of poetry. Various levels of

poetry and various levels of language. Poetry encompasses all these levels, in terms of

the occult situation, in terms of the cabalistic situation, in terms of the more ritual

aspect of Z’ev, in terms of the language-and-sound aspect of Uns, and in terms of

Magneet Bond -- more celestial, and Element L -- more elemental, having to do with

tape processes. (ibid., 111)

In talking about the difference between his performances and those of

mainstream rock ’n’ roll,

A general rock ’n’ roll performance is a social structure that is thrust upon people,

where the music is only a part, a soundtrack for an experience that the people know

everything about in advance.... whereas the Z’ev performance, at the sound level, deals

with an evocative, experimental mode in the listener -- the person listens and it gives

him food for thought -- ideally. There’s a tremendous amount of calligraphic language

in the instruments themselves. If you closed your ears and just watched it, there is a

language almost like puppeteers’ -- whole sagas and dramas get played out... (ibid.)

Z’ev states that he has studied ethnomusicology, particularly African and

Haitian drumming traditions, though his meaning of the study is more in

context with acquiring new motives for his performance than with the

anthropological study of a people.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

24

In the summer of ‘80 I was working with a Haitian man, and learned quite a bit from

him toward understanding the Caribbean systems of voodoo drumming.... I’ve used it

subliminally, but I haven’t really dealt with it that much overtly because... it’s difficult to

do, to keep the concentration. Because if you call an energy down, you have to be able

to deal with it. And if you’re doing shows night after night, for example, you have to be

very centered, otherwise the energy will not leave. And so I’d walk off stage and I

would not be me anymore. (ibid., 113)

Other points that come up in the interviews include his interest in the

soundtracks of movies (particularly horror films), where he points out the

importance of the sounds in invoking reactions in the viewer. Z’ev, in addition

to continuing his intense drumming performances, composed the soundtracks

to many cult films, consisting of many layers of recorded conversations and

abstract spoken word sound sources.

To give a fuller sense of the sort of scene in which these artists were

working, I will describe some of the other industrial performance art traditions

that surfaced in the late 1970’s. Mark Pauline was seminal to the scene,

because his performances with complex destructive robots -- widely televised in

California -- had ambient soundtracks (made by the group Factrix), and dealt

directly with the psychological terror of automation and the progress of the

industrial era. Through the years his prodigious technological abilities resulted

in robots with a complex range of possible motions, and more lethal weapons

(such as real-life rocket launchers and flame throwers), creating a riskier

spectacle. He also experimented with imbedding these robots in dead animals,

or parts of animals, so that it appeared to the audience as though a robotized

© 1997 Eliot Bates

25

rabbit was breathing a fifteen foot plume of fire. All the performances were onetime-only affairs, as the robots’ sole mission was to destroy one another, and

each was put in some sort of “predicament” guaranteeing their destruction at

the whim of another robot. All the robots were dead by the end of the

performance. Pauline was using the welding torch to illuminate his vision of

modern industrial era mankind -- the robots were a metaphor for people

hellbent on self-destruction.

Other industrial groups included SPK (an acronym for the Socialist

Patients Kollektiv5), an Australian (later British) band that created some

infamous videos and shocked audiences with revolting performances.6

However, they preached a doctrine of non-violence and defended the portrayal

of strange medical images in their films as a documentary exploration of

common phenomena to which people have unnatural resistances.

Boyd Rice was the man behind the Non performances, that created a

great deal of noise from a small amount of equipment. Apart from the hall

speakers and P.A. system, Rice could carry all the equipment he needed in a

small bucket. He was not interested in having the audience see him, so he

would walk onstage to create the sound sculptures and then leave the premises

until he felt the performance was over. As a recording artist, he did many

experiments with modified LP’s, producing ones with loop grooves and others

5

The Socialist Patients Kollektiv was a West German group of mental patients who

mobilized into a terrorist unit, only to blow themselves up while manufacturing bombs.

6

Performances comprised of bizarre sex acts such as scatology, and ritual laceration and

body mutilations.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

26

with two to four holes in the center (so the consumer could get four recordings

out of the same disc).

Mark Pauline, Boyd Rice, and the members of SPK echoed much of the

same ideology as Z’ev and Genesis P-Orridge: They believed they were

creating sonic poetry with their performances; they shunned press and popular

acceptance and were much more interested in creating sounds and spaces they

liked to be in; they had a strong work ethic and lived their art; and they were

well read in philosophy and literature and adept at describing exactly what they

did and why they did it. Risk was one of the main features of their

performances (all have been quite seriously injured). Each artist had certain

“specialties” of knowledge, ranging from the troop training tactics of the SS and

psychological treatises on Hitler to forensic pathology, mental “illnesses,” or

beat poetry, which may seem unrelated to their art but that were central to the

mindset of their creative work.

In the early 1980’s there was no longer a venue for the types of music

and visual arts described above. Changes in popular music scene also helped

along industial music’s decline. Although industrial was not a “popular music”

per se (it sold very few records and supported only a handful of artists), the

musicians were aware of other underground scenes and responsed to the

emerging punk scenes in England and California. Punk was, to the industrial

artists, a coyly marketed rock ‘n’ roll, fiercely determined to be commercial and

aboveground in every sense. The image of punk was more important than the

music itself -- the fashionability of stage performances, the look of the records,

© 1997 Eliot Bates

27

and the look of the audience was the performance.7 Skinhead culture was also

developing, and if it began as a statement about the conditions of life inherited

by intelligent British youth, it evolved quickly into a violent (and fashionable)

group. Many of the industrial artists I profile were “skinheads” in the early

sense, but fell out of fashion as they dedicated their life to their art, not their

image, and shunned the violence that punk music inspired.

In the early 1980’s, the music industry picked up on the potential market

for “industrial” music, possibly because of fragmentation among the fan base of

heavy metal music. Groups like Metallica and Iron Maiden had consistently

good concert returns, but the rising costs of producing the elaborate stage

shows that formed the focal point of groups like Stryper, Def Lepard, and Poison

were making two-musician units like Ministry and the less visually oriented

Skinny Puppy and Front 242 a more profitable return. This new “industrial”

music, though noisy, was not based on the philosophy of the original

movement; it was Just Another Pop Music Genre distinguished by an album

cover look, specific equipment on stage, and angrier lyrics. Also, with the

steady increase of volume, anger, and noise in the genres of metal, speed metal,

and the new “industrial” music, the initial shock value that allowed groups like

Throbbing Gristle to get a “message” across was lost, and many of the early

7

Simon Frith relates the fashion cult of punk to the fashion wars between the mods and

the teds, two British style cults from the 1950’s and 1960’s. (Frith 1987)

© 1997 Eliot Bates

28

industrial artists moved into studying the potential of subliminal messages in

music.8

Ex-Throbbing Gristle members Chris Carter and Cosey Fanni Tutti

became involved with the discotheque as well, creating noise-based music that

was danceable. The albums Trance (1982) and Exotica (1989) are two of their

most famous, and were released during tours of the U.S. and Europe. In

addition, the work of the post-industrial group Psychic TV and Genesis POrridge’s DJ’ing in America anticipated the Detroit techno, house, and acid

house music scenes.9 Other artists who are now grouped as ambient

composers began their musical careers working with these eclectic DJ’s, and

include Stephen Stapleton (the composer of all the music of Nurse With

Wound) and John Balance (of Psychic TV), who teamed up with Peter

“Sleazey” Christopherson (of Throbbing Gristle) to form the group Coil. Nurse

With Wound’s main venue has been the recording and the club, and Stapleton

has released about thirty recordings. Coil produced most of their music as film

soundtracks, from short cult films to full features, releasing albums of remixes

of the film scores.10 An interesting community has developed among these

8

The cult of Modern Primitivism, or the branch of industrial ideology that focused on

body modification, piercing, S&M, and other things which had been previously associated with

“primitive” as opposed to “developed” society, became pop as well, a considerable

disappointment to the major players in the underground movement who were specifically trying

not to be imitated or fashionable.

9

The same evolution that commercialized the industrial genre beset the club music

scene, which started as a subversive, intellectual medium but was reduced to a sell-out.

10

Coil became widely known in the club music scene for a music video they created

which began with the grotesque image of flies getting stuck in a vat of honey, and ended with

© 1997 Eliot Bates

29

musicians, who had previously worked in isolation creating industrial music, but

who now collaborate on remixes of each others ambient works. Now we find

Nurse With Wound albums remixed by Current 93, Coil songs produced by

Stapelton in collaboration with Psychic TV, and so on. The Sub Rosa

compilation Double Articulation uses the Deleuzian concept of the rhizome to

explain why all the songs are remixes (and the remixes were done by

composers of other songs on the CD), and how this symbolizes an enactment of

a lateral system of working (rather than a top-down hierarchy). Whether the

compositions are tree-like or rhizomatic, it’s become quite hard to determine

the authorship of pieces or recognize the work of individual ambient composers

with the interchange that now takes place.

At this point I will summarize some of the ways in which industrial

musical metamorphosed into the work of many ambient composers. There is

little difference between the sorts of sounds one hears on industrial or ambient

music recordings. Both genres explore noise-based timbres and shy away from

the prepackaged sounds of conventional keyboards and guitars.11 However, the

powerful images of a rock star who was dying of the AIDS virus. This video is now part of the

permanent collection of the Museum Of Modern Art in New York.

11

The Oxford Dictionary of Music defines “timbre” as “Tone-colour; that which

distinguishes the quality of tone or voice of one instrument or singer from another.” (Kennedy

1985). This is inadequate for describing industrial sounds which aren’t produced by

instruments, or that don’t have discernable pitches (tones). I define timbre as the “Spectral

characteristic of a sound,” and conceive of it as the aural equivalent of a fingerprint. A

fingerprint is a unique, complex combination of simple lines -- a timbre is a unique, complex

combination of simple sine waves.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

30

shock component of industrial performances meant that there was a greater

range of volume than in modern ambient pieces.

Theft was a practiced doctrine of industrial culture. Mark Pauline

recounts memories of organized raids on IBM and other large multinational

factories as part of the creative process of his works: The feeling was that the

anti-factory works should somehow exist outside the conventional channels of

capital flow, that the theft of scrap materials gave more credibility to the

message. Z’ev mentioned in one interview:

The thievery has to do with -- basically, Mercury on one level is the god of learning and

communication, and on the other level is the god of thieves! The thievery is more of an

occult situation, even though thievery is a political act on a certain level -- it’s shaped by

certain socio-economic inequalities. You know, taking from those who have, who can

afford it and don’t give it... the thefts that I did, say in 1980, were done as rituals....

There’s another level of working with the thievery, which has to do with the very big

premium I put on risk in the production of works. So I feel that at the very basic

beginning of the process, which means the accumulations of the material which are

then going to get formed into instruments which are then going to get used in a

performance -- since the risk is such a big part in the performance aspect, I try to keep it

consistent throughout the process! (ibid., 109-111)

Contrast this with pop genres where bands purchase the fad equipment

promoted by mass-media advertising. I have not read specific accounts of

ambient composers and material theft, but the principle of stepping beyond the

normal channels of capital flow is very much an institutionalized practice in

regards to the appropriation of restricted or commercial recordings. In chapter

5 I will discuss this theft further.

Two other principles of industrial music are risk and subversion. In the

context of 1970’s performances, there were obvious risks to the musicians, who

often practiced extreme realizations of the auto-destructive art preached by

© 1997 Eliot Bates

31

Metzger. Most performances involved some sort of physical injury, accidental

and deliberate, to performers and audience alike; those that didn’t often

suggested the possibility of such risk. Subversion came in the messages passed

to the audience, particularly at moments immediately following some shock or

trauma when the psyche is most susceptible to subliminal messages. There

were many targets of subversion: Some industrial artists in San Francisco tried

to create documentary films for elementary schools that included brief flashes

of images that amounted to a rejection of the values the teachers were

espousing, and some films did briefly circulate.

As industrial art was performative, many of the risks were physical;

ambient music exists in the recording studio, so the only risks to the listener

are psychological. Fans are aware that groups like Coil put subliminal

messages in their songs. Ambient maintains the power to suggest in its

application to film scoring. Coil’s music is well suited as a soundtrack to horror

films. If the reader doesn’t believe in the suggestible power of the music, they

should watch Hellraiser II with the sound turned off and compare the level of

fright to the sensations when the volume is on high. Without the soundtrack

the movie could easily be a comedy. By itself the soundtrack (that can be found

in remixed form on the album Unnatural History vol. II) is stimulating enough

to inspire odd and disturbing emotions.

Although I have briefly mentioned lack of intentionality, I want to stress

that the composers of ambient and industrial music, as well as some avant-garde

musical forms, strive to remove their egos from their works. Origins of this

© 1997 Eliot Bates

32

idea are generally credited to John Cage, though they appear earlier in the

philosophy of Dada. Cage also appropriated Zen philosophy, which advocates

stripping away layers of ego in the practice of visual arts. It is likely a derivative

of these influences that inspired Brian Eno to pursue process composition (as

opposed to product composition) and self-generative art in his installations and

albums. Industrialists describe similar beliefs; this is no surprise as they and

Eno were all in art school at about the same time. I talk more in chapter 4 about

two issues that arise from the egoless compositions: the lack of intense

idolization and iconography of the composers, and the use of the CD as a useful

commodity rather than as a recreational product or merely a marker of cultural

capital.

When it comes to hard work and prolificacy, ambient composers are the

equals of the industrialists. Coil, in just five years, released sixteen full-length

and double-length albums, plus compilations and singles; Chris and Cosey put

out twenty-three works, Psychic TV forty-six albums, and Current 93 at least

fifty-nine recordings. All the artists in these groups have collaborated on many

compilations and albums of other groups, and create in ambient and nonambient contexts. A large school of composers who inhabit the twenty-three

label collective distributed by World Serpent (particularly labels such as

Soleilmoon, Staalplaat, and Touch), and who were influenced by the works of

Throbbing Gristle and other early industrial artists, have produced similar

quantities of ambient music. Compare this to the two- and three-album

© 1997 Eliot Bates

33

contributions of thousands of briefly famous pop musicians, and one sees that

there is a fundamentally different mindset at work.

Trajectory 2 -- Brian Eno and Robert Fripp

There is quite a lot in common between the process composition of Brian

Eno and the industrial culture movement. Eno received a similar art education

to the industrialists in his years of apprenticeship with Roy Ascott at Ipswitch,

and was exposed to minimalist music, the ideas of Russolo and Cage, and the

music of the Velvet Underground while in art school. However, Eno took his

intellectual study into the studio, not the performance space, and became a

pioneer of many studio recording techniques.

Eno is a contradictory personality in the ambient music community.

Though his music is apparently not about commercialism (the credo of the

industrialists), he is a financially successful artist. He claims he is not a

musician, but as a non-musician he composed some famous rock songs and

began the entire musical movement of ambient (with the 1972 album No

Pussyfooting). Despite his claim that he can’t play any musical instruments, he is

one of the best known keyboard players in rock ‘n ‘ roll, from his acclaim with

Brian Ferry and Roxy Music. Many magazines point out the lack of commercial

success of his albums (none have gone gold), but when one compares six-digit

sales of twenty albums to the success of a pop band with one platinum release,

or to prolific ambient artists who never sell more than four thousand copies of

© 1997 Eliot Bates

34

any one, he is one of the most commercially successful artists in any genre.

Whether one considers his album sales or his fame as the producer of U2 and

David Bowie (on two of the top ten selling albums of all time), his reputation

was sufficient to win a commission from Microsoft to write a 3 3/4 second jingle

for the Windows 95 computer operating system, for the grand sum of $400,000.

Eno is credited with inventing ambient music, but the first album

described as such was a collaboration with Robert Fripp, who provided the

primary harmonic, melodic, rhythmic, and timbral material. On No Pussyfooting,

Eno experimented with a tape loop process that is analyzed in detail in chapter

5. The input into the equation was Robert Fripp’s Gibson guitar sound, a sound

familiar to fans of his renowned progressive rock act, King Crimson. Though

Fripp didn’t bring production techniques or an art school background to the

ambient music scene, he did bring the sensibility of a successful virtuoso art

rocker, and from 1972 until the late 1980’s he worked with a highly stylized

guitar sound he called “skysaw guitar.” In the same way that Jimi Hendrix’s

guitar sound was the sound of psychedelia, or Kurt Cobain’s voice the sound of

grunge and alternative rock angst, in the early 1970’s at least, Fripp’s guitar

sound was the sound of ambient.

Though Fripp is one of the few early British ambient artists who was not

connected to the art school system, he is an intellectual musician and a prolific

writer for eclectic music magazines. His writings echo the sentiments of the

ambient artists described in this thesis and are the best expression of the

philosophy of ambient music composing.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

35

Much can be written about both Fripp and Eno, and much has been in

their biographies, magazine articles, interviews, and reviews. In chapter 2 I

profile both artists in greater depth, and all chapters of the thesis reference to

their ideas and compositions. In addition these profiles, the bibliography has a

selected list of articles for readers who want more information on Eno and

Fripp.

3rd trajectory -- New York Minimalism

Often when people ask about what ambient music sounds like, they

wonder if the music of Philip Glass or Steve Reich is ambient. There is no

conclusive answer: To some fans it is, and to some it isn’t. Both Glass and

Reich, with their colleagues La Monte Young, Terry Riley, Frederic Rzewski,

Pauline Oliveros, and Merideth Monk, are generally considered to be

“minimalist” composers. However, when one analyzes the real meaning of

Oliveros’ concept of “deep listening,” it is fundamentally similiar to the ambient

listening practices I discuss in chapter 4.

The sacred history of the ambient genre places the history of minimalism

in response to the 12-tone and serial academic composition of the 1950’s and

1960’s, citing a marked transformation from music that went somewhere to

music that was static. Some early works of anti-academic music were “Come

Out” or “Piano Phase.” However, it is hard to think of Terry Riley’s and La

Monte Young’s years of experimentation with intonation systems as a response

© 1997 Eliot Bates

36

to anything other than the general meek acceptance of equal temperament. In

Riley’s words, “We were both going in this direction -- immersing yourself

inside the tone, so that the tone becomes everything.” (Woodard 1997: 70)

Steve Reich, too, abandoned his original protest motivation when his music

gained popularity on its own terms and moved to writing structured pieces such

as “Different Trains” and “Desert Music,” that have since assumed an important

place in the canon of western classical music.12

These two pieces have been cited as favorite “ambient works” by many

fans on the Internet (the Internet fan base of ambient music is discussed in

chapter 3). Drawing lines between the two genres is difficult by purely musical

distinctions though pieces like these stand apart from ambient in that they

require a large number of live performers. But a great deal of minimalist music

is electronic, and Phillip Glass has admitted that many of his works could be

performed quite well by a computer. Minimalist pieces often have an

accompanying tape track that consists of sounds and synthesis techniques used

every day in ambient music production. In analysis, the only real empirical

difference between ambient and minimalism is in the space of representation:

The performance venues of minimalist music are concert halls, while ambient is

a studio-recorded genre. Minimalism, at least to some degree, is about

acceptance as a high-art genre, which is not a concern of most ambient

composers.

12

It is ironic that minimalist compositions, with the pretenses of being anti-academic, are

now introduced to composition students all over the U.S. as good studies for percussion writing

© 1997 Eliot Bates

37

Once we get past the issue of differentiation, we can see how minimalism

has contributed musics and ideas to the ambient belief system, including

elements of Indian music. The history begins with La Monte Young, who was

responsible for bringing the esteemed Pandit Pran Nath to New York. In the

many years that Pran Nath lived in New York with Young and Riley, they and

Jon Hassell studied his rich North Indian vocal tradition, and each composer

applied the formal Indian music discipline to his own work. Young recently

formed a blues band that performs three hour-long blues songs structured more

like an Indian raga than a traditional delta blues number. Riley was interested in

the intonation and the modes and created pastiches of raga on his RCA

synthesizer. Describing his famous work, “in C,” Riley uses imagery similar to

what we would expect from Eno.

It’s almost like fractals... if you take the same shape and repeat it many times and then

you stick them together, they create a vibratory space. That was my big fascination -this vibratory body that happened with patterns interacting. It was kind of like what

Escher was introducing in the visual arts or the OP artists were doing in the ‘60s. It was

about creating a kinetic music. (Woodard 1997: 70)

Jon Hassell, too, adapted Indian raga and ornamentation on his jazz

trumpet. It is through Hassell, Riley, and Young that ambient music

“discovered” Indian music, and if we look at the influence of Indian music on the

opus of ambient works it is apparent that only a few facets of Indian music were

of interest. Hassell’s first ambient album, Vernal Equinox, has a sruti drone on

almost every song, and he explores the timbre of the drone in later albums

and rhythmic structures.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

38

(Music from the Fourth World Vol. I and II). His trumpet solos, which appear on

many ambient albums, are loosely based on the pitches of several raga-s

(particularly Darbari), but do not have the same structure or goal; their limited

pitch range makes them sound like a alap (unmetered improvisation) with

stunted growth. Tala (rhythmic meter) is not important to ambient music,

which shuns beat, and the occasional instance of a tabla will be just as a timbre

or an “ethnic touch.”

Another minimalist inspired composer, Harold Budd, has collaborated

with Brian Eno on several well-known albums and released many of his own. A

pianist, he took the sedate aesthetic of some of La Monte Young’s piano works

and adapted it to a four-minute song format. His works are the shortest ambient

compositions, eliciting some criticism for being repackaged new age pieces.

Budd figured in the New York scene before the Indian influence, playing piano

occasionally with Young (at that time a famous saxophonist) and Hassell (a

trumpeter) in a free jazz group, though his later compositions show few jazz

sensibilities and deal with modal regions like those Eno used on his first

realization of Discrete Music.

4th trajectory -- space music

For many a youth growing up near college towns, the first exposure to

ambient music came from the syndicated radio show “Music from the Hearts of

Space.” Here one could tune in and “chill out” once a week: in Santa Barbara,

© 1997 Eliot Bates

39

where I lived, it was broadcast at the ideal time of Sunday night, bringing a

small refuge of inner calm to the start of another school or work week. Much of

the music played is now thought of as “space music,” not “ambient,” though

programs often included works of Brian Eno, Jon Hassell, David Sylvian, and

many other ambient artists. What this show did was connect the electronic

keyboard and synthesized sounds of Vangelis, Tangerine Dream, and JeanMichel Jarre to the branch of ambient music by composers like Michael

Stearns, Robert Rich, Steve Roach, Michael Shrieve, and Michael Brook.

The sonic landscapes of early space music13 were centered around a few

popular but expensive synthesizers, most notably the RCA Mark II,14 the Bukla,

and the Moog. The main synthesis engines in these units were amplitude and

frequency modulation, which meant that banks of oscillators were daisy chained

to create “complex” combinations of “simple” sine waves. In some instances the

same operations could be applied to an external input, a primitive form of

sampling and sound manipulation. More important than the technical specifics

is how the composers used these units.

Vangelis is undoubtedly the most celebrated space musician, though his

most famous song, “Chariots of Fire,” is much more neo-classical than spacey.

In all his 1970’s and early 1980’s work he paired up electronic and acoustic

sounds, treating them separately and differently. A pianist, he played piano

13

See the discography for a larger list of early space music. Three seminal albums are

Vangelis’ Heaven and Hell, Tangerine Dream’s Phaedra and Tomita’s The Planets.

14

The synthesizer also used to create Milton Babbit’s “Philomel,” Luciano Berio’s

“Visage,” and Terry Riley’s “Shri Camel.”

© 1997 Eliot Bates

40

“solos” on every album, though in many songs (c.f. Heaven and Hell, part 1) the

piano was an accompaniment for electronic buzzes and whirs. He also

performed many Greek percussion instruments and mixed in choral music with

the electronics. Of his electronic effects, one of the most innovative and

characteristic was the portamento sweep, where a large synthesized chord

would smoothly glissando to a new pitch level. He used the same effect on his

synthesized clarinet sounds to make it seem as though the “player” was lipping

the reed.

Vangelis, despite his innovations in sound and his fame as a film scorer,15

used traditional classical forms for most of his pieces. In analysis, many are

sonatas, rondos, or theme-and-variations. In contrasting his work with that of

the other famous synthesizer and stadium concert giant, Tangerine Dream, we

find that although many of the sounds and synthesis techniques are the same,

Tangerine Dream didn’t adopt classical formal structures. They worked more

with layers of drones and ostinatos, putting less effort into the creation of

electronic “solo” instruments and melodic passages. Another fundamental

difference is found in the background of the musicians. In Greece, Vangelis is

known as the man who brought the first Greek rock ‘n’ roll band (Aphrodite’s

Child) to his country in 1967. He has progressive rock roots, and through the

years as one of the heaviest promoted artists of Polydor Europe, he delved into

space music, new age, and music about nature. In recent albums, more of the

© 1997 Eliot Bates

41

rock ‘n’ roll aesthetic has returned, though his new work is completely

synthesized. Tangerine Dream began as a rock band but interacted with

German experimental musicians and, as a group, went through personnel

changes, different working ideologies, and radical altering of their sounds.

Both Vangelis and Tangerine Dream pioneered the art of lavish stadium

concerts, complete with the most advanced keyboards and synths, experimental

lighting systems, and video displays. At Tangerine Dream concerts in

particular, many in the audience tripped on acid, or took other hallucinogens,

and it’s not a large stretch to assert that these concerts were a prototypical

“rave” scene. Raves were an urban music happening (originally in England),

held in abandoned warehouses where top DJ’s would broadcast very loud music

all night and into the morning, and it was at raves that the musical genre of acid

house was created. In the 1980’s, there was a fairly widespread understanding

of the “proper” sequence of drugs to take through the experience, and the

music would change mood from heavy, fast rhythms to slower, spaced out

grooves in response to the expected psychological needs of the ravers. The

variance in affect of the musics held true in British clubs, where different rooms

featured “industrial,” “acid house,” or “chill out” themes. I will talk more about

the club-DJ influence on ambient later in this chapter.

A subculture of Californian musicians, who had all been a part of the

stadium concert and proto-rave scene in the 1970’s and 1980’s, helped create

15

His well known films include Blade Runner and 1492: Conquest of Paradise, and the TV

series Antarctica and Cosmos.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

42

first the space music scene and later “ambient space music.”16 Steve Roach was

one of the first, composing space music much in the idiom of Vangelis’ early

electronic works, but later exploring world music (particularly Indian). He

collaborated with a number of other artists, initially hiring them as studio

musicians, but later producing albums with them or playing on their own space

and ambient music recordings. One of the best examples is the recording Dali:

The Endless Enigma, that is a compilation of the work of Roach, Robert Rich,

Michael Shrieve (the best known “ambient” drummer), Michael Stearns, and

Michael Brook. The work of all these artists comprises the bulk of the playlists

of the Music from the Hearts of Space, still broadcast over the continent at late

night hours.

Robert Rich is one of the central artists on the Music from the Hearts of

Space compilation CD’s, and his world music influenced synthesizer and guitar

washes are a frequent sound on the radio show, too. His personal ideology is

constructed around the concept of glurp, and two passages help to illustrate his

usage of this term:

For many years I have struggled with the schizms [sic] between symmetry and

randomness, rationalism and mysticism, reductionism and wholism, shimmer and

glurp. (from personal correspondence, June 1995)

As a child, I used to stay up late at night reading art books and Charles Addams

cartoons. A neuronal [sic] connection occurred in my brain, merging my fantasies with

16

This is a more specific category than “ambient” or “dark ambient,” referring to music

which is created by former space music composers. The term is one of many coined by fans on

the Internet, but is used frequently by people on the space music mailing lists. See chatper 2 for

more on Internet fans.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

43

Max Ernst’s melting “anti-Pope,” Dali’s Baked Beans and Nuclear Mysticism, the

chirping of frogs outside in the creek, and the dripping of rain upon moss covered

rocks. I could dream living worlds shrouded in clouds, mountains with faces,

geometric truth coexisting with liquid biomorphic phantasms. Glurp is the noun that

collects these associations. Dali was glurp, Gaudi was glurp. Fungus is glurp. Terry

Gilliam, J.G. Ballard, Gahan Wilson, Robyn Hitchcock... all connected to the archetype

of glurp. (from “The Meaning of Glurp,” 1990)

One feature that distinguishes the above-mentioned ambient and spacemusic musicians from all the other ambient artists, is that much of their initial

sponsorship came not from fans but from the music industry, particularly the

consumer electronics market. Roach was interviewed and profiled in just about

every keyboard magazine. Shrieve is featured yearly in Modern Drummer and

Electronic Drummer, and all the artists were used to help market new keyboards

and electronic drum equipment. Concerts became something of an industry

display of fancy new boxes, though Brook and Roach have shied away from that

in their more recent performances, depending less on the industry for their

bread and butter. Unlike the industrial-influenced artists or Eno and Fripp, for

that matter, there is no appeal in broken or semi-functional equipment, or in

low-fidelity sound-sources, which has prompted some Internet criticism as to

their “true allegiance” to new age or space music.

Despite disagreements about the ambient nature of various composers,

space music and ambient fans share a number of other affinities. One is with

space exploration (as in NASA). The year 1979, when the Cosmos series aired

on PBS, was one of the last great times in our nation’s popular history of space

exploration (Vangelis composed much of the soundtrack). The Voyagers I and

II were taking pictures like crazy, discovering new moons around the once-

© 1997 Eliot Bates

44

mysterious outer planets of our solar system. A number of factors shifted the

public consciousness away from space exploration, particularly the space

shuttle Challenger explosion in 1985. This event showed the world that

mortality was an issue in space exploration, and fear over possible repeat

incidents canned any existing ideas for manned missions to Mars or beyond. In

addition, the Republican administration of Ronald Reagan capitalized on the

public fear of Russian retalliation with an increase in high-tech arms

manufacture, which he deployed in situations like Grenada and Libya. His

personal fantasy, we now know, was the construction of unmanned space

weapons (“Star Wars,”) which would shoot down enemy planes, missles, and

rockets -- this is far from the public myth of the scientific interest in outer space

that had fueled many of the space missions.

In chapter 5 I will talk more about one of the main affinities of space

music, and ambient music, fans -- science-fiction. Most of the space albums I

suggest in the discography have cover art which is derivative of the same

graphical art style that covers sci-fi books, and many (such as Albedo 0,39 by

Vangelis) have an entire sci-fi subtext underneath the layers of synthesizers.

Robert Rich and Michael Brook give praise to sci-fi literature as some of their

main musical inspirations; in turn, several sci-fi journals give space music album

reviews.

5th trajectory -- Breakdown of the rock band

© 1997 Eliot Bates

45

Well I saw uh baby dancin’ in her x-ray gingham dress;

I knew she was under duress, I knew her under her dress

Just keep comin’ Jesus, you’re the best dressed...

-Captain Beefheart, “M’Human Gets Me Blues” (1968)

The late 1960’s and early 1970’s saw a number of experimental rock

groups that in many ways broke down the structure and meaning of rock ’n’ roll.

The above example of lyrics shows Beefheart’s interest in the sound of the

words more than in the story told or the meaning attributed to them. The way

he lulled and emphasized the “esses” in each word, placing these syllables off

the major beats of the music, sounds more like a timbral counterpoint to the

guitars than a synchronized vocal. Also, on this song there is no hierarchy of

musicians, and all the layers (guitar, bass, drums, saxophone, vocals) are

playing complicated parts in different meters, with none of the accompaniment /

melodic roles previously attributed to rock.17

A German group, Can, was flipping instrumental roles upside down at

the same time. In this four-piece band, the bass and drums were clearly the

most prominent instruments and the guitar and singer were backgrounded.

Can also broke down the normal accompaniment / melodic roles with use of

polyrhythms, non-rhythmic tape loops, and ambient sounds in the background

of their songs. Their “lead singer,” Dano Suzuki, was something of a deliberate

17

The Magic Band was also unique at the time for their instrumentation, which included

instruments like the Mellotron (a primitive sampling keyboard), bass saxophones, and

marimbas. Many of the drum parts have no cymbals or hi-hat, or only cymbals and hi-hat, and

even the electric guitar, a fairly standard instrument, was played in a very unconventional

fashion by Rockette Morton (who clawed rapid successions of five-note dissonant chords with

his right hand)

© 1997 Eliot Bates

46

mockery as well, with a very non-virtuousic voice, singing lyrics in broken

English. Bassist Holger Czukay, incidentally, went on to record two solo

ambient albums and to collaborate with David Sylvian on the brilliant Plight and

Premonition and Flux + Mutability. In England, the Velvet Underground was

working toward the same aesthetic, with haunting rock numbers that broke

down into long arhythmic and unconventional jams. Their music was a great

inspiration for early punk rock and industrial music, which took skewed

instrument roles as a given and developed from there. Brian Eno collaborated

with Velvet Underground’s John Cale on a couple of albums, too.

Many underground and cult groups that emerged through the 1970’s and

1980’s, cited one or more of the three above groups as their main inspiration.

The early recordings of Sonic Youth, one of the first Californian punk bands,

demonstrate an amazing exploration of guitar feedback.18 In live shows they

instigated feedback loops or slowly evolving distortions lasting for fifteen or

more minutes, and the trance-like states they induced in the audience (and

themselves) are much like the effect of ambient music recordings. Pere Ubu,

originally a Beefheart-inspired punk band in the midwest, was like Sonic Youth

in some ways, but by 1978 they produced theme albums on subjects such as

babies learning to walk. The Art of Walking, in the way it uses recurrent motives

and timbres and features the potential of vocal gibberish as a timbre, is very

much an ambient-leaning album.

18

The best examples are Confusion is Sex (1983) and Early Sonics: Sonic Death (1982).

© 1997 Eliot Bates

47

The Residents were a “commercial anti-group” who pioneered the art of

synthesizer playing. As a commercial entity, they were known for their

anonymity (no one still is sure exactly who the Residents are) and their stage

costumes (tuxedos with large eyeball sculptures that covered their whole

heads). Their Commercial Album, a record of forty one-minute pop songs and

jingles, is ostensibly about making a pop commodity in a pop context but in a

very non-pop way, as the effect of listening to forty different songs in the space

of the time of a normal album makes each piece a unique timbral exploration.

The songs are sparse, and if they have a lyric it is short and incomplete; in one

minute it is hard to make a song about anything. Two to three sounds, no more,

unfold in a given song they but the skill with which the Residents foreground

and background these delicate sounds is unlike the synthesizer use in any other

band I know. However, their best known work, and an album mentioned

frequently on the Internet ambient list, is Eskimo, an attempt at re-creating a few

Eskimo ceremonies and rituals (though they don’t know anything at all about

the Inuit!) A synthesized “wind” track runs through the entire piece, and there

are various arrangements of solo Eskimo chanting (beginning in a language the

Residents concocted and gradually incorporating English words as the Eskimos

are “corrupted” by developed nations), Eskimo choruses, and strange imprecise

drumming. There are also many soft and subtle synthesizer parts. As the

whole album exists in a singular mythical space (a San Franciscan’s impression

of the arctic tundra), it is a major recording in the history of ambient music,

© 1997 Eliot Bates

48

much like Jon Hassell’s Aka•Darbari•Java, Rapoon’s Kirghiz Lite, Nurse With

Wound’s Soliloquy for Lilith, all portraits of a particular landscape.

These are just a few of the experimenters of the 1970’s and 1980’s who

changed the way people listen to rock ’n’ roll, suggesting that the rock group

could be, first and foremost, about timbral exploration (and landscape

navigation). Other groups whose work also influenced ambient music concepts

include Tuxedo Moon, Wire, Dome, the Birthday Party (in Australia),

Einstürzende Neubauten (in Germany), and British progressive rock groups

Pink Floyd, Soft Machine, and King Crimson.19 These groups were pioneers in

sounds, structure, and mood, but as pioneers their music was novel, and unable

to get past being the “first” music to use these concepts. Ambient music was

able to take the new timbres and moods and use them without being novel, and

do (one could say) “further research” on the subjects possible because of

experimentation.

These groups I highlight were also under the constraint of being active

performing musicians, which is not a time commitment for most ambient artists.

Though they would experiment in the studio, too, the demands of fans meant

they needed to be able to recreate, without lip-synching, the albums they

produced. This aesthetic changed in the 1980’s when the groups changed from

album-producing live bands to album-producing studio artists. To take the

example of the group Wire, when they regrouped as Dome, their studio

releases quite exceeded what they could perform live, made of extensive layers

© 1997 Eliot Bates

49

of electronically treated and distorted sounds. The Dome albums, with long

songs that are mostly noisy drone (with a background of indistinguishable

lyrics), are ambient music in a rock band format. The Residents shied away

from performances, too, as they felt they had a mission to create the most

fascinating sounds for people to listen to. They also believed they had a closer

conncection to their audience if they made really good albums, stating that their

fans weren’t buying just a recording but buying a “friend.” (Search and Destroy

#3, 1981) From experimental rock groups we move to experimental DJ’s, who

also began in a performative space but moved to the production of ambient

recordings.

6th Trajectory -- Club Culture

One night on late night TV, I flipped onto a video of an androgynous person moving in

slow-motion in a world that was moving uncontrollably fast. It would come across a

crosswalk on the highway, but the car lights were moving at hundreds or thousands of

miles an hour. On a dank alley way it observed a vine attempting to grow out of a crack

on a dirty brick wall, but later in the video the vine died. The protagonist walked by a

store window in this hectic city, where dozens of black and white televisions were

broadcasting pictures and messages, messages which lasted only 1/24 of a second,

subliminal messages about something, until suddenly one of the video screens rested

on a message for a few seconds, “MONSTERS EXIST,” which caused a great deal of

fear in the androgynous cyber-person. The credits rolled and I saw this strange video

was by the techno/ambient group Orbital, part of a new MTV series, AMP, which

features “ambient music” and videos. Is ambient music going the route of every other

cultish music scene? (research notes, 12/28/96)

The music on MTV’s AMP is by and large not ambient. Artists like

Tricky, Ultraworld, Massive Attack, and Orbital are some of the major players in

19

See the discography for recommended albums by these artists.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

50

trip-hop and acid-house music, though their most recent albums are less dance

oriented, with weaker stated rhythms and more non-rhythmic content.

However, the music industry has latched onto these artists as part of the new

hip “ambient” music scene.

It’s not so easy to dismiss club music as something separate from

ambient music. There are some notable cross-over artists and still others who

work in both experimental, non-dance genres and as dance DJ’s. Also, some of

the first techno DJ’s who shaped the Detroit house scene and most of the

British club scenes -- Chris Carter, Cosey Fanni Tutti, and Genesis P-Orridge (of

Throbbing Gristle), and Richard B. Kirk (of Cabaret Voltaire) -- began as

experimental industrial musicians but adopted a club DJ mentality. Another

connection between club music’s origins and ambient’s roots lies in the

popularity of Krautrock acts, such as Kraftwerk, in the club venues later

inhabited by techno DJ’s. Kraftwerk and Can (cited previously), with other

Krautrock groups, gained international popularity in the early to mid-1970’s and

shared a common fan base.

Considerable information exists on the Internet on hundreds of local

DJ’s, including DJ’s who run chill-out rooms, techno, acid house, and trip hop

DJ’s who have made forays into ambient grooves. As club cultures weren’t a

part of my own musical background and there was already too much

information on the artists I was familiar with, I profess ignorance to many of the

developments in the club-inspired ambient music scenes. Sarah Thornton’s

© 1997 Eliot Bates

51

book Club Cultures would be nicely sequeled by a similar work focusing on such

artists and their fans.

From reading many posts on the ambient music Internet mailing list, I

have ascertained that several artists are quite revered among fans with club

backgrounds who also listen to ambient music. Such artists as the Future

Sound of London (FSOL), the Higher Intelligence Agency, and all the artists on

the FAX label (the offshoot projects of Pete Namlook) are mentioned frequently,

and experts on them abound on the mailing list. Qualities that are attributed to

them are their creative use of techno-based timbres in an ambient manner, but

most of all their ability to transport the listener to virtual spaces (which FSOL

calls “biospheres”) or conjure up abstract images of digital-age life (called

“lifeforms”).

Many ambient list-posters shun techno- and acid house-inspired ambient

music, and the factions of fans have gone through phases of suggesting a

breakdown of ambient into sub-categories (much like the fragmentation of

techno into jungle, trance, ambient, acid house, etc.). The titles of the subcategories, such as “ambient house,” are generally chosen for the timbral

allegiances of that canon of works, which is an interesting contrast to other

nomenclature systems of modern music.20 Thus, ambient house would use the

20

Categories of other underground genres seem to have varying motivations. The

subdivision of the British ska scene in the 1980’s contrived the 2-tone category, named after a

record label; psychorockabilly is a combination of the rockabilly instrumentation with a

psychotic mentality, and straight-edge punk is defined by the substance-free pledge of the fans

and musicians.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

52

same TC-808 drum machine (from which the ambient house group 808 State

gets their name) as regular house, but use it in a different way.

One important cross-over artist is Richard James, the man behind AFX,

Polygon Window and Aphex Twin, a prolific ambient and dance music artist

with a distinct philosophy of music, who recently landed a major label deal (with

Warner). James, like Brian Eno, used many unconventional recording and

sound manipulation techniques to create subtle rhythms and ostinatos, and

more detail on his mysterious compositional practices is in chapter 2. Aphex

Twin has videos on MTV, too. As a club DJ in the 1980’s, he was popular for his

videos, which would fill TV screens in the chill out rooms of prominent British

clubs.21

If James is an example of a balance between the club DJ and the studio

ambient artist, the chill-out rooms where his videos and music played were the

club’s antidote to the overbearing heavy rhythms of techno and acid house.

These rooms, which often had pre-recorded soundtracks, were where people

coming down off drug trips, too exhausted to move anymore, went to chill out.

James was one of the first club DJ’s who DJ’ed the chill-out room, though

Autechre and other cross-over artists soon followed-suit. The chill-out room and

the bedroom or listening room of the domestic ambient fan share a peculiar

similarity. People don’t interact in these spaces, and they experience their own

drug-induced voyages in a darkened setting designed with listening in mind.22

21

See chapter 2 for a composer profile of Richard James.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

53

Authenticity and the Recording

The presence of the original is the prerequisite to the concept of authenticity.

(Benjamin 1968: 220)

One might subsume the eliminated element in the term “aura” and go on to say: that

which withers in the age of mechanical reproduction is the aura of the work of art... the

technique of reproduction detaches the reproduced object from the domain of tradition.

(ibid., 221)

Every fundamentally new, pioneering creation of demands will carry beyond its goal.

Dadaism did so to the extent that it sacrificed the market values which are so

characteristic of the film in favor of higher ambitions -- though of course it was not

conscious of such intentions. The Dadaists attached much less importance to the sales

value of their work than to its uselessness for contemplative immersion. What they

intended and achieved was a relentless destruction of the aura of their creations, which

they branded as reproductions with the very means of production. (ibid., 237)

Walter Benjamin’s The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical

Reproduction, if not the first work to seriously explore the changes in the modes

of art perception after the advent of photography and sound films, is certainly

the most often cited. However, many of the issues that Benjamin introduces,

shrouding the larger category of “authenticity and art,” need a serious reevaluation in the 1990’s. The playing field has expanded and the rules of the

game have changed. Benjamin was not writing during a period when entire

genres were conceived in the recording studio, and commercial recordings

were the original musical performance. Also, it was not until the early 1980’s

that digital technology began to dominate the industry.

22

Sarah Thornton found, in her research of British club culture, that the chill-out room

was often a “VIP” room, one to which only a few exclusive people had access, and this correlates

well with the bedroom ambient listener’s exclusive listening space described in detail in chapter

4.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

54

It is imperative to understand the fundamental differences between the

LP and the CD, to appreciate not only the heightened concern of illegal

sampling, but moreover to understand the added value of a compact disc of

music. Arguments about digital versus analog notwithstanding, the CD is a

virtually exact replica of the original master. By this, I mean that no

degradation of sound, or loss of information occurred when the original master

was transferred to the CD, and subsequent digital copies caused absolutely no

loss in sound quality or increase in noise.23 With the LP, at best the disc is an

approximation of the original, and even with the best turntables there is a

perceivable difference in a copy made from the original master and one made

from the LP. In the age of digital, consumers are buying products that are the

equivalent of original masters, not the dubs they purchased before.

How do we conceive of the aura of a recorded product? Benjamin noted:

Even the most perfect reproduction of a work of art is lacking in one element: its

presence in time and space, its unique existence at the place where it happens to be.

(Benjamin 1968: 220)

We know that the earliest art works originated in the service of a ritual -- first the

magical, then the religious kind. (ibid., 223]

This may be true if one is comparing, for example, a studio recording of a

harpsichord work with the context of the piece in the court of Louis XIV, or a

Real World overproduction of African drumming with the original performance

experience. But how do we analyze a work, such as Oval’s 94Diskont composed

23

There is the potential for a slight loss of quality if the digital mastering of the CD is

© 1997 Eliot Bates

55

by an algorithm on a Macintosh computer, the digital output directly copied

onto the CD one purchases? There is no original time and space of this

recording except in the composer’s head. But there is a sense of ritual, and in

chapter 4 I describe in detail the components of ambient listening rituals. The

work, in its ability to affect the subconscious, takes on a magical aura of the sort

that Benjamin couldn’t have imagined writing in 1938.

Benjamin wrote well before the role of the DJ changed from one who

merely spinned dance records to one who creatively manipulated those

recordings, and before the emergence of any genres featuring the creative art of

DJ’ing (such as rap, hip-hop, and dub). One book that offers a post-Benjamin

definition of “authenticity,” in the context of the recorded artifact, is Club

Cultures. Thornton writes:

First... authenticity is dependent on the degree to which records are assimilated and

legitimized by a subculture. Authentication is the ultimate end of enculturation.

Second, the distance between a record’s production and its consumption is relevant to

the cultural value bestowed upon it. When original performers are remote in time or

place, as is the case with foreign imports and revived rarities, records can acquire

prestige and authority. Third, the environment in which a record is produced

contributes to its authenticity. Records are more likely to be perceived as the primary

medium of musics whose main site of production is the studio. And finally, the

ideological vagaries of music genres like their communication of bodily ‘soul’ or their

revelation of technology play a main role in whether records come across as genuine.

In other words, authenticity is ultimately an effect of the discourses which surround

popular music. (Thornton 1996: 66)

Another writing, and one of the few canonized reception studies, is

Theodor Adorno’s On the Fetish-Character in Music and Regression of Listening.

Where Benjamin attempted to disallow the possibility of aura in a mechanically

poorly done, but the increasing expertise of studio engineers has made that problem rare.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

56

reproduced medium, Adorno attempts to illustrate how the increasing

fetishization and commodification of music has rendered a “musical experience”

impossible.

The consciousness of the mass of listeners is adequate to fetishized music. It listens

according to formula, and indeed debasement itself would not be possible if resistance

ensued, if the listeners still had the capacity to make demands beyond the limits of what

was supplied.... In music as elsewhere, the discrepancy between essence and

appearance has grown to a point where no appearance is any longer valid, without

mediation, as verification of the essence. (Adorno 1938: 285)

The counterpart to the fetishism of music is a regression of listening.... Not only do the

listening subjects lose, along with the freedom of choice and responsibility, the capacity

for conscious perception of music, but they stubbornly reject the possibility of such

perception. (ibid., 286)

Replacing the previous system, where (albeit only a few) people were able to

specifically listen to music, is one where large corporations, through

advertising, dictate the commodities people should purchase. Adorno’s work

borders on pure paranoia, with the author using ideas such as “subversion” and

“betrayal,” and drawing on the images of Aldous Huxley, to contend that “The

liquidation of the individual is the real signature of the new musical situation.”

(ibid., 276) Four quotes illustrate clearly Adorno’s concept of the relationship

between listeners and corporations:

The star principle has become totalitarian. The reactions of the listeners appear to have

no relation to the playing of the music. They have reference, rather, to the cumulative

success which, for its part, cannot be thought of unalienated by the past spontaneities of

listeners, but instead dates back to the command of publishers, sound film magnates

and rulers of radio. (ibid.)

The concept of musical fetishism cannot be psychologically derived. That ‘values’ are

consumed and draw feelings to themselves, without their specific qualities being

reached by the consciousness of the consumer, is a later expression of their commodity

character. For all contemporary musical life is dominated by the commodity form; the

last pre-capitalist residues have been eliminated. Music, with all the attributes of the

© 1997 Eliot Bates

57

ethereal and sublime which are generously accorded it, serves in America today as an

advertisement for commodities which one must acquire in order to be able to hear

music. (ibid., 278)

The consumer is really worshipping the money that he himself has paid for the ticket to

the Toscanini concert. (ibid., 278)

Regressive listening is tied to production by the machinery of distribution, and

particularly by advertising. Regressive listening appears as soon as advertising turns

into terror, as soon as nothing is left for the consciousness but to capitulate before the

superior power of the advertised stuff and purchase spiritual peace by making the

imposed goods literally its own thing. (ibid., 287)

There are several factors which make Adorno’s arguments difficult to

accept, at least in relation to ambient music listening and consuming. First of

all, ambient is a fan-promoted genre. This means that virtually no advertising

monies are spent by the record companies. Second of all, ambient is an

underground, possibly subcultural genre that has a small but dedicated fan

base. It is decidedly unpopular (in a pop culture sense), and in my interview

with Jason Brown in chapter 2 he brings up the ostracism he experienced as an

ambient music fan. Third, ambient, which has been called by several artists and

many fans “isolationist” music, is an entirely solitary activity. In the Internet

survey I summarize in chapter 3, I found that with only two exceptions all the

fans listened by themselves to this music, and many respondants mentioned

that they didn’t know anyone else who liked this style of music. Fourth,

ambient music, though it could be used otherwise, is generally the center of

attention when fans listen, and fans often give hundreds of listenings to a song

or album. An interview with one fan revealed that although pieces by David

Sylvian invoked the same waking dream each time, he discovered many subtle

© 1997 Eliot Bates

58

nuances after years of repeated listening. The intense study of the music, which

isn’t done for academic reasons, is far from “regressive” listening.

These four points appear throughout the thesis in different contexts.

However, there are even more refutations to the arguments of Benjamin and

Adorno, which I will briefly summarize. The limitations I set on the scope of the

thesis mean that I haven’t developed these ideas fully, but introduce them to

stimulate other scholars to consider them.

The packaging of ambient music is a whole field of research in itself.

Though liner notes on new albums tend to be sparse, sometimes not even

indicating the name of the artists or the album, the presentation is very distinct.

Each record label favors a genre of visual art; one notable example is the label

Table of the Elements, which uses inks with metallic pigments for all their

covers. They moved beyond the recognizable gold and silver pigments, and use

less common metals such as zinc, chromium, titanium, tungsten, and tin. The

covers are reminiscent of the paintings of Anselm Keifer. Many of Soleilmoon’s

covers are designed by Robin Storey, whose art has roots in ancient Mayan

calendars and Native American cave paintings. These examples, I hope, show

that the packaging of ambient CD’s is sufficiently different from that of pop CD’s

to warrant a serious analysis as modern art.

I mention briefly that several artists invoke the Deleuzian image of the

rhizome to explain the studio phenomena of the remix. I think that other

aspects of ambient music would benefit from a similar comparison, including

© 1997 Eliot Bates

59

the relationship between audience and composer, the structure of the ambient

community, and the notion of time in ambient music listening.

© 1997 Eliot Bates

60

Chapter 2

ambient composer personalities

In chapter 1 the trajectory is used to demonstrate a mode of analysis that

focuses on the intellectual and musical influences of several important cultural

scenes. This chapter will go into more detail about six important ambient

composers. I singled these artists out for a number of reasons. First, there was

sufficient information in print, either in magazine articles or on the Internet,

concerning the issues I wished to consider about the personalities of the

composers. The seco