I’ve recently started to explore Ambient music largely based on recommendations from this forum by those far more knowledgeable than myself in this area.

This week I’ve listened to works by Chronotope Project (Olduvai Dreams), Chris Russell ( Radium), Tom Eaton ( The Fog And The Lifting), Craig Padilla ( Hidden), David Helping ( Ascension Of The Whales) and Thom Brennan (Green River Passage/ Beneath Clouds Pt 2)

Some of these I discovered as I said from forum members on here and others from the fabulous radio program Ultima Thule (which I was also made aware of by an old thread on these forums)

So what are you listening to in the field of Ambient Music?

Hearts of Space is offering 25% off subs til February. I haven't had a sub in a while but it might be safe to say that HOS was my intro to Ambient when it came on late nights on KPFK in Los Angeles. Inspired by this thread, I'm listening to the current episode on their website. Thanks.

Reciently happened apon the Bandcamp page of Sébastien Wright and bought 'The Silent Cathedrals Of Melancholy'. Reallly liked it so I bought a few more releases of his. You make remember his previous 'band name' of August Stars.

Thanks to the recent reissue of the first 4 Box, I have them all (that I know of).

No worries.The member on here who made me aware of Ultima Thule also made me aware of Hearts Of Space so I too am currently listening to the latest episode.Very much enjoying the tracks by Bridge To Imla. I haven’t subscribed though i’m listening on PRX ( I found the Hearts Of Space website’s interface to be a little clunky but maybe it’s just me!) I also just found a whole bunch of HOS archival episodes on Internet Archive starting from Episode 1 so I’ll be checking them out at some point.

Oh I've been listening to a ton of Laraaji lately. I became aware of him through Brian Eno's ambient series 1-4 but pretty much everything Laraaji has available I enjoy. I have everything in that series except the Laraaji one on vinyl, I'd love to get that. Pretty much all of last month it was my go to bed music.

Oh, another artist who I discovered through Eno's series was Harold Budd. Superior Viaduct re-issued his The Pavilion of Dream last year and man is that a beautiful album and pressing. Its one of those albums that touches you emotionally, at least that's what it did for my partner and I. Heavy rotation for sure.

While it only went three pages, and near the end kind of devolved into a discussion between myself and @GordonM, the Best ambient albums 2022 (so far) thread has a lot of good suggestions for new ambient stuff, and some maybe not quite ambient but still good

Yes I notice that a lot of these Ambient threads do seem to dissolve rather quickly. I did read your best 0f 2022 though and have seen threads for previous years in the same vein. Thanks!

I have had Day Of Radiance in my to listen list since reading about it on here a few weeks ago, so will report back when I do. Thanks

Todays early morning listen. The track Elmorya is great. Anyone know anything about this artist? I believe they are from Cornwall and have a lengthy career in Ambient music which is certainly evident by the amount of releases on Bandcamp. This is a compilation CD called Lotus from 2011. Really love this.

I do listen to stuff which emphasises texture but could only be loosely be described as ambient. Some of the recent stuff is mentioned in that thread @Davey linked up above. However, today I’m listening to the Eno bonus track for Neroli called New Space Music. It’s a nice drifting droning which I prefer to the main Neroli track itself.

Yesterday I listened to Aphex Twin Selected Ambient Works 85-92. It may not be ambient in the same way but it‘s chilled electronic music and a classic of the genre from 80s/90s.

One of my favourites from 2022 - the Arovane/Taylor Deupree album Skal_Ghost. You can find it on Bandcamp.

An ambient artist I sometimes dip into is Christopher Willits - take a listen to his Sunset release on Bandcamp.

Thanks for your input will check out some of those releases.

Yes that’s one of the first ones I listened to after recommendations on here. It’s outstanding and really I can credit that one for igniting my interest in the genre. Have listened to quite a few more Roach releases since but Dreamtime Return is still my fave so far . He has a large body of work though so still exploring!