Why ambient music is my go-to tonic for soothing my mind and managing chronic pain

As Bryan Ferry, lead singer and songwriter from the glam art rock band Roxy Music sang in his “elegant, seductive croon”:

‘Oh oh catch that buzz

Love is the drug I’m thinking of’

– Roxy Music, ‘Love Is the Drug’

Now, if I choose to take this sentiment on a literal level, rather than Ferry’s more carnal connotation, I am totally on-board with the buzz love can bring; the hooks love can sink into us.

I see love as completely embodying life. It’s beyond a substance or entity or emotion that helps, heals, distracts, and motivates. If we are surrounded by love and are open to offering love, life is usually inherently better.

But even if we are lucky enough to have love as our companion, life still dares to throw us curveballs when we least expect it. At times like these, if anything is my go-to drug, or for a much better term, antidote, to darker times, it is music. A cure for the crazy times.

Given the right mood, I’ll listen to practically any genre. My favourite band is indie darlings Pavement, but you are just as likely to catch me listening to The Caretaker one day and Charli XCX the next. I’ll walk to work with Atlas Sound, segueing into Oneohtrix Point Never on the commuter train. Work to Sharon Van Etten, Ben Frost, The Fall, Yellow Swans, Mount Eerie. Later, unwinding with Foxes in Fiction, Big Thief, or Graham Lambkin. Before accepting a helping hand into a deep sleep from Grouper, Félicia Atkinson, or Fennesz.

I appreciate and value all music. Genre, although often a helpful way in, can be a dirty word. If something moves me, captures me, holds me, I pay no weight to origin or appeal, popularity or the music press, aggregated scores, or sponsored streams.

But the style of music I turn to most when struggles bear down upon me, is actually a style first coined by Bryan Ferry’s former bandmate, Brian Eno: ambient.

Ambient music is the empty blanket I can wrap around any mood or moment. Simultaneously, a wash of clouds which disguises rain as tears, the lifecycle of a storm, chaos followed by calm, a gentle iridescence warming the soul after the downpour.

It is music that heals, and as someone who suffers from chronic illness and pain, it holds my absolute respect and gratitude for what it gives me and what I can take away from it.

Waves of Fear / Always Near

Waves of fear, attack in the night

Waves of revulsion, sickening sights

My heart’s nearly bursting, my chest’s choking tight

– Lou Reed, ‘Waves of Fear’

Although most likely describing his withdrawal from heroin at the time, Lou Reed’s lyrics to ‘Waves of Fear’ resonate with me for how they encapsulate feelings of anxiety, depression, and chronic illness or pain.

Sufferers of any anxiety disorder will no doubt note in themselves the waves of fears that can surface at any point — sometimes linked to a large or an apparently arbitrary experience, but also often through no apparent reason at all.

Chronic pain can come in many shapes and forms, too. From surges of electricity, lightning strikes, and shards of glass to constant exhaustion and those familiar waves of anxiety. Chronic pain can be debilitating and demoralising. You’re tired, twisted. Sensitive to light and surface. You can struggle to speak and think and sleep like you once did. Struggle to smile, like you once did.

Living with chronic pain is exhausting, physically and emotionally draining, with no respite, no break, no off switch.

It’s not a laugh every minute, and it’s tough to describe to someone else what it feels like. In fact, it’s highly likely that most of the people our lives intersect with each day will have no idea of the internal pain we have to bear.

Usually, when we feel pain, it’s our body warning us in some way: ‘I’ve cut my finger, I’ve broken a bone.’ But after any process of healing, if pain still reveals itself, then this is no longer functional. If this pain continues where there is no on-going healing after three months, then it is chronic, dysfunctional pain.

“By definition, the difference between chronic pain and what we call acute pain — which has no purpose — is that it doesn’t serve a purpose.”

– Dr Alan Fayaz, a spokesperson for the British Pain Society (BPS) and a consultant in Anaesthesia and Pain Medicine at University College London Hospital (UCLH)

Nearly half of the UK population — around 28 million — live with some form of chronic pain, described as “a major cause of disability and distress.” Chronic pain can come in different forms: musculoskeletal, such as chronic lower back pain; chronic neuropathic pain, caused by a nervous system dysfunction or disease; and chronic widespread pain or fibromyalgia.

It’s no wonder the numbers are reasonably high when suggesting that suffers from chronic pain are pretty likely at some point to experience a form of depression.

The trick is in how we try to manage this pain. There are numerous options from physiotherapy to yoga, practicing mindfulness to therapy, but it’s about finding something that fits you and your condition.

For me, music is a significant help, especially ambient.

Music for Airports, Elevators, or a Trip to The Shops

Music can be therapy for any number of reasons. Personally, it’s a mood lifter, mainly found in melody, a lyric with emotional resonance, a soaring guitar line, a swell of feedback. Music is also a mask. A place to bury myself in. To hide away from the world, if only for the length of two sides of an LP.

When Brian Eno released the solo album Ambient 1: Music for Airports in 1978, he sought to create music that would “accommodate many levels of listening attention without enforcing one in particular; it must be as ignorable as it is interesting.” This music was named ambient.

With Music for Airports, Eno took tape loops of differing lengths and layered them to form a continuous movement of sound. His intention was to create a sound installation which held a quiet power to defuse the tense, anxious atmosphere of an airport terminal.

Eno described ambient music “as ignorable as it is interesting” and that it should “induce calm and a space to think.

Preceding Eno, came Erik Satie’s ‘furniture music’ or musique d’ameublement (1917) — music described as background music, as something that could be played during dinner to create an atmosphere for that activity, rather than serving as the focus of attention. With the greater availability of electronic instruments in the 1960s and 1970s, Jamaican dub and German komische took on the mantle before Eno began to experiment and gave it a name.

As a genre, and to some listeners, it should be easy to describe, but it isn’t always so simple. Within the confinement of ambient, there is an excellent range of beautiful works that stretch out into many different horizons, galaxies even.

Generally, it is instrumental music that pushes the atmosphere and tone ahead of traditional music structure or rhythm. It may lack a distinct composition, a beat, or a melody. Often relying on skilful manipulation of sound and noise, forming layers that reward both passive and active listening.

Ambient has been labelled calming, soothing, atmospheric, unobtrusive, but also abstract, monotonous, pointless, boring. But the beauty of it is: it really depends on you and how you choose to listen. If you gift yourself the chance to plunge into the deep, rewards reap often.

It’s okay if you don’t, though. Ambient music isn’t for everyone. But neither is punk or black metal, ska or vaporwave. But once patience takes hold, ambient gently tugs at your sleeve. Magic can happen on the first listen, but it’s even more likely during the fifth, the tenth, the twentieth listen, when a spell takes hold.

Ambient music can creep up at you like a surprise frost. Although one that thaws, melts and drips. Only to refreeze, then crack and spread, forming strata and scree.

It is music that can adapt to fit whatever mood or environment we find ourselves in. From waiting in an airport to walking the dog in the park. From waking up and being in too much pain to walk, to buying some milk for our cup of tea. Ambient music can be the background to our day and night, but also an intense spiritual experience when time, mind, and ears are devoted to it.

Ambient Is My Zen Garden

“In forty years of medical practice I have found only two types of non-pharmaceutical ‘therapy’ to be vitally important for patients with chronic neurological diseases: music and gardens.”

– Dr Oliver Sacks

Ambient is not just magnolia. Plain, nothingness. A blank sheet of wallpaper to stare at. It can be, however, if that’s what needed: a reflective surface to bounce ideas off, encouraging respite from a messy mind. Ambient can also be protection, submerging us in anything from a light mist to dense fog.

Depending on the artist I choose to listen to, I can plunge deep into invisible waters, get taken along on swirling winds, get sucked into the centre of mountains, be lost in the forest or a hidden cave, erupting out into glorious clouds, at one with the birds, raining down like diamonds into shimmering sea.

Ambient can also be my zen garden; separating me from Earth, finding a place in a space all of my own. A treasured void. An escape from the noisy and busy and crazy and insane. Swapping the overstimulated for simpler solace.

Upon listening, we can enter an ambient mode where nothing is being prioritised into the foreground or background. The music helps us take the weight off our minds, or distract us from our pain, to help give us a little better focus of our surroundings.

There are no wrong ways to listen to ambient music. Do so passively, and its magic seeps into your everyday existence. It becomes the background insulation of my work. A trigger to induce sleepiness and unwind a coiled mind. An accompaniment to reading, tightening my cocoon away from the outside world, locking my senses even more so into the textual world.

Books are magic too, but in different ways to ambient music. Both can distract from my pain. But whereas good fiction does so through a narrative which takes us deep into a labyrinth of characters, decisions, and outcomes, ambient music — especially when we offer it complete focus — distracts through its textures, tones, timbre, loops, and dots, swells and spirals; its slow yet seismic shifts, the layers of sound, noise, notes, motifs; its quiet magical patterns and moments sidling into play, floating through one slow minute into the next, until we realise an hour has passed, and our mind is calmer. Our pain had been taken away to a space that both holds and heals, if only for a while.

Ambient music has an amazing ability to instil calm in any situation. From exam revision, work deadlines, for sleep, after emotional breakdowns and break-ups, in grief, panic attacks and any moment where colours and sounds seem to be moving too fast.

While the rise of raves was brought about by the need for escapism and the joy of being able to disappear from the daily grind into shared ecstatic energy, the process of listening to ambient pushes us deeper into our own thoughts. Ambient carries several shades of calm within its mysterious shapelessness, which can help whittle away the anxiety and blow away the psychic maelstrom.

There is scientific research that backs up the case that ambient music can be therapeutic. But how does it work?

Maybe, because it can draw us away from the experience of adverse physical or mental stimuli with something familiar, something soothing. Perhaps, because it’s slow music for our fast times.

Maybe, it is because within the constant harmonies and slow pacing, there is a wordless song that sings out ‘there is no danger here’, be at ease. Be free.

Sadly, the Ambient Is No Longer What It Was

The coverage of ambient music seems to move in peaks and troughs, dipping in and out of the near mainstream. But whatever might get written, it has never gone away. It’s not a trend, it is, and does, its own thing. This is the beauty of ambient.

I’m absolutely no expert in the genre, but I am an expert in my own feelings and how this music makes me feel. I simply celebrate it and the artists who make it.

Although appearing deceptively simple, ambient is a genuinely underrated art form that requires a delicate balance of listening, process, theme, and composition. I’m forever thankful for what ambient brings into my life, especially in the moments when I am most in need of a pick-me-up.

I always feel better knowing I can return to my ambient cave at any point when the city is too busy and noisy. Knowing that Loscil’s Equivalent will lift my feet off the pavement, up towards abstract clouds. Or how Solastalgia by Rafael Anton Irisarri will ground me, take me out of my own thoughts, and solidify the real world. Being reminded of the beautiful vastness of nature and how little we really are, through Lawrence English’s ‘wind album’, Viento. How ‘Strangeworks’’ the opening track to Eluvium’s False Readings On tears my malady into pieces with its torn, yet cathartic spirit.

Knowing there is always exactly the right haunting William Basinski loop to lose myself in for every possible occasion.

Just like ambient music, I can’t stay still. I’m always devouring recent releases, as well as the new-to-me classics. There is so much great ambient out there. And many of these artists reach out to each other, play with each other and celebrate one other. There is a tight community out there, and it’s inspiring. As a fan, I’m eternally thankful for every release I have ever heard and connected with, for every new recommendation to follow-up and later lose myself in.

I try to live for every moment. And in each of these moments, I carry my burden, whatever that may be at the time, and keep on walking from one point to the next, knowing that pulsing slowly somewhere in the atmosphere is a piece of ambient music I can step into at any moment.