Paessler AG PRTG Network Monitor software is a solution for effective monitoring of websites and networks running on the Windows platform.

Paessler AG PRTG Network Monitor allows you to easily and at an early stage detect network and website failures, monitor network resources, instantly identify system errors and minimize downtime.

Monitoring is carried out 24/7, and installation takes no more than 2 minutes. As a result of this application, local corporate networks work faster, with fewer delays and greater reliability.

Paessler AG PRTG Network Monitor users include more than 200,000 system administrators of small, medium–sized businesses and Fortune 500 companies.

Network monitoring

Bandwidth estimation (TCP/IP, UDP, ping, HTTP)

Monitoring of servers, drives, switches

Monitoring of processors, hard drives

Temperature and humidity monitoring

Monitoring of air conditioners

Network voltage monitoring

Firewall monitoring

Printer monitoring

Monitoring of medical systems (DICOM, HL7)

Monitoring of machines, surveillance cameras

Proactive identification of risks and problems

RTG Network Monitor contains more than 230 types of sensors for all major network services, including HTTP, SMTP/POP3, FTP, etc. The administrator receives notification of emerging risks (by email, SMS or pager) before the end users discover the problems.

After the PRTG Network Monitor has been running for several months, enough network performance data is collected to fully optimize the speed of sending and processing network requests, minimize downtime and reduce bandwidth load.

Multi-language support

The PRTG Network Monitor app is available in English, German, Spanish, French, Danish, Japanese, Czech and Chinese. Users can access the program from a desktop PC on the Windows platform or through a web browser under any OS.

In addition, if necessary, the administrator can work in PRTG Network Monitor from iPhone/iPad mobile devices and Android smartphones.

Bandwidth monitoring in global and local networks, on servers, websites, devices, URLs

PRTG Network Monitor operates on a Windows computer connected to the customer's network, collecting various statistics from the network JSC and software.

The application extracts the necessary data so that the administrator can view both the network history and respond to current issues.

In addition, the PRTG Network Monitor program is able to automatically detect AO and network mapping software.

The easy-to-use web interface allows you to share monitoring data with colleagues and clients through reports and graphs.

This makes it possible to plan the network load, find out which applications are used most often, and prioritize network traffic. PRTG supports various protocols: SNMP and WMI, Packet Sniffing, NetFlow, jFlow and sFlow.