Paessler PRTG is a professional, easily scalable network monitoring tool for monitoring and troubleshooting your entire enterprise network, no matter if it runs on Windows or Linux operating systems, on-premises or in the cloud.

From hardware and virtualized environments to network traffic, bandwidth usage, and applications, PRTG monitors availability, performance, uptime and downtime, or hardware health metrics such as CPU usage.

The price of the solution is based on the number of 'sensors' used – that’s what Paessler calls the individual measuring points. Every license, even the free version, offers the complete range of functions.

Paessler offers 100 sensors in the Freeware Edition.

Implemented as a comprehensive network monitoring solution, this 100-sensor edition is sufficient for a small company network or large home network. However, it can also be an interesting option for monitoring critical points in a larger network.

Syslog/Trap manager

In this first example, the Freeware Edition is used as Syslog and SNMP trap receiver. Syslogs and SNMP traps deliver a lot of information to devices in the form of text messages, which are delivered to a corresponding receiver.

A single Syslog Receiver or SNMP Trap Receiver Sensor can theoretically be used to monitor an entire network: Under lab conditions (one single sensor without filters), PRTG could handle 10,000 messages per second (Syslog or trap) on a quad core desktop machine, so the software offers more than enough power reserves.

The messages are collected and can be filtered and sorted, then serve as a basis for customizable real-time alerts, notifications and reports. You’re left with 99 sensors that can be used as Syslog and SNMP trap receivers for individual, important devices or for other purposes entirely.

Website monitoring

A website is a company's business card, showcase and retail outlet. However, if just entering a shop takes too long, most customers won’t even come in. Constant, comprehensive monitoring is necessary in order to guarantee fast response times and general availability of a website.

With 100 sensors, the free edition offers enough options for comprehensive website performance monitoring. For example, the HTTP v2 sensor can be used to monitor general availability, while the HTTP Full Web Page sensor measures the time needed to load an entire page. One can monitor specific website content for changes, or use the HTTP Transaction sensor to monitor processes like logins or filling out and sending forms.

Because the Freeware Edition also includes remote probes, these can be distributed worldwide to monitor the availability and reaction time of websites from other countries. Website operators can ensure that their sites are available for international customers as well. In addition, some sensors can be used for web server monitoring or to monitor backup processes, for example.

Database monitoring

Databases are another critical point in many companies. Whether internal systems or websites, the performance of many processes is directly dependent on the performance of the underlying database.

The Freeware Edition offers predefined SQL sensors (MySQL, Microsoft SQL, ADO SQL and Oracle SQL) for in-depth SQL database monitoring. To this end, one sensor monitors various standard parameters, while still permitting custom SQL queries, so that the monitoring can easily be adjusted to fit individual requirements.

Printer monitoring

Printers are generally not as integral to a company as databases, email or websites, but broken printers, empty toner or print jams often make for annoyed users. Up to 50 printers can be monitored with the Freeware Edition, if two sensors are used per printer:

One sensor that monitors the toner levels, queue, paper, etc.

A second sensor that monitors statistic values, like printed pages

With the network mapping and topology feature – which involves easy-to-create HTML pages for individual visualizations – printers can be displayed on a blueprint of the office, so the administrator immediately knows where the printer needing maintenance is located. The internal ticketing system can be used to create tickets and assign them directly to the responsible colleague.

In addition, the Freeware Edition can be used as a free and powerful alternative for some scenarios that, at first glance, seem to require expensive special solutions.

Flow monitoring

Functions that are usually available for purchase as add-ons or modules for other standard monitoring solutions like SolarWinds or ManageEngine are included in PRTG.

The Freeware Edition can be used in a small scope to monitor routers and switches using flow protocol. A flow sensor (PRTG supports NetFlow for Cisco devices, sFlow, jFlow and IPFIX) processes a flow stream from a router or switch. In this way, the free PRTG edition can monitor up to 100 flow-capable devices for free and analyzes the traffic that runs on these devices.

PRTG does not aim to replace highly specialized flow solutions with its flow sensors, but helps administrators to maintain a quick overview of top talkers, top protocols and top connections in day-to-day work.