Israel Rising

Speaking of which, and getting further into the meat of our presentation today, John Melotte, Director of Courm's London office is freshly back from Tel Aviv, he has been meeting with a number of interesting and well-run software and internet companies. Corum has done multiple deals with Israeli firms and he'll talk a little bit about that. We're certainly no stranger to the territory. John will talk to us about some of the things that makes this region so significant in our industry. Thanks, John.

John Melotte

Well, thank you Dougan. Israel is often in the news. This small country has more than its fair share of headlines. It also has more than its fair share of software technology companies.

8 million people, living in a country similar in size to New Jersey, smaller than Belgium. Yet, it is second only to the US for computer start-ups and it has the largest number of NASDAQ-listed companies outside North America. BackWeb, Check Point, Click Software, Comverse Technology, and so on. Great global software companies.

Israel has created an environment that welcomes entrepreneurial start-ups, incubates them through their early growth, and then supports the movement of the business from the constraints of a small domestic market, re-basing executives and the sales & marketing operations in the US, but leaving the technology back in Israel, and then hooking up to US finance. This is the “Israeli model” and no one else makes it work as well as they do.

Check Point, ClickSoftware, Amdocs will be considered by most people to be American companies – but they all have an Israeli technology heart. Other companies here, such as Ness, have remained based in Israel. Like all successful global companies these top Israel buyers acquire technology and business from across the world. If the deal is right then geography is no barrier. They have done many deals in the US, but also Romania, Spain, Italy, Hungary, Czech Republic, India, Canada, Ireland, Denmark, UK oh, and Israel.

We have on this slide a great bit of analysis for the Corum research team. Deal size is definitely on an upward track for the Israeli buyers.

Israeli buyers currently operate at an interesting level, as you can see from this slide of the notable software deals done by Israeli companies in the last couple of years. Good mid-market deals.

Israel: a land of milk and honey. A land of some great emerging software businesses, and the technology heart of good number of acquisitive companies; potential buyers of your mid-market software business.

As successful as the Israeli model has been for Israeli technology companies, not all have moved to the US. There are some great repeat buyers based in Israel. Here we have two: Ness Technologies and NICE Systems. These two companies have acquired ten companies in the last five years. They regularly appear on our lists of potential buyers for the selling clients that we represent. Indeed Corum represented Logos, one of the Ness transactions on this slide, and we have sold businesses to NICE in the past.

And with that, it is my pleasure to introduce Mr. Josef Mandelbaum, CEO of Perion, the company that was until last month known as Incredimail. IncrediMail was founded in 1999, and conducted an IPO in January 2006 on NASDAQ. It currently employs approximately 130 people, and has offices in Tel Aviv, Israel and New York. In August, Incredimail acquired Smilebox, and as Perion has secured additional bank funding for additional acquisitions. Over to Josef.

Josef Mandelbaum

At Perion, our object is really to build simple, safe, and useful products for what we call the second wave of adopters. These are people who are not tech savvy, although they are technically proficient. Technology to them is a means to an end, but such a part of life that they can't get around it, so they are embracing it. But, they are certainly not as savvy and secure in how they embrace technology. We are looking for companies in terms of M&A that really have a product in the productivity sector that addresses the needs of these consumers that we think, through good consumer insight and usability expertise, we can make it simple, safe, and useful to them for our consumers to use. And it goes across all platforms, like mobile and social. It does not include enterprise, we're really going after the consumer segment and we don't really have a geographical preference at this time.

At American Greetings, where I was the CEO for 10 years, in the internet and media division, we bought companies in five different countries, and being based in Israel actually gives us an advantage based on geography and reach. We can manage many different time zones more easily from here than in the United States from that perspective.

As I mentioned, we are not constrained by geography, but for M&A we are looking clearly at the US as for a plethora of startups, looking for different types of companies that have been around for a while, we call them orphan companies, and what I mean by that is we are looking at companies who started as much as seven or eight years ago, who have a great product, a single product in most cases, and because of different reasons, going public is not an option, they are not huge successes, but they have minor success, and the VCs are funding them in many cases, and they have to exit as their funds are expiring.

We think those are good opportunities for us and since they started six, seven, eight years ago, the reality is that they are probably more appropriate for my demographic anyway. We're also looking in Europe, particularly in Eastern Europe as it is very robust, there is lot of activity happening there, and a lot of really good technology and product people coming up with great ideas. So, Eastern Europe, Israel obviously, and the US are the three main places we are looking today for acquisitions.

As I mentioned, our focus is on second wave adopters, but the difference today between a second wave adopter and an early adopter, an early adopter fundamentally embraces a new product or new industry, and they are willing to try anything. Today second wave adopters, we look at mobile, tablets, social, those are all things which aren't new anymore, they are a few years old. Even though a second wave adopter won't be the first one to rush to try, say, Facebook if it were created today, but they would join the social revolution at some point.

So the question is how do we create products and services that really address the needs of my audience on these existing platforms. As we look at the future, clearly mobility is a big issue, whether it is a phone or a tablet, and it is going to grow and our audience, I think, may be bigger users of the tablets and will jump ahead as a consumption factor, maybe even ahead of the mobile phone, and of course social is growing as well. We're clearly looking at those aspects, where the trends are taking us, even for our audience.

Is the tech scene in Israel is unique and poised for future growth? The answer is absolutely yes. There was a book recently written about Israel called Startup Nation which describes the unbelievable technology, talent and entrepreneurial spirit of the country and the people and that is certainly demonstrated in the technology sector. Most big corporations have R&D sectors here, Israel has the most startups per capita in the world after Silicon Valley, the most entrepreneurs, the most public companies on the NASDAQ in the tech sector after the US.

A lot of this is driven by the military, there is a very sophisticated military with a draft, so a lot of people participate in that and go through certain divisions and training which hone skill sets, and just the spirit of the country is really an entrepreneurial one, which really helps drive that. The talent here is really second to none, probably on par with Silicon Valley, which gives you a great opportunity to focus on product development and technology solutions for all aspects of the technology sector, from enterprise to consumer, and especially for a company like Perion, we're certainly taking advantage of that unique concentration of technology here and we are poised for future growth, in our company, but also the country itself as well. Thanks.

John Melotte

Thank you very much Josef, for joining us today. It’s clear that your company is well positioned for significant growth in the next year and we will certainly be watching your developments.

Next I’m equally pleased to introduce live from Tel Aviv, Mr. Roy Golding, the CFO of TelMap,

a maker of mobile navigation software based in Israel. Two months ago, TelMap was acquired by Intel. Details of the deal were not disclosed, but Israeli media said Intel was paying $300 million to $350 million. A major deal, surely, but in past month’s time, TelMap has made two of its own acquisitions -- first of Australian mobile carrier Optus and second: South Africa's third largest mobile operator, Cell C, which will provide mobile mapping, search, and navigation services for Telmap. Roy, it’s been an amazing few months for you. What can you share with our attentive audience about your experiences?

Roy Golding

Thank you, John. It has been a very exciting last few months and I have just been with TelMap for 2.5 years and I can say that these years have been extraordinary, exciting, certainly taking into consideration the dynamics in the market and how face this market has moved.

Within these last two years, TelMap has renewed all its major contracts with the global leaders in tier one mobiles, and we signed additional contracts with NTS, one of the biggest Russian operators. We support a vast majority of operators around the world, including a recently renewal of contracts with all four carriers is Israel.

Through this dynamic market, so much has changed, but we are profitable and cash positive. In addition, we released some time ago what we define as the creation companion, which is TelMap 5, cutting edge technology for location. We have the basis for advertising, local content, social, and commerce, all meeting together in location. We positioned ourselves as a leader and as of a year ago, 46% of paying users are TelMap users.

TelMap is consistently the fastest, consistently growing company in our segment year after year. TelMap did not settle in the position where it is now. We felt about a year ago that the time for TelMap with its new contracts, its business model, its profitability, the cash flow, that it was time for us to move to the next level.

We had many meetings and we thought about the possibility of acquiring and we decided that we wanted to escalate to a level where we could engage with the big players. We started a process, looking at and defining backers. We went to all the suspected guys and chose backers that we felt comfortable with and who had experience in this field. This was a very long and exhausting period.

First of all you just want to find the right partner, a partner with vision who presents itself and gives the company the opportunity to grow and execute its vision. We found that partner with Intel. Both Intel and TelMap position themselves as friendly to the operator. They don't go after the end user, they don't take away the business, we work together and we provide one label for the operators. This obviously supports also the Intel vision. We felt that it was a very good match and Intel acquired TelMap as a stand alone company, meaning we have freedom and we can execute our vision and continue our growth in an ever-changing market.

One of the things that I think is worth mentioning is the joint vision that Intel and TelMap have. Intel's field mobility is one of its growth areas and plays a leading role across the mobility ecosystem, including consumer services. Obviously in that ecosystem, location is a key factor, and TelMap is a market leader in the mobility location industry. TelMap has developed cutting edge technology and IP around mapping, location services, and navigation. As a result we have more than 7 million users using that technology and location companies worldwide.

With that, John, back to you.

John Melotte

Well, Roy, we can’t thank you enough for joining us live from Israel and sharing your insights. Corum’s European team has just returned from a 5-day trip of meetings in Tel Aviv, but we’ll be back soon and we hope to catch up with both out guest speakers then, and with the many Israeli companies that we have mentioned today.

Dougan, that’s our report from Israel. Back to you.

Dougan Milne

John, thanks for your insights on the region and certainly a special thanks to Roy and Josef for taking the time today, congratulations to both of you on your M&A success.

We do have one more speaker, a friend of Corum, Stefan Fountain, he is the founder of Soocial, and Nat Burgess, Corum's President, had the chance to catch up with Stefan for a very candid explanation of his deal, so let's go ahead and roll it.

Nat Burgess

Now we have Stefan Fountain, founder and CEO of Soocial. Soocial was acquired on Tuesday by Viadeo. Stefan, welcome. First, tell us about the name. How did you arrive at the name Soocial with two Os?

Stefan Fountain

It sort of started as a joke, because we realized that Google, Facebook, and Yahoo! all had two Os in the name. We figured that if you want to make it big, clearly you need a name with two Os. And the reason behind Soocial, well the whole idea was that you have all these social networks, and in Holland you had a network called Hide. People were sending each other virtual beers and it was very silly. So we looked at that and felt that the most important social network you have is still on your phone, the people you contact to have a real beer with, the people you go out and have meetings with and if they are not in your phone, then they can't be that important. Hence the name Soocial and the whole idea of backing up and synching your phone address book with other address books.

Nat Burgess

If they're in your phone and you get a new phone, or you entered them in another system, you can solve that problem of making your contacts available anywhere.

Stefan Fountain

That's it in a nutshell.

Nat Burgess

You've had talks with a number of companies that are global household names in social networking, but the company that ultimately bought you is not, especially here, a household name. They are Viadeo. I was looking at them, they have over 40 million users.

Stefan Fountain

Yes, it's very interesting. It seems like these guys have been able to sail under the radar a bit and now they are really gearing up for a much more global exposure. They are really big in France, they're number one there.

Nat Burgess

They're certainly part of a bigger trend that we are seeing with buyers we've never heard of emerging from different geographies. That is exciting to be part of that. Let me ask you a last question, in terms of getting that last transaction done, was there anything that you did that worked particularly well to move that to closure?

Stefan Fountain

I think there are two elements there. I think the one is a balanced enthusiasm, understanding what their vision is and really trying to get behind that vision and seeing if it aligns with your own. That's what happened with these French guys, we found a real click with their CEO and their product officer and we really hit it off. We immediately decided that was where we were going, and I think it was really key to do that.

The other side is playing hard to get a little bit.

Nat Burgess

Well, thanks for checking in with us from Amsterdam. I'm looking forward to hearing your next album. If anyone is interested, go to littlethingsthatkill.bandcamp.com, and there you'll find music with Stefan on bass and backing vocals. Thanks so much, Stefan.

Dougan Milne

Nat, thanks for making that phone call. Folks, that was Soocial in a nutshell right there. Good for Stefan, a great deal for both parties there.

I see our chat window has been filling up with questions, we'll go to our Q&A with some of our speakers and the Corum team now.