Virgin Radio

10 Oct 2023, 15:33

Credit: Getty/@bbcdoctorwho X (formerly Twitter)

Over 800 episodes of Doctor Who related programming will be coming to BBC iPlayer for the first time this November.

In order to celebrate the sci-fi institution's 60th anniversary, as well as this year’s three David Tennant starring specials, the BBC has revealed it will be releasing tons of new content to its streaming platform, including episodes from the show’s so-called ‘classic’ era.

This will include Doctor Who’s first ever episodes starring the First Doctor, William Hartnell, and later fan favourite episodes from the show’s Fourth Doctor, Tom Baker, plus much more, all of which will be let loose onto the streaming platform from 1st November 2023.

Also included alongside the classic Doctor Who TV serials will be the American made-for-TV Doctor Who movie which starred Paul McGann and Sylvester McCoy.

“Viewers will have the opportunity to travel back in time with any of the Doctors through the show’s 60 year history,” a statement from the Doctor Who team said on Tuesday, 10th October.

It also teased how the spin-offs Torchwood, The Sarah Jane Adventures, Class and “every” old episode of the behind-the-scenes show Doctor Who Confidential would all also be made available on BBCiPlayer this November.

The BBC will also simultaneously be launching an online archive service featuring interviews with the show’s cast from over the years, written documents, behind-the-scenes photos and “long unheard audio” on the same day.

“Together, they tell the story of the ground-breaking series through 60 archive gems for the 60th anniversary,” the broadcaster’s announcement revealed.

Celebrating the announcement, Doctor Who’s current showrunner Russell T Davies said: “I’d like to thank the BBC for all the hard work, to get this massive back catalogue under one roof, at long last.

“I’m so excited for new viewers - imagine being 8 years old, spending winter afternoons exploring the 60s, 70s 80s and beyond,” he said, before adding: “And we’re determined this won't be a dusty museum - we have exciting plans to bring the back catalogue to life, with much more to be revealed!”

Every episode released onto the platform this November will be available with multiple accessibility options including subtitles, audio description and sign language.