Jay-Z put on a stylish display as he attended the Shawn Carter Foundation's 20th Anniversary Black Tie Gala in New York City on Friday.

The rapper, 53, modeled a classic black tuxedo suit with a satin bow tie at the event to celebrate two decades of the Shawn Carter Scholarship Fund — which he founded with his mother, Gloria Carter.

For the special occasion, the Blueprint 3 hitmaker donned a tailored jacket with shiny lapels over a classic white button-down.

The entrepreneur — who was spotted at his Book of HOV exhibition with his wife, Beyonce, 41, their 11-year-old daughter Blue Ivy earlier on the same day — also sported the matching trousers and shiny dress shoes.

Since 2003, the foundation and program created by the record producer and his mother has helped low income students achieve their goal of higher education and awarded scholarships to over 200 students annually across America.

At the star-studded gala, he was spotted mingling with many A-list attendees and even seen shaking hands with Kris Jenner's beau, Corey Gamble, at one point.

He was photographed beaming as he headed into the celebratory event.

He smiled widely and put his arms around his pals as they reunited at the star-studded gala.

While heading inside, he ran into former NFL player Dez Bryant and stopped to take a photo.

His mother, 72, was also spotted in attendance with her wife, Roxanne Wiltshire, as they made their first public outing and red carpet appearance since getting married earlier this month.

For the special occasion, the newlyweds — who tied the knot at a lavish, star-studded wedding in Manhattan on July 2 — were attached at the hip as they showed off their matching, all-black ensembles.

The Shawn Carter Foundation CEO looked stunning an a tuxedo jacket with leather lapels over a white button-down.

Instead of a classic tie, she accessorized with a gray silk scarf tied into a knot and tucked underneath the collar of her top.

To finish off the look, she donned a pair of sleek and chic trousers with patent leather dress shoes.

The mother-of-four was also seen modeling delicate silver hoop earrings and a pair of glasses with a rounded frame — which she later took off as she gave a moving speech onstage.

She was also seen toting around a glittering gray clutch to match the sparkling sequined details on her wife's dress.

The Wiltshire Foundation president — who Gloria had reportedly been dating, prior to their wedding, as far back as 2018 — put on a glamorous display in a strapless, floor-sweeping gown.

The Trinidad-born and New Jersey-based mother-of-two modeled the stunning garment featuring a horizontally-pleated bust and a mermaid-style skirt adorned with a stunning sequined design.

To accentuate her décolletage, she wore a silver necklace with a dainty star arrangement.

She styled her raven black tresses in an elegant updo with loose curls to frame her face.

She was also seen sporting a delicate silver bangle bracelet and carrying a black leather clutch purse.

A$AP Ferg was also spotted putting on a dapper display at the star-studded gala.

The 34-year-old rapper looked effortlessly stylish in an oversized, silk suit featuring a double-breasted and double-buttoned blazer jacket.

As he posed on the red carpet, he also showed off the matching pair of floor-sweeping trousers in the same light-catching material.

Underneath the chic choice in outerwear, he donned a white button-down that was fastened all the way up to the top of the collar for a modest look.

He also sported a pair of split-toe dress shoes in a shiny patent leather material and accessorized with a single massive diamond earring.

Miguel, 37, showed off his style, as well as the tattoos adorning one of arms, in a sleeveless tuxedo vest with satin lapels.

The Sure Thing singer also donned a sleeveless black button-down as well as a shiny leather bowtie and belt.

He finished off the look with the matching trousers, shiny dress shoes, and various ostentatious silver jewelry pieces decorating his hands.

DJ Khaled, 47, also opted for stylish matching black ensembles with his wife, Nicole Tuck, 47, to attend the star-studded gala.

The record executive and DJ modeled an all-black satin suit with a pair of classic wayfarer sunglasses and sneakers.

At his side, the entrepreneur and music manager looked stunning in a black gown featuring a plunging keyhole detail and a long pleated skirt that was made up of a sparkling mesh material.

She teamed the dazzling garment with black sandal heels and a structured clutch.

Yo Gotti, 42, was also spotted posing on the red carpet with his girlfriend, Angela Simmons, 35.

The rapper sported an iridescent, leopard-print tuxedo jacket and black trousers. He also donned a satin bowtie, a flashy white watch, and shiny oxford shoes.

The actress and entrepreneur showed off her figure in a low-cut, off-shoulder peplum blouse worn over a satin skirt.

For an additional touch of glamour, she donned silver metallic sandal heels, an eye-catching clutch adorned with crystals, and various dazzling diamond jewelry pieces.

While posing on the red carpet, Tinashe, 30, looked ethereal in a satin, baby blue gown teamed with silver accessories.

The 2 On singer donned the flowing dress featuring an asymmetrical draped shoulder detail with chrome sandal heels and a reflective mini purse.

The House Party actress also threw up her tresses into a polished topknot to show off a pair of organically shaped hoop earrings to go with her shimmering eyeshadow look.

Tamika Mallory, 43, put on a stylish display in a black gown with a mock neckline and one long sleeve.

The stunning dress also featured a cutout at the side of her waist and a sexy thigh-high slit that pulled into ruching on the side of her hip.

The American activist wore a pair of clear, pointed-toe heels with pearl details and accessorized with a Chanel box bag on a delicate gold chain.

Elle Smith was also spotted at the gala in a sleeveless, baby blue gown with a unique sheer design to highlight various cutouts on the torso and to reveal her legs.

The 25-year-old model also slicked back her hair into a polished bun to showcase a pair of dangling interlocking hoop earrings.

Similarly, Regina Hall, 52, looked radiant in a baby blue dress to attend the celebratory event.

The Girls Trip actress donned a figure-hugging, long-sleeved dress with a plunging neckline adorned with carefully arranged rhinestones along the bust.

The Scary Movie alum completed her look with a glittering silver clutch and a pair of metallic sandal heels.

Dr. Jackie Walters, 59, looked fabulous in a tight-fitting black gown with a circular underarm and midriff cutouts for a unique halter style in the middle of the torso.

The internet personality swept her voluminous curls to the side to showcase a pair of dangling earrings.

The Married to Medicine reality star further accessorized with silver bangle bracelets worn over the sleeves of her dress.

In similar fashion, Angie Martinez, 52, also modeled a black gown with long sleeves and cutouts to create a halter style.

The radio personality carried a black clutch purse as well as showed off her legs and high heels that were revealed by the sexy thigh-high slit in the skirt of the garment.

Robinson Cano, 40, also posed on the red carpet and put on a stylish display in a royal blue satin tuxedo.

The MLB player sported a black bowtie over a classic white button-up to match the dark lapels on his polished jacket.

Meek Mill, 36, looked effortlessly modish in a black suit with an intricate and ornate pattern adorning the slim lapels that he teamed with a classic black tie.

The Dreams and Nightmares rapper wore the matching patterned belt and finished off his dapper look with a pair of shiny patent leather dress shoes.

Lil Uzi Vert, 27, looked eye-catching in a crisp white suit with contrasting black lapels and shiny dress shoes.

The Pink Tape rapper accessorized in a tan woven hat with a black band and a red bandana tied around his neck.

The XO Tour Llif3 hitmaker also sported a pair of oversized sunglasses as well as a diamond-encrusted watch, chain, and extravagant bracelets.

Gamble — who was spotted arriving around the same time and shaking hands with Jay-Z — donned an all-black suit and left his blazer jacket open for a semi-casual appearance.

The 42-year-old internet personality also sported a pair of circular sunglasses with a metal frame as he posed for photographs on the red carpet.

Babyface, 64, was also spotted at the star-studded gala with his girlfriend, Rika Tischendorf.

The singer-songwriter put on a bold display in a hot pink satin suit with black lapels and adorned with the Dolce & Gabbana monogram.

The 12-time Grammy winner teamed the flashy suit with a pair of large retro sunglasses and shiny pointed-toe dress shoes.

At his side, the 33-year-old German model-turned GM of Babyface Entertainment looked striking in a sleeveless blazer dress with an extreme thigh-high slit to show off her toned legs and a pair of crystal-lined sandal heels.

Michael Rubin — who threw the epic, star-studded Fourth of July white party in the Hamptons earlier this month — was also spotted in attendance with his model girlfriend, Camille Fishel.

The billionaire entrepreneur donned a classic black tuxedo with a bowtie and all-white sneakers.

The social media personality posed at his side in a figure-hugging pale lavender gown with a chrome structure detail lining the top of the strapless garment.

Chaka Zulu was also spotted in attendance with a friend. The manager of Ludacris donned a white blazer and button-up with deep blue velvet trousers, mules, and the matching bowtie.

Robert Kraft, 82, was also spotted in attendance at the extravagant event in a handsome blue suit.

The Kraft Group chairman and CEO — who is also the owner of the New England Patriots — sported a tuxedo jacket with subtle chevron stripes with the matching pants.

He donned a white button-down with a slim black tie and jazzed up the look with a pair of flashy, rhinestoned sneakers.

Rudy Gay also attended the gala and posed on the red carpet with his wife, Ecko Wray.

The 36-year-old NBA player dressed sharp in a pastel blue button-down underneath a navy tuxedo jacket and the matching trousers.

By his side, Wray put on a glamorous display in a low-cut, figure-hugging dress adorned with purple, light-reflecting sequins.

Chazz Palminteri was also spotted at the gala with his wife, Gianna Ranaudo.

The A Bronx Tale actor, 71, donned an oversized satin tuxedo in a navy blue color with a black tie and a pinstriped button-down while the film producer donned a chic ensemble with matching colors.

The 57-year-old actress donned a figure-hugging black quarter-sleeve top with a flowing satin skirt with a belt tie.

She accessorized with crystal-covered shoes and carried a dazzling rhinestoned clutch purse.

Phoebe Gates, 20, was spotted posing solo at the gala in a black satin gown with a gold structured chest piece covering her bust.

The internet personality and daughter of business magnate Bill Gates teamed the unique ensemble with platform heels and tied back her tresses in a sleek topknot to showcase a pair of dangling silver earrings.

Steve Rifkind, 61, looked sharp in an all-black ensemble with satin lapels and a tie over a classic white button-down.

Jesse Collins was also spotted at the gala with the president of his entertainment company, Dionne Harmon.

The producer donned a black tuxedo with a satin bowtie and matched with Harmon — who modeled a stunning dress with a lace bodice, white skirt, and a black satin bow detail tied across her chest.

At one point, radio DJ Zane Lowe, music writer Nadeska Alexis, radio personality Dotty, and radio broadcaster Ebro Darden were all spotted posing together on the red carpet.

Lowe donned a royal blue suit while Alexis modeled a satin pink one. Dotty wore a black double-buttoned suit as Darden sported a black shiny tuxedo.

Later, Meek Mill was spotted again but this time posing with Sophia Kianna — who opted for an all-white ensemble — and Gates.

The social entrepreneur and activist donned a pair of pumps and a strapless gown with rectangular cutouts running vertically down the the front.

As the trio posed together for a fun group photo, they smiled animatedly and threw up their hands.

Later, Michael Seltzer and Steve Gawley were spotted posing together inside the venue showing off their matching black tie ensembles.

Lil Uzi Vert also took a picture with Juan 'OG' Perez — who donned a navy blue tuxedo with black lapels and a satin bowtie.

He was also photographed signing a bottle of Armand de Brignac Ace of Spaces Brut Rose that would later be put up for auction during the charity gala.

During the gala, Babyface changed into a fully sequined ensemble to give an electric performance onstage.

With a team of backup singers, he put on a fun performance for the many A-list attendees.

Inside Pier 60, Palminteri and his wife were also photographed with Angelina Davis, Monte Lipman, and Rifkind.