New York, NY -

JAY-Z’s Shawn Carter Foundation has accomplished an amazing feat by raising $20 million to help college students looking to pursue higher education.

On Friday (July 14), Hov’s foundation hosted a black-tie gala in New York City to celebrate its 20-year anniversary, where it raised money to assist those facing socio-economic hardships realize their educational ambitions.

There were numerous donations given including $10 million from Amazon chairman Jeff Bezos and his fiancée Lauren Sanchez, which will allow the foundation to build out their international exchange program, scholarships, community goodwill and emergency assistance programs.

Twitter founder Jack Dorsey also donated $2 million to the foundation as part of his annual contribution.

A bevy of celebrities attended the event including JAY-Z, Beyoncé, DJ Khaled, Lil Uzi Vert and Meek Mill, to name a few.

The Shawn Carter Foundation was co-founded in 2003 by JAY-Z and his mother, Gloria Carter, and has provided students with college scholarships and tours to historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs), study abroad opportunities, wealth building programs and more for underserved youth and families from disenfranchised communities.

Prior to the gala, the Shawn Carter Foundation announced a partnership with Robert Kraft’s Foundation to Combat Antisemitism to put a halt to the nationwide book bans that is affecting many educational programs across the U.S.

Both organizations contributed $1 million to advocate for free speech and intellectual learning, while Fanatics and Live Nation donated $500,000 apiece to provide additional support for the initiative.

The money raised will allow both organizations go toward book donations, legal support, marketing assistance, and other items to institutions who’ve been directly affected by the nationwide book ban.

Aside from his charitable endeavors, JAY-Z is also receiving flowers from his peers. His “Money Ain’t a Thang” collaborator Jermaine Dupri recently proclaimed that the Roc Nation mogul’s “Book of HOV” exhibition is the best curated celebration in honor of Hip Hop’s 50th Anniversary.

“As I’m coming in the studio, I’m watching clips of this ‘Book of HOV’ thing that Brooklyn Library decided to wrap the whole building in JAY-Z’s lyrics and turn the whole library into the ‘Book of HOV’ exhibit,” Dupri said on his Instagram Stories. “And recreate Baseline [Studios]. Listen, man. This is one of the most creative things I’ve seen done for Hip Hop 50.”

He continued: “I been saying this. When I wore the flat top, I did that to pay my respects and homage to Hip Hop. But this Brooklyn Library wrapping — the library with his lyrics — this is the most creative thing I’ve seen this whole Hip Hop 50, and I’m inspired.”

“The Book of HOV” opened its doors for a private party at the Brooklyn Public Library on Thursday (July 13), and marks one of the largest of its kind dedicated to a single Hip Hop artist.

According to its official website, the multimedia experience “presents thousands of archived objects, including original recording masters, never-before-seen photos, iconic stage wear, prestigious awards and recognitions, as well as videos and artifacts from every facet on JAY-Z’s professional life.”

Tracing the billionaire mogul’s journey from Brooklyn’s Marcy Projects to global stardom, the exhibition aims to “provide a behind-the-scenes look at a Hall of Fame songwriter and performer, successful business person and a consequential philanthropist” while celebrating his “artistry, roots, accomplishments and transcendent cultural impact.”

Among the array of rare artifacts on display from throughout Hov’s almost 30-year career is a recreation of Baseline Studios, the famed New York City recording studio where Jigga crafted classic albums like The Blueprint and The Black Album.