JAY-Z and his mother, Dr. Gloria Carter, commemorated the 20th anniversary of the Shawn Carter Foundation on Friday (July 15) with a glamorous gala. Held at New York City’s Pier 60, the star-studded black tie affair boasted appearances from the head honcho Hova, Beyoncé, DJ Khaled, Meek Mill, Lil Uzi Vert, Yo Gotti, and plenty others, who all came out to celebrate the organization’s two decades of service. Regina Hall hosted the event and Babyface took the stage to perform.

Business partners like Fanatics founder Michael Rubin and New England Patriots owner Robert Kraft were also in attendance. Kraft recently locked in a new partnership with the SC Foundation. Together, they are reportedly taking a stand against the rise of book bans by “donating $1 million to provide pro bono legal services to educators and librarians who’ve been targeted by local policies banning books.”

The celebratory event raised $20 million to support those facing socio-economic hardships further their education at postsecondary institutions. Amazon founder Jeff Bezos and Láuren Sanchez made $10 million legacy donation. Twitter founder and Square CEO Jack Dorsey also donated $2 million. All proceeds from the night will go towards the foundation’s efforts in opening the doors of education, travel, enlightenment and experiences to the underprivileged.

The Shawn Carter Foundation was established in 2003 and has committed to providing resources for students through scholarships, study abroad opportunities, tours to HBCUs and universities, and more.

The Reasonable Doubt creator has been in headlines this past week thanks to the honorary The Book of HOV installation at the Brooklyn Public Library. Roc Nation created the spectacle to celebrate the legacy of the Brooklyn legend, displaying rare art, photos, videos, and plenty more for fans to see for the first time. Most notably, Jay’s lyrics are currently plastered on the outside of the library’s walls to help ring in the new installation.

Take a look at photos from Shawn Carter Foundation’s 20th Anniversary Gala down below.