Burkina Faso has a population of almost 23 million people, with 32% of the population residing in urban areas and 68% living in rural regions. The country is heavily dependent on the agricultural sector, as 73% of the working population of Burkina Faso is employed by the sector to some degree. The agricultural sector accounts for 20.4% of the nation’s GDP.

Agriculture in Burkina Faso is largely subsistence based and consists of a small variety of crops and livestock.The agricultural sector is characterised by low productivity rates that have been exacerbated by climate change due to increased drought and desertification. National improvements in agriculture have reduced the likelihood of famine, however, roughly 20% of the population of Burkina Faso are food insecure, with nearly 44% of the population living below the international poverty line of $1.9 per day.

The top produced commodities in Burkina Faso are maize, sorghum, fruits and vegetables, and cotton seed. Similarly, Burkina Faso’s top export commodities in terms of quantity are cotton, karite nuts, cashew nuts, sesame seeds and cottonseed cake.

Minimum wage

The national minimum wage exclude farm workers in Burkina Faso, who are paid by work days. The estimated minimum wage for these workers is 46,799 West African CFA franc (71 EUR) per month , the equivalent of 1,918 West African CFA franc (3 EUR) per 8-hour day of work multiplied by 24.4. It is common for employers to pay their employees less than minimum wage. Many workers supplement their income through subsistence agriculture, the informal sector, or extended family.

Living Income

The Global Living Wage Coalition has developed a Living Income reference value study for rural Burkina Faso based on the Anker methodology.

The living income reference value for rural Burkina Faso is 104,436 West African CFA franc (159 EUR) per month for a typical rural family. This living income reference value is roughly twice the income of a typical rural family earning a minimum wage. Nonetheless, it is expected that living income gaps vary largely across Burkina Faso, as poverty levels are three times higher than in urban areas. Rural farming households, which depend mainly on agriculture, have the highest poverty rate in the country.