Quick Facts

Official Name: Burkina Faso

Capital: Ouagadougou

Official Languages: French

Recognised Languages: Mooré, Mandinka, Bambara

Independence: (from France) 5 August 1960

Population: 17,322,796 (2014 estimate)

Currency: West African CFA franc

Time Zone: UTC+0 (Daylight Savings Time not observed)

Burkina Faso Travel Insurance

Get travel insurance to Burkina Faso from Direct Travel Insurance. We offer low cost and high quality travel insurance to Burkina Faso and most of the world.

Direct Travel Insurance Guide to Burkina Faso

Situated in West Africa, Burkina Faso is a landlocked country bordered by Mali, Niger, Benin, Togo, Ghana, and the Ivory Coast. Its capital, Ouagadougou, is the country’s largest city. An estimated 70 languages are spoken in Burkina Faso, with around 60 of these being indigenous languages. The principal local languages in Ouagadougou are More, Dyula, and Fulfulde. Many schools are bilingual.

Burkina Faso’s climate is primarily tropical, with a rainy season lasting approximately four months from May/June to September. In Ouagadougou, the short cold season – between December and January – has an average minimum temperature of 16 degrees. The hot season, from March to May, offers a maximum average of 43 degrees.

Malaria and other tropical diseases are common – you are advised to visit your GP at least four weeks prior to travel in order to check for any necessary vaccinations or medicines. Medical facilities in Burkina Faso are limited, and evacuation to Europe is often necessary for any serious medical treatment.

The Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office currently advise against some travel to Burkina Faso, owing to recent terrorist attacks. Please check for updates here - https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/burkina-faso - before you book your trip. Direct Travel Insurance are unable to offer cover for travel to any country against FCDO advice.

You should also be aware that there is no British Embassy in Burkina Faso. If you need assistance, you should contact the British High Commission in Accra, Ghana. Burkina Faso has an Honorary Consul, who may be able to offer limited assistance.