Today’s Geo Quiz sends us to the home-town of the world’s top woman tennis player. Now, if you’re thinking, Saginaw, Michigan — after all, that’s where Serena Williams was born — I’m afraid that’s not it.

Jelena JankovićJelena Janković

Serena Williams was number one. But she made way in the rankings today for Jelena Janković. And the current tennis queen hails from a city in southeastern Europe. It’s the capital of Serbian culture, education, and science. And it’s on the Danube River. In fact, it’s the second biggest city on the river behind only Budapest in population.

Jelena JankovićJelena Janković

So we’re looking for the hometown of the world’s top woman tennis player, Jelena Janković, who plays right handed with a two-handed backhand. The ball’s in your court.

Today’s Geo Quiz introduces us to the woman who, as of today, is the best ranked women’s tennis player in the world. We asked you for the hometown of Jelena Janković, or “JJ” as she’s known.

Jelena JankovićJelena Janković

The city — and the answer to our Quiz — is Belgrade, the capital of Serbia.

View Larger Map

The Women’s Tennis Association gave Jelena Janković the top spot in the sport today. And Janković intends to stay there.

?Hopefully I would like to finish the year as number one ranked player in the world and I will try my best to continue in this way and hopefully I can do it you know there’s a couple of tournaments left so I will really work hard and try my best.?

Working hard is something JJ is used to doing.

“You know this year I struggled a lot with the injuries and I wasn’t able to really practise and I wasn’t able to produce the tennis that I wanted and now since the US open I haven’t had any injuries so I’m every day real spending a lot of time on the practise courts and in the gym and all this hard work is starting to pay off so I’m really pleased about that.”

Jelena JankovićJelena Janković

Janković also volunteers to work on behalf of children as the UNICEF Ambassador for Serbia. This week, Jelena Janković is competing in the Kremlin Cup in Moscow.