Love repairing old and broken stuff using ramen noodle, epoxy resins and crayon epoxy art? You might have seen millions of videos trending all over the world where you can see broken objects like tables, chairs, decoration pieces being repaired and fixed using ramen noodles, few using epoxy resin art and last but least crayon epoxy. Well we bring you the first ever repair & fix it game so be the repair master and fix the item now, the latest restore game is here where you can actually learn to repair & fix broken items using noodles, epoxy resin and crayon epoxy for the first time using real and actual process involved in such an oddly satisfying way that you won’t be able to resist repairing and giving these old wrecked broken items and giving them a new decorative look. Cut, polish and paint your masterpiece! the way you want using the epoxy resin art and restore these old objects into something new. Unleash the restoration master in you and not only restore these broken objects, but also give them a new look using smooth, addictive satisfying tap and hold controls that will make you play it all day long. Enjoy lots of objects to create your very own masterpieces. Can you fix things using ramen noodles, epoxy resin art & melted crayons? Lets find out in this new addictively smooth repair, fix & restoration game.

Sell what you make at the highest price to the customer and unlock new things that will amaze you.

The game is oddly satisfying to play and includes ASMR triggers that will relax you.

The device vibrations synchronized with each activity along with crisp graphics and smooth controls will surely make you play it all day long.

Learn real life DIY epoxy resin ideas and turn useless old objects into decoration pieces, perfect for restoration lovers.

Learn to do oddly satisfying ramen noodle repair that had been a crazy trend for a long time.

Perfect repairing experience. Highly satisfying to get a sense of fulfillment by making objects perfect, you have to Fix the Item with ASMR triggers!