In this week's How I Met Your Mother, we revisit an episode that aired soon after Lily and Marshall had gotten back together. In this one, they decided to elope, rather than go through all the mess of planning a wedding, especially after Lily had called off the last one and Marshall's family was none too thrilled with her. In the end, though, they didn't go through with the quickie wedding. It's not the strongest episode of the season, but it had some good laughs.

After Lily and Marshall go through the realization they want to get married, they gather Robin, Ted and Barney together, get a pedicure and head to Atlantic City. Little did they know there was a three day waiting period. This is good info for anyone thinking of getting married in Atlantic City. Lily and Marshall were initially very disappointed and starting hatching plan after plan to get married, but in the middle of actually getting married, they decided perhaps a big wedding would be best. This story was a fairly decent side-track for the newly reconciled couple.

Barney had some great moments this episode. He was the one getting the pedicure, and he made it look manly. Some Chinese businessmen came by and he knew them, had a conversation in Chinese with them, and clearly was on very friendly terms. He leads such a secretive life, but at the end, we discovered it was all simply related to his gambling problem. He managed to win enough money for Lily and Marshall to get married in international waters, though, thanks to his little problem and a game that no one but Marshall understood. Pick the jellybean? Seriously?

Despite some good moments both with Lily and Marshall's relationship (we have to wonder about the syrup after all) and Barney's usual scene-stealing self, by far the show-stopping moment of the episode was Robin's t-shirt. Ted was so enamored with the shirt, he even wanted to have sex with her with it on while they were at the courthouse. Her reaction was less than enthusiastic, which made the whole situation even funnier. Watching Ted scratch the painted on butt at the very end of the episode as he was wearing the shirt capped off the hilarity of the whole situation and is a moment that can be watched again and again always with the same result - laughs.

It was a very good episode and had some great moments, but focused more heavily on what most people deem as supporting characters, Lily and Marshall. Barney's gambling issue definitely could have been explored more as well, especially with the opportunity of being in Atlantic City. Another moment that, at the time, seemed to have weightier meaning, was Robin's admission she might consider marriage someday. We know it won't be to Ted, though.

Did you watch "Atlantic City"? Tell us what you thought about the episode by leaving a simple rating or a more detailed Reader Review.