Season 2 of How I Met Your Mother aired from September 18, 2006 to May 14, 2007 on CBS and contained 22 episodes from Where Were We? to Something Blue. Starting with this season, each episode would regularly feature cold opens with original footage instead of beginning with the opening title.

Synopsis[]

Ted and Robin are now a couple, and a heartbroken Marshall tries to move on without Lily. Barney and Ted try different ways to help him feel better, but only Robin can by taking him to a shooting range. Barney tries to encourage Marshall to date again, but continually sabotages any dates Marshall scores. Realizing art is not her true calling, Lily secretly returns to New York. Marshall initially rejects her offer to get back together, but when he eventually sees how far Lily will go to stop him dating someone else, they reunite. They begin to re-plan their wedding. Ted is shocked to discover his parents divorced without telling him and he vows to be more open with his children than his parents ever were with him. Ted and Robin fight when Robin accidentally mentions she finds Ted's work boring. Lily briefly lives with Barney who is surprised at how much he enjoys having a woman actually stick around for once. Robin struggles to say "I love you" to Ted. Barney loses a "slap bet," which permits Marshall to slap him in the face five times at any point in the future, whenever Marshall chooses. Barney introduces his gay, black brother James (Wayne Brady) to Robin. James and Barney used to score men and women together, but Barney is shocked and disgusted when James reveals he is engaged. Barney refuses to attend the wedding until James announces he is adopting a child. Neither Barney nor James know who their biological fathers are but Barney believes that TV host Bob Barker is his, and takes a trip to California to compete on The Price is Right. Ted misses a flight to Chicago for a job interview which Future Ted believes changed the course of his life. Robin is offput when she realizes how much of Ted's apartment is made up of things he kept from his exes. Ted retaliates by asking her to give away her five dogs, as they are all from exes too. Ted initially clears his exes belongings and Robin gives away her dogs but the couple have a huge fight when Ted reveals he never actually got rid of his possessions. At the end of the fight, Ted and Robin decide to move in together. When Ted moves his things to her place, there is no room for him and Robin does not enjoy him living there. He moves back in with Lily and Marshall, who were already missing him anyway. Everyone discovers Robin was a teen pop star in Canada in the early 90s, with a hit single "Let's Go To The Mall". The music video is viewed by Barney hundreds of times. The lead-up to Lily and Marshall's wedding is a series of disasters so the couple skip the initial ceremony and get married outside with only Ted and Robin in attendance and Barney officiating (while crying).

In the season finale, at the wedding reception, Barney discovered Ted and Robin have been broken up for some time due to their conflicting views on marriage. The season ends with Barney excited at the prospect of Ted and himself being single at the same time again.

Cast[]

Main Cast

In order of character appearances

Josh Radnor as Ted Mosby (22/22)

Jason Segel as Marshall Eriksen (22/22)

Alyson Hannigan as Lily Aldrin (22/22)

Neil Patrick Harris as Barney Stinson (22/22)

Cobie Smulders as Robin Scherbatsky (22/22)

Bob Saget as Future Ted (22/22) (Uncredited)

Recurring Cast

In order of character appearances

David Henrie as Luke Mosby (4/22)

Lyndsy Fonseca as Penny Mosby (4/22)

Joe Nieves as Carl MacLaren (4/22)

Joe Manganiello as Brad (3/22)

Charlene Amoia as Wendy the Waitress (3/22)

David Burtka as Scooter (1/22)

Wayne Brady as James Stinson (1/22)

Emmitt Smith as Himself (1/22)

Bob Barker as Himself (1/22)

Lucy Hale as Katie Scherbatsky (1/22)

Marshall Manesh as Ranjit (1/22)

Episode List: 2006-2007[]

Image Title Writer(s) Director(s) Airdate # Where Were We? Carter Bays

Craig Thomas Pamela Fryman September 18, 2006 2x01 Marshall is depressed over his and Lily's break up. Things get worse when he learns she might be back in town. The Scorpion and the Toad Carter Bays

Craig Thomas

Chris Harris Rob Greenberg September 25, 2006 2x02 Barney helps Marshall get back into the singles' scene. Lily is back in town and Ted and Robin try to learn the truth about how she feels about the breakup. Brunch Stephen Lloyd Pamela Fryman October 2, 2006 2x03 Ted discovers that his parents are keeping a secret from him after his dad acts as Barney's wingman. Marshall and Lily try to get each other aroused. Robin doesn't understand Ted's mother's reaction to her. Ted Mosby: Architect Kristin Newman Pamela Fryman October 9, 2006 2x04 Barney tells Ted that single women like architects. But will Ted use this useful tidbit of information to cheat on Robin after they have their first fight? World's Greatest Couple Brenda Hsueh Pamela Fryman October 16, 2006 2x05 Things get weird when Lily moves in with Barney. Marshall's relationship with Brad gets out of hand. Aldrin Justice Jamie Rhonheimer Pamela Fryman October 23, 2006 2x06 Ted gets Lily a job as an office assistant at his architecture firm. Barney tries to seduce Marshall's law professor. Swarley Greg Malins Pamela Fryman November 6, 2006 2x07 Marshall goes on his first date since the break up with Lily much to her dismay. Barney gets a new nickname. Atlantic City Maria Ferrari Pamela Fryman November 13, 2006 2x08 Marshall and Lily elope to Atlantic City, but they discover that getting married in Atlantic City isn't as easy as getting married in Las Vegas. Slap Bet Kourtney Kang Pamela Fryman November 20, 2006 2x09 Ted tries to uncover a secret about Robin's past. Barney and Marshall have a slap bet riding on the outcome and Lily serves as the Slap Bet Commissioner. Single Stamina Kristin Newman Pamela Fryman November 27, 2006 2x10 Barney's gay, black brother comes to town to serve as a wingman and the gang discovers a secret he is keeping from Barney. How Lily Stole Christmas Brenda Hsueh Pamela Fryman December 11, 2006 2x11 A rift forms between Lily and Ted after they find an old answering machine message where Ted badmouths Lily after she left Marshall. First Time In New York Gloria Calderon Kellet Pamela Fryman January 8, 2007 2x12 Robin tries to talk her younger sister, who is visiting NYC, not to lose her virginity. The gang all recount tales of their own first times. Columns Matt Kuhn Rob Greenberg January 22, 2007 2x13 Ted struggles to fire an employee. Meanwhile, Barney and Robin find an old nude portrait of Marshall that Lily painted, which prompts Barney to hire Lily to paint him. Monday Night Football Carter Bays

Craig Thomas Rob Greenberg February 5, 2007 2x14 The gang must postpone their viewing of the Super Bowl and must avoid hearing about the game until then. Lucky Penny Jamie Rhonheimer Pamela Fryman February 12, 2007 2x15 Ted recounts events leading up to being too late for a flight: Barney runs the Marathon in Marshall's stead, Lily and Robin camp outside a shop for a sale. Stuff Kourtney Kang Pamela Fryman February 19, 2007 2x16 Robin is upset when she learns how much of Ted's stuff came from his exes. Barney gets revenge on Lily for making him see her bad play by putting on a play of his own. Arrivederci, Fiero Chris Harris Pamela Fryman February 26, 2007 2x17 Marshall's Fiero breaks down. The gang each recall memorable times in the car and how it brought them closer together. Moving Day Maria Ferrari Pamela Fryman March 19, 2007 2x18 Ted plans to move in with Robin, but Barney steals the moving truck until he can convince Ted not to move in. Meanwhile, Lily and Marshall experience living without Ted for the first time. Bachelor Party Carter Bays

Craig Thomas Pamela Fryman April 9, 2007 2x19 Ted plans Marshall's bachelor party but Barney can't help intervening. Meanwhile, things get awkward when Robin brings a provocative gift to Lily's bachelorette party. Showdown Gloria Calderon Kellet Pamela Fryman April 30, 2007 2x20 Ted plans his best man speech for Marshall and Lily's wedding. Robin helps Lily gain weight to fit into her wedding dress. Meanwhile, Barney trains for an appearance on the Price is Right. Something Borrowed Greg Malins Pamela Fryman May 7, 2007 2x21 Marshall and Lily are about to get married but the wedding is becoming one disaster after another. Something Blue Carter Bays

Craig Thomas Pamela Fryman May 14, 2007 2x22

[]