Note: This review is for the first half of the How I Met Your Mother: Season 7 finale - the review of the second half can be found by clicking here. Full spoilers for the episode follow.

It feels like Lily has been pregnant for three seasons. The storytelling technique of the series has us jumping around in time so often, it can all get a bit exhausting. So not only was it great to share the moment with Marshall and Lily, it was also a relief to finally have this pregnancy be over.

The first of Monday night's doubleheader of How I Met Your Mother, "The Magician's Code, Part 1" gave us the story of Lily's labor and Marshall's desperate attempt to reach her side after finding himself drunk and stranded in Atlantic City. And overall, it was a satisfying conclusion to Lily's pregnancy.

On the labor side of the episode, Lily was joined by Robin and Ted. Robin has had experience birthing animals, so there was some fun watching her treat Lily like livestock. Ted was a bit more annoying with his cluelessness and lame labor announcement e-mail. But the meat of this half of the episode came from Lily demanding to be distracted from her pain by listening to the pair tell her stories. Essentially this became a clip show, giving us clips of moments from the gang that we've never seen.

Similar to Community's recent clip show style episode, HIMYM used the story flashbacks to deliver funny little vignettes. Most were unrelated to each other, though a couple quickly tagged back to themselves. These were funny, if meaningless bits. Robin getting to second base with a person she thought was Neil Young was a highlight. I also enjoyed the non-coordinated Breakfast Club Halloween and Barney as the Terminator. "Where Does That Door Go?" ran through much of the episode, but it was probably the least satisfying bit. While the distraction stories were fun, it's too bad they couldn't have had more of a connection to what was really going on. It would have been sweet to hear new stories about Lily and Marshall and the group and how things led up to this moment. Heck, this was the kind of event (the birth of a child!) where an actual clip show wouldn't have been a problem.

But the real heart of the episode came from watching Marshall, with Barney's help, make it from Atlantic City to Lily's side. The little challenges that started the episode were fun, especially watching Marshall do the most difficult thing he has ever done in his entire life: walk up two steps while drunk. But the real heartwarming moment came when the pair found themselves on a bus full of seniors heading to Buffalo. To get the bus to change course, we got an "I'm Spartacus" scene with the elderly all claiming heart attacks. It was a great little ending to Marshall and Barney's mini adventure.

The addition of Lily's dad to the proceedings was a bit of a waste. I can't stand the character, and he didn't turn things around here, even with his brief moment of supporting his daughter. Still, How I Met Your Mother did a decent job of making this a memorable moment in the lives of these characters.