For the original 1983 movie, see Scarface.

Scarface: The World is Yours is a video game developed by Radical Entertainment and published by Vivendi Universal Games. The game is based on the 1983 motion picture Scarface film starring Al Pacino, who is reprising his role as Tony Montana, with André Sogliuzzo providing Montana's voice. It was released on the PC, Playstation 2 and Xbox on October 8, 2006, and on the Wii on June 12, 2007. The PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions of the game were unofficially cancelled due to the fact that the older gen gaming system wouldn't work on the then-new ones.

Plot[]

The game begins with the movie's final scene in 1983; The Bolivian Cartel/Sosa's Army raiding Tony's Mansion. Instead of dying, Tony kills the assassin that killed him in the movie, the Skull, by turning around and spotting him. Tony then fights his way through his mansion, where several of his henchmen are gunned down and an explosion rocks around the mansion made by Juan. Tony then fights his way through the underground to his pool to escape to his awaiting car, the Ambassador, but the exit is blown up by a bazooka. Tony fights his way around the mansion, witnessing his tiger eat Jose, and is almost killed but the police and S.W.A.T arrive and wipe out the remaining assassins, inadvertently helping Montana. Tony escapes, barely alive, and a surviving assassin informs Sosa that Tony's empire is destroyed over a phone call and that the police has taken over the mansion.

Narration[]

Setting[]

In the year of 1984 in Miami, Florida, 3 months after escaping from Sosa's Attack, Tony now has to build his empire from scratch and take back what's his and eventually get his revenge on Sosa.

Combat[]

The game features a Balls Meter that can be activated by shooting certain spots on the enemy's body (example: head, right shoulder, groin), after Tony kills somebody and he can taunt them to increase his balls meter and balls in general. This balls meter, when full, will allow you to go into Blind Rage mode, where the screen turns blood red, and the game temporarily shifts to a "first-person shooter" perspective. While in this mode, Tony is invincible to all forms of damage, including explosions, getting run over by cars, and Kill Tony (Commit Suicide) cheat, can fall from tallest and highest heights and survive, has infinite ammunition for all weapons, time will slow down slightly, he can deal increased damage toward enemies, vehicles, boats, aircraft and can even auto-lock-on to multiple enemies, he can shoot at innocents and friendly allies (but cannot kill them) and every enemy kill gives him 200 health. Not only can he use any type of gun but also use melee weapons (except a machete and a lead Pipe). In addition, the balls meter can also be refilled through other means, such as hitting another car while driving and immediately taunting them, using the Fill Balls Meter cheat code (FPATCH), or talking in conversations with new citizens and NPC's. Also, there are two hidden "Sperm Bank" in the game, one at Little Havana and the other at the Industrial Zone, which looks just like the "blood banks" (which are used to refill health) however, here the player can sell his sperm from his balls meter for cash. The amount of cash the player receives depends on Reputation Level.

Heads-up display (HUD)[]

Game details[]

Unlike the GTA games, it is not possible to kill innocent civilians as Tony (despite this game being even more violent than GTA when it comes to battles). In the attempt of shooting an innocent person Tony will utter words such as "I only kill people who are dumb enough to fuck me", and no rounds will be fired. In the event of running a civilian down with a car, the civilian will just get back up unharmed, or might start running away. Tony can, however, beat the civilians up. This can lead to a bit of frustration in a gunfight, as innocent civilians and friendly allies may get in Tony's way and the enemy gang members aren't subject to that rule. It is still possible to kill the SWAT team, DEA agents and the police, as they aren't really innocent anyway. If you play as the Chauffeur, Enforcer, or the Assassin it is possible to kill civilians, since they are not in-honoured bound to "... not fuck anyone who didn't already have it coming to 'em". Using this characters and fighting rival gangs is easier, as the innocents won't be avoided the collateral damage status.

It was originally developed exclusively for the Playstation 2 but ended up being ported for the Xbox, PC, and Wii in order to make it more popular and make more purchases.

The game features the voices of several cast members from Scarface (1983 film), such as Steven Bauer (who voices The Sandman), Robert Loggia and Al Israel.

The game also features famous celebrity voice actors, such as Pitbull (who voices Juan (Montana henchman)), Ricky Gervais (who voices Simon Trent), Ice Tea (who voices John Johnson) and Tommy Chong (who voices Reginald).

It features a very realistic environment of Miami which includes: Little Havana, Downtown, North Beach, and South Beach.

It also features several different locations from the movie including Lopez Motors (which has been taken over by the Diaz Brothers and renamed Diaz Motors), the Babylon Club, the Sun Ray Hotel, Freedomtown, Coconut Grove, and Tony's Mansion.

It also features some fictional locations, called "Fronts" that can be purchased to facilitate drug distribution. Some of these fronts are loosely based on real world locations or named after real people. For example, the Oakley Drive-In Theater is named after a now closed theatre in Ohio of the same name, U-Gin Shotgun Bar is named and made after Yu-Jin Kim, an Asian artist in British Columbia, etc. Funny enough, the owner of said Bar, is the Chinese Ana Yamada.

The game also features a number of Islands loosely based on the smuggling trade in the Bahamas, Caymans, & Puerto Rico islands during the 1980's. There is also an UFO located in the middle of the sea. However, the main two Islands that are featured in the game seem to be based upon the Caymans specifically.

The deceased Manny and Gina's remains are among the furniture that can be placed in Tony's Mansion. The mansion can also be customised with three distinct themes: the original one from the movie, a modern-looking one with a shark tank, and a Gothic castle-looking one with a fireplace.

This game (much like in Grand Theft Auto series) features fictional vehicles resembling real cars, such as the Lakota Fastback which is based on the Ford Mustang, the QM Convertible which resembles Tony's Cadillac with tiger skin seat covers from the movie, and Tony's Porsche 928.

A small island in the game has characters that resemble the cast of the sitcom Gilligan's Island. These characters are the following: Carla, Fredrick, Jonas, Kitty, Brenda, etc.

While swimming, if Tony stays in the water too long while covered in blood (or even if he isn't), he will start to attract a Shark, and the shark will eat Tony, who will utter a Wilhelm scream. The same will happen with other characters, like Chauffeur and the Assassin, but never with enemy characters who swim in the same water.

All of the soundtracks in the game (except the purchasable one) are from the 80's, to give the player more vibe that the game is taking place in 1984.

System requirements[]

Minimum[]

GPU:DirectX(R) 9.0c-compatible video card (ATI(R) Radeon(R) 9200 or NVIDIA(R) GeForce(R) FX 5500 with 128 MB RAM) or higher

CPU:Pentium(R) 4 1.8 GHz or AMD(R) equivalent

RAM: 256 MB

Storage Space: 2.9 GB

Recommended[]

GPU: DirectX(R) 9.0c-compatible video card (ATI(R) Radeon(R) x800 or NVIDIA(R) GeForce(R) FX 6800) or higher

CPU: Pentium(R) 4 2.8 GHz or AMD(R) equivalent

RAM: 512 MB

Lifestyle[]

Scarface: The World is Yours has customization abilities and this can be done in various ways: changing outfits, buying vehicles, customizing the Mansion through themes and also putting objects into the mansion with Exotics, furniture and other rare items. By buying these exotics, the player can increase their Reputation points substantially and get a taunting call from Alejandro Sosa.

Development[]

According to Game Informer and Vivendi Universal, Scarface: The World Is Yours sold over 2 million copies in North America, Europe, and Australia. The commercial for the game featured the Mötley Crüe song "Kickstart My Heart", although the song was not in the game. However, the band's drummer, Tommy Lee, played the role of the manager of Fidel's Records and Tapes, Dean.

Reaction[]

The game has received largely favorable reviews. At the time of writing, only eight of the twenty-nine reviews cited by Metacritic for the Xbox version of the game have given the game a score lower than 75%, with most reviews lying in the 80–90% range (IGN gave it a review of 8.7/10, making it an Editor's Choice game, and Game Informer awarded it 85%). However, a small number of reviews have been less favorable, with GameSpot only giving it 6.6 out of 10 and the G4 TV show X-Play giving it a 3 out of 5, and OXM giving it only 4.5/10. The PS2 reviews have been very similar to those of the Xbox, with the 80-90% range dominating but several notable sources voicing dissent. The PC version had been released with several bugs, especially in controls and map loading systems, thus giving the game mixed reviews, but with a similarly respectable average score of around 72-75% in Metacritic and GameRankings. Gamespot gave the Wii version 5.8 for what they thought was a "poor control method", while IGN gave it an 8.5, praising the new controls and saying that it was "the best version of the game available", scored slightly lower only due to its late release and nature as a last-gen port.

The game has sold over 2.6 million copies since launched.

Strategy Guide[]

An official strategy guide released by Prima Games provides useful tips, hints, notes, and other helpful advice for the players. The strategy guide also reveals the status of every vehicle, names & pictures of the characters encountered, and other information.

[1]

If this site isn't working, try checking out the Prima Games guide on the Internet Archives, although every second page is missing there.

Cheats[]

The following cheat codes DO NOT hinder progress towards 100% Game Completion. They are safe to use and they will help the player out if needed.

KILTONY - Commit Suicide

FPATCH - Fill Balls Meter / Activate Blind Rage

AMMO - Max Ammo

MEDIK - Refill Health

TBURGLR - Repair Vehicle

NOBALLS - Decrease Gang Heat

FLYSTRT - Decrease Cop Heat

GOBALLS - Increase Gang Heat

DONUT - Increase Cop Heat

MARTHA - Change Time Of Day

SHAZAAM - Toggle Lightning

RAINY - Toggle Rain

666999 - Spawn Bacinari

OLDFAST - Spawn Ariel MK III

BUMMER - Spawn Bodog Stampede

DUMPER - Spawn Odin VH88

DOZER - Spawn Bulldozer

TUNEME - BReal "The World Is Yours" Music Track

BLACK - Black Suit

BLUE - Blue Suit

BLUESH - Blue Suit w/ Shades

WHITE - White Suit

WHITESH - White Suit w/ Shades

GRAY - Gray Suit

GRAYSH - Gray Suit w/ Shades

HAWAII - Hawaiian Shirt Tony

HAWAIIG - Hawaiian Shirt Tony w/ Shades

SANDY - Sandy Shirt Tony

SANDYSH - Sandy Shirt Tony w/ Shades

Concept art[]

Gallery[]

See also[]

Scarface (film)

Scarface: Money, Power, Respect

Grand Theft Auto: Vice City

The Godfather: Blackhand Edition

[]

Scarface: The World Is Yours - Official site

Wikipedia page; Scarface: The World Is Yours

References[]

Weapons (The World is Yours) Weapons Scarface: The World is Yours Melee Chainsaw • Lead Pipe • Machete Handguns .38 Automatic • .45 Automatic • Deagle Sub-machine Guns MAC-10 • Micro SMG Long Guns Shotgun(Masterkey) • SAW • Sniper Rifle Assault Rifles AK-47 • Colt M16A1(Cobray 37mm Launcher) Explosive Weapons Bazooka • M-79 • Missile Launcher

Vehicles (The World is Yours) Vehicles Scarface: The World is Yours Exotics Albatross • Ambassador • Ariel MK III • Bacinari • Bandit ST • Bodog Stampede • Brahma • Bulldozer • Caballo El Ray • Conick N29 • Delphine • Fellini • GPV Offroad • GS Wolhabend • Lakota Fastback • Lightning • Mojave • Monterery Shark • MPD Cruiser • Odin VH88 • Orient YV • Panther • Pumah • QM Convertible • Rattler • Santa Monica • Stampede • Stretch Limousine • Tomahawk SS • Whiskey Ghost Civilian Cars Ambulance • Bus • Chevrolet Blazer pickup • Chevrolet Step Van • Corfu • Cube Van • Epsilon • Hippie Van • Honda Accord • Jupiter • Macaro • Mack MR • Mercutio • Mullet • Shag Van • Station Wagon • Volkswagen Cabriolet Exotic Boats Antique Trickraft • Attack Boat • Cigarette Boat • Cigarette Gun Boat • Fan Boat • Floatplane • Jet Boat • Picklefork • Powerboat • Racing Boat • Sports Fishing Boat • Yacht Uncontrollable Vehicles Nacho's Tanker • Forklift • Frigate • Helicopters • JLG Tractor • Sail Boat • Armored Boat (controllable)