Scarface 2: The World Is Yours is a 1997 crime comedy drama film directed by Brian De Palma, written by Oliver Stone and produced by Kasumi Kobayashi for Pocky Prunce Productions. It is a American-Japanese co-production between Pocky Prunce Productions and OLM, Inc..

The film is a pseudo-sequel of the 1983 film directed by Palma himself, which changes the ending of the film so that Tony Montana (originally played by Al Pacino, who reprised his role) survives, and sets about exacting revenge on those who ousted him from power by re-establishing his drug empire in Miami.

Scarface 2: The World Is Yours premiered in Miami on March 31, 1997 and was released on April 1 by Universal Pictures, to moderately positive reviews and was a financial success, earning $45 million at the domestic box office and $66 million worldwide. It was also praised for maintaining the tone of its predecessor, for its humor, and for the accuracy of the depiction of Montana himself. It won Academy Awards for Best Actor, Best Editing, Best Makeup, Best Visual Effects, Best Sound and Best Sound Effects Editing.

A video game adaptation of the same name was released by Radical Entertainment and Vivendi Games for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox and Wii on October 10, 2006.

Plot[]

Scarface 2: The World Is Yours begins during the final events of the 1983 film, with Tony Montana's mansion under attack from assassins sent by Alejandro Sosa. Unlike in the film, however, Montana is able to over-power Sosa's men and escape the grounds, just as the DEA and Miami-Dade police arrive. Sosa then receives a call from one of his men, who says Tony's mansion is on fire and being seized by law enforcement, his drug empire is reduced to nothing, and he is certain Tony is dead. Meanwhile, hiding in a safehouse in the Miami glades, Tony laments the deaths of his friend Manny and sister Gina, curses himself for not listening to the advice of others due to his stubbornness, determines to quit cocaine, and vows retribution on Sosa.

Three months later in March 1984, Tony returns to Miami. All of his assets have been frozen, and the districts of Miami he used to dominate have been divided among other drug cartels. His first act is to ask George Sheffield to become his lawyer again. Sheffield reluctantly agrees, but at a higher wage than before. As Tony has no authority now, he has no choice. He next travels to see his old friend and contact Felix, who tells him Sosa is working with Gaspar Gomez in an effort to take over all of Tony's old turf. He also warns Tony that there are very few dealers who can be trusted anymore, as most report back to Sosa. Tony says he needs to make some small deals so he can make enough money to buy his mansion back from the Vice Squad, and begin to rebuild his empire. Felix advises him to speak to a waitress named Coco. She puts him in touch with some dealers, as he slowly begins to re-establish his name, earning enough to re-purchase his mansion. He calls Felix, who tells him that he thinks Gaspar is smuggling cash. Tony steals one of Gaspar's trucks, carrying $50,000, and uses it to open a bank account. Reconnecting with his old banker, Jerry, Montana uses the bank to launder his money as he sets out to reclaim control of Little Havana from the Diaz Brothers. As Tony's reputation increases, the brothers plan to have him murdered. He survives the assassination attempt, and one of the killers tells him the Diazes have killed his mother. Killing them both in retaliation, he regains control of Little Havana.

Tony then gets a call from Pablo, an associate of Sheffield's. He tells Tony they have information regarding the location of Tony's estranged wife, Elvira, and he arranges to meet. However, the meet is a trap. Tony escapes and kills Pablo, realizing that Sheffield has turned against him. Meanwhile, he sets about taking control of Downtown from the Contreras cartel. Upon doing so, he is contacted by The Sandman, a cocaine producer from the Caribbean islands south of Miami. Sandman also wants Sosa out of the picture, and he invites Tony to come to see him. They agree that with Tony in Miami selling Sandman's product from the islands, they can run Sosa out of business. Tony then meets Venus, Sandman's ex-girlfriend and a powerful influence on the islands herself. She tells him of the owner of a nearby casino, being run on a disused oil tanker, who is killing women and dumping their bodies overboard, and asks Tony if he can take care of it. The man turns out to be Nacho Contreras, formerly in control of Downtown's drug trade. Tony travels to the casino and kills Nacho.

He next sets about taking control of South Beach and North Beach, both of which are controlled by Gaspar Gomez. Upon doing so, he is contacted by The Sandman, who tells him he is going to war with the Colombian drug cartels. However, the Colombians get word of Sandman's plan and attack his plantation. Tony helps defend it, but Sandman tells him the Colombians have taken over his processing lab on the island of Tranquilandia, and are holding the workers hostage. Tony heads there, killing the Colombians and rescuing the hostages. Upon returning, The Sandman sells Tony his plantation, meaning Tony is now in charge of production and distribution, making him the most powerful drug lord in the area and allowing him to finally go after Sosa, who is in Bolivia.

At his mansion, Sosa is hosting a meeting with Sheffield and Gomez in which they are discussing how best to get rid of Tony. From outside, they hear an explosion, as Tony attacks the house. Fighting his way through the grounds, he kills Sosa's security people, before shooting and killing Sheffield. Heading further into the estate, he kills Gomez. Eventually, he confronts Sosa, who tells Tony he warned him not to betray him, but Tony did, referring to the planned assassination of a journalist which Tony refused to carry out because there were children in the journalist's car. Sosa says that in their business, sometimes children have to be killed. Tony then kills him. As he leaves the mansion, Tony finds one of Sosa's men still alive. The survivor begs for his life, and Tony offers him a job.

The film ends with Sosa's surviving henchman working as Tony's butler, as Tony and Venus watch television in a Jacuzzi. Feeling good about his life, Tony declares he finally has what he always felt was coming to him: "the world."