FLORENCE, Alabama -- The University of North Alabama has released the following statement, confirming reports that head football coach Terry Bowden has left the program to take over as coach at Akron.

Below is the university release, in its entirety:

University of North Alabama Head Football Coach Terry Bowden has resigned his position with the Lions after three seasons at the school to become the head football coach at the University of Akron.

"Today I have accepted the position as the Head Football Coach at the University of Akron," Bowden said. "I am very excited about this new opportunity, and at the same time saddened by the fact that I'm going to be leaving so many wonderful people in the Shoals community. I am so grateful to Mark Linder, Dr. William Cale and the Board of Trustees at UNA for giving me the opportunity to re-enter the coaching profession."

Bowden returned to college coaching at UNA in 2009 after a 10-year absence from the sidelines. He led the Lions to a combined 29-9 record that included one Gulf South Conference championship and three consecutive NCAA playoff appearances. His 2009 squad went 11-2, won the GSC championship and reached the quarterfinals of the Division II playoffs. In 2010 the Lions were 9-4 and reached the second round of the playoffs, followed by a 9-3 record in 2011 that included another trip to the second round of the playoffs. The Lions were ranked 14th in the final NCAA Division II poll this season, marking the seventh consecutive year that the Lions finished in the division's final Top 25.

"I want to thank my coaching staff and all of the support personnel for all they've done to help us have three great seasons," Bowden added. "Thank you also to the UNA alumni, faculty, students and fans who supported our program with such great enthusiasm. But most of all, I want to say thank you to all of the wonderful players - the great guys who played for me at UNA and made us all proud to say we were UNA Lions. I know that UNA Football will continue to go on to bigger and better things, and I will always feel like I am a part of the UNA family."

"We wish Coach Bowden well and appreciate the job that he did here at UNA in maintaining a high level of success," said Linder. "We have our process in place and will move as quickly as possible to find our next head football coach," Linder said. "The position will be posted on the UNA Human Resources website and will be open until a quality applicant is selected."

Here's Bowden making the announcement via the Akron Zips YouTube channel: