Terry Bowden was calling the Division II championship game for Westwood One radio in Florence, Ala., last December when Nate Salant, commissioner of the Gulf South Conference, stopped by to say that North Alabama coach Mark Hudspeth had resigned.

Bowden scribbled down his phone number and handed it to Salant, who passed it along to North Alabama Athletic Director Mark Linder. Less than three weeks later, after a four-hour interview on New Year's Eve, Bowden was named coach of the Division II powerhouse in Florence.

Bowden has made North Alabama a haven for players seeking a new opportunity, including seven former Florida State players. And he is thrilled to be leading a team again.

"After 10 years I'm living the dream," said Bowden, who hadn't coached since being forced out by Auburn in 1998.

His father, Bobby, is under fire at FSU. In recent years his brothers Tommy and Jeff were pushed out of their jobs as the head coach at Clemson and offensive coordinator at FSU, respectively. But Terry is a fresh success story for football's first family of coaching. He even hired Jeff as his associate head coach.

The Lions are 7-0 and ranked No. 2 in Division II with a more talented roster than some teams in the lower levels of Division I-A. The Lions have 25 transfers from Division I-A schools, 22 who arrived after Bowden was named coach.

Among the transfers are former Atlantic High star Preston Parker, a receiver who was dismissed by FSU after two arrests in one year. UNA also has T.J. Porter, a former Pahokee receiver who was suspended by Pittsburgh in March after his second arrest in less than a year for DUI, as well as defensive end Courtney Harris, who played at Miami after a career at Jupiter High.

North Alabama doesn't see itself as a halfway house for troubled players. Nine of the Lions have a college degree, eight from BCS conference schools, including Harris. Most of the transfers are players who were dissatisfied with playing time and chose a Division II school because they were allowed to play immediately.

"Division II football is much more about transfers than any other level," Bowden said. "We just had more connections."

Those connections were built through his family name, his successful run at Auburn (47-17-1) and 10 years working in TV and radio.

Bowden turned down the Texas Tech job one month after he left Auburn and had several offers through the years. He was content working from studios and broadcast booths until 2006, the year he turned 50.

"When I turned 50 I said this isn't going to make me happy the rest of my life," he said. "Then I began to plot a course."

Bowden didn't think broadcasting the Division II championship game between Minnesota-Duluth and Northwest Missouri State at Braly Stadium, where UNA plays its home games, would be on that course.

Even Linder was skeptical after talking to Bowden by phone the night of the game. After about 15 minutes, Bowden told Linder he was tired and asked if they could continue the conversation the next day.

"I thought that was his way of being courteous to get off the phone," Linder said.

But when Bowden re-established contact Linder's only fear was that a Division I program might suddenly recruit him.

Bowden accepted the job on New Year's Day and has no regrets, even if it means sacrificing a major portion of the $500,000 he was earning annually through public speaking.

"I enjoy the six-hour bus trips," he said. "Something's wacky about that."

The transition was made easier when Terry surrounded himself with family, including brother Jeff and John Pont, his future son-in-law, who coaches receivers.

Jeff, who received a $537,000 buyout from FSU spread over five years, does not draw a salary.

"Without a doubt this is what I was going to do," said Jeff, who left FSU after the 2006 season. "And working with Terry. ... it is like we were both starting over again. It's just fun. And when you win, you are happy."

North Alabama prides itself on winning. The Lions are the winningest program in the state since 1990. That 167-65-1 record includes three consecutive national titles (1993-95) and four straight seasons with at least 10 wins.

The latter streak should continue this season. The Lions, who play Delta State tonight, have won their seven games by an average of 32 points. Porter leads the team with 36 catches and Parker has 35 receptions for a team-high 580 yards and five touchdowns.

Marcus Sims and Jamaal Edwards, both former Seminoles, are second and third in rushing. Harris has 20 tackles and is tied for the team lead with three sacks.