The University of North Alabama has announced the hiring of Terry Bowden as the Lions' head football coach.

Bowden, 52, returns to college coaching for the first time since 1998 when he was head coach at Auburn University.

He will be introduced to the news media and Lion supporters at a news conference at 11 a.m. at the Performance Center on the UNA campus on New Years Day.

Bowden becomes the eighth head coach in UNA's modern football history.

He inherits a UNA program that has enjoyed four straight seasons with 10-plus wins, and has made four straight NCAA Division II playoff appearances.

The Lions were 12-2 in 2008 and reached the semifinals of the Division II playoffs.

A perennial Gulf South Conference and Division II power, North Alabama has made 14 playoff appearances since 1980 and the Lions' 26 post-season wins are the most by any current Division II institution.

Bowden brings a 111-53-2 record and 68 percent winning percentage in 15 seasons as a head coach to North Alabama.

As head coach of the Auburn Tigers from 1993-98, he won 73 percent of his games and posted the best opening five-year run of any head football coach in school history.

Also during his time at Auburn, Bowden became the first college coach in 50 years to win his 100th career game by his 40th birthday.

During his time away from coaching, Bowden first served as a studio analyst and color commentator with ABC Sports' college football coverage.

He is currently an expert analyst for Westwood One Radio's College Football National Game of Week, co-hosts "The Coaches Show" on Sirius Satellite Radio with Jack Arute, and has been the exclusive college football columnist for Yahoo! Sports.

He has also worked several times a month as a motivational speaker.

Prior to becoming head football coach at Auburn, Bowden built two programs from the ground up as head coach at Salem College (W.V.) and Samford University (Ala.).

Bowden was named head coach at Auburn on Dec. 17, 1992, and in less than a year he had accomplished a feat that no other Division IA coach had ever accomplished - he had gone undefeated and untied in his first year as a Division IA head coach.

Auburn had a perfect 11-0 record and Bowden swept virtually every national coach of the year award in his rookie season, including Walter Camp, Scripps Howard, Football News, Toyota and the Paul "Bear" Bryant Award presented by the Football Writers Association.

Bowden was again a finalist for coach of the year following his second season at Auburn as the Tigers had reeled off 20 straight wins, an Auburn record, and finished 9-1-1. He posted a 47-17-1 record at Auburn and led the Tigers to three Bowl games.

He was born into the most famous and successful college football coaching family. His father, Bobby Bowden, turned Florida State into a national champion and his 382 collegiate wins ranks second in Division 1A history.

His brother Tommy had an 18-4 record in two seasons as head coach at Tulane and a 72-45 record in 10 seasons as head coach at Clemson University, taking the Tigers to eight bowl games.

His brother Jeff was also a collegiate coach from 1983-2006, working at Salem, Samford, Southern Mississippi and Florida State.

During the decade of the 1990's, Terry, Tommy and Bobby all led their teams to undefeated seasons - a feat that will likely never be repeated.