About this Item

A translation by Culpeper of Prevost's work, originally written in Latin. Pp. [4] blank, title page, [3} "To the Reader" by Culpeper, [3} "The Contents", 135, [1] "Ten Several Books by Nich. Culpeper Gent." About 4 3/4" X 7" in later full tan calf with blind-stamped decorations, "1670" in gilt on spine. Firmly bound in the newer binding with renewed endpapers. Leaves browned at edges, particularly the title page and early part of the text block. Minor loss to the edges of the title page, not affecting the printed text. A few minor soil spots to the text, no significant tears. A very presentable copy of a rare early medical book. 6 copies of this edition found on WorldCat. Seller Inventory # 788685

Contact seller

Report this item

Inno Dubelaar Books is located in Toronto, Canada and has been selling books on the internet since 1995. Although we do not keep an open shop, books can be viewed by appointment. Our specialties are: Indian and Inuit subjects, Arctic travel, Canadiana, hockey, and Canadian, US and British modern firsts. We also stock many other subjects including 19th century travel and illustrated books, children's literature, mystery, railroad, art, decorative arts, and photography. We currently have over 7,000 books listed here. New listings are being added daily. We are particularly strong in Canadian authors such as Leonard Cohen, Michael Ondaatje, Robertson Davies, Margaret Atwood, Alice Munro, Alistair MacLeod and David Adams Richards. To browse our catalogs go to Browse below, then select the catalog you wish to view. As well, specific authors or titles may be found by going to Search and entering the relevant information. If we do not have what you are seeking, we do provide a free search service. We purchase collections of books in our areas of specialty, particularly older material on Canadian native peoples and Canadian first editions. We pack carefully and ship promptly.

Visit Seller's Storefront

Seller's business information

Inno Dubelaar Books

ON, Canada

Terms of Sale:

Prices in US$. US postage is $5 for surface, $7 for Priority for standard-sized books. Canadian postage is $11 for standard, up to 1kg. Expedited (4-5 business days) is $15. Overseas is $13 surface, $29 air, $45 Expedited (where available) for up to 1 kg. Heavier books at cost. Insurance recommended over $100. Please Email to hold items. Books will be held for 14 days pending receipt of payment (check or international money order in Canadian, US, or UK currency). We also accept Paypal. All books...

More Information

Shipping Terms:

Prices in US$. US postage is $5 for surface, $7 for Priority for standard-sized books. Canadian postage is $11 for standard, up to 1kg. Expedited (4-5 business days) is $15. Overseas is $13 surface, $29 air, $45 Expedited (where available) for up to 1 kg. Heavier books at cost. Insurance recommended over $100.