Was Lottie Williams murdered or

did she commit suicide? This is the

question that has been freely discussed

by the many friends of the Perth girl

who so tragically passed out in

Melbourne somewhere about a fortnight

ago; and it may be said that the gen-

eral opinion is that she did not take

her own life.

Although she was inclined to take an

interest in metaphysical or religions

fads, Lottie Williams was a, very

sensible and cheerful girl and in her

normal senses was not likely to listen to

any suggestion of self-destruction. She

was ordinarily well read and had an

inclination to penwork, and could write

attractively,as those who have read

the women's notes in the "Railway

Gazette" may discover. None of her

friends whom we have questioned ever

heard her express peculiar conclusions

as to the disillusions of life that would

induce what Schopenhauer would call

the "will to death."

Consequently the deduction is that

she did not die willingly-not, at all

events, in her normal mentality-and

the only alternative is that she was

either murdered or was induced to

take some will-destroying, drug and

was so made susceptible to suggestions

of suicide. Of course that resolves it-

self into very much the same thing as

homicide, and might be designated a

distinction without a difference. It is

to be feared, however, that "the tragic

mystery will never' be cleared up,

unless Lottie Williams had written to her

mother shortly before her death,in

which case some clue may be. gained

as to her state of mind.

It is strange, however, that after her

arrival in Melbourne, she does not

appear to have written to any of her

friends here. She was fond of scribbling

notes. It was a trick of hers in

the Audit Office to dash off notes to

other typists either in that department

or elsewhere and despatch them at

once. Such an idiosyncrasy or habit

was likely to remain with her wherever

she went, and the fact that she

did not communicate with people here

is inexplicable to those who knew her.

One of her closest friends had not

long previously gone to Sydney, and

it is just possible that this young lady

may hare had letters from her after

her arrival in Melbourne. This is

more likely to be the case, inasmuch:

as Lottie Williams took with her from

Perth several presents or pieces of

music for her friend, which shows that

she intended to go to Sydney herself..

In fact, it is stated that such was her

intention, as her friend had advised,

her that she would have no difficulty

in getting a position there.

Then why did she stay in Melbourne?

It is pretty certain that her objective

was Sydney when she left Perth. That

was on September 25, and several

friends who saw her off on the Indarra

state that she was bright and hopeful.

There was no secrecy about her going

away. The man Greenwood was there,

and somewhat ostentatiously bade her

good-bye, but he was never seen about

Perth afterwards, and the, inference is

that he remained on the steamer, and

went to Melbourne by it. If he .had

merely failed to come ashore when the

ship was casting off he could have left

the boat at Albany next day, but it is

clear that he intended to go on. Was

Lottie Williams cognisant of this intention

when they parted (apparently) at

Fremantle? Her friends firmly believe

that she was not, but that Greenwood

deceived her and kept out of the way

until the ship left Albany.

After that the deeper mystery begins.

They arrived in Melbourne on

Saturday,October 2, and must have

taken rooms almost immediately after-

wards at Whitehall Chambers, Bank

place, under the name of Mr. and Mrs.

Hardey: None of the residents of the

building saw much of them, and they

made no acquaintances. Now, the

bodies of both were found on October

22, or 20 days after they had reached

Melbourne, but it is alleged that Lottie

Williams had not been seen for a fort-

night previously. Even a week previously

would bring us only to October

15, whereas Greenwood dated a letter

to a resident of W.A. on the 18th.

When the girl's body was found the

doctor who was called in thought she

had been dead for some time, probably

a week. Therefore, when Greenwood

wrote on the 18th that they were going

to be married she must have been

lying dead in the room. If so, why

did he write? Did he contemplate going

away? Because, if' he did not,

then there was no object' in writing

and saying they were to be married

-unless he meant lt In the spiritual

sense.

Greenwood, however, was not spiritual,

but rather material. He expressed

the view while employed in the

State Audit Department that it would

be a splendid thing to have a grand

final flutter of a fortnight and then

pass out. That is purely the materialist's

apotheosis. It is the essence of

the declaration in Isaiah: "Let us eat

and drink, for to-morrow we die."

Greenwood affected to hold peculiar

views, but many now think that was

a veneer or a cloak, or a bait if you

like. He was known to lay siege

to the weaker sex, and occult jargon

and talk about affinities and twin souls

was part of his artillery, so to speak.

He is described as possessing

indications of a Mongolian strain. His

features were of the Mongolian type,

with high cheek bones sallow skin,

prominent almond-colored eyes, and

short wiry hair of the bristly kind. It