As the years pass us by, playfulness is often put to one side - but not at Questacon.

For a generation of Canberrans Silly Putty, explosive chemicals, optical illusions and simulated earthquakes are just some of the fond memories for those who have visited Questacon with children, and others who have not been there since their own childhood.

Nobel laureate and ANU astrophysicist Professor Brian Schmidt, recognised in 2011 through the official naming of the Schmidt Digital Studio at Questacon, said he loved visiting the centre with his family.

''For me, Questacon was a place to have fun with the kids,'' he said. ''The giant lightning maker, freefall and the giant harmonograph were always favourites.''

Chief Minister Katy Gallagher recalls visiting Questacon in the Mount Ainslie Primary School before it moved to its current site in 1988.

''This was always a more interesting way to learn about science and technology in a practical way than learning about it from a book in a classroom,'' she said.

These days, the centre houses various interactive science exhibitions, ranging from the thongaphone - a pipe organ played with a very Australian rubber thong - to Robo Q, a newly added, multilingual robot who winks at and talks to visitors in the lobby.

Australian Institute of Sport senior physiologist David Martin said Questacon was a place that always engaged his curiosity for science. ''Usually, the kids provide the excuse to go down,'' he said. ''I probably got as much out of it as they did.''

Questacon manager of design and development Sally D'Addio has worked in the building for 24 of its 25 years. ''I started working on the floor here in the visitor's services area,'' she said. ''It was new at the time, so it was the year after it had opened.''

She said it was rewarding to watch people of all ages engage with ideas and leave with a stronger curiosity about how the world works.

She has seen nearly all of the hands-on scientific exhibitions, science shows and demonstrations that have drawn more than 8.7 million people to visit Questacon.

''I hope that we will be as relevant now as what we have been in our 25-year journey,'' she said.

Ms D'Addio said she would not be anywhere else.

Industry Minister Ian Macfarlane congratulated Questacon on reaching its milestone and said it was important young people remained interested in science.