It has been "quite a difficult year" financially for the National Science and Technology Centre — better known as Questacon — which is 50 per cent funded by visitor revenue.

Questacon manager Tristan Hoffmeister said the centre's difficulties began in November last year, when school groups from bushfire-affected areas around the country had to cancel their annual tours.

Visitor numbers to the science play centre continued to drop in January, with the resulting bushfire smoke creating a hazardous environment in Canberra, and then when a hail storm broke the centre's skylights, solar panels and air filtration units.

But, just like businesses everywhere, Questacon's problems escalated in March due to COVID-19, leading to an indefinite closure of the centre after more than three uninterrupted decades since opening in November 1988.

Hundreds of thousands of students visit Canberra each year for educational tours of its national institutions, so their absence was always going to be felt in the sector.

But Questacon's position as a "hands-on" science institute with no museum-standard climatic controls left it exposed to the smoke haze, permeating the building easily.

The tactile, "high touch" environment was also at odds with pandemic social restrictions, shutting out up to an estimated 1,400 visitors per day, Mr Hoffmeister said.

"We understand our revenue won't be back to where it was for quite some time," Mr Hoffmeister said, "but we need to reconnect with our audiences. We need to re-engage."

National institutions to reopen over days, weeks ahead

In good news for Mr Hoffmeister and the educational tourism sector, many of Canberra's national cultural institutions plan to reopen "over the days and weeks ahead".

In an open letter co-signed by 10 of the institutions, the museums, galleries and tourist attractions said they were "delighted" that they would "soon reconnect with you in person" after COVID-19 closures.

"With the pandemic still amongst us, we are working hard to adapt our spaces and programs to help ensure your visit is both an engaging and a safe one," the open letter read.

"For those of you who cannot visit us onsite, we will continue to bring you great experiences online."

Questacon learning programs manager Shannon Cook said its online offering had already been "chock-full of amazing resources, great videos, cool links, all sorts of things".

Then, as COVID-19 hit, Questacon pulled its website materials into an "at-home package … full of resources, videos, written guides of activities and experiments; things like leaf-rubbing, cornflour slime ... ball runs, periodic table scavenger hunts," Ms Cook said.

"We challenged some of our staff to have a go at how you could do a similar experiment using just at-home materials or tools or different components.

"We really wanted people to be able to take a piece of Questacon and get it into their home and then take it out and explore the world. And that's been quite exciting to see."

'We have to change our delivery model'

When the science play centre does reopen, with a date yet to be confirmed, it will not be the same "high touch and high density" Questacon that visitors remembered, Mr Hoffmeister said.

"The environment is such that we have to change our delivery model," he said.

Mr Hoffmeister said, for now, centre managers were hard at work developing tours of the science centre's more than 200 interactive exhibitions with a necessarily "hands-off experience".

But he said Questacon was also seeking expert medical advice through ACT Health "to make sure we are covering off all the OH&S details" for later down the track.

Reimagining science education and entertainment will also extend to the travelling teams who run school group workshops and professional development for teachers.

"We're champing at the bit to get those things back on the road, but it is governed by the restrictions across borders and … by that [new] model for engagement," Mr Hoffmeister said.

But "that feedback, the wonderment we see on children's faces, that look of inspiration, pride and engagement from our staff: that's what I miss."