Belleau Wood: the name reverberates in American memory even today, more than 100 years after it first came to public attention. In this book, author J. Michael Miller, a former lead historian at the Marine Corps History Division, delves deeply into the Battle of Belleau Wood and the Battle of Soissons, fought less than a month later, to explain what these two battles meant to the Allies in 1918 and to Marine Corps history in general. Secondarily, Miller designed the book to be used as a battlefield guide for the prospective traveler.

While the focus of the book is the 4th Brigade of the U.S. 2d Division, Miller also discusses the U.S. Army units of the division and how they interacted with the Marine brigade during the two battles. For Belleau Wood, Miller covers the Marine brigade's movements and fighting from 1 June through 6 June 1918 in a fair amount of detail. In particular, his account of the fighting on 5 and 6 June is a fine example of combat narrative based on small units. Unfortunately, the author ends the Belleau Wood combat description on 6 June; there was still plenty of fighting to occur before the wood could be reported as being fully under American control.

After a brief hiatus to discuss strategy, Miller plunges readers back into the whirlpool of combat at Soissons. His discussion of the confusion in command and the disorganized approach to the battlefield will leave readers wondering how the division performed as well as it did during the battle. The disorganization that characterized the advance to the jump-off line continued after the battle began. Miller vividly describes the confused intermingling of troops. Marines, soldiers, Moroccans, French, and even several stray units of the 1st Division far to the north mingled at various times and places during the savage battle. The author's combat narrative covers 18 and 19 July in graphic detail; seemingly no platoon is omitted. Although the division had failed to reach its objective at Soissons, it came very close. Indeed, Miller tells us that

you can judge for yourself how close the attack came to success. Had the reserve of the 6th Marines and the 6th Machine Gun Battalion gone forward on July 18 to follow up the attack by the 5th Marines and 3rd Army Brigade, perhaps the Soissons—Chateau-Thierry Road could have been breached.

(p. 343)

This is true, but of course hindsight is 20/20, especially so in military history. In any event, the two days of battle had driven home to the Germans that the Marne salient was untenable, and they soon began a withdrawal.

In his final two chapters, Miller revisits the Army/Marine Corps controversy over publicity and credit, and he discusses "the evolving sentiments of the Marine Corps toward Belleau Wood" (p. 359). According to him, "Belleau Wood was of little strategic value and limited tactical worth to both sides. The real victory at Belleau Wood was one of morale, which in June 1918 meant more than almost any battlefield victory" (p. 363). The attacks at Soissons, however, "were of vital strategic value in [End Page 69] shifting the advantage to the Allies" (p. 364). Miller aptly sums up: "Even today, Belleau Wood continues to be a symbol of the meaning of World War I to the United States, while Soissons remains in comparative obscurity. In truth, both battles must be interpreted together to better understand the American sacrifices and contributions during World War I" (p. 367).

Interspersed throughout the narrative are chapters called "Belleau Wood Tour" and "Soissons Tour." Each of these sections contains two or three stops, with each stop pertaining to an episode of the battle and including the latitude and longitude of each stop in degrees, minutes, seconds, and tenths of seconds. A brief description tells the reader what happened at each stop, and a map illustrates that particular tour.

The book succeeds as a combat narrative of Belleau Wood and Soissons. Although Miller nicely describes the strategic setting for the battles, command decisions above regimental or brigade level are not examined in depth. The author also discusses casualty figures, the care and burial of the dead, and stories of various Marines, soldiers, and family members.