Belleau Wood is located on the high ground to the rear of Aisne-Marne American Cemetery south of the village of Belleau (Aisne), France. In the center of the road leading through the woods is a flagpole and a monument commemorating the valor of the U.S. Marines who captured this area in 1918.

It commemorates the actions of the 4th Marine Brigade of the U.S. Army’s 2nd Division. The 2nd Division attacked German positions beginning on June 6, 1918. The 4th Marine Brigade liberated Bouresches that day. Its 5th and 6th Marine Regiments fought in Belleau Wood through most of June 1918.

Their gallant actions resulted in the Battle of Belleau Wood ending on June 26. On June 30, 1918, the Commanding General, French 6th Army, officially renamed Belleau Wood as “Wood of the Marine Brigade.”

The 2nd Division sustained casualties of 8,100 officers and men during the intense fighting in this vicinity during June 1918. Vestiges of trenches, shell holes, and relics of the war to include weapons found in the vicinity, may be seen near the marine monument, which was erected by the U.S. Marine Corps.

GPS Coordinates: 49° 4' 24" N , 3° 17' 27" E

Belleau Wood is located on the high ground to the rear of the Aisne-Marne American Cemetery and Memorial south of the village of Belleau (Aisne), France.

Travel via Car:

From Paris travel via toll autoroute A-4. Take the Montreuil-aux-Lions exit (#19), then travel via N-3 (also called D1003), following the cemetery signs to “Lucy-le-Bocage” and proceed via D82 through Belleau Wood.

From Reims travel via toll autoroute A-4. The cemetery may be reached by taking the Château-Thierry exit (#20). Proceed to the center of Château-Thierry and then follow the Aisne-Marne American Cemetery signs in the direction of Meaux/ La Ferté sous Jouarre via D1003. About one mile after Château-Thierry, there will be signs for Belleau via D9 on your right, at the top of the hill. Once in the village of Belleau, take the first road on your left to Bouresches and then follow the Belleau Wood signs.

Travel via Train:

There is rail service from Paris (Gare de l'Est) to the train station in Château-Thierry. The journey takes about one hour. From Château-Thierry to Belleau, the trip is a 15-minute ride via taxi. (No bus transportation is available)

Travel via Airplane:

Paris is about 60 miles from the cemetery.

Travel via Public Transportation:

Public transportation to the cemetery is not available.