This is an original example of a World War I USMC Brodie helmet:

The paint color is more forest green, as used by the Marines, and less brown, as used by the Army:

The liner is the proper type with netting and oilskin:

The chinstrap loops are attached with a rivet instead of the split pins used on British and Canadian helmets:

There is a label in the dome of the helmet with "instructions":

The EGA device is World War I issue with latitude and longitude lines. It is made of brass and was painted black:

The EGA is held on by a thumbscrew, also original to the period:

This helmet has a manufacturing mark of ZC46. ZC has been attributed to a firm in Terre Haute Indiana, but I’m not sure that this has ever been confirmed.

The problem is; this helmet never existed. The United States Marine Corps never issued a helmet like the one pictured above. The US Marine Corps issued the very same type of helmet as the Army. There was no EGA device or divisional patch painted on an issue helmet.

At the start of World War I the Marine Corps didn’t have a helmet. They wore the familiar campaign hat that had been used since before the Spanish American War. When the US entered WWI it adopted the British pattern helmet and designated it as the M1917. The Marines were issued this helmet and there was no EGA device attached. Here is a photo of Marines in France at a decoration ceremony:

US Marines are extremely proud of their “Eagle, Globe, and Anchor” device and we are known to put it on everything from our skin to our automobiles. The EGA on these helmets is no different. These were added by the Marine either in the field or (more often) on the long boat ride home. There is evidence that the EGA was worn in France by some Marines. Note that three of the Marines photographed here in Belleau Wood are wearing the EGA device:

The EGA device was also added stateside well after the fact. I have heard that a punched hole was “original” but a drilled hole was not. This is not really true either. A drilled hole could simply mean that a veteran attached the EGA in his garage after he returned from the war. The point is that there is no such thing as an “original” helmet like this. Provenance is the most important thing to know about one of these helmets; who owned it, where was he, and when did he add the device?

Many believe that adding the EGA device to the helmet was prompted by recruiting posters at the time:

This may be true, but it has been my experience that a Marine doesn’t require much “prompting” to put the EGA on a piece of his gear.

The M1917 continued in use until 1941 and many examples have an EGA device attached. This was probably more prominent for Marine Barracks, sea duty, and guard than it was throughout the fleet. I can find no order saying that an EGA device must be attached to a helmet. This may have happened on a unit basis to provide uniformity (the Marine Corps is big on uniformity, especially in garrison), but there was no directive fleet wide. The EGA device on these helmets was probably more a product of Hollywood than it was Headquarters US Marine Corps.

By the way, this tradition continues to this day. Ever since I joined the Corps my cover had always had an EGA device on it. In 1990 the Marines were outfitted with brown “chocolate chip” camouflage utilities. A “boonie” hat was to be worn with this uniform and it was issued without an EGA.

Whiskey - Tango - Foxtrot!

Here is mine:

Some things never change!

Semper Fi,

John :salute:

Another post on this subject can be found here:

http://pickelhaubes.com/bb/viewtopic.php?f=10&t=985&hilit=marine" onclick="window.open(this.href);return false;

Good information John. I would add one point about "never existed." The United States NEVER used a Brodie helmet. The United States used a Model 1917 helmet, based on the British MkI, which was an improvement over the Brodie pattern developed by John Brodie. That might sound like nitpicking, but the Brodie pattern is a slightly different model. The earliest versions utilized a different metal and if memory serves had a raw edge.

Here is what I have from an article I wrote on the subject a decade ago:

The latest research on the subject of these helmets breaks these down into two types. The “Type A” Brodie featured a dome with a slightly flat top, with the brim approximately 40mm at the front and rear, and about 50mm at each side. The “Type B” featured a smaller brim and this may account for the variations in the earliest British helmets. While the very first Type A helmets were used for experimental purposes, it is now believed that up to several hundred Type B helmets were actually field tested in France. However, to add to the confusion, it was the Type A helmet that proved to be the superior design, and it was produced in mass, with some 20,000 being issued to the troops on the front line.

The liners of these first helmets consisted of padding fixed to the crown, along with a single piece of six-tongued leather. There were 12 pieces of tubular rubber around the headband to provide cushioning. The liner was mounted to the top of the helmet by a single copper rivet. The chinstrap was constructed of a strip of leather about 16mm wide and about 2mm thick, and it passed through metal loops on each side of the helmet.

The first Brodie helmets arrived in France in the latter half of 1915. This date of course conflicts with the stated belief that the British helmets were adopted in 1916, but that will soon be made clearer.

When the helmets received their baptism of fire, several problems were encountered with the Brodie design, including the unfinished edge of the helmet, while the shell itself was deemed too shallow. This led to a new helmet that was dubbed the Helmet, Steel, Mark I (MkI). It is important to stress that today collectors often refer universally to all British WWI helmets as “Brodies,” but in fact a Brodie and the MkI are different models. While based on the original Brodie design, the MkI is entirely a different helmet model on the evolutionary family tree of British helmets. It was also produced of non-magnetic manganese steel – and this too adds to the confusion over telling a Brodie from the later MkI.

The early “Type A” and “Type B” Brodie helmets were made of thin gauge of magnetic steel, but the later “Type A” – the ones made in mass – were produced from this new manganese steel. Thus some advanced collectors swear by the magnetic test to confirm that a helmet is a Brodie, and not a cut down or otherwise altered MkI, but the point remains that there are Brodie helmets that are non-magnetic.

Improvements to the MkI included an improved liner. This consisted of pad of layers of lint, asbestos and felt, which was affixed to the helmet by means of a single copper rivet. The rivet also held the chinstrap to the dome of the helmet, as well as the headband. The band consisted of cotton wool covered with leather-cloth. Instead of the tongues used with the Brodie, the MkI utilized netting for adjustment to the head. And while the helmet shell was only produced in a single size, the helmet liner was made in four sizes. The edge of the helmet was fitted with a mild steel rim – and often times Brodies are encountered where the owner may just simply think this rim is missing!