Kirk Fordice made history in Mississippi politics.

Elected as the state's 60th governor in 1991, Fordice was the first Republican to lead Mississippi since Reconstruction. He easily won reelection to his second term in 1995, earning the reputation as a colorful yet capable leader who wasn't afraid to court controversy.

But then sex scandals - similar in some ways to those swirling around Alabama Gov. Robert Bentley - ended up dominating his final years in office.

The first hint of an issue with Fordice came in 1996. The governor, then 62, was driving home alone from Memphis when his car left the highway, struck several trees and then flipped in the air before landing with a crash and catching fire. The governor suffered a broken back and shoulder bone, cracked ribs, a collapsed lung and a bruised heart.

Shortly after the wreck, reports surfaced that on the night of the accident Fordice was seen in Memphis dining and holding hands with a woman who was not his wife. The First Lady, Pat Fordice, issued a statement saying she was not aware of any marital difficulties and had no intention of leaving the governor. The couple had four children and 11 grandchildren.

The controversy continued to swirl around Fordice, who later claimed he had amnesia about the day. Then, in 1999, rumors surfaced again and this time, there was plenty of evidence to prove the governor's extramarital activities.

Fordice and a woman, later identified as his junior high sweetheart Ann Creson of Memphis, were spotted at the airport arriving home from a trip to Paris. Mississippi Highway Patrol officers met them at the airport to provide security, the Los Angeles Times reported, even as fellow passengers snapped pictures of the governor and his girlfriend. And remember that wreck outside of Memphis? Creson was later identified as the governor's dining companion on that night.

That airport incident was followed by an infamous encounter with a television reporter in which Fordice told WLBT-TV's Bert Case he was going to "whip his ass" if he continued to ask questions about his behavior. Case had previously confronted Fordice about his new $300,000 home as well as a beach condo in Gulf Shores - both acquisitions his wife said she knew nothing about.

Fordice - who had publicly chastised then-president Bill Clinton for his own sexual indiscretions - was later pictured walking his dog with a gun strapped to his hip.

The entire incident was embarrassing to Mississippians, as David Sansing, a retired history professor at the University of Mississippi said at the time.

"It wasn't paranoia, it was just macho. I heard people say, 'He didn't have to wear a gun.' But someone said, 'If Mrs. Fordice is really as upset as they say she is, maybe that's the reason.' "

The standoff between the Fordices continued for some time, with both refusing to leave the governor's mansion and firing volleys back and forth via their respective attorneys. Mrs. Fordice later released perhaps the most damming statement of all, apologizing "to the people of this state for being a partner in a marriage that has become a source of embarrassment."

The national media pounced on the story that had all the elements of a Southern Gothic romance, dubbing Fordice "the Love Gov," a name that's also been given to Bentley after the Alabama governor admitted to an improper relationship with advisor Rebekah Caldwell Mason.

It took until December 1999 - just a month before Fordice was to leave office and five months after his highly publicized Paris trip- for the first couple to reach a divorce settlement. The Fordices cited irreconcilable differences in their no-fault divorce petition to end their marriage of 44 years. The case and the property settlement between the two were sealed.

Mississippians sick of the scandal promptly elected Democratic Lt. Gov. Ronnie Musgrove, who counted among his supporters famed author John Grisham.

''After eight years of Kirk Fordice, we ought to be really thankful that we're going to get somebody who's a decent person,'' Grisham said in 2000. ''Right now Jesse Ventura would look good or Hulk Hogan or anybody would look good.''

Meanwhile, in January 2000 - 16 days after his divorce was finalized - Fordice married Creson, whose own husband had died the previous year. But those hoping for a fairy tale ending to the scandal were disappointed - Fordice and Creson divorced within two years. Then, less than a year later, Fordice announced he was diagnosed with a form of leukemia. He died Sept. 7, 2004 in Jackson, Mississippi.

Press reports said his former wife, Pat, was by his side.

Pat Fordice died July 12, 2007. She is buried next to her former husband.