Former Gov. Kirk Fordice, a hard-nosed, no-nonsense businessman who became Mississippi's first Republican governor in more than 100 years, died Tuesday of leukemia. He was 70.

Fordice, who had battled prostate cancer while in office, confirmed in August that he had been diagnosed with a form of leukemia. He died at the University of Mississippi Medical Center in Jackson.

On Thursday, there will be a public viewing of Fordice's body inthe Capitol Rotunda from 10 a.m. until 6 p.m. followed by visitation from 7 p.m. to 9 p.m. at Wright and Ferguson Funeral Home in Jackson. On Friday, services will be at 10 a.m. at First Baptist Church.

"His toughness showed to the very end," said longtime friend Jim Ingram, who served as head of the Highway Patrol during Fordice's two terms.

"He was a man of integrity and he expected integrity and honesty from those he appointed," Ingram said. "We discussed a lot of things, but he was a very private person, and that many of us respected."

Gov. Haley Barbour, the second Republican elected to the state's highest office, said Fordice focused the state's energies on economic development.

"His frank, outspoken and unwavering style made him a respected figure with his political opponents and a beloved governor by Mississippians across the state who elected him twice," Barbour said in a statement.

A self-made millionaire through his Fordice Construction Co., Fordice upset incumbent Democrat Ray Mabus in 1991 to become Mississippi's first Republican governor since Reconstruction.

Fordice served as governor from 1992-2000, becoming the first Mississippi chief executive to succeed himself.

Friends and associates say Fordice was the consummate alpha male his eight years in office—loud, gruff and domineering.

"Frankly I don't miss being inside politics," Fordice said in a 2001 interview with The Associated Press. "It has often been called an ugly, dirty game, and in many ways it is."

As a contractor, Fordice spent decades trying to tame the Mississippi River. He was active in party politics but had never sought statewide office before the 1991 governor's race, when he surprised pundits by defeating state Auditor Pete Johnson in a primary runoff and Mabus in the general election.

While in office, Fordice turned over full control of his Vicksburg engineering firm to two of his sons.

One of his many political battles included the feud with former Attorney General Mike Moore who in 1994 sued tobacco companies.

Mississippi was the first of dozens of states to seek repayment for public costs of treating sick smokers.

Democrat Moore used a stable of private attorneys, including some of his biggest contributors, to file the suit.

"Any idiot can see it's all about lawyers' fees," Fordice once groused.

He filed his own suit to try to block Moore's. That didn't work.

Moore negotiated a settlement with cigarette makers in 1999 that's bringing the state billions of dollars.

Moore had said no other governor filed a lawsuit against their attorney general.

"Most governors were supportive of those actions. But he just saw it differently," Moore said.

Despite controversies over his comments on race and other issues and his private life, the silver-haired grandfather only seemed to grow more popular with conservative Mississippians even though his agenda of tax cuts, school choice and term limits stalled in the Democrat-controlled Legislature.

He was successful in pushing for spending restraints, tougher sentencing laws and more prisons.

The Legislature agreed to a new law that limited spending to 98 percent of revenues, putting the other 2 percent into a "rainy day" savings account. Lawmakers also passed a law that required people convicted of felonies to serve at least 85 percent of their sentence before they could be considered for parole.

His most raucous debates were over racial issues.

Just a few days after his swearing in, he threatened to call out the National Guard if the state was ordered to spend more money on its three historically black colleges.

In 1994, black lawmakers, angered by Fordice's push for term limits, walked out on his state of the state address. Two years later, there was a controversy when he tried to push the Senate to confirm four white men to the board overseeing the state's higher education system. After a court battle and two rejections by the state Senate, Fordice backed down and made four new picks including a black man and a white woman.

But he argued racial issues were overshadowed by economic ones.

"Mississippi doesn't do race anymore," he said in his 1996 inaugural speech after winning a second term.

"The 1960s are over. ... We will acknowledge our history, but we will not let it determine our future. The only race that we're concerned with is the race for more jobs, for better schools, for safer neighborhoods and the race for lower taxes," he said.

His private life made headlines several times. In 1993, he revealed that he was having "irreconcilable differences" with his wife of 40 years, Pat. The first lady, through a terse press release, said she had no intention of getting a divorce.

Three years later, Fordice was seriously injured while driving back from his native Memphis, Tenn., where restaurant employees had seen him eating lunch and drinking wine with a woman believed to be Ann G. Creson, his high school sweetheart from Memphis.

In 1999, he was caught on television returning home from a vacation to France with Creson and cursed a television reporter.

Days later, he announced that he and his wife were divorcing. He married Creson shortly after leaving office in January 2000, barred by term limits from seeking a third term. They later divorced.

A statement released by Fordice's family said the governor had received calls, letters and prayers from people across the state during his illness.