It was probably in the air that the book autumn 2012 would also bring one or the other title on the subject of the Basler Zeitung. Not only, but also because the Basler Zeitung will celebrate its 35th anniversary this year on January 31. Hardly any other Swiss newspaper has caused so much discussion in such a short time. (Even its founding made headlines back then, when BaZ was launched in 1976/77 as a merger product of the tradition-rich Basler Nachrichten and the National-Zeitung).

At the Buch Basel book and media fair next November, Christoph Merian Verlag will present a book of just under 300 pages that pays tribute to the controversial development of BaZ. The title: "Challenged - the history of the Basler Zeitung". The editor is Walter Rüegg, former director of Swiss Radio DRS and now a lecturer at the Institute for Media Studies at the University of Basel.

Together with three other media scientists, Rüegg is in the process of systematically reviewing the highs and lows of the Basel media company and placing them in a larger context. "I'm actually surprised that no one has taken this on until now," says Rüegg, who himself served as publishing director of the Basler Zeitung for a short time in the 1990s. While the NZZ and other Swiss publishers had their journalistic past reappraised on their own, Rüegg and co-authors Christina Klausener, Rahel Walser and Dominic Wirz set out on a journey through history without a BaZ mandate.

In spring 2011, Rüegg and his team began to compile what libraries had to offer on the subject. "It wasn't much, and what little there was was often incomplete and rarely reported objectively," says Rüegg's assessment.

The authors took this shortcoming into account and expanded their research. As media scientists and with the Basel publishing house behind them, they gained access, among other things, to previously protected holdings in the Basel State Archives - and most recently also to the company archives of the Basler Zeitung. In addition, they interviewed about a dozen people - former employees and decision-makers - who were close to BaZ and its predecessor newspapers. Rüegg is certain: "Not only can we draw on new sources, but taken together, these sources above all allow us to look at the facts at hand in a new light."

Follow research on Bazbuch.ch

However, it will be a few months before the results are available to the public in book form. Until then, however, the authors are not working behind closed doors, but want to gradually make research results available online.

Together with the Bernese agency Efentwell, the website was thus created Bazbuch.chwhich went live on Monday. "What the authors needed was a kind of 'research blog' in principle," says Kaspar Kilchenmann, co-founder and one of the two creative heads of Efentwell, explaining the concept. "We took the WordPress idea, enriched it with a few social media tools and packed it into a suitable design." The designers took their cue from the print layout of the BaZ of the 1980s and translated its design ideas to the screen.

In parallel to the website, Twitter and Facebook also play an important role in communicating with the public. "But we don't use these channels to take a stand for or against one side or the other," says Dominic Wirz, co-author and previously a social media researcher, explaining the online strategy. "Instead, we make sure we can bring new voices and perspectives into the conversation - for example, historical sources from the time around the merger." The authors want to approach the work with a scientific, objective claim, even if, from the publishing program's point of view, a writing style that is close to the audience is clearly called for.