Information about «Basler Zeitung» media

Newspaper Name: Basler Zeitung Newspaper name in English: The Basel Newspaper Alternative Names: BaZ Owner: Basler Zeitung Medien Country / Region: Switzerland (Basel) Language: Deutch Format type: Newspaper Category: General Political alignment: None Frequency: Daily Publication Years (print version): 1977 — now (46 years) Circulation: 38,000 (2015) Official Pages: Official Apps: Website: bazonline.ch [read with translation]

The «Basler Zeitung» was first published in 1977 after the merger of the left-liberal «Basler Nachrichten» and the conservative «National-Zeitung». Translated into English, the newspaper is called «Basel Leaflet» or simply «Basel Newspaper». The «Basler Zeitung» newspaper traditionally consists of two parts: the main national and international events from the world of politics, economy, and culture; and regional news from the municipalities of Basel, Rien, and Bettingen. Subscribers to the newspaper receive the «Zurich Tages-Anzeiger» app for free every Saturday, and on Friday the main newspaper is distributed for free in Basel. The publication has an abridged version of «Baz Kompakt», which was created in 2014 on the basis of the free «Baslerstab».

Translate the latest edition of the Switzerland newspaper «Basler Zeitung»

Latest issue of the «Basler Zeitung» (The Basel Newspaper) may be translated in English language now.

For request latest edition of this media, click «Translate» button in front of the selected translator.

Translation result will be opened in your browser on new window (or tab).

Select one of the translators below.

available 3 translators

⇓

Translate «Basler Zeitung / The Basel Newspaper / bazonline.ch» newspaper into English by Google Translate

Click on this button to begin translation of the media ⇒

Read «Basler Zeitung / The Basel Newspaper / bazonline.ch» newspaper online in English with translation by Yandex Translate

For request translation result click on this button ⇒

«Basler Zeitung / The Basel Newspaper / bazonline.ch» in English by Bing Translator

Click on button this for translate media ⇒

...

English version of «Basler Zeitung / The Basel Newspaper / bazonline.ch», latest issue from SysTran Translation Service

Translator currently not available x

English edition of «Basler Zeitung / The Basel Newspaper / bazonline.ch», fresh translation by PROMT Trans

Translator currently not available x