months ago has been apparently of little account and represented by some

twenty Bakhtiaris or less.

I have the honour to be,

Sir,

Tour Excellency’s

most obedient, humble servant,

His Excellency

Sir Charles Marling, K.C.M.G., C.B.,

Acting Consul-General.

His Majesty’s Envoy Extraordinary and

Minister Plenipotentiary at the Court of Persia,

Tehran.

Sub-Enclosure No. 1.

Extract from a censored letter from Saiyid Amanullah, Deputy in the Majlis

at Tehran for Behbehan, to Mirza Abdun-Nabi Khan, Postmaster

Eehbehan, dated 2nd Ramazan 1333 (loth July 19l5j.

< It should be kept very very confidential.

You know very well of course how Germany and Austria have made

progress. Bussia has been finished and is totally without ammunition.

Turkey has made and is making fresh progress in the Caucasus.

The matter is this that there have been conversations between the German

Legation in Tehran and myself in order to check the development of the fresh

plan of these men (the English) in the Kuhgiluyeh and Behbehan by means of

the traitors. It is very likely that through my introduction a telegram may

be sent to you by the German Legation, giving you instructions to send them

daily reports through me. Of course according to the instructions, you should

enter into correspondence and communication with the Khans of the Kuh

giluyeh and incite and induce them on behalf of the German Government,

lou should also hold out every sort of promise. The other fellow, your friend

Haji Saiyid Agha Muin-ut-Tujjar, the Besidency news- writer The lowest of the four classes into which East India Company civil servants were divided. A Writer’s duties originally consisted mostly of copying documents and book-keeping. , is also giving

them promises but his promises are all false and yours are correct, and are

not baseless. In Tehran the German Legation and 1 are ready and will afford

every assistance for the furtherance of your object. You should most

eneigeticaliy proceed with your work which embraces the welfare of both

uns and the other world. If we are able by this means to check the progress

of their object, it is the same thing as you have written. ^

A few days ago Sardar Leader of a tribe or a polity; also refers to a military rank or title given to a commander of an army or division. Arfa had asked the Ministrv of the Inferior to

grant permission to Mulla Abdus-Sevvid who a Y f • lDteil0r t0

aI hipli ‘vr a Y 7 T who has rendered him services,

Av Mch are abominable to God and the people, to send his teleo-rams IYpa Tne

Mimstry asked me about it and enquiredUut ll procUdY l old them

what 1 ' vas expected to say. They therefore sent him a replyTo sav that thw

were not at all ready to give such permission. P J y 7

letter^by*telegram! “ kee P tMs confidential and report the receipt of this

Sub-Enclosure No. 2.

Extruct^rom ^fanulluh, Deputy o, Dehbehan in the

i .n.t j-enran,to Mirza ALaun- iSabt Khan, Kostmasler

dated 9th Mamazan 183J (Sand Jult/ 1U16J, * ’

Ton should keep confidential what I wrote* to you‘last week. * Instructions

* t ide Sub-Endoeure js 0 . i above. v ill be sent to you by the German Lega-

***• “ a "”“ m —■“