Maya the Bee (2013) Season 1 is an animated series focusing on the interesting adventures of a playful honey bee named Maya. She and her friends decide to explore and understand the importance of Mother Nature. It aired from April 1, 2013 to April 12, 2013.

Here’s how you can watch and stream Maya the Bee (2013) Season 1 via streaming services such as Peacock.

Is Maya the Bee (2013) Season 1 available to watch via streaming?

Yes, Maya the Bee (2013) Season 1 is available to watch via streaming on Peacock.

The first season proves to be impactful with a total of 26 entertaining episodes. The first episode of season 1 showcases the birth of Maya in the bee hive. The viewers also get to see the significance of the hive life and Maya’s friendship with Willy and Flip.

The series has an ensemble voice cast of Zalina Sanchez, Hans-Jurgen Dittberner, Ben Hadad, Sonja Deutsch, Lukas Till Berglund, Axel Lutter, and many others.

Watch Maya the Bee (2013) Season 1 streaming via Peacock

Maya the Bee (2013) Season 1 is available to watch on Peacock.

Peacock is a streaming service offering a diverse selection of movies, TV shows, news, sports, and original programming. It features content from NBCUniversal, including beloved series like The Office and Parks and Recreation.

You can watch via Peacock by following these steps:

Go to PeacockTV.com

Click ‘Get Started’

Choose your payment plan

$5.99 per month or $59.99 per year (premium)

$11.99 per month or $119.99 per year (premium plus

Create your account

Enter your payment details

Peacock’s Premium account provides access to over 80,000+ hours of TV, movies, and sports, including current NBC and Bravo Shows, along with 50 always-on channels. Premium Plus is the same plan but with no ads (save for limited exclusions), along with allowing users to download select titles and watch them offline and providing access to your local NBC channel live 24/7.

Maya the Bee (2013) synopsis is as follows:

”Hello everyone, I’m Maya the Bee! What do I love? Freedom! That’s why I live in the meadow instead of the hive. I have a thousand and one adventures with my friends: Shelby Snail, Max the Worm… and of course Willy! Willy is very lazy and greedy … But he’s my best friend. Together, we go on many adventures! Let’s go!”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.

Giveaway: Signed Farscape 25th Anniversary Marathon Poster

Shout! TV is celebrating the 25th anniversary of the cult classic sci-fi television series Farscape with a marathon airing on…

TV Tyler Treese 9 hours ago

Neil Gaiman Reveals He Worked on an Animated Thor Series

Legendary author Neil Gaiman recently revealed that in the early 2000s, he was part of a team that worked on…

TV Anthony Nash 10 hours ago

On Second Watch: Ghostbusters 2016 Remains a Disappointment

With Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire opening this weekend, I want to look back on some lesser Ghostbusters films to see how…

Movies Jeff Ames 10 hours ago

Oh What Fun: Michelle Pfeiffer Set to Star in Amazon Holiday Comedy

Michelle Pfeiffer is set to star in the upcoming holiday comedy Oh. What. Fun, which will be written and directed…

Movies Anthony Nash 10 hours ago