Feb 14 1958

The Arab Federation of Iraq and Jordan formed under Iraq's Faisal II.

King Hussein of Jordan forged a federation with Iraq, which was led by his cousin, Faisal II.

Jul 14 1958

In Iraq Gen. Abdel Karim al-Kassem (Qassim) assassinated Faisal II with his son and premier. Karim proclaimed a republic.

Jordan's King Hussein succeeded Faisal.

Faisal II, Hashemite King of Iraq (1939-58), was assassinated at Baghdad and Noeri el-Said, premier of Iraq, was murdered.

Mohammed Hadid (d.1999 at 92) served as the first finance minister under the government of Abdel Karim Qassem.

Jul 20 1958

King Hussein of Jordan broke off diplomatic relations with UAR.

Aug 1 1958

Jordan's King Hussein dissolved the Arab Federation of Jordan and Iraq.

So what if the Plot by Gen. Abdel Karim al-Kassem (Qassim) was discovered in March 1958, 4 months before.

Faisal manages to supress the riots of June, but the strain leads to his dieing some 3 months later, and King Hussein is crowned King of Iraq.

Several years later Husein's Son is crowned King of Jordon/Iraq.

?How does this affect the Mid East.?

While I could be wrong, I think the Jordan/Iraq Federation would go exactly where the other half-dozen odd Arab federations went-precisely nowhere. Though Abdul Karim Qassem's coup failing is still a major POD-TTL's Iraq will remain pro-Western and probably much more stable politically than OTL Iraq.

(Side note-everyone I've talked to about Iraq seems to consider the Iraqi kings to have been British puppets, and their overthrow a good thing for Iraq. Seen as how the other Hashemite monarchy, Jordan, is neither a western puppet nor a politically unstable mess, I fail to understand this.)

Though Abdul Karim Qassem's coup failing is still a major POD-TTL's Iraq will remain pro-Western and probably much more stable politically than OTL Iraq.

Not necessarily. Iraq was basically a powder keg in '58. Nobody liked the monarchy, and I mean nobody. The officer corps was dominated by Nasserists, the soldiers had more loyalty towards their generals than their government, Leftist parties were particular active/popular in Iraq (the Communist Party of Iraq had a particularly good record), and like you say later on, everybody saw the Hashemites as British puppets. The royals' deaths were mourned by nobody.

Seen as how the other Hashemite monarchy, Jordan, is neither a western puppet nor a politically unstable mess, I fail to understand this.)

Jordan managed to steer that really dangerous course of not belonging to any camp. They weren't British puppets, they successfully played Arab Nationalist and Islamic groups off of one another, they were the main leaders of the Palestinian cause, and they--unlike their neighbors--were willing to talk to Israel (albeit secretly). So they stayed stable by having sane monarchs and never doing enough to seriously piss most governments off.