Address

Priory Lane Stadium, Priory Lane, Eastbourne, East Sussex BN23 7QH

Via Car

From the east (via Hastings)

Take the A259 from Hastings, and approaching the roundabout at Pevensey, take the 2nd exit. Carry straight on at the traffic lights. Pass through Pevensey, past the castle on your left, and turn left at the Fish & Chip Shop in Westham onto the B2191 Eastbourne Road. Travel along the B2191 (you will see the floodlights on your left) and at the roundabout, turn left into Priory Road. Priory Lane is about 200 yards down the road on the left.

From the north and west (via Polegate)

If approaching via to A27 from Brighton, turn left at the Polegate traffic lights, and then take the exit at the large roundabout shortly afterwards to continue eastwards on the A27 (signposted Eastbourne, Hastings & Bexhill). Skip next paragraph.

If approaching via the A22, take the first exit at the large roundabout shortly before Polegate, signposted A27 Eastbourne, Hastings & Bexhill.

At the next roundabout, take the second exit towards Stone Cross and Westham (A22); at another roundabout shortly afterwards, take the first exit signposted Stone Cross and Westham. Continue towards Stone Cross village, past Dittons Nursery on your left. Shortly afterwards you will come to a crossroads, with a church on your left, the Red Lion pub on the right, and Stone Cross windmill immediately ahead. Turn right, down the B2104 Friday Street.

At the end of Friday Street, turn left at the double mini-roundabout into Hide Hollow (B2191), passing Eastbourne Crematorium on your right. Turn right at the roundabout into Priory Road, and Priory Lane is about 200 yards down the road on the left.

Nearest railway stations

Pevensey and Westham (approx 15-20 mins walk)

Eastbourne (taxi service outside station, or bus – see below)

Bus travel

The LOOP Bus serves Priory Road/Priory Lane. The Loop Bus is every 15 minutes.

The service runs from Eastbourne town centre to Hampden Park, and returns along the same route calling at Seaside (Arlington Arms), Pevensey Bay Road (ASDA) and Priory Road. From Hampden Park (Station) the service calls at Winkney Farm (Wilton Avenue), Langney (Shopping Centre) and Priory Lane.

Please see Taxi information below.

Taxis

If you require a taxi to/from Priory Lane then we recommend 720720 Taxis on 01323 720720.