Cast : Mark Wahlberg, Brie Larson, John Goodman etc...

Plot and the Summary:

The gambler is an crime drama film which is about an English professor Jim Bennett played by Mark Wahlberg . The story opens up with Jim in the hospital and his grandpa's is in " an about to die situation" and he breaks down, this is the only scene in the movie where we can see Jim cry. He then goes to a Korean gambling establishment where he goes to a very high winning streak and finally bets all of his winnings on 22 and loses the whole(You need to watch this scene seen because it will get familiar later on!!). We can see that throughout the film Jim is frustrated at his life, he shuns out his mother, and goes to her only for money to gamble more,As the film progresses on we get to a feeling that Jim is going to die because of his huge debts to the loan sharks and Jim doesn't care if they beat him to his death because he is too tired of his life and wants it to end. We can see this when he talks to the Amy about his wants in life and his frustration to his students when he shouts at Lamar.

The director then sets up the last seven days. Each day Jim builds up his debt more and more by getting it from different people( the Italian, the negro and the Korean). During the last two days he devises a plan where he bets in a NBA game with the help from Lamar and pays off the " King of Spades" . On the last day he calls up the Korean and the Italian to settle their due but he has enough to pay one of them. This is where the films subtitle " the only way out is all in" gets all its meaning.

The films background score is nicely done especially when he runs throughout the night to Alice's place. In many places the background songs blends into the situation especially the scene where Jim drinks away and thinks that the house is being flooded by the rain. Mark Wahlberg does this role with ease. With his impulsive and aggressive speeches which we have seen in many other films.

Verdict:

The film is a remake of 1974 film of the same name. Film critiques say that the film is a "let down" from the former version, but i haven't seen that one so i cannot comment on that. Overall a very good film. Brilliantly shot with all the old school locations and crisp dialogues.

Vinnaithandi Varuvaya(2010)

Vinnaithandi Varuvaya(VTV) is a tamil romantic drama film directed by Gautham vasudeva Menon and is considered one of the successful films in his career. Cast : Silambarasan, Trisha, Ganesh & Samatha etc Plot and summary: VTV is the story of Karthik( played by silambarasan) and Jessie( played by Trisha). The entire film is the narration of karthik's life how he met Jessie. How did he fall in love and did it succeed. The film begins with the marriage scene of Jessie. Karthik is sitting as the marriage among the audience and introspecting what has gone wrong and the flashback begins.

Zodiac 2007

Cast : Jake Gyllenhaal, Robert Downey, Jr, Mark Ruffalo, Brian Cox, Anthony Edwards. Plot and Summary: Zodiac is a american crime thriller directed by David Fincher and written by James Vanderbilt, Based on a book " Finding the zodiac killer " by Robery Graysmith. the film is based on the serial killings by a man who claims himself to be "Zodiac" in California between 1960-70s. The film begins with four killings at random places and after each time the killer leaves a mark of his own behind the scene( the symbol used in the poster of the film). the killer then posts letter to newspapers to publish some encoded messages to find out his true identity( Clearly a publicity scene to seek attention). Cartoonist Robert Graysmith and reporter Paul Avery( Robery Downey, Jr) get involved in finding the killer and often get the attention of the serial killer himself through the course of the film. The rest of the film is if Zodiac is ever found out or convicted or

Ethir Neechal(1968)

Cast : Nagesh, Sowcar Janaki, Jayathi, Muthuraman, Major Sowtharajan etc Plot and Storyline: Ethir Neechal(1968) is a tamil comedy drama film directed by K.Balachandar. It starts Nagesh as the main protagonist, a comedy character playing the lead, one of a very different film at the time. Madhu( nagesh) is an orphan who grows up in a crowded apartment, People call him Madipadi (Staircase) Madhu because he stays under a staircase through out his life. The film starts in a regular busy day, Madhu works as s servant for all the people in the apartment and manages his study in his college. Though he seems to be happy helping them, the people in the apartment are selfish and in many times ridicule his current state. Though the plot seems to be tragic and filled with grief for the lead. the film is filled with comic moments.