Mike Miller has grown up right before our eyes.

Once he was “Skinny,” a tall and lanky teenager who legendary coach Gary Munsen unleashed on the state in the mid-90s. Today he’s one of the NBA’s wise old men, a respected 17-year veteran whose services remain in demand year after year even as age takes its toll on a body that’s played in over 1,100 career NBA games.

In between, we’ve watched Miller accomplish just about everything someone can in a basketball life, all while maintaining close ties to his home state.

Remember when Skinny was in high school, and he and his teammates filed into the Mitchell High School library wearing backwards Florida Gators baseball caps to announced Miller’s college choice? Remember how up in arms some uptight folks were about something so trivial? It seems quaint 20 years later.

If you squint real hard, you can remember there were folks in South Dakota who were not so subtly rooting against Miller way back then. There’s a tendency sometimes in this state to demand that certain dues be paid, that success isn’t deserved if it comes easily.

And it often appeared to come easily to Miller. But looking back, it’s impossible not to admire the path he’s forged. Some didn’t like that he shunned the Midwest to play for the young and flashy Billy Donovan at Florida, but Miller had the last laugh, taking the Gators to the national championship game as a sophomore and hitting one of the most memorable shots in NCAA tournament history in the first round of that year’s NCAA tournament.

Some clenched their fists when Miller opted to turn pro after two years in college, but he was taken fifth overall in the NBA draft and won the 2001 Rookie of the Year award.

He was the Sixth Man of the Year in 2006 and was one of LeBron James’ wingmen on the Miami Heat’s NBA championship teams in 2012 and 2013.

Miller has made nearly $90 million in salary alone during his NBA career, having played for Orlando, Memphis, Minnesota, Washington, Miami, Cleveland, Portland and Denver. He’s bounced around, and nagging injuries have led him to flirt with retirement in recent years. But he keeps coming back and keeps finding work because his skills and intangibles remain in demand. He’s one of the league’s all-time great shooters – 20th in NBA history in 3-pointers made (1,582) and 21st all-time in 3-point percentage (.407), but also an adept passer, savvy defender and locker room leader.

Now 36 years old and with 10,945 career points, Miller’s legacy is secure – he’s the greatest basketball player in South Dakota history.

And he’s never far from home. Miller’s become a regular at the annual Legends for Kids event, and it isn’t uncommon to see him shooting hoops at a gym in Sioux Falls during the summer.

He keeps tabs on the local scene, too – his cousin Macy is a standout guard for the South Dakota State women’s team, and Miller openly campaigned for his brother Ryan to get the SDSU men’s basketball coaching job that ended up going to T.J. Otzelberger.

Someday soon Miller’s playing career will be over. Maybe he’ll go into coaching, or broadcasting. And maybe someday someone will come along and unseat him as the most accomplished basketball player in South Dakota’s history.

But don’t count on that. Skinny’s done pretty well for himself.

ABOUT MIKE MILLER

Date of Birth: Feb. 19, 1980

Hometown: Mitchell