MURFREESBORO – Mike Miller decided he wanted a lifestyle change.

The COVID-19 pandemic provided a moment of clarity for the former NBA shooting guard. Stay-at-home mandates and canceled sporting events meant Miller could finally have dinner with his family at a reasonable time.

“It allowed me to see how much I was missing,” he said. “Because I actually had to stay at home and I got to be around (my family). I turned around and saw I had a senior in high school and a sophomore in high school.”

Following 17 seasons as a pro player and two more as an assistant coach for the University of Memphis men’s basketball team, Miller has found a way to mesh basketball with family by coaching his teenage sons, Mason and Mavrick, and their teammates.

Last July, just six weeks after he stepped down at Memphis, Miller took over as the head boys basketball coach at Houston High School in Germantown, 25 miles east of the arena where he starred for the Grizzlies from 2003-08 and again in 2013-14.

His first season as a high school skipper ended with a water bottle bath at MTSU’s Murphy Center on Saturday evening.

Miller helped a loaded Houston roster dismantle Cane Ridge 62-43 for the Class AAA state title – the first in program history. The Mustangs finished with a 23-3 overall record against teams from seven states.

“I was able to sacrifice a little bit of what I wanted to do in my personal life to do this, and it was worth every minute of it,” said Miller, who won NBA titles playing alongside Lebron James with the Miami Heat in 2012 and 2013.

Miller was quick to credit former Houston coach Charlie Leonard, who retired last summer, for turning the Mustangs into a championship-caliber program. Houston earned its first state bid in 2020, but that tournament was canceled by the onset of the pandemic.

“This is his trophy,” Miller said. “He built this program (along with Houston athletics director) Mr. (Chad) Becker. They went through the (hard) stuff. They handed me a golden ticket, and when you bring guys in like this, it makes my job a lot easier.”

One of those “guys” was Mason, a Creighton signee who earned Mr. Basketball honors by averaging 17.3 points, 6.4 rebounds and 3.3 assists as a senior. Mason told Main Street Preps earlier this season that he has enjoyed the challenge of playing for his father.

“It’s definitely hard,” Mason said. “He’s always hard on me. But it’s exciting.”

Other notable names in Houston’s lineup included center Jerrell Colbert (LSU), forward Jonathan Lawson (Oregon) and combo guard T.J. Madlock (multiple Division I offers).

Even with all that talent, Miller admitted that working with high school players required a different approach than what he used at Memphis the past two seasons.

“I learned patience,” Miller said with a laugh. “But you learn through everything. That’s why you put yourself out there and do different things. Everything’s a different experience and a different challenge.”

Miller isn’t sure if high school coaching will be part of his long-term future. He said he plans to discuss that with his family.

Because after years of putting his career first, his priorities are focused on home.

“I enjoyed it – there’s no question about it,” Miller said of his debut season at Houston. “I really had a lot of fun. But we’ll see. I always take things one day at a time. Whatever’s best for my family I will do.”