Introduction

The capital of China, the world’s most populous country, Beijing is also China’s cultural and educational center and a major industrial city. It is China’s second largest city in terms of population (after Shanghai) and in total administrative area (after Chongqing). Beijing is one of four Chinese cities designated as a special, or national, municipality, with an administrative status equivalent to a province. The municipality includes the districts of the built-up central urban area as well as a much larger surrounding region of rural districts and counties. The heart of the built-up urban area is the urban core, which is sometimes called the city proper. The total area incorporated within the boundaries of the municipality is about 6,500 square miles (16,800 square kilometers).

Beijing sits between two rivers that flow out of the hills and onto the North China Plain, which at this location is a large alluvial fan. The city is located some 100 miles (160 kilometers) from the gulf known as Bo Hai, an arm of the Yellow Sea, or Huang Hai.

Located at 39° 55′ N. latitude on the eastern flank of Eurasia, the world’s largest landmass, Beijing has a climate that is largely continental with warm summers and long, cold, dry winters. The annual mean temperature is 53° F (12° C). Cold, dry winds blow a significant amount of dust onto the city from as far away as the Loess Plateau and the Gobi of Mongolia and Inner Mongolia. Precipitation averages 25 inches (64 centimeters) per year. Most of the rainfall occurs in the months of June, July, and August.

Cityscape

Central Beijing was a crowning achievement of the Chinese traditional style of architecture and city planning. Although a city near the current site was large and walled during the Yuan, or Mongol, Dynasty (1206–1368), the splendor of Beijing began during the Ming Dynasty (1368–1644). The major palaces and temples—as well as the brick-faced walled city and great gates—were begun during the Ming period.

Traditional Chinese cities normally had walls, and the geometric shapes ideally were regular and aligned according to the points of the compass. Beijing, with its north-south and east-west main axes, was typical. Major gates were located at the points where main arterials entered the city, and some of these gates have survived. The wall has been torn down and replaced by a ring road to facilitate the flow of traffic.

The inner city was square shaped and was surrounded by walls with a perimeter of about 15 miles (24 kilometers). Within it was the Imperial City, a walled complex where the emperor and his entourage lived. Within the Imperial City itself was the Forbidden City, which contained the Imperial Palaces and was off limits to all but the most highly placed. Only the emperor himself had unlimited access to this area. It was surrounded by both walls and a moat. The imperial family first took up residence in the inner city in 1420. An outer walled city was built in the 1500s along the southern edge of the inner city. This section was rectangular and was enclosed by walls measuring about 14 miles (23 kilometers) in total length.

During the Qing, or Manchu, Dynasty (1644–1911/12), the walled inner city, including the Imperial and Forbidden cities, was restricted to Manchus. The Manchus (who now make up just under 2 percent of Beijing’s population and are largely indistinguishable from the mainstream Han Chinese) were a hunting and herding people from the Northeast of China who spoke a different language from the Han Chinese (who today account for over 95 percent of Beijing’s population). The Han Chinese were allowed to live in the southern outer city.

During the Qing period the city’s general design did not change, though many new temples and palaces were built, some outside the walls. Among the most striking examples is the Summer Palace, which was built northwest of the inner city, about 6 miles (11 kilometers) beyond the wall.

The focal point of modern Beijing is Tiananmen Square, a huge plaza that covers nearly 100 acres (40 hectares). It is located at the center of the 24-square-mile (62-square-kilometer) historical urban core. Its name comes from the large stone gate at the northern end of the square known as the Tiananmen, meaning “Gate of Heavenly Peace.” The gate is the main entrance to the Imperial City, which is directly north of the square. On the east Tiananmen Square faces the National Museum of China, a large historical museum, and on the west, the immense, two-block-long Great Hall of the People, which is the main assembly hall dedicated to party and government rallies and the meeting place of the National People’s Congress. The memorial tomb dedicated to the late Communist party leader Mao Zedong is located in the middle of the square on the south. The plaza is the stage for major political and Communist party celebrations and can accommodate more than a half million people on such occasions. In June 1989 the square was the scene of a crackdown by government forces against student demonstrations advocating for greater political freedom and other reforms.

North of Tiananmen Square is the Forbidden City, now home of the Palace Museum, which displays vast collections of priceless artwork and other treasures from Chinese imperial times. The palace and temple complex within the Forbidden City are among the most impressive and beautiful examples of Chinese traditional architecture. A large park, Bei Hai, and the leadership residential compound are located just west of the Forbidden City. To the east and west are major commercial and shopping streets and centers.

Perhaps the most beautiful historic structure in Beijing is the Temple of Heaven in the southern outer city. It consists of several buildings in a park setting. The oldest building was erected in 1420 as a place of heaven worship for the emperor.

Since the mid-1990s the construction of new buildings in Beijing has proceeded very rapidly. Prior to that time, parts of the city outside the built-up inner zone (which stretches well beyond the older walled center), as well as some remaining areas within, were made up of low, crowded dwellings. Many have been torn down in recent years and replaced with new medium- and high-rise apartment buildings, hotels, and office buildings. Broad boulevards and avenues have been replacing the older streets and narrow alleyways that characterized old Beijing, at an extremely rapid pace. City planners tried to build 14 self-sufficient satellite towns inside the municipality beyond the built-up area, but these efforts had only limited success at reducing congestion in the city center.

People and Culture

The Beijing municipality is home to many millions of people. Most of them live in the built-up area, and many live in the urban core within that area. The rural population resides in the surrounding rural districts and counties that are part of the administrative territory of the municipality. About 70 percent of the total population is considered nonagricultural. The people engaged in agriculture grow mostly wheat and corn (maize) as well as vegetables for the local market. Far more people are employed in industrial and service enterprises.

The population growth of Beijing has been considerable. The city had only 728,000 people in 1913, and its population did not reach 1 million until the 1920s. In 1949 the population was estimated at more than 4 million, with about 43 percent believed to be nonagricultural urbanites.

Natural population increase based on a high birth rate accounted for the city’s rapid growth from 1950 to 1960. The period from 1960 to 1970 was one of fluctuation, beginning with several years of a severe national food shortage and followed by a family-planning and birth-control campaign begun in 1964. From 1971 to 1978 there was a rise in population growth. However, Beijing’s birth rate declined to 1.4 percent per year by 1979, a rate comparable to that of Western industrial countries. Stable population growth continued until 1990. From 1991 there was a rise in population primarily caused by the migration into the city of rural people, many from other provincial-level units. Diplomats, journalists, and business people make up the growing community of foreign residents. Beijing is planning for a population of 18 million by 2020.

Compared to those of China’s other large cities, the building and population densities in Beijing used to be relatively low but have expanded rapidly. The density of the municipality’s population (including the outlying areas) in 2001 averaged about 1,971 people per square mile (760 per square kilometer). For the more densely crowded built-up area of the city, it was 79,248 per square mile (30,054 per square kilometer). Still, Shanghai municipality had a higher population density, which in 2000 averaged 6,837 people per square mile (2,640 per square kilometer). Although the population density has increased, the average amount of housing space available for Beijing’s residents has grown rapidly in recent years.

Despite the city’s transformation into an industrial center during China’s socialist period, Beijing’s key role continues to be as China’s political and cultural center. There are dozens of institutions of higher education in the city, including two of China’s most famous universities—Peking (Beijing) and Tsinghua (Qinghua)—and the country’s largest library. The palaces and temples are well known throughout the world, and there are also many fine museums, exhibit halls, and theaters. The Beijing Zoo is in the northwestern part of the city. It is China’s largest zoo and is especially popular for its giant pandas.

Beijing Workers’ Stadium in the eastern part of the city was one of the largest buildings in the city even prior to its refurbishment for the 2008 Beijing Olympics. For the Olympics, the country built a whole new National Stadium and several other buildings in a sporting complex in the northern part of the city. A conservative estimate puts Beijing’s total demand for steel used in the Olympics-related construction at 3 million tons. Beijing and Shanghai arguably have been the fastest-growing cities in the world.

Economy

The economy of Beijing has changed dramatically under different phases of communism. Traditionally the city was primarily an administrative and cultural center because of its distance far from the country’s key economic areas, the Chang (Yangtze) River valley and the Pearl (Zhu) River delta. From 1949 it developed rapidly as an industrial and manufacturing city. It also strove to become mostly self-sufficient in such food supplies as vegetables, fruits, fish, and poultry, but that is no longer the case.

Prior to 1980 Beijing was unlike most of the world’s major cities because agriculture formed a significant portion of the economy. Such development conformed with the socialist belief in China that all cities should produce as well as consume, and Beijing developed a broad and diversified producer economy. The focus on municipal self-sufficiency gradually broke down after the 1980s.

Industries in the municipality produce machinery, including cranes, transport and mining machinery, printing equipment, and agricultural equipment; communications, electrical, and high-tech equipment; precision instruments; petrochemicals; biotechnology; pharmaceuticals; and processed foods. Among the city’s handicrafts are rugs and carpets, porcelain and china, jade and ivory sculpture, brass ware, enamel and lacquer ware, lace, and embroidery.

The city’s labor force reflects the nature of the capital and the rapid changes of economic growth since the 1990s. Beijing’s service sector expanded rapidly. Now most of Beijing’s workers are employed in service industries, such as public administration, finance, commerce, real estate, retail trade, education, and tourism. Most of the rest of the workforce is employed in manufacturing, with a smaller number working in agriculture and other primary industries.

Growth of population and economic activity has led to serious environmental problems, including air, water, solid-waste, and noise pollution as well as an insufficient water supply for domestic use. The quality of air in Beijing has declined as a result of increased industry and increased numbers of automobiles, trucks, and people. Air pollution is perceived as the most serious form of pollution because it can be easily seen and felt, but water pollution is arguably more serious. Polluted water has resulted from more people and industry, despite the expansion of wastewater processing facilities and lined waste dumps. Concern about these negative effects of industrialization on the environment has led to a cutback in the expansion of industry. In particular, Beijing attempted to improve its air quality for the 2008 Olympic Games, but with only limited success.

The insufficient supply of water is a major problem because the climate is comparatively dry. Water shortages result from poor agricultural practices as well as from industrial waste. Irrigation water is provided to farms surrounding Beijing at a low cost. Two thirds of the city’s water is supplied from underground sources. The rest comes from Guanting Reservoir, the largest artificial lake in the North China Plain, which lies in the mountains to the northwest, and from water diverted from other areas. Projects are under way to transfer water long distance from central China, which has a relative surplus, to Beijing and the surrounding North China Plain by massive canals.

Transportation

Beijing is a major transportation center. Several rail lines link the city with other regions of China. Beijing’s large, busy airport is about 12 miles (20 kilometers) northeast of the city center. It is served by both international and domestic carriers and contains the world’s largest terminal. There are several other domestic airports near the city.

Beijing’s citizens own more than 10 million bicycles and have used them as a major means of transportation within the city, though bicycle use has decreased in recent years. Buses are also a major form of transportation. Automobiles have become more numerous, with private ownership rising rapidly, and this has caused serious road traffic congestion. Since 1987 the underground commuting rail network has grown rapidly to encompass several lines, including a high-speed train line completed to link the airport with the city center in time for the 2008 Olympics.

Government

Beijing is China’s capital, and the country’s major political and judicial institutions are located in the city. These include the headquarters of the Communist party; the National People’s Congress, the main organ of state power; and the State Council. The major administrative departments, ministries, and commissions are under the authority of the State Council and typically have their headquarters in Beijing. In addition, Beijing is home to most international organizations’ China office as well as foreign government legations.

As one of China’s four national municipalities, Beijing is linked directly to the national government. Administratively the municipality is an enormous metropolis composed of 16 districts (qu) and two counties (xian). Many of the districts were upgraded from county status between 1986 and 2001. The districts are further subdivided into smaller units: streets (jiedao), townships (zhen), and villages (xiang). Beijing has a mayor, and a People’s Congress represents the citizens. The mayor’s office is responsible for implementing the decisions of the People’s Congress. The many functions served by the mayor’s office range from police and judicial activities to education, employment, and health and sanitation.

Municipal administration and control extend down to the districts and the approximately 4,000 neighborhood and residents’ committees. Such concerns as assisting the police, maintaining household registries, promoting birth control, basic sanitation, and welfare are administered at the neighborhood level.

Martial law was declared in Beijing in the aftermath of the massive student demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in May–June 1989. The military forcibly repressed the protests on June 3–4, and hundreds, or possibly thousands, of people were killed. Afterward, many who had supported the protest were imprisoned. In January 1990 martial law was lifted. Public commemoration of the event has been officially banned, and the youth of today are not too interested in the incident. In recent years, peasants have come to Tiananmen Square from rural areas to petition for redress against corrupt officials in other parts of the country. Often these rural people are sent back to their home provinces or imprisoned.

History

Human settlement in the vicinity of what is now Beijing began as early as the Lower Paleolithic period more than 400,000 years ago, and remains of early human groups from the more recent Upper Paleolithic period have been discovered in the same location. From 1918 to 1939 the fossil remains of “Peking man” (or “Beijing man”) were uncovered at Zhoukoudian, a cave 34 miles (55 kilometers) southwest of the city. Beijing man was of the species Homo erectus and lived about 770,000 to 230,000 years ago.

The first town in the area was constructed more than 2,000 years ago near the zone of contact between the “civilized” traditional Han Chinese and those tribal peoples from the north and west whom the Chinese viewed as barbarians. The various Great Walls, which run to the north and west of Beijing, were efforts to stabilize the frontier between the Han Chinese and the barbarian peoples beginning as early as the 3rd century bc. Yet it remained for a later Mongol leader from beyond the wall, Kublai Khan, to build the city Dadu, or “Great Capital,” at the site of Beijing in ad 1264 and to establish it as the political center for China. Except for a few brief interruptions, Beijing has served as China’s capital ever since.

In 1368 the founder of the Ming Dynasty named the city Beiping (Pei-p’ing), meaning “Northern Peace,” and shifted the capital to the south, to the city of Nanjing, or “Southern Capital.” Nanjing remained the capital until 1420, when a succeeding Ming emperor decreed that the capital should return to its previous site in the north. Beiping was then named Beijing, meaning “Northern Capital.” There the capital remained throughout the Ming (1368–1644) and Qing (1644–1911/12) dynasties. In 1928 the Nationalists again moved the capital to Nanjing and changed Beijing’s name back to Beiping. Beiping was occupied by the Japanese from 1937 to 1945 but did not sustain serious damage during World War II. In 1949, with the establishment of the People’s Republic of China, the city was once again selected as the national capital, and its name was restored to Beijing.

The city was long known to English-speakers outside China as Peking. In 1979, however, China formally adopted the Pinyin transliteration Beijing for use in foreign languages with Roman letters (such as English). Population (2009 estimate), urban agglomeration, 12,214,000; (2010 census), municipality, 19,612,368.