Capital of China, a modern metropolis with a long history

Beijing is the capital of the People’s Republic of China and also the national political centre, cultural centre, centre for international exchanges and centre for scientific discovery and technological innovation. It is a world-famous ancient capital city with rich cultural heritage and a modern international metropolis.

With over 3000 years of history as a city and over 800 years of history as the capital, Beijing is the city having the most world heritage sites. The Temple of Heaven, Great Wall, Palace Museum and Summer Palace are world-famous heritage sites of this ancient capital.

The 2022 Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games will be held in Beijing, making Beijing the first “Dual-Olympic City” in the world that hosts both the Summer and Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games. The APEC Beijing Summit, Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation and many other major international conferences have made Beijing the focus of the world. The Beijing Daxing International Airport was put into operation in 2019, ushering Beijing into the era of “double-hub” air traffic. The passenger throughput of the Beijing Capital International Airport has topped 100 million passenger-times, ranking second in the world for several consecutive years. 56 of the world’s top 500 companies are headquartered in Beijing, ranking first in the world. There are over 30,000 foreign organizations based in Beijing, and the important international organizations such as AIIB have also stationed their headquarters in Beijing. Beijing now has 56 international sister cities across the world. All of these Beijing is getting growing attention from the world.

A healthy urban environment

The success of the Beijing 2008 Olympic and Paralympic Games presented Beijing to the world as a more prosperous, more urbanized and more liveable city.

Beijing has highly comprehensive sports facilities open to the public and sports projects organized for international exchanges. Now Beijing has over 20,000 sports venues, training rooms and other facilities, over 60% of Beijing residents regularly take physical exercise and sports are increasingly popular. The China Open Tennis Tournament, Beijing International Long-distance Running Festival, ISF China Beijing Roller Ski World Cup, ISF Air+Style Beijing F15 Big Air World Cup and many other international sports events are regularly held, which boosts the enthusiasm of Beijing residents for sports.

Build a world-class metropolis that is harmonious and liveable

Beijing is a vibrant modern international metropolis. Since the Olympic Games in 2008, Beijing has set its development goal of becoming a world-class metropolis that is harmonious and liveable.

The per-capita disposable income of Beijing is now RMB 62,000 and average life expectancy 82.2 years. The per-capita education years for permanent resident population are 12.5 years. Medical services cover all citizens; the urban-rural integrated social security system has been established, with security standard enhanced year by year; and the housing support system is continuously improved. The capital city enjoys a stable and harmonious social environment and the best public security in the world.

Beijing is China’s only comprehensive pilot city for expanding service industry opening-up, a new program similar to that of the Pilot Free Trade Zone and CEPA, which has led to the settlement of a number of well-known foreign-invested finance and service institutions in Beijing. As the ecosystem for innovation is being continuously optimized, the advanced, sophisticated and cutting-edge industries are prospering and the advantageous service industries such as finance, information and technologies have contributed over 60% of economic growth.

Beijing has abundant human as well as science and technology resources, including over 90 universities, over 1,000 scientific research institutes, 120 national key laboratories, 68 national engineering research centres, about 860,000 university students, and approximately 25,000 national high-tech enterprises.

Beijing is deservedly the most active city in terms of innovation and entrepreneurship, with approximately 200 innovative enterprises created every day.