Marco Ferreri, the fiercely satiric Italian director perhaps best known for ''La Grande Bouffe,'' in which four charming middle-age men gorge themselves to death in a suicide pact, died yesterday in a hospital in Paris. He was 68.

The cause of death was a heart attack, Reuters reported.

''The Italian cinema has lost one of its most original artists, one of its most personal authors,'' said Gilles Jacob, artistic director of the Cannes International Film Festival. ''No one was more demanding nor more allegorical than he in showing the state of crisis of contemporary man.''

Mr. Ferreri, whose often funny and erotic films stirred shock and outrage with their essentially bleak, anarchic view of society, made no secret of his attitude.

In a 1977 interview, he said: ''The values that once existed no longer exist. The family, the bourgeoisie -- I'm talking about values, morals, economic relationships. They no longer serve a purpose. My films are reactions translated into images.''

Besides ''La Grande Bouffe'' (1973) with its destructive orgy of eating, Mr. Ferreri's notable films included ''The Conjugal Bed'' (1963), in which an eager 40-year-old bridegroom becomes a fatality, the victim of his lusty young wife's sexual appetites; ''The Ape Woman'' (1964), about a wretched woman covered with hair whose husband stuffs and exhibits her after her death, and ''The Last Woman'' (1976), in which a man persuaded by a beautiful woman that his sex is at the root of his egocentricity cuts off his penis to prove her wrong.

To those who accused him of using wretched excess for shock value, Mr. Ferreri replied: ''Doesn't life shock you enough? The shock I show is no bigger than the shock we see in daily living.''

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.