How can it be good if it's dead?

With the other bad reviews (none that recent though) I'm surprised that Robert has success with this company. There were some hiccups initially when I started with them a couple years ago, then things were going great for a while, as I only use for general transactions & never had more than $500 at any given time.

After a while though, I was unable to deposit funds from my bank account into Movo, & upon contacting them, they said a couple different times over the period of several months that they were working on it. It never worked. I gave up for a while, and when I went to check on things, I never could get into the app, finding out that Google doesn't carry them any more.

Although I can't find any legit info on it, this company seems to be defunct. Even the website reflects a copyright date of 2022, not normal for a currently operating company like this. Their FAQ page goes is not found. Fortunately, I used all my funds before things went south, although it seems like others haven't been so lucky.

Date of experience : September 21, 2023

MOVO is a wonderful payment app

MOVO is a wonderful payment app. I feel like after I verified my account and passed, the experience has been even better than before. The customer service team was very friendly and swift with helping me over the phone. For an added bonus the app is user friendly and the bill pay feature is so helpful for me, when I am paying my bills. If you have not already downloaded this app what are you waiting for? Come and experience what I am experiencing.

Date of experience : October 16, 2020

MOVO Loves Security!!!!

MOVO said they have just gone through some recent security updates to provide a better and safer platform to it's users.

It was a little inconvenient for a short period but I think it is definitely worth it in the long run!

I signed up for MOVO because of the great security they offer for payments and I love that they continue to improve that. No resting on their laurels here! Constant improvement and always put me first as a customer.

Date of experience : October 14, 2020

Runs like an Italian Sports Car.

I give the new MOVO card 5 stars because it deserves it. The old card deserves about 3. The truth: their customer service is kind consoderate yet extremely thorough. Expect to get about seven different pieces of information to confirm identity. I’m ok with that! Totally. Discard keeps you off the radar this keeps you not overspending your limits like a credit card. You can pay a friend with zero fees as long as they have a Movo account. The new card provisions to Apple Pay without a hitch, this excites me get my motor runnin’. Thank you, MOVO. The best in the biz as far as I’m concerned.

Date of experience : August 13, 2021

Back & Better Than Before

I have been a MOVO user for the past few years after I had trouble opening a traditional bank account while I built up my credit again. I was grateful to be able to use the account to receive direct deposits from my job and make online bill payments and purchases with the debit card, with the added benefit of being able to transfer money to my friends and family with MOVO accounts. There were some restrictions on the card while they upgraded the security systems, but I did get information whenever I called for the update, and once they launched the online portal, I was able to use the card again within a day. I have been verified for a few weeks now and everything is back up and running smoothly! I am excited to start using my MOVO card again and will undoubtedly be sticking with them. Thanks MOVO!!

Date of experience : October 12, 2020

I wish I had read the reviews first

I wish I had read the reviews first, they locked me out of my account once I made an deposit of $5K. They said they were reviewing my account for fraud, I sent them all of my documents to verify my account including a video of me holding my ID. I have sent numerous emails, and called several times where I'm greated with an answering machine. They do not have live customer service and there's no way to reach anyone. This company is a fraud and a joke, I'm contacting the Better Business Bureau on them and hiring an attorney to deal with these scammers.

Date of experience : July 13, 2022

These people are scammers

These people are scammers. They block your card and then try to get you to go to a vefiy site, which microsoft edge has flagged as a dangerous website that steals information. Thier customer service is terrible, and they should be in jail for fraud. They also refuse to delete my account, even after i sent them a email from the ema i signed up with, ssn, dob, and address. Stay far far away from these criminals.

Date of experience : December 25, 2020

Fraudulent Company Scammers

This company is fraudulent. When I created an accounting with this ridiculous scamming company I was a bit hesitant to do so. I should've listened to myself and not opened up the account. My husband sent me funds today and now my account has been acting strange. Whenever I log in to try to see my balance it says $0.00 and I have over $10k in my account. Calling them is the worst because you'll never talk to a customer service representative. I called and left a message and nothing. Hours of operation is 8:30am - 5:30pm PST. I live in California so we operate off the same time. No one picks up. I'm going to file something with BBB or file a lawsuit against this company. They're just like Sofi horrible company as well. Pathetic. WARNING DO NOT OPEN AN ACCOUNT WITH THESE PEOPLE THEY'RE SCAMMERS

Date of experience : July 20, 2022

I received a security monitoring alert…

I received a security monitoring alert that an account with movocash was opened in my name. When i called their customer service they said they cannot find the account. I called back and got a different rep and they saw an account in my name. I asked them to close it out and was told to call back in 48 hours. This is ridiculous that a fraudulent account can be opened and they do not have a resource to close it.

Date of experience : September 28, 2022

CEO should be in JAIL!

Unable to use my money for 3+ weeks already. Debit card keeps getting declined and I can't withdrawal the money to my bank account. The money is stuck with them. Contacted customer support and they can't even give you a time frame of when the problem will be fixed, they just give you generic answers that don't help at all. This is UNACCEPTABLE!!

Date of experience : August 10, 2020

I don't really know what have done…

I don't really know what have done wrong for MOVO too lock my account for almost 5 mouth, I tried getting the account opened but all my efforts isn't enough to get the account opened, pls I want you to look into it for my and get it done. Because I need my money

Date of experience : March 08, 2021

I was charged for over $100 for fees…

I was charged for over $100 for fees since I opened the account, while my total top-up was only $500, merchant refuses to refund.

Opened the account with MOVO back in early 2017, quickly realized that it does not live up to its promises, the generated temporary cash card never worked, I wanted to cancel, but a portion of my loaded money was on hold in the cash card, there was no obvious way to withdraw the cash I loaded at that time. I figured I could just leave it like that since there were no obvious fees. for the time that I wasn't using this card, I never got any updates from MOVO, no monthly statement, yearly summary, warning, reminders, nothing at all, but they have been charging $4.99 monthly inactivity fees since I don't even know when, the total was probably over $150

Date of experience : July 14, 2020

RUN AWAY from this company

RUN AWAY from this company. I am now in Day 8 of having my account locked, apparently along with 70,000 other cardholders due to some widespread fraud. This is my bill-paying and personal expense account. As of today, I incur a $35 late fee for my car loan. I have no gas in my car and can’t even withdraw cash. Customer service (haha) is useless, nothing but empty apologies, no answers on how long this will persist. How can any financial firm in this tech era have a security problem like this drag on so long without resolution or concrete answers at a minimum. As soon as this is resolved, I will get my money out of MOVO and run away from them. There are too many functioning alternatives to garbage like this. And BTW: this is NOT the first time they’ve done this.

Date of experience : August 14, 2020

MOVO had a rough patch and the use of…

MOVO had a rough patch and the use of the card was difficult for a couple for months. Not sure what was going on, but after going through their website to re-verify my identity, the use of my card was restored to what it was when I signed up a couple of years ago. Seems things are back to normal in the app and my ability to use my card. I still like Movo, especially the CASH Card. BTW, I LOVE the new Movo card with the chip in it!

Date of experience : October 12, 2020