“What has helped us the most is the visibility of what happens in our fleet on a day-to-day basis. Managing 70 vehicles in a highly competitive sector such as construction is not an easy task, and a system like Movolytics helps us enormously keeping control of our assets. When it comes to on-road and off-road vehicles, management needs to know where their vehicles are and what they are doing.”

We pride ourselves on providing excellent customer service to our customers at all stages of their Movolytics experience. Our UK customer support team are always on hand to help to resolve any queries you may have as quickly as possible.

Here at Movolytics, we’re also keen to ensure our customers know exactly how to exploit the cost-cutting and increased productivity opportunities facilitated by the system. We’ll stay in touch via the distribution of a quarterly e-newsletter, annual customer satisfaction surveys, and catch-up calls with your Customer Support representative. You can also keep up to date at your convenience by following us on LinkedIn and Twitter. We’ll communicate any system updates as soon as they become available.

We encourage our customers to be open about the installation of tracking devices and it’s important to ensure your workforce feel comfortable with the introduction of tracking devices in your business. Reliable and hardworking employees should have no concerns about the devices being installed and our customer success stories prove that employees rarely react negatively. If resistance does occur, this tends to be from individuals who haven’t been using company vehicles legitimately.

It’s vital that you explain the reasons why tracking has been installed. This can be done successfully by highlighting the benefits to both the business and employees. It’s essential not to lose sight of the fact that the devices are designed to integrate with the day-to-day operational processes of your business, adding value to what you do, resulting in improved efficiency and profitability. You may also wish to explain to your workforce exactly how the tracking system works. Even if they will not be directly using the system themselves, this approach will make them feel more at ease with the system, and give them a greater understanding of the system features.

Yes. Our self-installation devices can easily be moved from one vehicle to another, but you will need to inform customer support of your change of vehicle details.

If you require your vehicle tracking device to be moved to another vehicle, all you need to do is contact our dedicated UK customer support team. They’ll arrange for the tracking device to be removed by one of our accredited engineers and refitted into the new vehicle at a time and place that suits you. Moving the unit doesn’t mean you’ll lose your data, and all your historical information will still be easily accessible, and we’ll arrange the change of vehicle details such as driver identity and registration.

Contact our customer support team at [email protected] or call 03456 045 286

Here at Movolytics we take our responsibility for looking after your real-time and historical data very seriously. You’ll have access to your data using the Movolytics cloud-based portal, which is protected by your individual username and password. To further your control, you’ll have the ability to create additional log on details for other employees, allowing you to control what they view and disable specific functions/settings. These measures are designed to give you maximum control and peace of mind that your data will remain confidential and safe.

OBD stands for On-Board Diagnostics and is a computer system inside of the vehicle that checks and regulates a vehicle’s performance.

The OBD tracker will simply plug right into the OBD port, which is the same port that mechanics use when they are testing a vehicle and running diagnostics. It is very easy to add to any vehicle, and you will not need to have any specialised tools or knowledge to be able to do it.