Biography

Jeffrey Oster, known for being an aggressive litigator, concentrates his practice on general negligence, premises liability, motor vehicle liability, trucking, sexual assault, professional liability, medical malpractice, employment law and several other practice areas. He has also investigated potential instances of insurance fraud for several clients.

Jeffrey has experience at all levels of case management, from pre-litigation advisement and opinion through settlement, arbitration and mediation and, if necessary, trial. He is also skilled in general contract matters, negotiations, and government affairs. He has served as a member of emergency response teams for various national clients, as well as regional coordinating counsel for a multinational energy corporation. He has obtained numerous defense verdicts at arbitration and/or trial.

Jeffrey is both a creator and an accredited presenter of various Continuing Education Programs directed towards other attorneys, risk managers, and claims/safety professionals. In his down time, he enjoys spending time with his children, exploring new places, visiting the beach, and finding a new book to read.

Experience

Recognition

Pennsylvania Super Lawyers, Rising Star, 2017

The Rising Stars list recognizes no more than 2.5 percent of attorneys in each state. To be eligible for inclusion in Rising Stars, a candidate must be either 40 years old or younger, or in practice for 10 years or less.

Representative Matters

Obtained a defense verdict for a trucking company when the plaintiff was struck by the client’s trailer’s tires after exiting his truck and remaining in the roadway.

Obtained a defense verdict for an armored truck company where distant video footage reflected that the plaintiff was racing his vehicle and failed to apply his brakes prior to colliding with the side of the client’s truck.

Obtained a defense verdict for a construction company where the plaintiff alleged that the roadway condition in a construction zone caused extensive property damage to his luxury vehicle.

Obtained a defense verdict for a construction company where the plaintiff claimed that his house suffered property damage while an adjacent rowhouse was being constructed.

Secured a “no pay” settlement for a commercial premise’s owner per the utilization of a construction contract’s pre-operation indemnity agreement in a motor vehicle case where the accident occurred at a property that was actively under construction.

Secured a “no pay” settlement for a beer bottling line manufacturer by establishing that injuries suffered by a repair technician occurred due to the negligence of the brewery’s employees as opposed to the actions/inactions of the manufacturer.

Secured summary judgment for a vehicle repair facility where the plaintiff suffered a heart attack when his vehicle caught fire shortly after being repaired.

Secured summary judgment for a vehicle rental company upon establishing that the client could not be liable to the plaintiff under applicable federal law.

Secured the voluntary dismissal of a multi-plaintiff sexual assault case when, in conjunction with assisting in the defense of criminal charges, extensive investigation revealed that the allegations asserted against the client were fabricated.

Secured the voluntary dismissal of a personal injury action when extensive investigation revealed that the incident in question occurred on an adjacent property.

Secured the voluntary dismissal of a Family Medical Leave Act case after evidence reflected that the plaintiff’s termination was due to reasons unrelated to his utilization of FMLA benefits.

Secured a plaintiff’s social media login credentials after showing the court that publicly posted content warranted an exploration of privately posted content.

Background

Bar and Court Admissions

Admissions

U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania

U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania

U.S. District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania

U.S. District Court of New Jersey

Supreme Court of Pennsylvania

Supreme Court of New Jersey

Maryland Court of Appeals

District of Columbia Court of Appeals

Pro Hac Vice Admission in Delaware

Licenses

Pennsylvania

New Jersey

Maryland

Washington D.C.

Education

Widener/Delaware School of Law | J.D., 2006

University of Delaware | B.A., 2003

Memberships

American Bar Association

Philadelphia Bar Association

News & Events

News & Events

Publications

Quote, “Slip-Fall Suit Against Sports Bar Sent Back To Pa. State Court,” Law360, November 14, 2023

Quote, “Pennsylvania Lawyer Employs Creative Strategy in Crash Case,” Transport Topics, April 20, 2022

Author, “Three Things to Know: Get Your Premises Ready for Slip-and-Fall Season,” Vaughan Baio & Partners, October 15, 2021

Quote, “First 24 Hours After a Crash Can Affect Legal Implications Later,” Transport Topics, September 1, 2021

Author, “Three Things to Know: Slip-and-Fall at the Shore This Summer,” Vaughan Baio & Partners, June 30, 2021

Quote, “Strategies Exist to Protect Internal Safety Data From Plaintiffs’ Attorneys, Experts Say,” Transport Topics, April 21, 2021

Author, “Why your fleet needs dash cams,” Commercial Carrier Journal, February 17, 2021

Author, “Easy to slip,” NJBiz, February 15, 2021

Presentations

Presenter, “Winter Weather Premises Liability Claims,” VBP Continuing Education Webinar, Philadelphia, PA, December 2022

Presenter, “Independent Contractors – The Good, the Bad, and the Iffy,” Phillies Seminar, Philadelphia, PA, May 2022

Presenter, “Auto Claims 101,” Philadelphia, PA

Presenter, “Trucking and Catastrophe Introductory Claims 101,” Philadelphia, PA

Presenter, “Marijuana and the Workplace: What Employers Need to Know,” Phillies Seminar, Philadelphia, PA, May 2021

Presenter, “Marijuana and the Workplace: What Employers Need to Know,” PNAT Seminar, Philadelphia, PA