Paulo Moura, who has died of cancer aged 77, was one of Brazil's best-loved instrumentalists. A Grammy award-winning clarinettist, saxophonist and composer, he blurred the lines between classical and popular music, recording more than 40 albums which journeyed between dancehall, samba, bossa nova, jazz and orchestral music. He was a hero and friend to a younger generation of virtuoso musicians inspired by his rare talent, huge lungs and legendary charm.

"He always had the courage to show his own work," said the Brazilian guitarist Marcello Gonçalves, who accompanied Moura on recent trips to London, Amsterdam and Berlin. "He didn't limit himself to just playing what other people were playing. Each of his records is different and they were always different to what was happening at the time."

Moura was born in São José do Rio Preto, in São Paulo state. Aged nine, he was given his first clarinet and by 1944 he was playing alongside his father, Pedro Moura, also a musician. In 1945, Moura's family moved to Rio de Janeiro, where the young clarinettist began studying at the Escola nacional de música, now the Escola de música da UFRJ.

Moura's father reputedly urged his son to train as a tailor. Instead he quickly immersed himself in Rio's musical scene, simultaneously playing in orchestras, big bands and at the many samba dancehalls that proliferated during Rio's swinging 50s. By the age of 14 he was a professional musician.

"Sometimes on the same day I'd play in the symphonic orchestra, then in a big band playing jazz and at a dancehall by night," remembered Moura, who also mastered the saxophone and the trumpet. He said the dancehalls had taught him "that irresponsible way" of playing.

His first solo recording, Moto Perpetuo, was released in 1956. He went on to play alongside Brazilian stars such as Milton Nascimento and Elis Regina, as well as the US singers Ella Fitzgerald and Nat King Cole. Moura was heavily influenced by North American jazz and tried to "jazzify" the sounds of his homeland. His 1998 album Rhapsody in Bossa, a tribute to George Gershwin, mixed tracks such as Summertime and Rhapsody in Blue with bossa nova standards.

Moura's talent took him around the world, from London to Ecuador and from Switzerland's Montreux jazz festival to Carnegie Hall in New York, where he took to the stage in 1962 with Sergio Mendes for a show that propelled bossa nova into the global mainstream. His fame grew following his appearance in Brasileirinho (2005), an award-winning documentary about Brazilian choro music, directed by Mika Kaurismäki. In 2000, Moura received a Latin Grammy for his tribute to the Brazilian composer Pixinguinha. His most recent album, AfroBossaNova, came out in 2009.

"No matter where he was playing, he always maintained the same posture and this just added to his elegance," said Gonçalves, who was at Moura's bedside as the clarinettist played the choro classic Doce de Coco shortly before his death. "I have the feeling that he was trying to say goodbye, and to give his friends a blessing. It was a farewell, but a farewell on a high."

Moura is survived by his wife, Halina Grynberg, and sons, Pedro and Domingos.