The BBC’s Planet Earth series has been educating us on the wonders of the natural world since 2006. Hosted by Sir David Attenborough, the show has taken us from the depths of the world’s deserts to the peaks of the highest mountains and into the deepest, darkest caves. We’ve seen how animals and plants survive in an ever-changing world, adapting to increasingly difficult climate conditions. As Planet Earth III finally comes to the small screen, we chat to series producer Mike Gunton—research scientist, author and senior executive at the BBC Natural History Unit (the world's largest wildlife film production unit)—about what it’s been like working on the iconic show. He let us in on his favorite places to visit for wildlife watching, what it’s like to work with Sir David Attenborough and the most frightening animal he’s come face-to-face with during filming.

How long have you been creating nature documentaries?

I’ve been working in this industry for four decades. I didn’t start making natural history documentaries—I started making my own short films, more centered around social commentary. A random moment of fortune led me into natural history filmmaking, largely the chance to work with David Attenborough. It was an opportunity I couldn’t ignore.

Working within the BBC’s Natural History unit has been an honor and a privilege. Our programs embody a quality of imagery and storytelling that resonates worldwide. But I’ve also had the chance to work with some of the best people in the industry on some of the most incredible projects to have made it onto our screens. I couldn’t ask for a better experience.

You have travelled to some incredible places with your work over the years. What is the most amazing place you've visited?

It is so hard to choose one place! If I had to try to choose, it would be filming a large species of lemur in Madagascar called Indri, some 30 years ago. They are such striking animals, and their calls are haunting and unforgettable. I must also mention flying over the Namib desert and Namibia’s skeleton coast. It is just mesmerizing. Oh, and seeing hundreds of pitcher plants in the Madagascan rainforest. I better stop there!

When you are on a shoot, how long do you spend in each location? How grueling is the work?

It varies hugely depending on species, behavior, location, type of sequence required and time of year. Some shoots are a matter of days, whereas some take months or even years. Each shoot is a culmination of many brilliant minds, our teams working in collaboration with local guides and scientists, learning about the habitat or the species we are filming and understanding the story we need to tell. Each shoot can be so different, and there are always surprises.

You have to be resilient, be able to think on your feet and be ready to go at any moment. It can be grueling and tough, both physically and emotionally—being away from home for long periods of time does take its toll – but ultimately, it is one of the most rewarding experiences, especially if you get the shots you came for.

What is the most amazing nature encounter you've had?

I’d have to say being with the Indri in Madagascar. The experience has never left me.

Have you ever been frightened when shooting?

I once came face to face with a very large and grumpy male rhino that I had accidentally woken up. I hadn’t seen him sleeping behind a bush in Namibia. I think we were both equally surprised, but he definitely had the advantage! Luckily, I could extricate myself, and there was no harm done (other than to my nerves).

Do you have a favorite hotel in the world? Tell us about it.

My role as creative director and executive producer means I rarely get much downtime and travel regularly. One thing you always need working in this industry is a good night’s sleep, so any hotel that can ensure a peaceful night is good in my book!

For a touch of pure magic, though, and a truly once-in-a-lifetime experience, I absolutely love Vundu Camp on the banks of the Zambezi River. It’s a luxury tented camp, and you can watch the incredible wildlife from the terrace of your room.

What is it like working with Sir David?

Sir David is a supreme broadcaster. I have worked closely with him for much of my 40 years at the BBC, and his legacy cannot be ignored personally and professionally. Working with him, even in his late 90s, is a masterclass. His passion and wonder for the natural world match his professional ability. There isn’t much he doesn’t know about this business, and yet he is still hungry for any new knowledge or observation about a species or habitat.

One of the most recent shoots we did together was filming the opening for the Planet Earth III series in a quintessential English meadow in Kent, in the Downe Bank Nature Reserve. Sir David walked in the same footfalls that Charles Darwin trod some 100 years before, and it seemed a very fitting location. We’d had a spell of very typical British weather, which had forced us to rearrange the shoot already, but on this last day of filming, the sun shone, and we were gifted the most beautiful conditions. The wildflower meadows were alive with butterflies and insects, and David told me it was ‘just perfect’. It was a magic day indeed.

Is there a Planet Earth sequence you're most proud of?

I think it probably has to be the snakes and iguanas sequence from the “Islands” episode from Planet Earth II. It’s like a scene from Mission Impossible. It has all the ingredients: drama, tension, suspense, and the triumph of the young protagonist—you live every moment with the baby iguana as it escapes the racer snakes. The coming together of all those elements was just perfection.

The show is known for getting its audience animated—crying at scenes, shouting at the TV or getting emotional. Has any footage moved you to tears?

Well, it would have to be the ostrich story in the “Desert and Grasslands” episode of the new series. I won’t give too much away, but as a dad of three girls for whom I’d do almost anything, this story resonated emotionally, as I think it will for any parent. And even after seeing it countless times, I still get emotional.

The soundtrack for Planet Earth is always so moving. Do you have a favorite piece of music used so far?

The soundscapes for our series are the secret sauce of a great wildlife series. The theme for Planet Earth II has always been very special to me; it is such an evocative piece of music. It still draws me in every time I hear it. However, the song ‘Mother Earth’ created for Planet Earth III and performed by Mercury Prize Award nominated singer-songwriter RAYE, Grammy-nominated group Bastille and multiple Academy Award-winning composer Hans Zimmer, is truly inspiring and has touched so many people, even before the show aired.

What can we expect from Planet Earth III?

We are using all the technical brilliance, stunning visuals and compelling stories you would expect from a Planet Earth series, but we look through a new lens: a world where the biggest influence is now us humans. We look at how animals adapt to this new world and reveal some of the biggest challenges facing nature. But it is also a series driven by hope and wonder: wonder at nature’s ability to change and adapt, but also at our own innovation and passion to make a difference.

What was the most surprising thing you've learned about nature over the years?

Its ability to heal itself, and us, if we give it the space and time it needs.

Is there anything you never travel without?

These days, it’s usually my laptop and phone. I try to include a good book where I can, if I might have time to read. And if I’m really in the wilds—a jar of Marmite!

Any tips for aspiring nature documentary producers or filmmakers?

“Time spent in nature cannot be underestimated. Observing and understanding how animals behave and think and understand their world is essential. Get out and shoot sequences—on whatever you have to hand, even a phone these days can capture quality footage. Show your work to others, get feedback, and shoot again. Something else that is not often discussed but is essential in this business is how to work as part of a team, to collaborate and, most importantly, communicate as part of a group with a shared goal. I’d say to anyone keen, keep reaching out, keep asking questions, keep an open mind and don’t give up!

If you could recommend one place for travelers to see before they die, what would it be?

I can’t just recommend one! Can I have three? The Osa Peninsula in southwestern Costa Rica, the Skeleton Coast in Namibia, and to travel down the Zambezi river in a canoe.

Planet Earth III premieres on BBC America on November 4. A version of this article originally appeared on Condé Nast Traveller.