Carlisle Cathedral is one of the jewels of North West England and, after standing on the border with Scotland for almost 900 years, it has a lively story to tell. It may not be the best known medieval Cathedral in England, it is certainly not the biggest, but it delights its many visitors.

Worship is offered here every day of the year, with sung Evensong in term time every day except Saturday. Visitors of all traditions and faiths are always welcome to join the congregation at these services. We hope you will come to visit us and enjoy the beauty of the Cathedral and its precinct. There are fascinating stories of faith, hope and love to discover here

Carlisle Cathedral was begun in 1122, during the reign of King Henry I, as a community of Canons Regular following the reform of the Abbey of Arrouaise in France, which followed a strict form of the canonical life, influenced by the ascetic practices of the Cistercians. Many large churches of Augustinian foundation were built in England during this period as the Archbishop of Canterbury, William de Corbeil, was a member of this order, but Carlisle is one of only four Augustinian churches in England to become a cathedral, most monastic cathedrals being Benedictine. The church was begun by Athelwold, an Englishman, who became the first prior. In 1133, the church was raised to the status of cathedral and Athelwold became the first Bishop of Carlisle (1133–55). In 1233, the cathedral priory community were joined by two friaries in the city. A Dominican friary and a Franciscan friary were founded close to the cathedral.[3] The building was refurbished in the 13th and 14th centuries, receiving impetus from the presence of the court of Edward I in 1307.

Cathedral Church of St. Mary at Carlisle, 1783

In the 15th and early 16th centuries, the monastic buildings were renewed. With the Dissolution of the Monasteries from 1536, and the establishment by Henry VIII of the Church of England as the country's official church, the Dominican and Franciscan friaries were dissolved and Carlisle, along with the other monastic cathedrals, was run by a secular chapter like the cathedrals at Lincoln and York, which practice has continued to this day.

During the time of the English Civil War, a portion of the nave of the cathedral was demolished by the Scottish Presbyterian Army in order to use the stone to reinforce Carlisle Castle. Between 1853 and 1870 Carlisle Cathedral was restored by Ewan Christian. In the early 19th century, the cathedral became the subject for a geometric analysis by Robert William Billings.