Guy Verhofstadt, former Belgian Prime Minister (1999 – 2008), current MEP and President of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE), and the European Parliament's Brexit coordinator, published an article in The Guardian on the 22nd April putting forth his confusions around the upcoming UK snap election which takes place on 8th June 2017.

I would justifiably assume that Verhofstadt is not a silly man. Someone who has held the office of Prime Minister for almost a decade and a life long politician should ensure strategic credentials and understanding of the ongoing chess match in Westminster. I am therefore confused as to why Verhofstadt seems to have such an issue with the upcoming election, and also Theresa May’s motivation for holding one. Is he genuinely baffled? Is he worried, contrary to parts of his article that an even stronger Tory government would in fact make Brexit negotiations far more complicated for EU? Or could he be hacking into the British voters minds to lobby on behalf of Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour party, by denouncing Theresa May and her Brexit negotiating position which will highly likely mirror the Tory manifesto for the election?

Rambling..

Verhofstadt rambles on about May’s tough negotiating red lines hindering a Brexit deal and that the motivation of the upcoming election is attempting a power grab based on the feeble state of the Labour party, and that the election is being driven by opportunism rather than by the people that the government represents. He tries to invoke fear by clarifying the consequences of Britain leaving the customs union and the single market, which amongst other things will result in British citizens having as much right to holiday, travel and study in the EU come the summer of 2019 as a tourist from Moscow or a student from Mumbai. He then continues his fear mongering by threatening that the European Banking Authority and European Medicines Agency (currently stationed in the UK) will be relocated to the continent. All of these points being described by Verhofstadt as the “bitter realities of a post Brexit Britain”

Hysterical rightwing media..

My question to Verhofstadt is; ‘why are you so concerned mate?’ What are you telling us that we don’t already know? He urges the British people not to listen to the hysterical rightwing British media machine; too late pal, you should have perhaps published your article in June 2016 when all of your inputs might actually have swung a few more votes in favour of the remainers. Just let the Brit’s get on with their domestic issues, and worry about your own Brexit negotiating position.

Great Britain Vs. The European Union

So, what is motivating this attack on Theresa May, the election and the potential outcome of the election? I see two hypothetical reasons;

Firstly lets not fool ourselves, despite the predictable rhetoric of ‘hoping for a deal to continue a strong partnership’, Great Britain and the EU are now in the first phases of competition. Already, British diplomats in Brussels are being excluded from meetings, which discuss future policies and legislations; EU27 exists and certain member states have already given guidelines to their representatives in Brussels not to partake in meetings where British representatives are present. As the European Parliament’s Brexit coordinator, Verhofstadt naturally wants to go to battle with the weakest possible British government and create as much divide in order to get the best deal for the EU. He understands that a stronger Tory government would free up valuable resources and legislative carte blanche to confidently step forward and counter the EU’s 'threats' with their own.

Prime Minister Corbyn?

An early birthday present for Verhofstadt would be to engage in negotiations with a Labour Government and ‘Prime Minister Corbyn’ who would likely make deals that in the current climate would be bad for Britain. I expect deals would be made less complicated, and that in the short term a post Brexit Britain led by a Labour government would be less painful, but in the long term, Britain would lose their competitiveness.

An early birthday AND Christmas present would (god forbid) be another British coalition government - whatever that would look like.

May is stoking the fire and ready to go full steam..

I’m no great fan of Theresa May. I don’t think she is very convincing. She certainly doesn’t have the steely determination and tunnel vision of the late Baroness Thatcher where comparisons have been made, purely due to gender; but I do understand why she is playing her cards the way she has and is.

Calling an election now and winning it would give her the credibility as an elected Prime Minister and will give her an additional two years to steady what will be a rocking British ship following Brexit, until the next General Election. She would have close to three years for the country to show signs of recovering from difficult issues due to Brexit and if she succeeds, put herself in the best possible position in a 2022 general election.

If she didn’t call an election now, she would in the space of one year, have to show the country that post Brexit Britain is in a more favorable position than before. I predict it would be very difficult task.

Solidarity..

I was and am completely against Brexit. I think it is a blind decision based on lies, exaggerations and guesses, but lets move forward. Great Britain for good or for worse needs to stand together. The reality of Brexit should sink in, and in order to get the best possible result, a strong, unified British government will give the country the best chance of that happening.

Don’t underestimate the Brits..

Regardless of the situation now and what happens in the future, the worst thing that anyone non-British can do is to poke-fun-at and try to influence the British decisions. (Isn’t this ‘influence’ part of the reason why a large part of the country doesn’t want to be part of the EU anymore?). We love being the underdog; it's in our DNA. We thrive in battle and when our backs are against the ropes, we don’t surrender but come out fighting harder, stronger, more determined and resilient. God Save The Queen!! (sorry, getting carried away).

Don’t be fooled by the diplomatic rhetoric, Theresa May might just be a wolf in sheep’s clothing. Time will tell whether Verhofstadt is the cunning fox in this ongoing saga.

James Varnham