Yet Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt could be a man to watch and observers predict that his influence on the EU playing field will increase dramatically.

“He has prepared himself well and he listens to diplomats. He is quick and clever, and he has a great ability to convince people. I see no reason why he should not be good,” says Belgian MEP Dirk Sterckx who, like Verhofstadt, belongs to the Flemish Liberal Party (VLD).

When former Belgian Prime Minister Jean-Luc Dehaene first took office, he did not know his Common Agricultural Policy from his qualified majority voting system, but he soon got the hang of things. Sterckx predicts Verhofstadt will do the same.

Verhofstadt’s EU track record to date is short. Since taking up office in July, he has attended two major summits — the first in Tampere and the second in Helsinki last weekend — where his profile was relatively low. However, the dioxin-in-food crisis which erupted this summer and the controversy surrounding the nomination of Belgium’s European Commissioner Philippe Busquin have both given him an insight into what makes the EU tick. “He has learned very quickly through the dioxin crisis how it works and where the holes are,” says Sterckx.

The new Belgian premier’s handling of the European Commission during the food crisis is generally considered to have been adept. EU officials contrast his readiness to cooperate and keep them informed with the lack of diplomacy and sheer incompetence displayed by his predecessor.

“There was a real change of policy. The Belgians became very open and supplied us with full and accurate information. I am sure this was the result of Mr Verhofstadt’s policy of openness. We no longer had the impression that the government was trying to hold back information,” says one Commission official.

Verhofstadt’s masterstroke was, he adds, his decision to appoint a ‘dioxin troubleshooter’ — Freddy Willockx —to liaise with the Commission.

The reversal in Belgium’s fortunes on the dioxin question since Verhofstadt took office has been dramatic. The Commission has since eased the lion’s share of the restrictions it imposed upon Belgian farmers and even approved state aid to help them get back on their feet. Verhofstadt has emerged from the affair with his credibility intact. He has also shown he is capable of getting what he wants from the EU quietly and efficiently.

He will, however, soon find himself grappling with more complex issues such as reform of the Union itself, enlargement and a common defence policy. Initially, he will need to rely heavily on his advisers and is not expected to radically change Belgium’s EU policy. “I would not say foreign policy is his strong point and he is likely to stick to traditional Belgian views,” says one VLD party member. Indeed, diplomats describe his participation in Union affairs to date as minimal. “He has not really got involved very much, although he did raise the immigration issue at Tampere,” says one.

But one thing seems certain — Verhofstadt is no Eurosceptic and is likely to push hard for further EU integration. “He is a very strong federalist as we all are in Belgium and believes that power should be devolved to the level where it can best be handled,” explains a former colleague. He is keen on the idea of a single European army and is anxious to see many issues currently tackled through intergovernmental cooperation turned into full EU competences.

But he is less sure about enlargement. Verhofstadt fears that new members from eastern Europe will dilute Belgium’s own influence and has already gone on the record as saying he is “reticent” about rushing to set entry dates for candidate countries. “Nobody is saying politically that enlargement should not happen but I think he is a bit suspicious of the issue,” says Sterckx. “One of the biggest problems for Belgium is that small member states are in a more difficult situation. Enlargement is very difficult.”

Last month, Verhofstadt took this message to Paris, where he lobbied President Jacques Chirac and Prime Minister Lionel Jospin, arguing that smaller member states should not lose out as the bloc expands. He also told the Slovakian prime minister earlier this year that he favoured an individual approach to accession of “each according to their progress”.

Experts predict that defending Belgium’s right to maintain its current say in EU affairs is likely to keep Verhofstadt busy over the next few years. One of his concerns is that enlargement will mean there will be less and less justification for Belgium to have its own European Commissioner.

Verhofstadt, 46, who is married with two children, has been in politics since 1972 when he became president of the liberal student union. A lawyer by training, he became his party’s youngest-ever leader in 1982 at the age of 28. He served as vice-premier and budget minister in the coalition government of veteran Christian Democrat Wilfried Martens in the mid-Eighties before entering a long period of opposition.

Belgium’s new prime minister nearly got the job eight years ago, at the tender age of 38, only to see his bid for the premiership scuppered by the Socialists and Greens, who snubbed him on ideological grounds.

But he did his image no end of good with his work on a parliamentary commission investigating the deaths of ten Belgian paratroopers during the 1994 Rwandan genocide and later with his calls for an overhaul of the police and the judiciary in the wake of the Dutroux affair.

Often likened in appearance to Microsoft billionaire Bill Gates, the Belgian chief lists cycling, reading and a love of Italian food and wine among his interests.

Verhofstadt set out his EU stall when he came to power in July. Belgium would, he said, support European tax harmonisation, the convergence of European economic policy, the extension of qualified majority voting and the strengthening of the Commission’s powers. It also supported giving the European Parliament the right to initiate legislation if the Commission failed to act when it should.

However, as the head of a country with a population smaller than London, the new Belgian premier is unlikely to throw his weight around. “As a small member state, it is very hard to say ‘look this is what we want’. You can be the most gifted negotiator but you will not get anything if Britain, France and Germany do not want it,” says Sterckx.

But, in Verhofstadt’s case, if he does fail to get his way it will not be for a lack of effort. “He is very enthusiastic and when he does something he puts everything into it. He is driven and can defend himself,” says a former colleague. “He speaks well and he speaks good English, and he is a quick thinker.”

There are already signs that Verhofstadt might be looking to increase his influence by forming strategic partnerships with other European leaders. Earlier this month he paid his first official visit to London, where he held constructive talks with Premier Tony Blair, whose policies he claims to admire.