Jools Holland Background Information Birth name Julian Miles Holland Born 24 January 1958

Blackheath, London, England Genre Boogie, Jazz, Blues, Rhythm And Blues Instruments Piano, keyboard, guitar Years active 1974 — present Associated acts Squeeze, Rhythm & Blues Orchestra musician / presenter

This article covers only those aspects of the subject that are related to the career of Duran Duran.

A much more complete treatment can be seen in the Jools Holland article at Wikipedia.

Julian Miles "Jools" Holland (born 24 January 1958) is an English musician, author and television presenter. He was a founder-member of the band Squeeze and his work has involved him with many of the biggest names in the contemporary rock and popular music industry, including Sting, Dave Gilmour and Bono.

He is the host of Later... with Jools Holland, a music-based show aired on BBC, on which Duran Duran has appeared several times.

Biography[]

Born in Blackheath, London, Holland was a founding member of UK pop band Squeeze which was formed in March 1974. Holland played the keyboard with the group until 1980 when Holland left to forge a solo career; the band temporarily broke up in 1982.

Holland began issuing solo records in 1978 and continued through the early 1980s. He then became a co-presenter on the Newcastle-based TV music show The Tube with Paula Yates and appeared in the sitcom "The Groovy Fellers". In 1985 Squeeze reformed and Holland was once again the keyboard player for the band until 1990 before returning to his solo career as both a musician and a TV host. On the side, he formed the Jools Holland Big Band with Gilson Lavis from Squeeze, which gradually became his 18-piece Rhythm & Blues Orchestra.

Between 1988 and 1990 he performed on two seasons of the acclaimed music performance program Sunday Night on NBC late-night television. Since 1992 he has presented the eclectic music program Later with Jools Holland, plus an annual New Year's Eve "Hootenanny".

Duran Duran connections[]

Jools traveled to France to record The Tube's mid Summer night special featuring Duran Duran in June 1983

Duran Duran appeared on the final episode of The Tube on 24 April 1987 and later bootlegged on Live On The Tube.

Simon and Yasmin Le Bon appeared in the film Hunting Venus with Jools.

[]

Official website

Jooligans - Forum for Jools Holland/Sam Brown fans

Jools Holland at IMDb

Jools Holland's BBC Radio 2 show

Later with Jools Holland