Widely regarded as one of the most innovative guitarists in music history, Johnny Allen Hendrix (later James Marshall “Jimi” Hendrix) was born on November 27, 1942 in Seattle, WA. In the short 27 years of his life, Hendrix redefined the possibilities of the electric guitar as an instrument, while expanding the capacity of an artist to affect social change.

Multicultural in appearance and supernatural in performance, Hendrix burned guitars, dropped acid, oozed sex and rebellion, hated war and conformity, and generally scared the living hell out of straight-laced America. He did all of this while creating a body of music that still stands as completely unique and wildly inventive. Here’s a list of locations related to the life of Jimi Hendrix.

Renton, WA

Jimi Hendrix Foundation– The headquarters of the nonprofit group dedicated to promoting the legacy of Jimi Hendrix.

Jimi Hendrix Memorial– The final resting place of Jimi Hendrix; location of the Jimi Hendrix Memorial.

Seattle, WA

Jimi Hendrix’s birthplace– King County Hospital of Seattle is where Jimi Hendrix was born on November 27, 1942.

Location of Jimi Hendrix’s former boyhood home– Al Hendrix bought a home at this location in 1950 with a $10 down payment.

Horace Mann Elementary School– Jimi Hendrix’s elementary school in Redmond, WA.

Washington Middle School– Jimi Hendrix’s middle school in Seattle, WA.

Garfield High School– Where Jimi Hendrix went to high school. Also contains a bust of Hendrix in the library.

Myers Music– A former music store where Quincy Jones bought his first trumpet and Jimi Hendrix bought his first guitar; now an art gallery.

Temple De Hirsch (former)- Jimi Hendrix played his first live gig in the basement of this temple before he was kicked out of the band half-way through the show.

EMP Museum– A Paul Allen project that often has Hendrix exhibitions.

Jimi Hendrix Park– Located right off I-90 in Seattle.

New York, NY

Cheetah Club– Where Hendrix was discovered by Chas Chandler, who became his manager and organized the Jimi Hendrix Experience.

Forest Hills Tennis Stadium– Jimi Hendrix opened up for the Monkees here, before he quit the tour because he couldn’t stand their music.

England, UK

1970 Isle of Wight Festival– Location of the legendary concert that came after Woodstock.

23 Brook Street– An apartment where Hendrix lived; a blue English heritage plaque is on the exterior wall.

Hotel Samarakand– Where Jimi Hendrix overdosed on sleeping pills and red wine on September 18, 1970.

Other locations

Fort Campbell– Where Hendrix was stationed during his brief stint in the U.S. Army.

Witch’s Hat– Bob Dylan lived in Dinkytown, and was allegedly inspired by the Witch’s Hat to write “All Along the Watchtower”; Jimi Hendrix later had covered the song to great success.

Woodstock, NY– Jimi Hendrix played Woodstock on May 18, 1969 at 9:00 am. He was supposed to close the festival on Sunday night, but technical difficulties forced him to perform Monday morning after most of the crowd had left.

Jimi Hendrix’s Hollywood star- Dedicated on November 14, 1991.

Jimi Hendrix’s grandmother’s house– Located in the Strahcona neighborhood of Vancouver, CA (called East End back then), the house is still standing.