There's some fun gothic atmosphere to this, but it's not enough to make up for how derivative this is of better films like Gaslight, Suspicion and other thrillers of the 'Is my spouse mad/a gold digger/both?' kind.

The performances by Stanwick and Bogart are both subpar for them (can that be a coincidence?). Bogart starts out as the snarky angry dude from In a Lonely Place but then starts grabbing his temple a lot (mental illness!) before settling on unstable 'artist' convinced his art must go on no matter what. None of it is convincing.

To make things worse he has an annoyingly precocious child spouting ridiculous lines, and then into the mess sashays a pointy-shouldered, marriage-busting third wheel (played…

I should be enjoying this more than I am.

I kept thinking that thought to myself for the entire runtime of The Two Mrs. Carrolls. It checks so many boxes on the list of things that I love in a film. A plot filled with nefarious goings on. Gothic atmosphere created through the standard elements of big shadows, falling rain, howling wind, and blowing leaves. Many finely composed images captured by a fairly mobile (for the era) camera. Very unsubtle ideas about how artists are often awful people who abuse and manipulate those closest to them for the sake of their work. But all these elements, which are all wonderful in their own right just don't ever cohere into a…

The Two Mrs. Carrolls is an OK thriller, smoothly directed by Peter Godfrey, with occasional gothic flourishes. Love the rain, banging windows, shadows, J. Peverell Marley’s moody cinematography. Here are some random thoughts.

It’s odd that Babs Stanwyck plays some of the strongest female characters of her time yet still plays victims here, Sorry, Wrong Number, and Witness to Murder. I much prefer her strong or comic characters, but there is some fun here seeing her figure out what is going on.

It’s slightly odd that Godfrey had just directed Babs in Christmas in Connecticut in a completely different style. Godfrey uses the houses and other sets quite well in both.

It’s also odd that Bogie spent all those years…

It wasn't often that Humphrey Bogart was upstaged and outshone in a film, but in Peter Godfrey's The Two Mrs. Carrolls, he most certainly is. A mystery film noir set in England, this has Bogart playing second fiddle to the wonderful Barbara Stanwyck, and the lovely Alexis Smith certainly leaves an impression too. Unfortunately, like a few of Bogart's late 40's films, this wasn't one of his better efforts, and despite the quality supporting cast, I'd venture to say that Bogie was miscast here, and that the stage play limitations of the plot don't play out well enough here?

Bogart stars as painter Geoffrey Carroll, who falls in love while vacationing in Scotland with Stanwyck's Sally Morton. Carroll however has…