Six months ago, Sunny's Halo was a crippled and sour colt who had no supporters except the trainer who had staked his career on him. Today, he won the 109th Kentucky Derby at Churchill Downs.

Sunny's Halo, who returned $7 for $2 to win as the second choice in a field of 20 3-year-olds, was never more than a length off a slow pace, took the lead turning for home, and drew off to win by two lengths from Desert Wine, a 15-1 shot. Caveat came from the clouds to finish a neck farther back in third and a length in front of Slew o' Gold. Marfa, the slight favorite at 24-10, was another neck back in fifth.

Sunny's Halo, trained to peak form by David Cross, went the mile and a quarter in 2:02 1/5 under Eddie Delahoussaye, who won the Derby last year on Gato del Sol. The time was moderately good over a fast track that was not significantly affected by rain during the previous half-hour.

''Nothing to it, fellas,'' Delahoussaye said with a laugh as he returned to the jockeys' quarters, then added a few minutes later: ''I don't believe it. I still can't believe the first one. This is too much.''

Sunny's Halo's won $426,000 from a Derby purse of $531,100 to raise his career earnings to $907,019. It was the 8th victory in 14 career starts for the big chestnut colt and his third without a defeat as a 3-year-old. He was the champion 2-year-old in Canada last year but had not won in four American starts. This year, the colt won the Rebel Handicap and the Arkansas Derby at Oaklawn Park in his only two starts. It was the lightest 3-year-old campaign of any Derby winner since Jet Pilot in 1947.

Sunny's Halo, a son of Halo-Mostly Sunny, was bred in Ontario by David J. (Pug) Foster, a retired Toronto stockbroker. Foster's only broodmare is Mostly Sunny, whom Cross purchased for $2,900 at a sale of ''culls'' -rejects from a yearling crop.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.