SARATOGA SPRINGS – A solid class grew even stronger Wednesday as the National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame announced that two-time Kentucky Derby winning jockey Jimmy Winkfield and two-time filly champion Bowl of Flowers have been elected. The duo was approved by the Museum’s Historic Review committee and will be inducted Aug. 9, along with trainer Claude ‘Shug’ McGaughey, jockey Kent Desormeaux and champions Skip Away and Flawlessly. “The Historic Review Committee was established to review horses and individuals of the distant path in racing,” museum director Peter Hammell said. “We recognize that over the years some worthy candidates might not win election and then gradually fade from memory.” A 12-person committee of racing historians votes on induction and 75 percent ‘Yes’ votes are required as the new member receives full Hall of Fame status. Winkfield is one of only four riders to win back-to-back editions of the Kentucky Derby when he was aboard His Eminence and Alan-a-Dale in 1901 and 1902 respectively. The last jockey to pull off the feat was Eddie Delahoussaye in 1982 and 1983 with Gato Del Sol and Sunny’s Halo. Winkfield went on to successful riding stints around the world, with stops in Russia, France and Germany. He was a champion jockey in Russia in 1904 before being forced to flee following the Russian Revolution. The black rider is the subject of a biography by journalist and historian Ed Hotaling, who also wrote “They’re Off: A History of Horse Racing at Saratoga.” Published by McGraw-Hill, “Wink: The Incredible Life and Epic Journey of Jimmy Winkfield” is due out in November. “We had a remarkable individual who was an outstanding rider in this country and in several foreign countries, mostly in Eastern Europe,” Hammell said. “He had been considered several times in the past, and additional information brought into focus through research for Hotaling’s upcoming book assisted the Historic Review Committee.” Bowl of Flowers, by Sailor out of Flower Bowl (Alibhai), was a homebred in Mrs. Isabel Dodge Sloane’s Brookmeade Stable and was one of six champions trained by Hall of Famer Elliott Burch. As a 2-year-old in 1960, she won the National Stallion Stakes, Gardenia Stakes and Frizette Stakes to earn juvenile filly championship honors. At 3, Bowl of Flowers returned to win the Acorn Stakes and increased her winning streak to six, before being beaten in a photo finish in the Mother Goose Stakes to be denied the New York Filly Triple Crown. She came back in the final leg, the Coaching Club American Oaks, to exact revenge on Funloving by five lengths. That fall, Bowl of Flowers clinched her second championship by defeating 3-year-old rival Primonetta and older filly champion Airmans Guide in the Spinster Stakes. “I would put her in the top five of any horse I’ve trained and possibly the best filly I ever trained,” Burch said. “I was so very fond of her.” Bowl of Flowers won 10 of 16 races to earn $398,504 during her career. The Hall of Fame induction will be held at 10:30 a.m. at the Fasig-Tipton Sale Pavilion. The ceremony is free and open and to the public.