Kentucky Derby Museum is honored to announce that five female business owners will make up its prestigious group of 2024 Featured Milliners, and their stunning designs will be on display at the annual Derby Museum Hat Show. VIP and Premier tickets are on sale now for the fan-favorite event on Sunday, March 24, from 10:00 a.m. to 1:30 p.m.

Melissa Huff, Mary Julia Kaiser, Ilana Kogan, Christine Moore, and Jenny Pfanenstiel, the same milliners who knocked everyone’s hats off last year, have been selected again to take part in the Museum's Featured Milliner program, which was designed to highlight the beautiful artform of millinery and support small business owners. The five milliners are excited to show off their work during the hottest, head-turning fashion show ahead of Derby 150 at the Kentucky Derby Museum Hat Show!

"As we gear up for the 150th Kentucky Derby, the excitement is palpable, and the Hat Show is at the heart of it all," said Katie Fussenegger, Kentucky Derby Museum Executive Vice President. "This annual event not only showcases the incredible talent of our Featured Milliners but also emphasizes the importance of hat making as an art form deeply rooted in Derby history. The Kentucky Derby Museum Hat Show brings together tradition, innovation, and a whole lot of fun, setting the stage for a Derby season that will be nothing short of spectacular!"

This one-of-a-kind extravaganza promises an exclusive peek at the latest couture creations from the Featured Milliners and jewelry trends from David Yurman and Davis Jewelers that will leave you inspired for this year's Derby season. Guests can enjoy complimentary mimosas, bloody marys, and brunch bites to kickstart the fun, then models will hit the runway just before noon. After the show, everyone can shop and mingle with the milliners to plan their show-stopping Derby looks. This year, Wine Country Women will also offer premium sparkling wine options from Napa Valley and Sonoma County winemakers.

Spring is in the air and Derby is right around the corner, so grab your friends, dust off your most fabulous fascinator, and head to the Kentucky Derby Museum Hat Show for an unforgettable experience.

Meet the 2024 KDM Featured Milliners!

Melissa Huff -- Mad Hatter 502

Melissa Huff is the owner of the fun and sophisticated Mamili Boutique and Mad Hatter 502, her stylish Derby hat boutique. Huff, a Louisville native, has been attending The Kentucky Derby since she was a kid with her family. She decided to start making hats and fascinators in 2017 for her friends, then she launched Mad Hatter 502 after people started seeing her designs and requesting custom pieces.

Huff was named a Featured Milliner of the Kentucky Derby Museum in 2023. She has created hats and fascinators for state pageant winners, news anchors, the Kentucky Derby Princesses, friends, family and many other wonderful clients, both local and from out of town. She has been featured in several local magazines, on Great Day Live! and many of her hats and fascinators have been in numerous fashion shows leading up to the Kentucky Derby the last three years.