Private label. Custom products. World-class results

Partner with Danfoss - Your industrial, hydraulic, thermoplastic, PVC and specialty hose private label manufacturer.

Who we are

Danfoss offers private label hydraulic and industrial hose for distribution. Additionally, our SEL brand offers a range of low, mid, and high pressure industrial and hydraulic hoses - including rubber, thermoplastic, and PVC products that meet or exceed industry standards.

Expertise

All hoses are produced at our Çerkezköy plant in Turkey, one of the largest hose manufacturing facilities in the world. Thanks to our talented engineering staff and the largest hose manufacturing capacity in Europe, we can swiftly respond to any questions or requirements regarding the production of custom designs.

What we offer

Çerkezköy’s manufacturing process is certified to ISO 14001, ensuring an effective environmental management system, as well as ISO 9001, ISO 17025, and ISO 27001 to protect employee health and safety, and IATF 16949 to guarantee quality management for automotive products.

Industrial hoses

Manufactured using a variety of compounds and reinforcement methods, our vast portfolio of SEL industrial hoses suits a wide array of markets and applications.

From simple low-pressure water hoses, to hoses that can transfer the most hazardous chemicals, the SEL brand is designed to deliver reliable and consistent performance. Our hoses are also customizable by color and branding.

Our TAK-FLEX PUSH ON socket less hoses are designed to use in various low pressure applications .Great flexibility and quick assembling makes them the right product for different applications in hydraulic and pneumatic systems such as automotive industry, injection molding, paper mill factories and general industrial applications.

Our KUKA sewer jetting hoses, available in rubber and thermoplastic, are designed for ease of use and a long in-application lifespan thanks to their exceptional cover.

Our BETON UC concrete hoses offer very high abrasion resistance, flexibility and extended life in application. Primarily used as connecting or end hose on the boom in high pressure concrete pumping they endures even in the toughest construction environments . Available on custom lengths crimped in house with “full-flow” concrete pumping couplings.

Our KUM sandblast hoses offer exceptional abrasion resistance and provide a long in-application lifespan.

Our range of YAKIT petroleum hoses meet all expectations in terms of performance, flexibility, and ease of operation.