Government and society

inUttarakhand

Constitutional framework

The structure of Uttarakhand’s government, like that of other states of India, is determined by the national constitution of 1950. It is a parliamentary system, consisting of executive, legislative, and judicial branches. The chief executive is the governor, who is appointed by the president of India. The governor is aided and advised by the Council of Ministers, which is led by a chief minister. The Legislative Assembly (Vidhan Sabha) is a unicameral body whose members are elected for a five-year term. The final court in Uttarakhand is the High Court at Nainital, which is headed by a chief justice. Appeals may be made from the High Court to the Supreme Court of India. Below the High Court are district, sessions, civil, and magistrates’ courts.

Recent News

Aug. 16, 2024, 6:50 PM ET (The Weather Channel)

Weekend Weather (August 17-18): Heavy Rains to Soak Mizoram, Tripura, Kerala; Uttarakhand in for Snowfall

Aug. 14, 2024, 2:41 AM ET (The Indian Express)

As Uttarakhand political winds indicate a shift, tight contest on the cards for Kedarnath Assembly seat

Aug. 13, 2024, 8:51 AM ET (The Weather Channel)

Weather Today (August 14): Heavy Rains to Lash Himachal, Uttarakhand, UP, Delhi, Gujarat

Aug. 13, 2024, 6:09 AM ET (The Weather Channel)

Record-Breaking Rains Kill 25 in Rajasthan; Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, UP in for Heavy Falls Until August 18

Aug. 7, 2024, 8:37 PM ET (The Weather Channel)

Heavy Rains to Lash Himachal, Uttarakhand; Orange Alert Issued on August 8, 10

The state is divided into more than one dozen districts, each administered by a district magistrate. Districts are subdivided into smaller units called tehsils, each of which embraces numerous villages and, in some cases, a few towns. The towns and villages are grouped into blocks for development purposes.

Health

Health care in the state is provided by a number of district hospitals, several dozen community health centres, and, in the rural areas, hundreds of primary health centres and subcentres. Treatment is also available from private practitioners. The government recognizes and supports allopathic (Western), Ayurvedic (traditional Indian), Unanī (a traditional Muslim system using prescribed herbs and shrubs), and homeopathic medicine. The state participates in many of the national programs to control (or eradicate) diseases such as leprosy, tuberculosis, and malaria, as well as HIV/AIDS infection and various vector-borne diseases. It also has joined countrywide programs for the prevention of blindness and hearing loss.

Education

In the area that now constitutes Uttarakhand, there has been a virtual explosion since the mid-20th century in the number of schools and students enrolled at all levels. In the first decade of the 21st century, the state’s literacy rate (more than 70 percent) significantly exceeded the national average. Hindi is the medium of instruction at the primary school level, although there are several private residential schools where the medium of teaching is English. Hindi and English are required courses for high school students, and English is generally the medium of instruction at the university level.

Britannica Quiz

Geography of India

Uttarakhand has a number of government universities, the most prominent of which include, in the southeast, the Govind Ballabh Pant University of Agriculture and Technology (1960) in Pantnagar and Kumaun University (1973), with campuses in Nainital and Almora; in the western region, the Indian Institute of Technology (formerly University of Roorkee; 1847) in Roorkee; and in west-central Uttarakhand, Hemwati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University (formerly Garhwal University; 1973) in Srinagar. There are also a number of smaller colleges affiliated with these or other government institutions. The University of Petroleum and Energy Studies (2003) in Dehra Dun is one of the notable private institutions. Other universities and colleges offer specialized training in such areas as forest research, Sanskrit and other Indian studies, engineering, and various technical fields.

Cultural life

Pilgrimage centres

Some of Hinduism’s holiest shrines and temples, which are also pilgrimage centres, are located in the mountains of Uttarakhand. The Yamnotri temple, in the western part of the Garhwal region, lies at an elevation of about 10,600 feet (3,200 metres). Its chief deity is Yamuna, the Hindu river goddess. The Yamuna River emerges from the Yamnotri glacier nearby. The shrine of Gangotri, in the northwestern part of the state, is situated in a cedar- and pine-wooded area at an elevation of nearly 10,000 feet (3,000 metres); submerged in a river at the site is the natural rock linga (phallic symbol of the god Shiva) where, according to mythology, Shiva sat when he received the goddess Ganga in his matted locks. At Kedarnath, somewhat to the southeast of Gangotri at an elevation approaching 12,000 feet (3,500 metres), is a stone temple to Shiva that is considered to be more than 1,000 years old; a large statue of the bull Nandi, one of Shiva’s chief attendants, stands outside the temple door. The Badrinath temple, located at an elevation of some 10,300 feet (3,100 metres) on the bank of Alaknanda River, is the abode of the god Vishnu; the temple’s idol of Vishnu, made of black granite, is said to have been installed by the 8th-century philosopher Shankara.

An important Sikh shrine and pilgrimage site is Hemkund Sahib. Perched at an elevation above 13,000 feet (4,000 metres) in north-central Uttarakhand, the shrine honours the 10th Guru of Sikh religion, Gobind Singh. It marks the place where the Guru spent years in meditation.