Governor:Margaret Alva

Chief Minister:Ramesh Pokhrival

Capital: Dehradun (Provisional)

Legislature: Unicameral

Lok Sabha seats: 5

Judicature: Nainital High Court

Languages: Hindi, Garhwali, Kumaoni

Population density: 159/sq km

No. of districts: 13

Rivers: Ganga, Yamuna and Sharada

Minerals: Limestone, rock, phosphate, dolomite, magnesite, copper,

graphite, soap stone, gypsum etc.

Industries: Forest based-small scale industries

Airports: Jolly Grant (Dehradun), Pantnagar (Udham Singh Nagar),

and Nani-Seni (Pithoragarh), Airstrips at Gauchar (Chamoli) and

Chinyalisaur (Uttarkashi)

PHYSICAL FEATURES

Uttarakhand is located in the foothills of the Himalayas. The region is mostly mountainous with a major portion covered with forests. Based on topographic characteristics, specific availability of land resources for urban development and economic mobility, Uttarakhand can be segregated into three broad categories, 1. The high mountain region (these would include significant portions of Uttarkashi, Champawat, Pithoragarh, Chamoli and Rudra-prayag districts), 2. The mid-mountain region (major parts of Pauri Garhwal, Tehri, Almora, Bageshwar districts). 3. The Doon, Terai region and Hardwar (lower foothills and plains of Dehradun, Nainital, Udhamsingh Nagar and Hardwar districts). The significant peaks of the Great Himalayan range in the state are Nanda Devi, Panchachuli, Kedarnath, Chaukhamba, Badrinath, Trishul, Bandarpunch and Kamet. Pindari, Gangotri, Milam and Khatling are the important glaciers.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

Uttarakhand has been mentioned in the ancient Hindu scriptures as Kedarkhand, Manaskhand and Himavant. The Kushanas, Kunindas, Kanishka, Samudra Gupta, the Pauravas, Katuris, Palas, the Chandras and Pawaras and the British have ruled it in turns. It is often called the Land of the Gods (Dev Bhoomi) because of its various holy places and abundant shrines. The hilly regions of Uttarakhand offer unspoilt landscapes to the tourist-pilgrim.

POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS

1902 – Uttranchal came into existence.

1935 – Renamed United Province

1950 – Renamed as Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand remained a part of Uttar Pradesh

9 November 2000 – became the 27th State of India