News

Business News

India Business News

ET Inspiring Leaders: Celebrating and recognizing top leaders from Uttarakhand

ET Inspiring Leaders: Celebrating and recognizing top leaders from Uttarakhand

Since the inception of Uttarakhand in 2000, the state has made tremendous progresses. We at, Optimal media solution - a division of Times Internet Ltd, have partnered with I3RC Insights Pvt. Ltd, to carry out research to identify such leaders through research findings.

It is a matter of pleasure to announce the winners of our flagship property “ET Inspiring Leaders, Uttarakhand- 2022” which was held on 4th June, at Hyatt Regency, Dehradun in the presence of Hon’ble Governor of Uttarakhand Lt. Gen. Gurmit Singh PVSM, UYSM, AVSM, VSM (Retd.) as the Chief Guest and Pooja Chopra being the special guest

The program was designed to identify top leaders from all over Uttarakhand, who have contributed to society and the Indian Economy.

A. C. Dhiman, Vishwakarma Scales Pvt Ltd

Category: ITS (Road Safety)

VISHWAKARMA, a 45 years legacy caters to ROAD SAFETY through Intelligent Transportation Solutions (ITS). They are the first Indian company to have manufactured High speed weigh in Motion systems, Highway traffic Management, Electronic Toll collection, Fast Tag, etc.

Abhilash Kamani, Gupta Power Infrastructure Limited

Category: Manufacturer of H.T L.T Cables,LED,EPC

Gupta Power Infrastructure Ltd., the flagship company of JRG Group specializes in cable and conductors with its own EPC division for turnkey projects. Since 1961, Gupta Power have created quality products and services backed by thorough research.

Achal Agarwal, M.R.Healthcare Pvt Ltd

Category: Healthcare & Pharmaceutical

M. R. Healthcare is one of the largest custom manufacturer & a trusted partner for pharmaceuticals, herbal extracts, dietary supplements, nutraceuticals products, spices, certified seeds and Himalayan herbs. They have complete contract manufacturing services of pharmaceutical, veterinary, nutraceuticals and herbal products.

Agam Rajvanshi, Magma Industries Ltd

Category: Manufacturing of API and Intermediate

Magma Industries Limited is a leading bulk drug manufacturing company, with an experience of over 20 years. Under the leadership of Agam Rajvanshi, it has well-established infrastructure and world class facilities adhering to the latest quality standards they have prominent presence all across the country. Fulfilling the utmost levels of quality and quantity, the company is built on the three pillars of Transitioning to API & API Intermediates manufacturing in 2007, and complying with the cG.M.P. Norms (Approved by the Government of India).

Ajay Kumar, Shivalik College of Engineering, Dehradun

Category: Technical Education

Ajay Kumar is a graduate engineer in Electronics with post graduate degree in IT. He was associated with L&T for a period of over six years in a senior executive position. He left his job to fulfil his own distinct vision to establish an Institution for promoting education in the field of Engineering and Technology.

Ajay Kumar Agarwal, RK Plywood

Category: PLYWOOD & BLOCK BOARD

Ajay Kumar Agarwal from R.K.Plywood had vast experience in Plywood Industry & Food processing / cold chain Industry. He is the Managing Director in M/S R.K. Agrawal Agro Seeds Pvt. Ltd. Since 2009, he is successfully running an Agro based unit, M/s R.K. Frozen Foods a Cold Chain / Food Processing Unit, Cultivation of fruits & vegetables. He is Partner in M/s R.K. Food Products a Cold Chain / Food Processing Unit under setting up 2022.

Ajay Verma, KPT Piping System Pvt Ltd

Category: PPR Pipes and Fittings

KPT Piping System Pvt Ltd is a Leading PPR Pipes manufacturing company. It is only company in ASIA to make PPR-C pipes and fittings in 5 different colours for hot and cold application.

Akhil Bansal, Recliners India Limited

Category: Innovation in Comfort Furniture & Sleep Products

Recliners India Pvt. Ltd., started in 1996 by a team of father and two sons - R.K. Bansal, Akhil Bansal & Neeraj Bansal as Promoters.

Having foot print in 30 countries worldwide, they also have One Lakh sq.ft. State-of-Art Manufacturing Unit at Roorkee, Uttarakhand.

They have product lines of Cinema Recliners, Home Theatre Recliners, Single Seaters and Living Room Recliners for Home, Medical Recliners for patients and their attendants.

Anand Swaroop Gupta, Anandam

Category: Food & Restaurant

Anand Swaroop Gupta took the reins of his family business from his father in 1960.Since then It has been the motto of Anand Swaroop Gupta to make most authentic and hygienic products and create the “Mithaas Rishton Ki” By serving quality food and sweets and making Anandam the most successful brands of entire north India.

Anil Talukdar, Kukreja Institute

Category: Education in Hotel Management

Belonging to a leading respectable Bengali family of Doon valley, Anil Talukdar has made a name of himself in the hospitality industry in India as well as abroad. Having been educated at The Doon School, Dehradun and St. Stephen’s College, New Delhi, he joined the Oberoi Hotel Management Trainee program in 1976 batch, presently director of Kukreja Institute Dehradun.

Ankit Agarwal, SP Solvent Pvt Ltd

Category: Animal Feed & Edible Oil

In 1995 a new plant was set up by SP Solvent to manufacture balance cattle feed with an installed capacity of 20 MT/ Day. S.P. Solvent Ltd has endeavoured to supply its Cattle Feed to customers through an extensive network of dealers and retailer. Company is also supplying cattle feed to various government and private institutions like (G.B.P.U.A.T-Pantnagar, Mother Dairy etc.).

Arfat Rana, Rana TMT

Category: Manufacturing of TMT Rebars

In 1980 a revolution in steel industry roused in North Indian town Muzaffarnagar, RANA GROUP established RANA TMT Steels. The Founding Rana group was determined to elevate the company on the most prestigious position as one of the most established brands in steel.

Arvind Agarwal and Parul Agarwal, BNI

Category: Business Networking

CA Arvind Agarwal, brought to Doon a new way of doing business through referrals by spearheading BNI which has a presence in 74 countries. He made the entrepreneurs of Dehradun expand their horizon by getting them connected to 2,88,000 successful entrepreneurs worldwide. His wife Mrs. Parul Agarwal Joint Regional Director of BNI Dehradun and is instrumental in carrying the policy and procedure related matters of BNI.

Atul Asawa, Flexituff Ventures International Ltd

Category: Technical Textile Products

Flexituff is a multi-product, multi-market, multi-location enterprise, turning a business of over USD 200 Million, engaged in manufacture and export of Technical Textile products – serving the domain needs of Retail, Industrial, Agro and Infrastructure sectors. With export to over 60 countries, employing over 10000 global citizens, Flexituff is truly an Indian multi-national company.

Devendra Kumar Agarwal, Kashi Vishwanath Steels Pvt Ltd

Category: Iron & Steel

Devendra Kumar Agarwal, Chairman of KVS Premier Group, has business interests in steel, food processing and automobile casting. From the last three decades, he led his flagship company to win various awards like “Paryavaran Pururskar” & “ISPAT AGRADOOT AWARD 2022”.

Dr Nitish Kamboj, Luxmi Dental

Category:Laser and Microscopic Dentistry

Dr Nitish Kamboj is a dental doctor who has many first to his credit from starting his first Laser therapy centre in north India and starting YALD Imaging centre (CBCT Imaging) and first microscopic dental Academy in the hill state. Dr Nitish Kamboj is the First Dentist from North India who did his Double Masters in laser dentistry for LAHA Europe and SOLA Vienna.

Gaurav Jain, Core International

Category: Education - Day School

Mr Gaurav Jain is a blessed son of Lt Shri D K Jain and Mrs Veena Jain who is a gem of a person and a wonderful human. He is an alumni of St Joseph’s Academy Dehradun and Institute of Management Studies. He is the Director of TBL Hi-tech polymers Pvt. Ltd. & an ICSE School by the name of CORE International which is a dream project of his father.

Gautam Kapoor and Amit Takkar, Ramsons Impex

Category: Trusted Brand "Ricoitaly" in Agriculture & Horticulture Mechanization

RAMSONS IMPEX is a manufacturer & dynamic business house dealing in affordable farms Machinery. It is in the field of Rotary Tiller, Sprayers, Multi crop Threshers, Rice Mill, Flour mill, Reapers, Chainsaw, lawnmower, Brushcutter, water pumps and many other Agriculture / Horticulture related state of art modern machines. The company has developed brand by the name of “RICOITALY” Which now is rated as one of the most trusted in Agriculture and Horticulture sector.

Gyan Sharma, Astrolisting

Category: Astrology

Gyan Sharma is the founder of “AstroListing” aiming “To bring Astrology back to its former glory through removing misconceptions and highlighting its incredible knowledge and power”. He helps spreading true knowledge of Vedic Astrology in the Western World. He is an IT professional, Astrologer, poet, lyricist, composer and a ghazal singer. His expertise are in ‘Vastu Ratan’, ‘Jyotish Bhushan’, ‘Jyotish Ratna’, ‘Jyotish Praveen’, Certified ‘Ayurvedic Astrologer’ and is Certified ‘Planetary Gem Advisor’ (PGA).

Harinder S. Juneja, Adroit School

Category: Progressive Education

When going to school becomes pleasurable for children, ‘learning’ is not considered as an effort; it rather flows.” This was the principle which guided Harinder. S. Juneja and Rajni .S. Juneja to excel in the field of education. Through their dedication, love and commitment in dealing with young kids, the husband-wife duo has created a name for themselves in handling the educational and creative needs of the very young minds.

Disclaimer: Content Produced by Optimal Media Solutions Limited

End of Article

FOLLOW US ON SOCIAL MEDIA

Visual Stories

10 Most Affordable Cities in India to Buy a House

business

Most Visited Monuments in India

business

The Pros and Cons of Investing in Value Stocks

business

Investing in Small-Cap Stocks: Top 10 Tips for Absolute Beginners

business

10 Ways to Earn Money Online by Selling Physical Products

business

Richest Cricket Players Across the World

business

10 Things You Didn’t Know About Warren Buffett’s Investment Process

business

Priyanka Chopra Net Worth: Know How Rich is Global Actress

business

Top 10 Benefits of Investing in Small-Cap Stocks

business

15 Best Tax Saving Schemes in India

business

Financial calculators

SIP Calculator

A SIP calculator is a simple tool that allows individuals to get an idea of the returns on their

Calculate Now

PPF Calculator

This financial tool allows one to resolve their queries related to Public Provident Fund account.

Calculate Now

FD Calculator

When investing in a fixed deposit, the amount you deposit earns interest as per the prevailing...

Calculate Now

NPS Calculator

The National Pension System or NPS is a measure to introduce a degree of financial stability...

Calculate Now

Mutual Fund Calculator

Mutual Funds are one of the most incredible investment strategies that offer better returns...

Calculate Now