The Murder of My Sweet is a Swedish cinematic metal band founded in 2007 by drummer and producer Daniel Flores. The music is inspired by movie scores, film noir storytelling and bands like Queen, E.L.O and Genesis, presented with a modern twist and heavy sounding production.

In 2009 The Murder of My Sweet released their debut album, “Divanity” with Italian label Frontiers Music Srl and received swift, genuine praise from media around the world. Much of the praise was directed at the heavy orchestrations and Angelica Rylin’s strong, soaring vocals. Their first single, “Bleed me Dry”, reached a peak position of #14 on the Swedish international singles chart.

In the summer of both 2010 and 2011 the band toured in Sweden, France and Germany and played at festivals like Sweden Rock, Rock Weekend, Baltic Festival, Raismes Fest and Wacken Open Air. The darker Nordic months were spent in the studio where Flores and Rylin worked on the follow up album “Bye, Bye Lullaby”released in 2012. On that album, original members Flores and Rylin were joined by Christopher Vetter on guitars and Teddy Westlund on bass. The album featured guest spots from some of Sweden’s premiere metal musicians: Jesper Stromblad (In Flames), Peter Wichers (Soilwork) and Fredrik Akesson (Opeth). The album saw the band move in a direction similar to successful single, “Bleed me Dry”, except for the last three songs that were written to be a teaser for a third album that had already begun to grow in the minds of Rylin and Flores and would eventually become “Beth Out of Hell”.

After almost three years of silence, The Murder of My Sweet return with a new album which promises to be darker and heavier than the first two and is described by Flores as “an apocalyptic love story between good and evil”. The album features voice actors, a children’s choir and a new bass player in Patrik Janson (Platitude). “Beth Out of Hell” offers the symphonic and cinematic elements the band is now well known for and will surely please fans of the first two albums.

“Beth Out of Hell” will be released worldwide on August 21 2015.

THE MURDER OF MY SWEET

Angelica Rylin: lead and background vocals

Daniel Flores: drums, keyboards

Christopher Vetter: guitars

Patrik Janson: bass guitar

hardmanpr