THE MURDER OF MY SWEET is a Swedish cinematic metal band founded in 2007 by drummer and producer Daniel Flores. The music is inspired by movie score, film noir storytelling and bands like Queen, E.L.O and Genesis, presented with a modern, heavy sounding production. The first lineup included Flores (drums), Angelica Rylin (vocals), Daniel Palmquist (guitars), Johan Niemann (bass) and Andreas Lindahl (Keyboard).

In 2009 THE MURDER OF MY SWEET signed with Italian Record label Frontiers Records. Their debut album titled “Divanity“ was released in January 2010 and received genuine praise from press and media all over the world. Much of the praise was directed to the heavy orchestrations and Angelicas strong, yet soaring vocals. Their first single, “Bleed me dry”, that preceded the album in December 2009 reached a peak position of 14 on the Swedish international single chart.

The summers of 2010 and 2011 the band toured in Sweden, France and Germany, playing at festivals like Sweden Rock, Rock Weekend, Baltic Festival, Raismes Fest and Wacken Open Air. The darker Nordic months were spent in the studio where Flores and Rylin worked on the follow up album.

When the management and record label didn’t agree on the direction of the second album, THE MURDER OF MY SWEET and Frontiers Records parted ways and the band signed with German label AFM Records. On May 25th 2012 the band released their second album titled “Bye, bye lullaby“. This time with a new lineup; Flores, Rylin, Christopher Vetter (guitars) and Teddy Westlund (bass). The album featured guest musicians of some of Sweden’s top of the line metal bands; Jesper Stromblad (In Flames), Peter Wichers (Soilwork) and Fredrik Akesson (Opeth). The new album prompted the band to go more commercial, chasing the success of the first single, except for the last three songs that were written to be a teaser for a third album that had already begun to grow in the minds of Rylin and Flores.

After almost three years of silence the band reunited with Frontiers Records in March 2015. The third album is darker and heavier than the first two and is described by Flores as “an apocalyptic love story between good and evil”. The album features voice actors, a boy choir and yet again a new bass player. Teddy Westlund decided to take a break from music and the band welcomed Patrik Janson (Platitude) in his place. The album was released on August 21 2015 and bears the name “Beth out of Hell“.