It starts out as a futuristic space opera but turns out that's just the prologue before throwing us into another alien romp around a modern city in the spirit of Terminator, Highlander, and Dolph Lundgren's Dark Angel. This time Brigitte Nielson shows up in black leather and lots of guns, pursuing the evil Darth Moll (I made that up - it's just Richard Moll in a cape and gravely voice) and they go around shooting things and blowing things up trying to get the McGuffin, owned by random everyman, who is also sought out by the cops and loan sharks. No matter how many times I see this plot, I can't help it, I still like it, but this has…

So, this is a comedy. I don't know if a lot of people realize that or not, but it is and it's hilarious.

It's like a bunch of parts from other, better films* retold by a guy who has been hit in the head a few too many times as if they were all one movie. Story elements, characters, action set-pieces. It's all from other films and they were done better before with much larger budgets. That said, this is a movie that knows exactly what it is and is having a grand ole time playing around with all of it's toys.

I'm just gonna copy paste this plot description because frankly it does a better job of making sense…

1995 film feels like an 80s nostalgia film. Generic story of alien chasing alien to the planet earth, both trying to find one special crystal that can rule the world. Only here one alien is Brigitte Nielsen dressed in leather and carrying a large gun, while the other alien is Richard Moll giving his most cartoonist diabolical villain performance.

I couldn't tell if this film was in on a joke or if it was trying to be sincere. The two buddy cops were so generic that I started laughing at how on the nose they were to corny buddy cop stereotypes. They both played the straight cop and the goofy cop, they both walk through crime scenes with mutilated bodies…

0/5

Galaxis is an incredibly bad science-fiction film. It approaches itself as an action comic-book "sci-fi", something that is okay given the right delivery. Indeed, Galaxis was one of several leather-clad bimbo superheroine films that came out around the same time – see also Black Scorpion, Barb Wire and The Demolitionist. Barb Wire, for all its dismissal as a much worse film by the general public, managed to get right the faux cynical, tongue-in-cheek delivery. It is an approach that Galaxis very much needed to find – unfortunately, the entire exercise comes po-faced and deadeningly literal-minded, without any ability on the part of the filmmakers either to invigorate the clichés or plant tongues in their cheek.

Galaxis feels like it…

Galaxis is an interesting film. We put this one in the player expecting this to be some Red Sonja levels of bad, and instead we found a really fun and cheesy action sci-fi movie that ticks all the boxes of the genre. Nielson is amazing as the lead in this movie (I honestly don’t remember her even having a name in the movie), and she lands to Earth after a battle takes place. From here it's pretty much a mixture between Suburban Commando and He-Man, and it’s a lot of clean fun.

The stars of the show here are the police officers that are highlighted throughout the film. They are all in, and honestly pretty hilarious. They lend to some…