With such an emphasis on community, it is no surprise that tools and entire companies have sprung up to tackle the challenge of engaging and managing the growing communities in Web3. Galaxis is one such disruptive project taking the lead in this space.

But just what exactly is Galaxis?

What Is Galaxis?

Galaxis is also advised by Ethereum Name Service (ENS) founder Nick Johnson and Chainlink CEO Sergey Nazarov, with strategic partners including CoinMarketCap, Polygon Chainlink Labs, ENS, and more.

How Does Galaxis Work?

Galaxis utilizes a digital, NFT-based membership system. Community owners issue membership cards through Galaxis' creator platform. These NFT cards serve as the foundation for each community, conferring valuable features, functions, and value tailored by their respective creators for cardholders. Beyond granting access to the community and its ecosystem, a card's design reflects the community's values and identity.

Badges

To grant tangible value to their holders, the membership cards can be enhanced through a wide variety of Badges.

Physical Redeemable Badges

This trait enables holders to connect real-world assets to their cards and redeem a physical item reflecting their connection to the community. This includes items such as merch or new products offered to the community.

Digital Redeemable Badges

Similar to the Physical Redeemable Badge, digital collectibles can also be easily dispatched to users through this trait. This could range from exclusive digital art and NFTs to special access to online events or content..

Online Meeting Badges

Provides fans with a convenient way to arrange virtual 1-on-1 meetings with the community owner or creator.

Discount Badges

Discount coupons can be distributed to community members through the discount badge to help community members access paid content, events, and products at a preferential rate.

Decorative Badges

Sometimes referred to just as Badges, these are a special class of Utility Traits that function more as a marker on a holder’s membership card. These badges usually represent certain achievements, milestones, or participation in specific events or games by the holder. These badges imbue the experience of the user into the card to reflect their journey in the community. One such application of badges is in interactive games where a user’s leaderboard position and score can be reflected on a badge on their membership card.

Sticker Books

Galaxis supports Sticker Books, simulating the nostalgic experience of collecting physical stickers. Fans and collectors can showcase their "sticker" collections, including both Galaxis-issued stickers and non-Galaxis NFTs, tapping into the childhood joy of swapping stickers with friends.

Galaxis Grants Program

To support and develop the creator ecosystem, Galaxis will launch a $1 million USDT grants program over the next 12 months. The grant amount is split into two segments: the Creator Grant Program and the Community Member Grant Program.

Creator Grant Program

Monthly rewards based on active membership tiers within a creator's community

For every "Full Tier" member, community owners earn $1 per month

For every "VIP Tier" member, community owners receive $10 per month

Designed to mirror the Patreon model, incentivizing creators to increase community engagement on Galaxis

Community Member Grant Program

Rewards active community members who contribute to the community's success through content creation, supporting events, campaigns, and milestones

90% of the grant pool is distributed to community members

The remaining 10% is distributed to the respective community owners

The Brains Behind Galaxis

Galaxis is helmed by CEO Andras Kristof, a serial entrepreneur and an OG crypto user since 2013. Notably, Kristof installed Asia's first Bitcoin ATM in Singapore in 2014. He has contributed to the Ethereum ecosystem since its beta days, working significantly on infrastructure-related projects.

Kristof's work on NFT infrastructure led him to develop an NFT-based ticketing system for DEVCON Osaka in 2019. This foray into NFTs paved the way for his work on Galaxis. His understanding of the importance of communities developed during his time as CTO of Viki.com, a crowdsourced video translation platform with a strong focus on Korean dramas. This experience made him appreciate the power of engaging communities.

Alongside Kristof is Galaxis co-founder Benjamin Ong, who has partnered with him since the early days. They collaborated on the DEVCON NFT-ticketing system and several Ethereum Foundation initiatives related to privacy technology.

Notable Projects and Achievements

Since its beta launch in November 2022, Galaxis has sold more than 225,000 NFTs through its platform and generated more than 32,000 ETH in secondary sales volume. Beyond its impressive stats, Galaxis has also successfully partnered with some top celebrities today, including Mike Tyson, Steve Aoki and the NBA.

The Mike Tyson NFT Collection

The Mike Tyson NFT Collection features a set of NFT collections surrounding legendary boxer Mike Tyson’s life story and his legacy in the boxing world. It features creative oversight from Mike Tyson and original art from artist Cory Van Lew.

The Lifetime Collection takes fans on a complete journey through Mike Tyson's life, while the 1-of-1 Ultimate Mike Tyson NFT, utilizes Galaxis’ unlockable technology to grant highly exclusive and unique experiences to its holder.

The Ultimate Mike Tyson NFT was eventually sold in an auction for 84.72 WETH (~281K USD) to Charles Read, the CEO of Rarestone Capital. With the NFT, he was able to redeem a range of experiences and physical merchandise including:

A full expenses paid trip to the Tyson Ranch

A boxing lesson from Mike Tyson himself

A sparring session with Mike Tyson’s own sparring partner

Smoke weed with Mike Tyson

Mike Tyson treasure box containing memorabilia, merch and more

A physical Cory van Lew painting of the 1-of-1 NFT

Steve Aoki’s Dominion X

Steve Aoki collaborated with Galaxis in 2021 to launch a groundbreaking first use of Galaxis’ Forge feature. By collecting a specific set of NFTs, holders were able to claim a new and exclusive NFT which unlocked a short film stored on the blockchain, Dominion X.

This was the first use of the Forge technology, which enabled unlockable content through an on-chain experience. Moreover, this film also represented the first animated short film on the blockchain, making this collection a huge milestone for the NFT space.

NBA’s The Association

The Association NFT is a set of 30,000 dynamic NFTs officially launched by the NBA in partnership with Galaxis. These NFTs track real-time stats of NBA players during the 2022 NBA Playoffs, with 125 editions per player. The NFTs' appearance changes over time to reflect the team and player's on-court performance throughout the season.

This collection highlighted Galaxis' integration with the oracle network Chainlink. Chainlink Verifiable Random Function (VRF) helped ensure that each NFT mint was purely random, preventing minters from knowing which player they would receive until the reveal. Additionally, player stats were delivered on-chain through Chainlink's oracle service, enabling the dynamic updates of the NFTs based on real-world data.

This article contains links to third-party websites or other content for information purposes only (“Third-Party Sites”). The Third-Party Sites are not under the control of CoinMarketCap, and CoinMarketCap is not responsible for the content of any Third-Party Site, including without limitation any link contained in a Third-Party Site, or any changes or updates to a Third-Party Site. CoinMarketCap is providing these links to you only as a convenience, and the inclusion of any link does not imply endorsement, approval or recommendation by CoinMarketCap of the site or any association with its operators. This article is intended to be used and must be used for informational purposes only. It is important to do your own research and analysis before making any material decisions related to any of the products or services described. This article is not intended as, and shall not be construed as, financial advice. The views and opinions expressed in this article are the author’s [company’s] own and do not necessarily reflect those of CoinMarketCap. CoinMarketCap is not responsible for the success or authenticity of any project, we aim to act as a neutral informational resource for end-users.