Otto H. Jacobi III, age 75, passed away on August 3, 2019 in his home in Troutville, VA while surrounded by beloved family and friends. His passing marked the end of an 18-month battle with acute myeloid leukemia (AML).

He was born on November 17, 1943 in Flushing, NY, the eldest of three children to the late Athena Maidanos Jacobi and Otto H. Jacobi Jr.; he spent most of his formative years living in Ronkonkoma and then Medford, NY. During much of his early to mid-adult life he lived in Coram, NY, and would later move to Troutville, VA when he was semi-retired.

Over his lifespan, he was a veteran in the U.S. Navy, a U.S. patent holder, and had a successful career as a leader and project engineer at Brookhaven National Laboratory for over 40 years. He was well accomplished and well-liked by all who knew him, whether as a member of the St. Mark’s Episcopal Church, where he was an usher; a member of the local gun club, where he was a gun collector, and an active member of the local car club. He was passionate about many things and had an amazing gift of knowledge that he shared with those around him. Even in his retirement, he could not simply sit idle; he built his dream garage with the help of some friends and accomplished his dream of building his hot rod, a ’33 Ford, which he toured with his close friends.

In addition to his parents, Otto was preceded in death by his daughter, Lisa Jacobi. He is survived by his wife of eleven years Lorraine M. Santulli Jacobi, whom he cherished since meeting 15 years ago; his children Donna Jacobi, Lora Jacobi, and Travis Jacobi; step-father to Anne Cullen and husband Jamie Unruh, and Vincent Cullen and his fiancée Amy Walence; adored grandfather to Briana Jacobi, Drew Sebastino, and Cullen Unruh; and dearly loved brother of Roger Jacobi and Athena Jacobi.

Committal service with full military honors provided by the US Navy honor guard will be 11:00 AM Friday, August 9 at Southwest Virginia Veterans Cemetery, 5550 Bagging Plant Road, Dublin, Virginia 24084 with Rev. Fr. Willis Logan officiating. The family will receive friends for a Celebration of Otto’s life immediately following at Ballast Point, 555 International Parkway, Daleville, Virginia 24083.

In lieu of flowers, the family suggests memorial contributions be made to Good Samaritan Hospice, 2408 Electric Road, Roanoke, Virginia 24018.

Online condolences may be made to Otto’s family at www.rader-funeralhome.com.

To send flowers to the family or plant a tree in memory of Otto H. Jacobi III, please visit our floral store.