Sean Penn, 62, made a very rare sighting with his 56-year-old ex-wife Robin Wright this weekend as they made their way through the Los Angeles airport LAX.

The exes - who started dating in 1989, and were wed from 1996 to 2010 - were dressed casually as they held onto their luggage.

This comes after both split from their most recent spouses. Sean finalized his divorce from 30-year-old Leila George in April 2022 and Robin reportedly filed for divorce from 38-year-old husband Clément Giraudet in September 2022.

The exes also have children together: Robin and Sean share son Hopper, 28, and daughter Dylan, 30.

Sean and Robin have not been seen together in the same room for many years.

Robin modeled a black sweater with skintight blue jeans and lace up brown boots as she held onto a camo and white puffy jacket that looked perfect for the snow.

The Wonder Woman star carried a backpack as she pulled a wheeled suitcase.

The blonde had her hair back and wore prescription glasses as she was makeup free.

Sean had on a trendy outfit with a deep beige T-shirt under a dark gray zip-up hoodie jacket with khaki slacks and beige sneakers as he carried a backpack.

His facial hair was in its signature goatee with his hair worn a bit spiky.

They walked one after the other up the escalator and did not seem to have handlers with them.

Sean and Robin have a history of splitting up and getting back together.

They wed in 1996 then planned on divorcing in December 2007 but called it off four months later.

They separated again in April 2009, but withdrew the documents the following month; however, Robin filed the divorce documents in August 2009 and their divorce was finalized in July 2010.

Robin was reported to have filed for divorce in September from Giraudet, whom she had been married to for four years.

She began dating the Yves Saint Laurent executive in 2017, before tying the knot in a secret ceremony in France the following year.

According to TMZ, Robin listed the date of their split as July 31 in the divorce filing.

The actress has also asked that the court not use its ability to award spousal support and according to a 'post-nuptial agreement, all assets are his/her separate property'.

The couple did not have any children together.

Wright was pictured out without her wedding band as she stepped out in Los Angeles in August 2022.

It will be the third divorce for Robin, who married the late Dane Witherspoon in 1986, before pursuing Penn in 1989.

Wright and Clement have kept their relationship more on the private side, but have been pictured enjoying quality time together over the years.

They were last spotted together in October of 2021, when all seemed well with them as they enjoyed a steamy make out session on the beach in Los Angeles.

Prior to that the duo enjoyed a sun-soaked getaway to St. Tropez in August of 2021.

Clement and Robin tied the knot on August 10, 2018, in a 'very intimate and low-key' ceremony in France, according to People.

'Robin wanted it to be about them, not a big production,' a source told the publication at the time.

The two were 'surrounded by their nearest and dearest,' with Wright reportedly wearing a bohemian lace wedding dress for the occasion, according to Vogue Paris.

Robin and Clement had their nuptials and reception in La Roche-sur-le-Buis in Southeastern France.

They reportedly got engaged winter 2017; they were seen kissing in Paris with a band clearly seen on Robin's wedding ring finger.

The Princess Bride star was first seen with the fashion executive in September 2017 during Fashion Week; they were spotted at a soccer game with her son Hopper.

According to court documents obtained by TMZ, a Los Angeles judge finalized divorce between Sean and Leila in April 2022.

The two-time Academy Award winner and the daughter of actor Vincent D'Onofrio dated for four years before tying the knot in July 2020.

In October 2021, the Animal Kingdom star filed for divorce from the Mystic River performer.

The former couple, who do not share any children together, first began dating in 2016.

In an early 2022 interview with Hollywood Authentic, Penn expressed that he is not happy about the split.

The Gaslit star opened up about his relationship with George whose mother is actress Greta Scacchi.

Penn was honest about their relationship issues going as far as saying he 'f***ed up the marriage' because he was 'very neglectful.'

Penn went on to say that he 'doesn't know' what the future will hold for him and George, but he said he's worked on what he sees as the problems with himself during their relationship.