Sean Penn and Robin Wright Penn Divorcing

THURSDAY DECEMBER 27, 2007 10:15 PM EST

By Nicholas White

Sean Penn and Robin Wright Penn Photo by: Lionel Hahn / Abaca Sean Penn and wife Robin Wright Penn are divorcing, their rep, Mara Buxbaum, confirms to PEOPLE exclusively.

No other details were immediately available. The couple, who've been married 11 years, have two children together, Hopper Jack, 14, and Dylan Frances, 16.

Penn, 47, and Wright, 41, began dating in the early '90s and married in 1996. They also have starred together in several films, including 1998's Hurlyburly and 1997's She's So Lovely, directed by Nick Cassavetes.

"Marriage ain't easy, but it's great most of the time," Penn told Entertainment Weekly in 1997. "I love Robin. I've always loved her."

In the same article, Cassavetes was asked about working with the couple. "The beginning and the end of every day is how Sean and Robin are getting along," he said. "If they have a bad morning, Sean's broken up about it."

Penn's most recent film, Into the Wild, which he directed, is drawing awards buzz, with four SAG Award nominations and two Golden Globe nods.

people.com

Kinda sad, but there's been rumors for a long time I think, so no real surprise....

Actor Sean Penn and wife Robin Wright Penn divorce after 11 years of marriage

One of Hollywood's longer lasting unions, between actor Sean Penn and his wife Robin Wright Penn is over, as the couple confirmed they are divorcing.

The couple, who married in 1996, have two children together, Hopper Jack, 14, and Dylan Frances, 16.

According to People Magazine, the divorce was confirmed by the couple's spokesperson.

Divorcing: Sean Penn and wife of 11 years actress Robin Wright Penn are divorcing, the couple have two children together

Penn, 47, and Wright, 41, both actors, began dating in the early '90s and have starred together in several films, including 1998's Hurlyburly and 1997's She's So Lovely, directed by Nick Cassavetes.

Former wild man Penn who had a short lived marriage to Madonna said once: "Marriage ain't easy, but it's great most of the time.

"I love Robin. I've always loved her."

Happier times: The couple met on a film set in 1991 and starred in several films together, including 'She's so lovely'

The couple have had a notoriously tempestuous relationship, and director Cassevetes when asked about working with the couple said: "The beginning and the end of every day is how Sean and Robin are getting along.

"If they have a bad morning, Sean's broken up about it."

Penn's most recent film, Into the Wild, which he directed, has garned critical acclaim, with four SAG Award nominations and two Golden Globe nominations.

dailymail

This is such a sad news.They'd been together for 17 years.