Sean Penn and Robin Wright were married from 1996 to 2010; the pair share two adult children, Dylan Penn and Hopper Penn

Sean Penn is addressing how he and Robin Wright came around to being friends again after their divorce.

In a recent interview with The New York Times, Penn, 63, spoke to his past marriages with Wright, 58, Madonna and Leila George — and noted that it took him and Wright some time to resolve their issues following their 2010 split.

“It turns out it’s a lot quicker to repair a friendship after divorce if there are not kids involved,” he said. “It took Robin and I quite a while. There was a lot of drama.”

“Much more important to repair it if there are kids involved, but no easy swing, right?” the actor added.

Penn and Wright got married in 1996, several years after he split from Madonna in 1989. He and Wright share daughter Dylan Frances Penn, 33, and son Hopper Jack Penn, 30.

Related: Stephen Baldwin Says Sean Penn Told Him Not to Be Friends with Michael J. Fox on Movie Set: 'You Have to Hate Him'

The former couple appear to have found a friendship and co-parenting situation that worked for them by early 2023, when they were seen spending time together in Los Angeles on multiple occasions. "To be friends with the father of your children… I mean, it's a gift, because we know divorce with children is one of the most difficult things in life," Wright told E! News of her friendship with Penn in February 2023.

Never miss a story — sign up for PEOPLE's free daily newsletter to stay up-to-date on the best of what PEOPLE has to offer​​, from celebrity news to compelling human interest stories.

"We're always gonna be family, whether we're together or apart, you know?" she added at the time. "And I think that's beautiful, and I wish that for everybody."

Most recently, Penn married Australian actress Leila George in 2020; they finalized their divorce in 2022. Since then, the actor has been enjoying the single life, telling the Times he is "thrilled every day."

Related: Sean Penn Addresses False Claim He Hit Ex-Wife Madonna with a Baseball Bat: 'She's Someone I Love'

“If I’m going to be in a relationship, I’m still going to be free, or I’m not going to be in it, and I’m not going to be hurting," he said. "I don’t sense I’ll have my heart broken by romance again.”

Penn most recently appeared on the big screen with Dakota Johnson in Daddio, as well as in the 2023 movies Gonzo Girl and Asphalt City. He is next set to costar with Leonardo DiCaprio and Regina Hall in a still-untitled movie from filmmaker Paul Thomas Anderson.

For more People news, make sure to sign up for our newsletter!