What if the East Germans decided to move their capital to a city other than Berlin as West Germany did. Would they chose another large city like Leipzig or Dresden, or would they prefer a smaller city like the West Germans who chose the small city of Bonn.

Karl Marx Stadt(Chemnitz) would have been an ideal capitol for them if East Berlin were out of the question.

Well Berlin was picked for two reasons, first to put pressure on the West about the rest of the city, and two Berlin all of Berlin wasn't legally a part of ether East or West, having their capital there was a claim on the Eastern sector, that the Communists weren't leaving

anyways I don't think there was ever any plans or thoughts about having it some where else so its very hard to say, a less harsh cold war where the USSR respects Berlin as separate from the rest of Germany(ies) and doesn't try a blockade (Stalin dies maybe?) then I see maybe another large German city in the East

however a more harsh cold war, Stalin wants to keep East Berlin under direct Soviet military control maybe then a small or new city is more likely

Both GDR and FRG had claims on being the legitimate successor of pre-Nazi Germany and Berlin as capital (or capital-to-be) had to be maintained as a part of the successor legitimacy. For this reason, for GDR to break with Berlin as capital of GDR can only work if GDR decides to give up the claims to represent Germany. In this case, Leipzig's legacy as the city of trade and learning may be reinterpreted by SED sufficently to make it the capital. Anything else - except possibly Dresden - does not have nearly enough infrastructure to work as capital without leaving GDR broke and destitute (even more so than it was)

the one that immediately jumps to mind for me as an alternate German capital--ANY alternate German capital--is Brandenburg

It is just as suitable for a capital as Winchester or Canterbury for UK. Actually even less as the city of Brandenburg (as opposed to the province of the same name) almost never had any significance in German history.

It is just as suitable for a capital as Winchester or Canterbury for UK. Actually even less as the city of Brandenburg (as opposed to the province of the same name) almost never had any significance in German history.

i looked it up a little bit ago and learned that the Brandenburg Gate isn't actually in Brandenburg that was part of the reasoning behind my supposition

Both GDR and FRG had claims on being the legitimate successor of pre-Nazi Germany and Berlin as capital (or capital-to-be) had to be maintained as a part of the successor legitimacy. For this reason, for GDR to break with Berlin as capital of GDR can only work if GDR decides to give up the claims to represent Germany.

Did having their capital in Bonn really damage the Federal Republic's claim of sucessorship compared to the Democratic Republic's claims?

Did having their capital in Bonn really damage the Federal Republic's claim of sucessorship compared to the Democratic Republic's claims?

Not really, but they still made sure to emphasise the provisional nature of Bonn as capital. For example the Bundestag was seated in the former Pedagogical Academy for most of its time in Bonn, except for a few years were it was seated in the Old Waterworks next to it. Both could not hold all it functions and other buildings around the city were used as well. All because it was only provisional until a unified Germany decides upon a real one.

original planned also West Germany Berlin as capitol "Land Groß-Berlin"

but real politic made this imposslbe and after some meddling of Konrad Adenauer, became Bonn west German Capitol instead of Frankfurt am Main.

as GDR was founded by Soviet, was this in constitution article 2# “Die Hauptstadt der Republik ist Berlin“ eng: The Capitol of Republik is Berlin

now here come the interesting part the "Land Groß-Berlin" Is NOT part of Soviet occupy zone but under the Four-Power agreement a special occupy zone !

something the soviet in OTL never matter that detail, but it take until january 1957 that GDR official Integration east-Berlin as capitol into the GDR.

so Kovalenko you got a POD why East-Berlin is NOT capitol, because Soviet respect the Berlin Four-Power agreement.

so what take ?

Karl Marx Stadt(Chemnitz) is in size of Bonn, but too fare away from Soviet HQ in East Beriln.

Potsdam is ideal, incenter of GDR, close to East Berlin and Soviet troops to intervene

there are the parks and palaces of Sanssouci, the largest World Heritage Site in Germany.

The Potsdam Conference, the major post-World War II conference between the victorious Allies, was held at another palace in the area, the Cecilienhof.

so historical ground.

i looked it up a little bit ago and learned that the Brandenburg Gate isn't actually in Brandenburg that was part of the reasoning behind my supposition

[City XYZ] Gate is never in the City XYZ, it is the point where the road to City XYZ starts