Linda Stirling Nibley, an actress during the 1940s who later served as an educator for 27 years, died July 20 of cancer at her home in Studio City. She was 75.

Nibley, born in Long Beach, began her acting career at age 15 when she joined a local Shakespearean summer stock company.

In Hollywood she studied with character actress Maria Ouspenskaya (of Universal Pictures horror film fame) and at the Group Theater with Lee J. Cobb.

While attending Ben Bard’s drama school, Nibley, whose classic ingenue looks allowed her to become a successful photographer’s model, graced numerous magazine covers.

Her big break came in 1944 when she was signed to a contract with Republic Pictures. Nibley, whose professional name was Linda Stirling, appeared in more than 25 Westerns, features and serials, including “The Tiger Woman” and “Zorro’s Black Whip.”

In 1946 she married writer-producer A. Sloan Nibley, eventually raising two sons and retiring from the screen.

During the 1950s and early 1960s she appeared in plays at the Las Palmas Theater and Pasadena Playhouse.

Nibley also appeared in nearly 100 TV shows, including “The Real McCoys,” “The Joan Blondell Show,” “Heinz 57 Drama Series,” “The Adventures of Wyatt Earp,” “The Life of Riley” and “The Millionaire.”

Nibley returned to college and graduated from UCLA, Phi Beta Kappa, in 1964, earning her master’s degree the following year.

She subsequently taught English, Shakespeare and literature at Glendale college for 27 years, retiring in 1992. She received the Distinguished Faculty Award for outstanding teaching in 1990.

Following retirement, she continued her work in the theater by giving play readings. She also was a member of the Group Repertory Theater in North Hollywood.

Nibley is survived by her mother, a sister and two sons, including Christopher, who is a director of photography.

Family suggests that in lieu of flowers, donations in Nibley’s name be sent to the Linda Stirling Nibley Memorial Scholarship Fund at Glendale College, 1500 N. Verdugo Road, Glendale, CA 91208.