Linda Stirling, who was known as “the Serial Queen” for her stardom in the weekly cliffhanger adventure shorts that enticed young moviegoers to theaters in the 1940s and early 1950s, has died. She was 75.

Stirling, known in later years as Linda Nibley, died July 20 of cancer at her home in Studio City, her fan club announced this week.

Born in Long Beach, Stirling started acting in summer stock when she was 15. During her years of drama classes, the auburn beauty with classic features became a photographer’s model, appearing in several national magazines.

She was signed by Republic Pictures in 1944 to make such serial fare as “The Tiger Woman” and “Zorro’s Black Whip.”

Stirling appeared in two dozen westerns and feature films as well as the serials. Among her credits were “The San Antonio Kid,” “The Sheriff of Sundown,” “Vigilantes of Dodge City,” “The Cherokee Flash,” “The Sheriff of Cimarron,” “Topeka Terror,” “The Mysterious Mr. Valentine” and “The Invisible Informer.”

Her favorite work, she recently said in a newsletter to her fans, was “The Tiger Woman” serial.

“Even though I didn’t know what I was doing half the time,” she said, “the stuntmen were always so helpful and full of fun, they made the long hours and grueling pace go by quickly.”

Stirling had small roles on television and acted at the Pasadena Playhouse during the 1950s and ‘60s, but generally aimed toward a new career in teaching.

After earning bachelor’s and master’s degrees from UCLA, she taught English and literature at Glendale College for 27 years. In 1990, she earned the Distinguished Faculty Award for outstanding teaching.

In her retirement years, Stirling was active in the Group Repertory Theater in North Hollywood.

Her husband of 44 years, writer and producer A. Sloan Nibley, died in 1990. Stirling is survived by two sons, Christopher and Tim Nibley; her mother, Mary Weiss; and her sister, Alice Ogden.

The family has asked that any memorial donations be made to the Linda Stirling Nibley Memorial Scholarship Fund at Glendale College, 1500 N. Verdugo Road, Glendale, CA 91208.