The man will never pass on an opportunity to wear a pressed white shirt and black blazer. He's also got that salt-and-pepper thing going on for him now.

Martine has starred in several movies and TV shows in the U.K. since Love Actually. In February 2016, she had a mini reunion with Hugh Grant and Bill Nighy at a BFI event. It was adorable.

Colin's appeared in more than 30 films (Mamma Mia, The King's Speech, Tinker Taylor Soldier Spy, to name a few) since playing the hottest writer alive. He continues to be the leading man of your (and your mom's) dreams.

While Sienna's role was small (so small she didn't even get a name), she played a big part in aligning Jamie's stars with that of his true love Aurélia. Sienna most recently starred in the drama Lucky Man, created by Marvel giant Stan Lee.

Lúcia's post-Love Actually career has included a handful of Portuguese TV shows and films, but her main love has always been music. She's also been documenting her family on Instagram through the lens of her iPhone 6.

Carla's career has also stayed mostly in Portugal, where she's starred in a number of TV shows, including the telenovela Santa Bárbara, which premiered in 2015.

Keira's film resume has grown tremendously with mostly drama — Pride & Prejudice, Atonement, Anna Karenina, The Imitation Game — but she's also made time for some action and/or comedy, depending on how you categorize the first three Pirates of the Caribbean films.

Chiwetel has blessed the world with several impressive performances on the big screen. To date, his most important work has been in 12 Years a Slave, which earned him a Best Actor Oscar nomination in 2013.

Andrew has since ditched his poster board and broken heart for something even more grueling: The Walking Dead. Rick Grimes has been through enough, you guys. Can he live?

Liam continues to star in all the films in Hollywood, with more than 30 titles since Love Actually. I think it's time to #BringBackTaken (which officially ended with a third movie in 2015).

Believe it or not, Love Actually remains Claudia's most recent film credit. These days, she's busy taking glam shots for her Instagram and promoting her ultra chic knitwear line.

Thomas' career pretty much took off after Love Actually. He's since appeared in Nanny McPhee, Nowhere Boy (playing the great Sir Paul McCartney), The Maze Runner films and a little show called Game of Thrones. (Thanks for everything, Jojen Reed).

Since blowing everyone's minds with her rendition of your fave Mariah Carey holiday classic, Olivia has enjoyed the joy and chaos of being a Disney star with Phineas and Ferb. Since 2010, Olivia has been the voice of Marceline the Vampire Queen on Adventure Time.

Emma continues to be a force in Hollywood thanks to great roles like Professor Sybill Trelawney (that hair!), Nanny McPhee, and the Queen in Brave. Next up for the legend: Mrs. Potts in the 2017 remake of Beauty and the Beast.

Lulu is a self described comedy writer who loves a good bowl of porridge. No really. No word on whether or not she's dressed up as a lobster for Halloween since the movie.

While it's too bad things didn't workout for Sarah and Carl, Laura's been kicking major butt in her career, earning two Oscar nominations, starring in HBO's lovely The Big C for four seasons, and appearing on Broadway.

Rodrigo and his perfect abs have starred in a variety of treats over the years, including the 300 movies and most recently, HBO's Westworld.

Joanna's post-Just Judy career has included three seasons of the popular BBC sitcom Gavin & Stacy. Joanna, who is married to English actor James Thornton, recently welcomed her third child, a baby boy named Noah.

Since jumping off Just Judy's front steps and eloping a moment later, Martin's been the subject of some lovely Sherlock/Watson fan fiction stemming from the excellent BBC series opposite Benedict Cumberbatch. Come on BBC, give the people what they want.

BBT is basically reliving the year Love Actually was released. 13 years after Bad Santa, which came out the same year as Love Actually, the world has been blessed with another Bad Santa movie, aptly titled Bad Santa 2.