We don't want a lot for Christmas — just some of their skincare secrets, maybe.

Hugh Grant (David the Prime Minister)

The man will never pass on an opportunity to wear a pressed white shirt and black blazer. He's also got that salt-and-pepper thing going on for him now.

Martine McCutcheon (Natalie)

Martine has starred in several movies and TV shows in the U.K. since Love Actually. In February 2016, she had a mini reunion with Hugh Grant and Bill Nighy at a BFI event. It was adorable.

Colin Firth (Uncle Jamie)

Colin's appeared in more than 30 films (Mamma Mia, The King's Speech, Tinker Taylor Soldier Spy, to name a few) since playing the hottest writer alive. He continues to be the leading man of your (and your mom's) dreams.

Sienna Guillory (Jamie's awful GF)

While Sienna's role was small (so small she didn't even get a name), she played a big part in aligning Jamie's stars with that of his true love Aurélia. Sienna most recently starred in the drama Lucky Man, created by Marvel giant Stan Lee.

Lúcia Moniz (Aurélia)

Lúcia's post-Love Actually career has included a handful of Portuguese TV shows and films, but her main love has always been music. She's also been documenting her family on Instagram through the lens of her iPhone 6.

Carla Vasconcelos (Aurélia's sister Sophia)

Carla's career has also stayed mostly in Portugal, where she's starred in a number of TV shows, including the telenovela Santa Bárbara, which premiered in 2015.

Keira Knightley (Juliet)

Keira's film resume has grown tremendously with mostly drama — Pride & Prejudice, Atonement, Anna Karenina, The Imitation Game — but she's also made time for some action and/or comedy, depending on how you categorize the first three Pirates of the Caribbean films.

Chiwetel Ejiofor (Peter)

Chiwetel has blessed the world with several impressive performances on the big screen. To date, his most important work has been in 12 Years a Slave, which earned him a Best Actor Oscar nomination in 2013.

Andrew Lincoln (Mark)

Andrew has since ditched his poster board and broken heart for something even more grueling: The Walking Dead. Rick Grimes has been through enough, you guys. Can he live?

Liam Neeson (Daniel)

Liam continues to star in all the films in Hollywood, with more than 30 titles since Love Actually. I think it's time to #BringBackTaken (which officially ended with a third movie in 2015).

Claudia Schiffer (Carol)

Believe it or not, Love Actually remains Claudia's most recent film credit. These days, she's busy taking glam shots for her Instagram and promoting her ultra chic knitwear line.

Thomas Brodie-Sangster (Sam)

Thomas' career pretty much took off after Love Actually. He's since appeared in Nanny McPhee, Nowhere Boy (playing the great Sir Paul McCartney), The Maze Runner films and a little show called Game of Thrones. (Thanks for everything, Jojen Reed).

Olivia Olson (Joanna)

Since blowing everyone's minds with her rendition of your fave Mariah Carey holiday classic, Olivia has enjoyed the joy and chaos of being a Disney star with Phineas and Ferb. Since 2010, Olivia has been the voice of Marceline the Vampire Queen on Adventure Time.

Emma Thompson (Karen)

Emma continues to be a force in Hollywood thanks to great roles like Professor Sybill Trelawney (that hair!), Nanny McPhee, and the Queen in Brave. Next up for the legend: Mrs. Potts in the 2017 remake of Beauty and the Beast.

Lulu Popplewell (Daisy)

Lulu is a self described comedy writer who loves a good bowl of porridge. No really. No word on whether or not she's dressed up as a lobster for Halloween since the movie.

Laura Linney (Sarah)

While it's too bad things didn't workout for Sarah and Carl, Laura's been kicking major butt in her career, earning two Oscar nominations, starring in HBO's lovely The Big C for four seasons, and appearing on Broadway.

Rodrigo Santoro (Carl)

Rodrigo and his perfect abs have starred in a variety of treats over the years, including the 300 movies and most recently, HBO's Westworld.

Joanna Page (Just Judy)

Joanna's post-Just Judy career has included three seasons of the popular BBC sitcom Gavin & Stacy. Joanna, who is married to English actor James Thornton, recently welcomed her third child, a baby boy named Noah.

Martin Freeman (John)

Since jumping off Just Judy's front steps and eloping a moment later, Martin's been the subject of some lovely Sherlock/Watson fan fiction stemming from the excellent BBC series opposite Benedict Cumberbatch. Come on BBC, give the people what they want.

Billy Bob Thornton (POTUS)

BBT is basically reliving the year Love Actually was released. 13 years after Bad Santa, which came out the same year as Love Actually, the world has been blessed with another Bad Santa movie, aptly titled Bad Santa 2.

Heike Makatsch (Mia)

Heike has starred in several German films and TV shows since playing Mia. In 2009, she released an album with her musician husband Max Schroder.

Julia Davis (Nancy the caterer)

While Nancy probably never catered again, Julia has slayed on the small screen, winning a BAFTA for Best Comedy Writing for her sitcom Hunderby. In 2011, Julia appeared in an episode of Black Mirror playing a mean talent competition judge.

Kris Marshall (Colin)

Colin, who once declared himself to be the "God of sex," likely became a naturalized U.S. citizen shortly after meeting Harriet. In real life, Kris has spent recent years doing TV and radio work in the U.K.

John Sharian (Wisconsin taxi driver)

Shortly after Love Actually, John channeled his inner evil for The Machinist opposite Christian Bale. John has since appeared in a variety of shows like Law & Order and most recently, Louis C.K.'s web series Horace and Pete.

Ivana Milicevic (Stacey)

Hopefully, Stacey and her BFFs have since upgraded to better living conditions with separate bedrooms. Ivana's recent projects have a lead role on Cinemax's Banshee, playing the Bonnie to Lucas Hood's Clyde.

Elisha Cuthbert (Carol-Anne)

Unlike Carol-Anne in Wisconsin, Elisha has enjoyed a strong TV and movie career in Hollywood, playing the hilarious Alex for three seasons on Happy Endings. She currently has a recurring role on Netflix's The Ranch.

January Jones (Jeannie)

Mad Men's Betty Draper would be shocked to learn of Jeannie and her BFFs' living conditions.

Abdul Salis (Tony)

Following the success of Love Actually, Abdul spent six years playing a paramedic on Casualty, the longest running medical drama in the UK. (Grey's has nothing on this show in terms of longevity, but I guess they had McDreamy...)

Shannon Elizabeth (Harriet)

After vowing to never wear a cowboy hat ever again (probably), Shannon went on to appear on a variety of films and TV programs. In 2008, she competed on season six of Dancing With the Stars and finished sixth. Colin would be SO proud.

Denise Richards (Carla)

Denise's golden locks continue to be golden. Does anyone know what conditioner she uses?

Bill Nighy (Billy Mack)

~This is the part of the gallery where Billy Mack's Christmas song starts to play in your head~. #soifyoureallylovechristmas

Gregor Fisher (Joe)

Somewhere, Joe and Billy are living their best lives on a beautiful farm with an endless supply of cheap beer and liquor.

Meredith Ostrom (Billy's video vixen)

Meredith's post-video vixen days have included a handful of small movies roles. When she's not acting or producing, she's painting, selling her works of art, or playing with tiny hedgehogs.

Rowan Atkinson (Rufus)

Since playing the best gift wrapper of all time, Rowan has returned to his Mr. Bean roots, most recently voicing the animated version of his classic role. (The live-action Mr. Bean is still better, TBH).

Dan Fredenburgh (Jamie's Bad Brother)

Dan has come a long way since that awkward wimper in front of Colin Firth. These days, he's a certified screenwriter as well.

Nina Sosanya (Annie)

Nina has mainly stuck to TV roles since playing Prime Minister Hugh Grant's right hand woman. She currently stars as DCI Laura Porter in the British crime series Marcella. (It's as good as The Fall, so please watch it).

Junior Simpson (Wedding DJ)

Junior has been enjoying the finer things in life through his work as a stand up comedian. He (probably) agrees that there is nothing funny about bad wedding music.

Jake Curtis (Spider-Man kid)

Director Richard Curtis and his wife Emma Freud (who was the film's script editor) only recently revealed the true identity of the boy behind the Spider-Man face paint at the school's nativity play: he was none other than the couple's then 5-year-old son Jake. Jake is currently living his best life as a teenager and was recently romantically linked to Kate Moss, NBD.

Scarlett Curtis (Second Lobster)

The second Curtis child to have a cameo in the film was daughter Scarlett, who now writes for Elle UK, loves to Instagram, and the color pink.

The Christmas Whale

This guy had a small part in the school's nativity play, but he's since moved on to bigger and better things. He's also found another whale to spend the rest of his life with.

You Might Also Like