Romantics rejoiced earlier this month when it was confirmed that the stars of Love Actually were reuniting for a sequel. Keira Knightley, Hugh Grant, Colin Firth, Liam Neeson, Bill Nighy, Rowan Atkinson are all set to appear in the special ten-minute clip for Comic Relief, which will be shown on 24 March on BBC One. Martine McCutcheon, Andrew Lincoln, Lucia Moniz, Thomas Brodie-Sangster and Olivia Olson will also reprise their original roles.

Titled Red Nose Day Actually, the sequel has been penned by Richard Curtis and sets out to discover what the original characters are doing in the present day. "I would never have dreamt of writing a sequel to Love Actually, but I thought it might be fun to do 10 minutes to see what everyone is now up to," he said of the spin-off. "We hope to make something that'll be fun - very much in the spirit of the original film and of Red Nose Day." Ahead of the sequel's highly-anticipated screening, HELLO! Online takes a look at the stars of the hot 2003 British rom-com, then and now…

Billy Bob Thornton as the President of the United States.

Billy Bob has appeared in a number of films since 2003 – including The Alamo, School for Scoundrels, Eagle Eye and Faster. He also starred in the first series of TV anthology Fargo in 2014, earning him a best actor Golden Globe. The 61-year-old US actor has been married six times and has five children; he has been married to with makeup effects crew member Connie Angland since October 2014.

The late Alan Rickman as Harry.

Britain lost a huge talent in January 2016, when Alan Rickman passed away from cancer. The 69-year-old will be remembered for films including Die Hard, Harry Potter and Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves. His final roles were as Lieutenant General Frank Benson in thriller Eye in the Sky and as the voice of the caterpillar in Alice Through the Looking Glass. Alan left behind his long-term partner Rima Horton. The couple first met in 1965, when they were just teenagers, and were together until his death.

Liam Neeson as Daniel.

Since Love Actually, Liam has carved out a career as an action star in films such as Non-Stop, Taken and Unknown. He most recently appeared in Martin Scorsese's Silence, A Monster Call and The Lego Movie. In 2009, Liam tragically lost his actress wife Natasha Richardson when she suffered a skiing accident at the Mont Tremblant Resort. The couple had been married since July 1994, and have two children together, sons Michael (born June 1995) and Daniel (born August 1996).

Claudia Schiffer as Carol.

German supermodel Claudia might have only made a brief appearance in Love Actually (as a potential love interest for Liam Neeson's character) – but she was never meant to appear at all. Writer and director Richard Curtis has revealed he didn't originally intend for Claudia to be in the movie, but he struggled to find someone who looked like her, so instead offered her the cameo role. It wasn't the 46-year-old's first screen appearance; she made her film debut in the 1994 film Richie Rich and also starred in the 2001 Ben Stiller comedy Zoolander. Claudia has been married to Matthew Vaughn since May 2002, and together they have three children: Caspar, Clementine and Cosima.

Chiwetel Ejiofor as Peter.

Another hugely successful British export, Chiwetel was nominated for an Oscar for his acclaimed performance in the 2013 movie, 12 Years a Slave. His other film credits include Kinky Boots, The Martian and Doctor Strange. The 39-year-old has received numerous awards and nominations for his acting, including the BAFTA Orange Rising Star Award, two Golden Globe nominations and the Lawrence Olivier Award for his performance in Othello in 2008. He was made Commander of the Order of the British Empire by the Queen in the 2015 Birthday Honours.

Kris Marshall as Colin.

The success of Love Actually convinced Kris to leave My Family, the sitcom which had made his name, and he went on to appear in Murder City, surreal comedy Funland and US show Traffic Light. He also starred in a series of high-profile BT ads. The 43-year-old's biggest role in recent years has been as lead detective DI Humphrey Goodman in BBC murder mystery series Death In Paradise – although he recently confirmed he is leaving the show to spend more time with his family.

January Jones as Jeannie.

American star January went on to play repressed housewife Betty Draper in the hit Sixties drama Mad Men, for which she received a Golden Globe nomination. She also teamed up with Love Actually director Richard Curtis again in 2008 on the film The Boat That Rocked. January's other credits include X-Men: First Class and Unknown, while she currently stars in comedy series The Last Man on Earth. The 39-year-old welcomed son Xander Dane Jones in September 2011, and has declined to give any information regarding her son's father.

Laura Linney as Sarah.

Laura has received two Oscars nominations – for The Savages and Kinsey – since appearing in Love Actually, and has picked up a number of Golden Globes and Emmys for her work on the black comedy series The Big C. Her other film credits include The Truman Show, Mystic River and The Squid and the Whale. In 2009, she married real estate agent Marc Schauer with Love Actually co-star Liam Neeson walking her down the aisle. Laura, 53, welcomed her first child, son Bennett Armistead Schauer, in January 2014.