Shuttle Bus Leasing (SBL) specializes in providing short to long term leases of high-quality transit shuttle buses for a wide range of applications. With multiple locations within the United States, SBL is able provide leasing service to accommodate various transportation needs.

The American Public Transportation Association (APTA), formerly known as the American Public Transit Association, is a nonprofit organization which serves as an advocate for the advancement of public transportation programs and initiatives in the United States.

Founded in 1928, AAAE is the world’s largest professional organization for airport executives, representing thousands of airport management personnel at public-use commercial and general aviation airports. AAAE’s members represent nearly 875 airports and authorities, in addition to hundreds of companies and organizations that support airports.

Since, 1969, the California Bus Association has given Motorcoach companies a venue to pursue excellence in the industry. Our dedicated members work together to provide information that assists all operators, large and small, in their daily business success.

Public transit improves communities, stimulates economies and helps protect our environment. It benefits even those who never use it. We believe that public transit is beyond discretionary, that it is essential. We are champions for public transit, and we contend that with better public transit comes better quality of life for riders, non-riders, community stakeholders, businesses and the public at-large.

Public transit underpins the framework for livable, efficient and healthy communities. CUTA’s success is measured by the success of our members, the value they gain from membership and the strength of our collective influence on advancing public transit and integrated urban mobility in Canada.

The Florida Public Transportation Association (FPTA) is one of the most active state transit associations in the nation. FPTA is a nonprofit association whose members include every major public transit agency in Florida as well as interested citizens and businesses.

The Michigan Public Transit Association is a non-profit statewide association incorporated in 1977 under Section 501(c)6 of the Internal Revenue Code. First organized in 1974, our membership ranges from the largest urban public transit system providers in Michigan to a majority of the smaller rural demand-response systems. Geographically our membership is distributed throughout the state, from southeast Michigan to the western-most point of our Upper Peninsula.

The objectives of the association shall be to consider issues common to the bus and motorcoach industry and to advise its members concerning laws and regulations of federal, state and local governmental bodies: to disseminate information and to encourage equality and uniformity relative to legislative and regulatory action; to promote better understanding among owners and operators of bus companies through conferences, educational programs and social activities; and to bring about a greater awareness of bus operations on the part of the general public.

Missouri Public Transit Association (MPTA) was established in 1980 as a Missouri non-profit corporation. It was formed to provide a unified voice for public and specialized transportation providers in Missouri and to work toward elevating the status of public transit as a national priority.

OPTA is the primary advocate for public transportation in Ohio. Now nearly 400 members strong, the Association provides leadership, resources, training, support, technical assistance, media outreach, public engagement, and governmental relations services to public and private transit agencies across the state.

Founded in 1983, the Oklahoma Transit Association (OTA) is the state’s voice for public transit. OTA’s membership is comprised of the 34 urban, small urban, suburban, rural and tribal transit agencies in the state who share the common priority of providing and improving mobility and access for all Oklahomans. Industry-related vendors who share that vision also belong to OTA through its Associate Member Program.

In 1978, Oregon’s three major public transit districts established the Oregon Transit Association as a nonprofit association to represent them at our State Capitol. Today, the OTA claims many members throughout the state. OTA members support activities of this professional organization through the payment of annual dues. Dues vary according to membership category:

The Transportation Association of Maryland (TAM) is a statewide organization that is dedicated to improving mobility for all of Maryland’s citizens. TAM is a viable and effective advocate for its members and provides professional development, training, and forums for the pursuit of excellence in public transportation by public, private, and specialized transportation providers.

The Washington State Transit Association (WSTA) is a nonprofit corporation, representing 30 public transit systems in the state and the Washington State Department of Transportation’s (WSDOT’s) Public Transportation Division. Our associate members include state and local agencies and organizations, vendors, and consultants–those companies which provide services and products to the transit industry–as well as interested individuals.

AIRPORT IMPROVEMENT Magazine is the only brand focused exclusively on airport construction; all the players; all the time. You sell when airports are buying. Airports are buying when they’re building stuff, and they’re building more stuff now than ever before, and that’s the environment that is captured by Airport Improvement magazine.

For more than a half-century, BUSRide has been the industry’s most reliable source for news; trends; vehicle and product field tests; new product and service information; exclusive research and analysis; and editorial content by trusted industry thought leaders throughout the world.

Passenger Transport carries more in-depth articles and analysis than ever before, along with timely updates to help you do your job better. With its several themed issues (such as Technology; Legislative, Bus, and Rail conferences; and Safety and Security), this publication also provides opportunities for you to submit stories on what your agency or business is doing, providing “lessons learned,” case studies, best practices, and industry innovation.