RAA Statement on Member ExpressJet Accelerated Wind-Down

Washington, DC, August 24, 2020. Media contact: media@raa.org The Regional Airline Association released a statement today acknowledging a communication by member airline ExpressJet, indicating ExpressJet would accelerate its previously announced wind-down plan to September 30. ExpressJet employed 2,800 individuals and served more than 100 airports in North America. The Administration and Congress went into recess […]

RAA Joins NBAA, HAI and NATA In Letter Urging Treasury to Improve Air Carrier Loan Program

On Monday, August 3rd, the Regional Airline Association joined the Helicopter Association International (HAI), National Air Transportation Association (NATA), and the National Business Aviation Association (NBAA) sent ) in a letter urging the Treasury to prioritize lending to regional air carriers and general aviation commercial operators who have been largely shut out of Air Carrier […]

RAA Joins AAAE, ACI-NA, NASAO, and NACO in Letter to Support Essential Air Service Program

On Tuesday, August 4th, the Regional Airline Association joined the American Association of Airport Executives (AAAE), Airports Council International-North America (ACI-NA), National Association of State Aviation Officials (NASAO), and National Association of Counties (NACO) in a letter to House Speaker Pelosi, Senate Majority Leader McConnell, House Republican Leader McCarthy, and Senate Democratic Leader Schumer. The […]

RAA Statement on Wind-Down Announcement by Member ExpressJet

Washington, DC, July 31, 2020. Media contact: media@raa.org The Regional Airline Association (RAA) released a statement on long-time member ExpressJet’s announcement yesterday of its potential phased wind-down by the end of the year. ExpressJet provided safe, professional air service to communities of all sizes as a United Express carrier and, with the loss of this […]

RAA Supports Clean Extension of the Payroll Support Program (PSP).

Washington, DC, July 17, 2020. The Regional Airline Association (RAA) today voiced strong support for a clean extension of the Payroll Support Program (PSP) within the CARES Act, which otherwise stands to expire on September 30, 2020. The Payroll Support Program, which provided payments to commercial airlines to cover a portion of their employee payroll […]

FOURTEEN AVIATION GROUPS COMMEND USG RELEASE OF RUNWAY TO RECOVERY GUIDANCE

Today, the Administration released its Runway to Recovery: The United States Framework for Airlines and Airports to Mitigate the Public Health Risks of Coronavirus guidelines to support the health and safety of passengers, aviation employees, and the aviation industry in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. Stakeholders across the aviation sector joined together to commend […]

RAA Strongly Supports FAA Proposal for a New Pilot Records Database

Washington, DC, June 29, 2020. Media contact: media@raa.org The Regional Airline Association (RAA) today voiced its strong support for the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA’s) Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) on the establishment and maintenance of a robust Pilots Records Database (PRD). RAA member airlines’ top priority is safety for our operations, and the development of […]

RAA Statement for the Record for COVID-19 Hearing

Washington, DC, May 6, 2020. Media contact: media@raa.org. This afternoon, the Regional Airline Association (RAA) provided written testimony from President and CEO Faye Malarkey Black for the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, & Transportation hearing entitled, “The State of the Aviation Industry: Examining the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic.” RAA updated the Committee […]

RAA Statement on Treasury CARES Act Press Release

Media contact: media@raa.org Washington, DC, April 14, 2020 – The Regional Airline Association (RAA) issued the following statement today in response to the Department of Treasury’s Press Release announcing an agreement in principal for ten of the twelve air carriers Treasury has subjected to warrants. Treasury indicates Alaska Airlines, Allegiant Air, American Airlines, Delta Air Lines, […]

RAA Statement on Treasury CARES Act Details

Media contact: media@raa.org Washington, DC, April 10, 2020 – The Regional Airline Association (RAA) issued the following statement today in response to the Department of Treasury’s Press Release announcing certain details of the Payroll Support Program under the CARES Act, where the Treasury will not require passenger air carriers that will receive $100 million of […]