No one denies the cost of learning to fly is high, even exorbitant to some. That’s why every opportunity for some additional financial support a new pilot can find is worthy of a closer look. The latest opportunity to feed your flight training bank account comes from the Regional Airline Association (RAA), the trade group representing the nation’s second-tier air carriers, such as SkyWest, Cape Air, Air Wisconsin, Envoy, Piedmont and dozens of others. According to the RAA, “US regional airlines operate 41 percent of scheduled passenger flights and provide the only source of scheduled air service to nearly two-thirds of the nation’s airports,” making this association a valuable resource.

For 2021 the RAA is offering three scholarships of $4,000 each to U.S. citizens or permanent residents without regard to gender, race, religion, or national origin. The deadline for application is Friday, June 4, 2021. The RAA requires all applicants when they begin this process application, to be officially enrolled in an accredited college or university program leading to a career in the airline industry. The RAA said in a news release, “Applicants will be considered from other programs/majors, if a career in airline management can be demonstrated through work experience or a personal essay.” Applicants must possess at least a cumulative 3.0 grade point average on a 4.0 scale, as well as a transcript reflecting grades through the previous academic year at high school, college or university. Because of the June application deadline, applicants may submit transcripts through fall or winter term 2020/2021. “The application must also include a resume outlining the applicant’s work experience, extracurricular and/or community activities, a career essay, up to 350 words describing their interests in the airline industry and finally a faculty recommendation must accompany the application.”

This scholarship application may only be completed and submitted electronically using the RAA’s Smart Sheet. Applications may not be delivered via the US Postal Service. The RAA says applicants will be evaluated through their demonstrated scholastic achievement, work, extracurricular or community activities, the strength of their faculty recommendation as well as the power of their career essay. Additional information is available by contacting cravez@raa.org, the RAA’s membership, operations and meetings manager.