Most regional airlines work like that…

You simply are (majority speaking) employed by, and fly for, the regional carrier. You don’t just change employment or uniform etc depending on which route you fly. The regional carrier however often has contracts with other larger airliners, to fly shorter routes. You may fly different liveries and have different callsigns.

For example, if you are employed by Horizon, you will always be flying Dash 8-Q400’s that are fully painted in the Alaska livery (with the small ‘horizon’ annotation) and using the ‘Alaska Horizon’ callsign, however you are employed by Horizon.

Another example, in Australia, Cobham Aviation is actually contracted by Qantas, to operate under the name ‘QantasLink’ and own/lease each of the 20 Boeing 717s that are flown with the QantasLink branding and painted in the livery. Eastern airlines and Sunstate airlines also operate other aircraft which are painted in the QantasLink livery and now use the ‘Q-Link’ callsign.

I think marketing and financial backing plays a big part. Everyone knows The big airlines, they have a reputation, they have frequent flyer programs etc. if you can book it on a major airlines website and the aircraft is painted in their colours, people will fly on it.

I was going to say you probably mostly apply and work for a specific airline but i think sometimes they loan pilots to other companies but i don’t think it’s a request thing i think they do it on a as need basis im surprised how much I’ve forgotten my step mom used to work for a major airline for many years and knows quite a bit i love to ask her questions all the time some things she doesn’t know if course but she knows much more than i expected for working in call centers they still have to know all the ffa rules ect it’s a very interesting industry…

Yes. Airlines like, Skywest, republic, shuttle america, mesa, gojet, compass, trans states, express jet. Are the regional airlines. They have their own uniforms this own policies and procedures and fly for all 3 of the majors; Delta, American, United. Airlines like PSA, Envoy, Piedmont (American Airlines Wholly Owned), Endeavour (Delta Wholly Owned) and Horizon (Alaska Wholly Owned) fly strictly for those carriers. They’re policies and procedures typically fall similar to the mainline carrier and their uniforms typically match the mainline company and most have “flow through” agreements to the mainline carrier in seniority order. So they go to the mainline carrier when their number is called basically no interview no questions asked. Pilots at Skywest or any of the other above stated regionals usually fly their trips for the same airline, so say my trip on jan 4 starts as an American eagle trip it will usually stay that way through the whole trip. My next one on Jan 11 could be a United trip, and that will usually start that way for the whole 4 day trip. So you could feasibly fly for all 3 airlines that month while wearing the same uniform and using the same callsign. Each airline has its perks and difference when it comes to working for them. If you are looking for a job or need advice please do not hesitate to PM me.

Great day guys

Safe flying