Fellow classic film aficionados of Frederick and beyond will be jumping for joy for the silver screen revival of two classic comedy masterpieces with legendary brothers.

The Weinberg Center For the Arts presents: The Marx Brothers’ double-feature festival with “Duck Soup” (1933) and “A Night at the Opera” (1935)

The Weinberg Center for the Arts, in conjunction with Wonder Book & Video and Tenth Ward Distilling Co. will present their big-screen double-feature revival of two classic Marx Brothers silver screen comedy masterpieces; “Duck Soup” (1933) and “A Night at the Opera” (1935) this Sun., Nov. 3. The Weinberg’s double-feature twinset of classic Marx Brothers comedy masterpieces will begin at 2 p.m. (local time). This is part of the theater’s resurrection of their “Cinema Club Film Series.”

According to previous information that was posted on “Silver Screen Reflections,” the Weinberg had planned on showcasing the Marx Brothers’ double-feature presentation of “Duck Soup” and “A Night at the Opera” for Jan. 2016 as both features were not shown in chronological order. The aforementioned Jan. 2016 screening was cancelled by the cinema venue at the last minute without advanced warning to the public.

Who was in “Duck Soup” (1933)?

Original 1933 Paramount Pictures theatrical trailer for The Marx Brothers in “Duck Soup.”

Directed by veteran film director Leo McCarey, the players who were in the Marx Brothers’ “Duck Soup” were Groucho Marx (as Rufus T. Firefly), Harpo Marx (as Pinky), Chico Marx (as Chicolini), Zeppo Marx (as Bob Roland; this marked Zeppo’s last feature film appearance with his brothers; Zeppo also worked as an inventor and helped the Allied effort during World War II on developing a special clamp device for careful transportation of atomic bombs on the “Enola Gay” aircraft; according to A&E Biography); Margaret Dumont (as Mrs. Gloria Teasdale; Dumont was credited by Groucho as the “fifth Marx Brother” due to her numerous appearances with the Marxes in the majority of their feature comedies, according to IMDB), Raquel Torres (as Vera Marcal), Louis Calhern (as Ambassador Trentino), Edmund Breese (as Zander) Leonid Kinskey (as the Sylvanian agitator) Edgar Kennedy (as the lemonade vendor, Kennedy was also known for his RKO Radio Pictures short comedies) and Charles B. Middleton (as the prosecutor).

This was the Marxes’ final feature for Paramount Pictures, according to Mark Frankel’s article on “Duck Soup” for Turner Classic Movies’ website.

Who was in “A Night at the Opera” (1935)?

Original 1935 Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer theatrical trailer for The Marx Brothers in “A Night at the Opera,” featuring the Marxes’ famous take/spoof on the famed MGM “Leo” lion opening trademark.

Directed by veteran director Sam Wood, in addition to Groucho Marx (as Otis B. Driftwood), Harpo Marx (as Tomasso), Chico Marx (as Fiorello) and Margaret DuMont (as Mrs. Claypool); the players who appeared in the Marxes’ “A Night at the Opera” were Allan Jones (Jones later appeared in the 1940 Universal–Edward A. Sutherland production of “One Night in the Tropics;” which marked the Universal film debut of Bud Abbott and Lou Costello), Kitty Carlisle (as Rosa Castaldi, Carlisle went onto greater fame as a game show panelist on three Mark Goodson–Bill Todman/CBS television game shows, “I’ve Got a Secret,” “What’s My Line?” and “To Tell the Truth”), Walter Woolf King (as Rudolfo Lassparri), Sig Ruman (as Herman Gottlieb), Edward Keane (as the captain of the ship) and Robert Emmett O’Connor (as Police Sgt. Henderson).

This marked the first feature for the Marx Brothers as a trio and the Marxes’ first film for Metro-Goldwyn Mayer through the efforts of studio production executive Irving Thalberg, according to Rob Nixon’s article on “A Night at the Opera” for TCM’s website.

But wait! There’s more!

Before the show, the Weinberg will hold a “Marx Brothers Costume/Look-A-Like” contest with prizes for the best representation/impersonation of Groucho, Harpo, Chico or Zeppo; along with a post-film discussion according to the official Weinberg site!

From “Freedonia” to Frederick and beyond! Be sure to watch the Weinberg Center’s silver screen double-feature tribute to the Marx Brothers with “Duck Soup” (1933) and “A Night at the Opera” (1935) this Sun.!

Laugh along with Groucho, Harpo, Chico, Zeppo (“Duck Soup”), Margaret and several familiar faces by seeing the Weinberg Center’s silver screen masterpiece revival screening of the Marxes’ “Duck Soup” (1933) and “A Night at the Opera” (1935) this Sun. in Frederick! A classic big-screen double feature treat for all classic cinema and classic comedy aficionados in Frederick and beyond! You will not want to miss out on seeing “Duck Soup” (1933) and “A Night at the Opera” (1935) on the big screen! Highly recommended! You will not be disappointed!

The Weinberg Center For the Arts presents: The Marx Brothers’ double-feature festival with “Duck Soup” (1933) and “A Night at the Opera” (1935)

Both films start Sun., Nov. 3 at 2 p.m. (local time) with pre-show Marx Brothers “costume” contest & happy hour event (one hour before the show) and post-show film discussion.

The Weinberg Center for the Arts

20 W. Patrick St.

Frederick, Maryland 21701

Phone & Additional Ticket Info: (301)-600-2828

General Admission Ticket Prices:

Standard: $7

Military/Students/Children/Senior Citizens/Frederick Arts Center council members: $5

Employees of The City of Frederick (Maryland): $4

A flashback “Silver Screen Reflections” article on the planned Jan. 2016 Weinberg double-feature screening of The Marx Brothers’ “Duck Soup” & “A Night at the Opera,” originally written/published in Dec. 2015 as part of a Hood College online journalism blog with two fellow Hood College alums! Note: The Jan. 2016 Marx Bros. double feature was cancelled at the last minute without advanced warning to audiences.

In connection to the Weinberg’s “The Marx Brothers” double-feature festival of “Duck Soup” (1933) & “A Night at the Opera” (1935):

“Duck Soup” (1933) is also available in Universal’s multi-film Blu-Ray and DVD anthology set of the Marx Brothers’ Paramount comedies, “The Marx Brothers’ Silver Screen Collection.” The 1933 Marx Brothers-Paramount feature is also available in Universal’s multi-film classic DVD comedy anthology set of classic select pre-1948 Paramount and Universal comedies, “Classic Comedy Spotlight Collection.” “Duck Soup” is also available on DVD through Universal (as part of MCA’s 1958 acquisition of the majority of pre-1948 Paramount sound features for television and re-issue rights; which led to MCA’s 1962 purchase of U.S. Decca Records and along with Decca, Universal Studios).-C.H.

“A Night at the Opera” (1935) is also available on DVD and digital streaming through participating video-on-demand/streaming providers through Warner Bros. Home Entertainment (part of Warners’ ownership of the Turner Entertainment/pre-1986 MGM film, TV, cartoon and short subject holdings; Warner Media/the former Time Warner merged with Ted Turner’s media/cable properties in 1996; Turner purchased the aforementioned classic MGM holdings around summer 1986 after his brief ownership of MGM). -C.H.

Take the poll:

Questions/comments about The Marx Brothers, “Duck Soup” (1933), “A Night at the Opera” (1935) and/or the Weinberg’s Sun. “Marx Brothers” double-feature festival in Frederick? Drop a line in the comments section!