Some places have histories that far outweigh their size. Handsome little Tournai, on the River Escaut in the southern province of Hainaut, is just such an example.

The fact that it’s the only Belgian city ever to have belonged to England – under Henry VIII – makes it remarkable enough, but when you also factor in its artistic heritage, its medieval importance, its fine period architecture and its many wartime connections, a picture emerges of the significance of this pretty country town.

You don’t need to be here long to notice Tournai’s rich past. In past centuries it formed part of a flourishing district famed for its stone-cutters, its wool industry, its grand buildings and its magnificent wall tapestries.

More impressive still, as the 5th-century birthplace of Clovis, the legendary first King of the Franks, it once formed the heart of an empire roughly the size of modern France and was the capital of the French kings before Paris.

For those with an interest in the Middle Ages, the city therefore holds a huge amount of interest. Tournai’s connection with the Tudors makes for an intriguing back story – half a millennium ago it was one of the wealthiest bishoprics in northern Europe, becoming the subject of a forceful English occupation that lasted from 1513-1519.

In consequence, none other than Thomas Wolsey was once the bishop of Tournai and there’s still an appropriately stocky fortress named Tour Henri VIII.

Joining the cathedral on the World Heritage list, meanwhile, is Belgium’s oldest belfry, a restored free-standing bell tower that offers a sweeping view across town – ample reward for climbing its 250-plus steps. The tower is a further example of the city’s bold, inventive architecture. Extraordinary artistic endeavour is something of a Tournai stock-in-trade, in fact.

A glittering roll call of late medieval painters hailed from the city, among them Jacques Daret, Roger de la Pasture (who found fame under the name Rogier van der Weyden) and the great Robert Campin, known as the Master of Flémalle.

Close to the city centre you’ll also find an excellent Museum of Fine Arts, designed by Belgian art nouveau maestro Victor Horta and housing works by Brueghel, Rubens, Manet, Seurat and Van Gogh, among others.

Contemporary Tournai has a broad Grand Place which serves as the hub of city affairs

Its geographical significance is well illustrated by the fact that the first two British airmen to be killed on active service, 2nd Lieut Vincent Waterfall and Lieut Charles Bayly, who perished at nearby Marcq-Lez-Enghien on August 22, 1914, are buried here in Tournai. They were both 23.

The battlefields of Flanders and the Western Front might these days be the sites most readily associated with the Great War, but it was the citadel towns of Wallonia that witnessed the first action of the conflict.

By chance, it was the first time the British military had fought in western Europe since the Battle of Waterloo almost a century earlier, which itself had also taken place in what is today Wallonia. Both campaigns saw huge sacrifice. The well-tended cemetery at Tournai has 689 Commonwealth burials from the First World War alone, with some 645 of these graves belonging to British soldiers.

Being occupied for more than four consecutive years, Tournai became an important base for the resistance movement throughout the conflict. It was during the final stages of the war, however, that the city played arguably its most significant role.

The Museum of Fine Arts houses works by Brueghel, Rubens and Van Gogh

After meticulous restoration, the city remains attractive despite the bombs of both the First and Second World Wars. This year marks the centenary of the Great War (and next year the bicentenary of Waterloo) and also signifies 70 years since both the Liberation of Brussels and the start of the Battle of the Bulge in 1944.

Wallonia suffered widespread aerial damage during the Second World War and Tournai didn’t escape – the fact that its squares, bridges and buildings are today such a central part of its appeal makes it all the more remarkable as a visitor destination.

As in common with many Belgian cities, contemporary Tournai has a broad Grand Place which serves as the hub of city affairs (interestingly, a lane just off this main square holds a monument to a local man named Roger Delannay, a 24-year-old Belgian pilot who was the first of his countrymen to be killed in the Second World War).

For modern-day visitors, the Grand Place is the ideal spot to settle into a café – preferably with a local Brunehaut or Dupont beer – and enjoy the city’s fascinating charms.

In true national style, it’s also very easy to eat well. There are some fine bistros and restaurants around the city, while those with an eye for serious gastronomy can choose to head slightly out of town, where the double Michelin-starred Château du Mylord sits in landscaped gardens.

On a cultural note, meanwhile, Tournai also sits close to the superb Château de Beloeil, a 14th-century residence in 25 hectares of parkland that has been dubbed “the Belgian Versailles”. As with so much about the city and its surrounding region, it’s nothing if not rich in history.

Go to visittournai.be and belgiumtheplaceto.be or call 020 7531 0390 for information

Prize draw: win a short break in Belgium

Visit the First World War Centenary homepage or discover more of Belgium below:

• The Battle of Waterloo ‘defined European history’

• Remembrance tours in Liège