Tournai, known as Tornacum in Roman times, was an important crossing place on the Roman road from Cologne on the Rhine to Boulogne on the coast. As the Roman limes were withdrawn to the string of outposts along the road, Maximian fortified it. A Salian Frank took possession of it in 432. The Frankish empire was centered in Tournai during the reign of Childeric I, whose tomb was discovered there in 1653. Paris became the center of power in 486 under Clovis. As a result, Eleutherius, a native of Tournai, became bishop of the newly created diocese of Tournai, which encompassed most of the area west of the Scheldt. The County of Flanders was established in Tournai by Charles the Bald, the first king of Western Francia and still to become Holy Roman Emperor.

As a result of the Treaties of Verdun (843) and Meerssen (870), Tournai remained in the western part of the Frankish empire, which became France in 987. During the 11th century, the city became one of the fastest-growing cities in the Low Countries because of its woolen cloth industry based on English wool, which soon attracted wealthy merchants. 1030 marked the beginning of an ambitious rebuilding project for the cathedral. Following the commune’s independence from the local counts in 1187, the city became directly subordinate to the French Crown as the seigneurie de Tournaisis. It replaced an earlier wooden structure with a stone bridge over the Scheldt in 1290.

Cathédrale Notre-Dame de Tournai

One of two UNESCO-listed monuments on Grand Place, Tournai Cathedral is a magnificent blend of Romanesque and Gothic architecture.

Grand Place

Tournai’s triangular main square was outside the city walls some 2,000 years ago. This expansive area was originally a Gallo-Roman cemetery, becoming a marketplace only during the Carolingian era, around the 8th century, when European trade revived

Belfry

One of 56 belfries in France and Belgium with UNESCO World Heritage status, the 72-meter freestanding bell tower on Grand Place is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. In addition to spotting attacking enemies, the building also looked for city fires.

Musée d’Histoire Naturelle de Tournai

Built-in 1839 on the site of the former Abbey of Saint-Martin, which was dissolved in 1797, the museum has been housed in a Neoclassical building ever since. Barthélemy du Mortier, a leading botanist and politician patronized the museum in its early years, making it the first public museum in Belgium.

Maison Tournaisienne

This museum, housed in a 17th-century house near Grand Place, tells the story of Tournai’s inhabitants. All walks of life are covered, from the nobility to the orphans of Tournai.

Museum of Fine Arts

Built on the site of the Abbey of Saint-Martin in 1928, this art museum was designed by famed Art Nouveau architect Victor Horta. Designed after the theft of the Mona Lisa from the Louvre in 1911, the building has the shape of a turtle or flying squirrel, with radiating rooms convergent on the sculpture hall, allowing a single guard to view the entire building at once.

Église Saint-Jacques

Built in the 12th century for pilgrims, this church on Rue du Palais Saint-Jacques was enlarged in the 13th and 14th centuries in a transitional style unique to Tournai.

Musée de la Tapisserie de Tournai

Tournai was a significant center for tapestry weaving in the 15th and 16th centuries, and this museum in a handsome Neoclassical townhouse offers some stunning examples.

Hôtel de Ville

Tournai’s city hall sits beside the Museum of Fine Arts in a lovely formal park with an exciting history. As the Benedictine Abbey of Saint-martin’s residential palace, this Neoclassical building was completed in 1763.

Église Saint-Quentin

This Romanesque church stands out among the gabled buildings on the west end of Grand Place with its bare, castle-like facade. St. Quentin’s Church grew up in the 12th century, connected to Grand Place’s Gallo-Roman cemetery.

All our Gift Baskets contain well-known trademarks products

Selecting only the finest brands, no supermarket food brands because we believe gift baskets should be something special

We test all wines and foods before we put them in our gifts

All our wines are tested and approved by the management and the staff (no, we’re not constantly drunk, but a glass or two of wine is perfect for inspiration)

Branded gifts

Walwater Gifts may offer branded gifts. We can customize the entire gift with your company logo, name, ribbons, and more

Additional gifts available – add ons

We understand that we cannot always fit all needs which is why we offer additional gifts for each gift basket in our range. Add as many bottles of wine, Teddy bears or other gifts with no extra shipping charges – personalize it! And we have free cards!

Gift baskets for every occasion

SendGiftsInEurope offers gifts & gift baskets for every holiday and occasion in Europe