I love my Kindle Oasis for reading, but unfortunately it’s not great for technical books as you often need to click on a link or do a quick web search, so I’m thinking about getting an iPad.

Anyone use one for reading programming books? Which one have you got and how do you find it?

I am currently considering the iPad mini, iPad Air, and the 11" iPad Pro (the 12" is too bulky/heavy for reading for long periods from what I’ve heard from youtubers).

Anyone have any thoughts?

Pinging @herminiotorres and @jamiedumont as I know you both have iPads

I have the 11” pro, not the newest one but the one before that. Reading programming books, docs etc is the thing i use it for most though I do use it for other things as well. I find it to be really good for this task since it can render the graphics and diagrams nicely, support any format, easily open links, bring up docs/book side by side in split view, weighs less than most of the books I have in dead tree format…

In general unless you have a really good reason, I would be inclined to go for the Air rather than the Pro. For this kind of use case (and realistically most use cases) the pro doesn’t add enough to justify the extra cost. I would however recommend picking up the (2nd gen) pencil, it is great for notes, highlighting stuff or quickly sketching and it feels really nice to use. For me the mini is a bit on the small side for this kind of content, it is purely subjective where the size trade off is right for any person though. I like the size being similar to that of a normal printed page.

If you also want to do some heavier image editing (affinity photo and designer are great), video editing or get into some of the audio tools then you might start to see the benefits of the Pro, it is a pretty awesome bit of kit but it is also fairly hard to use to its fullest other than with these kinds of apps.

Those are my thoughts. If you can go into a store and play around with them for a little bit that might help a lot. You spend a lot of time holding the device so getting a feel for the sizes and weights directly is a good idea.

Hey AstonJ,

The 11" iPad Pro, it will feed your needs for most occasions.

In another side, the 12.9" iPad Pro when you like to split the display in a half, and for one side pick something to watch or read, and for another half put it on an app to take notes, the 12.9" iPad fits a bit better, or even writing something, and just quickly use the virtual keyboard a big and fat screen always gone help.

Also, for traveling or take it to be on your side wherever you go, the 11" it was the best. Besides, active the sidecar when you are traveling, the 12.9" seems a good second display for your MacBook.

I chose the 11" it is lighter you said. And I use it so much to taken my notes and read books and articles as well.