I have an iPad Air theoretically coming soon (ordered like a month ago… estimate delivery was any time from two days ago to July 6 ) and was thinking about doing some reading on it. Interested in purchasing books, but especially comics.

I’m sitting around thinking about and waffling whether I’m interested in using Kindle, Apple Books, or something else to read stuff. It’s been kind of fun to obsess over, but I’m curious about everyone’s thoughts here.

Seems like Apple Books, while beautiful to look at, is very barebones and content is more expensive. Kindle is pretty ugly, but seems to have a lot of cool features.

What do you use to read stuff?

I prefer Apple Books for non-fiction, but also use a Kindle Paperwhite if Kindle the only option.

I recently replaced my venerable iPhone 6 Plus and use it mostly for books and music now.

I prefer ePub books. For “serious” reading I use my iPad and Apple Pencil, or my MacBook Air.

I read a lot of books via Overdrive’s library app Libby, especially on the iPhone 6 Plus.

Amazon is often a necessity for purchases since I can’t drive, but I buy ebooks from Kobo. I don’t like a lot about Amazon’s ebook history.

I used to use Apple Books a lot, but switched to a Kindle paper white for a few reasons. 1) I have a 13-inch iPad, so it is a bit heavy to read in bed at the end of the day. 2) The kindle doesn’t tempt me with any notifications or other distractions. 3) Exporting notes and highlights from Kindle is better than from Apple Books. 4) I like the Kindle community highlight feature. 5) I have no problem bringing the Kindle with me to the beach. I never bring my iPad to the beach.

I was kinda forced onto Kindle by Amazon’s clever pricing schemes. I try to avoid it and often pay a few dollars more for a hard copy of a book I need. I don’t know how Apple books are but Kindle is still very poor regarding illustrations and diagrams. I have a biochemistry book on Kindle that I had to buy a hard copy of anyway because the rendering of diagrams is so bad, comics I think would not be very good on Kindle.

However I am now tied into it really, to my anger, with maybe 200 + books on it that are professional for want of a better word. I never read fiction now.

I really don’t know Apple Books very well as a consequence. I don’t remember being impressed by it initially but I haven’t looked at it for some time and I don’t really even know how it works.

Historically I tried both Amazon Kindle and Barnes & Noble Nook so I have a library on each. Wish I had just stuck to one source, probably Kindle.

I use Apple Books only for reading EPUB and PDF books that I am able to purchase without DRM (Digital Rights Management) from sources like Baen, Tor, Take Control, and (in the old days) O’Reilly.

I use it for cross platform sync. I tend to buy my eBooks from Amazon and then use the magic of Calibre and plugins to allow me to convert them to ePub. I then drop them in to Books on my Mac and can then read them on my iPad.

However, I recently purchased a Kobo Libra and have been doing a fair amount of reading on that, rather than my beloved iPad Mini - in part as others have said, because it’s less distracting. However, I think after some use, I’ll continue to read non-fiction on Apple Books because the notes sync between devices easier and I can make the notes easier. Using the eInk screen for it is a bit of a pain.

I get my books from a variety of sources and do exactly the same thing so I can read epubs using my beloved Marvin app on my iPhone and iPad. I’m on the hunt for a decent epub reader for my Mac that isn’t Apple books, which just don’t like at all. The reading experience is fine, but it’s too focussed on its store, doesn’t have tags, and doesn’t allow any editing of metadata and the like. (I’m currently flipflopping between Clearview, Clearview X, and Yomu, none of which have everything I need.) I use PDF Expert for PDFs on both my Mac and my iPad.

In my fantasy life, Marvin isn’t abandonware; has both iOS and macOS versions; handles epubs, PDFs, and comics; with bookmarks, highlights, and notes for every format. That or the long promised Readwise Reader emerges from beta.