‘Paddarai’ Online Webinar provides the opportunity to the Media Studies students to access the well-known film personalities, film directors, cinematographers, film critics, and the film academics from May 16th to August 29th, 2020.

Altogether 30 lectures were conducted on every Saturdays and Sundays from 7 p.m. to 9 p.m. by the organization of ‘Paddarai’, which works under the guidance of Mr. Subas, A Cinema Activist and Short Film Director from Norway.

‘Paddarai’ is a independent film movement which aims to promote the young film makers and the students who are living in Sri Lanka to acquire worldwide exposure in filmmaking and enhance the knowledge by update the developments in film relevant sectors.

Mr. Prasanna Vithanage (Film Director), Mr. Gnanadas Kasinathar (Short Film Director, Cinema Activist and Script Writer), Ms. Bavaneedha Loganathan (Short Film Director and Television Presenter), Mr. Pratheepan Selvarasa (Cinematographer and Short Film Director), Mr. Lenin M Sivam (Film Producer and Director), Mr. Gunaa Kaviyazhahan (Writer), Mr. Balaji Sakthivel (Film Director), Mr. Vijay Milton (Cinematographer), Mr. Nalan Kumarasamy (Film Director), Mr. Nazar (Actor), Mr. Mathi Sutha (Film Director, Production Designer and Cinema Activist), Dr. Swarnavel Eswaran (Associate Professor in Film Studies, Michigan State University, USA), Dr. S. Raguram (Head / Senior Lecturer, Department of Media Studies, University of Jaffna), Kalki Subramaniam (Writer, Actor and Gender Activist), Mr. Arun Karthik (Freelance Film Director), Mr. Somitharan (Documentary Filmmaker), Mr. Vijay Sethupathi (Actor), Mr. Kanal Kannan (Stunt Master) and Mr. Tamiliam Subas (Short Film Director and Cinema Activist) were some of the resource persons participated in the Webinar.

Students of Media Studies were actively participated in the series of lectures and discussions and played vital roles in organizing Webinar as In – Charge of Activities – Ms. Kunthavi Sivabalan, Programme Officer – Ms. Pirainila Krishnarajah (Media Studies Alumnae) and, Film Analysts – Ms. Dhulaparani, Ms. Kamjini, Ms. Suvanya and Ms. Luxana throughout the 30 days.