DALLAS — The Dallas Mavericks won the bidding Friday to obtain two-time All-Star forward Elton Brand off waivers, the latest in a series of moves to build their roster after a frustrating start in free agency.

Brand was available after the Philadelphia 76ers this week used the one-time amnesty provision in the new CBA to let him go and not have the $18.1 million he is owed in the final season of his five-year deal count against their salary cap or luxury tax.

Dallas also completed a one-year deal with 7-foot center Chris Kaman, who had tweeted two days earlier that he reached an agreement with the Mavericks.

A year after winning their first NBA title, the Mavericks couldn't sway Deron Williams to come play for his hometown team. Williams stayed with the Nets for their move to Brooklyn and signed his new deal early Wednesday, the first day new deals could be finalized.

Plus, guards Jason Kidd and Jason Terry are leaving Dallas in free agency.

The Mavs acquired point guard Darren Collison and wing player Dahntay Jones from Indianapolis in a trade Thursday for center Ian Mahinmi.

Brand will still get the full $18.1 million he is owed, with Philadelphia paying any difference. Any team under the salary cap was eligible to bid for the 6-foot-9 forward.

The winning bid wasn't revealed by the Mavericks. ESPN, citing anonymous sources, reported it was $2.1 million.

Brand was the top overall pick out of Duke in the 1999 draft by Chicago and has played 860 career games with the Bulls, Los Angeles Clippers and Philadelphia. He was an All-Star in 2002 and 2006.

His career averages are 18.3 points and 9.4 rebounds while shooting 50 percent from the field. Last season, he averaged 11.0 points and 7.2 rebounds in 60 games with the 76ers.

Kaman averaged 13.1 points and 7.7 rebounds in 47 games with the New Orleans Hornets last season. He played the first eight seasons of his career with the Los Angeles Clippers, and has averaged 11.9 points and 8.3 rebounds in 540 career games.

Kaman was on the German national team during the 2008 Olympics and was a teammate of Dirk Nowitzki.

Dallas this week designated 7-foot center Brendan Haywood as its amnesty player. Haywood is set to make $8.2 million next season and is due $27 million over the final three guaranteed years in his deal.