Notes: His name was written and then crossed out on the 1890 veteran census form (because he was a Confederate soldier). He served in the Confederate army for three months. “Shot through leg” is listed as a service-related disability [1890 Census]. “William enlisted in Company E of the 8th Georgia Volunteer Infantry Regiment in May of 1861. He was present at First Manassas, Va.; Gettysburg, Pa., where he was wounded; and Camp Winder Hospital, Richmond, Va., both as a nurse and patient. William J. Andrews mustered in as a private with the ‘Miller Rifles,’ Company E (Capt. Towers’ Company) of the 8th Georgia Infantry, on May 14, 1861. Military records show he was present at First Manassas in July 1861 and at the siege of Yorktown in April and May 1862. He was detailed as a nurse to the General Hospital, Camp Winder (Division 4), Richmond, from May 24, 1862 through Feb. 9, 1863. He participated in the siege of Suffolk, Virginia in April and May 1863 and then was part of the Gettysburg Campaign. William was wounded on July 2, 1863 in the Rose Woods near the wheat field at Gettysburg. He took a mini-ball in the left leg, fracturing the tibia, and was ‘captured’ by the Union Army on July 5. William stayed at Camp Letterman General Hospital in Gettysburg until October, then transferred to Baltimore, Maryland. He was paroled and sent to City Point, Virginia, and returned to Camp Winder, Richmond, this time as a patient. He was furloughed on Dec. 24, 1863, and did not return to active duty. Although the doctors saved the leg, it caused him pain and trouble the rest of his life” [FGC].

Notes: He was “ a Utah pioneer of 1847 . . . when but two years of age. . . . In 1851 he became one of the pioneer ‘Mormon’ settlers of San Bernardino, Cal., and was among its leaders in subjugating that part of California to the needs of the people, building mills and aiding in many ways in the development of the resources of the country. When [the] San Bernardino settlement was broken up in 1858, owing to the Johnston Army [Utah War] troubles, the Crismons . . . returned to Utah. . . . At the age of fifteen he brought a drove of sheep from the Missouri river across the plains and mountains to G.S.L. [Great Salt Lake] Valley. . . . In 1862, when Pres. Lincoln called for volunteers from Utah, Bro. Crismon enlisted in Lot Smith’s company which went out to protect the mail route from the Indians, leaving Salt Lake City May 1, 1862, destined for Chimney Rock. Later Charles Crismon turned his attention to sheep raising. He went to California and brought a drove of sheep from that State to Utah in 1863. In addition to the sheep he also brought with him a quantity of bees which are said to be the first bees introduced into Utah. . . . Bro. Crismon successfully undertook the business of railroad contracting. . . . [He] is also known as a successful mining man. . . . Bro. Crismon is universally known for his generosity and good will toward his fellowman” [LDSBE, 2:611–12] [PPMU, 828]. He was one of the earliest Lot Smith Utah Cavalry veterans to join the Grand Army of the Republic. For additional information, see the Alford chapter entitled “Mormons and the Grand Army of the Republic” herein.

Notes: Brother-in-law to LDS Church President Joseph F. Smith; he and Joseph F. Smith married sisters Melissa J. and Julina L. Lambson, respectively [PPMU, 995]. “Bishop Center Ward. City Councilman” [PPMU, 283]. “His parents joined the Church in 1851 and emigrated with their children to Utah that same year. . . . In the spring of 1862 he went east as a member of the expedition sent out to guard the mail lines under Lot Smith. . . . Again the spring of 1865 he crossed the plains. . . . On their return trip they had an encounter with the Indians about twenty miles west of Fort Laramie, during which several men were wounded and one woman was carried away by the Indians. . . . He left his home [for a mission to the Sandwich Islands, January 1885 to March 1887]. . . . While on this mission he with others witnessed a miraculous healing in the case of a little girl, a daughter of Elder Geo. A. Wilcox, who had accidentally taken a quantity of strychnine. The accident was not discovered until the child was in a dying condition. The Elders administered to her and she was instantly healed. . . . He was ordained a patriarch by Jos. F. Smith” and was a bishop and an ordinance worker in the Salt Lake Temple [LDSBE, 2:410–11].

Notes: His Confederate and Union military service was under his birth name, “William H. Norman.” Following desertion from the Union Army in 1865, he changed his name to “John Eugene Davis” and lived by that name the remainder of his life (Gerald Davis (grandson of John Eugene Davis), interview with Kenneth L. Alford, October 17, 2011, Provo, Utah). The online History of the 1st Confederate Regiment Infantry, Bibb County, “Brown Infantry,” states: “Norman, William H.—Private—July 22, 1861. Discharged by expiration of term of service March 18, 1862. Enlisted as a private in Company A, 1st Confederate Regiment Infantry April 14, 1862. Transferred to 2nd Company E, in 1862. Captured at Nashville, Tennessee December 16, 1864. Mustered into service in Company E, 6th U.S. Infantry March 25, 1865. Deserted therefrom August 3, 1865” (http:// www.ranger95.com/ civil_war/ georgia/ infantry/ rosters/ roster2/ 1st_confed_inf_regt_rost_1st_c.html). John’s obituary, entitled “Funeral Held at Annabella for Civil War Veteran,” states that he was affectionately known as “Uncle John” and that he “was born April 23, 1845, in Bibbs [sic] county, Georgia. When he was sixteen years of age he enlisted in the confederate army under General Robert E. Lee. After the Civil War, in 1867, he came to Utah. Later he went to Pioche, Nevada. . . . There he joined the L.D.S. church. . . . Mr. Davis served as an L.D.S. missionary in the southern states in 1887. He was at one time ward chorister, and served as Sunday school superintendent and ward teacher. He was justice of the peace for many years, and was for a number of years postmaster at Annabella” (Richfield Reaper, May 23, 1935, 5). For additional information, see the Ellsworth-Alford chapter herein.

Notes: Together with his wife, he started one of the first ice cream companies in Salt Lake City, which they called “Evans Union Ice Cream.” The patriotism of the Evans family was evident in the company name and logo. The logo was a red, white, and blue shield which hung on the side of the company wagon that traveled the streets of Salt Lake City (David F. Boone, “The Church and the Civil War,” in Nineteenth-Century Saints at War, ed. Robert C. Freeman [Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, 2006]). His obituary states that “in 1861 he joined a Missouri regiment on the side of the Union and fought three years and three months in the civil war, afterwards returning to Utah” (Deseret News, August 1, 1908, 6). It is claimed that “he was the only man from Utah to return to his own state to enlist. This claim is on record at the Utah State Capital [sic]. For three months, he drilled in the army with a broom handle because the company didn’t have money to buy guns. He was in the Army three years and 13 days. At the battle of Vicksburg, he was wounded in the left leg and was in the hospital for some time. He was honorably discharged in June 1864 and returned to make Utah his home. . . . John Davis [Evans] always said he was born on 4 March 1843. Research has shown this to not be the case. His birth certificate shows his birthdate as 17 March 1841” (http:// evansfamilyhistory.org/ index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=79:evans-john-davis&catid=81&Itemid=131). Several birth dates are listed in [NFS]. For additional information, see the Freeman chapter herein.

Notes: He “came to Utah 1848, Heber C. Kimball Company. Councilor in Presidency of Oneida [Idaho] Stake” [PPMU, 154]. His father was a bishop in Nauvoo, Illinois. He was one of the first settlers of Logan, Utah. He “had the reputation of being the best [horse] rider in the country. . . . On May 1, 1862, Mr. Hale enlisted in the government service in Captain Lot Smith’s command of Utah Volunteers and was appointed wagon-master and assigned to do duty in protecting the mails on the overland route, all the government troops having been called off the plains, leaving the Indians in almost full control and using their opportunity to murder emigrants, burn stage houses, destroy coaches, kill the guards and generally keep up a state of terror throughout the country. The Utah volunteers were used in restraining the savages and preserving order, putting up wires, protecting stage coaches and keeping up as far as possible communication with the east. They enlisted for ninety days, but were kept in service 115 [days]. . . . In April 1890, he was called by the Church to superintend the erection of the Oneida Stake Academy, at Preston [Idaho], to which town his family moved the following July” [LDSBE, 2:168].

Notes: His obituary noted that he was “a veteran of the Civil War” (Salt Lake Herald, December 6, 1909, 23). He “may have been wounded at Meadow Bridge on 12 October 1864. He was present at Appomattox Court House, Virginia, when General Robert E. Lee surrendered to General Ulysses S. Grant of the United States Army. As part of the surrender agreement General Grant allowed the Confederate soldiers to go home as paroled prisoners of war. To ensure their safe travel home each soldier was issued a certificate signed by his commanding officer stating his status as a paroled prisoner of war. . . . John was ordained a Seventy in the LDS church on 16 April 1876, and in 1879 he was elected constable in Payson, Utah, a title he held for several years. John married Fanny Coombs on 23 August 1883 in Salt Lake City and was called to serve a mission in 1887 leaving home on 13 May of that year and arriving at Chattanooga, Tennessee on 19 May 1887. . . . Many LDS missionaries suffered persecution while in the southern states at this time and John mentioned that tensions were often high. . . . John was made president of the North Carolina Conference on 29 October 1887, having responsibility to direct missionary activities in North Carolina. John, as president of the North Carolina Conference, was also placed in charge of helping the members of the church in the area immigrate to Utah. John also had the opportunity to travel to his home county of Franklin, Virginia, and visit many of his old friends and relatives as well as the grave sites of his mother, sisters, and his first wife, Ruth Anna Hill. John wrote of the reverence he felt at the gravesites of his loved ones and ‘how intensified this feeling by the knowledge the gospel brings, by vicorious [sic] work which is a labor of love for us who have the glorious privilege of living in a gospel dispensation.’ . . . He was imprisoned in the Utah State Penitentiary by summer 1889 for unlawful cohabitation [polygamy]. While in prison he kept an autograph book which was signed by fellow prisoners. In order to avoid further persecution from the U.S. government for the practice of plural marriage John moved his family to the Mormon town of Colonia Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico” (John Claiborne Harper Diary, vol. 1, 1887–1888, http:// lib.byu.edu/ digital/ mmd/ diarists/ Harper_John_Claiborne.php).

Notes: “President of the High Priests’ quorum of Bingham Stake, Idaho . . . [had a distant recollection] of hearing Joseph Smith the prophet preach. . . . Joined the Utah militia at the age of sixteen and rendered service in the Johnston ‘war,’ and acted as one of Robert T. Burton’s escort to Governor Cummings [sic]. In response to a call of President Lincoln, Bro. Huffaker became one of the 100 troops to go East to restore the Wells-Fargo stage line which had been broken up by the Indians, and was through the greater part of the ‘Black Hawk war.’ He has done considerable home missionary work and started on a mission to England Oct. 10, 1900, where he spent twenty-seven months in active and useful labor” [LDSBE, 2:54–55]. He “came to Utah in 1847, Jedediah M. Grant company. . . . Member 105th quorum seventies; missionary to England 1900–1902; high priest; home missionary 21 years; acting president high priests of Bingham stake, Idaho, three years; president block teachers. Constable of Summit county [Utah] four years. Took part in Echo Canyon war [Utah War]; Indian war veteran. Farmer and stockraiser” [PPMU, 947]. [PPMU] and [NFS] list birth date as March 19, 1841; [LDSBE] lists March 9, 1841. His obituary, entitled “Veteran of Civil and Indian Wars Dies at Home Here,” states that he was a “pioneer of ’47 and veteran of the Civil and Indian wars” and “commander of [the] Knowlton post of the G.A.R. . . . A native of Illinois, he crossed the plains with Jedediah M. Grant, the Mormon leader, took part in expeditions against the Indians and was assigned to guarding the United States telegraph, stage and mail line between here and Omaha when he entered the Civil war in 1862.” His obituary spells his last name “Huffacker” (Salt Lake Telegram, May 15, 1918, 3). For additional information, see the Ellsworth-Alford chapter herein.

Notes: “20 PA. CAV.” (20th Pennsylvania Cavalry) is carved on his grave marker [FGC]. “He enlisted with the 20th Pennsylvania Cavalry at Philadelphia in February 1864 as a Private. His unit was assigned to Sigel at Martinsburg, West Virginia in March 1864, where they are attached to the 2nd Brigade, 1st Cavalry Division, Department of West Virginia. It was there that Cyrus Irey died on 9 August 1864. I have checked the battle history of the area and there were no battles fought close to the time of Cyrus’ death. The statistics for the 20th Cavalry state that the Regiment lost during service three Officers and twenty-two enlisted men killed and mortally wounded and three Officers and one hundred enlisted men by disease, for a total of one hundred twenty-eight men. It is this author’s conclusion that Cyrus fell ill during an encampment near Halltown. His body had apparently been buried in haste and later moved to its present location. His death is recorded as 9 August 1864 and his burial 20 December 1867. The National Cemetery to honor the Civil War dead [at Grafton] was established in 1867 and thousands of known and unknown soldiers were moved from their original burial locations to that cemetery. After his death the word came back to California, and his estate was probated by the San Francisco Superior Court, Index Cyrus Irey record # 4040, Register 6, page 95. The records were lost during the San Francisco fires that occurred after the earthquake of 1906” (Richard Bullock, e-mail to editor, September 19, 2011; see also LDS Family History Library, Salt Lake City, microfilm 1000133). He sailed to Yerba Buena (San Francisco), California, with Samuel Brannon and other Latter-day Saints on board the ship Brooklyn. Presumed to be LDS [SBS]. The “Sons of the Utah Pioneers—Utah, Pioneer Companies” database at Ancestry.com lists his last name as “Irea.”

Notes: [MLM] “He lost both parents when he was quite young. . . . When the Civil War broke out, he joined the Southern army and served under General Price. He was in the battle of Boonville, June 17, 1861, and in a number of engagements later. Being captured in battle Dec. 19, 1861, he was taken to Gratiot Street prison and later to Alton, but was finally paroled in the spring of 1862 and commenced reading law. In 1865 he came to Utah. . . . Becoming a convert to ‘Mormonism,’ he was baptized in May 1866.” Following the war, he served a mission to the Southern states (1868–70) and baptized 108 converts. After his mission, he moved to Provo, Utah, in 1870 and taught at Brigham Young Academy for one year. In 1871, he moved to Payson, Utah, to teach school. In 1872, he moved to Nephi, Utah, where he served as school superintendent and justice of the peace. In 1876, he moved to Salt Lake City and taught school. In 1879, he was elected county superintendent in Salt Lake County. In 1885, he became principal of Ogden High School in Ogden, Utah, where he remained for twelve years. In August 1894, he was appointed as the territorial commissioner of public schools. “He exhibited the characteristics of a fine cultured Southern gentleman of the noblest type of his Virginian ancestors” [LDSBE, 3:148–50]. He was “sustained as one of the First Seven Presidents Oct. 8, 1882, at age 38; on Oct. 9, when he was to be set apart, he reported that he was already a high priest, so he was not set apart and did not function” in that position (2012 Church Almanac [Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 2012], 117–18). The [MLM] tag is warranted because several Confederate soldiers with the name Theodore Lewis are listed on [NPS].

Notes: “During the war of the Rebellion, which broke out when he was eighteen years of age, he joined the Union army, and served with honor and distinction, participating in several of the most important battles. Coming to Utah at the close of the war, he was soon engaged as an instructor in the University, when that institution was conducted in the Council House, Salt Lake City” [LDSBE, 1:204]. He enlisted in the Union army on September 6, 1862, and served until June 28, 1865. His unit fought in numerous battles across Kentucky, Tennessee, Georgia, and Alabama, including Chickamauga, Chattanooga, and Atlanta. From the date of his enlistment until August 15, 1863, his unit pursued and eventually defeated the Confederate General John Hunt Morgan (of Morgan’s Raiders fame), who was John Hamilton Morgan’s fourth cousin. Several of his Civil War letters have survived. On December 21, 1863, for example, he wrote: “A mother’s love is not purchased by either gold or diamonds; in camp, on the march, the bloody field of strife or the chill bivouac—the soldier’s veneration for his mother remains the same. Falling on the blood drenched battlefield or stricken down by sickness, his last words are invariably: My mother—My Country! Often I have seen an unbidden tear spring to the eye of the rough soldier who had braved death in a thousand different shapes; whose cheek was unblanched and nerve steady amid the roar of battle; whose voice was as clear and ringing on a charge as the bravest of the brave—I have seen such men moved to tears on receiving a simple short letter from a mother.”

He was recognized for bravery during the battle for Selma, Alabama, on April 2, 1865. An account of the battle written by Captain Owen Wiley (the Regiment’s commanding officer) reported: “It is unnecessary to make particular mention of either officers or men. All did their duty, so deserve the highest praise. Sergt. John Morgan, Company I is deserving of the highest credit for his credit for his gallantry in action in being the first to plant a flag upon the rebel works and for being in the extreme advance until all the rebel forts were captured, planting our colors upon each of them successively.” At the end of the war, he was offered an officer’s commission if he would reenlist, but he declined the offer. He joined the LDS Church after coming to Utah with a herd of cattle. In 1867, he founded the Morgan Commercial and Normal College—Utah’s “first successfully conducted school in Utah for higher education during the period from 1867 to 1875.” Students at Morgan College included Heber J. Grant, Brigham H. Roberts, Ira N. Hinckley, Orson F. Whitney, Ruth May Fox, and J. Golden Kimball. He served as president of the Southern States Mission. Beginning in 1878–79, many of his Southern States converts settled in Manassa, Conejos County, Colorado (where Morgan Street was named in his honor). He was ordained by Wilford Woodruff on October 5, 1884, to serve as one of the First Seven Presidents of the Seventy. Arthur M. Richardson, The Life and Ministry of John Morgan (n.p.: Nicholas G. Morgan Sr., 1965); The War of the Rebellion, series 1, vol. 49, part 1, 454–55; 2012 Church Almanac (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 2012), 118; “Family home, Salt Lake City” [PPMU, 1044]. See also Leon R. Hartshorn, Powerful Stories from the Lives of Latter-day Saint Men (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974). His baptism date is also listed as November 26, 1867 [LDSBE].

Notes: “President of the Weber Stake of Zion from 1877 to 1882. . . . His early years were spent on his parents’ plantation. . . . In 1862 he volunteered and entered the Confederate army of eastern Kentucky. . . . In November 1862, he was baptized by a local Elder, Absolom Young, when the snow was a foot deep and the ice six inches thick. . . . July 18, 1863, while in the army, his residence store and six adjacent houses filled with goods and provisions, property valued at $50,000, were burned to the ground by the Union Army. There was nothing saved and no insurance. After this loss he concluded to go to Utah, and in 1864 he started for the west. . . . The Indians were hostile that year and their train was attacked two or three times, but none of the emigrants were killed. . . . They arrived in Salt Lake City Aug. 31, 1864. . . . June 7, 1882, he was appointed by the Utah Territorial convention as a delegate to Washington, D.C. to labor for the admission of Utah as a State. . . . Mr. Peery was a Virginian of the old school and cherished the courtly traits and traditions of his chivalrous people. His generous hospitality was proverbial throughout the State ” [LDSBE, 1:756–58].

“President 76th quorum seventies; missionary to southern states 1875; member Utah legislature 1878–84” [PPMU, 1094]. His obituary called him “one of Utah’s most prominent citizens” and noted that he lived an “exemplary life of strictest business integrity, a friendship of truest loyalty for those who deserved it.” His lengthy, front-page obituary further notes that “Mr. Peery was zealous in the execution of his religious duties, and he has been strongly identified with church work in Utah. In 1875 he fulfilled a mission to the Southern States and labored in Texas, Tennessee and Virginia. His ability, sincerity and integrity endeared him to the authorities of his church and he possessed the confidence and esteem of Brigham Young. . . . On May 27, 1877, he was chosen by Brigham Young and sustained by the people as President of Weber Stake and continued in that position until October 19, 1882. . . . Like Lincoln he was a man strong with the common people. He had a cordial Virginia manner and treated the poor man equally as warmly and hospitably as the rich. He recognized merit quickly and was a correct and quick judge of character. His is a household name in every settlement in the county, and frequently remarks that he made years ago are quoted. He was strictly honest; his word was his bond, and he has always held the confidence of the community” (Ogden Standard, September 17, 1901, 1). For additional information, see the Ellsworth-Alford and Freeman chapters herein.

Notes: “Lot served his country in the fear of God and with good will to man in the Mormon Battalion. He was, perhaps, the youngest man that bore arms in that military body, being only sixteen years of age. . . . His policy toward the Indians was that of Brigham Young: ‘Feed them, not fight them.’ . . . His dying words were: ‘God bless the wives and children’’’ [LDSBE, 1:803–6]. “Member of the Deseret Militia; defended settlers at Provo against Indians; major of the Utah militia and in charge at the burning of Johnston’s army provision trains on their way to Echo Canyon, Utah” [PPMU, 1169]. He was a pivotal figure during the Utah War (1857–58) and served as the commanding officer of the only active duty military unit to muster and serve from Utah Territory during the Civil War. He served as president of the Little Colorado Stake and Sunset United Order in Sunset, Arizona (near present Winslow, Arizona). He was killed by Navajo Indians in Tuba City, Arizona (June 21,1890). He was reinterred in 1902 at Farmington, Utah (http:// www.media.utah.edu/ UHE/ s/ SMITH,LOT.html). His name is listed as “Lott Smith” on the [1862 MOR]. For additional information, see the Stuart-Alford chapter herein.

Notes: William was the sixth child of Joseph Smith Sr. and Lucy Mack Smith and the younger brother of Joseph Smith Jr., founder and first President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Following his 1830 baptism into the LDS Church, William served as both an Apostle and Patriarch of the Church. His apostleship was revoked on October 5, 1845, and he was excommunicated on October 12, 1845. “By May 1846 he was recognized as a Strangite apostle and patriarch” (Susan Easton Black, Who’s Who in the Doctrine and Covenants [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1997], 300–303). “William Smith, brother of Joseph Smith, Jr., was rebaptized into the LDS Church in 1860 by J.J. Butler. In a letter to Brigham Young, William Smith talked about joining the Saints in Salt Lake. . . . It was not until 9 April 1878 that William Smith was received into fellowship in the RLDS Church. . . . Until his death on 15 November 1893, he was affiliated with that group” (Buddy Youngreen, “Sons of the Martyrs’ Nauvoo Reunion—1860,” BYU Studies 20, no. 4 [Summer 1980: 359n15]). The Illinois Civil War Detail Report database lists the following information regarding his enlistment—residence: Aledo, Clayton County, Iowa; age: 44 (this is clearly in error; whether the clerk recorded it incorrectly or William reported his age incorrectly is unknown); height: 6 feet; hair: dark; eyes: blue; complexion: light; marital status: N/ A; occupation: minister; nativity: Royalton, Vermont. The same database reports his military service record information as follows—joined when: February 25, 1864; joined where: Rock Island, Illinois; joined by whom: LTC Birdsell; period (of enlistment): 3 years; muster in: February 25, 1864; muster in where: Springfield, Illinois; muster in by whom: N/ A; muster out: July 12, 1865; muster out where: Pine Bluff, Arkansas; muster out by whom: LT Hussey (http:// www.cyberdriveillinois.com/ departments/ archives/ datcivil.html). William’s pension application is available online at http:// www.fold3.com/ image/#249|286371. A photograph of his gravesite shows a Grand Army of the Republic veteran marker next to his headstone (http:// bycommonconsent.com/ 2011/ 02/ 08/ cemetourism-william-b-smith-1811%E2%80%931893). His military service can also be confirmed at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), microfilm number M539 roll 84 [NPS].

Notes: “He filled a mission to Europe in 1869–70, and was chosen as first counselor in the Kanab Stake presidency April 18, 1877, being set apart by Orson Pratt” [LDSBE, 4:504]. After a dispute over grazing rights, Spencer was assaulted and had his skull crushed with a rifle butt by First Sergeant Ralph Pike of Camp Floyd’s Company I, 10th Infantry, in 1859 at Skull Valley. Spencer recovered and later accosted Pike in Salt Lake City and shot him. Pike died soon after. “Spencer lived in the Fourth LDS Ward in Great Salt Lake City, and in 1862 joined Col. Lot Smith's Utah volunteer battalion to protect the Overland Mail route against Indian depredations. In 1874, Spencer moved to Kanab in southern Utah to live. His was a life of relative obscurity until August 1888 when U.S. Marshals swooped down on Liberty Park in Salt Lake City to round up a number of Mormon men on warrants charging ‘unlawful cohabitation,’ one of the several legal devices used to nab polygamists. . . . Trial was scheduled for May 6, 1889, before Third District Court Judge J.W. Judd. A 12-member jury, nearly all non-Mormons, was to hear the case. After three days of testimony, the jury brought in a verdict for acquittal. . . . Howard O. Spencer lived to be 80. He died March 4, 1918, after an accidental fall from a bridge in Glendale, Kane County, Utah” (“Is That You, Pike? Feud Between Settlers, Frontier Army Erupts and Simmers for Three Decades,” Salt Lake Tribune, July 2, 1995; and http:// historytogo.utah.gov/ salt_lake_tribune/ in_another_time/ 070295.html).

Notes: His father was Joseph Young, older brother of Brigham Young. Seymour gained his first experience as a cowboy while being exposed to the raids of hostile Indians and white cattle thieves. His family arrived in Salt Lake City in September 1850. His family was some of the early settlers in Cache Valley, Utah. In 1857, he was called to serve as a missionary in Great Britain and was a member of a missionary group who crossed the plains from west to east using handcarts. Following the Civil War, he became a physician. In October 1884, he was called as one of the first seven presidents of the Seventies and became the senior member in 1893. He was active in the Grand Army of the Republic during the last years of his life [LDSBE, 1:200-202] [MDA, 404]. He “became quarantine and city physician of Salt Lake City, and a little later [after 1874], by invitation of Pres. Brigham Young, became his physician and medical advisor, which position he held until Pres. Young’s death, August 29, 1877” [LDSBE, 1:202]. For additional information, see the Alford chapter entitled “Mormons and the Grand Army of the Republic” herein.