Microsoft Bing (commonly known as Bing, and previously MSN Search, Windows Live Search, and Live Search) is a web search engine owned and operated by Microsoft. Bing provides a variety of search services, including web, video, image and map search products. It is developed using ASP.NET.

Bing was unveiled by Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer on May 28, 2009 at the All Things Digital conference in San Diego, California as the replacement for Live Search, and was released on June 3, 2009. Notable new features at the time included the listing of search suggestions while queries are entered and a list of related searches (called "Explore pane") based on semantic technology from Powerset, which Microsoft had acquired in 2008.

On July 29, 2009, Microsoft and Yahoo! announced a deal in which Bing would power Yahoo! Search. All Yahoo! Search global customers and partners made the transition by early 2012.

In 2016, the BitFunnel search engine indexing algorithm and various components of the search engine were made open source by Microsoft. In February 2023, Microsoft launched Bing Chat (later renamed Microsoft Copilot), an artificial intelligence chatbot experience based on GPT-4, integrated directly into the search engine. This was well-received, with Bing reaching 100 million active users by the following month.

As of 2023, Bing holds the position of the second-largest search engine worldwide, commanding a query volume of 12%, trailing Google Search's 79%. Other competitors include Baidu with 5% and Yahoo! Search, which is powered by Bing, with 2%.

History[]

MSN Search[]

MSN Search was a search engine by Microsoft that consisted of a search engine, index, and web crawler. MSN Search first launched in the third quarter of 1998 and used search results from Inktomi. In early 1999, MSN Search launched a version which displayed listings from Looksmart blended with results from Inktomi except for a brief time in 1999 when results from AltaVista were used instead. Since then, Microsoft upgraded MSN Search to provide its own self-built search engine results, the index of which was updated weekly and sometimes daily. The upgrade started as a beta program in November 2004 and came out of beta in February 2005. Image search was powered by a third party called Picsearch. The service also started providing its search results to other search engine portals to better compete in the market.

Windows Live Search[]

The first public beta of Windows Live Search was unveiled on March 8, 2006, with the final release on September 11, 2006 replacing MSN Search. The new search engine used search tabs that include Web, news, images, music, desktop, local, and Encarta.

In the roll-over from MSN Search to Windows Live Search, Microsoft stopped using Picsearch as their image search provider and started performing their own image search, fueled by their own internal image search algorithms.

Live Search[]

On March 21, 2007, Microsoft announced that it would separate its search developments from the Windows Live services family, rebranding the service as Live Search. Live Search was integrated into the Live Search and Ad Platform headed by Satya Nadella, part of Microsoft's Platform and Systems division. As part of this change, Live Search was merged with Microsoft adCenter.

A series of reorganizations and consolidations of Microsoft's search offerings were made under the Live Search branding. On May 23, 2008, Microsoft announced the discontinuation of Live Search Books and Live Search Academic and integrated all academic and book search results into regular search, and as a result this also included the closure of Live Search Books Publisher Program. Soon after, Windows Live Expo was discontinued on July 31, 2008. Live Search Macros, a service for users to create their own custom search engines or use macros created by other users, was also discontinued shortly after. On May 15, 2009, Live Product Upload, a service which allowed merchants to upload products information onto Live Search Products, was discontinued. The final reorganization came as Live Search QnA was rebranded as MSN QnA on February 18, 2009, however, it was subsequently discontinued on May 21, 2009.

Rebrand as Bing[]

Microsoft recognized that there would be a brand issue if the word "Live" remained in the name. As an effort to create a new identity for Microsoft's search services, Live Search was officially replaced by Bing on June 3, 2009.

The Bing name was chosen through focus groups. Microsoft decided that the name was memorable, short, and easy to spell, and that it would function well as a URL around the world. The word would remind people of the sound made during "the moment of discovery and decision making". Microsoft was assisted by branding consultancy Interbrand in their search for the best name for the new search engine. The name also has strong similarity to the word bingo, which is used to mean that something sought has been found or realized, as is interjected when winning the game Bingo. Microsoft advertising strategist David Webster originally proposed the name "Bang" for the same reasons the name Bing was ultimately chosen (easy to spell, one syllable, and easy to remember). He noted, "It's there, it's an exclamation point [...] It's the opposite of a question mark." This name was ultimately not chosen because it could not be properly used as a verb in the context of an internet search; Webster commented "Oh, 'I banged it' is very different than 'I binged it'".

Qi Lu, president of Microsoft Online Services, also announced that Bing's official Chinese name is bì yìng (simplified Chinese: 必应; traditional Chinese: 必應), which literally means "very certain to respond" or "very certain to answer" in Chinese.

While being tested internally by Microsoft employees, Bing's codename was Kumo (くも), which came from the Japanese word for spider (蜘蛛; くも, kumo) as well as cloud (雲; くも, kumo), referring to the way search engines "spider" Internet resources to add them to their database, as well as cloud computing.

Legal challenges[]

On July 31, 2009, The Laptop Company, Inc. released a press release stating that it is challenging Bing's trademark application, alleging that Bing may cause confusion in the marketplace as Bing and their product BongoBing both do online product search. Software company TeraByte Unlimited, which has a product called BootIt Next Generation (abbreviated to BING), also contended the trademark application on similar grounds, as did a Missouri-based design company called Bing! Information Design.

Microsoft contended that claims challenging its trademark are without merit because these companies filed for U.S. federal trademark applications only after Microsoft filed for the Bing trademark in March 2009.

Yahoo! search deal[]

On July 29, 2009, Microsoft and Yahoo! announced that they had made a ten-year deal in which the Yahoo! search engine would be replaced by Bing, retaining the Yahoo! user interface. Yahoo! got to keep 88% of the revenue from all search ad sales on its site for the first five years of the deal, and have the right to sell advertising on some Microsoft sites. All Yahoo! Search global customers and partners made the transition by early 2012.

Bing AI[]

On February 7, 2023, Microsoft announced a major overhaul to the Bing search engine, adding an AI powered by OpenAI's technology that also powers ChatGPT.[1] Preview access was granted only to Microsoft Account holders who signed up for a waitlist, which filled up with millions of users within a few weeks.[2] On March 13, 2023, The sidebar of Microsoft Edge was updated to enable Bing Chat as an exclusive feature available directly from the web browser.[3] Third-party browsers, such as Google Chrome, require an extension to access Bing Chat along with a Microsoft Account.[4] On March 16, the waitlist to sign up for the feature was apparently lifted.[5]

Features[]

Microsoft Copilot[]

Main article: Microsoft Copilot

Microsoft Copilot, formerly known as Bing Chat, is an artificial intelligence (AI) chatbot developed by Microsoft and released in 2023. It is powered by the Microsoft Prometheus model, which was built on top of OpenAI's GPT-4 foundational large language model (LLM), and has been fine-tuned using both supervised and reinforcement learning techniques. Copilot can serve as a chat tool, write different types of content from poems to songs to stories to reports, provide the user with information and insights on the website page open in the browser, and use its Image Creator to design a logo, drawing, artwork, or other image based on text. Copilot's Image Creator supports over a hundred languages.

Copilot's conversational interface style appears to mimic that of ChatGPT. Copilot can cite its sources, unlike many other chatbots, and is capable of understanding and communicating in major languages including English, French, Chinese, Japanese, and Portuguese, but also dialects such as Bavarian. The chatbot is designed to function primarily in Microsoft Edge, Skype, or the Bing App, through a dedicated webpage or internally using built-in app features.

Third-party integration[]

Facebook users can share their searches with their Facebook friends using Facebook Connect.

On June 10, 2013, Apple announced that it would be dropping Google as its web search engine in favor of Bing. This feature is only integrated with iOS 7 and higher and for users with an iPhone 4S or higher as the feature is only integrated with Siri, Apple's personal assistant.

Integration with Windows 8.1[]

Windows 8.1 includes Bing "Smart Search" integration, which processes all queries submitted through the Start screen.

Translator[]

Bing Translator is a user facing translation portal provided by Microsoft to translate texts or entire web pages into different languages. All translation pairs are powered by the Microsoft Translator, a statistical machine translation platform and web service, developed by Microsoft Research, as its backend translation software. Two transliteration pairs (between Chinese (Simplified) and Chinese (Traditional)) are provided by Microsoft's Windows International team. As of September 2020, Bing Translator offers translations in 70 different language systems.

Languages in which Bing can find results[]

Albanian

Arabic

Bulgarian

Catalan

Chinese (Simplified and Traditional scripts)

Croatian

Czech

Danish

Dutch

English (American and British)

Estonian

Finnish

French

German

Greek

Hebrew

Hungarian

Icelandic

Indonesian

Italian

Japanese

Korean

Latvian

Lithuanian

Malay

Norwegian

Persian

Polish

Portuguese (Brazil)

Portuguese (Portugal)

Romanian

Russian

Serbian (Cyrillic)

Slovak

Slovenian

Spanish

Swedish

Tamil

Thai

Turkish

Ukrainian

Vietnamese

Languages in which Bing can be displayed[]

Basque

Bulgarian

Catalan

Chinese (Simplified and Traditional scripts)

Croatian

Czech

Danish

Dutch

English (American and British)

Estonian

Finnish

French

Galician

German

Greek

Hindi

Hungarian

Icelandic

Italian

Japanese

Korean

Latin

Latvian

Lithuanian

Malay

Norwegian

Polish

Portuguese (Brazil)

Portuguese (Portugal)

Romanian

Russian

Serbian (Cyrillic)

Slovak

Slovenian

Spanish

Swedish

Thai

Turkish

Ukrainian

Vietnamese

Search products[]

In addition to its tool for searching web pages, Bing also provides the following search offerings:

Service Description Dictionary Bing Dictionary enables users to quickly search for definitions of English words. Bing Dictionary results are based on Microsoft Encarta World English Dictionary. In addition, Bing Dictionary also provides an audio player for users to hear the pronunciation of the dictionary words. Entertainment Bing Entertainment allow users to view and search for detailed information and reviews for music, movies, television shows, and video games. Bing Entertainment partners with Microsoft Games to allow users to directly play online games within Bing Online Games. Events Bing Events allow users to search for upcoming events from Zvents, and displays the date and time, venue details, brief description, as well as method to purchase tickets for the events listed. Users can also filter the search results by date and categories. Finance Bing Finance enables users to search for exchange listed stocks and displays the relevant stock information, company profile and statistics, financial statements, stock ratings, analyst recommendations, as well as news related to the particular stock or company. Bing Finance also allow users to view the historical data of the particular stock, and allows comparison of the stock to major indices. In addition, Bing Finance also features a JavaScript-based Stock screener, allowing investors to quickly filter for value, contrarian, high-yield, and bargain investment strategies. Health Bing Health refines health searches using related medical concepts to get relevant health information and to allow users to navigate complex medical topics with inline article results from experts. This feature is based on the Medstory acquisition. Images Bing Images enables the user to quickly search and display most relevant photos and images of interest. The infinite scroll feature allows browsing a large number of images quickly. The advance filters allows refining search results in terms of properties such as image size, aspect ratio, color or black and white, photo or illustration, and facial features recognition. Local Bing Local searches local business listings with business details and reviews, allowing users to make more informed decisions. Maps Bing Maps enables the user to search for businesses, addresses, landmarks and street names worldwide, and can select from a road-map style view, a satellite view or a hybrid of the two. Also available are "bird's-eye" images for many cities worldwide, and 3D maps which include virtual 3D navigation and to-scale terrain and 3D buildings. For business users it will be available as "Bing Maps For Enterprise". News Bing News is a news aggregator and provides news results relevant to the search query from a wide range of online news and information services. Now functioning as part of Microsoft Start. Recipe Bing Recipe allow users to search for cooking recipes sourced from Delish.com, MyRecipes.com, and Epicurious.com, and allow users to filter recipe results based on their ratings, cuisine, convenience, occasion, ingredient, course, cooking method, and recipe provider. Reference Bing Reference semantically indexes Wikipedia content and displays them in an enhanced view within Bing. It also allow users to input search queries that resembles full questions and highlights the answer within search results. This feature is based on the Powerset acquisition. Social Bing Social allow users to search for and retrieve real-time information from Twitter and Facebook services. Bing Social search also provides "best match" and "social captions" functionalities that prioritizes results based on relevance and contexts. Only public feeds from the past 7 days will be displayed in Bing Social search results. Shopping Bing Shopping lets users search from a wide range of online suppliers and marketer's merchandise for all types of products and goods. This service also integrates with Bing cashback offering money back for certain purchases made through the site. This feature is based on the Jellyfish.com acquisition, but it has been discontinued since July 30, 2010. Translator Bing Translator lets users translate texts or entire web pages into different languages. Travel Bing Travel searches for airfare and hotel reservations online and predicts the best time to purchase them. This feature is based on the Farecast acquisition. University Bing University allow users to search for and view detailed information about United States universities, including information such as admissions, cost, financial aid, student body, and graduation rate. Videos Bing Videos enables the user to quickly search and view videos online from various websites. The Smart Preview feature allows the user to instantly watch a short preview of an original video. Bing Videos also allow users to access editorial video contents from MSN Video. Visual Search Bing Visual Search (now deprecated) allowed users to refine their search queries for structured results through data-grouping image galleries that resembles "large online catalogues", powered by Silverlight Weather Bing Weather allow users to search for the local weather for cities around the world, displaying the current weather information and also extended weather forecasts for the next 10 days. Weather information are provided by Intellicast and Foreca. Wolfram Alpha Bing Wolfram Alpha allow users to directly enter factual queries within Bing and provides answers and relevant visualizations from a core knowledge base of curated, structured data provided by Wolfram Alpha. Bing Wolfram Alpha can also answer mathematical and algebraic questions. xRank Bing xRank allowed users to search for celebrities, musicians, politicians and bloggers, read short biographies and news about them, and track their trends or popularity rankings. As of October 2010, this feature was shut down.

Webmaster services[]

Bing allows webmasters to manage the web crawling status of their own websites through Bing Webmaster Center. Additionally, users may also submit contents to Bing via the following methods:

Bing Local Listing Center allow businesses to add business listings onto Bing Maps and Bing Local.

Soapbox on MSN Video allow users to upload videos for searching via Bing Videos.

Mobile services[]

Bing Mobile allows users to conduct search queries on their mobile devices, either via the mobile browser or a downloadable mobile application. In the United States, Microsoft also operates a toll-free number for directory assistance called Bing 411.

Developer services[]

Bing Application Programming Interface enables developers to programmatically submit queries and retrieve results from the Bing Engine. http://www.bing.com/developers

To use the Bing API developers must obtain an Application ID, http://www.bing.com/developers/createapp.aspx

Bing API can be used with following protocols:

XML

JSON

SOAP

Query examples:

http://api.bing.net/xml.aspx?AppId=YOUR_APPID&Version=2.2&Market=en-US&Query=YOUR_QUERY&Sources=web+spell&Web.Count=1

http://api.bing.net/json.aspx?AppId=YOUR_APPID&Version=2.2&Market=en-US&Query=YOUR_QUERY&Sources=web+spell&Web.Count=1

http://api.bing.net/search.wsdl?AppID=YourAppId&Version=2.2

Other services[]

BingTweets is a service that combines Twitter trends with Bing search results, enabling users to see real-time information about the hottest topics on Twitter. The BingTweets service was initiated on July 14, 2009 in a partnership between Microsoft, Twitter and Federated Media.

Bing Rewards is a service that allows users to earn points for searching with Bing. These points can be redeemed for various products such as electronics, multimedia and gift cards.

Software[]

Toolbars[]

Both Windows Live Toolbar and MSN Toolbar will be powered by Bing and aim to offer users a way to access Bing search results. Together with the launch of Bing, MSN Toolbar 4.0 will be released with inclusion of new Bing-related features such as Bing cashback offer alerts. (See "Bing Rewards")

Gadgets[]

The Bing Search gadget is a Windows Sidebar Gadget that uses Bing Search to fetch the user's search results and render them directly in the gadget. Another gadget, the Bing Maps gadget, displays real-time traffic conditions using Bing Maps. The gadget provides shortcuts to driving directions, local search and full-screen traffic view of major US and Canadian cities, including Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Denver, Detroit, Houston, Los Angeles, Milwaukee, Montreal, New York City, Oklahoma City, Ottawa, Philadelphia, Phoenix, Pittsburgh, Portland, Providence, Sacramento, Salt Lake City, San Diego, San Francisco, Seattle, St. Louis, Tampa, Toronto, Vancouver, and Washington, D.C.

Bing Desktop is also a gadget-like Windows program for Windows 7 that adds a search bar to Windows Desktop and changes the desktop background to that of Bing's image of the day.

Prior to October 30, 2007, the gadgets were known as Live Search gadget and Live Search Maps gadget; both gadgets were removed from Windows Live Gallery due to security concerns. The Live Search Maps gadget was made available for download again on January 24, 2008 with the security concern addressed. However around the introduction of Bing in June 2009 both gadgets have been removed again for download from Windows Live Gallery.

Accelerators[]

Accelerators allow users to access Bing features directly from selected text in a webpage. Accelerators provided by the Bing team include:

Bing Translator

Bing Maps

Bing Shopping

Web Slices[]

Web Slices can be used to monitor information gathered by Bing. Web Slices provided by the Bing team include:

Weather from Bing

Finance from Bing

Traffic from Bing

Add-ons[]

The Bing team provides an official Bing Firefox add-on, which adds search suggestions to the Firefox search box from Bing.

Marketing and advertisements[]

Live Search[]

Since 2006, Microsoft had conducted a number of tie-ins and promotions for promoting Microsoft's search offerings. These include:

Amazon.com's A9 search service and the experimental Ms. Dewey interactive search site syndicated all search results from Microsoft's then search engine, Live Search. This tie-in started on May 1, 2006.

Search and Give - a promotional website launched on 17 January 2007 where all searches done from a special portal site would lead to a donation to the UNHCR's organization for refugee children, ninemillion.org. Reuters AlertNet reported in 2007 that the amount to be donated would be $0.01 per search, with a minimum of $100,000 and a maximum of $250,000 (equivalent to 25 million searches). According to the website the service was decommissioned on June 1, 2009, having donated over $500,000 to charity and schools.

Club Bing - a promotional website where users can win prizes by playing word games that generate search queries on Microsoft's then search service Live Search. This website began in April 2007 as Live Search Club.

Big Snap Search - a promotional website similar to Live Search Club. This website began in February 2008, but was discontinued shortly after.

Live Search SearchPerks! - a promotional website which allowed users to redeem tickets for price while using Microsoft's search engine. This website began on October 1, 2008 and was decommissioned on April 15, 2009.

Debut[]

Bing's debut featured an $80 to $100 million online, TV, print, and radio advertising campaign in the US. The advertisements do not mention other search engine competitors, such as Google and Yahoo, directly by name; rather, they attempt to convince users to switch to Bing by focusing on Bing's search features and functionality. The ads claim that Bing does a better job countering "search overload".

Bing Rewards[]

Bing Rewards was a loyalty program launched by Microsoft in September 2010. It was similar to two earlier services, SearchPerks! and Bing Cashback, which were subsequently discontinued.

The program provided credits to users through regular Bing searches and special promotions. These credits were then redeemed for various products including electronics, gift cards, sweepstakes, and charitable donations. Initially, participants were required to download and use the Bing Bar for Internet Explorer in order to earn credits; but later the service was made to work with all desktop browsers.

The Bing Rewards program was rebranded as Microsoft Rewards in 2016, at which point it was modified to only two levels, Level 1 (similar to "Member" of Bing Rewards) and Level 2 (similar to "Gold" of Bing Rewards).

The Colbert Report[]

During the episode of The Colbert Report that aired on June 8, 2010, Stephen Colbert stated that Microsoft would donate $2,500 to help clean up the Deepwater Horizon oil spill each time he mentioned the word "Bing" on air. Colbert mostly mentioned "Bing" in out-of-context situations, such as Bing Crosby and Bing cherries. By the end of the show, Colbert had said the word 40 times, for a total donation of $100,000. Colbert poked fun at their rivalry with Google, stating "Bing is a great website for doing Internet searches. I know that, because I Googled it."

[]

An advertising campaign during 2010, Los Links Son Malos ("The Links are Bad"), took the form of a Mexican telenovela, with people conversing in Spanish, subtitled in English. In it, somebody rides in on a horse and takes a woman away when he shows her how easy Bing is to use in order to get movie tickets or travel.

Search deals[]

As of Opera 10.6, Bing has been incorporated into the Opera browser, but Google is still the default search engine. Bing will also be incorporated into all future versions of Opera. Mozilla Firefox has made a deal with Microsoft to jointly release "Firefox with Bing", an edition of Firefox where Bing has replaced Google as the default search engine. However, the default edition of Firefox still has Google as its default search engine, but has included Bing in its default list of search providers since Firefox version 4.0.

In addition, Microsoft also paid Verizon Wireless $550 million USD to use Bing as the default search provider on Verizon's Blackberry, and in turn, have Verizon "turn off" (via Blackberry service books) the other search providers available. Though users can still access other search engines via the mobile browser.

Content censorship[]

Video content[]

Bing's video search tool has a preview mode that could potentially be used to preview pornographic videos. By simply turning off safe search, users can search for and view pornographic videos by hovering the cursor over a thumbnail, since the video and audio, in some cases, are cached on Microsoft's server.

Since the videos are playing within Bing instead of the site where they are hosted, the videos are not necessarily blocked by parental control filters. Monitoring programs designed to tell parents what sites their children have visited are likely to simply report "Bing.com" instead of the site that actually hosts the video. The same situation can be said about corporate filters, many of which have been fooled by this feature. Users do not need to leave Bing's site to view these videos.

Microsoft responded in a blog post on June 4, 2009, with a short term work-around. By adding "&adlt=strict" to the end of a query, no matter what the settings are for that session it will return results as if safe search were set to strict. The query would look like this: http://www.bing.com/videos/search?q=adulttermgoeshere&adlt=strict (case sensitive).

On June 12, 2009, Microsoft announced two changes regarding Bing's Smart Motion Preview and SafeSearch features. All potentially explicit content will be coming from a separate single domain, explicit.bing.net. Additionally, Bing will also return source URL information in the query string for image and video contents. Both changes allow both home users and corporate users to filter content by domain regardless of what the SafeSearch settings might be.

Regional censorship[]

Bing censors results for adult search terms for some of the regions including India, People's Republic of China, Germany and Arab countries. This censoring is done based on the local laws of those countries. However, Bing allows users to simply change their country/region preference to somewhere without restrictions – such as the United States, United Kingdom or Republic of Ireland – to sidestep this censorship.

Criticism[]

Censorship[]

Microsoft has been criticized for censoring Bing search results to queries made in simplified Chinese characters, used in mainland China. This is done to comply with the censorship requirements of the government in China. Microsoft has not indicated a willingness to stop censoring search results in simplified Chinese characters in the wake of Google's decision to do so. All simplified Chinese searches in Bing are censored regardless of the user's country.

Performance issues[]

Bing has been criticized for being slower to index websites than Google. It has also been criticized for not indexing some websites at all.

Copying Google's results[]

Bing has been criticized by competitor Google, for utilizing user input via Internet Explorer, the Bing Toolbar, or Suggested Sites, to add results to Bing. After discovering in October 2010 that Bing appeared to be imitating Google's auto-correct results for a misspelling, despite not actually fixing the spelling of the term, Google set up a honeypot, configuring the Google search engine to return specific unrelated results for 100 nonsensical queries such as hiybbprqag. Over the next couple of weeks, Google engineers entered the search term into Google, while using Microsoft Internet Explorer, with the Bing Toolbar installed and the optional Suggested Sites enabled. In 9 out of the 100 queries, Bing later started returning the same results as Google, despite the only apparent connection between the result and search term being that Google's results connected the two.

Microsoft's response to this issue, coming from a company's spokesperson, was clear: "We do not copy Google's results." Bing's Vice President, Harry Shum, later reiterated that the search result data Google claimed that Bing copied had in fact come from Bing's very own users. Shum further wrote that "we use over 1,000 different signals and features in our ranking algorithm. A small piece of that is clickstream data we get from some of our customers, who opt-in to sharing anonymous data as they navigate the web in order to help us improve the experience for all users." Microsoft commented that clickstream data from customers who had opted in was collected, but said that it was just a small piece of over 1000 signals used in their ranking algorithm, and that their intention was to learn from their collective customers. They stated that Bing was not intended to be a duplicate of any existing search engines.Representatives for Google have said the company simply wants the practice to stop.

References[]

See also[]

Windows Live

[]

Official Bing homepage

Bing Community

Bing Newsroom

Bing Toolbox - for developers and webmasters

Bing API - for developers

Decision Engine - Flash based marketing page (archived 2009-05-30)

Discover Bing - marketing page (archived 2013-02-08, 2009-05-30)

Microsoft Bing at Wikipedia

People Founders Bill Gates • Paul Allen Board of directors Dina Dublon · Bill Gates · Raymond Gilmartin · Reed Hastings · Maria Klawe · David Marquardt · Satya Nadella · Charles Noski · Helmut Panke Senior Leadership Team Satya Nadella (CEO) · Scott Guthrie · Amy Hood (CFO) · Harry Shum · Phil Spencer Corporate VPs Joe Belfiore · Richard Rashid (SVP) · S. Somasegar (SVP) Divisions Engineering groups (Accessories · Mobile) · Digital Crimes Unit · Garage · Press · Research · Studios · .NET Foundation · Outercurve Foundation Regional branches Algeria · Egypt · India · Japan · Pakistan Product families Operating systems (Microsoft Windows) · Software (Office · Servers · Visual Studio) · Band · HoloLens · Lumia · Surface · Xbox Web properties Bing · Channel 9 · CodePlex · Developer Network · MSN · Office 365 · OneDrive · Outlook.com · Microsoft TechNet · Windows Store Conferences Build · MIX · PDC · TechEd · WinHEC · WPC · OneDrive · Outlook.com · TechNet · Windows Store Criticism Bundling of Microsoft Windows · iLoo · Internet Explorer · _NSAKEY · Windows · (2000 · ME · XP · Vista) · Xbox 360