What is Dolly Parton’s Imagination Library?

Dolly Parton’s Imagination Library is an international program that offers free books to children each month from birth until age 5. This program is available to any child living in the 44601 zip code through a partnership between Rodman Public Library, Early Childhood Education Alliance, and the Greater Alliance Foundation.

Who is eligible to participate?

This program is for children from birth to age 5 who are residents of the 44601 zip code. Due to processing time, the age cutoff for registration is 4 years, 8 months.

Can anyone living in zip code 44601 register, even if they don’t have a Rodman Public Library card?

Yes. In addition, if you live in a different zip code, you may still be able to participate in Dolly Parton’s Imagination Library. Please contact Rodman Public Library at (330) 821-2665, or find out if you are eligible here: https://imaginationlibrary.com/usa/find-my-program/

How do I register?

You can register online at https://imaginationlibrary.com/usa/affiliate/OHSTARK/. You can also register in person at any Rodman Public Library location.

What are my responsibilities?

Be a resident of the 44601 zip code

Register online or submit an official registration form, completely filled out by a parent or guardian.

Please notify Rodman Public Library any time your address changes, so that your child can continue to receive books at your new address.

Read with your child.

Can books be sent to P.O. boxes?

Yes.

How long will it take for my child to receive their first book?

It may take 6 to 9 weeks for the delivery of your child’s first book.

Is there a program like this for older kids?

No, there is no equivalent program for older children.

Who do I contact for questions regarding this program?

Please contact Rodman Public Library at 330-821-2665.

Who sponsors our local Dolly Parton’s Imagination Library?

This is currently sponsored by the Friends of Rodman Library, the Greater Alliance Foundation, Rotary Club of Alliance, Alliance Kiwanis Club, Alliance Lions Club, Washington Ruritans, and multiple private donors. We are always looking for more sponsors to help sustain this program into the future.

How can I help support this program?

Please contact the Greater Alliance Foundation at 330-823-8560 if you would like to help sustain Dolly Parton’s Imagination Library in the Alliance area.