This article is updated frequently as titles leave and enter Max. *New additions are indicated with an asterisk.

Action movies have long been the most successful genre at home, as viewers try to replicate that rush they got at the movie theater in their own living room. The Max (formerly HBO Max) selection of action flicks is predictably dense, bringing in some of the DC Universe, classic genre movies, and modern hits. Everyone from Martin Campbell to Martin Scorsese can find a home here, and you’ll often find a Batman, too. We will update this list regularly to give readers a new action movie to watch whenever they need a fix, or a reminder to watch a classic they’ve already seen.

How We Pick Our Films

Critic Brian Tallerico watches and writes about movies and TV every day. To curate this list, he dives into Max’s catalogue every month to surface exciting, white-knuckle action titles — using his taste and a lifetime of cinema study as his guide, instead of whatever the algorithm happens to be pushing. After triple-checking to make sure they’re still available, he watches each and writes his recommendation. We highlight more than just the thrilling crowdpleasers: Filmmakers use action to punctuate drama, lighten or heighten the mood of a movie, and explosively make an impact on cinema. Read on to find something to watch.

*Attack the Block

Year: 2011

Runtime: 1h 29m

Director: Joe Cornish

Long before he won a Golden Globe for Small Axe, John Boyega broke through in this 2011 sci-fi/action flick from director Joe Cornish. With echoes of John Carpenter, it’s the tale of a street gang who end up being the final defense between the world and an alien invasion.

Batman

Year: 1989

Runtime: 2h 7m

Director: Tim Burton

The modern superhero movie owes an incredible debt to what Tim Burton did in 1989 with Michael Keaton, Jack Nicholson, and Kim Basinger. It wasn’t the first superhero movie, but it felt darker and different from the candy-coated men in tights movies that came before, especially the superior sequel, also on Max. Watch them both.

The Batman

Year: 2022

Runtime: 2h 56m

Director: Matt Reeves

Matt Reeves now owns the saga of the Dark Knight as a sequel to his March 2022 action blockbuster has already been announced. Dropping on Max while it was still in theaters, The Batman is an ambitious epic reboot of the legendary hero, anchored by Reeves’s craft and fascinating performances from Robert Pattinson, Zoe Kravitz, Paul Dano, and many more.

Crank

Year: 2006

Runtime: 1h 28m

Directors: Mark Neveldine, Brian Taylor

There aren’t enough action movies with the pure momentum of Crank, directed by Mark Neveldine and Brian Taylor, and the 2009 sequel, also on Max. Jason Statham plays a hitman who has to keep his adrenaline up to stay alive. It’s like Speed with a human heart instead of a bus. It’s a hell of a ride.

Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon

Year: 2000

Runtime: 2h 1m

Director: Ang Lee

One of the most successful foreign language films of all time, Ang Lee’s 2000 wuxia epic was so popular that it landed an Oscar nomination for Best Picture, along with nine other nominations (winning four). It’s a gorgeous epic based on the Chinese novel by Wang Dulu that stars the legendary Chow Yun-fat, Michelle Yeoh, Zhang Ziyi, and Chang Chen. It hasn’t aged a day in the over-two decades since its release.

Dawn of the Planet of the Apes

Year: 2014

Runtime: 2h 10m

Director: Matt Reeves

Any list of the best modern action trilogies really needs to include the rebooted Planet of the Apes series that started with Rise of the Planet of the Apes over a decade ago. The series arguably got even richer in the follow-up from The Batman director Matt Reeves, which is currently the only one in the trilogy on Max for some inexplicable reason. Still, it’s a great movie, even if it’s weird to not have the whole saga of Caesar to marathon for your subscription fee.

Dune: Parts One & Two

Year: 2021, 2024

Runtime: 2h 36m, 2h 46m

Director: Denis Villeneuve

You can now watch the entire Dune saga to date on Max, the exclusive home to the highest grossing film of 2024 so far. The second half of Villeneuve’s saga fulfills the promise of the first, turning the set-up of the 2021 film into a full-blooded action tale of a new messiah. Timothee Chalamet and Zendaya lead an all-star cast in a film that understands both scope and character. It may not play quite as well at home as it did in theaters, but it still rocks.

The Edge

Year: 1997

Runtime: 1h 58m

Director: Lee Tamahori

David Mamet wrote this 1997 survival thriller about a wealthy businessman (Anthony Hopkins) who crashes in the Alaskan wilderness with a photographer (Alec Baldwin) and his assistant (Harold Perrineau). The men have to survive the vicious elements to return to safety … and each other. Hopkins and Baldwin are all in, even in some impressive sequences involving a large Kodiak bear who is hunting his prey.

Godzilla

Year: 2014

Runtime: 2h 4m

Director: Gareth Edwards

The new MonsterVerse is on Max in its entirety, but let’s take a minute to lavish some praise on the one that restarted it all, Gareth Edwards’s underrated 2014 blockbuster. Aaron Taylor-Johnson, Elizabeth Olsen, Juliette Binoche, Sally Hawkins, and Bryan Cranston star in the reboot of the classic Toho series that pits the big lizard guy against two monsters of equally unfathomable size. It’s a rocking good time.

Greenland

Year: 2020

Runtime: 1h 59m

Director: Ric Roman Waugh

An end-of-the-world movie released during the first Summer of the pandemic, this genre exercise wasn’t seen by enough people. It’s really solid, a reminder of how much Gerard Butler can carry a movie like this one, which reunites him with his Angel Has Fallen director in a film that’s quite literally about the end of humanity. The movie takes a micro approach to the most macro issue as it tracks one family trying to find a way to survive the impending impact from a planet-destroying comet.

Hellboy II: The Golden Army

Year: 2008

Runtime: 2h

Director: Guillermo del Toro

Oscar winner Guillermo del Toro wrote and directed this sequel to his own 2004 adaptation of the Mike Mignola comic book about everyone’s favorite demon from hell. Ron Perlman returned to play the title character in a more ambitious film than the first, even if it doesn’t quite come together. The most frustrating thing about watching Hellboy II now is knowing how much Del Toro and Perlman wanted to make a third part but the studio declined. Those are the true monsters.

Infernal Affairs

Year: 2002

Runtime: 1h 42m

Director: Andy Lau, Alan Mak

A lot of people probably don’t even know that Martin Scorsese’s Oscar-winner The Departed was a remake of an awesome Hong Kong action film from just a few years earlier. Andy Lau and Tony Leung star in the story of a cop who goes undercover in a Triad while a criminal becomes a mole in the other direction at the same time. It was followed by two sequels, both of which recently dropped on Max too.

The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring

Year: 2001

Runtime: 2h 58m

Director: Peter Jackson

The Oscar-winning franchise by Peter Jackson bounces around the streaming services with alarming regularity, now finding its way to Max for an indeterminate amount of time. Watch the entire saga of Frodo Baggins, Samwise Gange, and the rest of the Fellowship while you can.

Mad Max: Fury Road

Year: 2015

Runtime: 2h 1m

Director: George Miller

Have you seen the Furiosa trailer?!!? It’s insane and easily one of the most anticipated films of 2024. Go back to its predecessor, one of the best action movies ever made. This sequel rocked the world when it was released in 2015 on its way to winning multiple Oscars and really setting a new bar for practical action effects. George Miller went into the desert and returned with one of the most ambitious, insane, downright impossible action epics ever made.

Mad Max 2: The Road Warrior

Year: 1982

Runtime: 1h 35m

Director: George Miller

Mad Max was fun, and it helped put both Mel Gibson and George Miller on the map, but it was the sequel, often just called The Road Warrior that blew the roof off. With some of the best car sequences of all time, this was a game-changer, a film that felt completely fresh and new, while also paying homage to classic tropes of the Western.

*Panic Room

Year: 2002

Runtime: 1h 52m

Director: David Fincher

David Fincher followed up his cult hit Fight Club with a movie that still doesn’t get enough attention in his filmography, this 2002 thriller starring Jodie Foster and a young Kristen Stewart. Not only is this a tight, well-crafted flick but it’s also, believe it or not, unavailable on Blu-ray. So streaming is the only way to watch it in HD right now.

Robocop

Year: 1987

Runtime: 1h 43m

Director: Paul Verhoeven

People like to point at ‘80s movies and say they were ahead of their time, but this may be most true about Paul Verhoeven’s 1987 masterpiece, a film that foretold how technology would impact law enforcement in ways that took decades to come true. A brilliant action satire, this is the story of a Detroit cop who is murdered and revived as the title character, a superhuman cyborg enforcer. It’s even more riveting and relevant almost four decades later. Note: Both original era sequels and the 2010s reboot are also on Max.

Seven Samurai

Year: 1956

Runtime: 3h 26m

Director: Akira Kurosawa

They don’t get more classic than Akira Kurosawa’s classic that inspired generations of action filmmakers. Co-written, directed, and edited by one of the best filmmakers of all time, it’s the story of seven ronin who are hired by farmers to fight the bandits who are ruining their village. It’s a formative text for the action genre, and quite simply one of the best movies ever made.

The Thomas Crown Affair

Year: 1999

Runtime: 1h 54m

Director: John McTiernan

Pierce Brosnan gave his best non-Bond performance in stellar remake of the 1968 film of the same name. Stepping into the shoes of Steve McQueen is no easy feat but Brosnan does so with style as Thomas Crown, a billionaire art thief who falls for the insurance investigator chasing him, played by the wonderful Rene Russo.

Wanted

Year: 2008

Runtime: 1h 50m

Director: Timur Bekmambetov

It’s not perfect but few films have felt more like a moving comic book than this 2008 blockbuster based on the graphic novels by Mark Millar and J.G. Jones. James McAvoy stars as an ordinary guy who learns that he’s actually in the lineage of professional assassins as he gets sucked into a world that include characters played by Morgan Freeman, Angelina Jolie, Terence Stamp, and Common.

All recommendations are made independently by our editors. Services you subscribe to through our links may earn us a commission.