What Does Max Mean?

While the name can be given on its own, Max is usually short for the names Maximus, Maxwell, and their many variants.

Maximilian and Maximus both mean “greatest.”

Maxwell means “Mack’s stream” or “great stream.”

What Is the Origin of the Name Max?

The name Max is derived from the Latin boy name Maximus and the Scottish-English name Maxwell. The latter is itself derived from the Scandinavian name Magnus.

How Popular Is the Name Max?

Max has been a consistently popular name since the widespread usage of the name Maximus in the Classical Era, which spanned from the 8th century BCE to the 6th century CE.

At the moment, the name Max is popular. It is the one hundred fifty-ninth most popular name given to baby boys (1). The female variant, Maxine, is fairly popular. It is the seven hundred and the first most popular name given to baby girls (2).

How Do I Pronounce Max?

In English, the name Max is pronounced, “MAKS.”

Is Max a Boy or Girl Name?

Max can be both a boy’s name and a girl’s name. It is more commonly used as a boy’s name since there are more male variants of Maximus.

Variations of Max

There are several variations of the name Max. Some are included here:

Macsen (Welsh)

Magnus (Scandinavian)

Maks (Russian)

Maksim (Macedonian)

Maksym (Polish)

Massimo (Italian)

Maxen (Welsh)

Maxence (French)

Maxi (German)

Maxim (Ukrainian)

Maxine (Latin, feminine)

Miksa (Hungarian)

Milian (Norwegian, Swedish)

Máximo (Spanish)

Nicknames for Max

Though Max is already a short version of many variants, it can be endearing to attach some nicknames to the name such as:

Big Mac

Em

LilMaxy

Maxibear

Maxidoodle

Maxmus

Similar Names to Max

Some names that are similar in sound or meaning to Max include:

Akbar

Bex

Bohumír

Bolesław

Daisuke

Dak

Grant

Jalal

Jax

Vladimir

Zach

Čestmír

Middle Names for Max

Some possible middle names for a child named Max include:

Anthony

Arthur

Augustus

Brandon

Carter

Christopher

Drake

Ernest

Francis

Jacob

Jasper

Jeremy

Luther

Sibling Names for Max

Here are some possible names for the sibling of a child named Max.

For a brother:

David

Francis

Jason

Joseph

Marcus

Michael

Miles

Norman

Robert

Thomas

For a sister:

Alice

Charlene

Claire

Emily

Emma

Marcia

May

Olivia

Rose

Ruby

Famous People Named Max

The name Max and its variants are very popular around the world. Celebrities and well-known public figures that share the name include:

Max Ernst: German artist and poet.

Max Fleischer: American animator, film director, and producer.

Maxim Staviski: Bulgarian ice dancer.

Maximilian Adelbert Baer: American professional boxer.

Maximilian Schmeling: German professional boxer.

Maximillion Drake Thieriot: American actor and director.

Maximo Guillermo Manus: Norwegian resistance fighter in World War II.

Maxine Brown: American country singer.

Maxwell Braden Mittelman: American voice actor.

Maxwell Caulfield: British-American actor.

Maxwell Jacob Friedman: American professional wrestler.

Maxwell Lemuel Roach: American jazz drummer and composer.

Max in Popular Culture

The name Max pops up very often in popular culture. A few of the characters and media that feature the name include:

Max Cady: character in the 1957 thriller novel The Executioners and its 1962 and 1991 film adaptations, both titled Cape Fear.

Max Goof: character in various Disney movies and cartoons, including the 1995 movie A Goofy Movie.

Max Payne: character in Rockstar Studios’ neo-noir video game series Max Payne.

Max Rebo: character in Star Wars: Episode VI Return of the Jedi.

Max Rockatansky: character in the action film series Mad Max.

Max: character in the 1999 children’s animated series Dragon Tales.

Max: character in the 2002 anime Pokemon: Advanced Generation.

Max: character in the 2005 children’s film The Adventures of Sharkboy and Lavagirl in 3-D.

Maxie Zeus: character in DC Comics’ Batman comics.

Maximilian Zorin: character in the 1985 James Bond film A View to Kill.

Maximillion Pegasus: character in the 2000 anime Yu-Gi-Oh!

Maximus Decimus Meridius: character in the 2000 historical drama Gladiator.

Maxine Mayfield: character in the 2016 science fiction horror series Stranger Things.

Maxwell Q. Klinger: character in the 1972 war-comedy-drama series M*A*S*H.

Maxwell Sheffield: character in the 1993 sitcom The Nanny.

Max FAQs

Here are some of the answers to the most commonly asked questions about the name Max.