Jarreau was born on 12 March 1940 in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, US. He was raised alongside five siblings by his father, a minister of a Seventh-day Adventist Church and by his mother, a church pianist. He frequently sung with his family for various church organized events. Apart from Jarreau’s immediate inspirational ties to church music he also states influences such as Ella Fitzgerald , Mel Torme, Stevie Wonder, Johnny Mathis, Lou Rawls, and Johnny Hartman.

Though Jarreau had always taken his musical endeavors seriously this was not always his soul aspiration. Jarreau was a very dextrous student in high school and college. During his time at Lincoln High School he was student council president as well as a “Badger Boys State” delegate. He advanced to Ripon College where he earned a Bachelor’s degree in psychology. Jarreau still managed to keep his feet in the music industry, lending his voice to local bands around college such as the Indigos. After Jarreau finished up at Ripon he went on to study at the University of Iowa where he received his master’s degree in vocalization rehabilitation. He put his studies to use in San Francisco, acting as a rehabilitation counselor, but while he was not on the job he took up a gig singing with George Duke’s jazz trio. Jarreau finally decided to pursue his music career full time and once he built a devoted fan base at the Sausalito night club alongside acoustic guitarist Julio Martinez he was given a reason to wholeheartedly commit.

Initially Jarreau focused strictly on jazz music. In 1969 he headed down to LA to make his break into the music business and before long he gained performance residencies at a variety of hopping nightclubs. He expanded the type of venues he would play, which included comedy lounges such as the Improv where he would perform next to acts like John Belushi, Bette Midler, and Jimmie Walker. Jarreau’s affiliation with comedic outlets grew even stronger as he acted as a musical guest on the 1st season of Saturday Night Live. Jarreau appeared on the show in 1975, the year in which he released his 1st studio album “We Got By”. The album was a critical success particularly in Germany where it went on to win a Grammy award as did his 1976 follow up “Glow”.

Jarreau’s popularity began to steadily rise. His 3rd studio album “All Fly Home” was also a success, entering the US charts at No. 78, but it was his 4th studio album “Breakin’ Away” that was really a game changer. This release hit No. 9 on the US Albums chart and No. 1 on both the R&B and Jazz charts, going on to establish him as one of the leading figures in contemporary crossover jazz.

His next album “Jarreau”was his 1st release to breach into the UK top 50. It has since gone platinum and has also earned him four Grammy nominations. Jarreau released three more albums in the 80s “High Crime” (1984), “L is for Lover” (1986), and “Heart’s Horizon” (1988). Though Jarreau released only one album “Heaven and Earth” in the 1990s he kept busy touring. He returned to the studio at the turn of the century to release his 11th studio album “Tomorrow Today” (2000). He spent the rest of this decade releasing albums averaging one every two years: “All I Got” (2002), “Accentuate the Positive” (2004), “Givin’ It Up” (2006), and “Christmas” (2008).