An overview of the Beyoğlu district in Istanbul European

Istanbul's civilization cannot be reflected through any other neighbourhood but Beyoglu. The area was named after the Venetian prince named Beyoglu. Then he got the name of Prince Pontus, who lived there for a while after his conversion to Islam. This region consists of a large area extending from Kagithane to the Bosphorus and the Golden Horn.

-Beyoglu has neighbourhoods, including Karakoy, Tophane, Cihangir, Sishane, Tepebasi, Dolapdere and Kasimpasa, and is connected to the Old City via Galata Bridge, Ataturk Bridge and Golden Horn Metro Bridge.

Its population today has reached 400,000 thousand people, including a large part of those who hold foreign nationalities.

Its general character is vitality and activity because it includes the most important foreign embassies and consulates.

Beyoğlu does not lack historical character, as it contains many tourist places that attract the attention of tourists.

It is the largest and oldest district in all of Istanbul, in addition to containing a number of important and well-known neighbourhoods such as Taksim / Istiklal Street.

It is of great importance to many people, because it has a connection with history, and its history can be identified through its ancient landmarks.

It is important to mention that it is the commercial center of the whole city.

-The services offered by Beyoglu are distinctive, which makes them suitable for comfortable housing and perhaps a profitable investment, especially during the tourist seasons.

Beyoğlu real estate is characterized as a great choice for housing and stability, like all the necessities of life are available in it, in addition to the fact that the prices of its properties are suitable for the vast majority of people as it suits their financial budgets.

Where is Beyoğlu located ?

Beyoglu is located on the European side of Istanbul, and this alone is enough to attract the investing eye.

Between the southern part of the Bosphorus and the Golden Horn, and. It is a mosaic group of Byzantine, Arab and Ottoman civilizations, especially in Galata and Pera. It holds Istiklal Street. Beyoglu is 42 km from Istanbul Airport and 48 km from Sabiha Gokcen International Airport.

Moreover, this region is surrounded on all sides by distinctive sites, in addition to its large area, which has been recorded at about 8.67 square kilometres.

The borders of Beyoğlu are Sisli, Besiktas, Sultan Eyup and Katani

Beyoglu real estate is characterized by many wide options suitable for many foreign investors. Beyoglu has apartments, villas, offices, and suitable options for those looking to buy a property in a special area in Istanbul. Deal Real Estate offers many apartments and villas in Istanbul with multiple properties such as sea view, city view, and residential towers suitable for investment in a wide number of areas in Istanbul, especially in the Beyoglu area. The average real estate prices in Beyoglu are 300,000 US dollars, and we also provide many offers on a weekly basis that can be viewed and benefit from the experience of our consultants to help you reach the best real estate option.

One of the advantages of investing in Beyoglu is the presence of small industrial projects with the availability of huge commercial markets, which made it important in the list of foreign and Turkish investors, as it is an area in which many social classes settle, as well as modern housing complexes.