890G.6363/5–2945

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State (Grew)2

Participants: Nuri Pasha, former Prime Minister of Iraq. Iraqi Minister3 Mr. Grew Mr. Phillips4 Mr. Acheson5 Mr. Clayton6 Mr. MacLeish7 Mr. Ralph A. Bard, Under Secretary of the Navy Mr. Charles P. Taft8 Mr. Henderson

The Iraqi Minister and Nuri Pasha as-Said, former Prime Minister of Iraq and at present adviser to the Regent of Iraq, called upon Mr. Grew this afternoon in order to meet senior officers of the Department and to discuss several matters of interest both to the American Government and to the Iraqi Government.

Nuri Pasha stated that he hoped that the American Government would do everything possible in order to bring about an increase in the extraction of petroleum in Iraq. He pointed out that of the three great Iraqi petroleum fields, namely Mosul, Kirkuk and Basra, only the Kirkuk field was being exploited at the present time; that American interests owned approximately 23¾% of the Iraq Petroleum Company, which had concessions in all three fields; that unless the American shareholders were energetic in pushing the matter, he feared that the Iraq Petroleum Company would not endeavor to open [Page 50] up the Mosul and Basra fields since other shareholders of the company would not like Iraqi oil to compete with that of other companies in which they were interested, and that he hoped that the American shareholders, backed by the American Government, would take steps to bring about the opening of the Basra and Mosul fields, and also to increase the production of the Kirkuk field.

Nuri said that the Iraqi Government was particularly anxious for the construction of an additional pipeline from Kirkuk—that this pipeline should be 24 inches; that the British could not manufacture a pipe of so great a diameter; that the only country where such type of pipe could be purchased was the United States, and that he hoped the appropriate American authorities would agree to the export of the necessary 24-inch pipe to the Near East. He insisted that the American shareholders of the Iraq Petroleum Company, namely Socony Vacuum and Standard Oil of New Jersey, had told him that they could find the dollars for purchasing this pipe in case the American Government would be willing to permit its exportation.

After some discussion of Nuri Pasha’s statements, the officers present told him that they would transfer his request to the appropriate authorities of the American Government.

Nuri Pasha also expressed his hope that the Government of the United States would show more interest than it has in the past in the industrial development of Iraq and in trade with Iraq. He said that Iraq was anxious to strengthen its economic relations with the United States. It wanted to buy American equipment and materials and to obtain the services of American technicians. One of the difficulties involved, of course, was that of the lack of dollars at the disposal of Iraq. He hoped that means could be found to increase the purchasing power of Iraq in dollars; he added that it was his understanding that Great Britain was placing $14,000,000 at the disposal of Iraq to be used in making purchases in the United States during the remainder of the current year.

Mr. Grew expressed gratification at the desire of Iraq to strengthen its economic relations with the United States. He pointed out that one of the best ways to strengthen economic relations was to improve economic facilities. The United States shared Iraq’s desire for closer American-Iraqi economic relations; it therefore hoped that the Iraqi Government would look with favor upon proposals which the American Government had made that direct radio-telegraphic communications be established in the immediate future between Iraq and the United States9 and that Iraq grant the United States licensing privileges which would permit the operation of airlines from the [Page 51] United States to and through Iraq. Nuri Pasha stated that he was certain that arrangements would eventually be worked out which would make possible direct radio-telegraphic communications between Iraq and the United States and the operation of American airline between those countries. He said that he hoped that the American Government would have patience with the Iraqi Government in the matter since there were certain problems which must be solved before the proposals made by the United States could be agreed to. He stated that upon his return to Iraq he would take a personal interest in the matter.