Kris Jenner has opened up about her former marriage to Robert Kardashian Sr.

In the latest two episodes of the Kardashian family’s Hulu reality show, The Kardashians, Jenner sat down with her daughter, Khloe Kardashian, about her alleged infidelity in her first marriage.

During last week’s episode, which aired on 18 October, Kardashian admitted that she was struggling to trust people after she was repeatedly cheated on by her ex-boyfriend and father of her two children, Tristan Thompson. “What was the mindset when you cheated?” she asked her mother in the episode.

“You’re asking me?” Jenner asked, seemingly confused, as her daughter replied: “Who the f**k else am I talking to?”

Robert Kardashian Sr was Jenner’s first husband, as well as the father to her first four children: Kourtney, Kim, Khloe, and Robert Kardashian Jr. One month after their divorce was finalised, she went on to marry Caitlyn Jenner and had two more children: Kendall and Kylie Jenner.

In Thursday’s episode, Kardashian wondered what influenced her mother’s decision to cheat on her father. “When you did that with my dad, and you had four kids and you had a family? Yes, I know you were really young,” Kardashian said.

The famous momager replied that part of what caused her infidelity was that she was “young and dumb”, which can sometimes lead to not “understanding the consequences of their actions.” However, Kardashian wasn’t satisfied with her mother’s answer and again asked: “But what was my dad not doing that made you want to look elsewhere?”

Jenner admitted that she didn’t know, adding: “I don’t know because he was such a great husband and such a great dad, and I think that I fell into a situation where I thought that the grass was greener somewhere else, and I made a huge mistake.

“That’s my life’s biggest regret,” she said.

“We talked on the phone all day long, helped each other through things all the time. And I did have regrets. I thought: ‘Wow, what was I thinking?’” Jenner recalled about cheating on her ex-husband.

Despite her regrets, the 67-year-old added that there were some positives to come out of her decision to leave her first marriage. “You know, I’m not proud of the way that I behaved during that time, but you know what? Everything happens for a reason,” she said. “I really do live my life by thinking God has a plan. And without that whole thing happening, there never would have been Kendall and Kylie.”

As for Kardashian, she has spent the majority of season four struggling to co-parent with Thompson, despite him fathering another child with someone else while they were still dating. Speaking about their relationship on The Kardashians, she said: “We’re gonna be in each other’s lives for the rest of each other’s lives because of our kids, so I’m not gonna fight that and I’m gonna make sure it’s as nice as possible for me.”

“I’m so proud that I’m able to be kind and mature and show my children that Mommy and Daddy can co-exist and be co-parents, and I’m able to be here for him when he’s in his time of need. Someone that I really did not want to look at just a couple months ago, I have living under my roof.”