Synopsis

Kris Jenner, the sexagenarian mother of socialite Kim Kardashian, has revealed details about her marriage with Robert Kardashian.

Kim Kardashian's mother Kris Jenner has candidly discussed the factors that led to the end of her marriage to her first husband, Robert Kardashian.

In Episode 5 of "The Kardashians" Season 4, Jenner opens up to her daughter Khloe Kardashian about her past marriage to the lawyer and businessman. This conversation continues from Episode 3, where they discussed the reasons behind Jenner's infidelity.

67-year-old Kris Jenner has reflected on how youth and naivety played a significant role in the dissolution of her marriage. She acknowledges that at a young age, she didn't fully grasp the consequences of her actions, shedding light on the complexities of her past.

"The Kardashians" Season 4 is streaming on Hulu.

Meanwhile, reality TV star Khloe Kardashian revealed on the latest episode of 'The Kardashians' that she was not amused by her mother Kris Jenner's jokes about Scott Disick having a crush on her after he revealed that she was essentially his idea of a perfect woman, reported People.

Scott, who dated Khloe's sister Kourtney Kardashian Barker and has three children with her, revealed earlier in the show that he was feeling lonely in a conversation with Khloe and Kris "all the time" and couldn't "live with just having my kids.", as per the report.

FAQs:

Q1. What is the age of Kris Jenner?

A1. Kris Jenner is 67-year-old.

Q2. What is the name of the programme?

A2. The name of the programme is "The Kardashians".

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

Disclaimer Statement: This content is authored by a 3rd party. The views expressed here are that of the respective authors/ entities and do not represent the views of Economic Times (ET). ET does not guarantee, vouch for or endorse any of its contents nor is responsible for them in any manner whatsoever. Please take all steps necessary to ascertain that any information and content provided is correct, updated, and verified. ET hereby disclaims any and all warranties, express or implied, relating to the report and any content therein.

(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

...moreless

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

...moreless

Mpox virus is back. Are India’s vaccine makers Serum Institute, Bharat Biotech ready?

As Zara, H&M swelter over Bangladesh turmoil, this is what India can stitch up

How HC order on I-Sec delisting will impact class-action suit against ICICI Bank

“Nava Raipur will emerge as IT hub; Maoist influence is waning”: Chhattisgarh CM

India must protect doctors. They are scarce, and it takes years to train one.

When earnings growth falls to 14-quarter low, you can't predict but can prepare

1

2

3