This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the cc by 4.0 license. Nuncius 37 (2022) 84-117 brill.com/nun In the Footsteps of Galileo History of Science in Italian tv Films and Series in the Nineteen-Sixties and Seventies Italian scientific biopics experienced a period of extraordinary media hype in the 1970s, when some intellectuals personally committed to bringing the lives of the scientists of the past to television in order to discuss the relationship between knowledge and power in the present. Nevertheless, might we properly speak of “Italian-style” historical-scientific fictional drama? To answer this question, we will focus on Roberto Rossellini, Liliana Cavani and, above all, Lucio Lombardo Radice, a promoter, scientific consultant, author and presenter of, and sometimes even actor in, some of the most controversial of these scientific biopics. This article aims, first of all, to reconstruct this history, explaining the reasons for the success of the genre, starting in the 1960s, and the crisis it underwent in the 1980s; secondly, to ascertain the influences these ideological works exerted on choices, approaches and styles of the next generation of science historians and communicators.

THE ITALIAN (Milky)WAY TO SCIENCE FICTION Abstract of the paper read at the 2013 Global Science Fiction" symposium at Wellesley College", Boston, USA. by Jadel Andreetto Science Fiction is translated with the word “Fantascienza” a fusion of science and fantasy. This gap between definitions pigeonholed this literary genre with the status of children's or pulp fiction. Italy, until the end of World War II, was a rural country, literature was produced almost exclusively within the cultured ruling class and was almost always oriented towards introspective fiction or realism. After the war country's reconstruction Italy became an industrial power and the literature began to recount the horrors of war and the partisan resistance, choosing, as did cinema, a (neo)realist approach. The progressive politicization of the literary salons and the new cultural elite decreed the ultimate death of Fantascienza. The only Science Fiction "allowed" was the foreign one, which was, however, still considered a minor genre. After the economic boom, with the escalation of the Cold War and the Years of Lead, the “victory” of existentialism over idealism, Italian literature found a new way to express the issues related to the "uncanny" through the “purely fantastic,” but with few concessions to Sci-Fi. We have to wait the arrival of the middle nineties to separate Fantascienza from the "suspicion" that it was only pulp fiction. But it was only with the arrival of Valerio Evangelisti that Italian Sci-Fi and Fantasy begins to find its way. From Evangelisti on many writers have gone in search of a Sci-Fi fiction that eschews the duty to be Sci-Fi, a literary genre able to chart an unexplored course, an Italian way to Sci-Fi, Fantasy and New Weird, until the publishing industry destroy it all. The Italian (Milky)Way to Science Fiction, after a historical and critical introduction will focus on those interesting days of raise and fall.

Sang d'oiseau infecté par un hématozoaire et phagocytose de ce parasite, or an “astonishing phantasmagoria which takes place in microbes' world”? Épanouissement de quelques fleurs, or a “brutal firework”, close to “the fly of Loïe Fuller's multicolour skirts”? La cristallisation de quelques sels, or some shapes that “come together with sympathy's sweetnesses” and whose “symmetries are their habits and their traditions”? Apparently that kind of linguistic game is played on the two most far away fields: on one side, the purest scientific objectivity, and on the other side, a lyrical poetry. Starting from a historiographical study about the early scientific films screening practice in avant-garde clubs, we will argue that, in those old curation practices of ephemeral films, we can find new forms of a relation between cinema and visual arts, and at the same time rediscover today a chapter of an early European cinematographic production.

After discussing some problematic premises of topic theory in relation to the study of cinema, the paper proposes to investigate audiovisual topoi by combining Rick Altman's "semantic/syntactic/pragmatic" approach to film genre with the structural perspective on audiovisual "textuality" developed by Gianmario Borio starting from the reflections of Michel Chion and Nicholas Cook. This methodological framework is applied to the case of Italian industrial cinema. An outline of the history of this non-fiction genre presents technology as a semantic field emerging in relation to the rapid industrialization process during the period of the so-called Italian "economic miracle" (1958-1963). Pragmatic aspects play a significant role. In those years the major industrial corporations and centres for scientific research (Enea, Eni, Fiat, Innocenti, Italsider, Olivetti) invested in cinematographic communication as a means to promote their image and popularize scientific-technological information, taking advantage of state subsidies. On this basis industrial cinema became a field of conscious audiovisual experimentation. Among the musical collaborators we find prominent avantgarde composers engaged in the field of both electroacoustic and instrumental music, such as Luciano Berio and Egisto Macchi. Their contribution produced a radical change in the soundscape of the genre, directly affecting the audiovisual representation of technology. Particularly electronic and concrete music were the fundamental component in the recurrence of audiovisual structures forming new topoi. Among these emerge both topical configurations aiming at producing simple communicational effects and elaborate constructions involving the use of rhetoric figures.

A wave of translations of Anglo-American science fiction characterized the Italian publishing market during the years of the ‘economic miracle’ (1950s–1960s). Starting from an assessment of quantitative data about science fiction novels published in specialized series, the article discusses the agency of publishers and editors in shaping and marketing ideas of genre, in terms of selection of texts to be translated, adaptation through the paratextual apparatus and translation strategies. Translations in popular series were in fact characterized by a vast range of domestication and manipulation phenomena. A close reading of a number of cases reveals a complex series of motives at work behind these practices: from the adaptation to a readership younger than the original one – and/or believed by the publishers to be less culturally prepared – to economic factors, as the physical characteristics of each book were strictly standardized, and issues of cost and seriality often took precedence over artistic considerations.

Is it really feasible to write a history of film technique without taking into account experimental, craft-oriented and not-industrial practices as the ones of Italian cinema? In other words, the horizons of the story of technique, of the cinema machine understood as a collection of the modes of production, representation and reception and the film apparatus itself, cannot be looked at in isolation without taking into consideration he actual making of the film and how that is linked to the style of the filmaker. The story of technique cannot ignore the link between the making and the style. This places fundamental importance on the weight represented by the process of transformation from making to expression or rather to the moment in which the technique becomes a plastic art form. Therefore, the technique should be seen not merely as an aid to production but as an integral part of the semantic operation of expressing the language of the film itself.