Brian Dannelly’s film, “Saved!” is a comedy-drama centered around the fictional Eagle Mountain Christian High School, where Jesus’ name is spouted as if He’s a popular soft drink—complete with advertising buttons ready to be pinned onto anyone’s backpack and make them eternally popular. The mostly white students live within wealthy suburbs, venturing into the city only long enough to picket abortion clinics.

Audience members are asked to believe this is a community where one might win the “Christian Home Decorating Award of the Year” to wild acclaim. During high school assemblies, the one teen who rebelliously mocks her Christian classmates is targeted by a spotlight, as the school principal asks if anyone wants to get saved. “Getting saved” in “Saved!” is a flip decision that a three-year-old who knows no better may make. True repentance for sin, freedom from its bonds, and laying down one’s life for your friends are none to be seen here.

In fact, based on this movie, one could easily get the idea that calling yourself an evangelical Christian puts you in the categories of judgmental, rude, violent, and stupid. It comes as no surprise that the credits give special thanks to George H. Smith for his book, Atheism: The Case Against God.

The formulaic plot of “Saved!” deals primarily with Mary (Jena Malone), a self-identified Christian whose boyfriend, Dean (Chad Faust), announces, “I think I’m gay!” Moments later, Mary nearly drowns, and she believes Jesus appears, telling her to help Dean. She interprets the “vision” to mean that Jesus wants her to become sexually involved with Dean. Soon after, she is pregnant and furious with God for betraying her. We watch Mary reject God while looking at a cross and trying out several profane words for the first time, defying God to prove His existence to her.

Meanwhile, Dean’s Christian parents ship him off to a care center after finding his pornography, hoping to keep their son away from a homosexual lifestyle. Dean is shown having a great time at the center, where he shares a room with another teen who is there for the same reason. Dean is shown lusting after this boy, and they are soon sweethearts at the prom who are proud of their homosexual choices.

When Mary tells her friends where Dean is, she swears them to secrecy. Her best friend, Hilary Faye (Mandy Moore) promises to keep quiet, then she reveals the secret to their school via a prayer meeting flyer. Through this plotline and some other scenes, Christians are depicted as notorious gossips.

The principal of the Christian school, Pastor Skip (Martin Donovan), is married to a woman who left him years ago to serve as a missionary in South America. He uses “hip” jargon, ridiculously asking students, “Are you ready to get your Jesus on?” Skip performs round-offs, and he rejoices in Christian music that sounds just like mainstream rock, so the gospel message can be subtly slipped in. Pastor Skip begins an affair with Mary’s mother, who also professes to be a believer. Through this plot point, Christians, especially leaders, are depicted as liars, adulterers, and hypocrites.

Christians are portrayed as violent and devious. Hilary Faye and Mary practice shooting handguns, in order to protect their bodies from rapists, at the “Eye for an Eye Shooting Range”—a location presumably designed to welcome Christians. Later in the film, Hilary Faye and her friends forcibly tackle Mary and attempt to exorcise demons from her. Failing that, Hilary Faye throws a Bible forcefully at Mary, hitting her on the head. Hilary Faye later frames Mary and her friends by painting lewd graffiti around the school, which leads to their expulsion.

As Hilary Faye, actress Mandy Moore is given the unenviable task of portraying evil incarnate, and her acting lacks subtlety or depth. The only explanation given for her viciousness is the fact that she was once very fat. They may as well have cast the Wicked Witch of the West to play the role.

Besides Mary, the other heroes of “Saved!” include Roland (Macaulay Culkin), Hilary Faye’s handicapped brother who has rejected Christ, and Cassandra (Eva Amurri), a rebellious Jewish teen who delights in mocking and abusing the Christian kids. In perhaps the film’s most offensive scene, Cassandra pretends to speak in tongues at a school assembly, while she exposes her body to the school. Hilary Faye finally steps in and utters the lewd phrase Cassandra had been actually communicating under the guise of pig Latin.

While the film’s message is being preached during a stand-off at the prom, the character Dean, home from rehabilitation, crashes the dance with his gay lover. Dean says emphatically, “I know in my heart that Jesus still loves me!” Young men and women may see “Saved!” and take away a message that Jesus accepts them despite whatever sinful actions they may choose. To read more about what the Bible says about this, click here.

Despite the fact that “Saved!” takes a lot of farcical low blows at Christians (too many to name in this review), this comedy merits very few laughs (besides its own cliché-ridden and predictable plotline) and hammers home a saccharine message of universal tolerance and goodwill that writers of “Barney” might have discarded as too obvious and trite.

As a follower of Jesus, I regret having seen “Saved!” in the same way one might regret visiting a classroom of ninth graders who’ve been programmed to mock you. I know that the movie was not made with a Christ-centered audience in mind; rather, it appeals to Americans who, according to most polls, believe a God exists but can’t agree on whether He has called them to live according to any standard. The heroes of the film (who challenge their hypocritical principal, parents, and classmates) acknowledge God with their lips, but they live according to their own desires and moral standards, not Christ’s.

Over the last few months, there has been a new wave of worldwide interest in Christ because of Mel Gibson’s “The Passion…” “Saved!” feels like a backlash—a picture of how many people in Hollywood view evangelical believers. At least one of the plot points may convict believers—those who choose to spread gossip via prayer requests. Don’t count on much more of “Saved!” to point out your sin—its characters are mostly too broad to believe or identify with.

Believers who choose to respond with anger or hatred toward “Saved!” may inadvertently mimic the judgmental cardboard cutout “Christian” characters presented in the film, and Christ’s name will continue being tainted. If believers choose to combat the ideas in “Saved!” with the following Scripture in mind,

“Always be ready to give a defense to everyone who asks you a reason for the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear.” (1 Peter 3:15)

…a watching world may note the contrast.