MICHAEL URBAN and Brian Dannelly started writing ''Saved!'' when they were students at the American Film Institute in 1998. By the time it went into production in 2002, the film -- one part bittersweet religious satire and one part rite-of-passage teen movie -- had acquired a veritable congregation of young, indie-Hollywood talent. Set at a Christian high school, it stars Jena Malone as the born-again Mary, a 17-year-old who becomes pregnant after Jesus appears to her in a swimming pool and instructs her to have sex with her gay boyfriend. Mr. Dannelly, who directed, also enlisted Patrick Fugit, Macaulay Culkin, Heather Matarazzo and -- playing against type as the insincere leader of the Christian Jewels, the high school's equivalent of a girl gang -- the former teen-pop star Mandy Moore.

''Saved!'' (opening Friday) is not without claws. But it is ultimately a movie with a gentle and universal point to make: spiritual perfection being an impossibility, the truly Christian thing is to accept imperfect adherence to the letter of religious law. Last month, Mr. Urban, 40, and Mr. Dannelly, 34, spoke by telephone with Mim Udovitch about faith, controversy and the Lifetime network.

MIM UDOVITCH -- Brian, I understand that you have some experience with the Christian educational system.

BRIAN DANNELLY -- Yes. I went to a Christian high school, a Catholic elementary school and a Jewish summer camp.

UDOVITCH -- How did that happen?

DANNELLY -- It was very random, actually. I never was a bad kid. But I would go to clubs and get in trouble. My parents were friends with the principal of this Christian high school, which at the time was one of the strictest schools in the country, and they thought that would help out. So instead of military school, it was Jesus. The Jewish summer camp was just because I was dying to go to a summer camp, and that was the only one that I could go to. And I was actually kicked out of the Catholic elementary school in the first grade for hitting a nun. So that wasn't for very long.

MICHAEL URBAN -- And although I went to a regular high school, I grew up in the South and my family is all Baptist, so I know the world pretty well. My immediate family was not too into it. We sort of stayed away from it. But my extended family are all Southern Baptists.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.