MGM's forthcoming film Saved!, from writer-director Brian Dannelly, takes a satirical look at student life in the religious educational system. Mary (Jena Malone) and her popular best friend, Hilary Faye (Mandy Moore), are starting their senior year at the top of the social structure at American Christian High School. But when Mary finds out she's pregnant, Hilary Faye and her band of devotees turn against Mary and the school labels her an outcast, turning her senior year into a nightmare. It's as an outcast, however, that she finds true friends – other students that the school doesn't quite know what to do with.

Although it's completely different, Saved! might make an interesting cinematic footnote to Mel Gibson's Passion. It seems to want viewers, especially ones that subscribe to a certain ideology, to ask similar questions about how they treat people. Dannelly tells e-church.com, "I think audiences will enjoy it because it's a little shocking but it also has a very big heart. It asks questions more than answering them. Each character has their journey they go through and, at the end of the film, the door is left open for what they will do in the future. I hope people see that we make mistakes and make bad choices but I think that's part of the nature of being human."

The film was born out of Dannelly's own experiences as a teen. He says, "I grew up attending a Catholic elementary school, a Jewish summer camp and a Baptist high school so I came to terms with; perhaps, a more universal kind of God. ... One of the first rules of screenwriting is to write what you know so, naturally I gravitated to my own experiences as a young person trying to get a grasp on God and religion. The goal in writing the script was to write a funny film that wasn't scared to poke fun of things that ordinarily you're not suppose to. It was also my goal to make a film that wasn't about Christian bashing but about teens in crisis and going through things a lot of us have to face everyday."

Malone and Moore star along with a talented cast including Macaulay Culkin, Patrick Fugit, Heather Matarazzo, Eva Amurri, Martin Donovan and Mary-Louise Parker.

Co-written by Dannelly and Michael Urban, Saved! is produced by R.E.M. frontman Michael Stipe. Stipe is adamant about the film's positive stance on religion. "I don't think this film in any way mocks Christianity," he says. "I come from a very religious family, and I would not insult them or the people I grew up with by working so hard on something I thought was insulting. This film presents things the way they really are. Teenage girls get pregnant, people figure out they're gay, and sometimes those things happen in places where they are least expected. ... My personal belief is that Christianity and spirituality in general need a little bit of a push into the 21st century, particularly from the point of view of a teenager," he continues. "That is what this movie captures in such a brilliant way. It is subversive, but it is sweetly subversive. I don't think we are stepping on anyone's toes."

Saved! has been rated PG-13 by the MPAA for "strong thematic issues involving sexual content, pregnancy, smoking and language." The film hits theaters on May 28.

Have a look at more fresh stills from the film by clicking the "Media Page" link below...