Saved! is a 2004 American independent satirical black comedy film directed by Brian Dannelly, and starring Jena Malone, Mandy Moore, Macaulay Culkin, Patrick Fugit, Eva Amurri, Martin Donovan, and Mary-Louise Parker. Its plot follows a teenage girl (Malone) at a Christian high school who has sex with her boyfriend in an attempt to "cure" him of his homosexuality; she becomes pregnant as a result and is ostracized by her schoolmates. Filmed in British Columbia, the film had its theatrical release on May 28, 2004. Saved! was considered a sleeper hit, grossing over $9 million domestically following a platform released by Warner Bros. Pictures under United Artists. The film received mixed reviews from critics, with many remarking on its blend of religious satire with elements of the contemporary teen film.

Plot[]

Devout Evangelical Christian Mary Cummings is entering her senior year at American Eagle Christian High School near Baltimore. She and her friends Hilary Faye and Veronica have formed a girl group called the Christian Jewels. One afternoon, while swimming in his pool, Mary's boyfriend Dean Withers confesses to her that he suspects he is gay. In shock, Mary hits her head, and has a vision in which Jesus tells her to help Dean. Believing Jesus will forgive her, Mary loses her virginity to Dean in an attempt to restore his heterosexuality.

Dean is sent to Christian treatment center Mercy House after his parents find gay pornography in his bedroom. The news shocks and disgusts Mary's friends, aside from Hilary's sardonic, paraplegic brother Roland. Mary soon discovers she is pregnant with Dean's child. Because her due date is after graduation, she opts to hide the pregnancy from her classmates, as well as her mother Lillian, who is covertly dating the school's divorced principal Pastor Skip. Feeling forsaken by Jesus and saddened by her peers' reaction to Dean's sexuality, Mary begins questioning her faith. An enraged Hilary ousts Mary from the Jewels and replaces her with unpopular student Tia. Hilary, Veronica, and Tia later accost Mary in the street and attempt to perform an exorcism on her. Mary fights back, and Hilary strikes her with a Bible.

By Christmas time, rebellious Jewish student Cassandra is the only one of Mary's peers who has discovered her pregnancy. Mary befriends Cassandra and Roland, who are now dating, while ostracized by the rest of their peers. Meanwhile, Skip's son, Patrick, attempts to pursue an evasive Mary, much to Hilary's chagrin. Cassandra and Roland retaliate against Hilary's constant harassment of them by uploading photos of a young, overweight Hilary to the school's computer system. The following day, the school is vandalized with obscene, anti-religious graffiti. Skip suspects Mary, Cassandra, and Roland, and discovers empty spray-paint cans in their lockers planted by Hilary, along with a sonogram of Mary's baby, exposing her pregnancy.

Cassandra is expelled while Mary and Roland are banned from the impending prom. Skip threatens to end his relationship with Lillian if she does not send Mary to Mercy House. Meanwhile, Roland discovers more empty spray-paint cans in Hilary's car, as well as receipts from purchasing them. Planning to expose Hilary with this evidence, Mary, Roland, and Cassandra crash the prom along with Patrick, who takes Mary as his date. Hilary tries to have them ejected, but Roland confronts her with the receipts for the spray-paint. Tia, tired of Hilary's lies and hypocrisy, also attests her guilt to Skip, having discovered additional receipts bearing Hilary's signature.

A humiliated Hilary storms outside while Dean arrives with his boyfriend Mitch and other residents of Mercy House. They are met by Mary and Patrick in the school foyer, where she reveals her pregnancy to Dean. Skip attempts to banish the Mercy House residents, but they refuse. Patrick and Mary attempt to argue with Skip, but their altercation is interrupted by Hilary driving recklessly through the parking lot and ultimately crashing into the school's effigy of Jesus. She then tearfully expresses remorse for her behavior and is comforted by Cassandra as Mary abruptly goes into labor and is taken to the hospital.

At the hospital, Mary gives birth to a daughter. Skip arrives with flowers and contemplates going inside. As a nurse takes a photo of Mary, Dean, Roland, Cassandra, Patrick, Mitch, Lillian, and the baby, Mary explains in a voice-over that she has returned to believing in a God who loves and helps the ones that love and help others in need.

Cast[]

Jena Malone as Mary Cummings, a quiet girl who attempts to help her gay ex-boyfriend, Dean, by giving him her virginity, unintentionally becoming pregnant.

Mandy Moore as Hilary Faye Stockard, the leader of the Christian Jewels and initially Mary's best friend. She is an extremely devout conservative Christian, though very self-righteous and overbearing, much to the annoyance of others. She reluctantly cares for her handicapped brother, Roland, keeping him on a tight leash.

Macaulay Culkin as Roland Stockard, Hilary Faye's sardonic brother. He fell out of a tree as a child, leaving him a paraplegic. Unlike his sister, he does not identify as Christian.

Eva Amurri as Cassandra Edelstein, the only Jewish girl to ever attend American Eagle. She is naturally rebellious and devious on the outside, but when she becomes friends with Mary and lovers with Roland, her true colors show in that she is actually very loyal and open.

Patrick Fugit as Patrick Wheeler, the son of Pastor Skip, the school's principal, and Mary's love interest.

Elizabeth Thai as Veronica; adopted from Vietnam by a pair of missionaries, she is the third Christian Jewel.

Chad Faust as Dean Withers, Mary's boyfriend at the beginning of the film. He comes out to Mary as gay.

Martin Donovan as Pastor Skip Wheeler, the principal of American Eagle. A superficially pious and devout minister who is cheating on his wife, Pastor Skip tries to remain "young and cool".

Heather Matarazzo as Tia; somewhat of an outsider in the beginning, Tia takes Mary's place in the Jewels when Mary is kicked out. Her father has a drinking problem which disturbs her deeply.

Mary-Louise Parker as Lillian Cummings, Mary's mother, a widow from an early age.

Kett Turton as Mitch, a fellow gay resident of Mercy House who becomes Dean's boyfriend.

Dave Rosin, guitarist of the Canadian pop-rock band Hedley, appears as the guitarist for the band playing in the prom scene.

Production[]

Director and co-writer Brian Dannelly based much of the film on things he had experienced and witnessed while attending a Baptist Christian high school. "I would even go so far as to say that everything in the film is something I experienced or researched," Dannelly stated. "I didn’t try to make up stuff." Though set in Maryland, Saved! was filmed in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Release[]

Box office[]