Kingston Gleaner (Newspaper) - July 24, 2016, Kingston, Kingston Ryon Jones Staff Reporter FOR DECADES, fatalaccidents in the BogWalk gorge, particularly around the Flat Bridge, have made the headlines as the area developed a reputation as a black spot. The Rio Cobre, which runs beneath the more than 300- year-old bridge, has been the scene of some of the most horr i fy ing motor vehic le accidents in the nat ion’s his tory, wi th some bodies never recovered f rom the murky water. The la tes t fa ta l crash to have occurred at the bridge took place eight days ago, when the driver of a Suzuki Vi tara los t control of the vehic le , which ran off the road and in to the r iver, leaving s ix of i t s e ight occupants dead. This has again sparked debate on what can be done to reduce the number of fatal accidents in the area. Guard rails, the widening of the bridge, stationary police teams in the area or speed bumps on the approaches to the br idge are among the many suggestions over the years. However, not much has been done to make the cross ing safer and many believe there is no need for physical changes. FLAT BRIDGE NOT MORE ACCIDENT-PRONE Despi te the numerous crashes in the vicinity of the br idge, head of the Pol ice Traff ic Divis ion, Senior Superintendent Calvin Allen, sa id the s ta t i s t ics do not suggest that Flat Bridge is more accident-prone than many other places across the island. “In 15 years, we have had 12 fatalit ies (including the latest six) in the vicinity of the Flat Bridge. However, in that same 15-year span we have had 32 collisions that resulted in 46 deaths along the Bog Walk gorge,” Allen said. “The Flat Bridge in itself is quite OK. Persons just need to negotiate the area using the i r sk i l l and exper ience from the perspective of how they were taught to drive to negotiate the Flat Bridge.” The dangers of the bridge have also caught the attention of Pr ime Minis ter Andrew Holness who, last week, told our news t eam tha t i t has entered his policy zone. “There has been a massive inves tment in the Nor th - South Highway which creates an alternative route, but that is a paid route. “ S o t h e F l a t B r i d g e w i l l h a v e t o b e g i v e n consideration, and it is now someth ing in my zone o f con templa t ion to make i t safer,” said Holness. He noted that the Bog Walk gorge carries a high volume of t r a ff i c and a ve ry low percentage of accidents. “The accidents that happen there a re persons who are definitely speeding, and who are dr iving reckless ly and carelessly. So it is a matter of pub l ic consc iousness and public awareness. “There is some amount of design work that I bel ieve can be done to reduce the speed in the gorge and approaching Flat Bridge. So there cou ld be g rea te r signage, there could be speed bumps a long the way; in other words, there are things that can be done to increase the safe ty and ensure tha t d r ive rs obey the ru les , ” added Holness. Executive director of the Nat iona l Road Safe ty Counc i l , Pau la F le tcher, agreed tha t mos t o f the crashes in the vicinity of the br idge resu l t ed f rom bad choices by drivers. According to Fletcher, the statistics show that in more than 90 per cent of crashes persons were speed ing , d r ink ing and d r iv ing , no t wear ing a sea t be l t , o r overtaking recklessly. But despite the statistics, F le tcher i s u rg ing the authorities to protect people from themselves where the Flat Bridge is concerned, as drivers are prone to making bad choices on the road. “Our approach a t the Nat iona l Road Safe ty Counc i l i s no t wha t everybody else would say: that there is nothing wrong THE SUNDAY GLEANER, JULY 24, 2016 A5| NEWS FILE A container fell off a trailer and into the Rio Cobre while negotiating the Flat Bridge in St Catherine. PLEASE SEE GORGE, A10 No ‘duppies’ on Flat Bridge! Despite headline-grabbing crashes, the crossing is not as deadly as many other Jamaican roads Undertakers removing the body of one of the victims of the latest tragedy at Flat Bridge in St Catherine. ;