A fan poster based on "Sing It Loud!" from the show

Cast

Liv Rooney

Bree DuMont

South Salamanca

Genre

Musical, comedy-drama

Followed By

Sing It Louder!!

Filmed

Los Angeles

Sing It Loud! is a fictional TV show mentioned in Liv and Maddie several times. Liv starred in it and spent four years in Hollywood filming it. She played a character named Stephanie Einstein, who was the main character of the show.

To see more fictional movies and TV shows, see Fictional Filmography.

Plot[]

Based on Sing It Louder!!-A-Rooney, the plot of this show highly suggests Stephanie Einstein broke a law and was caught, which resulted in her being sent to a therapeutic boarding school to help her become a model citizen. At the series finale, she graduated and was allowed to return home.

Featured Songs[]

On Top of the World

Trivia[]

The show ends with Liv and her class graduating.

Sing it Loud! has been mentioned in several episodes, such as Twin-A-Rooney, Skate-A-Rooney, and especially Sing It Louder!!-A-Rooney and Sing It Live!!!-A-Rooney.

Liv once found a Sing It Loud! DVD in a ditch. (Dodge-A-Rooney)

Liv left for Hollywood to film the show when she was only 11 years old. (Flashback-A-Rooney)

This was the first show Liv starred in, the second being Voltage, and the third being Sing It Louder!!

It had 4 seasons, which is the same maximum amount of seasons a Disney Channel show has, including Liv and Maddie.

Kathy Kan stars as Stephanie Einstein in the Korean version of Sing It Loud! (Korean: 큰소리로 부르세요!)

Based on the fact the show revolved around a boarding school, it is likely Bree DuMont was not a part of the main cast.

An episode was called Race It Loud.

In one episode, Stephanie has a dream where she is visiting an international space station and sings a super high note to destroy an asteroid before it fell to earth. The producers of Space Werewolves saw this episode and loved it so much they changed the male lead Tristan Lycanth into a girl so Liv could audition for the role.

Cast[]

Liv Rooney as Stephanie Einstein

South Salamanca as Stephanie's best friend

Bree DuMont as Alberta Einstein

Unknown as Gunther

Gallery[]