Correction appended.

At around noon on December 27, 2007, Benazir Bhutto arrived at a fourth-floor suite in the Serena Hotel in Islamabad to meet with Hamid Karzai, the President of Afghanistan. She “was in a very good mood,” Karzai told me recently. She admired his cape, and they laughed as he recounted how he had acquired it—an improbable tale that involved a visit to the exiled King of Afghanistan. They sipped tea and coffee and discussed the region’s gathering political violence. Militant Islamic leaders had named both of them as targets for assassination; suicide bombings had escalated in their two countries during 2007, and in Pakistan had reached an unprecedented rate of about one a week. The targets included politicians, Pakistani Army soldiers, Air Force cadets, intelligence-agency employees, paramilitaries, and civilians. Bhutto had been attacked in Karachi in October, as she returned from exile in Dubai; she escaped, but more than a hundred and forty people died. “I am not afraid of death,” she told Karzai. The Afghan President, who had never spoken with her in person, found her “to be a very, very brave woman—too courageous for her own good,” he recalled.

That evening, Bhutto was to meet with two American officials, Senator Arlen Spector and Representative Patrick Kennedy. After seeing Karzai, she went to her Islamabad home and summoned Farhatullah Babar, a close aide, and asked him to prepare a short briefing memo for the Americans about Pakistan’s large and influential intelligence agencies. The spy services, particularly the Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate, which is run by the military, have a long history of collaborating with Islamist militias to wage covert war in Afghanistan and India. The I.S.I. also collects foreign intelligence, represses separatist movements inside Pakistan, monitors loyalty in the country’s armed services, and involves itself in electoral politics on the military’s behalf. A national parliamentary vote was less than two weeks away; Bhutto asked Babar to describe in his memo how the intelligence services “were directly interfering in the elections, with some specific examples—what she felt, her fears,” Babar recalled.

She ate a light lunch and then climbed into her armored white Land Cruiser to drive to the nearby city of Rawalpindi, where a political rally had been organized in a park called Liaquat Bagh, an irregular oval surrounded by brick walls and metal railings. The park is named for Liaquat Ali Khan, Pakistan’s first Prime Minister, who was assassinated there in 1951. A few pine and eucalyptus trees shade its lawn. A banner hung above a raised platform where Bhutto and local leaders of the party she headed, the Pakistan People’s Party, were to speak; it depicted Bhutto and her father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, a former President and Prime Minister of Pakistan, who, in 1979, was hanged in a military prison a mile away.

As Bhutto sat on the platform and listened to the opening speeches, her aides’ cell phones began to ring. Sherry Rehman, a senior political and media adviser, leaned over to relay the news: elsewhere in the city, gunmen had killed election workers for Nawaz Sharif, a political rival of Bhutto’s who heads a branch of the Pakistan Muslim League, and who, like her, had served twice as Pakistan’s Prime Minister. “O.K.,” Bhutto said. “We must phone him,” to offer sympathy and support. She asked Rehman to remind her to make the call.

She was hoarse from campaigning, but, in Rehman’s estimation, she delivered “one of the most resounding and exceptional speeches” she had made since her return. Bhutto praised local Party workers and promised to help the poor and to lead a national struggle against religious extremists.

“Long live Bhutto!” the crowd chanted as she descended from the platform, at around 5 P.M. She got into the Land Cruiser, which was surrounded by other Party vehicles. There were police patrolling the park, but not as many as Bhutto wanted: she and her aides had petitioned the government for four police vehicles to create a protective phalanx when she travelled by car, but the request had not been met. As the Land Cruiser left the park, the driver crossed a median to turn east onto a city street. Another crowd of chanting supporters swarmed toward her. The vehicle stopped; Bhutto unrolled the sunroof and stood up to wave to them. A clean-shaven man wearing sunglasses and a black vest moved toward her, raised a pistol, and fired. Video footage acquired by a British broadcaster showed that moments later either this man or a second man, behind him, who was wearing a white head scarf, apparently detonated a suicide explosive device.

Few victims of political murder have contemplated their demise in advance as thoroughly as Benazir Bhutto did hers. In part, this habit of mind was an inheritance; her father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, before his execution, wrote a book entitled “If I Am Assassinated.” For his children, violent intrigue was a recurring theme of family life. Benazir’s youngest brother, Shahna-waz, died from poisoning during a family holiday in Cannes in 1985; no one was ever charged in the case. Eleven years later, police shot and killed her other brother, Murtaza, outside his home, in Karachi, in circumstances that remain disputed. Benazir’s political career encompassed two long periods of exile and two terms as Pakistan’s Prime Minister; a persistent pattern in her life, as she saw it, was the mobilization of her family’s enemies against her.

Last fall, as she prepared to return to Pakistan from her second exile, Bhutto received an intelligence report from the government of a “brother country,” as she put it to me. The report identified four Islamist networks that planned to kill her after she arrived. Three of them operate along Pakistan’s western frontier, near the border with Afghanistan: Al Qaeda, the Afghan Taliban, and a group of survivors from a raid at the radical Red Mosque, in Islamabad. Bhutto told me that the fourth network named in the report was “some group in Karachi,” a city with a dauntingly large cast of violent Islamist radicals. In addition, Baitullah Mehsud, a fugitive radical Islamist leader, who is attempting to unify Taliban fighters inside Pakistan, publicly threatened to kill her. (He has denied any involvement in her murder.) As Bhutto reflected on the death threats and assassination attempts against her, she did not dwell upon the foot soldiers in her country’s growing Islamist insurgency. She spoke instead about the support networks that these insurgents seemed to draw upon, which were rooted, she suspected, in sections of her country’s government. “Everybody talks about Baitullah Mehsud and Osama bin Laden and all of that,” she said when we met in Karachi in October, three days after the attack on her homecoming rally. “There is another structure that is giving them succor, that is giving them encouragement.”

Between 1979 and 1992, the Pakistan Army, primarily through the I.S.I., received several billion dollars from the C.I.A. and Saudi Arabia to support Islamic militias fighting against Soviet and Afghan Communist forces. Toward the end of this war, the I.S.I. also built up jihadi groups that were seeking to liberate the disputed territory of Kashmir from India. The Taliban, which started in 1994, as a small group of religious students and veterans of the anti-Soviet war, became the best known and most successful of the I.S.I.’s Islamist clients, but there were many others. After the attacks on New York and Washington on September 11, 2001, President Musharraf repudiated these historical policies and pledged to destroy any Islamist groups in Pakistan that persisted in violence. Some of the groups continued their violent activities nonetheless, but Musharraf’s supporters, particularly those in the Bush Administration, pleaded for patience; they rarely questioned his intentions, or those of his colleagues in Pakistan’s military and intelligence bureaucracies. Benazir Bhutto, however, doubted that the Army and the I.S.I. had abandoned the policies of the past.

Between her glaring sense of entitlement and a tireless use of the media, Bhutto could seem like “a machine that operates solely in the mode of victimization,” as her estranged niece Fatima Bhutto put it late last year. Bhutto’s criticisms of Musharraf’s government did not make careful distinctions between fact and speculation. However, when she spoke of the nexus between the I.S.I. and Pakistan’s Islamist groups, she could draw upon direct experience. During her second tour as Prime Minister, between 1994 and 1996, when Pakistan covertly supported the Taliban, Bhutto participated in many discussions with I.S.I. officers about that support—a fact that she denied at the time but later conceded.

Pakistan’s politicians sometimes temporize about the Taliban; Bhutto, however, after September 11th, did not. In her final weeks, she criticized the country’s radical Islamist groups and also warned repeatedly about civil violence. “Pakistan faces the threat of disintegration unless it can control the irregular armies, the irregular militias, the weapons depots, and the recruitment centers, training centers for those people who are suicide bombers and preachers of hate,” she said last fall. “Unless we do that, then our country’s going to face a very bloody internal situation. Already we have seen the havoc that suicide bombers can wreak.”

Nevertheless, even Bhutto may not have grasped the extent to which old patterns of radicalism in Pakistan are changing. Jihadi groups that once collaborated with the I.S.I. are breaking away to pursue an independent revolutionary agenda, and they are having considerable success. The Army’s fitful efforts to suppress this uprising have, so far, only motivated the militants to regroup. Early last year, for example, about a thousand Islamists gathered at the Red Mosque, which is not far from the headquarters of the I.S.I., and managed to stockpile rifles, grenades, and sophisticated military technology. In July, when Army commandos raided the mosque, more than a hundred people, both soldiers and civilians, died. Radicalized survivors of the raid fled to western Pakistan, where they have joined the Taliban and embarked on revenge attacks against the Army. These attacks seem to be generating confusion, demoralization, and conflict within the I.S.I., the Army, and the Frontier Corps, a local paramilitary force. There is also evidence, according to Pakistani and outside specialists, to suggest that some current and former Pakistani military and intelligence officers sympathize with the Islamist insurgents with whom they are notionally at war—all this taking place in a country that possesses between fifty and a hundred atomic bombs. It seems doubtful that Benazir Bhutto will be this contest’s last notable victim.

The road from Peshawar, which lies about a hundred miles west of Islamabad, to Kohat, a garrison town in Pakistan’s North-West Frontier, begins as a flat highway lined by metal shipping containers holding workshops and small garages. When I travelled down it a few days after Bhutto’s murder, it was filled with Japanese sedans, motorized rickshaws, horse carts, and brightly painted trucks. Buildings and brick walls were festooned with campaign posters, most of them featuring local candidates who were standing in the upcoming provincial and national elections. Bhutto’s was the only female face to be seen. Pashtuns, a minority who are tribally organized and speak a distinct language, are predominant in Pakistan’s North-West Frontier, and office-seekers there cultivate two distinct personal styles: the mustachioed nationalist-criminal look and that of the hirsute religious activist. Because many voters are illiterate, political parties are assigned visual symbols to make balloting simpler. The symbol for Nawaz Sharif’s section of the Muslim League is a lion, and that of the Pakistan People’s Party is an arrow; some of the smaller parties based in the North-West Frontier have chosen more unusual ones, such as a ceiling fan and an AK-47 assault rifle.

Kohat is a jumble of whitewashed houses, shops, and mosques on a knoll in a desert valley; in the center is an imposing military cantonment. Beyond ridges rising to the west are Pakistan’s Federally Administered Tribal Areas, the seven semiautonomous political regions, along the border with Afghanistan, where tribal rather than Pakistani law prevails. (Pakistan is divided into four provinces: the North-West Frontier, Baluchistan, Sind, and the Punjab, which is the most populous, and is home to the country’s dominant Punjabi ethnic group.) Kohat did not seem particularly tense, but it is one of the places that have been affected by the recent spread of the Pakistani Taliban. To the north, the Army has deployed armor and helicopter gunships to drive Taliban and other militants out of Swat, a once popular tourist destination known for its mountain vales. Kohat’s difficulties with the Taliban have been more sporadic, but two weeks before I arrived a suicide bomber had detonated himself beside a soccer team of Army soldiers as they walked home after a match, and twelve of them died.

I had an appointment with Javed Ibrahim Paracha, who is running for the National Assembly, where he has served before; his bearded face stares out from election posters on the walls of Kohat’s shops. He seemed well qualified to explain the Taliban’s growth inside Pakistan. Paracha, a member of Nawaz Sharif’s party, has, by his own account, been arrested three times since September 11th, most recently in 2005, on criminal and terrorism charges; he now faces about six dozen charges in Pakistani courts. On each occasion, he says, he was interrogated by F.B.I. personnel working in Pakistan.

The Paracha tribe, from which he draws his name, has a strong presence in Khurram, one of the seven Tribal Areas. It lies just over the border from the former Al Qaeda redoubt at Tora Bora, where, in December, 2001, the United States and its Afghan allies fought against Al Qaeda volunteers, including Osama bin Laden. Afterward, a number of bin Laden’s followers found their way to Paracha, who is a lawyer by profession. He helped them in court and formed groups to support them—one of which was named the World Jihad Council.

Down an alley where a man was shovelling garbage into a wheelbarrow, I found Paracha in a back room of his urban compound, sitting on a cot strewn with pillows. He is a rotund man in late middle age, with coffee-colored skin, bushy black eyebrows, and an undisciplined, graying beard. He wore a gown and a sweater, and had a bright gold watch. Speaking in deliberate, sonorous English, he told me that while he was in detention he was beaten and abused at first. (Bill Carter, a spokesman for the F.B.I., said that agents sometimes interviewed detainees in Pakistani custody but that the bureau never comments on particular cases. He added, “It is the policy of the F.B.I. not to be involved in the abuse of individuals.”) Eventually, Paracha said, his American interlocutors adopted a softer strategy: they offered him half a million dollars to serve as “a bridge” between the United States and the Taliban and Al Qaeda. Paracha said that he turned down the offer. “Their way of discussion is based on dollars,” he explained. “Every man is not purchasable.” Besides, he continued, “if I arrange a meeting and they send them to Cuba, what’s in my hand? What is the guarantee of my trust?”

When I asked why there had been such a dramatic increase in suicide bombings, he gave three reasons, the first of which was “a reaction to the Red Mosque in Islamabad.” He went on, “The second reason is Bajaur and Waziristan”—large, mountainous regions in the Tribal Areas, populated by young men who have grown up with assault rifles slung over their shoulders. These regions are now controlled almost entirely by the Taliban or related groups, Paracha said, which are pushing down from the mountains. “The third reason is the agencies”—a common term for Pakistan’s intelligence services. “Sometimes there are blasts in the most carefully protected security areas,” he said. “Where military forces are standing, how is this possible, that a new man will enter in this area?” He implied that only inside help could explain it.

“Everyone has sympathy with the Taliban,” he continued. “It is very easy to approach them. In our area, with the Pakistani government, it’s very difficult to approach a police officer or a minister, because they are afraid of suicide bombers.” Kohat’s residents, he said, had come to prefer the jirga approach—informal courts and councils, overseen by the Taliban—to that of the Pakistani government, where an ordinary judge may require several years to resolve a case. “With the Taliban, a very big unsolved problem is solved in one week or even three days. If there is any case between tribes, they sit together with the Taliban on the floor. Every party explains its case in front of the second party. Even in Kohat town the Taliban are present in every mosque.”

As we talked, three white-bearded tribal elders entered the back room of Paracha’s compound and sat down on cushions on the floor. They said that they had come from Parachinar, a Pakistani town near Tora Bora, to escape warfare between Sunni and Shia tribes. One of them, Mohammad Nazir, a thin man in a white robe, introduced himself as the chief of the Paracha tribe in Khurram. He said that when he and his colleagues left Parachinar they turned their houses and businesses over to the Taliban; they were confident that their property would be handed back in good condition whenever they chose to return. In the meantime, they were available to help their clansman Javed Ibrahim in his election campaign.

I asked if the local Taliban played favorites at election time. “The Taliban have no part in politics,” Paracha answered emphatically. “They are totally against democracy and the ballot. They will decide everything under the Holy Koran or with the bullet.”

Pakistan’s relationship with the Taliban has often seemed mysterious and has proved vexing for the Bush Administration. During 2004 and 2005, as the Taliban and Al Qaeda increased in strength in Pakistan, they carried out attacks on American and NATO forces in Afghanistan. The Bush Administration urged President Musharraf to dispatch the Pakistani Army into South Waziristan to disrupt them, and Musharraf agreed to do so. The Army had never before entered the Tribal Areas to subdue them by force; after British troops were defeated there, during the late imperial period, colonial and Pakistani governments had favored a system premised upon local autonomy. The invasion began poorly and has been deteriorating ever since; the Army has taken significant casualties, and, while its forces have killed or captured some Taliban leaders, they have also set off popular resentment.

For decades, Pakistan’s Army has been trained and equipped primarily to fight conventional infantry-and-armor wars against India; it has little capacity for counterinsurgency. Moreover, both officers and men are mainly ethnic Punjabis, from the eastern province bordering India; they are foreigners among the Pashtuns of the Tribal Areas. By late 2006, after sporadic battles that received little international attention, the Army had been, in essence, “militarily defeated” by the Taliban and Al Qaeda, as a U.S. Defense Department official put it.

During this campaign, the Taliban have captured hundreds of Pakistani soldiers and paramilitaries, not only in the Tribal Areas but also in the towns and villages of the North-West Frontier. Many prisoners are released after negotiations, but sometimes, when the Taliban discover enlisted men or officers who are Shiites, they execute them. Militants in black turbans parade the victims before handheld cameras and behead them with machetes or knives. The Taliban’s propaganda wing distributes these gruesome videos throughout Pakistan.

The Army has some Pashtun commanders—about fifteen per cent of the officer corps—and many of them also serve in the Frontier Corps. Frontier Corps personnel occasionally balk at assaulting fellow-Pashtuns among the Taliban, because they regard the Army’s campaign in the Tribal Areas as a mercenary expedition directed by Washington. “They have been saying, ‘We won’t fight,’ ” Shuja Nawaz, a Pakistani researcher from a prominent military family, told me. He has written a book about the Army, “Crossed Swords,” that is based on extensive interviews with generals and access to military archives. According to Nawaz and other specialists, a number of these dissenting soldiers have been court-martialled and imprisoned, in cases that the Musharraf government has never publicized. Mullahs in the Tribal Areas have refused to preside over proper burials for fallen soldiers, because the dead did not perish righteously.

As these failures accumulated, Musharraf was distracted. He published an autobiography, toured abroad, appeared on “The Daily Show,” and, at home, became increasingly preoccupied by domestic politics. “He was a part-time Army chief, and it showed,” Mushahid Hussain, a senator who is a member of Musharraf’s party, the other branch of the Pakistan Muslim League, told me. The President delegated the campaign in the Tribal Areas to a Pashtun general, Ali Mohammad Jan Aurakzai, who advocated a more political approach, using the jirga system; Aurakzai believed that this could reduce the need for military force. In September, 2006, he signed a peace treaty with Pakistani Taliban leaders in North Waziristan.

Pakistan promoted this deal in Washington as being a means of pacifying the Taliban and luring its fighters away from hard-core Al Qaeda groups. To the Bush Administration and the government of Afghanistan, however, the North Waziristan treaty appeared to be a nonaggression pact that gave the Taliban tacit license to strike across the Afghan border if they left the Pakistani Army alone.

Tariq Waseem Ghazi, a retired three-star general who served as Pakistan’s Defense Secretary between 2005 and 2007, told me that, among Pakistan’s top commanders, “everybody felt there was a need for a political accommodation” in the Tribal Areas. “I think it was unreasonable at any time that we should go into the Tribal Areas with the same kind of motivation and fervor with which the coalition went into Afghanistan or into Iraq,” he said. “That was a point that I made to the U.S. Defense Department in my talks a number of times. I kept telling them, ‘Shock and awe is fine for you if you fly in from the U.S. or Canada, but shock and awe is no good for us when we have to live with the Tribal Areas as part and parcel of Pakistan.’ ”

Ghazi said that he often found the Pentagon to be unsympathetic. In fact, U.S. commanders in Afghanistan believed that American and NATO soldiers were dying as a result of the North Waziristan peace treaty. Nonetheless, Pakistan’s generals felt that Washington had rushed to judgment. “Whenever you had casualties in the U.S. forces, they had to find somebody they could put the blame on,” Ghazi said. Pentagon delegations travelled to Pakistan with “fancy graphs about attacks going up” in Afghanistan as a result of the treaty, but Ghazi found their analysis of cause and effect unconvincing.

This situation did little to relieve the undercurrents of mistrust that circulated among the governments of Pakistan, Afghanistan, and the United States. “That’s not how partnerships work,” Ghazi said. “I think we did not have a common plan because we did not have common objectives. You can’t have partners who are suspicious of each other. The Americans are suspicious of us. We are suspicious of the Americans. The Afghans are suspicious of us. We are suspicious of the Afghans.”

Afghan intelligence officials have repeatedly claimed that the I.S.I. may still be collaborating with the Taliban. Among other things, the Afghans have asked why Musharraf’s government has been unable to root out Taliban leaders from major Pakistani cities like Quetta, in the southwestern province of Baluchistan. Some American officials and outside regional experts share the Afghans’ suspicions about the activities of the I.S.I., or elements within it. Pakistan could have several motives in undertaking a covert program to aid or protect the Taliban: appeasing Pakistan’s radicalized Pashtun population; pressuring Afghanistan’s government into political concessions favorable to Pakistan; or preserving a historically friendly militia as a hedge against an eventual American withdrawal from Afghanistan.

Ghazi, referring to these suspicions, said, “We thought they were most irresponsible.” In discussions with American officials, “we cried ourselves hoarse,” he said, trying to convince them that Pakistan had abandoned its clandestine support for the Taliban. “But, every time, somebody would come around saying, ‘This is true.’ We ended up saying, ‘If that’s what you believe, believe it. There’s nothing we can do about it.’ I think there were people in Pakistan who just gave up trying to convince the Americans.” He added, “There is absolutely no reason for the Pakistan Army or anyone to have been involved with the Taliban.” General Rashid Qureshi, Musharraf’s spokesman, said the notion that Pakistan might support the Taliban was “a ridiculous argument, really. We have lost over a thousand military men fighting these extremists. How can the government be supporting extremists to fight its own security people?” Even within the I.S.I., he added, “there’s no way that these officers would defy or go against the orders of the Chief of Army Staff.” Those who suggest otherwise “want to bring doubt in the minds of the Western world” about Musharraf, “a man to whom we all owe so much.” (Also, Musharraf has survived four assassination attempts by Islamist conspirators.)

When Vice-President Dick Cheney visited Pakistan last February, the Musharraf government made a carefully timed arrest of a Taliban leader in Quetta. The apparent ease with which this and other, similarly timed roundups were engineered suggested that Pakistan could take down the Taliban’s fugitive leadership if it really wished to do so. Ghazi conceded that some of the arrests may have been ordered by Musharraf’s government “purely for cosmetic reasons,” because “there was this pressure on us” to prove that Pakistan was cracking down. “I think we may have overdone it, overplayed it, because of which we lost credibility.” He insisted, however, that the roundups were merely public relations—a matter of grabbing whoever could be located quickly—“not a deliberate ploy in the sense that we always had the ability to deliver what needed to be done.”

Even if Pakistan has no organized covert policy to support the Taliban, the Army has yet to make a full commitment to the Taliban’s eradication. Shuja Nawaz, the military historian, said he doesn’t think that among the senior generals and intelligence officers “there’s any consensus that the Taliban are the enemy.” He explained, “So long as the Taliban don’t attack the Army, it sees them as perfectly fine. And, potentially, if they take over Afghanistan, it sees them as a group that would have at least some sympathies with Pakistan, and vice versa. That has been in the way of Musharraf’s desire to act and capture the Taliban leadership. I cannot believe that the I.S.I. does not know which houses are owned by the Taliban leadership and where they’re living and so on.”

The I.S.I. has had only limited ties to Al Qaeda in the past, while other jihadis, such as the Kashmiri groups and the Afghan Taliban, have been much more closely connected. None of these groups have ever been easy for Pakistan to control. Particularly in the case of the Taliban, however, American intelligence analysts have been unable to determine whether the I.S.I. or sections of it are still trying to support or at least protect their former jihadi allies. “This is a big subject of debate for us,” a senior U.S. intelligence official told me late last year. “The fact that they operate from Pakistani soil is undeniable. Is it omission or commission?” He added, “The legacy’s still there. But is there official sanction? I would tend to say no, but I have no way of knowing.”

“There’s calibration,” another senior U.S. intelligence official said. The Pakistanis “recognize that they want a friendly Pashtun entity in Afghanistan” and that the Taliban might eventually provide this, as they did during the late nineteen-nineties. Yet it is unclear how many active I.S.I. officers might be involved in such a project today. “Is it a lot of people? Several people? It’s changing. It’s a dynamic issue.” Perhaps, the official speculated, the recent spate of attacks against the Army by Islamists would force a reëvaluation. When “suicide bombers are shooting up Pakistan,” he said, “do you see that, whatever you’ve been doing, it’s not working?”

Intelligence dossiers about the I.S.I. and the Taliban are often ambiguous. “There is an enormous amount of evidence about what the Taliban do in Pakistan,” Ronald E. Neumann, who served as U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan between July, 2005, and April, 2007, says. “There is a body of evidence about what some retired or technically retired I.S.I. officers are doing. But there’s a dearth of hard evidence—‘These five documents.’ So at that point it’s everybody’s opinion.”

When U.S. military commanders on the Afghan side of the border monitored Pakistani operations in the Tribal Areas, Neumann said, they observed that some Pakistani officers attacked the Taliban, some did so halfheartedly, and others did not fight at all. “That’s too incoherent to be policy,” Neumann said. “Maybe it’s the fear of the individual commanders. Maybe it’s the absence of policy. I don’t know the factors that create this incoherence, but it’s there.” Still, while “the mass” of Taliban fighters in Afghanistan are recruited there, the most important Taliban leadership is based in Pakistan, and the sanctuary the leaders enjoy there is destabilizing both countries.

There is raw intelligence describing contacts between I.S.I. officers and Taliban leaders, U.S. officials told me, but the accuracy of this reporting can be difficult to assess, and the motives of the I.S.I. officers are not always clear.

The evidence that retired I.S.I. officers support the Taliban is more convincing, though it can be difficult to know whether these officers are acting as religious volunteers or as clandestine operatives of the I.S.I. In any event, Pakistan’s militants are by no means a cohesive force. A Pakistani who has been a senior member of one of the country’s militant groups for more than a decade told me that Al Qaeda, the Afghan Taliban, and the Pakistani Taliban have separate leadership councils. (Pentagon analysts refer to the Afghan Taliban as Big T, and their Pakistani counterpart as Little T.) By late 2007, some of the jihadis appeared to be acting more destructively than ever before—a Frankensteinian narrative that had long been predicted by the I.S.I.’s critics. On November 24th, a suicide bomber detonated himself beside a bus at the entrance to Camp Hamza, the I.S.I.’s national headquarters, in Islamabad. More than a dozen people died; it was one of the first known attacks by an apparent Islamist cell against the intelligence service.

One recent morning in the capital, I visited Khalid Khawaja, a former Air Force and I.S.I. officer. He was detained last January and held for a total of seven months on charges that he was involved in terrorism at the Red Mosque and was in possession of religious hate material. Asserting his innocence, he said that he had been harassed by the government because of his human-rights advocacy. Khawaja wore a white cap and a full, gray-white beard; it was unusually cold, and we huddled before a heater in a sitting room on the lower level of his home. I asked him why the I.S.I., which had so long supported the Taliban and other Islamist groups, had now become a target for suicide bombers.

He said that the intelligence services and their onetime clients were basically not enemies but that the Musharraf government and its American allies had managed to create conflicts over loyalty and identity within those institutions. “The I.S.I. was supposed to be supporting the Taliban—it cannot change in one day just because Uncle Sam has ordered it. So there will be the people who have sympathies. Yes, of course you can handle the big bosses—give them money, and threaten them, and all of that. But everybody cannot be threatened.” And, he went on, “very successfully, you have pitched us against each other.” The I.S.I., he suggested, was to some extent at war with itself now. “They’re all the same people,” he continued. “Same brothers and cousins. They have their relatives in the Army and the I.S.I. Sometimes people can take government orders; some resist that. I have talked to many security people. I have not met anybody who is really pro-American, who does not really hate Americans.”

As Benazir Bhutto prepared to return to Pakistan last year, senior military officers and planners at the Pentagon concluded that, despite the unhappy experience of the North Waziristan treaty, the Islamist insurgency in Pakistan should be attacked by political means, not merely with Predator drones or cordon-and-search operations by the faltering Pakistani Army. CENTCOM, the U.S. military command responsible for the region, together with Musharraf’s government, developed a strategy for calming the Tribal Areas. The emphasis was to be on long-term counterinsurgency, particularly through economic aid and increased training of local tribal forces from the Frontier Corps.

The Pentagon’s planners realized that the Tribal Areas were “not suddenly going to become governable,” as a senior Defense Department official put it. “You’ve got to work security, governance, and economics all at the same time, so that they become supportive of one another and eventually become a self-sustaining cycle that ultimately moderates the radical, just as it would anywhere,” the senior Defense official said.

Bhutto presented herself in Washington as an instrument of these ambitions. The Bush Administration had ignored her after September 11th, but now there was a sense that she might be useful. The People’s Party was not particularly strong in the North-West Frontier or the Tribal Areas, but it did have allies and experience in both places. Also, Bhutto commanded the only political party in Pakistan with support in all four provinces, and she was prepared to speak out for religious moderation; by doing so, she would lend legitimacy to Musharraf’s agenda. Bhutto and Musharraf both tended to see themselves, however, as indispensable saviors of Pakistan, a role that would be difficult for them to share.

Last September, on the eve of her return, I met with Bhutto in the lounge of the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Washington. We took a table near a jazz pianist. I had not seen her for more than fifteen years. She was fifty-four, and her face had become full, but her skin was pale and youthful. She was in a giddy mood; she ordered water for herself and, for me, a “pre-celebratory” glass of champagne. As we spoke, I was reminded of her ability, honed when she was president of the Oxford Union, to transform informal conversation into oratory, a feat that made her seem at once impressive and untrustworthy.

She spoke with particular conviction about the need to curtail the power of Pakistan’s intelligence services. “The security apparatus must be reformed,” she said. “Unless that is done, it is going to be very difficult for us to dismantle the terrorist networks and the militant networks, and today they’re a threat not only to other countries but to the unity and survival of Pakistan.”

As for the North-West Frontier and the Tribal Areas, Bhutto said that her return could create greater stability. “We want to bring the Tribal Areas into the modern world, the twenty-first century,” she said. “The people there do not have fundamental human rights. So our reform package aims at extending the political parties there, introducing habeas corpus, creating an elected council of those people who respect our laws.” She went on, “We intend to send in our paramilitary force and put together a law-enforcement team that can give protection to the people who are living in the Tribal Areas from the militias.”

This was vintage Benazir: perfect-pitch liberalism and, at the same time, a formulation barely distinguishable from the American foreign policy of the moment. The exception to her accommodation of the Bush Administration’s agenda lay in her jaundiced attitude toward the Army and the I.S.I., institutions that the Administration had embraced as vital partners in the war on terror, and to which it had given more than ten billion dollars in financial aid.

“General Musharraf’s team has relied on the principle that to catch a thief you send a thief,” Bhutto continued, speaking of the recent difficulties in North and South Waziristan. “So they’ve asked people—they’ve said, ‘These are “reformed Taliban,” or “reformed militants,” and let’s use them.’ It hasn’t worked. Signing peace agreements with them is not working. And it’s not going to work. I’m not saying this as an afterthought; I said this long ago. There are thousands in irregular armies. And we must really pause and think, Where do they get their food from, after all, to feed and look after irregular armies that have thousands of people? And to clothe them, and to heal their wounds when they get wounded in battle? It requires a huge apparatus—so it requires a real breakdown in governance for such forces to continue to prosper and grow. That’s what we’re seeing in Pakistan, a breakdown in governance.

“But I don’t rely on security agencies,” she concluded, her voice taking on the rhythms of public speech. “I rely on the people of Pakistan, because my party has a base and an organization—and that’s why the military hard-liners remain opposed to me.”

Assessments of Bhutto have tended to emphasize the contrasts in her public life: her feudal roots as the daughter of a landed aristocrat in the East, versus her intellectual training in the West; her uncompromising stands while in opposition versus her accommodations of the Army while pursuing office; the soaring idealism of her speeches versus the prosaic greed narrated in the allegations of corruption filed against her. Yet she did not seem to experience these dichotomies as contradictions.

Bhutto’s first term as Prime Minister ended in 1990, when she faced charges of financial and administrative malfeasance and was dismissed, by the Army and President Ghulam Ishaq Khan. But the real cause of her leaving may have been her decision to privately confront the military high command over Pakistan’s secret nuclear-weapons program, which was about to bring economic sanctions from the first Bush Administration. During her second term, which ended in late 1996, she again had uneasy relations with the Army and the I.S.I., and she and her colleagues in the People’s Party aggravated their difficulties by allowing corruption to flourish to a point where it became garish even by Pakistani standards. Bhutto invited into the cabinet her husband, Asif Zardari, who was by then widely known as Mr. Ten Per Cent, in reference to his reputation for extracting illicit commissions on government contracts. Zardari became Bhutto’s Minister of Investment, a title that at least carried a degree of transparency. She was dismissed again, to be followed as Prime Minister by Nawaz Sharif, whose record of corruption and poor governance, made worse by difficult relations with the Army, rivalled her own.

In 1999, General Pervez Musharraf seized power in a bloodless coup. A self-confident man who had served two tours as a commando during his Army career, he pledged to rid Pakistan of political corruption; the era of failed politicians like Bhutto had passed, he said, and a new period of efficiency and modernization would be ushered in under the Army’s oversight. Since the nineteen-nineties, Pakistani investigators have charged Bhutto and her husband in more than ninety corruption cases, involving the alleged misappropriation of hundreds of millions of dollars. The prosecutions may have been politically motivated, as the Musharraf government has recently admitted, but the evidence suggests that they were not all invented. Pakistan’s government continues to seek the return of about fifty-four million dollars allegedly deposited in Swiss banks by members of the Bhutto family. Investigators are looking into companies involved in Iraq’s oil-for-food program, under Saddam Hussein, from which Bhutto allegedly benefitted. In another case, Zardari’s lawyers have acknowledged that he was the beneficial owner of a multimillion-dollar country estate in Surrey, England, where he built a replica of a village pub and apparently planned to raise polo ponies. He and Bhutto have asserted their innocence in the corruption cases; despite the many allegations, neither has been convicted of any crime in Pakistan or anywhere else.

Zardari was imprisoned in Pakistan for eleven years; he says that he was beaten and tortured, and toward the end of his confinement he suffered a heart attack. In 1999, while her husband was in jail, Bhutto left Pakistan to live in Dubai with their three children, a boy and two girls. “It was a difficult life,” she recalled. “The government waged relentless psychological warfare. And it was very painful to have my reputation attacked. I lived in a state of uncertainty and anxiety. I never knew when I would be arrested at an airport.”

Her feelings of being targeted unjustly did not seem to be accompanied by guilt over the sums of money that members of her family had evidently acquired while she was in office. Bhutto may have seen money as a form of informal campaign financing in a country that had no provisions for political funding, according to a Pakistani official who once worked closely with her and later became estranged. “If you rationalize it as ‘for the Party,’ you can justify it,” the official said.

On June 21, 2003, Bhutto celebrated her fiftieth birthday at her residence in Dubai with about a hundred friends. The guests received a privately printed pamphlet containing a poem entitled “The Story of Benazir.” Its concluding stanza suggested the culture of siege, inflected with tones of Bollywood melodrama, in which Bhutto had long seemed to thrive:

Midnight raids and imprisonment

Torture and terror. . . .

Billions spent on false cases

On propaganda

Psy war and special operations

On a Mother.

In the fall, I asked Bhutto whether, at some basic level, she trusted President Musharraf, her prospective political partner. “You know, what is trust?” she replied. “You can’t see into people’s hearts. I don’t know him, so I can’t say.”

The negotiations began when Musharraf telephoned her while she was visiting New York in August, 2006. General Ashfaq Kiyani, then the chief of the I.S.I., led an initial round of discussions. In January, 2007, Bhutto flew by helicopter to a palace in Abu Dhabi to meet secretly with Musharraf. “Much to my surprise, the meeting was both long and cordial,” she wrote in a book, entitled “Reconciliation,” that will be published next month. They exchanged cell-phone numbers, talked periodically, and met again without publicity, in July.

But their negotiating priorities, and those of the Bush Administration, which involved itself in the talks, were not easily reconciled. Musharraf was motivated principally by his need for parliamentary support from the People’s Party to insure reëlection to another five-year term as President. Bhutto bargained hard for immunity from criminal prosecutions that she and her husband faced in the corruption cases—a prerequisite, she reasoned, for her return to active political life in Pakistan.

An agreement might have been difficult to achieve under any circumstances; as it was, the negotiations took place during a period of extraordinary political turmoil in Pakistan. Beginning in March, thousands of the country’s lawyers mounted a protest movement after Musharraf suspended the Supreme Court Chief Justice. Soon afterward, Nawaz Sharif agitated to return from exile in Saudi Arabia. Because of Musharraf’s high-handedness in confronting the judiciary, but also because of general exhaustion with his rule, his popularity fell during 2007. As his predicaments grew worse, the Bush Administration stepped up its efforts to secure an agreement that would satisfy both Musharraf and Bhutto. Richard Boucher, the Assistant Secretary of State, tried to move both sides toward compromise. By early fall, following at least two direct interventions by Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, the outline of a deal had been fashioned that would grant Bhutto and Zardari immunity and permit her to return to Pakistan and take part in parliamentary elections; in exchange, Bhutto agreed to tacitly support Musharraf’s reëlection, after he resigned as Army chief. But it was a shaky agreement at best.

“The Americans were trying very hard,” Mushadid Hussain, the senator, recalled. “I think they pushed too hard on Benazir. We try to press the right buttons to please our American friends, but the ground realities here can be very different.” On her side, Bhutto wondered, as she wrote in her forthcoming book, whether Musharraf was “merely stalling for time to try to consolidate power.” As her return to Pakistan approached, Bhutto’s tentative faith in Musharraf seemed to decline, as did his in her—a development that only increased her fears of assassination.

On October 16th, two days before she left Dubai for Karachi, Bhutto wrote to Musharraf. She named at least one former and two current Pakistani officials as likely suspects in the case of an attempt on her life.Two days after the attack on her convoy in Karachi, Bhutto appeared at an emotional press conference and disclosed this letter’s existence, but she declined to name the trio she had accused “as long as I’m alive.”

One of the names on her list, she confirmed for me privately a few days later, was retired Lieutenant General Hamid Gul, who had been director-general of the I.S.I. during her first term as Prime Minister, until she dismissed him from the post. Gul said last week that when he heard that his name had been included by Bhutto “it was a bolt from the blue.” He filed suit against her. “I want to clear my name,” he said. “I would never destabilize Pakistan. I have been prepared to lay my life down for Pakistan.” As for Bhutto’s death, “The deal was brokered by the Americans, and she paid the price.”

The second person named by Bhutto was Brigadier Ijaz Shah, the present director-general of Pakistan’s Intelligence Bureau, the country’s equivalent of the F.B.I. (Shah could not be reached for comment.) The third was Chaudhry Pervez Elahi, a civilian politician and an important ally of Musharraf’s, who was then the chief minister of Punjab. Bhutto felt that these three adversaries “would go to any length to stop me,” as she told me. Yet she did not appear to possess—or, at least, she did not cite—specific evidence that any of them might be involved in a conspiracy to kill her.

Musharraf was infuriated by the letter, according to Elahi. “The President talked to her and said, ‘Why have you done this?’ ” Elahi recalled. By this account, the U.S. Ambassador to Pakistan, Anne Patterson, became involved, and “went to see Benazir and said, ‘Don’t do this. They are not involved.’ ” (The Ambassador declined to comment.)

The actual threats against Bhutto after she returned to Pakistan, Elahi told me, came not from him or anyone else in the Musharraf government but from loose terrorist cells—including, he said, several suicide bombers originally from Egypt, Sudan, and Uzbekistan, who were later identified by Pakistani investigators. Bhutto, however, interpreted the bombing of her convoy in Karachi as confirmation that parts of the government were involved at least on the periphery of plots to kill her. Her thinking was not irrational: the police teams sent to protect her homecoming were inadequate, and in the area where the attack occurred the streetlights had been turned off—perhaps owing to one of the city’s chronic power failures, but perhaps not. In the weeks after the attack, Bhutto held numerous press conferences and granted dozens of interviews, in which she repeatedly accused Musharraf of failing to protect her.

If some of her specific allegations appeared to be groundless, her basic claim—that the government-provided security was inadequate—seemed inarguable. Electronic equipment that might disable remote-controlled bombs did not work, according to Bhutto’s aides; requests for permits that would allow her bodyguards to carry weapons were denied; requests for permission to hire American- or British-trained security guards went unanswered; and the demands for additional police vehicles to escort her through city streets were not met.

On October 26th, Bhutto wrote on her BlackBerry an e-mail to Mark Siegel, a longtime friend who sometimes represents her in Washington: “Nothing will, God willing happen. Just wanted u to know that if it does in addition to the names in my letter to Musharaf of Oct 16nth, I wld hold Musharaf responsible. I have been made to feel insecure by his minions.” None of his government’s refusals to deal with her security requests, she wrote, “cld happen without him.”

In Washington, Siegel and Husain Haqqanni, a former adviser to Bhutto who teaches at Boston University, pressured the State Department to intervene on her behalf. “I can assure you that our very specific concerns about Benazir’s security needs were repeatedly brought to the Administration,” Siegel said. “We felt that we were being patronized and basically told that Benazir was paranoid and had nothing to worry about—and that Musharraf had told them that he’d make sure Benazir was all right.”

In December, Tom Casey, the State Department’s deputy spokesman, denied to reporters that the Bush Administration had failed to take Bhutto’s security seriously enough. “It is simply untrue, and I simply do not understand why anyone, anywhere would assert that the United States did not have concerns, minimized those concerns, or was not very active in trying to insure that she was provided with whatever kind of security support she required.” A State Department spokesman reiterated Casey’s remarks, but would not elaborate.

Meanwhile, Musharraf’s struggle with the Pakistani Supreme Court over his right to serve another Presidential term had reached a climax—with Musharraf concluding that he would be blocked from continuing in office if he didn’t get rid of the Chief Justice. On November 3rd, Musharraf imposed a national state of emergency, suspended the constitution, and stacked the Supreme Court with friendly judges; six days later, he placed Bhutto under house arrest. A few weeks later, under pressure from the Bush Administration and other allied governments, Musharraf fulfilled his pledge to resign as Army chief; he also lifted the emergency and scheduled elections for January 8th.

During this unsettled period, opinion within the Bush Administration about Musharraf’s future became increasingly divided. President Bush supported Musharraf unwaveringly. Pentagon and CENTCOM officials, however, questioned whether Musharraf retained the political legitimacy essential for success in the counterinsurgency campaign that they now believed would last for five or more years. “In the future, the U.S. is going to need to be very careful about what we support, as opposed to whom we support,” the senior Defense Department official told me in mid-December. “What role President Musharraf will play in the future ought to be more a matter for the people of Pakistan than for us. We’re probably better off over the long term if we support the ideal of a moderate, democratically elected government, rather than any one individual.” As for Bhutto, the Bush Administration seemed to support her return to Pakistan not because it had any particular faith in her capacity to lead but because the People’s Party was needed to prop up Musharraf politically. Or so it often seemed to Bhutto’s aides.

Even during the emergency in November, Bhutto never broke with Musharraf entirely, and when he confirmed that national elections would be held in January, she decided that the People’s Party would participate, despite the forthcoming campaign’s obvious constraints. Once Bhutto committed herself, the question of her personal security took on renewed significance. Her competitors on Election Day would be Mushar-raf’s political followers; they controlled the local governments and police forces whose services Bhutto demanded for her protection. Despite the risk, she knew that holding big rallies might increase support for her party at the polls. Punjab province was a particularly important battleground. Bhutto had previously asked permission to hold a rally at Liaquat Bagh, in Rawalpindi, one of the province’s largest cities, but Chaudhry Pervez Elahi, then the chief minister of Punjab, and a political rival, told her that it was too dangerous.

“As you have already blamed me, I will not allow you that here in Punjab,” Elahi recalls telling Bhutto, referring to her accusatory letter. Musharraf asked him, he said, to “accommodate” Bhutto’s wish to hold a rally—and “I said no.” Some three hundred and fifty houses surround Liaquat Bagh, Elahi told me, and the park is “too dangerous to cover. So I stopped her.” Bhutto travelled to Lahore and attempted to stage a rally there, but Elahi again refused permission, citing information that “three Egyptians, suicide bombers,” had entered the city. “The Americans also informed her,” he recalled. Bhutto insisted on going forward; she was placed under house arrest. “I said, ‘You’re not coming out unless you stop this thing.’ ” By December, a caretaker administration had replaced Elahi’s government, at which point, he said, “my responsibility was over.” The entire struggle with Bhutto over her security “was all political,” he said.

The Bhutto family mausoleum, designed in the grandiose style of a Moghul-era tomb, rises over the flat rice and cotton fields of the interior Sind province, near the Bhutto family’s ancestral lands, irrigated by the Indus River. Renovation, begun more than a decade ago, is still going on, and the mausoleum’s façade is partly obscured by scaffolding. Inside, concrete poured across sections of the floor is rough, apparently awaiting additional work, so that in one area the grave sites of some lesser family members appear as misshapen lumps. Benazir has been buried next to her father’s crypt, which lies under a roof supported by polished marble columns. Since her murder, buses and vans have often filled the dusty parking areas around the site, as thousands of people—the Sindhi women, farmers, laborers, teachers, and shopkeepers who made up the core of her support in the People’s Party—have come to pay respect to the most recently fallen Bhutto.

A few miles away, in the village of Naudero, Asif Zardari occupies a family compound of colonial-era farmhouses and bungalows. Zardari, who is now in his mid-fifties, has lost some of the swagger of his youth, but with his well-pressed robes, trimmed mustache, and jet-black hair combed straight back, he still has the intimidating air of a South Asian ward boss.

After his wife’s death, Zardari asserted control over the People’s Party. As authority for this gambit, he has cited a “political will” that Bhutto composed on October 16th, the day she wrote to Musharraf naming her potential murderers. This document, according to Zardari and other Party leaders, named him as her successor. Zardari has not published the will, but he has shown it to Party leaders familiar with Bhutto’s handwriting, and they have confirmed its authenticity.

Zardari asked his son, Bilawal, who is nineteen years old and a student at Oxford, to become chairman of the Party with him, although this was not something that Benazir had specifically instructed him to do. Bilawal agreed, and added “Bhutto” as his middle name to complete this branding initiative. He appeared briefly at a press conference with his father to announce the succession arrangements. Zardari said that he will not run for political office but will work behind the scenes, as a caretaker, until Bilawal is ready to assume his political inheritance.

In Naudero earlier this month, where he has been holding planning sessions for the elections (they have been rescheduled for February 18th), Zardari received me in one of his bungalow’s sitting rooms; dozens of visitors and mourners had congregated outside. I asked why he had chosen to share power with Bilawal. “I know the East,” Zardari said. “We know our People’s Party. We know where the intellect stops and Bhuttoism starts. This is a thought process started with the father, who chose martyrdom, rather than life,” and it continued with Benazir, “who chose martyrdom, rather than hide in a house, or hide abroad.” Such sacrifice “is what the Party believes in,” he said. “That is Bhuttoism.” He went on, “I, in my wisdom, and in the wisdom of my Party colleagues—we decided that we needed more than me to keep the Party together.” As for Bilawal, Zardari said, “He decided. People think that today’s nineteen-year-olds, or nineteen-and-a-half-year-olds, are young—are children—but they’re not. . . . They know what is good, they know what is bad in the world. They may be inexperienced, but otherwise they’re old enough to understand.”

It is not clear what will be left of the People’s Party by the time Bilawal may be prepared to lead it. If the February elections are free and fair, the Party may well enjoy a wave of sympathy. To keep the Party unified over the long run, Zardari will have to overcome a number of centrifugal challenges, including ethnic and leadership fissures.

Leaders of the Pakistan People’s Party and Musharraf have exchanged heated accusations about who bears responsibility for Bhutto’s murder. The vitriol has a familiar ring. Pakistani politicians may be the world’s leading violent-conspiracy theorists, and a culture has developed in which no malevolent hypothesis is too wild, no sinister motive too preposterous to be aired. In Bhutto’s case, some of the initial controversy has involved such matters as whether she died of gunshots or from the concussive impact of the bomb explosion. More significant issues—such as why the government-provided security was so inadequate, despite Bhutto’s repeated pleas for improvements—have been subsumed, at least temporarily, by a climate of suspicion and political maneuver in advance of the elections.

By writing down her accusations against Musharraf, Benazir Bhutto insured that she would be heard from beyond the grave. The People’s Party has adopted her October 16th e-mail to Mark Siegel—“I have been made to feel insecure”—as her “dying declaration,” as Zardari put it. The Party has demanded that the murder be investigated by the United Nations, in a manner similar to the U.N. investigation into the murder of the former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, who was killed by a car bomb, in an attack that may have had support from Syrian intelligence. Musharraf has rejected these demands, although he did agree, in an effort to calm some of the criticism against him, to invite detectives from Scotland Yard to help in the investigation.

On January 3rd, Musharraf held a press conference in Islamabad to defend himself against the accusatory ghost of Benazir Bhutto. The President wore a suit and tie and sat at a table by himself; he displayed his familiar bluff confidence, but at times he sounded defensive. “I have been brought up in a very educated and civilized family, which believes in values, which believes in principles, which believes in character,” he said at one point. “My family is not a family that believes in killing people.”

Musharraf said Bhutto had ignored warnings that campaign rallies had become too dangerous, and he blamed her for standing recklessly in the open air to greet her supporters. As for Bhutto’s suspicions that Pakistan’s military or intelligence agencies might have been involved in a conspiracy against her—or that people in those agencies might secretly support the Pakistani Islamists who apparently carried out the murder—Musharraf dismissed such thinking as “a joke.” He said that he and his administration had nothing to hide. “Nobody is involved from the government or agency side,” he declared. In the previous three months, Musharraf pointed out, suicide bombers had carried out nineteen attacks inside the country. They had killed not only Bhutto but also officeholders in his party, soldiers, and police. Was this target list not adequate evidence, he asked, that the country’s Islamists had an agenda of their own? With apparent sincerity, he said, “No intelligence organization of Pakistan is capable of indoctrinating a man to blow himself up.” ♦

Correction: The reference to Senator Arlen Spector should read Senator Arlen Specter.