One-way fares between New York-LaGuardia and Boston start at $129; New York-LaGuardia and Washington , D.C. as low as $169*

NEW YORK , May 19 /PRNewswire-FirstCall/ -- Passengers flying Delta Shuttle, a service of Delta Air Lines (NYSE: DAL), between New York City and Boston and Washington, D.C. can now enjoy fares that are up to 60 percent cheaper than previous walk-up fares, the airline announced.

(Logo: http://www.newscom.com/cgi-bin/prnh/20090202/DELTALOGO )

The new one-way Delta Shuttle fare between New York's LaGuardia Airport and Boston's Logan International Airport is $129*. The fare between New York's LaGuardia and Reagan National Airport is $169*. Additional taxes/fees/restrictions/baggage charges may apply. Details are included below.

"The Delta Shuttle has a very loyal following among business travelers whose schedules can change on a dime," said Gail Grimmett , senior vice president, New York . "We recognize the need to be flexible to meet their needs and at the same time remain competitive."

Delta offers more than a dozen daily flights connecting both New York and Boston , and New York and Washington, D.C.

Delta Shuttle customers depart from the historic Marine Air Terminal at LaGuardia, the most convenient terminal for business travelers, with the on-site PowerStop(TM) business center offered in partnership with American Express(R). Through this comfortable, state-of-the-art business center, customers can:

-- connect at workstations equipped with power outlets and wireless high-speed Internet access; -- use personal computers, copy and fax machines, VIP lounge and a conference room; and -- relax in new furniture in a comfortable setting.

Delta Air Lines is the world's largest airline. From its hubs in Atlanta , Cincinnati , Detroit , Memphis , Minneapolis-St. Paul , New York-JFK, Salt Lake City , Paris-Charles de Gaulle , Amsterdam and Tokyo - Narita , Delta, its Northwest subsidiary and Delta Connection carriers offer service to 370 destinations in 66 countries and serve more than 170 million passengers each year. Delta's marketing alliances allow customers to earn and redeem either SkyMiles or WorldPerks on more than 16,000 daily flights offered by SkyTeam and other partners. Delta's more than 70,000 employees worldwide are reshaping the aviation industry as the only U.S. airline to offer a full global network. Customers can check in for flights, print boarding passes, check bags and flight status at delta.com.

A portion of travel for some itineraries may be on the Delta Connection(R) carrier Shuttle America.

*Terms and Conditions:

Up to 60% discount based on refundable, economy class, walk-up fares with no minimum stay available at delta.com on May 5, 2009 .

Fares shown available at delta.com (or a self ticketing kiosk). Tickets cost $20 more if purchased from Delta over the phone, $35 more at a Delta ticket counter or ticket office, and these amounts are nonrefundable. Tickets are non-transferable. Seats are limited. Travel Period: Ongoing. Blackout Dates: During peak travel periods such as holiday periods and spring break, seats at these fares are extremely limited. Fare Validity: Fares are valid in the Economy (Coach) cabin on Delta/Delta Connection carrier flights only. Minimum Stay: None. Maximum Stay: None. Cancellations/Refunds/Changes: Tickets are refundable in accordance with Delta's cancellation policy. Fees may apply for downgrades/reissues and itinerary changes. Contact a Delta agent or visit delta.com for details. Taxes/Fees: Federal Excise tax of $3.60, Passenger Facility Charge(s) of up to $4.50, and the September 11th Security Fee of up to $2.50 for each flight segment are not included. Taxes and fees must be paid when the ticket is purchased. Baggage Charges: For travel within the United States , $15 fee for 1 checked bag and $25 fee for second checked bag. Allowances subject to size/weight limits. Contact a delta agent or visit delta.com for details. Miscellaneous: Fares, taxes, fees, rules, and offers are subject to change without notice. Other restrictions may apply. (C)2009 Delta Air Lines, Inc.

SOURCE Delta Air Lines