NEW YORK, Aug. 14, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Delta Air Lines (NYSE: DAL) will move New York operations of its Delta Shuttle between Boston-Logan International Airport and New York's LaGuardia Airport from the Marine Air Terminal to Terminal C beginning Nov. 2.

Boston Shuttle customers will enjoy new departure and arrival facilities at LaGuardia in Terminal C as well as upgraded service to Boeing 717 aircraft. The move is part of Delta's strategy of adding bigger aircraft on more routes.

In 2012, Delta completed renovations to Terminal C as part of its $160 million investment to modernize and connect Terminals C and D at LaGuardia and opened a new 7,600 square foot Delta Sky Club featuring a full wall of windows with runway views. Customers will also have access to Delta's five new restaurants with menus led by celebrity chefs, an expansive food hall and fresh markets.

Weekday flights depart near the top of the hour from 6 a.m. through 8 p.m. and will be operated by Delta using Boeing 717 aircraft which accommodates 110 passengers including 12 First Class seats in a two by two configuration, 15 Economy Comfort and 83 economy seats in a two by three configuration. Boston-based customers will now be able connect through Delta's LaGuardia hub for access to 64 additional cities.

"Delta Shuttle customers between Boston and New York will fly on larger mainline jets as we shift operations to Terminal C," said Gail Grimmett, senior vice president – New York. "Customers will enjoy a great Delta Shuttle product with the frequency and amenities they've come to expect as well as being able to experience our most updated space at LaGuardia."

Delta Shuttle service began on its Boston to New York and Washington, D.C. to New York routes on September 1, 1991 after Delta completed the purchase of the Pan Am Shuttle. For nearly a quarter century the Delta Shuttle has been a core part of its New York operations. In June 2010, Delta added New York to Chicago-O'Hare service to the Shuttle operation.

Customers flying the Delta Shuttle between New York-LaGuardia and Boston will enjoy:

Convenient, top of the hour schedule for Delta Shuttle customers including 15 weekday departures

Check-in as close as 15 minutes prior to departure without bags or 30 with checked bags

Dedicated check-in counters exclusively for Shuttle customers

Expedited security screening with nearby access to TSA Pre-Check lanes for eligible passengers

Dedicated gates – located near the Delta Sky Club in LaGuardia's Terminal C – with access to complimentary coffee and newspapers for all customers including The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, USA Today, Financial Times and power at the gate

Advanced seat selection on all Delta Shuttle flights and complimentary access to Economy Comfort seats for SkyMiles Gold, Platinum and Diamond Medallion members at the time of booking

Two classes of service with complimentary upgrades for SkyMiles Medallion members when available.

Complimentary onboard snacks including bagels in the morning before 10:30 a.m. or gourmet nut mix for flights after 10:30 a.m.

Complimentary beverages in-flight including craft beer and wine in all classes of service

Cocktails available for purchase in economy

Access to in-flight Wi-Fi on all Shuttle flights

Access to power from every seat on the Boeing 717 aircraft

The November 2014 schedule between New York–LaGuardia and Boston is below.

Delta Shuttle flights between New York and Chicago-O'Hare International Airport or Washington Reagan-National Airport will continue to operate from LaGuardia's Marine Air Terminal operated by Delta Connection partner, Shuttle America using E-175 aircraft.

Delta has invested billions of dollars in the customer experience, including updating interiors with more baggage space and access to power throughout 225 domestic narrowbody aircraft through 2016, and building a new Terminal 4 at New York-JFK and the Maynard H. Jackson Jr. International Terminal in Atlanta. Delta has also spent more than $100 million to expand, renovate and consolidate terminals C and D at New York-LaGuardia Airport and opened a Sky Deck at Delta Sky Clubs in New York-JFK and Atlanta in 2013. Additionally, customers have seen Delta's investment in its more than 45 Delta Sky Clubs throughout the system, power recharging stations at dozens of airports, and continued updates to the Fly Delta app including features such as integrated baggage tracking and mobile check-in. Customers can see a complete overview of Delta's ongoing updates to its products with the Delta Fleet Sheet on Facebook.

Delta Air Lines serves nearly 165 million customers each year. This year, Delta was named the 2014 Airline of the Year by Air Transport World magazine and was named to FORTUNE magazine's 50 Most Admired Companies, in addition to being named the most admired airline for the third time in four years. With an industry-leading global network, Delta and the Delta Connection carriers offer service to 334 destinations in 64 countries on six continents. Headquartered in Atlanta, Delta employs nearly 80,000 employees worldwide and operates a mainline fleet of more than 700 aircraft. The airline is a founding member of the SkyTeam global alliance and participates in the industry's leading trans-Atlantic joint venture with Air France-KLM and Alitalia as well as a newly formed joint venture with Virgin Atlantic. Including its worldwide alliance partners, Delta offers customers more than 15,000 daily flights, with key hubs and markets including Amsterdam, Atlanta, Boston, Detroit, Los Angeles, Minneapolis-St. Paul, New York-JFK, New York-LaGuardia, Paris-Charles de Gaulle, Salt Lake City, Seattle and Tokyo-Narita. Delta has invested billions of dollars in airport facilities, global products, services and technology to enhance the customer experience in the air and on the ground. Additional information is available on delta.com, Twitter @Delta, Google.com/+Delta, Facebook.com/delta and Delta's blog takingoff.delta.com.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20090202/DELTALOGO

SOURCE Delta Air Lines