Overview:

What was originally supposed to be an easy 350km drive from Narita airport to Myoko-Kogen turned out to be 8 hours of traffic jams, due to a blizzard that hit the Tokyo area on our arrival day. The result? An unscheduled stay in a Japanese love hotel along Route 17, somewhere in the Saitama Prefecture, near Mochida train station in Gyōda-shi (about 65km from central Tokyo).

The route that was supposed to be

The nightmare road trip [1100h-1930h]

Not knowing that many roads and expressways around Tokyo had been closed due to the blizzard, we happily left Narita airport in our rental Nissan. Can’t believe the Nissan Rent-a-Car staff didn’t tell us either!! Grrrr. The drive was pretty uneventful for the first 70km or so until we arrived in Central Tokyo, after which the built-in GPS led us on a confusing route through the city centre instead of connecting to the Nagano/Jōshin-etsu Expressway. Not realizing that this was due to road closure, we tried to be smart and use Google maps to circumvent the GPS, but got caught up in a series of crazy diversions. Not knowing how to read the Japanese road signs didn’t help either, although road signs generally can’t be saying anything comforting when there are lots of flashing lights and exclamation marks.

The ill-fated Nissan Note

Ghost town in Tokyo city centre

Road closures & accidents

Since the Nagano/Jōshin-etsu Expressway was closed, Route 17 highway was the only other way to get to Myoko-Kogen, but we soon ran into numerous traffic jams caused by accidents and icy roads. Slipping and sliding along on packed ice was no fun at all. Twice we came to a complete standstill for a whole hour! We finally threw in the towel at 7.30pm and decided to find a hotel off the highway and continue our drive the next morning.

Complete standstill on Route 17 and getting dark

3 tired, hungry and frustrated travellers ended up at a brightly-lit Steak Miya for dinner. As we were in the middle of nowhere, I was pretty amazed by the steak, which is served in a similar style to that of Angus Steakhouse in Singapore’s Takashimaya. A small hot stone is provided for you to sear your steak further if you want.

Steak Miya- A surreal experience in the sticks

Vanilla Resort, the love hotel [2100h-1000h]

Since Steak Miya had such a family atmosphere, it was a while before we realized that the hotels in the vicinity were all (yikes!) “love hotels”. Discreet entrances via the carpark, dim lighting in the lobby, lack of front desk, different rates for (a few hours’) “rest” and (overnight) “stay”. After some trial and error we managed to get a triple room at the Vanilla Resort. I think the staff were a bit bewildered, but everyone is entitled to happiness, right? Anyway I was quite impressed by the hotel, which had a lovely bath bar, extensive toiletry selection, comfy room and free porn channels. Japanese of course! Showing strong support for local arts & culture here.

Preview your room and get your key using the vending machine

You get to choose your toiletries

Colorful bath salts

We got the least kinky room

Minibar of assorted sex toys

Huge tub for vigorous baths

Payment is also by vending machine

Our love hotel by day

Conclusion:

OK, so this driving thing turned out to be a fiasco, but hey, we would never have experienced a love hotel otherwise. Most of the couples that I saw in the lobby looked like girlfriend-boyfriend, rather than, uhm, “business relationships”, so it didn’t have a sleazy feel at all. In fact, it was really quite tastefully done, with emphasis on being discreet. I really think Singapore should start this concept too!

Date of stay: 15-16 Feb 2014 (1 night)

Location: Saitama, Japan (Greater Tokyo)

Contact: Vanilla Resort (can’t find the website) Rate I paid: JPY5,000/adult for overnight “stay” (2100h-1000h) in a triple share room (room only)

Booking: Walk-in only (I think)

Facilities: Free parking