Jennifer Lopez surprised guests Thursday at the 17th annual Latin Grammy Awards when she performed with and presented an award to her ex-husband Marc Anthony.

She described the father of her 8-year-old twins as “a living legend” as she presented Anthony with the Latin Grammy Awards’ Person of the Year prize.

“Marc, you are a living legend who has laid bare your heart and soul on your musical journey,” Lopez said in Spanish. “We’ve learned so much and we’ve grown so much, and you’ve always been so many things in my life: my mentor, a twin soul, a father who’s not only the Person of the Year, he’s the person of all time.”

The audience cheered, “Kiss! Kiss! Kiss” and the former couple obliged with a small peck.

Anthony and Lopez were wed from 2004 to 2011. He has been married to Venezuelan model Shannon De Lima since 2014.

Anthony, who was feted in a separate ceremony Wednesday, dedicated his award to his five children, whom he said have “sacrificed more than anyone” for his career. He also dedicated the prize to “all those people who told me I would never make it.”

Lopez and Anthony performed “Olvidame y Pega la Vuelta” together Thursday. Anthony also sang his hit “I Need to Know.” The former couple also appeared together recently at a campaign rally for Hillary Clinton.

The Latin Grammy Awards were presented at T-Mobile Arena in Las Vegas and broadcast live on Univision.

Dylan likely to travel for Nobel in 2017

Bob Dylan, who was awarded the 2016 Nobel Prize for literature but won’t be attending the prize ceremony, likely will travel to Stockholm next year and might give his Nobel Lecture then, the Swedish Academy said Friday.

Dylan likely will give a concert in the Swedish capital, offering “a perfect opportunity to deliver his lecture,” the academy said. The Swedish Academy awards the Nobel Prize for literature.

Sara Danius, the organization’s permanent secretary, told Swedish public radio Friday that the Nobel Foundation’s rules for laureate lectures are “flexible.” Dylan can deliver his as “a written speech, a spontaneous discourse, a film,” or another format of his choosing, Danius said.

In 2004, Austrian playwright and Nobel literature prize winner Elfriede Jelinek stayed home because of social phobia. Her lecture was prerecorded, and shown on video in Stockholm.

Dylan has said he cannot attend the Dec. 10 prize ceremony, pleading other commitments.

The 75-year-old American singer-songwriter was awarded the prize on Oct. 13 “for having created new poetic expressions within the great American song tradition.”

Cannon expecting with ex-girlfriend

Nick Cannon says he’s expecting a baby with his ex-girlfriend Brittany Bell.

The 36-year-old “America’s Got Talent” and “Wild ‘n Out” host made the announcement on several radio shows Thursday morning. During an appearance on New York’s WWPR-FM, Cannon told the hosts, “God said be fruitful and multiply. I’m doing the Lord’s work.”

Cannon is also the father of 5-year-old twins, Moroccan and Monroe, with ex-wife, Mariah Carey.

Cannon is set to host the HALO awards on Nickelodeon on Nov. 27.

Briefly

■ Officials say a dress worn by Marilyn Monroe as she famously sang “Happy Birthday” to President John. F. Kennedy has sold for nearly $5 million at a Los Angeles auction.

Julien’s Auctions says that the iconic, form-fitting gown was sold for $4.8 million Thursday night to Ripley’s Believe It or Not.

The company says in a news release that the actress wore the Hollywood designer Jean Louis creation — flesh-colored and sparkling with more than 2,500 hand-stitched crystals — on May 19, 1962, for an early 45th birthday celebration for Kennedy at New York’s Madison Square Garden.

Monroe’s breathy rendition of the birthday song has been broadcast repeatedly since, adding to the lore surrounding the screen icon.

It was just a few months later on Aug. 5, that the 36-year-old Monroe was found dead from what the Los Angeles district attorney’s office ruled was an overdose of barbiturates.

■ An angry letter from John Lennon to Paul and Linda McCartney written shortly after the Beatles’ breakup has been sold at auction for nearly $30,000.

The two-page typed draft, with handwritten annotations by Lennon, was sold Thursday by Boston-based RR Auction.

RR says the letter is believed to have been written in 1971 in response to criticism Lennon received from Linda McCartney about his decision to not publicly announce his departure from the band.

The letter was sold to a collector in Dallas who requested anonymity.

Compiled by Janet Graham from

Free Press news services.