As we enter our 13th year as the proud sponsor and merchandise supplier at the world-famous Hong Kong Sevens, it’s no surprise this glorious rugby spectacular is billed as the place “Where the World Comes to Play” as over 120 000 fans prepare to fly into Hong Kong from all over the world to soak up the carnival action and intense on-field action.

Firmly established as the world’s premier event of its kind and one of the most popular annual sporting events in Asia, the Hong Kong Sevens attracts some of the world’s greatest rugby players and thousands of fans from every corner of the globe to the magnificent Hong Kong Stadium every year. With fast and furious rugby action combined with a carnival atmosphere and world rugby’s largest prize purse, the 2018 Cathay Pacific /HSBC Hong Kong Sevens will be an unforgettable three days for everyone there.

This year the fun lasts even longer as you can experience the atmosphere and fun of the Cathay Pacific/HSBC Hong Kong Sevens outside of the stadium! This year, Kukri is proud to be taking part in the 16 day festival at Lee Gardens, fun for all the family from the 24th March. From junior rugby clinics, international team visits, and cultural performances to the famous fan walk and a fabulous kick-off concert featuring UB40 there truly is something for everyone.

As well as supplying the official Hong Kong 7’s merchandise, Kukri Sports are the official supplier to the Hong Kong Rugby Union teams across men’s, women’s and national age grade teams.

The online shop is now open to purchase your piece of rugby history. All our bespoke designs are inspired by Hong Kong traditions, customs and rich culture and include men’s, ladies and kids wear as well as accessories. During the tournament can purchase your official HK7’s merchandise at one of the seven Kukri retail stores located around the stadium.

Where to Buy

In Store

HYSAN PLACE

24th March–8th April

1st Floor

Merchandise Booth

Causeway Bay

The Stadium

6th–8th April

HK Stadium

So Kon Po

Hong Kong Island

Online Shop Now Open: www.kukrisports.hk

Contact Kukri Sports:

Clare Millington

General Manager – Asia

Clare.Millington@kukrisports.com

t:+852 9832 2859

For further event info: www.hksevens.com

Get the App and Join the Party – the official HK7’s app is now available in the App Store or in the Google Play Store.