The title of this article is little sensational but it captures the gist of the problem. As per Wikipedia “death by thousand cuts” refers to a form of ancient Chinese torture system called Lingchi, where a knife was used to methodically remove portions of the body over an extended period of time eventually resulting in death.

There is similarity here with we radiologists- the “cuts” are slices on the cross sectional imaging and “death” is the burnout leading to radiologist quitting practice.

An article published in JACR in 2016, Harold et al dealt with the topic of Radiologists burnout, and discussed the causes and the remedies [1]. The authors have cited many risk factors including increasing workload but they have not elaborated as to why has the work load increased. What has been left out is the eight-hundred-pound gorilla in the room so to speak. What constitutes our workload? Yes, the studies have become more complicated; the number of “studies” has gone up but not by that much. What else has changed?

In the late 1990s, the world of medical science exulted at the arrival of thin slice CT and MRI. Year after year, the technology advanced at a rapid pace. Every vendor showcased how thin they could go. There was a competition to go ATAP (as thin as possible). With overlapping slices and thin collimation, we could get pixels as small as 0.3 mm. There were claps, cheers and often wild celebrations. Everyone was happy- the radiologists, the physicians, the managers and even the pseudo-doctors in the media. Now we could see even microscopic abnormalities with imaging- but the people of wisdom forgot to ask – what was the downside and how thin was too thin?

A little bit of history. When I was doing my neuroradiology fellowship at Hopkins in 1999- on a busy day- we used to read about 50 head and spine CTs. Each head CT used to have around 60 axial slices, 30 in soft tissue and 30 in bone filters. At the end of the day we saw around 3000-4000 images. The sagittal reformats were available for the spine but infrequently used. There were no reformats for the head CT. A couple of CTAs were done per week and processed on the separate work station. Life was simple. Everyone went home – smiling and satisfied. By 2002 things started to change. We at Hopkins thought that why not use the already acquired axial CT data to do reformats. We tried reconstructing head CT data to the thinnest possible. For example, we were acquiring head CT on Toshiba scanner on 16 x 0.5 mm or 32 x 0.5 collimation using non-helical mode. From the raw data, we could reconstruct 0.5 mm axial slices with no gap. Using Vitrea workstation, I created the coronal and sagittal reformats and showed to my colleagues. They frowned at my idea of seeing head and neck CT in other planes, and told me that they did not like it, and there was no need for the reformats and thin slices. But the proverbial genie was out of the bottle. By 2008-2009, reformats really took off and has been adopted in not only neuro but also body, chest and MSK. The surgeons and other clinicians love the reformats. And the reformats need thin slices. As the scanners offer thinner and thinner slices, there is a tendency to go with thinnest possible slices with overlap. In some centers, even a routine non-contrast head CT has several hundred, sometimes close to thousand images.

So where is the problem, one might ask. The problem is that our work load is not the number of studies but the number of images or slices. If the images are sent to the viewer, the radiologists must see it, no matter what the number.

Most radiologists still read 30-60 cross sectional studies on a normal work day but the number of slices has increased many folds. Till a few years back, the work load was 3k to 4k cross sectional images a day, and now that number is 40k to 50k a day; and often each image is viewed more than once. Besides the number of slices, here is another overlooked issue- thinner the slices, less is the contrast resolution. With thin slices, we gain spatial resolution in z-axis but lose contrast resolution. The problem is worse with CT, which has inherently less contrast than MRI. Add automatic exposure control and ALARA (as low as reasonable achievable) to that, the thin slices are noisy and one has to really strain the eyes to see subtle abnormality. So why should we be concerned? Because more slices we see, more tired we get. Our eyes, fingers, wrists, hands, shoulders, neck, back, legs all are stretched to their physiologic limits day after day, week after week. As per one MIT study, human eyes can perceive an image in 13 ms but that experiment was about identifying monkeys and smiling faces on the images! We radiologists are looking for proverbial needles in the haystack, and probably take 100 ms to view each image. Our eyes are glued to the screen for minutes without blinking. I don’t want to go into the details on the nature of occupational injuries reported by the radiologists. But overall, the stats are frightening. More than 60% of radiologists have work related injuries. That is a staggering number for any profession.

Here are my humble thoughts. We need to strike a balance between the number of slices and the diagnostic quality. I propose the idea of As Thick As Diagnostically Achievable. (ATADA). Think of the organ and possible diseases, partial volume averaging effect, contrast resolution, and then decide on the slice thickness and overlap of slices (aka pitch).

Here are a few examples in neuro-

CTA head- If the request is for CTA of the head only- there is no choice but to go as thin as possible with nearly 50% overlap of the slices- because we need to see tiny peripheral vessels on 3D rendering.

CTA of the neck- The neck vessels are large and there is no need for so much overlap and we can get away with even 10% overlap and that will cut down the number of slices by nearly 40%.

Here is the math and see how many fewer slices we will have-

Let us assume the area of coverage on the neck CTA is 40 cm

Detector collimation being used is 64 x .625

If there is no overlap- the total number of axial slices of .625 mm thickness- 640

If there is 10% overlap – number of 0.625 mm slices - 760

If there is 50% overlap- number of 0.625 mm slices – 1280

As one can see that by decreasing the overlap of the slices (decreasing the pitch), we reduce the number of slices substantially. Yes, it is true that the 3D rendered images will look less smoother than on 50% overlapped data- but it shall not affect the diagnostic quality. Try it out. Play with slice thickness and 3D rendering and see what is acceptable to the group.

CTA of the head and neck both- Well in this case there is no choice but to go thin with overlap. I wish we had scanners which could change the pitch on the fly, larger pitch for the neck and lower pitch for the head. But as far as I know there is no vendor which provides this kind of capability.

CT venogram of the head- Veins are large and there is no need for 50% overlapping slices. Cut it down to 10% and you can still have diagnostic venogram.

CT soft tissue neck- There is certainly no need to have axial data reconstructed at 0.6 mm with 50% overlap. Little or no overlap of the slices should suffice. In my own personal experience 1 and 3 mm axial reconstructions, and 2.5 to 3 mm thick sagittal and coronal MPR should be enough for diagnostic information for a routine neck CT.

Here are some of the ideas- have two sets of protocols for head CT, one for trauma and stroke, and another for low suspicion and follow up cases. A routine non contrast head CT could include 0.625-1 mm and 3-5 mm axial, 2-3 mm thick sagittal and coronal reformats. There is very little need for more than 10% overlapping slices.

So why do we still need thin slices? The simple answer is to avoid partial volume averaging which may mask the abnormality or the area of interest, and for better 3D rendering. However, many abnormalities and organs are large enough that they don’t need very thin slices in the first place.

We need to look at our diagnostic needs, comfort level and tailor the CT protocols accordingly. There is no need to compromise the diagnostic image quality while changing protocols. Same is the case with MRI- ask if there is any need for 3D thin slices gradient sequence in a routine case. Is there any need for 3D thin slice post gad sequence for low suspicion cases? Thin slice 3D acquisitions make sense for conditions like metastasis and pre-op planning, but in routine cases, these are overkill. Also, one must not forget that thinner slices have less contrast (by and large). Of course in medicine, there are situations where one has to deviate from the routine protocol and there should be no hesitation in doing so.

Needless to say there are some other issues which are interlinked- the mAs, kVp, helical vs. non-helical modes, rotation time, radiation dose etc. One has to take into account those issues as well. Most departments have staff dealing with those issues and can be part of the solution.

We should take the clinicians into confidence and discuss with their needs, which makes our task easy.

Finally, this post is my personal opinion, and has been written from my own experience. I am sure there are other viewpoints on the topic. Please feel free to email me at deepakjhu3@gmail.com and share your experience and thoughts. If you have any questions or need to discuss anything drop me a line.

Reference:

Jay A. Harolds, MD , Jay R. Parikh, MD , Edward I. Bluth, MD , Sharon C. Dutton, MD, Michael P. Recht, MD J Am Coll Radiol. 2016 Apr;13(4):411-6. Burnout of Radiologists: Frequency, Risk Factors, and Remedies: A Report of the ACR Commission on Human Resources. J Am Coll Radiol. 2016 Apr;13(4):411-6 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacr..11.003

Thank you

Deepak Takhtani, MD

10-17-2017