Bernard Herrmann was a composer who left an indelible mark on the film and television industry. He was a master of his craft and created some of the most memorable scores in cinematic history. He worked with some of the greatest directors of all time, including Alfred Hitchcock, Orson Welles, and Martin Scorsese. In this article, we will take a closer look at Bernard Herrmann’s life, career, and legacy.

Early Life and Career

Bernard Herrmann was born on June 29, 1911, in New York City. He showed an early aptitude for music and began studying the violin at the age of nine. He attended DeWitt Clinton High School in the Bronx, where he formed a string quartet with three of his classmates. After graduating from high school, he attended New York University (NYU) and the Juilliard School.

Herrmann’s first job in the music industry was as a conductor for CBS radio in the 1930s. He became known for his work on Orson Welles’ radio drama, “The Mercury Theatre on the Air.” He composed the score for Welles’ legendary radio broadcast of “The War of the Worlds,” which aired on October 30, 1938.

Film and Television Career

In the 1940s, Herrmann began working in the film industry. His first film score was for “Citizen Kane,” which was directed by Orson Welles. The score was critically acclaimed and is considered one of the greatest film scores of all time. He went on to compose scores for several other films directed by Welles, including “The Magnificent Ambersons” and “Touch of Evil.”

Herrmann also worked with Alfred Hitchcock on several films, including “Psycho,” “Vertigo,” and “North by Northwest.” His score for “Psycho” is particularly well-known and is often cited as one of the most iconic film scores of all time. The screeching violins in the shower scene are instantly recognizable.

In addition to his work in film, Herrmann also composed music for television. He composed the scores for several episodes of “The Twilight Zone” and “Have Gun – Will Travel.”

Legacy

Bernard Herrmann’s influence on the film and television industry cannot be overstated. His innovative use of music in film helped to elevate the art form and inspired countless composers who came after him. His work with Alfred Hitchcock is particularly noteworthy, as he helped to create the tense and suspenseful atmosphere that became a hallmark of Hitchcock’s films.

Herrmann’s legacy can also be seen in the many film scores that have been influenced by his work. Composers like John Williams, Hans Zimmer, and Danny Elfman have all cited Herrmann as a major influence on their own work.

Career and Education

If you are interested in pursuing a career in the music industry, there are several paths you can take. You could become a composer, like Bernard Herrmann, and work in the film and television industry. Alternatively, you could work as a music producer, sound engineer, or music supervisor.

To succeed in the music industry, it is important to have a strong foundation in music theory and composition. You should also be familiar with the latest technology and software used in the industry. Many colleges and universities offer music programs that can help you develop these skills.

One program that is worth considering is the NYU x Billboard | Music Industry Essentials online course and certificate program. This program, offered by NYU, in partnership with Billboard, provides a comprehensive overview of the music industry. It covers topics like music publishing, marketing, and branding. The program is taught by industry professionals and can be completed entirely online.

Key Takeaways