Directed by Francois Dupeyron

Written by Francois Dupeyron and Eric-Emmanuel Schmitt, based on a novel by Schmitt

Rated M

Chauvel, Paddington

The French title is Monsieur Ibrahim et les fleurs du Coran. For the film's American, and now its Australian, release, "and the flowers of the Koran" has been dumped, perhaps inevitably. The original was more poetic, the new one more politic. When was the last time you saw a film with Koran in the title?

This change is doubly ironic, because the film is a parable of tolerance, about the friendship between a Jewish boy and a Muslim man. In the context of France, both groups have an uneasy history, but the film is primarily interested in their unease with each other, not France's unease with them. The only hint in that direction is that the script places both characters in a working-class neighbourhood of Paris, suggesting they may have that, at least, in common.

The period is the early 1960s. Moses (Pierre Boulanger) is about 15, and from his window he can see the hookers on the Rue Bleue. Beyond is the grocery of M. Ibrahim - the "Arab shop", as everyone calls it. Omar Sharif, bewhiskered and stooped, is hard to recognise behind his air of resignation.

Moses (known as Momo) pays him no heed. His life is consumed by rock 'n' roll and the desire to cash in his virginity, at 35 francs a tumble. He practises his nonchalance in front of the mirror, trying to sound like Delon or Belmondo.

"'It's hot, let's take a walk." When he does eventually ask one of the women for sex, she just smiles. "Are you 16 yet?"

Moses appears to live alone but his morose father (Gilbert Meki) eventually turns up, grumbling about Momo's spending on groceries.

To save money for hookers, Momo often steals from M. Ibrahim. He's only an Arab, he tells himself. He's startled when Ibrahim says "I'm not an Arab. I'm a Muslim", as if he has heard his thoughts. Ibrahim is from the Golden Crescent, the region between Anatolia and Persia, and he's a Sufi. Later, he makes clear he knows about Momo's stealing. "If you have to steal, I'd rather you did it in my shop." So begins the friendship of Moses the hard-case child and Ibrahim the lonely immigrant, who is something of a sage.

The film has an easy pace and a colourful background, an early '60s optimism, where prostitutes are beautiful and generous to horny teenagers, and the street life is jazzy. The developing friendship in the foreground is more complicated, but the script never goes deeply into their cultural differences. These two need each other, and that is all that matters. It's an innocent way of looking at the problem, and a naive one. Making Ibrahim a mystic and a Sufi elides the collision with Islam of a thornier sort - the kind that is lately out on the streets of Paris demanding the right to wear the hijab.

If this innocence borders on glibness, the movie never stops being watchable. The main reason is Omar Sharif. He was always attractive on screen, not just for his beauty, but his pride. That largely condemned him to playing princes, playboys and potentates, but this role offers him humility. He's able to use his elfin humour, which makes the character very light. The wisdom never comes out preachy.