Kilroy on Saipan!

I ran into the picture looking at the B-29s for a pict of a Z-square. When I saw it...I sent it.

Dwight Rider

Editor's Note: This is another important Sighting. There are people and even a site that suggests that Kilroy Was Here was a post-war phenominan. This is more proof that he was with out GIs thoughout the war.

From B-29Saipan.com. This site is an amazing source of fantastic images of B-29s. It is operated by the photographer's son.

Not sure if anyone saw this. It's from the movie Zone Troopers (1985) I saw and took a picture of the "Kilroy was here" logo, one of the soldiers put on the space ship towards the end of the movie. Not a great movie but was about WW2 so I checked it out.

John Kilroy

From IMDB: "In Italy during WW II, a patrol of American soldiers discover a space ship that has crash-landed in the woods, and they come across its alien crew. A nearby Nazi unit also finds out about the alien craft, and sends a patrol to capture it and the Americans. "

Greetings;

I've been researching a magazine piece on wartime cartoonists that will include GI graffiti such as "Kilroy Was Here".

Of course, there are many contemporary images on the Internet but the one thing I have not been able to find is a real documented "Kilroy Was Here" by James J. Kilroy.

Have you seen such an image? Is it possible that I just have not explored your great Website sufficiently?

It seems that, given the number of accounts that suggest James Kilroy marked many ships at the Fore River shipyard, it would be easy to find an image of the original graffiti but I have had no luck.

Can you give me any help or point me in the right direction?

Many thanks,

Jerry Cleveland

Boulder, Colorado

I contacted the museum staffs for the existing ships James J. Kilroy is believed to have inspected during construction but they had never seen a "Kilroy" slogan anywhere on their ships.

I'm attaching two actual "Kilroy" images, both from the "Mail Call: Best Of Season 3 DVD" with R. Lee Ermey, that I do not believe are on your Website.

Gerry loved to 'throw' pottery, and turned out some rather good stuff. Though an avowed atheist, he turned out many pieces for the chapel at a local hospital. As is often the case with care receivers, Gerry and I became good friends. He made me the Kilroy piece bout twelve years ago.

Gerry Gardiner, Kilroy Potterer

Gerry, a teenager in the middle forties, became intrigued with Kilroy during the latter part of World War II. Youngsters who remained behind idolized those who went off to fight. Emulation being the best form of adulation, Gerry, like so many of his peers, caught the Kilroy passion from America's warriors. Artistic by nature, Gerry soon discovered his flair for pottery and embellished on that throughout life. He attended Casper Union College in New York where he met his future wife, Ruth. Gerry served a short stint in the US Army in the pay grade of Private. He eventually settled in the Seattle, Washington area, taking employment with the Boeing Company's Defense and Space Division. Pottery remained a passion as did his obsession with Kilroy. Clay coffee mugs with Kilroy peering over the edge became a natural product of these two interests.

Barely sixty, Gerry contracted cancer in his right lower leg. Unfortunately, he suffered also from clinical depression. In the final analysis he could not bring himself to accept his only option for preventing spread of the disease to vital organs; amputation. And so, the world lost a vital person well before his time.

Gerry alleged himself to be an atheist despite his practice of the golden rule being better than most Christians. He spent many of his final days at Overlake Hospital Medical Center, Bellevue, Washington. There, various members of the Pastoral Care Department showed him believers do not have a monopoly on the need for compassion. As a consequence, Gerry donated some of his finest pottery as appointments for the hospital chapel that remain on display there today.

Best, Don Ulmer