‘KILROY WAS HERE.”

Kilroy was practically everywhere during World War II. The graffiti of a baldheaded little guy peering over a fence showed up wherever there were G.I.s and sometimes even when there weren’t.

Today, Kilroy seems to have all but disappeared. However, he has made a comeback peering out from all the displays at the latest Martinez Museum exhibit, “The 1940s “… Kilroy Was Here.”

Andrea Blachman and Adria Schwartz, coordinators of the new museum exhibition, chose Kilroy to represent the era because anyone who was around in the 1940s would know immediately what the displays were all about.

Kilroy was the funny, hopeful mascot of those terrible years.

The new museum exhibition on the 1940s is a very personal one for longtime Martinez residents. It features the stories of the Martinez men who fought in the war and of their families left behind at home.

One of the first displays you will see when you enter the museum at 1005 Escobar St. is the collection of Al Lomeli, former Contra Costa County treasurer.

Lomeli’s incredible collection not only includes photographs, uniforms and documents, but weaponry. There are even several WWII green grenades in the display case.

Blachman assured us these are not armed.

As a 19-year-old private first class in L Company, 3rd Battalion, 7th Marines, 3rd Platoon, Lomeli fought in the battle of Peleliu or as it was called, “Operation Stalemate.” The Marines won the battle despite the name. But it was the Marine Corps’ bloodiest battle until Iwo Jima.

Next to the display case holding the grenades stands an easel with the story of the battle.

Peleliu is a small island in the Palau chain (between the Philippines and Indonesia). The battle happened Sept. 15, 1944, and 64 years later, on Sept. 15, 2008, Lomeli revisited the site of the battle with four of his children and a daughter-in-law.

Another display not to be missed is the story of “The Spirit of Martinez.” This one tells the story of how a Boeing Flying Fortress came to be named after Martinez, with the name printed right across the nose “big enough for enemies to read without their glasses.”

Lt. Frank Calicura of Martinez, the pilot, and his crew voted to name the plane after his hometown because the people of the town more than doubled their $855,000 Sixth War Bond quota during the bond campaign of 1944.

The home front is not forgotten in this exhibition.

Rosie the Riveter gets her spot. And a case shows the many kinds of ration stamps and books used to buy sugar, beef, gas, tires and shoes.

A former closet in this old Victorian house now turned into a museum recalls the Martinez Canteen.

Between 1943 and 1946, 1,348 volunteers established and operated the canteen on Ferry Street. Servicemen and women passing through town on troop transport trains could use the facilities, which included restrooms, showers, food, magazines, newspapers, music and a place for conversation. Close to half a million soldiers and sailors used the canteen during those three years.

Of special interest in the exhibit are the memorial scrapbooks, kept by the late Leo Marchi. With his partner Chester Middleton, Marchi operated a men’s clothing store on Main Street. For generation after generation, the store clothed the young men of Martinez.

After the war started, Marchi began collecting photos from customers going into the service. Martinez servicemen and women began sending pictures back from wherever the war sent them. The numbers grew. Another scrapbook was bought and filled. Then the war ended. The photographs were stored away, stuck in a cardboard box. It wasn’t until the 70-year-old store closed that the books were found again. Marchi donated the books to the Martinez Historical Society.

As news of the discovery circulated around town, more WWII photos were added to the collection. Now there are 400 photos in the collection, from more than 500 servicemen and women. WWII veteran Bill Francis led the effort to restore the books. He said that finding the books after all these years “is such a treasure.”

The exhibit at the museum will continue through the spring. The Martinez Museum is open from 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. Tuesdays and Thursdays and from 1 to 4 p.m. the first four Sundays of the month.