It's been nine days since my last proposal but more than three months since my last double proposal. But it ends one as I have another pair of candidate from one movie to discuss, one I'm more confident he keeps (he already has the Pure Evil category on his page) and the other I'm neutral but think there are arguments for his case regardless. So, as the wonderful Pro-Wrestler would say, let the trial commence!

What's the work[]

The Last Legion is a 2007 historical fantasy movie based on a 2002 novel of the same name by the Italian writer Valerio Massimo Manfredi. The film is set at the time of the invasion of Rome by the Goths. The invaders kill the Roman Emperor Orestes and his wife. Their son, future emperor, and last descendant of Caesar, Romulus, is captured and sent Capri to be imprisoned alongside his mysterious advisor named Ambrosinus. Once on the island, Romulus finds Caesar's legendary sword. Managing to escape thanks to survivors of the siege of Rome, he and his allies embark on a quest to find the Ninth Legion and repel the Goths.

Who are they/What have they done[]

Vortgyn[]

Vortgyn is a rogue warlord who wants Caesar’s sword to rule over Britannia. A long time before the movie’ events, he captured Ambrosinus and tortured him to have the location of the sword, scarring him with his medallion.

In the present, Vortgyn has conquered the south of the country and wipes out entire villages, leaving no survivors. A Goth named Wulfilla comes to see him in his lair. He says that a young boy, accompanied by an old man, has a sword with a prophecy marked on it. Realizing at once that it's the sword he's after, Vortgyn warns Wulfilla that the sword belongs to him and that, in exchange for his cooperation, he'll let him have the child. Vortgyn will take care of the old man.

Vortgyn surprises a little girl who had befriended Romulus and asks her to deliver a message to her people: Romulus must be given to him or many more will die. Evidently, the heroes refuse and organize the resistance.

The warlord, helped by Wulfilla, sends his army to kill Romulus and his friends. Vortgyn's army initially has the upper hand, but the army of the Ninth Legion appears to help Romulus. Distraught, Vortgyn notices Merlin heading for a circle of stones. Wanting to kill his archenemy, he follows him and burns the circle of stones, but Merlin attacks him from behind, takes his mask off, and sends into the fire he caused himself, putting an end to the warlord’s reign of terror.

Wulfila[]

The second-in-command of the Goths, Wulfila leads the assault on Rome. During this, he throws an axe to the Emperor of Rome then throws a spear to his wife, killing them both. Another Goth warns him that his leader Odoacer wants him alive. Saying he will try, Wulfila immediately chases the boy. He eventually grabs him, only to be stabbed in the leg by Romulus who manages to escape. Wulfila finds the crown for Romulus and crushes him out of spite.

In the next morning, Romulus is found and brought to Odoacer by Wulfila. The latter insists to behead the boy to end the lineage of Caesar, but Odoacer shuts him up. However, he orders Wulfila to execute him after Rolumus proclaims himself Caesar again. Merlin intervenes, however, and convinces Odoacer to keep him alive, saving him in extremis. Wulfila protests, but Odoacer, having enough of his right-hand defiance, cuts off his finger. Wulfila is then ordered to escort Romulus to Capri, where he will be his prison guard. He is told to not harm him unless Odoacer gives the order. He reluctantly accepts.

In Capri, the barbarian offers Romulus a drink, but just as the prisoner reaches for the bowl, Wulfila spits into it. Romulus retaliates by throwing it back in his face. Wulfila is about to throw the child off the cliff, but Merlin warns him that if he kills him, he'll join him soon enough, as Odoacer will punish him for disobeying orders. Wulfila relents, promising to Romulus he will gladly kill him when the times comes. Turning his attention to Ambrosinus, he suspends him in the air by tying his hands. He notices the mark on Vortgyn's medallion and asks him what it is. Merlin replies that he got it while searching for the truth, a concept Wulfila will never understand.

Later, Wulfila is sleeping. Romulus finds Caesar's famous sword and attempts to assassinate his gaoler. Unfortunately for him, Wulfila wakes up just in time to avoid the sword. He then orders Romulus to give him the sword. Romulus flees and Wulfila lashes out at him. He finds him in the company of General Aurelius and his allies, who have come to save the Emperor. The barbarian briefly fights Aurelius. The Roman general manages to wound him by banging his head against his own axe. The heroes manage to escape from the island. Wulfila goes to the place where Caesar's sword used to lie and realizes that the weapon contains great power. Beginning to scheme to have the sword for himself, he gathers his men and sets off for Britannia.

There, he meets with the warlord Vortgyn. He warns him that a young boy, accompanied by an old man, has a sword with a prophecy marked on it. Realizing at once that it's the sword he's after, Vortgyn warns Wulfilla that the sword belongs to him and that, in exchange for his cooperation, he'll let him have the child. Vortgyn will take care of the old man, having a long grudge against him.

Wulfila then assists Vortgyn to attack the last army of Rome. During the battle, the Goth mortally wounds Batiatus, an ally of Aureliusm by throwing a spear on him. Then he turns his attention on Romulus, decided to get rid of his enemy once for all. However, Aurelius comes to his rescue and knocks Wulfila off his horse. Wulfila however takes the sword of Cesar and fights against Aurelius. Since he has the magic weapon, Wulfila has the advantage over the Roman and breaks the blade of his sword. But Aurelius manages to get the sword out of Wulfila's hands. Wulfila then grabs an axe and attacks Aurelius again. After a moment, the noble soldier breaks the barbarian's axe, but Wulfila is determined to throw himself at him, striking him with the handle. Unbeknownst to Wulfila, Romulus seizes Caesar's sword and points it at the surprised Wulfila. Romulus pierces him to avenge the death of his parents.

Mitigating factors[]

For Vortgyn, the movie makes it clear he is a man only out for power. He lets the girl alive when he sends her to deliver a warning to Romulus’ army, but as you may have guessed, this is just out of convenience as he needs the army to know his presence to inspire fear among them.

For Wulfila, he is at Odoacer’s service, but he isn’t really loyal to him. He tries to murder Romulus even after being ordered to keep him alive for Odoacer and the leader of the Goths is clearly annoyed of Wulfila’s constant protests and disregards for his orders. I also don’t know why his page has the Honorable category and describes him as such. The dude has clearly no honor nor shows the slightest bit of mercy.

Heinousness[]

Vortgyn has a pattern of burning villages to the ground with no survivors just for terrorism, as he wants to rule over Britannia. He stands out for the highest direct body count in the movie. He also tortured Merlin and left him a mark on the chest with his medallion.

However, this section is a little tricky concerning Wulfila. When I watched the movie the first time, I didn’t recall him having standout acts under his belt and simply seemed to be a villain wanting to kill a hero kid because he annoyed him. But after a rewatch, I’d say Wulfila has a bit of a niche about personal villainy. He killed Romulus’ parents, an ally of the protagonist, and spends the whole movie trying to kill Romulus and his allies. I’m not sure if it’s enough to push him that, ngl, but I distinctly remember we approved other villains who did similar deeds.

About the other antagonists, nobody else really qualifies. Odoacer is the leader of the Goth, but lacks the bodycount of Vortgyn and the personal cruelty of Wulfila despite having far more resource. He just assaults Rome and orders Romulus to be killed when the child still proclaims himself to be Cesar.

There is also Nestor who is a traitor attempting to give Romulus to the Goths, but that is the only thing he does.

Final verdict[]

Vortgyn imo is a decent keep. For Wulfila, I'm neutral and could go either way with your verdict, guys!