Travel with Pull Over and Let Me Out to the 28th president's library and museum in the scenic Shenandoah Valley.

The Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library and Museum honors the legacy of the 28th president and is located in the historic downtown of Staunton (pronounced STAN-ton), Virginia, in the scenic Shenandoah Valley. This is more than just a library; it is also the site of the future president’s birth on December 28, 1856. The primary mission of the Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library and Museum, according to its website, is education. As part of our homeschool studies, my son and I went to deepen our understanding of WWI and its impact on the country and the world, and we ended up in the trenches of the Western Front.

Disclosure: Many of the links you see on this site and within our trip planning tool are affiliate links. If you click through and make a purchase, I’ll get a small commission and it won’t cost you any extra. On selected stories, for those hotel and car bookings made using our TravelingToGive™ tool we contribute 2.5% of gross hotel and car sales to Paws for Purple Hearts. So, thanks in advance for helping me keep bringing you the content you enjoy and, at the same time, giving back to those who so bravely serve our country! #everytripmatters

Visiting the Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library & Museum

The Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library & Museum is comprised of a complex of buildings perched on a hill at the corner of Coalter Street in Staunton, Virginia.

We entered through the Smith Center which serves as the visitors center where we purchased our tickets to the museum. We then went on to explore the museum, which takes visitors on a dynamic tour of Wilson’s life.

From his pre-Civil War birth to his childhood, to his time at Princeton, to his marriage, family, period as Governor of New Jersey, to his presidency, and finally to his death. The museum provides a wealth of information and exhibits as it investigates the man, his era, and his legacy.

Woodrow Wilson's Pierce-Arrow

One of the most popular and prominent exhibits at the museum is the presidential limousine. The shiny black Pierce-Arrow made in 1919 was part of the White House fleet of vehicles while Wilson was in office. President Wilson absolutely loved the car. He loved it so much that friends of his purchased it so that it could be his personal car after he left office. It also has the distinction of being the very first object donated to what would become the Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library & Museum in 1925. Visitors who enjoy classic cars will relish seeing this pristine vehicle and learning about its historical past.

World War I Trench Warfare

The Immersive WWI Trench exhibit is a favorite and with good reason. Created in May of 2010, the exhibit contains a collection of artifacts from WWI. The large exhibit in the museum basement recreates a realistic trench like the ones on the Western Front.

Descend the stairs and find yourself in Verdun somewhere between 1914 and 1918. The exhibit does an excellent job of depicting the trenches’ sound effects, zig-zag pattern, and narrowness, and it even includes several items that would have been commonly found in a trench during the war. Gas masks, helmets, weapons, cots, and even a working trench periscope provide visitors with an immersive look at life on the Western Front.

The timeline of Wilson's life

The museum is on the first floor of the building and features seven exhibit galleries depicting Woodrow Wilson’s life and public service through historic photographs, documents, and artifacts. The galleries delve into several key areas of his life, including his childhood, and public life, from his Princeton studies to his historic Great War peace efforts, the 14 Point Plan, and his service as the 28th President of the United States from 1913 to 1921.

Woodrow Wilson’s views on race were troubling and as the museum’s website states, “We make no excuses for Woodrow Wilson’s racist beliefs.” We learn from our history and to that end, while we were there the museum was preparing for an upcoming series called Reckoning. The series, in keeping with the commitment to education, investigates individual presidents’ views and political policies toward minority populations, with a focus on how presidential policies aimed at them affected each of these minority groups.

A special guided tour focusing on the experiences of the enslaved people who lived and labored in the Presbyterian Manse where Woodrow Wilson was born is offered on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Tickets can be purchased in our gift shop upon arrival.

The Birthplace - The Manse

Thomas Woodrow Wilson was born on December 28, 1856, to Jesse Woodrow Wilson and her husband, Reverend Joseph Ruggles Wilson. The third child in the family, the future president had two older sisters.

Wilson’s father was a Hampden-Sydney College professor who had accepted a call to be the pastor of Staunton Presbyterian Church two years before the birth of his son. The small family relocated to the lovely Greek Revival home on Gospel Hill. Although the family moved on when Woodrow was still a young boy, he would return and spend two nights as President-elect in 1912, and shortly after his death in 1924, the Presbyterian Church gave its approval to sell the home in 1925 to be a museum for the late President.

Visitors to the Library & Museum may take a guided tour of the home at designated times throughout the day to learn what life would have been like back in 1856. The manse is a genuine example of a pre-Civil War Shenandoah Valley home, and it is furnished with Wilson family treasures and period furnishings. If your visit does not correspond with a tour, a 360-degree virtual tour is available. Because our visit didn’t coincide with a tour, I took the virtual tour on my phone from the comfort of our hotel room at the nearby Blackburn Inn. You can read more about the Blackburn Inn here.

The Gardens

Parking at the Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library & Museum is directly behind the home. Adjacent to the parking lot is the expansive gardens. These beautiful gardens make a wonderful welcome to visitors and have their own special story.

In the manse’s early days it was also a working farm for the families living here. Over the years, the size of the property got smaller, but there was always a garden. Different groups have cared for these gardens throughout the years, and in 2008 the Garden Club of Virginia brought new life back by planting an array of new shrubs, plants, and flowers. In 2015, the gardens lost the boxwoods to disease but with love, care, and a great deal of work, the gardens are thriving and stunning once again.

What I liked

Woodrow Wilson’s story is intriguing. And while there are elements of his life that are pretty bad such as re-segregating the U.S. military, authorizing segregation within the Federal Government, screening the film Birth of a Nation at the White House, and holding racist views, his museum does a good job of tackling these challenging topics while also highlighting the significance of his time in office.

I especially enjoyed the Immersive WWI trench. This exhibit is well-done and impactful. It’s also a delight to see the classic Pierce-Arrow limousine. Especially knowing how much he enjoyed the car and how it came to be the first piece in the museum. Additionally, I loved the gardens and the gorgeous location that’s within walking distance of the picturesque historic downtown area.

Take Away

The Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library & Museum is a great itinerary item when visiting Staunton, Virginia, and the Shenandoah Valley.

The tour is primarily self-guided but if you bring your smartphone and it is fully charged, you can use the QR readers to access additional activities and content that are included with your general admission ticket.

If you’re into history and learning about the presidents, the museum does a good job of presenting the 28th president’s life and times. I would have liked to have seen a little more information about the second Mrs. Wilson and her influence after her husband’s stroke, but there was a section of the museum that was closed for construction so perhaps that’s forthcoming.

Overall, this is an outstanding educational site that offers a little something for everyone with programs and activities for students of all ages. Pairing that with the magnificent location and proximity to the charming downtown of Staunton, Virginia, that makes a visit to the Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library and Museum a winning ticket.

Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library & Museum

20 N. Coalter Street Staunton, VA 24401

For travelers with questions about accessibility, learn more here.

Hey, Pinners! Pin this for later!

► Plan Your Trip to Staunton, Virginia Now!

It makes it simple to plan your trip. We’ve pre-filled the destination from the article and if there are multiple places mentioned in the article, we’ve put the one that is best used as your base to see all of the places mentioned.

Just select I’M STAYING and enter the travel dates and hit SEARCH. It automatically uses the first place in the article.

For a multi-day trip, if you stay near that location, you should be able to use it as your base.

Super simple. Just click on the pencil and enter the name of any place mentioned in the story. Or you can enter any address or even the name of a company if you are mixing business and pleasure.

Just click I’M DRIVING and you can see how long it will take, get driving directions and even rent a car if you need one.

Yes, we guarantee the best published rates on hotels. Click on the link for BEST RATE 110% GUARANTEE for details.

Share your experiences

Hey pinners, save this for pinning after your trip

After you get back from your trip, please use these images to post to social media or post your own photos. Please tag us on your post #pulloverandletmeout

You can also use the social sharing links on the SmartTrip tool.

More travel stories you'll love reading!

Visit the Birthplace of Kentucky Fried Chicken in Corbin, Kentucky

The Bluegrass State is well-known for many things, from racehorses to bourbon. However, when it comes to cuisine, there is perhaps nothing more iconic than the finger-licking goodness made famous by Colonel Sanders. Travel to Corbin, Kentucky with PullOverandLetMeOut to visit the Birthplace of Kentucky Fried Chicken.

Read More »

Tour the Southfork Ranch from the Hit TV Show Dallas

Southfork Ranch was the iconic setting of the hit TV series Dallas. From 1978-1991 fans faithfully tuned in and followed the adventures of JR and the rest of the Ewing family. Travel to this legendary ranch with PullOverandLetMeOut and take the tour!

Read More »

Enjoy a Historic Stay at the Talbott Tavern

The Talbott Tavern has been a mainstay of Bardstown, Kentucky’s downtown since 1779. In a town recognized as the Bourbon Capital of the World, the tavern has seen its share of famous and not-so-famous guests over the years. Travel there with PullOverandLetMeOut to learn about an enjoyable stay at the historic Talbott Tavern.

Read More »

Let’s Get Social!

Click below and join the conversation on social media