CHARLOTTE, N.C. ” Carmelo Anthony scored 18 of his 25 points in the second half, Chauncey Billups added a key three-point play late, and the Denver Nuggets held off the Charlotte Bobcats 88-80 on Tuesday night to stay unbeaten with Billups in the lineup.

It was Billups’ second trip to Charlotte in just over a week. He had a much more pleasant day this time around. A week after he abruptly left town before the game when Detroit traded him, Billups calmly guided his new team, finishing with 16 points and five assists as Denver moved to 3-0 since he replaced Allen Iverson at point guard.

After an 11-point fourth-quarter lead was sliced to 75-73, the undermanned Nuggets turned to Billups and their defense. Charlotte went six straight possessions without a point, while Billups found Nene for a thunderous dunk before Billups’ driving layup and free throw on the next possession made it 80-73 with 2:56 left.

The Bobcats couldn’t recover, sending coach Larry Brown to his fifth loss in seven games with his newest team.

Jason Richardson scored 23 points and Adam Morrison added 16 for the sloppy Bobcats, who committed 18 turnovers and shot 40 percent.

Despite dressing only nine players, Denver rallied from a sluggish start to give coach George Karl a win in the coaching matchup of North Carolina alums.

A day after Antonio McDyess was waived, forward Kenyon Martin missed his second straight game with a sprained right wrist. He joined a lengthy injury list that included centers Chris Andersen (ribs) and Steven Hunter (knee), and guards Chucky Atkins (knee) and Sonny Weems (groin).

The Nuggets trailed by as many as 10 points in the second quarter before Anthony took over in the third.

With a combination of fadeaway jumpers, fastbreak layups, mid-range shots and free throws, Anthony scored 14 points in the quarter, the last two coming on a jumper over Morrison that put Denver ahead 68-59.

Anthony’s jumper early in the fourth quarter made it 73-62 before Charlotte rallied.

Morrison’s 3-pointers and Richardson’s reverse layup capped a 9-0 run to cut the lead to 75-73. But with Raymond Felton on the bench with five fouls, the Bobcats couldn’t sustain the run with rookie D.J. Augustin struggling running the point in Felton’s absence. Augustin shot 1-for-9 with three assists and four turnovers.

Even Sean May’s return to the court couldn’t prevent Charlotte from dropping to 1-2 on its season-high six-game homestand.

May was active for the first time since the opener, when Brown criticized his conditioning following knee surgery. May started the fourth quarter and missed a jumper 13 seconds later. He went to the bench with no points or rebounds two minutes later and didn’t return.

Anthony hit 10 of 19 shots and grabbed six rebounds. Notes: Karl and Brown reminisced of their days at North Carolina at the morning shootaround.

“I don’t know how long he’ll do it, but I think he’ll be very excited and energized for at least a couple years,” Karl said of Brown.