Los Angeles Clippers guard Chauncey Billups will miss the remainder of the season after tearing his left Achilles tendon.

Billups suffered the injury during the team’s 107-102 victory over the Magic in Orlando on Monday night. The Clippers say an MRI exam Tuesday confirmed Billups’ injury.

Billups will return to Los Angeles on Thursday for further evaluation. The Clippers say a date for surgery hasn’t been determined.

The five-time All-Star, whom the Clippers claimed off waivers in December, was averaging 14.9 points and 4.0 assists in 30.4 minutes per game this season.

Billups was having a huge night Monday, scoring 11 of his 18 points in the fourth quarter when he turned to run up the court and buckled to the ground with 5:48 left in the game.

Suns 107, Bucks 105: Steve Nash hit a driving layup with 5 seconds left, giving Phoenix a victory over host Milwaukee. Nash, who also celebrated his 38th birthday Tuesday, had 18 points and 11 assists.

Michael Redd scored 14 points and came away with a win against his former team, but it wasn’t easy. The Suns blew a big lead in the second half and had to rally at the end.

Marcin Gortat scored 21 points and Jared Dudley added 19 for the Suns, who have won three straight.

Celtics 94, Bobcats 84: Paul Pierce passed Larry Bird for No. 2 on the Celtics’ career scoring list, finishing with 15 points as host Boston increased its winning streak to five straight with a victory over Charlotte.

Pierce needed nine points to tie Bird’s total of 21,791. He had seven points at halftime, then hit a 3-pointer with 10:23 left in the third quarter to pass Bird.

Heat 107, Cavaliers 91: Dwyane Wade scored 26 points, LeBron James added 24 against his former team, and Miami tuned up for a long trip by beating Cleveland.

Chris Bosh finished with 15 points for the Heat, which has won 11 of its past 13 games.

Lakers: No charges will be filed against Kobe Bryant over an alleged incident in August at a church in San Diego, the city attorney’s office announced. A young man had alleged that Bryant assaulted him while both were attending Sunday services at St. Therese of Carmel Church in the upscale Carmel Valley neighborhood. The alleged victim said Bryant aggressively pulled on his arm because he felt the man had taken the star’s picture.

The Los Angeles Times contributed to this report.