I know it’s the first full weekend of NBA free agency but because the Portland Trail Blazers are yet to do anything of note, we turn to the bench and its newest additions.

Three seats opened up on Chauncey Billups’ sidelines after the end of the 2023-24 season, two of which were purposefully made vacant by the Blazers.

Steve Hetzel was poached by new Brooklyn Nets coach Jordi Fernandez as his lead assistant. The Blazers then chose not to renew the contracts of Rodney Billups and lead assistant Scott Brooks.

While the younger Billups didn’t make it onto an NBA bench until big brother hired him in 2022, the Blazers lost a combined 39 years of coaching experience in Brooks and Hetzel.

Experience is a must for this particular incarnation of the Blazers with the head coach himself owning only a year of NBA coaching experience before joining the team in 2021.

The perceived doubts relating to Billups’ own coaching ability could be hurting the franchise’s chances of getting him help.

What I mean, is that prospective replacements could be turned off by the lack of job security associated with the franchise not yet picking up Billups’ 2025-26 team option.

Fortunately, they have been able to secure the services of Nate Bjorkgren and Chris Fleming to replace two of the three vacant seats.

Bjorkgren, who served as Special Assistant to the Blazers Coaching Staff in 2023-24, has already reached notable coaching heights, leading the Indiana Pacers in 2020-21.

The 49-year-old has also spent time as an assistant throughout the NBA, including the 2019 Toronto Raptors championship after heading multiple G-League programs.

Fleming, 54, played and coached in Europe and led the German national team for three years. In the NBA, he’s spent time with three rebuilding franchises over the past decade.

Below we take a look at each coach and what they might bring to the table.

Nate Bjorkgren

Bjorkgren started his coaching career at a high school level in Iowa and Arizona, before entering the G-League (then D-League) in 2007.

He enjoyed stints with the Iowa Energy, Santa Cruz Warriors and Bakersfield Jam, serving as assistant coach to Nick Nurse as part of the Energy’s 2011 D-League championship.

He cut his NBA teeth with the Phoenix Suns, working under both Jeff Hornacek and Earl Watson between 2015 and 2017.

Those were two seasons best forgotten in Phoenix with the franchise finishing 14th and 15th in the west as they developed young prospects in Devin Booker and TJ Warren. The Iowan then re-joined Nick Nurse, helping the Raptors to their first championship in 2019.

Bjorkgren’s success with Nurse helped him land the Pacers head coaching role during the COVID-shortened 2020-21 season. The campaign resulted in an underwhelming 34-38 record, with Indiana finishing ninth in the Eastern Conference and 17th in NBA Net Rating.

That team featured Myles Turner, Domantas Sabonis and Malcolm Brogdon with Victor Oladipo missing much of the season through injury.

Despite winning their first Play-In game against the Charlotte Hornets, Bjorkgren’s Pacers missed the playoffs in 2021, losing to the Washington Wizards for the eighth seed.

After Bjorkgren’s firing, Jake Fischer, then of Bleacher Report, described the coach’s time in Indianapolis as “turbulent”. While the dynamic leader had received a strong endorsement from Nick Nurse, his ability to solidify relationships had been called into question.

Bjorkgren was described as meticulous with a strong tactical acumen, known for his aggressive defensive schemes. Unfortunately, the word aggressive was also used to describe the way he related to players.

Tony East at Forbes went further to suggest Bjorkgren clashed with players and staffers throughout the season and was reportedly a micromanager.

After being let go by the Pacers, Bjorkgren returned to Toronto in 2021 as a assistant on Nurse’s staff until the end of the 2022-23 season.

If the reports a true, I hope Bjorkgren has learnt from his Indiana experience but I'm still optimistic about his tactical ability.

The Blazers have clearly built a rapport with Bjorkgren over the past 12 months via his consultant role, so there’s clearly something there.

It’s a particularly good addition if he’s filling either Hetzel or Billups’ role and not lead assistant, which should go to someone with a little more head coaching experience.

Chris Fleming

With 26 years of coaching experience, Fleming has plied his trade on two continents and at almost every level.

The New Jersey native spent the first two decades of his basketball journey in Germany, first as a player with QTSV Quakenbrück between 1994 and 2000. Notably he straddled the assistant coach-player role in 1998-1999, before taking the team's top coaching job between 2000 and 2008 winning the second-division German Cup in his final year.

He led first division German franchise Bamburg Basket to four consecutive Bundesliga titles between 2009 and 2013, before taking the reigns of the German national team in 2014. He was also named Bundesliga Coach of the Year in 2011.

Fleming returned to the US in 2015, spending a year with the Denver Nuggets under Michael Malone. The Colorado franchise finished the season 10th in the Western Conference with a 33-49 record but with a young Serbian center showing strong signs.

He then served a three-year stint working for Kenny Atkinson on the Brooklyn Nets, which was still rebuilding in the aftermath of the Kevin Garnett-Paul Pierce era.

In 2019, Fleming signed on as lead assistant with the Chicago Bulls, helping Jim Boylen with another re-building project. Fleming was retained after Boylen left in 2020, serving as an assistant under new coach Billy Donovan.

In December 2021, Fleming stepped in as Acting Head Coach for five games when Donovan entered COVID protocols. He came away with a perfect 5-0 record.

The Chicago Sun Times’ Joe Cowley wrote about Fleming’s head coaching stint, describing him as a respected figure with a tough-love mantra, earning admiration for his preparation.

Fleming faced some criticism last season after an incident where he made contact with John Collins in the final seconds of a Bulls game against the Utah Jazz. There was no penalty for the incident but it temporarily placed the assistant coach in the spotlight.

Since entering the NBA, Fleming has been hired on predominantly rebuilding squads, so he should be familiar with the current situation in Portland.

Like Bjorkgren, Fleming is a solid get at either the Hetzel or Rodney Billups positions, helping Chauncey further his experience and skillset.

Conclusion

Brooks and Hetzel have left pretty noticeable holes on a Blazers bench run by a guy with minimal experience himself.

Whether either Bjorkgren or Fleming are Billups’ lead assistants remains to be seen but I like the amount and variety of their collective experience. Bjorkgren has been part of an actual NBA title with the Raptors as well as experience running his own NBA team.

Fleming enjoyed his success across the Atlantic but has since grown a decent reputation as a no-nonsense personality and someone players respond to.

Due to the uncertainty surrounding Billups’ future, we don’t know whether the duo will be in Portland long term as the head coach enters what appears to be a lame duck season. But it’ll be interesting to see how they settle in with the franchise and their roles.