Abstract

Cercospora apii Fres., Cercospora arachidicola Hori, and Cercospora kikuchii (Matsumoto & Tomoyasu) Gardn. were single spored, and the resultant colonies were characterized. All isolates of C. arachidicola were morphologically identical, whereas those of C. apii and C. kikuchii were either smooth or had radial folds. Variability in sporulation was also evident. Multiple-point inoculation of culture media in plates with conidia helped to overcome variability in the amount of conidial production. Maximum sporulation was obtained at 4 days with C. apii and C. kikuchii, and from 7 to 10 days with C. arachidicola. Single-point inoculation of a V-8 culture medium in plates from peripheral dark mycelial growth in potato dextrose agar (PDA) culture resulted in increased sporulation by C. kikuchii. Sporulation of C. kikuchii was maintained throughout a 15-month study by selective subculturing; however, conidial production decreased over time. A total of 15 other species of Cercospora sporulated within a week following a V-8 inoculation of culture medium in plates with mycelial agar blocks.

Résumé

non disponible

Get full access to this article

View all available purchase options and get full access to this article.

Information & Authors

Information

Published In

Canadian Journal of Botany

Volume 60 • Number 6 • June 1982

Pages: 862 - 868

History

Version of record online: 30 January 2011

Permissions

Request permissions for this article.

Authors

Affiliations

N. E. El-Gholl

S. A. Alfieri Jr.

W. H. Ridings

C. L. Schoulties

Metrics & Citations

Metrics

Other Metrics

Citations

Cite As

N. E. El-Gholl, S. A. Alfieri Jr., W. H. Ridings, and C. L. Schoulties. 1982. Growth and sporulation in vitro of Cercospora apii, Cercospora arachidicola, Cercospora kikuchii, and other species of Cercospora. Canadian Journal of Botany. 60(6): 862-868. https://doi.org/10.1139/b82-111

Export Citations

If you have the appropriate software installed, you can download article citation data to the citation manager of your choice. Simply select your manager software from the list below and click Download.

Format Direct import

Cited by

1. Use of image analysis to assess radial growth of Passalora arachidicola and Nothopassalora personata on solid media

2. Cercospora kikuchii (purple seed stain)

3. Evaluating Cercospora leaf blight resistance in soybean accessions using an improved categorical disease-evaluation scale

4. Induction of sporulation of cercosporoid pathogens of moth vine ( Araujia hortorum )

5. Plant-Based Culture Media for Improved Growth and Sporulation of Cercospora janseana

6. Screening a Diverse Soybean Germplasm Collection for Reaction to Purple Seed Stain Caused by Cercospora kikuchii

7. Assessment of Lineages of Cercospora kikuchii in Louisiana for Aggressiveness and Screening Soybean Cultivars for Resistance to Cercospora Leaf Blight

8. Expression of the Cercosporin Transporter, CFP, in Tobacco reduces Frog-eye Lesion Size

9. Vegetative Compatibility Groups in Cercospora kikuchii , the Causal Agent of Cercospora Leaf Blight and Purple Seed Stain in Soybean

10. Esporulação de Mycosphaerella fijiensis em diferentes meios de cultura

11. Lack of Induced Systemic Resistance in Peanut to Late Leaf Spot Disease by Plant Growth-Promoting Rhizobacteria and Chemical Elicitors

12. Mutants of Cercospora kikuchii Altered in Cercosporin Synthesis and Pathogenicity

13. The California Fig Industry

View Options

Get Access

Login options

Check if you access through your login credentials or your institution to get full access on this article.

Personal login

Email*

Password*

Forgot password? Reset it here

Keep me logged in

All fields with * are mandatory

Institutional Login

Purchase options

Purchase this article to get full access to it.

Single Article PPV

Canadian Journal of Botany

Vol. 60 No. 6 pp. 741-1029

Electronic, Individual, (access for 1 year)

Add to cart USD $40.00

Single Article PPV Checkout

Single Issue PPV

Canadian Journal of Botany

Vol. 60 No. 6 pp. 741-1029

Electronic, Individual, (access for 1 year)

Add to cart USD $75.00

Single Issue PPV Checkout

Restore your content access

Enter your email address to restore your content access:

Email -

Note: This functionality works only for purchases done as a guest. If you already have an account, log in to access the content to which you are entitled.

View options

PDF

View PDF

Media

Media

Other

Tables

Share Options

Share

Share the article link

Copied!

Copying failed.

Share on social media

Request permissions