You'd be forgiven for thinking it was the plot of a soap opera.

Taiwanese actor and former boy band member Nicky Wu has been forced to remarry, then re-divorce his ex-wife Ma Yashu before he could tie the knot with his new wife, Liu Shishi, the Shanghaiist reports.

Mr Wu, 45, and Ms Yashu, 40, were first married for three years, from 2006-2009.

To make matters even more complex, Ms Yashu, who is an actress herself, married Australian billionaire James Robert Hayes in 2010.

According to an interview Mr Wu's mother did with media outlet, the Taiwan Apple Daily, the couple were forced to remarry and re-divorce due to an unusual set of legal requirements in the country.

Apparently Mr Wu and Ms Yashu never registered their marriage in Taiwan during the three years they were together, because Mr Wu was 'interrogated like a criminal' when making a visa application for his then wife.

It appears because of this oversight, Mr Wu and Ms Yashu were required to remarry, register their marriage in Taiwan, and then re-divorce so that Mr Wu and Ms Shishi's nuptials were legal in the country.

Mr Wu and Ms Shishi, who is 29, met on the set of the Chinese television series Scarlet Heart in 2011. It is unclear if they became romantically involved at this time or later.

Mr Wu announced on his weibo page in January 2015 that the two had registered their marriage in Beijing, but the wedding ceremony was only held in Bali on Sunday.

In China, the legal element of a wedding must be completed in the offices of the Civil Affairs Bureau, so many couples choose to officially marry before proceeding to hold a ceremony and party the following weekend or later, according to the Travel China Guide.

It is possible the unusual circumstances that surrounded Mr Wu's previous marriage and subsequent divorce was the reason behind the 14-month delay between the marriage and the ceremony.

The wedding was held at the luxurious Ayana Resort and Spa in Bali, which sits on a cliff edge and has stunning views.

Approximately 350 guests attended the wedding, which reportedly cost more than 20 million yuan, or AU$4 million.

The wedding was held outside with thousands of white, blue and pink flowers decorating the clifftop space. Ms Shishi cried during the ceremony as her new husband spoke of his love for her.

During the ceremony, Ms Shishi wore a white strapless gown with a full lace skirt and veil. For the reception, the new bride changed into a traditional red Chinese dress with delicate flower beading.