A Dream Team Board of Directors

by Jarrett Meek

Being aware of and embracing the phases of an organization’s growth and development is not an easy task. Like parenting, each new phase of an organization requires different skills and intentional adjustments.

In the early growth stages of Mission Adelante, our board of directors was made up primarily of my own life-long friends who were excited to contribute to Mission Adelante’s mission and success. As a founder, I was grateful to have a trusted and competent group of people backing me in this endeavor. Because of our long-term relationships and shared history, alignment was easy and decision-making streamlined. In the midst of the many challenges that come with starting a new organization, our board of directors was a steady and uncomplicated source of encouragement and wisdom. That original board of directors largely stayed together for about 12 years, before some members began to transition off. They served well, gave generously, and used their gifts and experience to provide a healthy and stable foundation for the ministry during our early phases of growth.

Mission Adelante is now in a new stage of development as we move toward maturity and next generation leadership. One of the most important aspects of this maturing process starts with our board of directors. Over the last few years, we’ve been active in pursuing new board members from all places who bring perspectives from diverse cultural backgrounds as well as strengths and experiences that address some of the most important big-picture needs of our ministry. What we have now is an exciting, energized, and diverse group of leaders who are contributing in new ways to the success of Mission Adelante! I’m thrilled to introduce you to our Dream Team board of directors!

Todd Jones, an attorney working in the Commercial Title Insurance industry, serves as our Chairperson. Todd joined our board in 2006 and has provided continuity through the evolution of our board over the years.

Ariel Griffin, whose father immigrated from Nigeria, is our Secretary and originally served with Mission Adelante as a college intern in 2011. She has earned two Master’s degrees and serves on a variety of boards.

Michael Fry, our Treasurer, is the co-founder and owner of Brown Button Estate Sales, bringing business and entrepreneurial experience to the table.

Israel Guillermo immigrated to the U.S. from Mexico as a child, and understands the challenges of growing up in new country. He has earned a Master’s degree in Project Management and works in I.T.. Israel serves on our Education and Advocacy committee.

Reid Kapple, a local Pastor, brings a theological depth, extensive experience with the local church, and a passion for issues of biblical justice, especially related to immigration. He serves on our Education and Advocacy Committee.

Kori Carew, an attorney who immigrated from Sierra Leone, is a professional speaker, coach and trainer specializing in Diversity, Equity, Inclusion. She is passionate about coaching and mentoring leaders and others to create belonging in organizations. Kori also serves on our Education and Advocacy Committee.

Steve Steddom interacted frequently with Mission Adelante over many years in his previous role as the Executive Director of the Harry J. Lloyd Charitable Trust. Steve has recently earned his PhD and is now a nonprofit consultant and coach with expertise in philanthropy. Steve serves on our Partner Engagement and Fundraising Committee.

Nayeli Flores, an entrepreneur from Mexico, earned her Master’s in Business Administration in Spain. She currently serves as the President of the Kansas City chapter of the Global Network of Mexican Professionals (Red Global MX). She serves on our Partner Engagement and Fundraising Committee.

Felipe Ham was part of the original team of volunteers who started Mission Adelante. After years of serving in our children’s ministry, he joined our Board of Directors and serves on our Ministry and Personnel Committee.

Wendy English first connected with our ministry as a volunteer in our Youth Club. In the marketplace, she works in Human Resources as a Corporate Recruiter. She serves on our Ministry and Personnel Committee.

Jarrett Meek, that’s me! As Pastor and Executive Director, it is my joy to work with this Dream Team of board members to lead Mission Adelante into an exciting future!

For more about our Board of Directors, please visit: https://www.missionadelante.org/board

Be part of our programs!

We are so excited to start this year and we are grateful for all our volunteers who make everything possible. Would you consider partnering with us this trimester?

How can you help?

Pray for our program participants would create an impact in our community and grow with their walk with the Lord.

Volunteer – Come to one of our obseveration nights the first week of March. For more information visit: https://www.missionadelante.org/observe

Donate to join us in building a multicultural community of disciples making disciples.

From our summer intern Mikya

I have so many unforgettable memories that I will cherish forever. I’m sad the summer is over, but I can’t wait to see what God has in store for the future.

How can serving reveal a lifelong passion?

Shreya Gautam, a medical student at UMKC and volunteer in the multicultural tutoring program (Leaders in Training), shares how serving helped her find direction for her own future

Welcome to the Team Patrique!

Today I’m very excited to officially introduce you to the Youth Ministry Director at Mission Adelante: Patrique Harris.

A Day of Celebration in our Neighborhood!

Today is a day of celebration!

A few of my hobbies and goals 🏃🏽‍♀️

These are some of the peaks of my life and it is the way I want to live it with no regrets. I believe that we should always do what makes us happy and live a meaningful life.

My Leadership Lessons 👩🏽‍🏫

I am excited to take all of this leadership experience and continue on my career path...

Jesus Raises Things from the Dead

When we lived and worked in Bolivia as missionaries, I learned an important lesson: God raises things from the dead!

How can I be a good neighbor in this season?

Want to Know What your Investment, Commitment, and Servanthood is Doing in the Life of Another?...just keep reading!

Pausing and Counting the Blessings

The Courageous Immigrants

Serving with Passion 💫

My name is Sydney Bass and I served with Mission Adelante for the first time over the summer in the Kids Adelante groups. Every week, twice a week, I got to interact with kids and share the love of Christ with them during pretty troubling times.

Phul Maya's two pieces of leadership advice

I had learned so much from leading those two programs that I couldn’t say “no” when I was offered to lead Refugee Kids Club and co-lead...

Leaders from All Places on the Playing Field

by Jarrett Meek, Pastor/Founder/Executive Director

In the midst of life and the ups and downs of ministry, the Lord is quietly carrying Mission Adelante through important milestones. For some years now we have been focused on mobilizing volunteers and raising up leaders from within the immigrant and refugee community in KCK. In 2011 we began measuring the number of ongoing immigrant volunteers that were serving in ongoing, defined roles in our ministry. At that point the number represented about 14% of all of our volunteers, a modest, but decent start for a ministry that had initially emphasized recruiting volunteers from suburban churches. Slowly, each trimester we've made progress. In 2013 we shifted the focus of our summer internship to equipping youth from our community. We experimented with different leadership team models that were meant to provide a place at the table for people from other places. And, with two steps forward and one step back, we began to see fruit.

Mobilizing "community leaders" for the mission field in our own backyard is not just a strategy, but it is value that comes close to the heart of our mission. We are convinced that to truly live out our mission in this community, we must do it together! Not as "us" serving "them", but as a new "we". Every day I see evidence that we still lack a lot in this regard, but I also see that the Lord is moving us forward. While we still have a long way to go, this summer trimester marks the first time that more than 25% of our 130 ongoing volunteers are immigrants or refugees. And, if patterns remain consistent, we might expect to make another significant jump in September.

There is another important and related transition taking place at Mission Adelante; half of our staff Leadership Team are from other countries, and, during the summer, with our summer interns included, almost half of our staff (46%) are first or second generation immigrants. These statistics may not break any records for urban ministries, but they represent significant fruit from our efforts at becoming "a multicultural community of disciples making disciples where immigrants and others are thriving and using our gifts together to impact our neighborhood and world for the glory of Jesus Christ. "

Important Dates:

Mission Adelante will be on break next week, July 4th - 7th. There will not be any programs that week so that our staff and volunteers can enjoy the holiday with their family and friends.

Observation Nights are coming soon! If you have ever wondered what goes on during a night of programming at Mission Adelante you can join us on Tuesday July 11th & 18th from 6:30 - 8:30 to observe our Refugee Ministry or on Thursday July 13th & 20th from 6:30 - 8:30 to our observe our Latino Ministry. We are located at 22 S 18th St. Kansas City, Kansas 66102. Visit our website at: www.missionadelante.org/serve/

Summer Interns from our Neighborhood!!

Our Summer Internship opening retreat began in Lawrence

by Jarrett Meek, Founder, Executive Pastor

Jesus, having seen the crowds of people in the towns around Jerusalem had compassion on them. "The are like sheep without a shepherd," he said. Where are the shepherds? Then he said to his disciples, "The harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few. Pray to the Lord of the harvest that he would send out workers into his harvest field." And then Jesus sends his twelve disciples out to preach the good news. The disciples became the harvest workers. This was Jesus' plan!

When I look throughout our urban Kansas City neighborhood I see deep and desperate needs all around, but I also see great potential. I see sheep without a shepherd, but at the same time I see young leaders emerging. Our prayer at Mission Adelante has been that God would raise up workers for His harvest from within our neighborhood. And its happening!

This weekend we launched our first ever summer internship for emerging leaders from our own neighborhood;

Helen Venegas, Edgar Soriano, Iris Venegas, and Odalis Delgado.

These are amazing young people who have been involved in Mission Adelante now for many years, most of them having started with us as kids when Kids Adelante still met in our basement. Over the years the Lord has worked in their lives in powerful ways and has begun something that we are confident He will continue on until the day of Christ Jesus. These neighborhood all-stars are learning to follow Jesus, they're making an impact, blazing new trails, loving their peers, and becoming leaders in our ministry.

This summer they will become key-carrying members of our staff, walking closely with mentors, doing ministry together, receiving training workshops and being challenged to seek the Lord in their own personal lives in new and deeper ways. They are ready to be sent out, just like the disciples were sent out; not yet fully trained, but bravely depending on Jesus for every step in their own growth, knowing that He will use them in ways they never imagined and that the experience will shape their own lives.

The opening retreat for the internship began in Lawrence with a tour of KU's campus, where Iris will be attending in the Fall. And then we moved to The Barn Bed and Breakfast Inn were we dove into games and activities that deepened our relationships and set a course for pursuing Christ together through the summer. As I look forward to the next 8 weeks I am expectant and excited about what the Lord will do in their lives and through them. And I continue to "pray that the Lord would raise us workers for His harvest" from within our neighborhood. Please pray with us this summer!

In other news

This trimester we have a new volunteer position available at Bhutanese Teens Club.Tenteenagerswill serve as captains this trimester. These captains will have leadership roles and help teach or organize games. We are excited to see these students develop their leadership abilityas they learn to follow Yeshu (Jesus) this summer!

Four Latino teens confirmed their participation as summer interns this past week. They will be challenged in new ways over the next two months, but they are ready and eager.

Yanelis, the Raices director in Cuba, arrived on Saturday and will help lead our summer interns in discipleship seminars. We are excited to have her here this summer.

A Memorial Day get-together at the Meeks’ home turned into a beautiful multicultural party. A spontaneous dance party erupted on the patio--and on the picnic table! There was football, volleyball, and croquet in the yard, s'mores in the firepit, and all kinds of meat on the open grill. It was a slice of heaven!

Prayer needs

Please pray for our senators and representatives looking to reform immigration laws. Pray for them to be wise, courageous, and God-honoring in their decisionmaking.

Please pray for English students and conversation partners to enjoy each other and develop authentic relationships as they spend time together this summer.

Current Needs

We need several 4x8 foot ivory-colored cloth tablecloths to be used for events at the building. If you are able to provide these, please contact Jenny Dunn at jennyd@missionadelante.org.

We still need a few more board books for our Mommy & Me ESL and early literacy class in June. Please contact laurent@missionadelante.org for book titles.

Important Dates

Latino Summer Program Launch: Tonight

Raising up Leaders One Song at a Time

Written by Megan McDermott, Latino Children's Ministry Director

Have you ever met someone that after knowing them for only five minutes, reminded you of the absolute joy found in Christ? When Janoy first came to Mission Adelante, he brought an infectious energy and a passion for Christ that has continued to inspire everyone around him. He is a man that does everything with 100% of his heart and this became even more obvious as he began to emerge as a potential leader in our house church.

One of his greatest gifts is leading others in worshiping the Lord with his voice. When a church has a worship leader that loves to praise the Lord whole-heartedly, it allows the church body to pursue the Lord in a really intimate way. One of the greatest desires at the heart of Mission Adelante is that we are

dedicated to reproducing and equipping Indigenous leaders for ministry.

Therefore, it seemed only natural to encourage and empower Janoy to step into leading the Latino worship team.

The majority of the worship team is composed of teenagers that are hungry to learn and play music. However, because they are still learning how to play the instruments and they struggle with self-confidence, they often experience a great deal of frustration when trying to learn a new song. It has been so incredible to watch as Janoy,

one Indigenous leader, reaches out to help raise up other Indigenous leaders!

Wouldn’t it be incredible if one day the teens themselves were mentoring the future worship leaders of our community, teaching what they learned from Janoy?

It is a blessing to walk alongside my brother, Janoy, as the Lord encourages and challenges him to lead others. His passion for Christ is cultivating the melody of the song that the Lord desires to love His children with.

In other news:

We have been busy planning for our summer ESL classes. Bhutanese students will learn useful English words for gardening, food packaging, and road signs. We will even have a workshop for moms and their preschoolers. It’s going to be a great summer!

Cindy Green from Senator Jerry Moran’s office came to visit our ministry last week and learn about how we are serving and connecting with immigrants and refugees in our community.

Director of Community Development, Kristen Allen, attended the Christian Community Health Fellowship’s annual conference in Atlanta last weekend to continue networking and developing our vision for a community-based medical clinic for immigrants and refugees.

Prayer needs:

We are visiting 8 Latino teens this week with the hope they will move forward in applying for our summer internship. Pray for these teens to catch a vision for how God wants’ to use them.

Please pray for emerging partnerships in our neighborhood with refugee groups from Burma.

Please pray for ongoing renewal and rest, deepening passion, and relational unity for our staff and missional community as we serve in a sometimes difficult urban context.

Current needs:

A set or two of 5-7 baby board books for our “mommy & me” Bhutanese ESL workshop. Please contact Lauren at laurent@missionadelante.org if you can help purchase one or more books.

Volunteers to join the Transportation Team for the Bhutanese Outreach. There are positions available on Tuesday evenings for the summer, as well as Tuesday - Thursday evenings in the month of June. For more information, contact Drew Hammond at drewh@missionadelante.org.

Important dates:

Volunteer Orientation & Training: Saturday, May 18, 9:00-12:30 All volunteers should attend this training once at the beginning of serving with Mission Adelante. It's also a great way for someone to become familiar with Mission Adelante's ministry. If you or someone you know is interested in finding out more about what we do, and about our volunteer opportunities, please plan to attend/encourage him or her to attend this informative training.

All Volunteer Huddle & Dessert: Monday, May 20, 6:30 p.m. We encourage everyone that will be volunteering with us during our summer trimester to attend so we can prepare for a great launch.

Summer trimester programs launch: Week of May 27

Equipping Leaders to Serve

Written by Lauren Timberlake, Bhutanese ESL Director

Mon Maya, level 1 class captain, takes attendance on a Tuesday night.

Chuda, the Level 4 captain, by the Kansas River during a class field trip to Kaw Point last summer.

Mission Adelante desires to build indigenous leaders.

We believe that the essence of the great commission is reproducing disciples and leaders who are capable of multiplying the work.

We want the people we serve to take ownership of our programs, to care deeply for their neighbors, and to see themselves as leaders. Ultimately, we want to see shepherds leading the way for their community to know Jesus. So many of our students don’t see themselves as having much to offer. They have been pushed to the fringes of their own culture and ours, and sometimes they don’t see their worth.

On registration night, each Bhutanese ESL class now chooses one or more leaders to “captain” the class. The class votes on the leader and decides what his or her responsibilities should be. They even came up with the term “captain”. Each group’s leaders may have different responsibilities, but most of them are responsible to help the lead teacher with attendance, name tags, time-keeping, and checking in on absent students.

When we introduced class leadership last fall, most of our students shied away from it. They said we should find someone younger, with more education, or who could speak better English. One student told me, “I cannot read the names. I cannot help you.” Another said, “I am too old.”

Rachel Yeargin, the level 2 instructor, said, ‘This is unique opportunity for them. Many of our students are old, have physical challenges, or lack education. Student leadership gives them a platform to lead and serve that they have not had before. It has even had an impact on class and gender barriers in the classroom.”

Mon Maya is the captain in our level 1 class this session. She cannot read or write in English or Nepali, her native language. She stepped into leadership after watching a friend do it last fall. Before class begins each week, she has already counted and sketched out attendance using her own system. She helps students understand what is going on in class, and is ready to assist at any time. She is engaged, and her enthusiasm draws other students in as well.

A hurt arm has kept Chuda, the level 4 captain, from getting a job. He said, “Because I cannot go to the job, I can be a class captain and help my friends in that way.” He said he is glad for the opportunity to contribute.

Please join us in praying for our ESL class captains. Pray that God blesses them and draws them to himself. Pray that they have a deeper understanding of their own value, and that this taste of leadership would show them the capacity they have to serve others in their community. And finally, pray that the staff at Mission Adelante would find new and meaningful ways to partner with our community, to increase their ownership of our programs and grow leaders ready to change lives around them.

In other news:

Our Bhutanese and Latino LIT kids have worked hard to earn a pizza party this Saturday where we look forward to having some fun and fellowship!

Our Bhutanese house church leaders have begun to meet regularly for discipleship training, worship and fellowship!

Prayer needs:

As we begin to lay the foundation for a family practice medical clinic in our neighborhood, we recognize the immense value of input from immigrant and refugee families in our community. Please pray for the health care surveys that we're conducting with Latino and Bhutanese ESL classes this month. Please pray that God guides this process and shapes these ideas into something that will bring him glory.

Praise God for a miracle! Graciela, a Latina woman in our church, was hospitalized and it seemed that she would need heart surgery. It was concluded that she does not need surgery, and she was released from the hospital yesterday. Pray for Graciela as she will still need to make healthy lifestyle adjustments.

Janoy is a friend and member of our Latino church. His wife and children have been awaiting permission to immigrate and join him in Kansas City for quite some time, and have become discouraged that the process is taking so long. Please pray for Janoy’s family as they await their visa--the final step in the process.

Praise God for answered prayers! One of our Bhutanese house church leaders recently found a new, full-time job with a great employer. Please continue to pray for others as they seek employment.

Current needs:

Our Resource Center is low on gently-used kitchen items. Please contact Molly at mollym@missionadelante.org if you have items to donate.

Upcoming dates:

Bhutanese ESL Volunteer Dinner: March 2 at Lauren Timberlake's house. Please contact Jenny Dunn for more details at jennyd@missionadelante.org

Observation Days: Tuesdays, March 5 & 12 (Bhutanese)/Thursdays, March 7 & 14 (Latino) 6:30-8:30 Have you wondered what all goes on around here on a typical evening of programming? Here's your opportunity to come and see for yourself!

Bring-A-Friend Fund-Raiser for Bhutanese Teens Coordinator Hannah Hume: Saturday, March 9 Email Hannah Hume at hannahh@missionadelante.org for more information.

Enrichment Through Multi-generational Friendship

Written by Megan McDermott, Latino Children's Ministry Director

At Mission Adelante, one of the things that we are passionate about is investing in the next generation of leaders. Throughout the Gospels, we read that Jesus was constantly attending to the widows, orphans, and aliens that he encountered. We desire to encourage the children we love and serve, to love and serve others in turn, the way that Jesus did. One ongoing relational opportunity that we foster for our Leaders in Training is visiting Bickford Place, an assisted living home, each month. For the school year, each child is paired with the same resident, or buddy, to learn from one another, do fun crafts, and ultimately become friends. Both the children and residents are blessed by the friendships that develop. Two of the LIT girls wrote about their recent experiences at Bickford.

"I liked getting to know my buddy Roma. I felt excited about going to Bickford because my buddy was really nice to me and she also told us about her childhood. When she told us her story, she let us look all around her room. She also let us look at all her pictures. We saw a picture when she was very very young. I enjoyed spending time with her because it was my very first time going to Bickford. She also liked spending time with us because she told us. Roma said that I was really really sweet to her and that I asked a lot of questions. When it was time to go, I felt sad, but I will go back again. I hope I get to spend time with Roma again." --Perla, age 9

"Bickford is a good place to be because the people there are super nice and friendly. I feel very exicted when I go to Bickford because I get to be with my buddies. I learn new things about them and about how they grew up. Both of my buddies lived during World War II. By the stories they've told me, it was a rough time. They've told me they were very very scared at that point. They also lived during the Great Depression and they said it was a very sad time. It makes me very thankful for what I have today. When you leave you will be wishing you'd spend more time with them and will be wanting to come back. --Nataly, age 11

In other news:

On December 8th we'll wrap up our fall outreach programs with Bhutanese and Latino Christmas parties to celebrate the kids' and adults' accomplishments. The parties provide another great chance to share Jesus. Pray for God to prepare our friends' hearts to hear and believe the great news of His incarnation!

The Bhutanese and Latino Leaders In Training will spend the night at the Great Wolf Lodge this weekend to celebrate their hard work and effort during the semester.

Prayer needs:

Several families we know through our outreach programs are in need of work. Pray for God to provide for them.

Please pray for a particular family to be geographically reunited before Christmas.

Please pray that Bhutanese Teens club would be a place where student-to-student and student-to-leader relationships are characterized by deep mutual respect and trust.

Current needs:

The Bhutanese and Latino LIT programs need a small group (or groups) to purchase pre-packaged, healthy, after-school snacks for the kids. We would be blessed to receive a couple months worth of snacks. Please contact Megan at meganm@missionadelante.org.

Teen Bibles and devotionals for Teens Adelante. Please contact Brooke at brookec@missionadelante.org for specifics.

Upcoming dates:

Latino Christmas Party: Saturday, December 8 @ 5:00 Bethany Community Center, 1120 Central Avenue, Kansas City, KS 66102

Bhutanese Christmas Party: Saturday, December 8 @ 5:00 First Baptist Church of Kansas City, 2900 Minnesota Avenue, Kansas City, KS 66102