Tegel

*Your countryside seclude – close to the city. *

You’ll love this...

In Tegel there is beauty all around you, both natural and man-made.

It’s part of the greater district of Reinickendorf, and more than a quarter of the land is wilderness or water.

You’ll live right by lake Tegeler See, where you can windsurf, rent boats, and relax. You can also shop in one of the most stunning buildings anywhere in Berlin.

But you won’t love this...

It isn’t exactly super-central.

In fact it’s decidedly non-central, mostly residential, and often quiet. That’s why the people who live here, live here.

But if you seek techno and cocktails, scandalously good street food and graffiti-covered walls, or if you seek to befriend the colourful city-center characters, then you’ll want to look... more to the centre.

We suggest Neukölln or Kreuzberg.

Will I like living here?...

It’s peaceful. You can enjoy a stress-free homelife.

The houses are gorgeous, some very old and others hyper-modern. You’ll find them on picturesque streets full of green foliage.

You can also go shopping, have a nice meal, check out the latest blockbusters at the cinema, and much else at Hallen am Borsigturm.

This shopping center is found in refurbished 19th-century locomotive-manufacturing halls. It’s one of the largest malls in Berlin and the building is just… wow.

And if you’re bored...

… you are less than 1 hour on the train from central Berlin.

Anything else?

You can enjoy an afternoon gazing out over the lake or walking in Schloßpark Tegel.

And did you know?…

If you want to take a more leisurely trip into town, you can get a River Cruise which starts on Lake Tegel. The trip takes about 3.5 hours and takes you close to central Berlin.

Move here to be near:

* Lake Tegel * Tegel International Airport * Greenwichpromenade * Humbolt Library * Wittenau Village Church * Lubars Beach

Getting to and from the airport...

Actually, you’ll very probably be landing here – at Tegel Airport. Should you be landing at Schönefeld Airport, you are about 35 minutes away in a taxi.