New Top up fuel service

Top up service suits my needs as I’m always sure that the fuel will not run out as this is a holiday let and I’m not always in a position to check the levels. It’s working well

Date of experience : July 20, 2024

A satisfied customer

I wasn’t at home when the fuel was delivered, but had every confidence in the delivery man and his attention to the refill.

I have always used Scottish Fuels during these past 30 years, and have never had cause to seek an alternative supplier.

I confess to not being aware as to SP’s performance on price comparison, but I trust the company and assume that I am charged a fair price.

The process of ordering the fuel from Certas was easy and flawless - a professional response. Thank you.

Date of experience : July 09, 2024

Complete Turn Around From Last Purchase

Made an order over the phone for heating oil, may I give praise to the pleasant,professional woman who answered my call. The oil was delivered within the week by another pleasant and professional man. Very happy after a nightmare of service I recieved previously. Well done all.

Date of experience : July 19, 2024

Called early in morning saying I had…

Called early in morning saying I had run out of house fuel but there was no real rush as I was going to sea. Went shopping for an hour and it had been deljvered before I returned. Excellent service.

Date of experience : July 23, 2024

My neighbour and myself ordered at the…

My neighbour and myself ordered at the same time to help reduce costs and carbon footprint. The driver arrived at my house without enough oil left onboard to fill my tank. My neighbour had a delivery a couple of days later and then a few days after that I had my final amount delivered. 3 visits that should have been done in 1 very poorly organised.

Date of experience : July 16, 2024

Reply from Scottish Fuels

Good Morning Ken - I am so sorry to hear this, please accept our sincere apologies. I have passed your feedback over to the relevant department. Kind regards, Scottish Fuels

Very helpful staff, easy to work with

They offered a good service which adapted to technical issues. It was above and beyond my expectations so I highly recommend their service...

The only downside was the clumsy manual filler nozzle!

Date of experience : July 16, 2024

Reply from Scottish Fuels

Good morning - Thank you for taking your time to leave your positive feedback. I'm so so sorry to hear this, I have passed your feedback over to the relevant department. Kind regards, Scottish Fuels

prompt delivery

prompt delivery, within time scale given, at a competitive price, delivery by competent and tidy driver, what more do you want?

Well I would like to have a delivery which tops up tank fully, I knew that it would take 600 ltrs but perhaps it would have taken another 50~60 ltrs which would suit us.

Date of experience : July 12, 2024

Reply from Scottish Fuels

Good morning Ian - Thank you for taking your time to leave your feedback. So sorry to hear this, please accept our sincere apologies. I can assure you I have passed your feedback over to the relevant department. Kind regards, Scottish Fuels

the Delivery driver is extremely…

the Delivery driver is extremely efficient and very pleasant as well, helpful and friendly, it's a pleasure to meet with him. Equally the lady who dealt with the payment was incredibly efficient and helpful, again a real pleasure to speak with her. You should be proud of your staff, they make us want to come back.

Date of experience : June 26, 2024

Staff were very helpful and as I was…

Staff were very helpful and as I was anxious I was low on oil they arranged an urgent delivery. As it was, it appears the oil was fine and their projected next delivery was correct.

Date of experience : May 31, 2024

Reply from Scottish Fuels

Good morning - Thank you for taking your time to leave your feedback. So sorry to hear this, I can assure you that your feedback has been passed over to the relevant department. Kind regards, Scottish Fuels

I did not shop for prices but just…

I did not shop for prices but just accepted the offer. I hope that after previous orders I was given the best (cheapest) price.

I ordered and the following day the oil was delivered.

I hope to get the same service in winter.

Date of experience : July 11, 2024