About the project

Scottish Enterprise is Scotland’s main economic development agency and a non-departmental public body of the Scottish Government. They support business and industry to help create equal opportunities for all, working with public and private sector partners to identify and exploit the opportunities that will have a significant positive effect on Scotland.

McAteer Photograph has been working with Scottish Enterprise since 2004 when we were invited to join their roster of Scottish photographers. Since then we have worked on projects large and small: from the 10 year Clyde Waterfront initiative to one-of press calls. However, in 2016 SE changed the way they commission photography and, after a successful tendering process, we were chosen as their sole supplier for photography commissions and image library management.

This involves curating and managing a roster of talented photographers across the whole of Scotland who help deliver the photography commissioned by Scottish Enterprise and their affiliate brands including Scottish Development International, Cooperative Development Scotland and Scottish Investment Bank.

In addition SE asked for the implementation of an innovative solution to host and manage an online photo library to store their archived and newly commissioned images. We researched a number of reliable, secure and easy-to-use cloud-based asset management solutions and decided on a simple, trackable, permission-based structure for SE staff and stakeholders to have quick and easy access to a growing library of content, through one centralised location. We continue to manage this library on a daily basis, uploading and cataloguing commissioned content, creating collections and distributing images for use.

Additional services we provide include the sourcing of third-party images, advising on copyright and consent and liaison with stakeholders and partner agencies which all makes for a busy, demanding and satisfying contract that plays to our team strengths.