Patrick McLanahan Books In Order

Book links take you to Amazon. As an Amazon Associate I earn money from qualifying purchases.

Publication Order of Patrick McLanahan Books

Chronological Order of Patrick McLanahan Books

Publication Order of Brad McLanahan Books

Dale Brown is an American based writer and aviation specialist who is best known for aviation thriller novels. More than 13 novels by the author have been listed as New York Times bestsellers. Brown was born in Buffalo, New York and has five other siblings. At 15 years, Brown began flying instructions, which eventually earned him a pilot’s license. Dale Brown, later on, joined Penn University where he graduated with a degree in Western European History. While in College, Dale Brown joined the Airforce ROTC. In the year 1978, Brown was commissioned to the United States Airforce. While at the Airforce, Brown served as a navigator-bombardier also known as a weapon system officer.

Due to his dedication and performance, Brown was awarded several awards and decorations including the Combat Crew Award, the Marksmanship Ribbon, and Airforce Recommendation medal. Brown eventually rose to the Captain’s rank, and now, he has more than 25,000 flight hours. In the year, 1986, Brown left the Airforce, without ever seeing combat. He is a member of the U.S Naval Institute and the Airforce Association.

Patrick McLanahan (series by Dale Brown) 2

Flight of the Old Dog, a New York Bestseller is the first book in the Patrick McClanahan book series. In this book, the author Dale Brown introduces the reader to Captain Patrick Mclanahan, who works as a flight navigator. We are also introduced to another significant character, General Elliot, who is the man in charge of the dreamland projects. These two characters work on an exceedingly important mission in the story. There are also several plenty characters who are also significant in the book such as Wendy who works on the B-52 as a missile tracker. Another character is Angie who works as the main controller of the weapons in B-52. General’s Elliot’s co-pilot is Colonel Ormack. All the significant characters in the storyline work for the United States

This book has mainly been set in Russia and the Pacific Ocean. Other significant locations in the book include Dreamland, which is located in the United States. The great thing about this installment is the third eye omnipotent view that the author uses. It is ideal because it gives the reader detailed descriptions of the people, actions, and places.

Night of the Hawk is the second book in the Patrick Mclanahan book series. This book is an excellent read, which is quite enjoyable. It picks right where the first installment had left off from. Night of Hawk has two main storylines; the first storyline is the one, which involves the sudden upsurge in Lithuania’s civil unrest, while the other one revolved around Dave Luger, who many had believed had died before, towards the conclusion of the Old Dog Mission. Dave Luger was not only alive, but he had also been brain washed by the Russians in one of their high tech bases in Fiskious. The need to relinquish all of U.S citizens from Lithuania.

Five years after Dave Luger had awoken in one of the hospitals in the Soviet Union, a special operations mission which was set up to rescue one of the Lithuania CIA defector agents was able to recover a photo of Luger. Luger was not only brainwashed, but at this point in the book, he had been working on a Soviet aircraft design using a false identity. Colonel Paul White, who is the extraction’s team leader was the first person to recognize Luger since he had previously had the chance to work with him together with one Patrick McLanahan. After he had received no substantive report from the right chain of command, Paul White decides to seek General Bradley Elliot, who is the commander of a top-secret facility in Dreamland.

Elliot managed to convince his superior to approve a mission whose main task would be to rescue Dave Luger. However, he is unconvinced the superiors are not going to follow through with the mission. As this happens, General Palcikas the commander of the Self-Defense Forces of Lithuania toils under the challenges of creating an identity for his forces while also at the same time trying to defend them against an incoming invasion from the neighboring Belarus. As things get out of hand in Lithuania, General Voschanka conducts an invasion while at the same time trying to overrun a country. Irrespective of the unauthorized nature of the extra forces, which may have gathered by White and Elliot, the military commanders and the American President have no choice but to use these forces to put an end to the Belarussian invasion. White’s commandos and Elliot’s high-tech bombers assist the Lithuanian forces in putting an end to the Belarussian invasion together with Mclanahan and Luger, who manage to steal the Russian Bomber. In the act of revenge and desperation, General Voschanka manages to launch a nuclear missile at Vilnius, which was intercepted successfully by one of Elliot’s bombers.

The third book in this series is Sky Masters. Being the third book in the series, Sky Masters has been set on a much further canvas than the other installments. The author treats the readers to a much wider confict, with USA and China being ready to face one another. The USA has managed to remove its forces from the Philippines. This is after a feud erupted between the Philippines and China over the Spartly Island. The feud goes out of control one of the admirals from China fires a missile towards the Philippines. Prominent communists decide to take advantage of the dispute by staging a Chinese-led coup. As the Chinese military force continues to build up, America is forced to take action so as to prevent the complete takeover of the Spartly Island by the Chinese. What comes after this is an extremely brutal battle, which involves the Chinese Navy and United States Airforce as they try to stop the final invasion of the remaining area.

With that said, Sky Masters is a well-written book that will definitely keep you the reader interested throughout the book. As it is the case with all the other books in the series, the protagonist, Patrick Macnalahan is the person who is going to putt all these fighting to an end.