VJ Books Presents Author Dale Brown!

Dale Brown is a former U.S. Air Force captain and the author of several best-selling military-action-aviation-adventure novels. His novels are published in 11 languages and distributed to over 70 countries.

Dale was born in Buffalo, New York on November 2, 1956. He graduated from Penn State University with a degree in Western European History and received an Air Force commission in 1978. He was a navigator-bombardier in the B-52G Stratofortress heavy bomber and the FB-111A supersonic medium bomber, and is the recipient of several military decorations and awards including the Air Force Commendation Medal with oak leaf cluster, the Combat Crew Award, and the Marksmanship ribbon.

Dale is a volunteer pilot for Angel Flight West, an organization that connects pilots with needy medical patients to fly for necessary medical treatment at no cost to the patient. He also supports a number of organizations to support and promote law enforcement and reading. In addition, Dale is a mission pilot and former squadron commander in the Civil Air Patrol, the civilian volunteer arm of the U.S. Air Force, flying emergency missions in support of the Air Force and several federal, state, and local agencies.

Dale Brown is a member of The Writers Guild and a Life Member of the Air Force Association and U.S. Naval Institute. He is a multi-engine and instrument-rated private pilot and can often be found in the skies all across the United States, piloting his own plane. On the ground, Dale enjoys tennis, skiing, scuba diving, and hockey. Dale, his wife Diane, and son Hunter live near the shores of Lake Tahoe, Nevada.

He is best known for writing Aviation Techno-Thrillers. His latest book, Weapons of Opportunity, is available for order now.

Dale Brown Book List

Author's website: www.dalebrown.info

Similar authors: Larry Bond, Stephen Coonts, W.E.B. Griffin, Patrick Robinson

Follow them on Facebook

Follow them on Twitter

Weapons of Opportunity

Signed First Edition

Countdown to Midnight

Signed First Edition

Arctic Storm Rising

Signed First Edition

Eagle Station

Signed First Edition

The Kremlin Strike

Signed First Edition

Act of Revenge

Double-Signed First Edition