Description:

Second printing in the month after first publication. Inscribed humorously on the front free endpaper: "To the excellent lady from Illinois, with best wishes and sincere gratitude for all favors received, from a reprehensible woman from Seattle, Emma-Lindsay Squier." The previous owner's signature is opposite on the front pastedown: "Cora E. Hughes." With an 11-page introduction by Gene Stratton-Porter (who was a friend and encourager) and illustrations by Paul Bransom. Emma-Lindsay Squier was a popular writer in her time, and after working as reporter for the Los Angeles Times and writing for magazines, The Wild Heart washer first book, a collection of stories about wildlife interacting with people which "captured the imagination of readers from coast to coast ." She later collected Indigenous myths and stories from Seattle to Mexico. A very good book in green cloth with some sunning to spine, gentle rubbing to edges, one bump on lower edge of rear board. Offsetting to FFEP. A nice copy from a then prominent but now unheralded woman writing about wildlife. Squier died of tuberculosis at only 49. Seller Inventory # 1334

Hearts are Wild: SIGNED BY AUTHOR

Webber, Heather S.

Published by Avalon Books, 2004

ISBN 10: 0803496672 / ISBN 13: 9780803496675

Used / Hardcover Signed

Quantity: 1 available

Seller: Call Phil Now - Books, West Roxbury, MA, U.S.A.

Seller Rating:

Hardcover. Condition: As New. Dust Jacket Condition: Fine. ## AS NEW book is clean, crisp, unclipped and unmarked. No edition stated. First printing. Dust jacket is Fine. Red covers with black lettering on spine. c. 7 7/8 by 5 1/4 inches. Inscribed "For ___ Some villains are good guys in disguise" and SIGNED by the author. Dust jacket has Autographed Copy seal on front. No marks in or on book except as noted. NOT A REMAINDER. Not ex library. Not book club. 185 pages. Appears as an unread, unopened book. SIGNED COPY. As New. Signed by Author(s). Seller Inventory # 000517

Contact seller

Wild To The Heart (Signed First Edition)

BASS, Rick and Elizabeth Hughes

Published by Stackpole Books, Harrisburg, PA, 1987

Used / Hardcover First Edition Signed

Quantity: 1 available

Seller: Jeff Hirsch Books, ABAA, Wadsworth, IL, U.S.A.

Seller Rating:

First edition and first printing. Hardcover. 141 pages. Bass' second book, a collection of essays. Includes drawings by Elizabeth Hughes. A close to near fine copy with some slight foxing to the page edges and in a near fine dust jacket with some minor wear and some slight sunning to the edges and spine. Signed and inscribed by Bass on the title page. Seller Inventory # 198652

Contact seller