2. Name : Nirnay Mukharjee ID : 143-15-4421 Section : D Department of CSE Faculty of FSIT

3. 1. What is Nobel Prize? 2. The Nobel Prize in Physics 1917. 3. Biography of “Charles Glover Barkla”. 4. Charles Glover Barkla’s contribution to Physics. 5. Charles Glover Barkla’s invention which is used in our daily lives.

4. The Nobel Prize is a set of annual international awards bestowed in a number of categories by Swedish and Norwegian committees in recognition of academic, cultural and/or scientific advances.

5. The Nobel Prize in Physics 1917 was awarded to Charles Glover Barkla "for his discovery of the characteristic Röntgen radiation of the elements". Charles Glover Barkla received his Nobel Prize one year later, in 1918. During the selection process in 1917, the Nobel Committee for Physics decided that none of the year's nominations met the criteria as outlined in the will of Alfred Nobel. According to the Nobel Foundation's statutes, the Committee did not give the prize in 1917. Charles Glover Barkla received his Nobel Prize for 1917 one year later, in 1918.

7. Name :Charles Glover Barkla Born :7 June 1877 Widnes, Lancashire,England Died :23 October 1944 (aged 67) Edinburgh, Scotland Nationality :United Kingdom Fields :Physics Institutions :University of Cambridge University of Liverpool King's College London University of Edinburgh Alma Mater :University College Liverpool Cambridge University Academic Advisors :J. J. Thomson Oliver Lodge Known for :X-ray scattering X-ray spectroscopy Notable Awards :Nobel Prize in Physics (1917) Hughes Medal of the Royal Society

8. Charles Glover Barkla (1877-1944) was one of the early pioneers in x-ray research. He explained the latter in terms of the Rutherford-Bohr atom. Barkla made significant progress in developing and refining the laws of X-ray scattering, X-ray spectroscopy, the principles governing the transmission of X-rays through matter, and especially the principles of the excitation of secondary X-rays. Though a great deal of work was done on this, he was not really able to substantiate its existence.

9. 1.Medical Uses : There are many uses of radiation in medicine. The most well known is using X-Rays to see whether bones are broken. The broad area of X- Ray use is called radiology. 2.Security Devices: There are a few common devices used for security that involve x rays and are generally regulated by federal or state agencies. 3.Food Irradiation: Food irradiation is used to destroy food-borne bacteria and parasites and extend the shelf life of some foods. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports. 4.Industrial Uses: There are many uses of radiation in industry. The most common use is measurement.