It has been 36 years since Gloria Gaynor became a big star with her anthem I Will Survive, a No. 1 hit and Grammy winner for best disco recording in 1979.

But true to the song, she's back at the Grammys after all these years — with a nomination for best spoken word album. It's the longest time between nominations among any of this year's Grammy contenders.

"I was ecstatic," recalls Gaynor, 65, when she learned of the nod for We Will Survive: True Stories of Encouragement, Inspiration and the Power of Song. She faces stiff competition; others nominated in the spoken word category include James Franco, the late Joan Rivers and Democratic Sen. Elizabeth Warren.

"It's a wonderful honor because it comes from your peers," Gaynor says. "I got my first Grammy for the song; now this is about what that song has done for other people."

Having published an autobiography called I Will Survive in 1997, Gaynor solicited others people's stories for We Will Survive. Her subjects range from a Holocaust survivor to the mother of a 9/11 victim.

"Some people wrote their own stories," says Gaynor. "Others didn't quite know how to; I had to help pull it out of them."

Gaynor notes that people have been sharing their survival tales with her since I Will Survive was released. "When I recorded it, in fact, I was thinking of other people — people who were enduring diseases or felt socially unacceptable. That was uplifting and encouraging for me."

The singer had suffered through her own ordeals by then, among them a fall during a performance that left her temporarily paralyzed from the waist down. "During that time, my record company said they weren't going to renew my contract. And my mother has passed away a few years earlier, so I was thinking of all that."

In one chapter in We Will Survive, Gaynor recounts some of her earlier struggles as one of seven children raised by a single mom. She was sexually molested, once by a trusted neighbor and later by a man who moved in with her mother.

"You have to just reach deep inside of you and pull out whatever you need," Gaynor says. "Mine is faith in Christ." Her mother, after a religious upbringing, had "made a vow not to take her children to church, but when you've been inundated with Christian values that's what you teach."

Gaynor recalls "getting on my knees when I was five or six years old, praying. As a teenager, I went buck-wild and got stupid, but then I came back."

These days Gaynor also continues to preach the gospel of disco, which she calls "the first and only music to bring together people of every race, creed, nationality and age group." She broke onto the scene in 1975 with Never Can Say Goodbye. And although I Will Survive won a Grammy in 1979, the only year that disco had its own category, the genre is still thriving, Gaynor insists: "Dance music has only changed its name to protect the innocent — and the not-so-innocent."

Gaynor has proof, as she continues to perform for audiences "who range in age from 8 to 80. It shows me that I'm still on the right path, that I'm not outdated." She stays current in her listening as well, counting Justin Timberlake, John Legend and Beyonce among the artists she admires.

She'll get a chance to mingle with the latter two at the Grammy Awards this Sunday. "We bought our tickets before I even knew I was nominated," she says. "I can't wait."