Appleton's Cyclopedia of American Biography, edited by James Grant Wilson, John Fiske and Stanley L. Klos. Six volumes, New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1887-1889 and 1999. Virtualology.com warns that these 19th Century biographies contain errors and bias. We rely on volunteers to edit the historic biographies on a continual basis. If you would like to edit this biographyplease submit a rewritten biography in text form . If acceptable, the new biography will be published above the 19th Century Appleton's Cyclopedia Biography citing the volunteer editor

Virtual American Biographies

Over 30,000 personalities with thousands of 19th Century illustrations, signatures, and exceptional life stories. Virtualology.com welcomes editing and additions to the biographies. To become this site's editor or a contributor Click Here or e-mail Virtualology here.

A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z

Benjamin Tupper

TUPPER, Benjamin, soldier, born in Stoughton, Massachusetts, in August, 1738; died in Marietta, Ohio, in June, 1792. He served as a soldier in the French war of 1756-'63, and afterward taught. Soon after the battle of Lexington he was a major at Boston, and distinguished himself in a boat expedition at Castle island, Boston harbor. He became a lieutenant-colonel, 4 November, 1775, colonel of the 11th Massachusetts early in 1776, and in August of the same year commanded the gun-boats and galleys on the North river. He served under General Horatio Gates at Saratoga, was at the battle of Monmouth in 1778, and was brevetted a general before the close of the war. With General Rufus Putnam he originated the Ohio land company, was appointed in 1785 surveyor of Ohio lands, and served against Shays's rebellion in 1786. He settled at Marietta, Ohio, in 1787, and became a judge in 1788.--His son, EDWARD W., was a brigadier-general of Ohio volunteers, and served under General Harrison in 1812. He died at Gallipolis, Ohio, in 1823.

Edited Appletons Encyclopedia, Copyright © 2001 VirtualologyTM

Start your search on Benjamin Tupper.

Unauthorized Site: This site and its contents are not affiliated, connected, associated with or authorized by the individual, family, friends, or trademarked entities utilizing any part or the subject's entire name. Any official or affiliated sites that are related to this subject will be hyper linked below upon submission and Evisum, Inc. review.