At 10:00AM on Thursday May 25th, there is a Revolutionary War Patriots of the Northwest Territory Memorial Service.

This will be hosted by the Marietta Chapter of the Sons of the American Revolution.

The location will be in Marietta Ohio at the Mound Cemetery at the intersection of Fifth and Scammel Streets.

GPS Coordinates: 39.419886, -81.452796

There will be updates on the Eagle Scout project and presentation on the “Boston Massacre and other Pre-Revolutionary Activities”.

There will be a memorial service, including wreath presentations and a musket salute by Color Guard participants.

Following the formal service, there will be a tour of the Mound Cemetery and a lunch to follow at St. Paul’s Evangelical Church (across from the cemetery).

Color Guard participates are requested to muster at 9:30AM at Mound Cemetery.

All SAR, DAR, CAR, Scouts, their families and public are invited and encouraged to attend.

See the attached flyer for more complete information and contact info:

2023-RWP_NWT-Event-Flyer

Below is information on Mound Cemetery as provided by Wikopedia:

Mound Cemetery in Marietta, Ohio, is a historic cemetery developed around the base of a prehistoric Adena burial mound known as the Great Mound or Conus. The city founders preserved the Great Mound from destruction by establishing the city cemetery around it in 1801.

The city of Marietta was developed in 1788 by pioneers from Massachusetts, soon after the American Revolutionary War and organization of the Northwest Territory. Many of the founders were officers of the Revolutionary War who had received federal land grants for military services. Among high-ranking officers buried at the cemetery are generals Rufus Putnam and Benjamin Tupper, who were founders of the Ohio Company of Associates; as well as Commodore Abraham Whipple and Colonel William Stacy. The cemetery has the highest number of burials of American Revolutionary War officers in the country.[2][3]

Great Mound or Conus

Main article: Marietta Earthworks

The conical Great Mound at Mound Cemetery is part of an Ohio Hopewell culture mound complex known as the Marietta Earthworks. Archaeologists estimate that it was built between 100 BC and 500 AD. Early European American settlers gave the structures Latin names. The complex includes the Sacra Via (meaning “sacred way”), three walled enclosures, the Quadranaou, Capitolium (meaning “capital”) and at least two other additional platform mounds, and the Conus burial mound and its accompanying ditch and embankment. The complex was surveyed and drawn in 1838 by Samuel R. Curtis (at the time a civil engineer for the state of Ohio). This survey was incorrectly attributed to Charles Whittlesey by E. G. Squier and E.H. Davis in their Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley, published by the Smithsonian Institution in 1848.[4] At the time the complex “included a large square enclosure surrounding four flat-topped pyramidal mounds, another smaller square, and a circular enclosure with a large burial mound at its center.”[5]

The Conus mound was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on February 23, 1973 as the Mound Cemetery Mound, site listing number 73001549.[1] In 1990 archaeologists from the Cleveland Museum of Natural History excavated a section of the Capitolium mound and determined that the mound was definitely constructed by peoples of the Hopewell Culture.[6]

American Revolutionary War soldiers

The city of Marietta was developed in 1788 by migrant pioneers from Massachusetts, soon after the American Revolutionary War and organization of the Northwest Territory. The cemetery has the highest number of burials of American Revolutionary War officers in the country.[3][7] The original pioneers, city founders from the Ohio Company of Associates, preserved the Great Mound from destruction by establishing the city cemetery around it.

Many of the founders were officers of the Revolutionary War who had received federal land grants for military services. Among high-ranking officers buried at the cemetery are generals Rufus Putnam and Benjamin Tupper, who were founders of the Ohio Company of Associates; as well as Commodore Abraham Whipple and Colonel William Stacy.

It was stated at the Conference that “more officers of the Revolution are buried in the Old Mound Cemetery, Marietta, than at any other place in the United States.”

— DAR, American Monthly, Vol. 16 (Jan–Jun 1900), 329.

In 1825, General Lafayette of France, who fought with the Americans during the Revolution, visited Marietta. He said of the city’s veterans: “I knew them well. I saw them fighting the battles of their country … They were the bravest of the brave. Better men never lived.”[8]

The Washington County Historical Society compiled the a list of Revolutionary soldiers buried in Mound Cemetery, notable persons in that list shown below:[9]

Col. Robert Taylor, first burial in the cemetery

Gen. Rufus Putnam

Griffin Greene, Sr., Quartermaster

Commodore Abraham Whipple

Col. Ebenezer Sproat

Col. William Stacy, Sr.

Gen. Benjamin Tupper

Maj. Anselm Tupper

Capt. Nathaniel Saltonstall

Samuel Hildreth, Sr. (father of Samuel Prescott Hildreth, also buried here)

The books of Samuel Prescott Hildreth (1783–1863), buried here, provide insight into the early history of Marietta and the Northwest Territory, and the lives of the soldiers and early pioneer settlers.[10][11]

Major General James Mitchell Varnum (1748–1789) was originally buried in the Mound Cemetery. His remains were later moved to Oak Grove Cemetery in Marietta.