The grandeur of the Great Mound of ancient native culture was the backdrop.

Bright May sunlight made the flag colors glow in the breeze.

Memorial wreaths were massed at the foot of Abraham Whipple’s monument.

But the remembrance, reverence and respect at Mound Cemetery Thursday morning were directed to the many other Revolutionary War patriots buried there, as well.

It was the annual memorial service conducted by the Marietta Chapter Ohio Society Sons of the American Revolution to pay tribute to the Revolutionary War patriots of the Northwest Territory. They were joined by Daughters of the American Revolution, Children of the American Revolution, their families, Scouts and members of the public, all who find the legacy of the American Revolution’s patriots to be compelling.

The printed program for Thursday’s memorial service provided background about the area’s relationship to that era of history. Marietta, as the first settlement in the Northwest Territory, is home to one of the oldest pioneer burial grounds west of the Appalachian Mountains, Mound Cemetery. The memorial service program listed the names, ranks and military service details of the 37 Revolutionary War soldiers buried there. It also mapped the known locations of their gravesites. Six men on the list are in unknown locations in the cemetery at this time.

Mound Cemetery has the highest number of burials of American Revolutionary War officers in the country, the printed program reported. Among the high-ranking officers buried there are General Rufus Putnam and General Benjamin Tupper, who were founders of the Ohio Company, and Commodore Abraham Whipple and Colonel William Stacy Sr.

Thursday’s memorial service was opened by Marietta Chapter President Douglas Pettit. There was a special message from Marietta Chapter Past President Tony Durm about the recent project of Eagle Scout Landyn Listermann of Troop 207, who updated the Rufus Putnam grave area in Mound Cemetery and, with the help of others, did other refurbishing in the cemetery.

Marietta Chapter Historian Scott Britton presented the keynote address, discussing the 250th anniversary of the Boston Tea Party to be observed this December and tracing the Marietta connections to that and other pre-Revolutionary activities. The SAR recessional was led by Robert Fitzgerald of the Marietta Chapter.

Ohio Society Sons of the American Revolution representatives also participated in Thursday’s program: OHSSAR President Donald G. Miller, OHSSAR Chaplain Father Michael Nimocks and OHSSAR Color Guard Commander Robert Hill.

There were 18 representatives of various organizations participating in the presentation of the wreaths.