MARRIED. Prince Ahmed-Fuad, 25, only son of Egypt’s late King Farouk; and Student Dominique-France Picard, 29, who is writing her doctoral thesis at the Sorbonne on the psychology of women in The Thousand and One Nights; both for the first time; at Monaco’s royal palace. The infant Fuad was King-for-a-day in Egypt after his father abdicated in 1952, but his parents fled for Europe that night with him, his three half sisters and an estimated $40 million aboard the royal yacht.

DIED. José Ber Gelbard, 60, wealthy Argentine aluminum and tire manufacturer who served as Economy Minister (May 1973 to October 1974) under President Juan Perón and his widow Isabel; of a heart attack; in Washington, B.C. To slow Argentina’s 80%-a-year inflation, Gelbard decreed stringent wage and price controls. But his policies contributed to the country’s near economic collapse, precipitating the 1976 coup that overthrew Isabel. Said Gelbard of Argentine business: “There are no rules. Those who are in power make up the rules. So those out of favor are bound to break them.”

DIED. Fred F. Finklehoffe, 67, Hollywood and Broadway producer-writer; in Springtown, Pa. Finklehoffe and John Monks Jr. wrote a parody of their cadet days at Virginia Military Institute that became the 1936-37 Broadway hit Brother Rat. Finklehoffe went on to produce other successful plays and revues (The Heiress, Showtime, Big Time). He also co-authored several screenplays, including For Me and My Gal and Meet Me in St. Louis, for which he received a 1944 Academy Award nomination.

DIED. Dr. Robert Collier Page, 69, founding chairman of the Occupational Health Institute and pioneer advocate of company-paid preventive medicine for blue-collar workers; in Ocho Rios, Jamaica. While studying dying miners in the grimy English town of Leeds in 1933-34, he concluded that management should do everything possible to prevent illness in workers, not just take care of them after they become sick. He put some of his ideas into practice as medical director of the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey from 1946 until 1955. Said he: “It is not uncommon to find an executive who worries more about tire replacement on his fleet of trucks than the health of his employees.”

DIED. Jan Garber, 82, bandleader known for his mellow dance music; in Shreveport, La. Garber, who formed his first band at the age of 21, blended saxophones, played with what musicians call a “nanny goat vibrato,” guitar and muted brass into “sweet with a beat,” a smooth style that was highly popular in ballrooms and on radio during the 1930s and ’40s.