Robert “Teto” Martinez, 78, of Ensenada, NM, passed away peacefully on September 15, 2022, with his loved ones by his side.

Robert was born May 13, 1944, in Tierra Amarilla, NM to Margarito and Margarita Martinez. He was preceded in death by his parents; his loving wife, Rose Martinez; his beloved grandson Roman Martinez; and his sister Patsy Hinds.

He is survived by his three daughters: Rebecca (Becky) Martinez and husband Luis; Rachel Mora and husband Gary; and Ramona Martinez; two grandchildren Rayann Mora and Garrett Martinez; siblings: Lucy Cordova, Joe Martinez, Louella Sandoval (Dennis), Lorraine Vigil (Tommy), Nestor Martinez (Janie), Anthony Martinez (Maryann), and Michael Martinez (Linda).

Growing up, Robert spent many summers in the mountains of Ensenada herding his family’s sheep. He was a graduate of Tierra Amarilla High School where he met his wife of 52 years, Rose Martinez. After graduating high school, Robert attended a trade school where he perfected his skills in welding. Robert would go on to join the Iron Workers Union and retired in his 40’s from Davis & Associates. Robert would later use his skills to build several head gates for the acequias in Ensenada, Tierra Amarilla and Los Ojos.

After he retired, Robert worked on his ranch, which he named the 5R ranch after his family. He enjoyed raising his cattle and horses, looking for antlers, picking piñon, camping, fishing, playing horseshoes and corn hole, and playing the harmonica. Robert was a lifelong Dallas Cowboys, Los Angeles Lakers, and New York Yankees fan.

Our family would like to thank the ICU and Hospice teams at St. Vincent’s Hospital for their compassionate care during his short stay. We would also like to extend a special thank you to all of the family and friends for their support and prayers, and all those who spent time with him prior to his passing.

A Rosary will take place on Saturday, October 15, 2022 at 10:00 a.m. and a Mass of Christian burial to follow at 11:00 a.m. at San Jose Parish Church in Los Ojos, NM.

Pallbearers Include: Paul Cordova, Dennis Herrera, Joseph Valdez, Macario Aragon, Masen Cordova, Johnny Esquibel, Lawrence (Mogie) Cordova, and Richard Leyba.