patrick o'hearn

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patrick_O'Hearn

"While on tour in Los Angeles in 1976, O'Hearn met Frank Zappa, who offered him a job as bass player in his band - a position he held for over two years. During this period, O’Hearn shifted from the acoustic bass to the electric bass guitar (given the requirements of Zappa's arrangements), and also became increasingly interested in electronic music instruments."

After his time with Zappa, in 1979, O'Hearn teamed up with Mark Isham and guitarist Peter Maunu to form Group 87. The band recorded two albums.

In 1981, Terry Bozzio asked Patrick O'Hearn to join The Missing Persons. The band featured Warren Cuccurullo, Dale Bozzio, Terry Bozzio, Patrick O'Hearn and Chuck Wild.

discography

semi-official radio show releases

frank zappa: berlin 1978

(2018, 2cd, uk, leftfieldmedia lfm2cd575) = 1978/02/15 berlin concert

2010/03/11 John Hiatt - tv-show"The Late Show with David Letterman (CBS-TV/USA)"

The Late Show with David Letterman, Ed Sullivan Theatre, New York City, NY

line-up

John Hiatt - vocals,guitar * Doug Lancio - guitar * Patrick O'Hearn - bass * Kenny Blevins - drums

setlist

The Open Road 4:38

an MPEG2 video recording of this performance got seeded on DimeADozen

random notes

born: september 6th, 1954

in the early '80s, this bassist and synthesist was mired in the glitz and grind of pop music as a member of the group missing persons. then friend peter baumann, best known for his work with tangerine dream, made o'hearn an offer he couldn't refuse. baumann had visions of starting a record label catering to his first love, contemporary electronic music, and he wanted o'hearn to become a charter member of the new company. nearly a decade and a half-dozen albums later, o'hearn is still amazed at the success of ancient dreams, the richly hued debut release that established his career as a solo artist and helped launch the private music label. born in los angeles and raised in oregon, o'hearn was exposed to a wide variety of music by his parents, who were both working musicians. though he studied cello, violin, and flute, he gained early experience playing bass with his parents' lounge act. as his musicianship began to excel, he found himself accompanying jazz greats like joe henderson, joe pass, tony williams, and charles lloyd. while living in san francisco in the mid '70s, he played with frank zappa and co-founded the visionary progressive band group 87 with mark isham and peter maunu before joining missing persons. o'hearn's style reflects all of these experiences within the context of a highly personal electronic sound. during the late '80s, however, his innovative vision seemed to blur under the strain of the commercialism infiltrating the new-age and contemporary instrumental realms. urged on by increasingly conservative, pop- oriented executives at private music, o'hearn conformed to more conventional song forms on albums like between two worlds and rivers gonna rise. his music suffered from excessive predictability as a result. the record label even released some crass disco mixes of the composer's most tuneful selections on the embarrassing mix up. fortunately, o'hearn's good musical sense prevailed in the long run. his more recent releases eldorado and indigo are both admirable, highly satisfying albums. he is, however, the last remnant of the private music label's original roster of innovative, electronic-based instrumentalists. -- linda kohanov

patrick o'hearn has been releasing albums on his own. at least one of these albums, "river's gonna rise", with the help of terry bozzio and warren cucurrullo(?).

patrick o'hearn solo career--he has in fact had several albums, and both terry bozzio and warren cuccurullo have helped on some. i know in particular that warren helped on rivers gonna rise, indigo, and the white sands soundtrack

released a bunch of new age stuff. apparently used to keep in touch with zappa due to zappa's use of an instrument called a "roland octapad." (1990 time frame).

last night i began reading a screenplay named "silent tongue" by playwright and actor sam shepard (acting credits include "the right stuff", "country"), and the title page credits patrick o'hearn for music.

warren cucurullo reckons he is going to work with patrick and terry bozzio this year (1994) on an album. let's hope so.

patrick o'hearn and white sands--yes he did the score for that movie, as well as fatherhood and the upcoming silent tongue. if you look closely in the credits to the movie white sands, you will see that he was assisted in this by warren cuccurullo and terry bozzio.

patrick o'hearn toured (on bass) with andy taylor in 1987, and appeared with andy on the mtv new years eve special that year, and the band did a 6 or 7 song set, including "when the rain comes down" with andy's friend dweezil zappa with him on guitar. also, any concert videotape or audiotape from andy's 1987 tour will have patrick on it.

stewart gartland(jazznazi@albany.jrc.net.au) said:

i have a patrick ohearn album called eldorado which is kinda new worldy but has some very nice tunes on it. i still think patrick's bass solo on the purple lagoon (fz live in ny) is one the best.

from: jdeesel@mail.atl.bellsouth.net

patrick o`hearn can be heard playing some of the best bass of his career with guitarist cam newton on cam`s 1980 release welcome aliens:party music for the first authenticated landing.i have the vinyl release...great stuff ....james diesel, atlanta ga.

from: román (donlope@globalia.net)

i remember seeing the name of patrick o'hearn as the composer of the music of the last episodes of the "falcon crest" tv series (i couldn't even belieeeve it!)

from: "stan, terry, or sarah lovell" (stlovell@cmc.net)

patrick o'hearn and i were both music students at mt. hood community college in gresham, or. in the early 70's.

from: albert lu (gt8349c@prism.gatech.edu)

my girlfriend, sue wilkinson, worked with patrick a little while ago, and collaborated on several projects. if you want to take a look at sue's site, it's at http://www.suewilkinson.com/

from: ryan childress (rchildr1@tampabay.rr.com)

greetings - have been searching high and low for any new material by patrick o' hearn. discovered he contributed a track on a various artist compilation titled "prelude" (i believe it is on the universal label) - this compilation includes various new age artists interpretations of classical music - more specifically the prelude or introductory movement in a classical composition. credits describe one track by o'hearn - i believe it to be a bach original. if anyone knows anything about any new material or releases by o'hearn - please post it or e-mail me (rchildr1@tampabay.rr.com) thanks!

patrick o'hearn's home site: hhttp://www.patrickohearn.com/

filmography:

1979 baby snakes

198 "falcon crest" tv series (composer)

1987 made in heaven (as titus white/bass player)

1988 destroyer (composer)

1992 heaven is a playground (composer)

1992 white sands (composer)

1993 father hood (composer)

1993 silent tongue (composer)

1994 as good as dead (composer) (tv)

1995 crying freeman (composer)