The Daytime Creative Arts & Lifestyle Emmy® Awards will be presented on Saturday, June 8 at 9pm ET / 6pm PT and streamed on The Emmys® apps and at watch.TheEmmys.tv. The ceremonies will take place at the Westin Bonaventure Los Angeles.

The Daytime Emmy® Awards have recognized outstanding achievement in daytime television programming since 1974. The awards are presented to individuals and programs broadcast between 2:00 AM and 6:00 PM, as well as certain categories of digital and syndicated programming of similar content. This y...

The 46th Annual Daytime Emmy® Awards at a grand gala held at the Pasadena Civic Auditorium in Pasadena, Southern California.

“The National Academy is pleased to be honoring the men and women who make Daytime television one of the staples of the entertainment industry,” said Terry O’Reilly, Chair...

“What a fantastic evening to be celebrating Daytime television in the magnificent Pasadena Civic Auditorium,” said Chuck Dages, Chairman, NATAS. “The National Academy is excited to be honoring the men and women who make Daytime television one of the staples of the entertainment industry.”

The ev...

“The National Academy is excited to be honoring these esteemed nominees and we are thrilled to be honoring the woman who the whole country fell in love with when she first appeared on ‘Entertainment Tonight,’ Mary Hart. Mary’s charm, wit, and intelligence made her the most trusted anchor in the g...

“We are blessed with an embarrassment of outstanding nominees and none could shine brighter than this year’s Lifetime Achievement honoree, Sonia Manzano. Over the last forty-plus-years, we, and many of our children, have followed her iconic journey as “Maria” on Sesame Street and the National Aca...

"So many stars lighting up the red carpet at the iconic Warner Bros. Studio Lot in addition to the indefatigable, unparalleled Betty White as our Lifetime Achievement Award honoree.

This is a terrific showcase of the power of Daytime Television that will be remembered for years to come!” Tonigh...

This was the first time in its history that the prestigious organization utilized streaming technology, provided by Livestream LLC, to webcast the awards show engaging a world-wide audience in an event which celebrates programs that are known internationally and boast a global fan base. Emmy® Aw...

For once, the ladies of The Real were at a loss for words! In celebration of The Real’s 1,000th episode, let’s look back on the co-hosts’ emotional Emmy® win in 2018 at the 45th Annual Daytime Emmy® Awards.

"About a year ago Jim Paratore was trying to convince station managers that people still wanted to see me on television." Sixteen years later, we still can't get enough. Here's a throwback to The Ellen Degeneres Show's first Daytime Emmy win. Presented at The 31st Annual Daytime Emmy® Awards in 2...