The Primetime Emmy Awards 2016 may be a while away, but the next best thing, the Daytime Emmy Awards 2016, is just around the corner. The 43rd annual Daytime Emmys will be held on Sunday, May 1, while the Creative Arts awards will be distributed on Friday, April 29, in Los Angeles.

This year, the Lifetime Achievement Award will go to Sonia Manzano, who is best known as Maria from the children's show "Sesame Street." "My children and just about every child in America has grown up learning their ABC's from the iconic character of Maria, on 'Sesame Street' played by Sonia Manzano," Soaps quoted the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences President Bob Mauro as saying. He added, "She is one of the most beloved female performers in the history of 'Sesame Street,' and the National Academy is proud to be honoring her with our prestigious Emmy Award for Lifetime Achievement."

The nominees for the Daytime Emmy awards 2016 was announced on "The Talk" on Thursday, March 24. Long-running soap "The Young and the Restless" has a whopping 27 nominations this year, and is expected to win big.

Meanwhile, check out the list of nominees in major categories below. Our predictions for winners have been highlighted in bold and Italics.

Outstanding Drama Series nominees

"The Young and the Restless"

"The Bold and the Beautiful"

"Days of our Lives"

"General Hospital"

Outstanding Lead Actor nominees:

Christian LeBlanc (Michael) "The Young and the Restless"

Tyler Christopher (Nik) from "General Hospital"

Anthony Geary (Luke) form "General Hospital"

Justin Hartley (Adam) from "The Young and the Restless"

Kristoff St. John (Neil) "The Young and the Restless"

Outstanding Lead Actress nominees:

Finola Hughes (Anna) from "General Hospital"

Kassie DePaiva (Eve) from "Days of our Lives"

Mary Beth Evans (Kayla) from "Days of our Lives"

Maura West (Ava) form "General Hospital"

Tracey Bregman (Lauren) from "The Young and the Restless"

Outstanding Morning Program

"Today Show"

"Good Morning America" "CBS Sunday Morning"

"CBS This Morning"

Also Read: 'Mother's Day' star Owen Vaccaro talks working with adults in exclusive interview

Outstanding Talk Show/Entertainment

"The Ellen DeGeneres Show"

"The Wendy Williams Show"

"The Talk"

"The Real"

"The View"

Outstanding Talk Show/Informative

"Dr. Oz"

"The Chew"

"Larry King Now"

"The Doctors"

"The Kitchen"

Outstanding Entertainment Talk Show HostKelly Ripa and Michael Strahan of "Live! with Kelly and Michael"

Co-hosts of "The Talk"

Wendy Williams form "The Wendy Williams Show"

Co-hosts of "The Real"

Co-hosts of "The View"

Outstanding Game Show

"The Price Is Right"

"Jeopardy!"

"Let's Make a Deal"

"Monopoly Millionaire's Club"

"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire"

Outstanding Game Show Host

Steve Harvey of "Family Feud"

Craig Ferguson of "Celebrity Name Game"

Brooke Burns of "The Chase"

Billy Gardell of "Monopoly Millionaires' Club"

Wayne Brady of "Let's Make a Deal"

Outstanding Culinary Program"My Grandmother's Ravioli"

America's Test Kitchen

Cook's Country

Giada in Italy

Mexico One Plate at a Time

Pati's Mexican Table

Patricia Heaton Parties

The Mind of a Chef

Who do you predict to be the winners of Daytime Emmy Awards 2016? Let us know in the comments section below.