Paul Spence and David Lawrence have done other things, but Canadian film fans can’t be blamed for recognizing them mostly as doofus Alberta longhairs Dean and Terry, respectively, from Fubar—especially now, when its sequel is currently in theatres.

Similarly, it’s not entirely shocking when the long-time Calgarians similarly show up in Fubar II character for a lunch date with the Georgia Straight. Here to promote the new film’s October 1 opening, Spence and Lawrence breeze into the lobby of a tony Yaletown hotel looking like meth hosers with the wrong address. Remarkably, no one shouts “Security!”, but it turns out that the lads have preordered huge bowls of spaghetti to have in the hotel’s café annex.

They sit down, shaking their stringy locks. They utter sighs of relief, though, when I say I’d prefer to interview the Fuboys out of character, and the wigs and tractor caps are instantly yanked off.

“Whew,” Spence says. “My ears are tickling—which is usually my reminder of when to be the Deaner.” Of course, the low-rider mustache and tattered Ratt T-shirt are still pretty decent reminders of a character known for sniffing, smoking, and otherwise guzzling all available noxious agents from here to Fort McMurray, Alberta. (That’s where, this time around, the guys end up looking for jobs in the oil biz.)

“My part is a little easier to play,” says the shorthaired Lawrence, now almost normal looking except for a light coat of lipstick that matches his plaid work shirt. “Because Terry is just a little smarter, eh?”

It’s safe to say that the actors, while honing improvisational skills as veteran members of Calgary’s Loose Moose Theatre Company, never set out to make Bob and Doug McKenzie look like Fulbright (or even half-bright) scholars. But that’s just what they did back in 2000, when they took their hopeless stage stoners to director Michael Dowse and came up with a mockumentary—complete with obscene military acronym—that played like The Office with bong hits and rusty Buicks. It was also a surprise hit at Sundance and in Canada.

“We honestly didn’t know if it was going to be worth bringing them back,” Spence recalls, “but the idea of them getting older made it seem worthwhile.” Dowse went on to direct the more complicated It’s All Gone Pete Tong, but he was open to reviving the Dean and Terry show, with everyone again inventing their dialogue as they went along.

“Of course, we also worried,” Lawrence chimes in, “that it would freak people out to see Dean struggling with cancer—that it would be too dark. But that’s what gave it a kind of depth, I think, to see these guys actually grasping something about their own mortality.”

At this, the actors, who have since completed a period comedy called Western Confidential, almost simultaneously choke on the cocoa powder that tops their tiramisu desserts.

“Hell,” Spence sputters. “I didn’t realize you were supposed to snort it!”