Hey there, time traveller!

This article was published 10/09/2010 (5092 days ago), so information in it may no longer be current.

TORONTO — I arrived at the Toronto International Film Festival Thursday morning and I’ve only seen four feature films to date.

But in that shallow pool of cinematic experience, I have to say the most enjoyable film I’ve seen so far is Fubar II, the sequel to Michael Dowse’s 2002 mockumentary about a couple of all-Canadian headbangers enduring life’s slings and arrows with a demented, party-hearty attitude.

Fubar II loses the mock-doc format (but not the smart improvised comedy) as long-haired screw-ups Terry and Dean (Dave Lawrence and Paul Spence) drive north to Fort McMurray on the pipeline to earn themselves unprecedented riches.

Gone, too, are the interactions with real people that gave the original Fubar the edgy sense of an elaborate practical joke.

"We tried to do that but it’s hard to do, because everybody knows Terry and Dean now," says Dowse. "We’ll have to go to Europe now to do that.

"We had no budget on the first one but with this one, we just wanted to do bigger things, bigger stunts… do things like go to the West Edmonton Mall, while keeping the style of it the same."

When he’s not doing the requisite appearances at TIFF in support of Fubar II (which opens Oct. 1), Dowse is in Winnipeg working on the pre-production of The Goon, scripted by Jay Baruchel and Evan Goldberg, and starring Seann William Scott (American Pie) and Montreal actor Marc-André Grondin (C.R.A.Z.Y.).

"It’s about a Jewish bouncer (Scott) who gets discovered while getting in a fight as a spectator with a hockey player at a hockey game," Dowse says. "He then gets invited to a league where he has to take care of a superstar, and it’s sort of about that relationship.

"It’s like Raging Bull on ice," Dowse says. "It’s going to be hyper-violent and hyper-funny."

Grondin plays the hockey star and "he has been fantastic.

"He’s been training twice a day. He’s really into it," Dowse says. "He plays like the Gretzky character so he has to be a really good hockey player.

"It’s going to be a great film," Dowse says. "I love comedy and I love hockey and violence and to be able to combine those three things in one film and make something legitimately funny…"

Dowse confirms the production will employ the same hockey resources as Keep Your Head Up Kid: The Don Cherry Story, which shot in Winnipeg last year.

"They did a great job on that film so it’s nice to have those resources, especially with the casting," he says. "I thought the level of hockey in that film was great. And we want to excel beyond that and make it bigger.

Dowse has enjoyed working with Baruchel, who has been almost omnipresent in cineplexes this year with films such as The Sorcerer’s Apprentice, She’s Out of My League and The Trotsky.

"Jay’s awesome; he’s had such a great year in terms of all his releases," Dowse says. "He probably watches more films than anybody I know, and to his credit, he knows film very well.

"He’s so excited to see something he’s written, and he loves to be on the other side of the production for once."

— — —

Another film on my list of things to see at TIFF is a short titled How to Rid Your Lover of a Negative Emotion Caused by You, the directorial debut of erstwhile Winnipegger Nadia Litz.

Litz, who starred in TIFF films such as The Five Senses and Monkey Warfare, appears onscreen with her Monkey Warfare co-star, the late Tracey Wright, in the TIFF feature You Are Here.

But Litz clearly has a lot riding on her own film, which, as she told Eye Weekly, was stalled while she was studying film theory for four years.

"In my final year at university, I was dumped by my boyfriend," Litz said. "And suddenly I was able to go full force in pursuing it because of the heartache."

randall.king@freepress.mb.ca