Charlotte, Princess Royal (September 29, 1766 – October 6, 1828), was Queen of Württemberg as the wife of King Friedrich I. She was the eldest daughter and fourth child of King George III Great Britain and his wife, Duchess Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, the youngest daughter of Duke Charles Ludwig Friedrich of Mecklenburg, Prince of Mirow (1708–1752), and his wife Princess Elisabeth Albertine of Saxe-Hildburghausen (1713–1761). Mecklenburg-Strelitz was a small north-German duchy in the Holy Roman Empire.

Charlotte was officially designated as Princess Royal on June 22, 1789. The title had been vacant since 1757 with the death of the last holder, Sophia Dorothea of Hanover, the only daughter of Georg Ludwig, Prince-Elector of Hanover, later King George I of Great Britain, and his wife, Sophia Dorothea of Celle. She was detested by her elder brother, King George II of Great Britain. She was the mother of King Friedrich II the Great of Prussia.

After the birth of three sons in a row, her parents were delighted to have Princess Charlotte in the nursery. Like all of her siblings, Charlotte was inoculated, in her case, in December 1768 along with her brother William. As the eldest daughter of the monarch, Charlotte was assumed to be destined for an important marriage on the continent, and her education was considered to be of the utmost importance, beginning when she was only eighteen months old.

Though she was the eldest daughter, Charlotte was constantly compared to her sister Augusta Sophia, only two years younger than she. When Augusta was a month old, Lady Mary Coke called her “the most beautiful baby I have ever seen” while Charlotte was “very plain”. Passing judgement once again three years later, Charlotte was now “the most sensible agreeable child I ever saw, but in my opinion far from pretty” while Augusta was still “rather pretty”.

Although the Princess Royal was never as beautiful as her younger sister, she did not share in Augusta’s primary flaw: painful shyness. Charlotte also had a stammer that her attendant Mary Dacres tried to help her young charge manage. In 1770, the cluster of the three eldest princesses was completed with the birth of Princess Elizabeth, the seventh child.

Marriage

On May 18, 1797, the Princess Royal was married at the Chapel Royal, St James’s Palace, London, to Hereditary Prince Friedrich of Württemberg, the eldest son and heir apparent of Friedrich II Eugene, Duke of Württemberg and his wife, Margravine Sophia Dorothea of Brandenburg-Schwedt, a daughter of the Hohenzollern Prince, Margrave Friedrich Wilhelm of Brandenburg-Schwedt and Princess Sophia Dorothea of Prussia.

Margravine Sophia Dorothea of Brandenburg-Schwedt’s mother, Princess Sophia Dorothea of Prussia, was a sister of Friedrich II the Great of Prussia, and thus a granddaughter of Princess Sophia Dorothea the only daughter of King George I of Great Britain.

The younger Friedrich succeeded his father as the reigning Duke of Württemberg on December 22, 1797. Duke Friedrich II had two sons and two daughters by his first marriage to the late Princess Augusta of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel, the daughter of Duke Charles II of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel and Princess Augusta of Great Britain (the elder sister of George III) and thus Charlotte’s first cousin; Princess Augusta was also the elder sister of Caroline of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel, the estranged wife of the future George IV (then Prince of Wales).