Muna Muday, MPH, is the senior program manager for The Addis Clinic, an international healthcare nonprofit based in Nashville.

As a healthcare capital in the U.S., Nashville is home to more than 500 healthcare companies that collectively employ more than 270,000 people. Nashville is uniquely positioned to drive healthcare innovation into a new future thanks to the established network of health systems.

In the early 1990s, my parents fled from the armed crisis in Somalia. For weeks they took turns carrying my four siblings through hostile conditions until they were able to reach safety at a refugee camp in Kenya.

My family lived there for 12 years, and it was in that refugee camp that I was born. I spent the first decade of my life in Dadaab, the largest refugee camp in the world. Although we were safer there, armed militants still presented a regular threat to the more than 200,000 refugees who lived there.

When my family and I were granted asylum as refugees in the U.S., we were settled in Nashville by the Catholic Charities of Tennessee. My father got a job in a warehouse and my family and I tried to adjust into our new home.

Hear more Tennessee Voices: Get the weekly opinion newsletter for insightful and thought provoking columns.

Working to improve healthcare worldwide

After I graduated college at Tennessee State University, I completed my masters in public health at Vanderbilt with the goal of working to improve health outcomes in East Africa. Although much has changed in Somalia since my family was forced to escape conflict, it is still home to some of the starkest health outcomes in the world.

One in nine Somali children die before they reach their first birthday, and the life expectancy is only 57 years.

As the senior program manager for The Addis Clinic, an international healthcare nonprofit based in Nashville, I have the opportunity to develop and implement programs aimed at reversing these bleak health outcomes.

This year we have partnered with over 1,000 healthcare workers in over 200 facilities around the world to improve the lives of 1.5 million people. Although there is still a need for healthcare services in East Africa, we still have some work to do at home.

More than 12% of Nashville’s population is foreign-born and nearly 30% of public school children speak a language other than English at home. Behind these statistics are people with stories of hope and endurance, like my family.

Hear from Tennessee's Black Voices: Get the weekly newsletter for powerful and critical thinking columns.

How Nashville can help redfine health outcomes around the world

At The Addis Clinic, we believe change is best driven by people who understand the community they are in. As a Somali public health expert, my approach to developing programs in my home country is guided by my history and understanding of culture.

For the more than 500 healthcare companies that call Nashville home, our rich cultural diversity can be used to provide more culturally-sensitive and patient-centered care to their diverse clienteles.

For the companies interested in supporting under-resourced communities, I encourage you to follow The Addis Clinic’s model of empowering local leaders to redefine health outcomes in their communities.

At The Addis Clinic, we’ve been fortunate enough to partner with many of these organizations to redefine health outcomes around the world while promoting sustainable health systems. As we witnessed how COVID-19 crippled health systems around the world, I encourage you to think of the 3.5 billion people around the world who didn’t have access to basic healthcare before the pandemic.

With collective efforts through partnership between private sector and nonprofit organizations, Nashville can become the global hub of nonprofit healthcare innovation.

Muna Muday, MPH, is the senior program manager for The Addis Clinic, an international healthcare nonprofit based in Nashville.