Business Valuations – Nashville (TN)

Many business owners in Nashville and across Tennessee contemplate conducting a business valuation when it comes time for a transaction. While an independent determination of a company’s value is necessary before a transaction, a valuation has many other uses. The details contained within the report can provide important insight into how economic, competitive, global, and legal factors impact bottom-line value. These details can help management better understand the current market and the potential changes that can help drive value. Using a valuation as a planning tool can provide immense value before a transaction commences.

There are other situations when a valuation may be required. These include seeking new financing, updating shareholder or partnership agreements, conducting estate and gift tax planning during succession planning, and benchmarking purposes. Occasionally, Nashville attorneys will initiate a valuation to assist with litigation, including divorce, partner disputes, etc. Whatever the reason, working with a business appraiser with the needed experience is essential to meeting your needs.

Tennessee Business Valuation Experience

Belfint, Lyons & Shuman works with business owners and attorneys in Nashville and Tennessee to conduct business appraisals. Our team has years of experience conducting independent and objective valuations for transactional, planning, and litigation purposes. Our team of experienced professionals holds the Certified Valuation Analyst (CVA) and Accredited in Business Valuation (ABV) credentials. Combining technical acumen and practical expertise allows us to deliver the best experience possible.

Nashville Business Valuations

Our valuation professionals take a comprehensive approach to valuing business interests. This is essential because rarely is there an established market for Nashville and Tennessee closely held business interests. Our process includes:

Conducting an in-depth analysis of the latest market data.

Implementing the latest techniques to arrive at an accurate valuation.

Creating a business valuation report that is accurate and defensible against outside scrutiny.

Reviewing the latest administrative rulings and other regulatory concerns to ensure the valuation complies with the highest professional standards.

Map of Nashville (TN)

Contact Our Nashville Business Valuation Team