At the present time, Korean arts and culture are attracting many enthusiasts around the world. Korea’s cultural and artistic achievements through the ages are now leading many of its young talents to the world’s most prestigious music and dance competitions, while its literary works are being translated into many different languages for global readers. Recently, Korean Dansaekhwa (monochrome paintings) have become the talk of the global art world.

The world’s craze for K-pop reached its zenith in August 2020, when the South Korean boy band BTS achieved its first No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 songs chart with its first all-English-language single entitled “Dynamite.” BTS has become the first all-South Korean act to top the Billboard Hot 100, as well as the first one in Asia since 1963. This outcome reflects the popularity of K-pop throughout the world, including the United States, South America, and Europe, as well as Japan, China, and Southeast Asia, rather than just a feat of a specific group. It is in the same context that music videos of K-pop stars such as BLACKPINK, a South Korean girl group, have recorded explosive views on YouTube and become more popularized.

As such, the artistic excellence of globally recognized Korean culture was not built overnight. The original artistic sensibility reflected in the diverse artifacts and tomb murals of the Three Kingdoms Period became richer and more profound as Korea progressed through the periods of Unified Silla (676–935), Goryeo (918– 1392), and Joseon (1392–1910). In addition, the DNA of this artistic sensibility has been handed down through the generations to today’s Korean people.

South Korea preserves a wealth of priceless cultural heritage, the majority of which have been inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List to be protected for future generations. As of 2020, a total of 50 South Korean heritage items are listed either as World Heritage Sites or Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity, or included in the UNESCO’s Memory of the World Register.

Changdeokgung Palace

Changdeokgung Palace, located in Waryong-dong, Jongno-gu, Seoul, is one of the five Royal Palaces of the Joseon dynasty (1392–1910), and still contains the original palace structures and other remains intact. It was built in 1405 as a Royal Villa but became the Joseon dynasty’s official Royal Residence after Gyeongbokgung, the original principal palace, was destroyed by fire in 1592 when Japanese forces invaded Korea. Thereafter, it maintained its prestigious position until 1867, when Gyeongbokgung was renovated and restored to its original status. Changdeokgung was listed as a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1997.

The two main buildings at the Royal Shrine, Jeongjeon Hall and Yeongnyeongjeon Hall, exhibit a fine symmetry, and there are differences in the height of the raised platform, the height of the eaves and the rooftop, and the thickness of the columns according to their status. The entire sanctuary retains its original features, including the two shrine halls, which exhibit the unique architectural style of the 16th century. Seasonal memorial rites to commemorate the life and achievements of the royal ancestors of the Joseon dynasty are still performed at the shrine.

Hwaseong Fortress

Located in today’s Jangan-gu, Suwon-si, Gyeonggi-do, Hwaseong Fortress is an impressive structure stretching for 5.7 km and was built in 1796 during the reign of King Jeongjo (r. 1776–1800) of the Joseon dynasty. The construction of the fortress was begun after the King moved the grave of his father, Crown Prince Sado, from Yangju in Gyeonggi-do to its current location near the fortress. The fortification is structured rationally and practically to effectively perform its function of protecting the city enclosed within it. The fortress and related facilities are well-known for having been constructed by means of scientific devices developed by the distinguished Confucian thinker and writer Jeong Yak-yong (1762–1836), including the Geojunggi (a type of crane) and Nongno (pulley wheel) used to lift heavy building materials such as stones.

Seokguram Grotto and Bulguksa Temple

Seokguram, located on the middle slope of Tohamsan Mountain in Gyeongju, Gyeongsangbuk-do, is the representative stone temple which was completed in 774 to serve as a dharma hall. This grotto is the product of outstanding architectural techniques. It is placed in such a way that the first rays of the sun rising over the East Sea would strike the forehead of the seated Buddha statue in the rotunda.

Completed the same year as Seokguram Grotto, Bulguksa Temple consists of exquisite prayer halls and various monuments, including two stone pagodas, Dabotap Pagoda and Seokgatap Pagoda, standing in the front courtyard of the temple’s main prayer hall called Daeungjeon. The two pagodas are widely regarded as the finest extant Silla pagodas: the former is admired for its elaborately carved details, the latter for its delightfully simple structure.

The Royal Tombs of the Joseon Dynasty are highly regarded as tangible heritage reflecting the value of Joseon funeral customs, which were derived from Confucianism and geomancy. It is worth noting that these historical remains have been preserved in their original conditions.

Haeinsa Temple Janggyeong Panjeon, the Depositories for the Tripitaka Koreana Woodblocks

The Printing Woodblocks of the Tripitaka Koreana, which was made during the Goryeo period (918–1392), are housed in the Janggyeong Panjeon complex specially made for that purpose in 1488 at Haeinsa Temple. As the oldest remaining buildings at the temple, the Tripitaka depositories are marked by the uniquely scientific and highly effective method of controlling ventilation and moisture to ensure the safe storage of the age-old woodblocks. The buildings were built side by side at the highest point (about 700 m above sea level) in the precincts of Haeinsa Temple, which is located on the mid-slope of Gayasan Mountain.

What makes these depositories so special is their unique design, which provides effective natural ventilation by exploiting the wind blowing in from the valley of Gayasan Mountain. The open lattice windows of different sizes are arranged in upper and lower rows on both the front and rear walls of the depositories to promote the optimum flow of air from the valley. Similarly, the floor, which was built by ramming layers of charcoal, clay, sand, salt, and lime powder, also helps to control the humidity of the rooms.

The defensive position of the fortress was reinforced by exploiting the rugged topography of the mountain (average height: at least 480 m). The perimeter of its wall is about 12.3 km. According to a record dating back to the Joseon period, about 4,000 people lived in the town built inside the fortress, which also served as a temporary capital for the royal family and military commands to take refuge in during emergencies. Accordingly, temporary palaces, the Jongmyo shrine, and Sajikdan Altar were built in the fortress in 1711 during the reign of King Sukjong of Joseon.

This fortress is also understood as the important evidence of the wide-ranging exchange of architectural techniques used for fortification through wars between Korea (Joseon), Japan (Azuchi-Momoyama Period), and China (Ming and Qing), which lasted during the 16th–18th centuries. The introduction of cannons from western countries brought many changes to the weaponry inside the fortress and the way the fortress was built. The fortress is a “living record” that shows the changes in the fortification technique methods by era from the 7th–19th centuries.

Baekje Historic Areas

Baekje, one of the three ancient kingdoms on the Korean Peninsula, existed for 700 years from 18 BCE to 660 CE. Baekje Historic Areas comprise the eight cultural heritages located in Gongju-si, Buyeo-gun, and Iksan-si. They are the Gongsanseong Fortress and the Royal Tombs in Songsan-ri in Gongju-si, Chungcheongnam-do; the Archeological Site in Gwanbuk-ri, Busosanseong Fortress, the Royal Tombs in Neungsan-ri, the Jeongnimsa Temple Site, and the Naseong City Wall in Buyeo-gun, Chungcheongnam-do; and the Archaeological Site in Wanggung-ri and the Mireuksa Temple Site in Iksan-si, Jeollabuk-do.

These archaeological sites represent the historical relationships among the East Asian ancient kingdoms of Korea, China, and Japan from the 5th to the 7th centuries, and the resulting architectural development and spread of Buddhism. The Buddhist temples, ancient tombs, architecture, and stone pagodas are a testament to the culture, religion, and aesthetics of the Baekje kingdom.

Seowon, Korean Neo-Confucian Academies

Seowon were educational institutions intended to teach Neo-Confucianism, which was introduced from China and flourished greatly during the Joseon dynasty. Most were established from the mid-16th to 17th centuries. It comprises nine representative seowon: Sosuseowon, Namgyeseowon, Oksanseowon, Dosanseowon, Piramseowon, Dodongseowon, Byeongsanseowon, Museongseowon, and Donamseowon Confucian Academies, all of which are located across the central and southern parts of South Korea. They are recognized as an exceptional testimony to the excellent Neo-Confucianism and educational culture of Korea.

The local literati led seowon and made a significant contribution to the development and prosperity of seowon-centered culture in the Joseon dynasty. The local literati at seowon created educational systems and tangible structures so that their younger scholars could devote themselves to learning. Learning, veneration, and interaction were the essential functions of the seowon, which are closely reflected in their design.

Hunminjeongeum

(The Proper Sounds for the Instruction of the People)

Hangeul is the name of the Korean writing system and alphabet, which consists of letters inspired by the shapes formed by the human vocal organs during a speech, making it very easy to learn and use. Hangeul was promulgated in 1446 by King Sejong, who helped devise it and named it Hunminjeongeum, or The Proper Sounds for the Instruction of the People. It was also in that same year that he ordered his scholars to publish The Hunminjeongeum Haeryebon (Hunminjeongeum Manuscript) to provide detailed explanations of the purpose and guiding principles of the new writing system. One of these manuscripts is currently in the collection of the Kansong Art Museum and was included in UNESCO’s Memory of the World Register in 1997.

The invention of the Hunminjeongeum opened up a broad new horizon for all the Korean people, even women and those in the lowest social class, enabling them to learn to read and write and express themselves fully. Hunminjeongeum originally consisted of 28 letters, but only 24 are used now.

Seungjeongwon Ilgi: Diaries of the Royal Secretariat

This collection of documents contains the records of the Joseon rulers’ public life and their interactions with the bureaucracy; they were made on a daily basis by the Seungjeongwon, or Royal Secretariat, from the third month of 1623 to the eighth month of 1910. The records are collected in 3,243 diaries and include the details of royal edicts, reports, and appeals from ministries and other government agencies. The diaries are currently kept in the Kyujanggak Institute for Korean Studies, Seoul National University.

Ilseongnok: Records of Daily Reflections

Vast collection of daily records made by the kings of the late Joseon period (from 1760 to 1910) is compiled in a total of 2,329 volumes. The records provide vivid and detailed information on the political situation in and around Korea and the ongoing cultural exchanges between the East and the West from the 18th to the 20th century.

Uigwe: The Royal Protocols of the Joseon Dynasty

This collection of beautifully illustrated books contains official manuals recording the details of court ceremonies or events of national importance for the purpose of future reference. The most frequently treated subjects in these books are royal weddings, the investiture of queens and crown princes, state and royal funerals, and the construction of royal tombs, although other state or royal occasions such as the “Royal Ploughing,” construction or renovation of palace buildings, are included. As for the latter, those published to mark the construction of Hwaseong Fortress and King Jeongjo’s formal visit to the new walled city in the late 18th century are particularly famous. These publications were also stored in the history depositories, sadly resulting in the destruction of early Joseon works by fire during the Japanese Invasion of Korea in 1592. The remaining 3,895 books of Uigwe were published after the war, some of which were stolen by the French Army in 1866 and kept in the Bibliothèque Nationale de France until 2011, when they were returned to South Korea following an agreement between the governments of South Korea and France.

Printing Woodblocks of the Tripitaka Koreana and Miscellaneous Buddhist Scriptures

The collection of Tripitaka woodblocks stored at Haeinsa Temple (established 802) in Hapcheon-gun, Gyeongsangnam-do, was made during the Goryeo period (918–1392) under a national project that started in 1236 and took 15 years to complete. The collection is generally known by the name Palman Daejanggyeong, literally “the Tripitaka of 80,000 woodblocks,” as it consists of 81, 258 blocks of wood.

The Tripitaka Koreana woodblocks were made by the people of Goryeo who sought the Buddha’s magical power to repel the Mongol forces that had invaded and devastated their country in the 13th century. The Tripitaka Koreana is often compared with other Tripitaka editions produced by the Song, Yuan, and Ming dynasties in China, and has been highly praised for its richer and more complete content. The process of manufacturing the woodblocks played an important role in the development of printing and publication techniques in Korea.

Human Rights Documentary Heritage 1980 Archives for the May 18th Democratic Uprising against Military Regime, in Gwangju

The May 18 Democratization Movement was a popular uprising that took place in the city of Gwangju from May 18 to 27, 1980, during which Gwangju’s citizens made a strong plea for democracy in Korea and actively opposed the then military dictatorship. This pro-democracy struggle in Gwangju ended tragically but exerted a powerful influence on similar democratic movements that spread across East Asia in the 1980s. This UNESCO records consist of the documents, videos, photographs, and other forms of records made about the activities of Gwangju’s citizens during the movement, and the subsequent process of compensation for the victims, as collected by the May 18 Memorial Foundation, the National Archives of Korea, Republic of Korea Army Headquarters, the National Assembly Library of Korea, and various organizations in the United States

Royal Ancestral Ritual in the Jongmyo Shrine and Its Music

The Royal ancestral ritual (Jongmyo Jerye) in the Jongmyo shrine is now held on the first Sunday of May to honor the deceased Joseon kings and their queen consorts at the Jongmyo shrine in Seoul. It was the most important state ceremony designed to maintain the social order and promote solidarity and the practice of duties as a human after the establishment of Joseon as a Confucian state in 1392.

This ritual consists of performances of ceremonial orchestral music (Jerye-ak) and graceful and fancy dance moves (munmu and mumu) praising the civil and military achievements of the royal ancestors of Joseon. This age-old Confucian ritual combining splendid performances of music and dance is widely admired not only for the preservation of the original features for over 500 years but also for its unique syncretic and composite art form.

Pansori Epic Chant

Pansori is a genre of musical storytelling performed by a vocalist and a single drummer in which he or she combines singing (sori) with gestures (ballim) and narrative (aniri) to present an epic drama conceived from popular folk tales and well-known historic events. The art form was established during the 18th century and has generated enthusiastic performers and audiences ever since.

Gangneung Danoje Festival

This festival is held in Gangneung, Gangwon-do, for about 30 days until Dano Day on the fifth day of the fifth lunar month. It is one of Korea’s oldest folk festivals and has been preserved more or less in its original form since its emergence many centuries ago. The festival starts with the traditional ritual of honoring the mountain god of Daegwallyeong and continues with a great variety of folk games, events, and rituals during which prayers are offered for a good harvest, the peace and prosperity of villages and individual homes, and communal unity and solidarity.

The first event of the Danoje Festival is related to the preparation of “divine drinks” (sinju) to be offered to gods and goddesses, thus linking the human world with the divine world. This is followed by a variety of festive events such as the Gwanno Mask Dance (Korea’s unique nonverbal performance by masked players), swing riding, ssireum (Korean wrestling), nongak (traditional Korean music performed by farmers) contests, changpo (iris) hair washing, and surichwi rice cake eating. Of these, the changpo hair washing event is particularly widely practiced by women who believe that the extract of changpo will give them glossier hair and repel the evil spirits that are thought to bear diseases.

Ganggangsullae

This traditional event combining a circle dance with singing and folk games was performed by women around the coastal areas of Jeollanam-do during traditional holidays such as Chuseok (Harvest Moon Festival/Thanksgiving) and Jeongwol Daeboreum (the first full moon of the New Year on the lunar calendar), in particular. While today, the dance part is selected to be performed by professional dancers, the original performance included several different folk games such as Namsaengi nori (Namsadang vagabond clowns’ play), deokseok mori (straw mat rolling), and gosari kkeokgi (bracken shoot picking). The performers sing the Song of Ganggangsullae as they dance, and the singing is done alternately by the lead singer and the rest with the tempo of the song and dance movements becoming faster and faster toward the end.

Namsadang Nori

Namsadang nori, generally performed by an itinerant troupe of male performers, consists of several distinct parts including pungmul nori (music and dance), jultagi (tightrope walking), daejeop dolligi (plate spinning), gamyeongeuk (mask theater), and kkokdugaksi noreum (puppet theater). The performers also played instruments while they dance, such as the barrel buk (drum), janggu (hourglassshaped drum), kkwaenggwari (small metal gong), jing (large metal gong), and two wind instruments called nabal and taepyeongso. It was intended to reduce fatigue and increase cooperation during hard work such as weeding, weeding a rice paddy, rice-planting, etc.

Yeongsanjae

Yeongsanjae is a Korean Buddhist ritual performed on the 49th day after one’s death, which is to guide the soul of the deceased to the Pure Land of Ultimate Bliss (Buddhist paradise). The ritual, known to have been performed since the Goryeo dynasty (918–1392), aims to enlighten both the dead and the living about Buddha’s teachings so that they can be freed from all defilement and suffering. Its value as a Buddhist ritual lies in the engagement of the public rather than a unilateral performance. It is also performed as a Buddhist ceremony to pray for the peace of the country and the well-being of the people.

Jeju Chilmeoridang Yeongdeunggut

This age-old shamanic ritual was at one time performed in almost all the towns and villages in Jeju Island, with worshippers praying for a good catch and the safety of fishermen working at sea. According to the traditional folk belief of Jeju islanders, the second lunar month is the month of Yeongdeung, during which Grandma Yeongdeung, a wind deity, visits all the villages, farming fields, and homes across Jeju Island, bearing tidings about the harvest in the oncoming autumn.

Taekkyeon, A Traditional Korean Martial Art

One of the surviving traditional martial arts developed in Korea, Taekkyeon, which is different from taekwondo historically and technically, used to be known by several different names such as Gakhui (“sport of legs”) and Bigaksul (“art of flying legs”). Such names suggest that it is related with the movement of kicking. Like most other martial arts in which weapons are not used, Taekkyeon is aimed at improving one’s self-defense techniques and promoting physical and mental health through the practice of orchestrated dance-like bodily movements, using the feet and legs in particular. Compared to other martial arts, Taekkyeon focuses more on defensive techniques than on offensive ones, characterized by fluid, dynamic foot movement. The way of playing the match is simple. To be a winner, the fighters knock the opponent down with their hands and feet or jump up and kick the other on the face, while maintaining a stance where one foot is placed in front of the other, pointing to the opponent.

Jultagi, Tightrope Walking

In the traditional Korean art of jultagi (tightrope walking), a tightrope walker performs a variety of acrobatic movements, as well as singing and comic storytelling, as he walks on a tight rope. He is generally assisted by an eorit gwangdae (clown) on the ground who responds to his words and movements with witty remarks and comic actions intended to elicit an amused response from the spectators. Tightrope walking was formally performed at the royal court to celebrate special occasions such as the (Lunar) New Year’s Day or to entertain special guests such as foreign envoys. However, the aspiration of Joseon’s rulers toward a more austere lifestyle gradually pushed it toward villages and markets, and it ultimately became entertainment for the common people. While tightrope walking in other countries tends to focus on the walking techniques alone, Korean tightrope walkers are interested in songs and comedy as well as acrobatic stunts, thereby involving the spectators more intimately in the performance.

Falconry, A Living Human Heritage

Korea has a long tradition of keeping and training falcons and other raptors to hunt wild pheasants or hares. Archaeological and historical evidence shows that falconry on the Korean Peninsula started several thousand years ago and was widely practiced during the Goryeo period (918–1392) in particular. The sport was more popular in the north than in the south, and usually conducted during the winter when farmers were available. Falconers would tie a leather string around the ankle of their bird and an identification tag and a bell to its tail. The Korean falconry was inscribed on the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity in 2010 jointly with falconry preserved in 11 other countries around the world, including the Czech Republic, France, Mongolia, Spain, and Syria.Korea has a long tradition of keeping and training falcons and other raptors to hunt wild pheasants or hares. Archaeological and historical evidence shows that falconry on the Korean Peninsula started several thousand years ago and was widely practiced during the Goryeo period (918–1392) in particular. The sport was more popular in the north than in the south, and usually conducted during the winter when farmers were available. Falconers would tie a leather string around the ankle of their bird and an identification tag and a bell to its tail. The Korean falconry was inscribed on the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity in 2010 jointly with falconry preserved in 11 other countries around the world, including the Czech Republic, France, Mongolia, Spain, and Syria.

Arirang, Lyrical Folk Song in the Republic of Korea

Arirang is a Korean folk song that represents Korean culture. It is not a single song but has been handed down in different versions by region. At present, there are an estimated 3,600 variations of 60 different versions of “Arirang.”

Arirang has been created together by people over several generations. As anyone can create new lyrics and melodies, it has been handed down in various versions tailored to local characteristics. The most famous Arirang versions include “Jeongseon Arirang” originating in Gangwon-do, “Jindo Arirang” in Jeollanam-do, and “Miryang Arirang” in Gyeongsangnam-do. Although the melodies and lyrics vary in each region, all of them include a refrain similar to “arirang” or “arari” in common.

The contents of the song are as diverse as the versions. They are sung in different situations and for purposes. In other words, they can be sung to soothe the difficulties of farming, to confess one’s true heart to one’s beloved, to pray for an affluent and peaceful life, and to entertain people gathered for a celebration. One thing in common is that the song embodies the emotions of joy, anger, sorrow, and pleasure that people feel in their daily lives. The lyrics and melodies of Arirang depend on a singer’s situations, and this characteristic has provided a catalyst for enriching the diversity of Korean culture.

Today, Arirang is sung at important national events, playing a role in unifying the Korean people. For example, the Korean national team sang the song when they entered the stadium at the 27th Olympic Summer Games: Sydney 2000. Also, during the 2002 FIFA World Cup Korea/Japan, Red Devils, the official supporting group for the Korea Republic national football team, sang Arirang to cheer up their national football team.

Kimjang, Making and Sharing Kimchi

Kimjang is the activity of making kimchi that is conducted all over Korea during late autumn as part of the preparations to secure fresh, healthy food for the winter season. Now gaining a worldwide reputation as a representative Korean food, kimchi has always been one of the key side dishes required to complete the everyday meals eaten by Korean people since olden times. That is why kimjang has long been an annual event of paramount importance for entire families and communities across Korea.

It takes a whole year to make preparations for kimjang. In spring, households procure a selection of seafood including shrimps and anchovies, in particular, which they salt and leave to ferment until they are ready for use in the kimchimaking season. They then obtain fine-quality, sun-dried sea salt in summer and prepare red chili powder and the main ingredients, kimchi cabbage and Korean white radish, in autumn. Then, with winter approaching, members of families and communities alike gather together on a mutually agreed date to make kimchi in sufficient quantities to sustain families with fresh food through the long, harsh winter.

Kimjang refers to a collective practice of making and sharing large quantities of kimchi, thus closely associated with the communal culture of Korea. Kimjang, therefore, is meaningful as the age-old tradition is still maintained as a collective cultural event, strengthening solidarity and reaffirming Korean identity among today’s Korean people even in the modern society where individualism is prevalent. In addition, the tradition is significant in the sense that it symbolizes the sharing culture of Korea that has been passed down through generations.

Recognized for such contribution by UNESCO, “Kimjang: Making and Sharing Kimchi” was inscribed on the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity on December 5, 2013.

Gugak

The term gugak, which literally means “national music,” refers to traditional Korean music and other related art forms including songs, dances, and ceremonial movements. The history of music in Korea should be as long as Korean history itself, but it was only in the early 15th century, during the reign of King Sejong of the Joseon dynasty (1392–1910), that Korean music became a subject of serious study and was developed into a system, resulting in the creation of the first mensural notation system called jeongganbo in Asia. King Sejong’s efforts to reform the court music led not only to the creation of Korea’s own notation system but also to the composition of special ritual music called Jongmyo Jeryeak to be performed during the royal ancestral ritual (Jongmyo Jerye) in the Jongmyo— inscribed on UNESCO’s Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity in 2001—and Yeomillak, or “Joy of the People.” The term gugak was first used by the Jangagwon, a government agency of late Joseon responsible for music, to distinguish traditional Korean music from foreign music.

Traditional Korean music is typically classified into several types: the “legitimate music” (called jeongak or jeongga) enjoyed by the royalty and aristocracy of Joseon; folk music including pansori, sanjo, and japga; jeongjae (court music and dance) performed for the King at celebratory state events; music and dance connected with shamanic and Buddhist traditions such as salpuri, seungmu, and beompae; and poetic songs beloved of the literati elite such as gagok and sijo. Of the numerous folk songs, Arirang—inscribed on UNESCO’s Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity in 2012—is particularly cherished by the common people and there exist many variations with special lyrics and melodies unique to each region such as Miryang, Jeongseon, and Jindo.

Gugak instruments are similarly diverse. These traditional musical instruments are generally divided into three categories: wind instruments such as the piri, daegeum, danso, and taepyeongso; stringed instruments such as the gayageum, geomungo, haegeum, ajaeng, and bipa; and percussion instruments such as the buk, janggu, pyeonjong, pyeongyeong, kkwaenggwari, and jing.

Painting and Calligraphy

Painting has always been a major genre of Korean art since ancient times. The art of ancient Korea is represented by the tomb murals of Goguryeo (37 BCE– 668), which contain valuable clues to the beliefs of the early Korean people about humanity and the universe, as well as to their artistic sensibilities and techniques. Their art had been influenced by China and disseminated to Japan. The artists of Goryeo (918–1392) were interested in capturing Buddhist icons and bequeathed some great masterpieces, while the literati elite of Joseon was more attracted not only to idealized landscapes but also to the symbolism of plants and animals, such as the Four Noble Lords (Sagunja, namely, the orchid, chrysanthemum, bamboo, and plum tree) and the Ten Creatures of Longevity (Sipjangsaeng), including crane, tigers, and deer.

Korea in the 18th century saw the arrival of two great artists, Kim Hong-do and Sin Yun-bok, both of whom developed a passionate interest in depicting the daily activities of ordinary people in their work. Kim Hong-do preferred depicting the kaleidoscope of people in various situations and scenes of everyday life, whereas Sin Yun-bok, for his part, devoted his efforts to capturing erotic moments in works that were surprisingly voyeuristic for the period.

Calligraphy, which developed in Korea under the influence of China, is the art of handwriting in which the beauty of the lines and forms of characters and the energy contained in brush strokes and subtle shades of ink are appreciated. While calligraphy is an independent genre of art, it has been closely related to ink and wash painting because these forms use similar techniques and the tools commonly called the “Four Treasures of the Study” (i.e., paper, brush, ink stick, and inkstone). Korea has produced an abundance of master calligraphers, of whom Kim Jeong-hui (1786–1856) is particularly famous for developing his own style known as Chusache or Chusa Style (Chusa was his pen name). His calligraphic works are still widely admired for their remarkably modern artistic beauty.

100 to 600 years ago, white porcelain ware was the main representation of Korean ceramic art. While some of these porcelain wares display a milky white surface, many are decorated with a great variety of designs painted in oxidized iron, copper, or the priceless cobalt blue pigment imported from Persia via China. The Royal Court of Joseon ran its own kilns in Gwangju, Gyeonggi-do, producing products of the highest quality. The advanced techniques used in the production of white porcelain wares were introduced to Japan by Joseon potters kidnapped during the Imjin Waeran (Japanese invasion of Korea 1592–1598).

The third main group of Korean pottery is Buncheong ware, which was independently made by Goryeo potters 500 to 600 years ago after the fall of their Kingdom.

Today, traditional artworks such as paintings, calligraphy works, and pottery are widely traded through auctions in galleries and antique shops in Insa-dong, Seoul.

Handicrafts

In the past, Korean craftsmen and women developed a wide range of techniques to produce the items they needed at home. They made pieces of wooden furniture such as wardrobes, cabinets, and tables marked by a keen eye for balance and symmetry, and wove beautiful baskets, boxes, and mats with bamboo, wisteria, or lespedeza. They used Korean mulberry paper to make masks, dolls, and ceremonial ornaments, and decorated diverse household objects with black and red lacquer harvested from nature to make them stronger and more beautiful.

Later, they developed the art of using beautifully dyed ox-horn strips, and iridescent mother-of-pearl and abalone shell to decorate furniture. Embroidery, decorative knot making (maedeup), and natural dyeing were also important elements of traditional Korean arts and crafts, which were widely exploited by women to make attractive garments, household objects, and personal fashion ornaments.

(Korean Wave)

From the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s, South Korean TV dramas and popular music gained great popularity in Asian countries such as China and Japan. In 1997, when the TV drama entitled What Is Love was aired by the Chinese major state broadcaster China Central Television (CCTV), it ranked second in China’s alltime imported video content. Then, the term Hallyu or the “Korean Wave” first appeared, referring to the global craze for Korean culture.

The Korean Wave landed in Japan in 2003 when the KBS TV drama series Winter Sonata was aired via NHK. The drama became a megahit, and Nami Island in Chuncheon, the filming site of the drama, was a must-visit destination for Japanese tourists.

From the mid-2000s to the early 2010s, the spread of the Korean Wave was mainly led by Korean boy groups and girl groups called idol stars such as Big Bang, Girls’ Generation, and Kara. During this period, the Korean Wave extended its fan base into the global stage, including Latin America and the Middle East beyond Asia, especially loved by young people in their teens and 20s.

The Korean Wave, which had established a solid foundation through popular culture such as TV dramas and music, has been pushing the boundaries of its influence since the 2010s. As the unique charm of Korean culture is widely known to people around the world through global online platforms such as YouTube and social networking services, the craze has expanded to Korean traditional culture, food, literature, and language, creating more and more enthusiasts.

In 2020, the film Parasite, which was nominated in six categories, won four leading awards at the 92nd Academy Awards, including Best Director and Best Picture, which serves as an opportunity to introduce Korean movies around the world.

The number of Hallyu-related organizations enthusiastic about Korean culture is on the rise. Every year, the number of these organizations increases by 7% and the number of members by 36%. As of 2020, the total number of members who have joined Hallyu-related organizations in all countries around the world have reached nearly 100 million. This is a five-fold increase over five years. The majority of them consist of K-pop fan clubs such as ARMY, BTS’s global official fan club, and BLINK, BLACKPINK’s official fan club. In addition, other organizations and communities are also active in various fields such as South Korean dramas, food, and tourism.

K-Pop

One area that is growing more rapidly than any other is 21st century K-pop, or Korean pop music, which spans dance-pop, pop ballads, techno, rock, hip-hop, R&B, and so on. K-pop is a generic term for popular music from South Korea, which was originally called gayo, meaning pop music. Recently, the term “pop,” which originally referred to British and American pop music, has been used to refer to popular music in other countries by adding it to the first letter of the country’s name, like “K-pop” of Korea. For example, popular music in Thailand, Japan, and China is called T-pop, J-pop, and C-pop, respectively. In the same context, Korean pop music is called K-pop.

In the mid-2000s, idol groups such as TVXQ, Kara, Big Bang, Girls’ Generation, and 2NE1 gained explosive popularity in Asia including China, Japan, Taiwan, and Singapore, which consequently triggered global interest in K-pop.

In 2009, the girl group Wonder Girls became the first Korean singers toappear on the Billboard Hot 100 with the English variant of “Nobody.”

In 2012, as Psy’s “Gangnam Style” maintained its ranking as No. 2 on the Billboard Hot 100 for seven consecutive weeks and finally reached three billion views on YouTube, the K-pop craze began to spread around the world in earnest.

The worldwide success of “Gangnam Style” was followed by a surge of K-pop boy group, BTS. BTS topped the Billboard 200 chart in 2019 and won the Top Social Artist award for the third consecutive year at the Billboard Music Awards. This attracted attention from the world, resulting in the global recognition of K-pop as a genre. After landing atop the Billboard 200 chart in February 2020, “Map of the Soul: 7” maintained high rankings for 23 consecutive weeks. BTS has achieved various Guinness World Records titles, including a title for most viewers for a music concert livestream. In August 2020, BTS made history by becoming the first South Korean act to top the Billboard Hot 100 with its first English-language song “Dynamite.”

The influence of K-pop is further expanding. In 2019, Best K-pop, was launched as a new category at the MTV Video Music Awards, an award show presented by the cable channel MTV to honor the best in the music video medium.

K-pop features remarkable feats of idol groups. Among more than 150 idol groups active in South Korea, the representative ones include BTS, BLACKPINK, TWICE, EXO, Red Velvet, SF9, NCT, ITZY, MONSTA X, and more.

K-pop has special value in many areas and not just limited to music. The popularity of K-pop lies in a splendid performance that harmonizes excellent singing skills, stage manners, and flashy dance moves. The songs and choreography of the idol groups for perfect performance are not built in a day or two. They are attributed to years of thorough planning in conjunction with systematic training programs and sweat during their trainee periods.

Active communication with fans also accounts for K-pop’s ever-growing popularity. Idol group members are devoted to real-time communication with their fans from around the world by means of social media, thereby quickly building stronger intimacy and bonds with them.

Fans are contributing to the growth of the singers and, furthermore, K-pop through active fan club activities. Fans do not think of singers as just their stars. Fans who have supported idol groups since their debut or early days watch them grow up to be adults from boys or girls, and feel like they are also growing together. This naturally leads to forming stronger bonds by sharing satisfaction and rewards.

Recently, K-pop has been pursuing diversification. While the idol groups still play a pivotal role, indie pop musicians are constantly active in making their music careers. Collaboration between idol groups and indie musicians has been done to explore genre diversification.

Idol stars such as IU, Sunmi, (G)I-DLE, BTOB, and Seventeen are moving a step forward as singer-songwriters who create songs in person without relying on existing composers or lyricists.

In addition, major entertainment companies are developing and selling products such as idol goods through secondary content based on idol groups, thus maximizing the added value of K-pop. The representative examples include books with graphic lyrics of BTS’s “Butterfly” and BLACKPINK’s AR avatar service. These provide K-pop fans with new joy and value.

TV Dramas

Moving beyond the Hallyu craze South Korean dramas are gaining attention from around the world, recognized as an independent genre called K-dramas.

Korean dramas have been steadily loved around the world after What Is Love made a splash in China in 1997 and Winter Sonata was a big hit in Japan in 2002.

Dae Jang Geum (MBC), an epic TV series about royal cuisine, which aired between 2003 and 2004, was exported to 91 countries around the world including Japan, China, and Turkey. This drama expanded the scope of the Korean Wave into Korean food, fashion, and medicine while drawing global interest in Korean culture.

In 2013, TV dramas such as My Love from the Star and That Winter, the Wind Blows, were loved by international fans, while in 2016, Dokkaebi (Guardian: The Lonely and Great God), Moonlight Drawn by Clouds, and Descendants of the Sun revived the Hallyu craze.

In 2019, Netflix’s first original Korean drama Kingdom successfully gained international traction. The high recognition of its cinematography based on the well-organized script and directing ability naturally led to the production of Kingdom Season 2 and the creation of a new genre called K-zombies. It is interesting that foreign viewers, using their social networking services, freely expressed their appreciation for the architecture and clothing styles of the Joseon dynasty, the background of the drama series. In particular, the growing curiosity about the Korean traditional hat for men called gat contributed to the increase in its sale on the global online shopping website Amazon.com.

As such, Korean dramas, recognized for their topicality and cinematography, have been expanding their fan base abroad in 2020. This is because they have benefited from the over-the-top (OTT) market, which has rapidly grown worldwide because of COVID-19.

Crash Landing on You, which aired in 2020, was premiered in 190 countries through Netflix. This drama is about a romance between a South Korean heiressof chaebol (conglomerate) and a captain in the North Korean Army. It caused a sensation in Asia, including Japan, where it reached the list of the top 10 most popular TV shows on Netflix in Japan for 10 weeks.

Movies

The cinema of South Korea has become a large market in the world, with the increasing global success and globalization of the Korean film industry.

According to the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), the value of the cinema of South Korea in 2018 was USD 1.6 billion out of the global film market of USD 41.1 billion, placing the value of South Korean cinema at the fifth largest in the world following North America, China, Japan, and the United Kingdom.

South Korea ranks first for attendance frequency per capita in the world, and Korean films take 51% of the local box offices.

Korean cinema, the history of which spans 101 years, has been recognized for its cinematic quality at international film festivals, and is currently being introduced widely around the world. Since 1961, when The Coachman became the first Korean film to win the Silver Bear Extraordinary Jury Prize at the Berlin International Film Festival, South Korean films have stood out at the most prestigious film festivals in the world, known as the Big Three: Berlin (Germany), Cannes (France), and Venice (Italy).

Films such as Old Boy, Oasis, Burning, and On the Beach at Night Alone won leading awards in major categories. Famous Korean film directors such as Bong Joon-ho, Im Kwon-taek, Lee Chang-dong, Park Chan-wook, Hong Sang-soo, and Kim Jee-woon are attracting attention in the global film industry.

In 2019, Bong Joon-ho became the first Korean director to win the Palme d’Or at the Cannes Film Festival for his latest film Parasite, which also won four leading awards at the Academy Awards in 2020. This has triggered more global interest in Korean films.

As Parasite took home the most awards at the Oscars 2020, winning four Academy Awards including Best Picture, Directing, International Feature Film, and Writing, world media began earnestly reporting about Korean films. For example, the British newspaper, Guardian, recommended the film The Handmaiden, and Rotten Tomatoes, an American review-aggregation website for film and television, spotlighted Poetry.

Furthermore, South Korea also holds various international film festivals to enhance the status of its films, which serve as a driving force for the further development of the Asian film industry. For instance, the Busan International Film Festival, the largest film festival in South Korea, the Bucheon International Fantastic Film Festival, and the Jeonju International Film Festival attract attention from filmmakers around the world each year with a variety of concepts and programs.

In addition, South Korean films are gaining great popularity through OTT platforms. Specifically, #Alive, a South Korean zombie film released in June 2020, is an example of successful Korean films introduced abroad through OTT media services. It topped the global movie charts in 35 countries two days after its release on Netflix.

Music

Many Korean classical artists are playing a vibrant role in the world of classical music.

In 2015, pianist Cho Sung-jin was the first Korean to win the world’s prestigious International Frederick Chopin Piano Competition in the Polish capital, Warsaw. Pianist Sohn Jeung-beum was the first Korean to win First Prize in the piano category of the 66th ARD International Music Competition in Munich, the largest international classical music competition in Germany.

In addition, Korean singers were placed in the top three spots at the Gian Battista Viotti International Music Competition held in Vercelli, Italy, in 2016, and Korean pianists also swept the top three spots at the Prague Spring International Piano Competition in that year.

South Korea has continued to produce distinguished vocalists, such as Sumi Jo (soprano), Hong Hei-kyung (soprano), Shin Youngok (soprano), Kwangchul Youn (bass), and Samuel Yoon (bass baritone), who are eagerly sought after by classical music lovers in many parts of the world. Regarding instrumental music, Yeol Eum Son (piano), Dong-hyek Lim (piano), Sarah Chang (violin), and Zia Hyunsu Shin (violin) are receiving the spotlight.

Lee Hee-ah, known as a four-fingered pianist, is also widely acclaimed for her great performances and heroic fight against challenging physical conditions. Korea’s first generation of classical pianists includes Han Tong-il and Kun-woo Paik, who fascinated international audiences between the 1950s and the 1970s and still play for their enthusiastic fans.

Chung Myung-whun, a world-renowned pianist, has received more acclaim for his conductorship in recent years. He has conducted some of the world’s most prestigious orchestras, including the Berlin Philharmonic and the London Philharmonic, before going on to serve as the musical director and resident conductor of the Opéra de la Bastille in Paris. In addition, he served as the principal conductor of the Seoul Philharmonic Orchestra and now leads the One Korea Youth Orchestra. He is also widely known in the global music scene as a member of the Chung Trio with his two sisters, violinist Chung Kyung-wha and cellist Chung Myung-wha.

Kim Eun-seon, a world-renowned South Korean conductor, is the next musical director of the San Francisco Opera starting in 2021. This means that she will be the first female director of a major opera house in the United States, inaugurating a new era in the classical music world.

Musical Theater

Korean theatergoers can enjoy a variety of Broadway musicals such as Jekyll & Hyde and Chicago, along with new musicals written and directed by Korean talents, whose creativity is highly regarded on the world stage. Korean musical theatre performers are invigorating a K-musical boom by going on performance tours or giving licensed musical performances in Southeast Asia including Japan, China, and Taiwan. The representative musicals include Finding Mr. Destiny and Laundry(BBALLAE), both of which have been big hits in South Korea.

In recent years, idols have often performed in musicals, providing important opportunities for their foreign fans to take interest in K musicals.

Contemporary Dance and Ballet

The launch of the National Dance Company of Korea in 1962 provided the momentum for the Korean people to become more interested in contemporary dance. The changed environment eventually led to the birth of a great dancer, Sin Cha Hong (or Hong Sin-ja, born in 1943), who is now credited as Korea’s first avant-garde dancer and premier performance artist. She learned to dance from Alwin Nikolais in the United States and worked there until 1990, and then returned to Korea to involve herself in various activities related to contemporary dance.

Today, the Korean National Ballet, the Universal Ballet, and the Seoul Ballet are still actively performing classical ballet at home and abroad. The world-renowned ballerina in South Korea is Kang Sue-jin, who has been the artistic director of the Korean National Ballet. She was the first and youngest Asian ballerina to be a member of the Stuttgart Ballet.

With respect to other successful ballet dancers, Seo Hee joined the ABT Studio Company in 2004 and became a principal dancer at the ABT in 2012. In 2011, Kim Ki-min became the first Asian ballerina to join and become First Soloist at the Mariinsky Ballet, one of the world’s leading ballet troupes.

Park Seon-mee, a student at the Korea National University of Arts, became the first Korean to win the Moscow International Ballet Competition, one of the three major ballet competitions in the world, in June 2017.

Park Se-eun is the first Korean ballerina to serve as a principal dancer (Premier Danseur) at the Paris Opera Ballet. She was proudly chosen in a list of the world’s top ballerinas after being named best female dancer at the Benois de la Danse in 2018, which is considered the equivalent of the Oscars for ballet dancers.

Contemporary Art

It seems that Korean contemporary art is becoming more and more recognized as Korean artists have steadily achieved meaningful results on the global stage.

Korean-born video artist Nam June Paik, who passed away in 2006, is considered the father of contemporary video art. Dansaekhwa masters Lee Ufan, Ha Chong-hyun, and Park Seo-bo are attracting attention from major collectors around the world. Park Seo-bo’s Ecriture series of paintings were successfully exhibited at the Guggenheim Museum in New York in 2020.

Yang Hye-kyu is a world-renowned contemporary artist who works in Seoul and Berlin and whose practice spans a wide range of media from paper collage to performative sculpture and large-scale multi-sensorial installation. She ranked 36th in the 2019 Power 100 List announced by ArtReview, the world’s leading international contemporary art magazine in the United Kingdom. Currently, she has been actively engaged in her solo exhibitions in the US, Canada, the UK, and other countries.

Works of prominent contemporary artists can be enjoyed in Insa-dong and Samcheongdong in Seoul, where many art galleries are located, such as Insaart Center, Gongpyeong Art, and the Kyung-in Museum of Fine Art. Recently, more art galleries have been opening in Cheongdam-dong and Hannam-dong in Seoul.

Various contemporary art festivals are held in South Korea. Among wellknown art festivals is the Gwangju Biennale, a contemporary art biennale, which was first held in 1995.

Contemporary Literature

In recent years, Korean literature, especially including Korean novels, has been recognized in the international literary world for its potential for global themes.

This change was made possible because of the achievements made by writer Shin Kyung-sook in 2011 and writer Han Kang in 2016.

Han Kang’s novel entitled The Vegetarian won the 2016 Man Booker International Prize, which is regarded as one of the world’s three most prestigious literary awards. Her other book Human Acts also won the 2017 Malaparte Prize, Italy’s authoritative literary award.

As for Shin Kyung-sook, the English-translated version of her novel entitled Please Look After Mom entered the top 10 in the Amazon best-sellers rank upon its release in the United States. Subsequently, this book was promptly translated and published in about 30 countries in Asia (including Japan) and Europe, and in Australia.

Thanks to these splendid feats, the number of Korean literature works published overseas has increased significantly every year: 69 in 2017, 74 in 2018,and 91 in 2019.

The popularity of Korean literature can be analyzed in many aspects. Most of all, the narrative style that dissolves global social issues into the characters’ personal history can be seen to resonate with the readers. A representative example is Kim Ji-young Born 1982, a fiction novel by Cho Nam-joo, which is labeled a feminist novel. Along with the exportation of the copyright to 18 countries, 80,000 copies were sold in just two months after its release in Japan in 2018, becoming the best-seller in the Asian literature category except for Japan and China. Thanks to the popularity of the novel, its movie adaptation was released in South Korea with the same title.

In addition, a variety of works by different Korean artists, ranging from senior artists such as Park Wan-suh and Hwang Sok-yong to young artists such as Chang Kang-myoung and Jung Eun-young, are being vigorously introduced overseas.

Korean Cuisine and Culinary Customs

The Korean Wave is expanding into other cultural areas such as food and culinary traditions. Restaurants serving traditional Korean dishes began to open in the world’s largest metropolises such as New York, London, and Paris, attracting praise even from the choosiest gourmets. Kimchi, bulgogi, bibimbap, and other dishes loved by Korean people through many generations are now beginning to appear in homes around the world.

Chefs in some restaurants in the United States have combined traditional Korean dishes with Western traditions, creating the bibimbap burger, kimchi hotdog, and gochujang steak for New Yorkers.

Interestingly, Korean cuisine is recognized as a well-being diet, not just out of curiosity, but in line with the global trend in preferring healthy food. Korean cuisine consists of a properly balanced diet of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats and ensures a sufficient intake of vitamins and minerals through vegetable side dishes. In recognition of these merits, the World Health Organization (WHO) selected Korean cuisine as a nutritionally well-balanced model in 2004. USA Today, a US general-interest newspaper, selected kimchi, along with Vietnamese rice noodles and cabbage, in its prediction of most popular foods in 2020.

While Koreans and other Asians largely visited Korean restaurants in the past, locals now account for more than half of the customers at Korean restaurants. A survey reported that bibimbap and bulgogi are the most popular dishes in Korean restaurants in Paris, and bibimbap, in particular, is further recognized as a vegetable-oriented well-being food.

Recently, more people have tried to make their own Korean dishes by following the recipes on Korean cooking channels on YouTube.