Match Preview: Jack McGraghan

Gateshead play host to Hartlepool United for the first time since Boxing Day 2018 when Pools visit Gateshead International Stadium on Tuesday, March 26 (7:45pm kick off).

The Heed boosted their play-off bid by coming from behind twice to secure a 3-2 win at Altrincham last weekend, lifting them to sixth in the Vanarama National League table in the process.

A second successive win on home soil tonight would take Rob Elliot’s side to 66 points, which would be enough to move them up to fourth should other results go in their favour.

Hartlepool United, meanwhile, were denied three points on the road by a late Chris Maguire penalty at Eastleigh, leaving Kevin Phillips’ men 14th and five points above the bottom four ahead of kick off.

Pools are winless in their last four National League games following Saturday’s draw, with their last victory coming at home to Altrincham on February 20 at the end of a run which had seen them win four from five.

Marcus Dinanga moved to 20 league goals for the season with his strike at Altrincham on Saturday, while Hartlepool forward Mani Dieseruvwe sits one behind him on 19 for the current campaign.

Heed View

“These are the games you want to be in,” said Rob Elliot.

“Local derby, or as local as you can get for us, and I think hopefully it will be a good advert for non-league football.

“It’s a different game to the one at the start of the season, but we’re on good momentum now and we just need to make sure we stick to our principles.”

Opposition View

“We’ve got a quick turnaround to go to Gateshead,” said Kevin Phillips following Hartlepool’s 1-1 draw at Eastleigh.

“Some really positive stuff today, and if we could have just held on, or we hadn’t had the decision go against us we’d have come away with a 1-0 win.”

Team News

Eddie Beach misses out on tonight’s game due to being on international duty with Wales U21s.

Live Streaming

Supporters can watch our fixture live from Gateshead International Stadium via National League TV for £9.50 per match pass.

Live Commentary

Live commentary will be provided by the Heed Army Podcast, beginning from 7:30pm, as well as via BBC Radio Newcastle.

Supporter Information

Tickets can be purchased online or on the gate at Gateshead International Stadium, with admission priced at:

Adult: £20

Concession (65+, Blue Light, Armed Services or Veteran): £15

Young Adult (17-21): £10

Youth (15-16): £5

14 & Under: Free (must be accompanied by a paying adult)

Turnstiles will open to all supporters at 6:30pm.

Segregation will be in place, with Hartlepool United supporters seated in the East Stand.

Home supporters can purchase tickets online here, or on the gate via cash or card.

Hartlepool United supporters can purchase tickets online here, or on the gate via cash or card.

Tickets purchased online are not posted to supporters and must be either printed at home or shown via smartphone upon entry.

Full supporter information can be found here.

Match Report: Will Brown

Gateshead put Hartlepool United to the sword with a scintillating six-goal second half display to earn a 7-1 win at Gateshead International Stadium.

Joe Grey gave Hartlepool the lead in the seventh minute when he confidently dispatched a chance from a tight angle.

Luke Hannant soon brought the heated match back to a deadlock in the 28th minute when he fired his penalty hard and low into the bottom tight corner.

A loose ball in the box was stuck sweetly across goal by Kieron Evans to give the Tynesiders the advantage in the 47th minute.

Hannant’s inch-perfect cross found an unmarked Dajaune Brown in the box for the Heeds third of the game in the 54th minute.

A floated cross into the box managed to go past several bodies before Regan Booty struck the ball into the bottom right corner in the 60th minute.

Brown found his second of the game in the 70th minute when he dinked the ball over Pete Jameson.

Ed Francis played another majestic path in the 73rd minute – this time it was Callum Whelan who chipped the ball past Jameson.

Tom Allan managed to flick the ball towards goal which deflected off Courtney Duffus en route to goal in the 90th minute.

Rob Elliot made three changes to the starting XI that defeated Altrincham 2-3 on Saturday. Kain Adom and Booty were reintroduced into the starting XI – while Louis Storey slotted in defence following Mamadou Jobe being recalled by Cambridge United.

A long ball from the defence found Grey one-on-one with Nathan Harness. Grey found Dieseruvewe with a squared pass with the target man’s eventual shot being blocked – before Grey slotted home the rebound of his across-goal attempt.

Francis’ whipped free-kick from just outside the box beat Pete Jameson as it rattled the bar before Callum Whelan put the ball in the back of the net with his headed attempt in the 13th minute. However, Whelan’s goal was ruled out for being offside to the uproar of the Heed faithful.

Robbie Tinkler’s through-ball to Brown saw the attacker being brought down in the box and a penalty being awarded to the Tynesiders. Hannant fired the ball into the bottom-right corner with Jameson at full stretch.

Tom Parkes failed to clear the ball in his own box which allowed Evans to strike a perfect ball into the far corner to give the the Heed the advantage.

Hannant managed to beat his man before he delivered a curled cross in the path of Brown who headed home.

A deep ball into the box failed to be cleared by the Hartlepool defence which allowed Booty to show precision – as he volleyed the ball into the bottom corner.

Ed Francis looked up to pick out Brown who made a darting run into the box before he looped the ball over the Pools’ goalkeeper.

A familiar ball from Francis then played in Whelan who produced a nonchalant finish to score.

A corner was played into the box by Greg Olley – who found Allan to guide the ball past Jameson.

Gateshead: Harness, Tinkler, Richardson, Storey, Francis, Booty, Whelan (Worman, 78’), Evans (Olley, 67’), Hannant, Adom (Allan), Brown

Subs: Dinanga, Grayson

Goals: Hannant (27’), Evans (47’), Brown (53’, 70’), Booty (60’), Whelan (73’), Allan (90’)

Hartlepool United: Jameson, Ferguson, Grey, Dieseruvwe, Crawford, Onariase (Duffus, 74’), Agyemang, Parkes, Oduroh (Cooke, 58’), Featherstone, Waterfall

Subs: Dixon, Stephenson, Cooper

Goals: Grey (7’)

Attendance: 2,685 (1,313 away)