Hartlepool United celebrated its 113th birthday this week, and to mark the occasion, tributes have poured in for those who have kept the club afloat over the years.

Through the decades it's the 'Never Say Die' spirit which has kept Pools alive, but sadly, not everyone who's contributed to the resilience of the club is still around to celebrate the special anniversary.

Paul 'Goffy' Gough from BBC Radio Tees used the occasion to pay tribute to those tragically lost through the horror period of coronavirus.

He fondly remembered the contributions made by players Ernie Phythian, Ronnie Hold, John Rowlands and Eric Tunstall, and referee Tommy Harvey on his show this weekend, just before Hartlepool triumphed in their play-off game against Bromley.

'Goffy' celebrated the life of Ernie Phythian, one part of the "club's best ever strike partnerships", who sadly passed away in August of last year aged 78.

Ernie and Jimmy Mulvaney flourished under the guidance of Brian Clough and Peter Taylor when they arrived at Clarence Road in October 1965, with Ernie notching a very impressive 51 goals in 124 games after arriving at the club.

He was part of the history making 1967/68 squad that went on to win promotion for the first time, and later went on to pursue his sporting career in South Africa.

Returning to the ground during the Chris Turner era, Ernie told Goffy about how much he loved the spell of the place and the partnership he shared with Jimmy Mulvaney.

He said: "We just knew each other’s games and once you have that with a strike partner you really are in business.

"The fans were brilliant too: it was financially very tough for the club but the fans had a really special connection and that unique bond got them through some really difficult times.

"I was in South Africa when the club gained promotion in 1968 and I was so thrilled for the fans as they were super special to myself and the team of that mid 60s period."

Hartlepool born Ronnie Hold was another to tragically pass during the hugely difficult Covid period, who Goffy described as "a strong centre forward" that played for HUFC in the Cloughie / Gus McLean period during the 1960s.

It was an era when many young players were recruited locally such as John McGovern, Eric Tunstall, Peter Blowman, and Andy McCluskey.

Ronnie’s only game was in the FA Cup game at Victoria Park on November 16 1968 with a crowd of over 6,500 – but he would go onto play local football for many sides.

Goffy continued: "His whole hearted approach and great attitude made him a hugely popular member of the squad during that first season in Division Three.

"Later, he was often seen ( minus his few front teeth) on Grayfields and on the Rec at Rift House on a Saturday afternoon and Sunday morning. St Joseph’s, Old Boys, Touchdown and Throston were amongst his teams.

"Not only was Ronnie Hold a cracking footballer he was a fantastic husband, father, father-in-law and grandad, as well as a much loved member of the Hartlepool Bowling Club just opposite the ground."

Another missed member of the Pools family is John Rowlands, who was signed by Ken Hale in 1975 and played as both centre forward and centre half in the blue & white.

His career at Pools lasted until 1977 playing 49 games and scoring 10 goals. John was aged 73 when he died on 13th April 2020 in Holyhead, Wales.

Goffy remembered how he: "played his football all around the world and his heading ability was of the very highest order."

Hartlepool referee Tommy Harvey was another to pass during the coronavirus period, he died on Good Friday 2020, aged 86.

Tommy had given over 50 years of total dedication developing grass roots football, and he was often at the ground when he was not out in the middle refereeing games elsewhere.

Goffy explained: "He had the the blue and white of the town running through his veins, and was responsible for encouraging lots to take up refereeing in this area .

"One of his many roles was as Chairman of the Durham County FA Referees Committee for many years and was instrumental in plenty of new initiatives.

"Tommy also played a major part in setting up and promoting girls’ football here in our region.

"He was always a real life joy to meet in town and his knowledge of the game was of the very highest order.

"He helped HUFC in many ways – waiving his refereeing fees for games and helping the club with his endless book of contacts down the decades."

Goffy also mentioned Eric Tunstall, a "great local player" from the 60s, who "sadly left us pre-Covid in January 2020, aged 69."

Newcastle United Manager Joe Harvey was so impressed watching Eric play for Pools youths – that he paid HUFC £3,000 for him after the game at St James' Park.

According to Goffy, Eric’s funeral at St Oswald's Church in the town was a "lovely tribute to his life and memories of playing football for Reeds Cases (where he worked) after his professional career ended."