HARRIS, Wallis J.B (Wally)

November 23, 1935 to April 17, 2024

It is with great sadness and heavy hearts that we announce the passing of Wallis (Wally) Harris.

Wally passed away peacefully Wednesday, April 17, 2024, in the Lakeshore General Hospital following a short illness, and with his nephews Rick (Louise), Jim (Susan) and loving companion and friend Agnes Dickson by his side.

Wally was the husband of his late loving wife Dorothy (nee Robson) of 63 years. A brother to late Bobby, Leslie, Charlie and the late sisters Donny and Beverly. Wally will be dearly missed by his close nephews, nieces, godchildren, and cherished friends.

Wally was born in Lachine, Quebec on November 23, 1935, to Ida and Dave Harris (deceased). He spent most of his youth growing up in Lachine and later years in the west island of Montreal, Toronto, Mont Tremblant and Sarasota Florida where he met many life long friends. Wally kept all his friends close to his heart.

He played junior hockey for 6 years with the Lachine Maroons and has his picture hanging in the Lachine Arena Hall of Fame. Then in 1963 he joined the QAHA and signed a contract with the NHL under Carl Voss. His Officiating career record and stats are impressive to say the least. From 1966 through 1983 Wally refereed 943 regular season games, 85 playoff games and 6 Stanley Cup finals. He later became the first NHL Director of Officials and then on to Supervisor of Officials for over 1500 games. Wally refereed one of hockey's greatest games ever played. Montreal Canadiens vs CSKA MOSKVA (Russia) 3-3 tie. He was the first NHL referee to referee the Spengler Cup over 3 years. Wally's career and accomplishments within the NHL are known by many. He respected the profession he chose and especially the players and colleagues he interacted with. He was not one to promote himself and he held his NHL career close to his heart until the day he passed.

He contributed to many causes. He was President of the Club de Ski 100 from 2008 to 2011. Karnak Shriners Ambassador to the Children's Hospital Fundraiser, he was instrumental in raising over $300,000 for the Mont-Tremblant Rotary Club (2004-2011) and is a lifelong ambassador for hockey (locally and internationally).

Wally was also very instrumental in helping younger kids to get involved in sports. Whenever he came across a young kid playing any sport out on the streets or in a park his first reaction was to initiate a friendly and often a very jovial conversation with them. He loved to be around children and them around him. Theirs and his laughter would carry to anyone nearby.

Wally ways put family first. He was always willing to help when the need arose. Always available to mentor or guide anyone. Always there!

He cherished his close friends and through the years has experienced the loss of several very close buddies.

Wherever you go from here Wally you will be received with open arms and hearts. There are many waiting for you. Safe travels dear Wally. You will be missed more than you could ever imagine. Your humor and love of life will be dearly missed by many. But our memories will live forever in our hearts.

Special thanks to the Doctors, Nurses, and Staff of the Lakeshore General Hospital.

Visitation will be held on Saturday May 18, 2024 from 2:00 to 4:00, followed by light food and beverage from 4 to 6 at Rideau at Memorial Gardens, 4239 Sources Blvd. DDO. All will of course be welcome to share special memories of our uncle, your friend, Wally Harris.

In lieu of flowers, donations can be made to the Canadian Heart & Stroke Foundation or the Canadian Cancer Society.