Adopt-A-Beach - SF - Marin

California Coastal Commission.

Alliance for Technology Access - San Rafael

Providing access to empowering technology for children and adults with disabilities.

Antique Automobile Club - San Rafael

Golden Gate Region / Local old car hobbyist group.

Alliance for Technology Access - San Rafael

Technology for children & adults with disabilities.

Asthma Education & Resource Council of Marin - Mill Valley

Educational talks, information, referral, resources.

Audubon Canyon Ranch - Stinson Beach

Wildflife sanctuarie of Great Blue Herons, Great Egrets, and Snowy Egrets.

Autodesk Foundation- San Rafael

Non-profit, K-12 Education

Bay Area Volunteer Information Center- San Rafael

Volunteer information, workshops, youth volunteers.

Big Brothers Big Sisters of Marin - San Rafael

Matching children, one to one, with adults who serve as friends and mentors

Boy Scouts of America , Marin Council - San Rafael

-Troop 84, Boy Scouts of America - San Rafael

Lucas Valley

-Troop 15, Boy Scouts of America - San Anselmo

Buck Center for Research in Aging - Novato

Non-profit research organization.

CAFE - California Artists for Education - San Rafael

Teaches collaboration, creative prob. solving, self conf., workshops in schools/commn.orgs.

Citizens for a Safe Golden Gate Bridge - San Anselmo

Traffic Barrier information

Eichler Network - SF - Marin

Preservation of Eichler homes.

Environmental Action Committee of West Marin - Point Reyes Station

Since 1971, protecting West Marin's land, air, and waters

Environmental Forum of Marin - Larkspur

Dedicated to preserving the quality of our environment through education.

The Environmental Health Network (EHN) - Larkspur

Support and advocacy on behalf of those chemically injured.

Falkirk Cultural Center - San Rafael

A Place of History, a Home for the Arts

Friends of Corte Madera Creek Watershed - Corte Madera

Protect, Enhance, and Restore the Bio., Chem., and Physical Resources of the C. M. Creek

George Lucas Educational Foundation - Nacasio

Charitable org. helping schools.

Golden Gate Computer Society - Marin

Making computer technology accessible to everyone.

Golden Gate Raptor Observatory - SF - Marin

Volunteers dedicated to the study of Golden Gate Hawk flight.

Green Party - Marin

List of events & Groups

Guide Dogs for the Blind, Inc. - San Rafael

Supporting guide dog breeding / training, info on becoming a trainer, interacting with the blind.

Headlands Institute - Sausalito

Outdoor education and conference facility

Historical Societies - Marin

See this page.

Human Concerns Center of Marin - San Rafael

Ritter House - Helping people with disabilities, homeless, low income.

Humane Farming Association - San Rafael

Dedicated to the protection of farm animals.

Intuition Network - San Rafael

Non profit org., sponsors conferences,publications & research about all aspects of intuition.

Kiwanis Club International - San Rafael

Dedicated to promoting & fostering youth & community services.

Kule Loklo - Olema

Coast Miwok Indian village in Point Reyes Seashore

Learning Center - Marin

Training, counseling, team building to business & health care communities.

Local Control - San Anselmo

The journal of planning and preservation in Marin.

Lifehouse - San Rafael

Serving people with developmental disabilities

Macs of Marin (MOM)- San Rafael

Org. dedicated to the education & enhancement of Mac users in our community.

Marin Aids Project - San Rafael

Prevention & education, client services, volunteer services.

Marin Agricultural Land Trust- Point Reyes Station

Preserving farmland in Marin County.

Marin Alano Club - San Rafael

Provides a clean and safe environment for recovering alcoholics & support.

Marin Amateur Radio Club - San Rafael- Marin

Clubs - Amateur Radio

Marin Breast Cancer Commitee - Kentfield

A volunteer organization comprised of breast cancer survivors and friends.

Marin Center for Independent Living - San Rafael

Assist persons w/ disabling conditions,achieving their max. level of sustainable independence.

Marin Community Food Bank - Novato

Providing food for those in need.

Marin Community Foundation Buck Trust - Larkspur

Charity which administers private funds for public purposes.

Marin Community Foundation Disability Resources Online -

Connecting Marin residents with most helpful web sites related to disability.

Marin Conservation League - San Rafael

Caring for Marin's environment.

Marin Divorce Resources- Marin

Resources & support for couples / families who are separated and divorcing.

Marin Nexus - San Rafael

Nonprofit Resources & Volunteer Connections

The Marin Human Society- Novato

Animal shelter & services.

Marin Learning Center - Marin City

Therapeutic, development program for low-income children.

Marin Literacy Program- San Rafael, Olema

Literacy instruction.

Marin non-profits organizations & services- Marin

An index of listings.

Marin Recovery- Marin

Social gathering for fellow sufferers.

Marin Rose Society- Marin

To promote the culture, interest & appreciation of roses of all kinds.

Marine Mammal Center - Marin

Helping with the survival & habitat of marine mammals.

Meals of Marin - San Rafael

Nouishment, comfort, hope, dignity for homebound people with Aids.

Mill Valley Masonic Lodge No. 356 - Mill Valley

Fraternal Organization

Mill Valley StreamKeepers - Milll Valley

To protect the ecological health of Mill Valley's waterways.

Mountain Bike Roots-Woodacre

Photographs and information about the early days of mountain bikiing

Narcotics Anonymous - Marin

NA Meetings in Marin County

Native Sons of the Golden West, Fairfax Parlor* - Fairfax

Community projects, social events, operates the Canon Swim & Tennis Club in Fairfax.

North Bay Chapter Trout Unlimited - Corte Madera

Helping to restore Coho and Steelhead to Marin and Sonoma.

North Bay Council - Novato

A research & public policy organization representing employers in the north bay.

North Bay Ecumenical Homes - Novato

Non-profit housing development org. Create homes for low-moderate income.

North Bay Multimedia Association - San Rafael

Fostering the growth of the on-line & interactive multimedia industry.

Novato Business Education Roundtable - Novato

Strives to build a strong partnership between business & education.

Novato Mothers Club - Novato

200+ member support and education club whose goal is to enrich families.

Novato Online- Novato

Novato Chamber of Commerce, uniting business and professional firms.

The Osher Marin JJC - San Rafael

Osher Marin Jewish community center, health & wellness, performing arts, education.

The Recovery Station- San Rafael

Preventing alcohol and drug addiction

Permaculture Institute of Northern California - Point Reyes

The conscious design & maintenance of cultivated ecosystems.

Persian Cat Rescue - Mill Valley

Uniting people with Persians.

Rotary Clubs of Marin County - San Rafael

District #5150 - club listings

Rotary Club of Marin Evening - San Rafael

District #5150

San Francisco Bay Oceanic Crew Group - SF - Marin

Non profit servicing environmental groups through boating activities.

San Geronimo Valley Cultural Center - San Geronimo

TThe Cultural Center offers arts, human services and community programs.

Senior Access - San Rafael

Programs for people with dementia; caregiver support.

Single Cyclists - Kentfield

The Bay areas only bicycling club especially for singles.

Sustainable Fairfax - Fairfax

Pioneer sustainability, legacy of educating the town council, supporting the community.

The Slant - Marin

Marin County's ten year old newspaper for the Gay, Lesbian & Bisexual Community.

Softech North Bay Software & Info. Technology Asso.- Novato

Promoting Software & Information Technology Industries in the North Bay

Sonoma - Marin Irish Network -Sonoma - Marin

Site for local Irish events

Southern Marin Mothers' Club - Marin

Mothers Club, Non profit support group

Spectrum Center for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Concerns - San Anselmo

Marin LGBT community center

St. Vincent de Paul Society- Marin

Free dinning hall & help locations

The Holocaust Album - Greenbrae

A collection of historical & contemporary photographs.

Tiburon Laboratory for Fisheries Research - Tiburon

Research on the Pacific Coast Groundfish & Salmon.

Trips for Kids - San Rafael

Non- profit volunteer org. that provides mountain biking outings for low income youth.

Trust and Triumph - San Rafael

A safe environment for anyone seeking help from alcohol or substance abuse.

Volunteer Center of Marin - San Rafael

Volunteer opportunities

West Marin Senior Services - Point Reyes Station

Provides in-home supportive services to the rural elderly, 60 and over

Wildcare - San Rafael

Terwilliger Nature Education and Wildlife Rehabilitation.

Return to top

Also see Recreation for more Clubs

Also see Museums

Click to visit The Marin Town & Country Club / Fairfax History