Schools should fight spraying

Congratulations to both the San Francisco and Berkeley school boards for passing a resolution opposing the planned aerial pesticide spraying over their cities and over their schools to eradicate the light brown apple moth.

My question is directed to the Marin Board of Education: Why it is not taking a stand against the spraying? Do the trustees not realize that any effort they put into stopping the spraying will save them the burden and expense of having to protect the children and their facilities if it happens?

Diane Hoffman, Fairfax

Mill Valley has its senses

No doubt Amy Hope Davis’ May 31 letter will result in a change the way tickets for mixed-sex couples are picked up at the next Tamalpais High School reunion.

No, Mill Valley hasn’t lost its senses despite such an oversight. As to surprising changes, I have seen a lot of them in my 75 years.

When I was a boy, Memorial Day was called Decoration Day. It occurred on May 30. We gathered flowers from our gardens and drove out to the local cemeteries and placed the flowers on the graves of those brave young men who gave their lives so you and your significant other can live the way you desire.

Yes, there were service women who did a great deal to win that war, but by far, the brave soldier citizens who gave their lives and who we honor on Memorial Day were men.

Regarding the current wars, most Mill Valley taxpayers would agree with you.

Tam school still reflects this wonderful community. Amy Hope Davis can criticize Tamalpais High School, Mill Valley and Marin County about a lot of things, but one thing we are not is intolerant.

To prove that fact, the IJ gave her letter a lot of space.

Don Dickey, Mill Valley

Helping neighbors in need

Thank your for your recent articles, “Desperate Times” and “For foundation, a broad view on helping needy,” which described the recent effects of our economy’s downturn on Marin’s struggling citizens.

It’s important to clarify two key points about funding sources for people facing economic crisis in Marin.

First, the Marin Community Foundation has never provided any operating support for the St. Vincent de Paul Society of Marin, despite the fact that we serve the very population that Beryl Buck named in her bequest.

Second, while our Homeless Help Desk is funded by the groups named in the article, our Free Dining Room and other programs have received funding from, among others, Autodesk, Fireman’s Fund, Crescent Porter Hale Foundation, San Francisco Foundation, Mill Valley Outdoor Art Club, Headlands Foundation, Bill Graham Foundation, the Order of Malta and dozens of faith- based groups of every kind.

Most importantly, we’re funded by thousands of generous Marin residents who see value in helping a neighbor in need. While our community foundation may not consider the daily struggle of Marin’s elderly, our mentally ill, our physically disabled, our poorest children, or our struggling veterans as their “mission,” we certainly appreciate all Marin’s residents who support us and the other agencies who consider food, shelter and clothing a human right in this county, and the first, and most important, step to a better life.

Christine Paquette, Mill Valley, Director of Development, St. Vincent de Paul Society of Marin County