Marco Ferreri, the Italian director whose “La Grande Bouffe” (“The Big Feast”) opened at the Little Carnegie yesterday, is best known here for three films: “The Con jugal Bed” (1963), in which an eager 40‐year‐old bride groom becomes a fatality, the victim of his lusty young wife's sexual appetites; “The Ape Woman” (1964), about a wretched lady covered with hair like a sheepdog's fur, and “The Man With the Bal loons,” about a fellow who is so obsessed with finding out how much air a balloon con tains that he goes crazy and commits suicide.

These comedies now turn out to have been only warm ups for “La Grande Bouffe,” which so infuriated a number of Italians at this year's Cannes Film Festival that they insisted that Ferreri was not really Italian but French, which is the nationality of the film. It also fascinated a number of other people who weren't turned off by the spectacle of vomit and excrement. At the end of the festival the film was awarded the International Critics' Prize.

“La Grande Bouffe” is about four charming, middle aged men who meet in a villa near Paris to spend a gourmet weakend to end all gourmet weekends. They are Marcello (Marcello Mastro ianni), an airline pilot; Ugo (Ugo Tognazzi), a grand chef de cuisine; Michel (Michel Piccoli), a television produc er, and Philippe (Philippe Noiret), a judge.

Early in their extraordinary revels they are joined by three pretty whores—who become quickly bored by all the eating and leave—and by a lovely, plump school teach er named Andrea (Andrea Ferreol), who stays on to eat and eat and eat, and to tend each man in his time. It soon becomes evident— although it's never stated ex plicitly—that the four men have joined in a suicide pact: they have decided to dine themselves to death.

“La Grande Bouffe” is not a successful film—it allows for too much pretentious, doomy interpretation, But If you can stand its almost childlike fascination with bodily functions and, toward the end, malfunctions), and the sight of food being eaten, slurped, sucked and stuffed, it is sometimes very funny in the robust bad taste of a joke about a flatulent bishop.

The Cast

??

I say this perfectly aware that a lot of people will find “La Grande Bouffe” as dis gusting as it sounds, and that there will be others who in sist on seeing it as a solemn metaphor about the collec tive suicide of the bourgeoisie. Metaphors are an unfortu nate Ferrer) hangup. One of the four pactees in “La Grande Bouffe” meets his end slurping a pink gelatin dessert, sitting under a tree that once was a resting spot for Nicholas Boileau, the 17th‐century poet and critic who advised prudence, mod eration and common sense in all things.

•

If “La Grande Bouffe” were no more than a meta phor, or if it was meant as serious contemplation of world's end, it would be in tolerable; one of the most de cadent films ever made.

It does, however, have surface life of its own. It is vulgar vaudeville on an epic scale, beautifully performed by four of Europe's finest comic actors, as well as by Miss Ferreol, who shares her hosts' obsession with the food which, from time to time, is either equated with sex or confused with it.

Ferreri's preoccupation with the grotesque eventual ly grows tiresome. In the au dience latent ulcers stir, But much of the time “La. Grande Bouffe” works as a guilt ridden fantasy of horren dously comic proportions. Its most weighty statement: “I ate too much.”