Robert Eugene White, Sr., 89, of Covington passed away on April 18, 2024 surrounded by his family. He was born March 30, 1935 in Washington, Indiana to the late Henry and Olive White. He graduated from Washington High School with the Class of 1954.

Robert served 8 years with the United States National Guard. Robert was a member of the Clarity Mason Lodge #30 for over 64 years. He was also a member of the Eastern Star and the NRA. He looked forward to obtaining new guns for his gun collection with the hope of someday passing them along to his grandchildren, which he proudly did this past year. Robert worked at several locations throughout his career as a Project Engineer, but eventually retired in 1997 from Heatcraft Refrigeration Products in Danville.

In his spare time, Robert loved flying. He owned 3 planes and took his first solo flight in 1960. He and Ireta looked forward to traveling when the opportunity arose. He loved spending time outdoors, particularly if it included fishing. Above all else, Robert loved spending time with his family.

Robert married Shirley Baker Lanza and together they had 3 children. He then married Kim Anson White, who preceded him in 1995. Following Kim's passing he met Ireta and the two were married in January of 1997. With this union, Robert gained 2 more sons and a daughter.

He is survived by his wife Ireta White; children Robert E. (Sheila) White, Jr., Debra D. Joyce, Lori L. (Scot) Brewer, Scott (Charlene) Woodard, and Michael (Tracey) Woodard; and his grandchildren Jason Joyce, JR Joyce, Gavin Lett, Devin (Tia) Lett, Robert White III, Jodi White, Rickie Reese, Mickie Reese, and Codie (Linley) Brewer. He also leaves behind his great-grandchildren William Joyce, Riley Joyce, Ethan White, McKenzie White, Braylon Reese, and Granger Brewer; special friends Scott Kerestes and George Camarata; and his beloved cat Lucy.

In addition to his parents, Robert is preceded in death by his second wife Kim White; stepdaughter Christy Hari; son-in-law David Joyce; and sisters Virginia Dillon, Reba Timmel, Anna Stoll, and Ruby Chickedantz.

A visitation will be held on Monday, April 22, 2024 from 4- 8 pm EST at Sunset's Funeral Home's Covington Chapel, located 420 3rd Street in Covington. Masonic services following the visitation on Monday at 8 pm. A funeral service will be held the following day on Tuesday, April 23, 2024 at 11 am EST, also at the funeral home. He will be laid to rest at Sugarland Memorial Gardens in Washington, Indiana next to Kim. Online condolences and fond memories can be shared with his family at www.sunsetfuneralhome.com