Terry Bowden was born into a football family. And he has enjoyed every minute of it.

Akron's coach, who leads the Zips (7-5) into the MAC championship against Toledo (10-2) at noon Saturday (ESPN) at Ford Field, grew up with a legendary father, Bobby Bowden, who won the national championship at Florida State in 1993 and 1999.

"We were fortunate our father went through this business for, gosh, 40-something years as a head football coach," Terry said on Friday. "My dad became a head coach in 1955, the year before I was born. All of us loved the business he was in. We got to be part of his programs as young children. It's a special opportunity."

Terry, who led Auburn from 1993-98, took over a struggling Akron program in December 2011.His brother, Tommy, was a former coach at Clemson, and brother, Jeff, is Terry's special teams coordinator.

Coming off consecutive 1-11 finishes before Bowden arrived, Akron went 1-11, including 0-8 in the MAC, in 2012. From there, Bowden built his program, collecting five wins each of the next two seasons. In 2015, the Zips were 8-5, capping their season by winning the Famous Idaho Potato Bowl.

"This program has been more special than some I've been at," Bowden said. "We've been able to get things turned around. We had a culture of losing. We had to start from scratch."

Ending up in the MAC title game this season was a surprise, considering the Zips were picked to finish fourth in the East Division. Toledo, on the other hand, was picked to win the West. Akron is seeking its second MAC title and first since 2005, while the Rockets last won the championship in 2004.

"I'm proud of these seniors, getting us to this game," Bowden said. "Toledo is ... right where they're supposed to be. We feel like we've earned it."

Although the Rockets beat Akron, 48-21, at Toledo on Oct. 21, both teams expect a closer outcome this time around.

"That game has no bearing on what's going to happen (Saturday)," said Toledo quarterback Logan Woodside, this year's MAC offensive player of the year. "It's two totally different teams now. We know they're going to be ready to go."

Regardless of the final results, Bowden has earned the respect of his players.

"Coming in as a freshman, it was like a family atmosphere," said linebacker Ulysees Gilbert III. "I'm honored to play for a Bowden."

Two more years

The MAC announced on Friday a two-year contract extension to keep the championship in Detroit through 2021.

"We are pleased to extend our relationship with Ford Field for another two years," MAC commissioner Jon Steinbrecher said. "Ford Field and the City of Detroit have been outstanding hosts for our football championship game. The facility is among the best in the country."

Bowden echoed those sentiments.

"I love Detroit," he said. "We've come here for our MAC meeting so many years and they're so (good) to us. We're looking forward to playing at the stadium."