The main characters aren't the only ones that have a lot of speech. In fact, there's a great deal of voiceovers in Star Wars: Starfighter for secondary characters that aren't even important enough to have a name. These include pirates, mercenaries, bravo team members, and even the evil Trade Federation.

Freighter Captain / Bravo 12 / Droid -- Rob Paulsen

Rob Paulsen is a seasoned voice actor that has been credited for more than 80 different roles since 1983. For LucasArts he did the voiceovers for Castaneda and Judge Kahuna in Escape from Monkey Island.

Some other videogame appearances for Rob include Baldur's Gate (Chanter/Kivan/Prism/Telmen/Vo), Baldur's Gate II, Planescape: Torment (Morte), Animaniacs Splat Ball (Yakko & Dr. Scratchandsniff), and Clayfighter 63 1/3 (Bonker).

Rob is also the man behind the voices for Air Raid, Chase, Slingshot in the 1984 television series Transformers. Some other notable movie and television credits include appearances in G.I. Joe (Tripwire/Snow Job), Johnny Quest (Hadji), Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (Raphael, Zack, Mr. Ogg, Hi-Tech), Goof Troop (PJ), and The Powerpuff Girls.

"Bravo 12 on your..." (62 KB)

"If we don't take out that gate..." (123 KB)

"Enemy sighted..." (91 KB)

Bravo 8 / Rescue 2 -- Grey Delisle

Grey Delisle has made significant appearances in a great number of different titles from LucasArts. She played Queen Amidala in Jedi Power Battles, Episode One: Insider's Guide, Episode One: The Phantom Menace, LLL Jar Jar's Journey, LLL Yoda's Challenge, LLL Star Wars: Early Learning Activity Center. Plus she did the voice for Princess Leia in Force Commander, Yangja the Pirate Student in Escape from Monkey Island, and Jabba's Announcer, Ghia and Tia in Star Wars: Demolition.

She's also done some voices for some non-LucasArts titles including Baldur's Gate (Brielbar/Nereid/Skie) and Baldur's Gate II. Some of her non-gaming credits include the voice for Vicky in the new TV series called Fairly Old Parents and the part of Nicole in the movie called Bob's Video.

"Bravo 8 in formation..." (62 KB)

"Copy that Bravo 10..." (69 KB)

"This is Rescue 2, we've..." (114 KB)

"This is Rescue 2, heading down..." (144 KB)

Pirate Cargo Captain / Mercenary Wing / Rescue 1 -- Carlos Alazraqui

Starfighter might be Carlos Alazraqui's first voice acting job for LucasArts, but it's not the first videogame that he's offered up his voice for. Most notably, he did the voice for Spyro in Sony's hit 3D platformer for the original PlayStation, Spyro the Dragon. Carlos has also performed work for several animated films and TV shows including Rocko's Modern Life, where he does the voices for Rock and Spunky, and Disney's hit film, A Bug's Life.

"Come on cadet..." (95 KB)

"I got that hot shot cadet..." (121 KB)

"This is your last fight, Vanna..." (145 KB)

"This is Rescue Leader..." (172 KB)

"This is Rescue 1, I'm loading..." (213 KB)

Pirate Ground Control / Wingman 1 -- Jim Ward

LucasArts has used Jim War in a wide variety of its games, including the roles of Hector LeMans in Grim Fandango, Tony DiBoulda in Escape from Monkey Island, Fud Sang and Mars Guo in Racer, Mars Guo and Fud Sang in Star Wars: Episode I - Racer, and Gamorrean Guard in Episode One: The Phantom Menace.

Jim's other credits include the voices of Armor Seller Gnome, Hillman, and Unseen Voice in King's Quest VIII: Mask of Eternity, and appearances in The Macahans, Tapeheads, Quick Change, Jetsons: The Movie, Last Chance, and Xyber 9: New Dawn.

"Two more Drop Ships coming..." (64 KB)

"Anything to report out there..." (58 KB)

Pirate Ground Forces / Ric Olie -- Jess Harnell

Jess Harnell did the voices for Ki-Adi-Mundi in Jedi Power Battles, Estaban and Judge Tripps in Escape from Monkey Island, and Darth Maul and Malakili in Star Wars: Demolition.

He has also performed voiceover work for a wide array of animated films and television series. The most noteworthy is probably the voice of Wakko Warner in popular Animaniacs TV series. You can also hear him speak in The Tick, Toy Story 2, Little Nicky, and The Emperor's New Groove, among other titles.

"The cargo Nym brought in..." (138 KB)

"It's as quiet as a..." (115 KB)

Mercenary Pilot / Wingman 3 -- Tom Kane

Tom Kane is a voice-acting veteran that has been in the business since 1994. His LucasArts credits include the parts of C-3PO in Jedi Power Battles, Star Wars: Behind the Magic, Episode One: Insider's Guide, Force Commander, Episode One: The Phantom Menace, LLL Droidworks, the Star Destroyer Communications Officer in Force Commander, Yoda in Jedi Power Battles, Yoda's Challenge, Pegnose Pete in Escape from Monkey Island, Rene du Rottingham in The Curse of Monkey Island, and Elan Mak in Racer and Sega Racer Arcade.

Kane has also made an appearance as the Anchor Man in the movie Dracula 2000 and served as the Angel Voice in Prophecy III: The Ascent. He's also done work for other videogame titles including Gabriel Knight: Blood of the Sacred, Blood of the Damned (Jesus) and Activision's Interstate '76 (Skeeter).

In addition, fans of the animated TV series, The Powerpuff Girls, will recognize him as the voice for Professor Utomium, Talking Dog, Him, and various other smaller parts.

"Let me put a stop..." (105 KB)

Wingman 2 / Rescue 3 / Trade Federation Officer -- Neil Ross

Neil Ross' work for LucasArts includes the role of Han Solo in Force Commander, Rebellion, Masters of Teras Kasi, Rogue Squadron, Wally in The Curse of Monkey Island, and Perfume Spritzer in Escape from Monkey Island.

Ross has also done voice acting work for some non-LucasArts games, including Spyro: Year of the Dragon (Moneybags and Bentley), Legacy of Kain: Soul Reaver (Rahab), Baldur's Gate (Eldoth, Ogrillon, Scar), King's Quest VIII: Mask of Eternity (Archon, Spirit Knight, Wizard), Leisure Suit Larry 7: Love for Sail (Narrator, Mr. Bonning, Rod, Male Ship's Announcer), and Blood Omen: Legacy of Kain (Malek, Ottmar, Elzivir the Dollmaker).

Fans of Transformers might recognize Neil's work in the TV series and movie, as he did the parts for Bonecrusher, Hook, Slag, and Springer. He was also Clyde in the Pac-Man cartoon series, and Buzzer, Dusty, Heavy Metal, Monkeywrench, and Shipwreck in the ever-popular G.I. Joe Saturday morning cartoon.

"This is Rescue 3..." (157 KB)

"Commence shield test..." (133 KB)

"The remaining tests will use..." (172 KB)

"May I remind you..." (172 KB)

"It is a pity that you had..." (239 KB)

"This is Trade Federation convoy Delta..." (239 KB)

» Back to the Main Story