Rob Paulsen (born March 11, 1956) is an American voice actor and singer. He is best known for roles such as Raphael and Donatello from the 1987 and 2012 animated series respectively of Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles; Yakko Warner, Dr. Otto Scratchansniff and Pinky from Animaniacs and Pinky and the Brain; Carl Wheezer from Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius and its spin-off television series The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron, Boy Genius; Peck the Rooster from Barnyard and its spin-off television series Back at the Barnyard; Spike in The Land Before Time films and television series; and the title character in The Mask: Animated Series.

In total, Paulsen has been the voice of over 250 different animated characters and voiced over 1,000 commercials. He received a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Performer in an Animated Program and three Annie Awards for his role as Pinky.

He voiced Prescott Wentworth and some other minor characters in the Jem animated series.

Career[]

Paulsen's first voice acting role came in 1983 with the miniseries G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero, where he played Snow Job and Tripwire. A few years later, his career launched into more roles such as Cobra Slavemaster, Corky on The Snorks, Marco Smurf on the later seasons of The Smurfs, Boober on the animated version of Fraggle Rock, Hadji in The New Adventures of Johnny Quest, and the title character Saber Rider and the villain Jesse Blue on Saber Rider and the Star Sheriffs.

During the 1980s, Paulsen also explored the field of live action films. His first movie was Eyes of Fire in 1983. He played supporting roles in Body Double, Stewardess School, Warlock, and Mutant on the Bounty. He appeared in television shows during this time as well, such as MacGyver and St. Elsewhere.

Paulsen became more prevalent in the world of advertising as well. In the 1980s, he had been the announcer for the sitcom Cheers and continued to secure roles as an announcer. He appeared as the voice of Mr. Opportunity, spokesman of Honda commercials on TV and radio, the announcer for Buffalo Dick's Radio Ranch, and the spokesman for Lucky Stores. He provided the voice of Dog in the Taco Bell kids meal commercials from 1996 to mid-1997.

However, Paulsen's most famous advertising role was in the original commercial of the now ubiquitous Got Milk? campaign. The famous commercial, Who shot Alexander Hamilton in that famous duel?, aired in 1993, and launched the Got Milk? campaign into a monstrously successful enterprise. Paulsen continues to be one of the most sought-after commercial voice actors in the industry. He can be currently heard as the voice of singing Mr. Mini-Wheat in the Mini-Wheats commercials in Canada.

From 1987 to 1995, Paulsen voiced Raphael and various supporting characters in the original 1987 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles series. Originally starting as a five-part miniseries, the series continued for ten seasons and 193 episodes. It was a great success and became an instant pop culture symbol. Paulsen has said that Raphael's voice is very similar to his natural voice. He returned to the franchise as Donatello for the 2012 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles series on Nickelodeon, which ran for five seasons and 124 episodes from September 29, 2012 until November 12, 2017. He also reprised his role as 1987 Raphael in the multiple 1987/2012 crossover episodes. Paulsen serves as the voice director for the subsequent series, Rise of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, which premiered in July 2018.

Throughout the early 1990s, Paulsen continued to co-star in animated series, which allowed him to branch further into radio and television announcements and dropped live action acting from his repertoire. In 1993, he voiced Antoine D'Coolette in ABC's series Sonic the Hedgehog, and Arthur in the superhero series The Tick in 1995, replacing Micky Dolenz.

In 1993, he starred as the title character in both Mighty Max and The Mask. Also at this time, he starred in what became one of his most popular roles, Yakko Warner of Animaniacs. Paulsen also provided the voice of Pinky from both Animaniacs and its spin-off Pinky and the Brain, a show which won him several Annie Awards and a Daytime Emmy in 1999. He also did a number of characters in Tiny Toon Adventures, including Fowlmouth, Arnold the Pit Bull, and Concord Condor. Paulsen continues to voice Yakko and Pinky in the 2020 Animaniacs revival on Hulu.

Paulsen has also provided voices for numerous other characters, including Prescott A. Wentworth III in the Jem episode The Fan.

Paulsen was best known to Transformers fans as the voices of the Autobots Air Raid, Chase, Haywire, Fastlane and Slingshot in The Transformers.

Paulsen has voiced characters in video games such as Doom 3. He played Fluffy the Chinese-crested dog in 102 Dalmatians: Puppies to the Rescue, an Irish pub landlord in the 1996 video game Toonstruck, and a floating talking skull named Morte in Planescape: Torment, as well as Anomen Delryn in Baldur's Gate II: Shadows of Amn and Gray Fox in Metal Gear Solid: The Twin Snakes and both Super Smash Bros. Brawl and Super Smash Bros. Ultimate as an Assist Trophy. He provided the voice for Erik the Swift of The Lost Vikings in its second installment. He portrayed Tobli and Lian Ronso in the English version of Square Enix's Final Fantasy X-2 and has played the lead character in Bubsy. He voiced Jaq and The Grand Duke from the Cinderella world in Square Enix's and Disney's Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep.

Paulsen is also the off-camera voice of the syndicated television series Funniest Pets & People, which is seen on Superstation WGN and other television stations throughout the United States and abroad.

In the Rob Zombie animated film, The Haunted World of El Superbeasto, Paulsen voiced the characters El Gato and Commandant Hess, among some others. He also has a role as Ditto, one of the alien forms on Ben 10, as Rhomboid Vreedle of the Vreedle Brothers and Baz-El in Ben 10: Alien Force, two characters that he reprised, along with a new character, Magister Patelliday on Ben 10: Ultimate Alien and Ben 10: Omniverse.

Gallery[]

[]

Anime News Network

Behind the Voice Actors

Facebook

IMDb

Rob Paulsen at Animaniacs Wiki

Rob Paulsen at Dubbing Wiki

Twitter