Rob Paulsen Character Throttle Born March 11, 1956, Detroit, Michigan, U.S.

Robert Fredrick "Rob" Paulsen III (born March 11, 1956), often credited as Rob Paulsen, is an American voice actor and singer, best known as the voice behind Raphael from the 1987 cartoon of Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, Yakko Warner and Dr. Otto Scratchansniff from Animaniacs, Pinky from Pinky and the Brain and Animaniacs, Rev Runner from Loonatics Unleashed, and Throttle from the 1990s and 2006 versions of Biker Mice from Mars].[1] His role as Pinky won him a Daytime Emmy Award for male vocal performance.

In total, Paulsen has been the voice of over 250 different animated characters and performed in over 1000 commercials. He continues to play minor parts in dozens of cartoons as well as supporting characters in animated movies.

Personal life[]

Paulsen was born in Detroit, Michigan. He is married to Parrish Todd and has one son, Ashton. In an interview with a Chicago TV station, Paulsen described himself as "a singer who decided to become an actor." Growing up in Grand Blanc, Michigan, Paulsen sang in choir throughout his youth and adolescence and began performing in plays in grammar school. However, his idol growing up was Gordie Howe of the Detroit Red Wings; he considered the arts to be a secondary career choice, primarily interested in becoming a professional hockey player.

Paulsen has long supported charity organizations, and donated considerably for cancer research. He has worked a lot for GOALmodels, a program for adolescents, and is a sponsor of Camp Will-A-Way, a camp for mentally and physically disabled children. Paulsen also donates funds from autographs to the Wounded Warrior Project and Operation Smile.

Career[]

Early career[]

He began his voice over career at Hanna-Barbera in 1983 with the mini-series G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero, where he played Snow Job and Tripwire. A few years later, his career launched into more roles such as Cobra Slavemaster and reprising Snow Job and Tripwire on G.I. Joe, Corky on The Snorks, Marco Smurf on the later seasons of The Smurfs, Boober on the animated version of Fraggle Rock, Hadji in The New Adventures of Jonny Quest and the title character, Saber Rider and the villain "Jesse Blue" on Saber Rider and the Star Sheriffs.

During the 1980s Paulsen also explored the field of live action cinema. His first movie was Eyes of Fire in 1983. He played supporting roles in Body Double, Stewardess School, Mutant on the Bounty, and Warlock. He appeared in television shows during this time as well, such as MacGyver and St. Elsewhere. He mentioned in an interview, regarding his role in Body Double, that he would not want his child (who was very young at the time of the interview) to see the movie, so he could not really be proud of his work.

Paulsen's first major role was in 1987, as "Raphael" in the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles television series.

Advertising[]

Paulsen became more prevalent in the world of advertising as well. In the 1980s he had been the announcer for the sitcom Cheers and continued to secure roles as an announcer. He appeared as the voice of "Mr. Opportunity", spokesman of Honda commercials on TV and radio, the announcer for Buffalo Dick's Radio Ranch, and the spokesman for Lucky Stores, a West-coast grocery store chain, before it was acquired by Albertsons in 1998. He provided the voice of "Dog" in the Taco Bell kids meal commercials from 1996 to mid-1997, with Eddie Deezen as the voice of "Nacho" the cat.

However Paulsen's most famous advertising role was in the original commercial of the now ubiquitous Got Milk? campaign. The famous commercial, Who Shot Alexander Hamilton?, aired in 1993, and launched the Got Milk? campaign into a monstrously successful enterprise. Paulsen continues to be one of the most sought-after commercial voice actors in the industry.

He can be currently heard as the voice of singing Mini-Wheat in the Mini-Wheats commercials in Canada.

Tuning in to Spielberg[]

Throughout the early 1990s, Paulsen continued to co-star in animated series, which allowed him to branch further into radio and television announcements and dropped live-action acting from his repertoire. In 1993, he voiced "Antoine D'Coolette" in ABC's series Sonic the Hedgehog, and "Arthur", an insecure accountant in a moth costume (wings included), in the superhero series The Tick in 1995.

In 1993, he starred as the title character in both Mighty Max and The Mask. Also at this time he starred in what became one of his most popular roles, "Yakko Warner" of Animaniacs. Paulsen also provided the voice of "Pinky" from Pinky and the Brain, a show which won him several Annie Awards and a Daytime Emmy in 1999.

He also did a number of characters in Tiny Toon Adventures, including "Fowlmouth", "Arnold the Pit Bull", and "Concord Condor". In the direct-to-video movie Tiny Toon Adventures: How I Spent My Vacation, he did the voices for "Banjo Possum", "Mr. Hitcher" (who would also appear in other episodes), and "Johnny Pew".

Current roles[]

Animation[]

Paulsen has provided voices for a great amount of characters, among which are Yakko Warner, Dr. Otto Scratchansniff and Pinky in Animaniacs; Steelbeak in Darkwing Duck; "Brick" and "Boomer" in The Powerpuff Girls; Atchan in Hi Hi Puffy AmiYumi; Spooky the Tuff Little Ghost in The Spooktacular New Adventures of Casper; Ogden Ostrich in Channel Umptee-3; "Reuben" in Lilo & Stitch: The Series; "Jack Fenton," "Box Ghost," "Technus", and "The Ghost Vultures" in Danny Phantom; "Carl Wheezer" and "Butch" in Jimmy Neutron; "Mark Chang", "Mr. Birkenbake" and "Peppy Happy Gary" in The Fairly OddParents; Peck the Rooster in Barnyard, and Back at the Barnyard; and "Gordon" in the Nickelodeon cartoon Catscratch. He was also the voice of "Rothchild" in the early episodes of Samurai Jack. Additionally, Paulsen provided the voice of "PJ" in Goof Troop, the animated series starring Goofy.

He also voiced "Zeek" and "Joshua" in K10C: Kids' Ten Commandments, Rude Dog in Rude Dog and the Dweebs, and Archie the Raccoon, A.K.A., Ze Archer in "Mask of the Raccoon" on The Penguins of Madagascar. He reprised his role as "Throttle" in the 2006 Biker Mice from Mars, and played a role in The Boondocks as an art teacher. He also provided the voices of 2T Fru-T, Mike Ellis, Dark Comet and Ronald in the 2001 cartoon series Butt-Ugly Martians. He also portrayed the voice of Chomper in The Land Before Time II: The Great Valley Adventure, Spike and Rinkus in The Land Before Time sequels and Spike in the TV series, but Spike was played anonymously in the original The Land Before Time. Paulsen also played Mo in The Land Before Time IX: Journey to Big Water.

It was not long before Paulsen returned to Warner Bros. Animation, which had diverged into a new era of television serials (following what is sometimes referred to as the "Silver Age of Animation"). Paulsen appeared as "Rev Runner" of the new show Loonatics Unleashed and stars in Coconut Fred's Fruit Salad Island. He also voiced "The Source" in the Teen Titans episode "Employee of the Month." He was also the voice of the character "Squeeky" on the TV show Danger Rangers. Paulsen also provides the voice for the Honda character "Mr. Opportunity." In the Rob Zombie animated film, The Haunted World of El Superbeasto, Paulsen voices the characters "El Gato" and "Commandant Hess", among some others. He also has a role as "Ditto", one of the alien forms on Ben 10.

Paulsen is also the current voice of classic Disney character "José Carioca". Rob became the new voice of "Prince Eric" of Disney's The Little Mermaid II: Return to the Sea since Christopher Daniel Barnes failed to reprise the role. in 2000. He is also the voice of Peck the rooster and other minor characters in the Nickelodeon computer-animated series Back at the Barnyard and various minor characters on the Disney Channel animated series, The Replacements. One of the newer titles he is voiced in is the Tinker Bell line as Bobble. He also did the voices of Boober Fraggle, Sprocket and Marjory the Trash Heap in the animated version of Fraggle Rock. As well as Gwizdo in the Dragon Hunters movie.

Paulsen was best known to Transformers fans as the voices of the Autobots Air Raid, Chase, Haywire, Fastlane, Slingshot in The Transformers.

He has expressed interest in doing voice work on The Simpsons and Futurama, but it is unknown if he will.

Video games[]

In video gaming, much voice talent has bled over from television and radio voice actors. Paulsen has appeared in video games such as Doom 3 and Clay Fighter 631⁄3. He plays "Fluffy", the Chinese-crested dog, in 102 Dalmatians: Puppies to the Rescue, an Irish-talking pubtender in the 1996 video game Toonstruck, and "Morte", a floating, talking skull, in Planescape: Torment, as well as "Anomen Delryn" in Baldur's Gate II and "Gray Fox" in Metal Gear Solid: The Twin Snakes and Super Smash Bros. Brawl as an assist trophy. He provides the voice for Erik the Swift of the Lost Vikings in its second installment. He portrays "Tobli" and "Lian Ronso" in the English version of Square Enix's Final Fantasy X-2 and has played the lead character in Bubsy. Although an extremely minor role, Paulsen has also done the voice for the Greek soldiers in God of War. He voiced Jaq and the Grand Duke from the Cinderella world in Square Enix's and Disney's Kingdom Hearts: Birth by Sleep. In the video game The Nightmare Before Christmas: Oogie's Revenge, he does the voice of "Igor". He also reprised his role as "Yakko Warner", "Dr. Scratchansniff", and "Pinky" in Animaniacs: The Great Edgar Hunt. Rob Paulsen voiced the lead character, Lazarus Jones, in the PS2 game Ghosthunter, and played The Duck Avenger in Disney's Donald Duck Pk out of the shadows. Rob also voiced Alfredo Fettuccini, Bob the Ghost Pirate, Lookout and Ghost Priest in The Secret of Monkey Island Special Edition. He voiced the Fox and the Mouse in the Green Eggs and Ham PC game. He also voiced "Tlaloc" in Tak and the Power of Juju.

Other[]

Paulsen is also the off-camera voice of the syndicated television series Funniest Pets and People which is seen on Superstation WGN and other television stations throughout the United States and abroad.

Awards[]

Rob Paulsen has been nominated for an Annie Award for his role of "Pinky" for 4 consecutive years, which he won in 1996, 1997, and 1999. In 2004 he was nominated for his role of "The Troubador" in The Three Musketeers, and in 2005 he was nominated for his role in The Happy Elf. In 1999 he also won the Daytime Emmy Award for the role of Pinky.

Public appearances[]

Paulsen has been a regular industry guest and featured panelist at Comic-Con International over the past several years. He has also appeared at animation industry-related events such as the World Animation Celebration in 1998, among many others. He has also been a guest at several anime conventions, including JACON, Mikomicon, and Anime Overdose. Paulsen was a guest of honor at Anthrocon in 2007. He has recently started doing "Rob Paulsen Live" seminars across the U.S. to talk of his career, sign autographs, and talk with fans. Paulsen's first seminar was in Atlanta, Georgia. on July 30, 2011, and the next will be in Dallas, Texas on September 17, 2011.

Sometimes people in attendance would request him to sing the famous "Yakko's World" number, where he sings all the nations of the world with his "Yakko" voice in a fast-paced delivery without rehearsing.

In May 2011 working with social media and web producer Chris Pope, Rob rolled out a brand new website RobPaulsenLive.com as well as a weekly audio podcast called "Talkin' Toons with Rob Paulsen" which is managed and deployed by The Tech Jives Network.[2]

June 2011 Rob made announcements that he was taking his show on the road with his "Lots of laughs and autographs" tour. Working closely with a team that included Chris Pope, his publicist and others he made his first successful tour in Atlanta, Georgia, which happened on July 30, 2011, and another in Dallas, Texas on September 17, 2011, that required two seminars, one in the afternoon and one in the evening, as they were so popular.[3]

Filmography[]

Rob Paulsen voices most of the characters with his original accent which is American, but he used a British accent to voice Strut in The Land Before Time II: The Great Valley Adventure and Brunch in Scooby-Doo and the Reluctant Werewolf while using a Scottish accent to voice Bobble in the Tinker Bell films. In his role as Pinky, Paulsen used an exaggerated Cockney accent, especially in earlier episodes. He even used a Brooklyn accent for Reuben in Lilo & Stitch: The Series.

TV roles[]

2 Stupid Dogs - Anteater, Cubby, Announcer

Ace Ventura: Pet Detective - Spike, Additional Voices

Animaniacs – Yakko Warner, Dr. Otto von Scratchansniff, Pinky

The Annoying Orange (TV series) - Commander Broccoli

Batman: The Animated Series - one of Penguin's goons (episode 20)

Back at the Barnyard – Peck the Rooster

Ben 10 – Ditto

Ben 10: Alien Force - Baz-El, Rhomboid Vreedle

Ben 10: Ultimate Alien - Baz-El, Rhomboid Vreedle, Magister Patelliday

Ben 10: Omniverse - Magister Patelliday

Big Time Rush C.A.L (Big Time Job), Superparrot (Big Time Guru) and Sam of SelMart (Big Time Merchandise)

Biker Mice from Mars – Throttle, Fred the Mutant, Hairball

Bump in the Night - Squishington

Casper - Spooky

CatDog - Hotdog, Hamburger (Meat, Dog's Friends)

Catscratch – Gordon

Channel Umptee-3 – Ogden Ostrich

ChalkZone - Vinnie Raton, Walrus, Craniac

Cheers - Announcer

Chip 'n' Dale Rescue Rangers - Flash

Coconut Fred's Fruit Salad Island – Coconut Fred

Dan Dare: Pilot of The Future - The Mekon

Danger Rangers – Squeeky

Danny Phantom – Box Ghost, Technus, & Jack Fenton

Darkwing Duck - Steelbeak

Dave the Barbarian – Malsquando

Dexter's Laboratory – Major Glory, Puppet Pal Mitch

Disney's Adventures of the Gummi Bears – Gusto Gummi

Disney's House of Mouse - Jose Carioca

Duck Dodgers - Martian Gopher #1, Porko

Ducktales – Gladstone Gander

Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends - Additional Voices

Fraggle Rock – Boober Fraggle, Sprocket and Marjory the Trash Heap

Freakazoid - additional voices

Funniest Pets & People – Announcer

Gargoyles- Helios (One Episode)

Gary the Rat – additional voices

G.I. Joe – Snow Job, Tripwire

Goof Troop - P.J.

The Greatest Adventure: Stories from the Bible - Moki

Handy Manny – Fast Eddie

Hercules - additional voices

Hi Hi Puffy AmiYumi - Atchan, additional voices

Histeria! – Mr. Smartypants and Sammy Melman

House of Mouse - Danny, Pirates, Rusty, additional voices

Jungle Cubs - Hathi / Akela

Justice League - Lightray

K10C: Kids' Ten Commandments - Zeek & Joshua

Kids Next Door – Rupert Puttkin /The Great Puttinsky, additional voices

Kim Possible - Prince Wally, King Walus

Kipper the Dog – Tiger, Pig, Jake, Various Voices

Lilo & Stitch: The Series - Reuben/Experiment 625

Loonatics Unleashed – Rev Runner

The Looney Tunes Show - Mac Gopher, Chuck Berost

Mickey Mouse Clubhouse - Toodles

Mighty Max – Mighty Max

Phineas and Ferb - additional voices

Pinky and the Brain – Pinky

Pound Puppies- King (AKA No-Name) (Uncredited)

Planet Sheen - Doppy

Power Eons: Super Legends – Demeon (Ninja Storm)

Saber Rider & the Star Sheriffs - Jesse Blue

Samurai Jack - Rothchild

Slimer and the Real Ghostbusters - Robby, additional voices

Spider-Man – Morris Bench/Hydro-Man

Sonic the Hedgehog – Antoine D'Coolette

SWAT Kats: The Radical Squadron – Hard Drive, Al

Tak and the Power of Juju - Party Juju, Judge Juju, Gillbert

Taz-Mania - Digeri Dingo

Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (1987) – Raphael, Zach the "Fifth Turtle", Wingnut, HiTech, The Grybyx, Mr. Ogg, Professor Sopho, Tokka additional voices

Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (2012) - Donatello

Teen Titans – The Source

The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron – Carl Wheezer, Mrs. Wheezer, Mr. Wheezer, Butch, additional voices

The Boondocks – An Art Teacher

The Fairly OddParents – Mark Chang, Happy Peppy Gary, King Grippulon, Bucky McBadbat, additional voices

The High Fructose Adventures of Annoying Orange - Commander Broccoli

The Land Before Time – Spike

The Magician - Cosmos,Sonny Boy

The Mask: The Animated Series – Stanley Ipkiss/The Mask

The New Woody Woodpecker Show – additional voices

The Penguins of Madagascar – Archie the Raccoon, A.K.A. The Archer in "Mask of the Raccoon", Kid Kazoo/Stockbroker (Kid Kazoo grown up) in "An Elephant Never Forgets", Lobster #1 in "Dr. Blowhole's Revenge" Ad Exec #1, and Technician in "Fit to Print".

The Powerpuff Girls – Brick, Boomer, Major Glory ("Members Only")

A Pup Named Scooby Doo - Professor Digby/Were-Doo

The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest – Hadji, additional voices

The Replacements – Fabian Le'Tool, Master Craig, Hiram Smeck, Mr. Vanderbosh

The Smurfs – Marco Smurf, additional voices

The Snorks – Corky

The Spooktacular New Adventures of Casper – Spooky

The Super Hero Squad Show - Werewolf by Night, Baron Strucker

The Tick – Arthur

The Tom and Jerry Show - The Runaway Zebra

The Transformers – Air Raid, Chase, Fastlane, Slingshot

Tiny Toon Adventures - Fowlmouth, Arnold the Pit Bull, & Concord Condor, Porky Pig (in one episode)

Time Squad – Buck Tuddrussel.

T.U.F.F. Puppy - Bird Brain

City Trams – Eric

Random! Cartoons – Solomon Fix, Danny, Tickle Monster, Handycat, Drillbit, and Flavio

Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated - Winslow Fleach, Radio Newsman

What's New, Scooby Doo? - Jamison Steven Ripley, additional voices

Yo Yogi - Dick 'Dickie' Dastardly, Chuck Toupee, Super Snooper, Robin Hood, Waiter, Wee Willie the Gorilla, additional voices

The New Yogi Bear Show - La Bamba Bear

Ultimate Spider-Man - Batroc the Leaper

Movie roles[]

Alvin and the Chipmunks Meet the Wolfman - Mr. Rochelle

Bambi II – Friend Bear

Barnyard – Peck the Rooster

Batman: Gotham Knight – Sal Maroni

Bat Thumb - No Face, Commissioner

Body Double - Supporting Role

Eyes of Fire

Cinderella II: Dreams Come True – Jaq, the Grand Duke, the Baker, Sir Hugh, Bert and Flower Vendor

Cinderella III: A Twist in Time – Jaq, the Grand Duke and the Bishop

Charlotte's Web 2 - Farley the Fox

Cranberry Christmas - Mr. Whiskers

Dragon Hunters - Gwizdo

Free Willy 2: The Adventure Home – Dakar Crew Member #2

FernGully 2: The Magical Rescue – additional voice

The Land Before Time II: The Great Valley Adventure – Spike / Strut / Chomper

The Land Before Time III: The Time of the Great Giving – Spike / Kosh

The Land Before Time IV: Journey Through the Mists – Spike

The Land Before Time V: The Mysterious Island – Spike / Kosh

The Land Before Time VII: The Stone of Cold Fire – Spike / Rinkus

The Land Before Time VIII: The Big Freeze – Spike / Leading Stegosaurus

The Land Before Time IX: Journey to Big Water – Spike / Mo

The Land Before Time X: The Great Longneck Migration – Spike

The Land Before Time XI: Invasion of the Tinysauruses – Spike / Kosh

The Land Before Time XII: The Great Day of the Flyers – Spike / Mo / Guido / Kosh

The Land Before Time XIII: The Wisdom of Friends – Spike / Beipiaosaurus #4

Lone Wolf McQuade – Man at festival

Mannequin – Cop #4

Mickey's Magical Christmas: Snowed in at the House of Mouse - Prince Eric and Additional voices

Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers – The Troubadour

Mickey's House of Villains - Hades (singing only)

Mulan II – Prince Jeeki

101 Dalmatians II: Patch's London Adventure - Danny

Rainbow Brite and the Star Stealer – additional voice

Return to Neverland - Pirates Rusty

Rockin' with Judy Jetson - Sky Rocker

Scooby-Doo and the Reluctant Werewolf – Brunch

Scooby-Doo Meets the Boo Brothers - Shreako

Steel Magnolias – Delivery guy

Stewardess School - Larry Falkwell

The Emperor's New Groove – Pink Cow (uncredited)

The Fox and the Hound 2 – Chief, Additional Voices (uncredited)

The GodThumb - Mickey, Toll Booth Guard

The Happy Elf

The Haunted World of El Superbeasto – El Gato and Commandant Hess

The Little Mermaid II: Return to the Sea – Prince Eric

The Little Mermaid: Ariel's Beginning – Ink Spot & Swifty

The Little Troll Prince – Borch #1

Tinker Bell – Bobble

Tinker Bell and the Great Fairy Rescue – Bobble

Pixie Hollow Games – Bobble

Tinker Bell and the Lost Treasure – Bobble, Tall Troll, Owl

Secret of the Wings – Bobble

Tiny Toon Adventures: How I Spent My Vacation - Banjo Possom, Mr. Hitcher, & Johnny Pew

Tom and Jerry and the Wizard of Oz - Hickory/Tin Man

Tweety's High-Flying Adventure – Sphinx, Ship Crewman and Casino Cat

Wakko's Wish – Yakko Warner / Dr. Otto Scratchansniff / Pinky

Warlock - Supporting Role

Games[]

The Secret of Monkey Island: Special Edition — Bob

Toonstruck — Lugnut, Mee, Barman

Final Fantasy X-2 — Additional Voices

Planescape: Torment — Mortimer 'Morte' Rictusgrin

Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep - Jaq, Grand Duke

SpongeBob SquarePants featuring Nicktoons: Globs of Doom - Technus, Carl Wheezer, Traloc

Metal Arms: Glitch in the System -

Baldur's Gate II - Shadows of Amn — Anomen Delryn / Saerk Farrahd / Biff The Understudy / Qadeel

Metal Gear Solid: The Twin Snakes and Super Smash Bros. Brawl - Gray Fox

Disney's PK: Out of the Shadows - PK

Ghosthunter — Officer Lazarus Jones

Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes — Riddler

Other works[]

Jimmy Neutron's Nicktoon Blast (2003) – Carl Wheezer

References[]

^ Forman, Ross (1994-11-08). "Cartoon-voice Actor Is All Talk". Chicago Tribune. http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1994-11-08/features/9411080101_1_cool-job-animaniacs-rob-paulsen. Retrieved 2010-08-28.

^ Talking Toons with Rob Paulsen on TechJives.net

^ Rob Paulsen comes to Atlanta by BigShinyRobot.com

[]

Official website at RobPaulsenFans.com

Rob Paulsen on Myspace

Rob Paulsen at the Internet Movie Database

Rob Paulsen at http://www.voicechasers.com