The Children of Princess Margaretha of Sweden

Princess Margaretha in her wedding dress Princess Margaretha of Sweden was born Margaretha Sofia Lovisa Ingeborg to Prince Carl, Duke of Västergötland and Princess Ingeborg of Denmark . She married Prince Axel of Denmark . Their marriage was a love match with her mother remarking that they were so in love the couldn't be left alone in a furnished room. Their children were: George Valdemar Carl Axel, " Prince George Valdemar of Denmark " Flemming Valdemar Carl Axel, " Prince Flemming Valdemar ", later " Count Flemming Valdemar of Rosenborg " after renouncing his Princely title Margaretha with Prince George Valdemar and Prince Flemming Valdemar

The Children of Persida Nenadović

Persida Nenadović Persida Nenadović was born to the Voivode Jevrem Nenadović and Jovanka Milovanović . She married Alexander Karađorđević, Prince of Serbia . Their children were: Poleksija, " Princess Poleksija of Serbia " Kleopatra, " Princess Kleopatra of Serbia " Aleksij, " Prince Aleksij of Serbia " Svetozar, " Prince Svetozar of Serbia " Peter, " Prince Peter of Serbia ", later " King Peter I of Serbia " Jelena, " Princess Jelena of Serbia " Andrej, " Princess Andrej of Serbia " Jelisaveta, " Princess Jelisaveta of Serbia " Đorđe, " Prince Đorđe of Serbia " Arsenije, " Prince Arsenije of Serbia "

Usain Bolt Reveals Name of Baby Girl

Olympia Lightning Bolt Earlier in the year Olympian Usain Bolt and his longtime girlfriend, Kasi Bennett, welcomed their first child, a girl. They have now revealed that her name is Olympia Lightning Bolt.

The Children of Princess Helen of Serbia and Yugoslavia

Princess Helen and Prince John's engagement photo Princess Helen of Serbia and Yugoslavia was born Princess Helena Karađorđević to Peter I of Serbia and Yugoslavia and Princess Zorka of Montenegro . She married Prince John Constantinovich of Russia , who was called "Ioanchik". It was a love match and shocked family members because they believed John might become a Russian Orthodox Monk. Their children were: Vsevolod Ivanovich Romanov, " Prince Vsevolod Ivanovich " Yekaterina Ivanovna Romanova, " Princess Catherine of Russia ", later " Catherine, Marchesa Farace di Villaforesta "