By Josh Farley of the Kitsap Sun

Anyone who would like to donate to the memory of Aaron Waag can do so at any Columbia Bank location. The funds benefit his wife Ashley and daughter Abigail. The account is titled "Waag Family Donation Account."

Aaron Bjorn Waag was known as a fearless adventurer whose love of all things outdoors was trumped by only one thing: his family.

Whether it was working high up huge firs in the tree service business founded by his father John, fishing in Puget Sound in his Boston Whaler or heading east for bow hunting, he loved being in nature.

"He was either in the woods, up a tree or in the water," his sister-in-law, Kat Waag, said. "He loved what he did (for a living), too. He never would have stopped climbing."

Waag, 28, died Wednesday in a fall while working on Rocky Point.

Devotion to his wife Ashley, young daughter Abigail, parents, brothers, and other family came first, Waag's loved ones said.

At his last Thanksgiving in 2010, the Waags told one another what they were thankful for. "Family," Aaron is said to have replied.

Waag knew his work was risky and intricate. On the heavily forested Kitsap Peninsula, tree trimming and felling is a kind of landscape surgery, removing enormous firs and cedars while preserving everything around them.

"You're not just dropping trees, you're taking them apart," said Jon Westerlund, Aaron's first employer in the tree business. "Lowering them, working in tight spaces, over structures."

Waag was a quick learner in the industry.

"He took to it right away," Westerlund said. "He loved tree work. Loved everything about it."

Heights were no issue for the 28-year-old, his father said.

"I'd look at a tree and go ?boy,'" John Waag said of the more intimidating tree projects. "He'd think nothing of it."

John Waag has no idea what could've happened Wednesday that caused Aaron's death. He said in the family business, which he started in 2009, safety was paramount; the equipment "top notch."

"It was a very freak thing that happened," he said. "Something happened up there that made him come undone."

The 28-year-old was regarded as "the heart and soul" of the business, according to Chris Heins, his uncle.

"He was the go-to climber," Heins said.

Born at Harrison Medical Center, Aaron attended Pearson and Vinland elementary schools, Poulsbo Junior High and North Kitsap High School. He ultimately graduated from the Northwest Academy, an alternative school, in 2001.

He fell in love with baseball during his youth, playing in leagues for about 10 years.

His father John said he was an aggressive player who "just loved the sport just loved to play it."

His work ethic was forged early on, working with his brothers at his grandparents' house on Finn Hill. "Papa Vic" ? Aaron's grandfather, Victor Heins ? taught the three Waag boys about working in the woods: cutting and hauling trees, splitting kindling, picking up pinecones for a penny apiece.

"He taught them if they worked hard, they would be rewarded," said Aaron's mother, Teri.

When he was young the family ? John, Teri, Eric, Aaron and Chad ? would venture to Idaho and backpack into a favorite fishing hole along the Salmon River. More recently, he and his father John would make yearly trips to Winthrop to bow hunt deer, elk and bear.

He'd often fish right off Eglon in a little Boston Whaler, said his father, who was amazed how many times he'd come home with a fresh catch.

Waag met his wife, Ashley, in school. While both were shy, Ashley got to know Aaron when Aaron worked for Westerlund.

"We were attached at the hip," she said.

The two married on Aug. 26, 2008. Not too long thereafter, Ashley became pregnant with their child, Abigail.

The birth tempered Aaron, Ashley said, and made him a little more careful in his adventuring.

"The first time he saw her, he just stopped," she said. "And all he wanted was her."

Even as another generation began for the young family, their tie to his parents and brothers remained tight.

"They're as close as they come," said Aaron's sister-in-law Kat Waag. "If you got one Waag, you got them all. It was a package deal.