Paul Lawrie Biography

Paul Lawrie rose to notoreity with his win at the 1999 Open Championship. He was able to withstand a four-hole playoff with Jean van de Velde and Justin Leonard to win the Claret Jug. Going into the final day Lawrie had trailed van de Velde by ten shots. That victory set his career on an upward swing. Lawrie would have finished in the top ten on the European Tour's Order of Merit three times in the next four seasons. Overall, he has eight victories on the European Tour. He represented Europe in the Ryder Cup in 1999 and 2012. In 2016, Lawrie was vice-captain for the Ryder Cup team. Currently, Lawrie stands as the last player from Scotland to win a major championship. He has been named both a Member of the Order of the British Empire and Officer of the Order of the British Empire. Through his Paul Lawrie Foundation, he has been able to bring the game of golf to many young people who otherwise would not have a chance to play it.

Book Paul Lawrie for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Paul Lawrie for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Paul Lawrie. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Paul Lawrie, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Paul Lawrie's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Paul Lawrie, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Paul Lawrie for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Paul Lawrie for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Paul Lawrie for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Paul Lawrie’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Paul Lawrie for your Virtual Meeting