Delaney Bramlett

LOS ANGELES (AP) – Delaney Bramlett, a singer-songwriter-producer who penned such classic rock songs as “Let it Rain” and worked with musicians George Harrison and Eric Clapton, died Saturday. He was 69.

Bramlett died at UCLA Ronald Reagan Medical Center in Los Angeles as a result of complications from gallbladder surgery, his wife Susan Lanier-Bramlett said.

Born in Mississippi, Bramlett enjoyed a career in the music business that spanned 50 years. With his then-wife Bonnie Lynn, he created the Southern blues-rock band Delaney & Bonnie & Friends. The group opened for Blind Faith, which featured British guitarist Clapton, in 1969.

He is perhaps best known for standards such as “Superstar,” co-written with Leon Russell, which was recorded by Usher, Luther Vandross, Bette Midler, The Carpenters and most recently, Sonic Youth, in a version featured on the Grammy-nominated soundtrack of the movie “Juno.”

During his career, he performed, co-wrote or recorded with stars such as Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, John Lennon, Dave Mason, Billy Preston, the Everly Brothers and Mac Davis. He also produced artists including Etta James and Elvin Bishop.

–––

Alvah H. Chapman Jr.

MIAMI (AP) – Alvah H. Chapman Jr., former president and chief executive officer of The Miami Herald, chairman of Knight Ridder Corp. and a champion of philanthropic causes in South Florida, died Thursday. He was 87.

Chapman succumbed to pneumonia on Christmas Day after spending the holiday with his family in Coconut Grove, the newspaper reported. He had Parkinson’s disease, suffered strokes in recent years and broke a hip in March.

Chapman brought his family to Miami in 1960 and was a corporate and civic leader. He worked to house the homeless, helped sculpt downtown Miami’s contemporary appearance and led the group, We Will Rebuild, after Hurricane Andrew in 1992.

–––

George Francis

SACRAMENTO, Calif. (AP) – George Francis, the nation’s oldest man, died Saturday. He was 112.

The son of George Francis says his father died of congestive heart failure at a nursing home in Sacramento.

The son, 81-year-old Anthony Francis, says his father was born on June 6, 1896 in New Orleans, and that his only wife, Josephine Johnson Francis, died at age 63 in 1964.

UCLA gerontologist Dr. Stephen Coles, who maintains a list of the world’s oldest people, says Francis was the oldest man living in the U.S., at 112 and 204 days. Coles says the oldest living person in the world is Maria de Jesus of Portugal, who is 115 and 109 days old.

–––

Robert Graham

SANTA MONICA, Calif. (AP) – Robert Graham, a sculptor whose massive bronze works mark civic monuments across America, including the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial in Washington and the Duke Ellington Memorial in New York, died Saturday. He was 70.

Graham, who had been ailing, died at the Santa Monica UCLA Medical Center and Orthopaedic Hospital with his family at his side, including his wife, Academy Award-winning actress Anjelica Huston, the governor’s office confirmed.

In Washington, Graham’s bronze sculptures mark the Roosevelt memorial, where bronze panels symbolize the 54 social programs that were initiated under the president’s New Deal. Graham also created the life-size, bronze figure of President Roosevelt in his wheelchair at the entrance of the memorial.

In Detroit, Graham’s Joe Louis Memorial honors the boxer with a 24-foot bronze monument in the shape of a massive fist and forearm suspended from a pyramid structure.

–––

William J. “Sandy” Colton

NEW YORK (AP) – William J. “Sandy” Colton, an Associated Press photographer and editor for two decades who supervised innovative changes including the news agency’s conversion from black and white to color photography, died Thursday. He was 83.

Colton, who had battled cancer in recent years, died of heart failure at his home in Bleecker in upstate New York, his son James said.

During the Korean war, Colton was in the Air Force and assigned to the staff of Pacific Stars and Stripes, the unofficial U.S. military newspaper, where he wrote war features.

Frustrated by having to rely on Signal Corps photographers, he established the Tokyo-based paper’s own photo operation and later, as a civilian, became its chief photographer, covering events across Asia and the Middle East.

–––

Tuanku Ja’afar Tuanku Abdul Rahman

KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia (AP) – Tuanku Ja’afar Tuanku Abdul Rahman, a royal state ruler who became Malaysia’s king for five years under the country’s unique monarchal system, died Saturday. He was 86.

Tuanku Ja’afar, the constitutional head of central Negri Sembilan state, was taken to a hospital Saturday after complaining of a headache and dizziness, said state secretary Norzam Nor. He died in an intensive care unit several hours later.

Tuanku Ja’afar took over the state throne in 1967 and eventually served as Malaysia’s 10th constitutional monarch between 1994 and 1999 under a system that allows nine hereditary state rulers to take turns being king for a five-year term.

–––

Ann Savage

LOS ANGELES (AP) – Ann Savage, who earned a cult following as a femme fatale in such 1940s pulp-fiction movies as “Detour,” died Thursday. She was 87.

The actress died in her sleep at a nursing home on Christmas Day from complications following a series of strokes, said her manager, Kent Adamson.

Her Hollywood career had largely been over since the mid-1950s, but she had a resurgence over the past year with a starring role in Canadian cult filmmaker Guy Maddin’s “My Winnipeg.”

Savage was best-known for director Edgar G. Ulmer’s 1945 B-movie “Detour,” in which she played a woman ruthlessly blackmailing a stranger, played by Tom Neal.