Delaney Bramlett

LOS ANGELES — Delaney Bramlett, the singer-songwriter and producer who penned classic rock songs such as “Let it Rain” and worked with musicians George Harrison and Eric Clapton, died Saturday. He was 69.

Bramlett died shortly before 5 a.m. at UCLA Ronald Reagan Medical Center in Los Angeles as a result of complications from gall-bladder surgery, his wife Susan Lanier-Bramlett said.

Born in Mississippi, Bramlett enjoyed a career in the music business that spanned 50 years.

He is perhaps best known for standards such as “Superstar,” co-written with Leon Russell, which was recorded by Usher, Luther Vandross, Bette Midler, The Carpenters and most recently, Sonic Youth, in a version featured on the Grammy-nominated soundtrack of the movie “Juno.”

He co-wrote “Let it Rain” with British guitarist Clapton, who also recorded it, and “Never Ending Song of Love,” which was recorded by more than 100 artists including Ray Charles, George Jones, Tammy Wynette, Patty Loveless and Dwight Yoakam.

Robert Graham

LOS ANGELES — Robert Graham, a Los Angeles sculptor with a towering public presence who designed major civic monuments across the nation, died Saturday at Santa Monica-University of California, Los Angeles, hospital, his friend Roy Doumani said. Graham, who had been ill for about six months, was 70.

An elegant, gentlemanly artist who maintained a large studio in Los Angeles” Venice neighborhood, Graham was enormously productive throughout his career. A fiercely independent perfectionist with high-tech skills and an enduring fascination with the female figure, he explored almost every conceivable position and attitude of the female nude in his personal work, often working in an intimate scale. But he is best known for large public commissions that pay homage to historical figures or symbolize big ideas in prominent locations.

His legacy, Doumani said, “is all over the city. He brought a lot of beauty and a vision of what art should be. … Bob was special to this city and, fortunately, his work will remain here and elsewhere, and he”s certainly not going to be forgotten.”

Graham was inducted Dec. 15 into the California Hall of Fame.

Ann Savage

LOS ANGELES — Ann Savage, who earned a cult following as a femme fatale in such 1940s pulp-fiction movies as “Detour,” has died at 87.

The actress died in her sleep at a nursing home on Christmas Day from complications following a series of strokes, said her manager, Kent Adamson.

Her Hollywood career had largely been over since the mid-1950s, but she had a resurgence over the past year with a starring role in Canadian cult filmmaker Guy Maddin”s “My Winnipeg.”

Starting with her 1943 debut in the crime story “One Dangerous Night,” Savage made more than 30 films through the 1950s, including Westerns (“Saddles and Sagebrush,” “Satan”s Cradle”), musicals (“Dancing in Manhattan,” “Ever Since Venus”) and wartime tales (“Passport to Suez,” “Two-Man Submarine”).

Savage was best-known for director Edgar G. Ulmer”s 1945 B-movie “Detour,” in which she played a woman ruthlessly blackmailing a stranger, played by Tom Neal.

Robert Ward

MACON, Ga. — Robert Ward, a Georgia blues musician who played with some of Motown”s biggest artists, died Thursday. He was 70.

His wife Roberta told The Telegraph of Macon that her husband died at his home in Dry Branch in central Georgia. She said her husband had suffered a stroke in 2001 and never fully recovered.

Robert Ward, a Georgia native, moved to Ohio and founded The Ohio Untouchables, which later became The Ohio Players. In the 1970s, he moved to Detroit where he performed with The Temptations, Wilson Pickett and other Motown artists.

The vocalist and guitarist recorded multiple albums over his career starting in 1991 with “Fear No Evil.” His last album, “New Role Soul,” was released in 2000.