By Colleen Cason

A note of discord has sounded over the estate of the founder of the '60s rock band Delaney & Bonnie and Friends.

Michele Bramlett of Camarillo filed a petition last month in Los Angeles County Superior Court challenging the trust left by her father, Delaney Bramlett. The hit composer and acclaimed guitarist died in December in Los Angeles at age 69 from complications of gall bladder surgery and left his estate to his wife.

Michele Bramlett believes her father was mentally unsound and unduly influenced by his wife, Susan Lanier Bramlett, when he signed the 2007 trust. Lanier Bramlett maintains her late husband was of sound mind and writing songs up until his death, and charges that Michele Bramlett visited him infrequently in his last years and was not familiar with his mental state.

At stake for Michele Bramlett and her two younger sisters are the inheritance of Delaney's Sunland ranch, the rights to his song catalog as well as his collection of guitars ? some given to him by rock ?n' roll's most stellar frontmen. Under terms of the trust, the three women will only inherit whatever is left of the estate when Lanier Bramlett dies.

Delaney Bramlett co-wrote Eric Clapton's "Let It Rain," the oft-covered "Never Ending Song of Love" and "Superstar," a chart buster for The Carpenters.

Considered a musician's musician, he is widely credited with teaching George Harrison to play the slide guitar and encouraging Clapton to strike out on his own when his band Blind Faith fizzled after its one and only tour in 1969. Clapton performed with Delaney & Bonnie before embarking on a solo career.

Mental capacity questioned

Michele Bramlett, 47, claims in the court document that her father lacked the mental capacity to sign over his estate to Lanier Bramlett.

Delaney Bramlett's battle with the bottle was well known to his family. Michele Bramlett's petition cites an episode in the early 1990s when Delaney signed away the rights to his songs. In 1996, he sued to regain those rights, and the case was settled in his favor after his attorney presented evidence Delaney suffered from alcoholic dementia and lacked the capacity to make such a decision, according to H. Miles Lang of Camarillo, Michele Bramlett's counsel.

The petition asks the court to determine if Bramlett's trust, dated May 10, 2007, was "procured by means of fraud, duress, menace and undue influence, thereby rendering it invalid," according to attorney Lang.

The document also alleges Lanier Bramlett "engaged in conduct to isolate Delaney from his daughters, friends, business associates and grandchildren."

"Something bad wrong was happening," said Michele Bramlett. "She (Susan) would never let me talk to my dad alone. And my phone calls were intercepted."

Growing up on dad's ranch

This contrasts with the comfortable home Michele remembers from her childhood. Her parents met in 1961 when Delaney was playing the old Bandar nightclub in Ventura. Michele's mother, Patty King Stanley, walked in wearing a red dress that caught the musician's eye. Although her parents never married, Michele split her time between her dad's ranch and her mom's home in Ventura.

"I remember laying in my bed at the ranch and hearing his music through the walls," she said. "It was controlled chaos. My Mamo (grandmother) was cooking greens and making sweet tea for all the musicians who came to record in my dad's studio."

Lanier Bramlett maintains she did nothing to drive a wedge between Delaney and his daughters.

Instead, she said, Michele lived in New York during the past several years and visited her father only a few times in a space of six years, so she had little opportunity to observe him.

Lanier Bramlett argues that her husband was of sound mind, writing songs and recording up until the time of his death.

"He would be mortified that his daughter is making this claim. It is dismissing all his later work," said Lanier Bramlett, an actress whose credits include a recurring role on the TV sitcom "Welcome Back, Kotter."

The petition also questions whether Delaney and Lanier Bramlett were legally married. If Lanier Bramlett's role was that of caregiver ? not of spouse ? a state probate statute prevents her from inheriting the estate, according to Lang, who added he has been unsuccessful in finding a marriage license for the pair.

Widow says marriage legal

Lanier Bramlett said she and Delaney had known each other for 30 years after they met when he was playing the Troubadour in West Hollywood. They were married April 20, 2005, at the Shadow Hills Presbyterian Church in Sunland, she said, adding that she would prove that in court.

When asked to present a copy of the marriage license for this article, Lanier Bramlett declined to do so on the advice of her attorney. She instead e-mailed a photo she said was taken on their wedding day.

Michele Bramlett counters she flew into Southern California at least once a year, and in the past few years her visits increased to around four a year. She is sure of that because her grandmother Iva "Mamo" Bramlett ? who lived at her father's ranch ? was in failing health so she wanted to spend more time with her. Iva Bramlett died in March of last year at age 92.

During each of those visits, the father she observed was "totally emotionless, and he would look like a zombie," she said. "He'd be sitting on the bed and looking like there was nothing in his eyes."

?Sharp as a tack'

Delaney's brother John disagrees. "He was as sharp as a tack until maybe a month before his death," said John Bramlett, who lives in Norwalk and said he visited his brother's home three or four days a week for the past few years.

"Even in the hospital, my brother would say, ?Hand me a pencil and paper. I got an idea for a song,'" said John Bramlett, 71.

While John Bramlett said he is sympathetic to his niece's concerns, he points out Delaney was not a man who was easily led. "Nobody ever made my brother do anything he didn't want to do," he said.

Attorney Lang admits the extent of Delaney Bramlett's estate at the time of his death is only a guess at this point.

At least one of the most valuable instruments is long gone. The BBC reported in September 2004 that the Telecaster given to Delaney by George Harrison had been auctioned for almost $435,000.

John Bramlett's wife, Yolanda, said she worked as Delaney's bookkeeper and helped arrange the sale of the vintage Les Paul given to Delaney by the late rocker Duane Allman a few years ago to save Delaney's home from foreclosure.

Michele Bramlett believes her father meant for his daughters to inherit his prized instruments, recalling how he assembled the girls, told them that he was getting older and had selected guitars for each to own after his passing.

Neither of Michele Bramlett's sisters ? Suzanne or Bekka ? gave interviews for this article, although both were offered the opportunity to speak on the record through attorney Lang. Both women are children of Delaney's marriage to singer Bonnie Bramlett. Suzanne Bramlett lives in Los Angeles; Bekka lives in Nashville, and she records and tours with country artist Vince Gill.

Michele Bramlett believes her father would want his daughters to share in the rewards of his distinguished music career.

"I know this wouldn't be his wishes. Everybody who knew him knows how much he loves his girls," she said.

The matter is scheduled to be heard in Los Angeles Superior Court on May 15.