​Thanks for visiting. I'm a retired Lifeguard Chief for the San Diego Lifeguard Service who has been active in lifesaving, boating safety, and drowning prevention since 1979. Most of my current work, along with much of my work while I served as a professional ocean lifeguard, involves volunteer leadership and authorship in a variety of capacities locally, nationally, and internationally. This website comprises my curriculum vitae, for those who may have an interest. I occasionally ​offer my services as a consultant to governments, organizations, and in legal proceedings. This website details my qualifications and expertise.

​Lifesaving, Boating Safety, and Drowning Prevention Leadership

​

International Life Saving Federation - President of the Americas Region: The ILS is the world’s international organization of lifesavers, promoting world water safety through a wide variety of initiatives. The ILS promotes drowning prevention efforts, sets international lifesaving standards, conducts the biennial World Lifesaving Championships, and hosts lifesaving conferences. The President of the Americas Region oversees ILS activities throughout the Western Hemisphere (including North, Central, South America, the Caribbean, and Hawaii). (1995 – present)

United States Lifesaving Association - Chair – National Certification Committee (2018 – present, and 1992 – 2005), Editor, American Lifeguard Magazine (2015 – present), Liaison Officer (2015 – 2020, and 2000 - 2003), President (2003 – 2015): The USLA is America's nonprofit, professional association of beach lifeguards and open water rescuers. The USLA works to reduce the incidence of death and injury in the aquatic environment through public education, national lifeguard standards, training programs, promotion of high levels of lifeguard readiness, and other means. The USLA provides the Lifeguard Agency Certification Program, Aquatic Agency Response Team program, www.usla.org website, and conducts the annual USLA National Lifeguard Championships. The USLA is the USA’s Full Member to the International Life Saving Federation.

Water Safety USA- Moderator: Water Safety USA is a roundtable of equals composed of longstanding national nonprofit and governmental organizations with a strong record of providing drowning prevention and water safety programs, including public education. It exists to empower people with resources, information, and tools to safely enjoy and benefit from our nation’s aquatic environments. (2014 - 2019)

San Diego Lifeguard Service- Lifeguard Chief and (concurrently) Harbormaster (Mission Bay)- Agency responsibilities include water rescue of swimmers, marine firefighting, law enforcement via citation and arrest, coastal cliff rescue, swiftwater rescue (flood rescue), ocean rescue of boaters up to three miles offshore, staffing of a 24-hour dispatch center with full 9-1-1 capabilities, and public safety education programs. Responsibilities included participating in citywide labor negotiations, membership on the City Labor Advisory Committee, drafting five state legislative bills involving lifeguard and boating safety related issues ultimately enacted into California law -- including the California Boating Safety Act of 1999 -- and presiding over a biennial citizen committee to help develop boating safety and water use policies. January 1988 – September 2001 (Lifeguard Lieutenant 1986 – 1988; Lifeguard Sergeant 1985 – 1986; Lifeguard 1979 – 1985)

International Life Saving Federation - Commissioner of Lifesaving: The ILS Lifesaving Commission seeks to reduce the incidence of drowning and other aquatic injuries throughout the world: through the development of organized lifesaving in areas of the world where it does not exist; support for existing lifesaving organizations; support for standardized public information and education; tracking the incidence of drowning throughout the world and publishing this data; development and identification of best medical practices; reviewing, identification, and development of best practices in rescue; and identification of best practices in the training, staffing, and equipping of lifesavers. The Lifesaving Commission included the Rescue Committee, Development Committee, World Drowning Report Committee, Education Committee, and Medical Committee. The Commissioner chairs a commission composed of the chairs of each of the committees and oversees its work. (September 2004 – 2008)

United States Lifeguard Standards Coalition - Co-Founder and Member - This collaborative effort of the American Red Cross, United States Lifesaving Association and YMCA of the USA seeks to research, identify and promote evidence-based standards for lifeguarding. (2006 – present)

International Life Saving Federation - Liaison to the World Congress on Drowning 2002 - Amsterdam, The Netherlands: This international conference on drowning was sponsored by the oldest society on drowning in the world and identified key issues in the prevention, rescue and treatment of drowning worldwide. (1999 – 2002)

World Congress on Drowning 2002 - Chair, Rescue Task Force - See details above.

State of California Boating Safety Advisory Committee, California Department of Boating and Waterways - Member - This committee was mandated by state law to recommend enhancements to California boating law. (1998)

United States Lifesaving Association - Chair, Textbook Committee - This committee has developed the last three iterations of Open Water Lifesaving - The United States Lifesaving Association Manual, which is used to train beach lifeguards in the USA by over 150 lifeguard agencies. (1994 – present

California Surf Lifesaving Association - President: The Southwest Region of the United States Lifesaving Association. CSLSA includes beach lifesavers from Hawaii, California, and Arizona. (1993 – 1997