Courtesy: United States Lifesaving Association (USLA)

United States Surf Lifesaving National Team Staff selects 16 athletes to represent the U.S. at the 2023 International Surf Rescue Challenge to be hosted for the first time in the United States, in South Padre, TX, from September 20, to September 23, 2023.

The United States Lifesaving Association National Team staff will take eight women and eight men to challenge Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, and South Africa in the 2023 International Surf Rescue Challenge (ISRC). The bi-annual event will be held for the first time in the United States since its inception in 1999. The international surf lifesaving invitational tournament consists of three ‘Tests’ of surf lifesaving competition. Each Test will allow the athletes the opportunity to race the best of the best from the world’s top surf lifesaving teams.

The event lineup includes surf swims, board races, surf ski races, beach sprints and combinations of the disciplines in the ironman and ironwoman individual and relay championships. In addition, the Rescue Race, Beach Flags, mixed Board and Surf Ski Relays will be conducted on each of the three days of competition. Teams are only allowed to use six male and six female athletes each day.

The men’s team will be led by Tom O’Neill (Riis Park, NY) celebrating his eighth National Team selection. Other National Team returners include Beach Flag veteran Mo Peacock (Wrightsville, NC) and craft specialist Chase Robertson (Palm Beach, FL). Making their first National Team appearances are swim specialists Stephen Blaauw (LA County, CA) and Josh Mcinitire (Sussex County, DE) craft specialists Dylan Narcowich (Deerfield, FL) and Matt Lynskey (Palm Beach, FL) and beach flag & sprint star Konner Knarr (Rehoboth Beach, DE).

Eight elite female athletes, four veterans, and four newcomers will challenge a collection of the top surf lifesaving sport athletes from around the world. Leading the team will be 2022 & 2023 USLA Nationals High Point winner, Casey Francis (Fort Lauderdale, FL) whose endurance level and speed makes her a force in every event. Joining her are swimmers Sam Tadder (Virginia Beach, VA) and Montana White (Huntington, CA), beach specialists Sophia Gulotti (Sussex County, DE) and Torre Moser (Wrightsville, NC), and three multi discipline stars Hallie Lynskey (Palm Beach, FL), Holly Maine (LA County, CA) and April O’Gorman (Volusia, FL).

The team will be led by Team Manager Tom McGibney and Head Coach Hunter Hay. Staff members Joji Abasolo, Jen Noonan, Mike O’Donnell and Merrill Riley will manage the team as they take on the best surf lifesaving athletes from around the world.