Paramount Pictures is the second to last major Hollywood studio to give its presentation at CinemaCon 2024. Warner Bros., Lionsgate, and Universal Pictures have brought some awesome reveals to the convention thus far, including exclusive looks at Beetlejuice 2, John Wick Presents: Ballerina, Wicked, and more. The official convention of the National Association of Theatre Owners (NATO), CinemaCon has become one of the top news events for moviegoers since it debuted in 2011. Every year, studios, distributors, exhibitors, industry professionals, and more unite at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas to celebrate the communal theatrical experience and discuss what’s coming in the future. After Paramount, Walt Disney Studios will be the last to present their upcoming slate of theatrical releases to theater owners at CinemaCon 2024.

CinemaCon 2024 is not open to the public, but fear not because DiscussingFilm is on the ground this year reporting the biggest announcements and reveals. From Paramount Pictures, fans can expect news related to upcoming releases like IF, A Quiet Place: Day One, the upcoming animated film Transformers One, and perhaps even Sonic the Hedgehog 3 and Gladiator 2. There could be more news related to the animated Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles and animated Avatar: The Last Airbender franchises as well. Paramount always gives an impressive presentation, so it also wouldn’t be shocking to get a surprise update on Mission: Impossible 8 even though it got delayed to 2025.

Exclusive footage and first-look reveals from CinemaCon are never released to the public, so that’s where we come in. Aside from listing huge updates, we’ll also describe all exclusive footage shown to CinemaCon 2024 attendees. Stay tuned as we cover all the announcements and reveals from Paramount Pictures’ 2024 CinemaCon presentation, and make sure to stay tuned as we report the presentations from Walt Disney Studios later today.

New Paramount Pictures films confirmed at CinemaCon 2024

A new installment of The Scary Movie comedy franchise

A live-action, Rated-R adaptation of Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: The Last Ronin.

Untitled Damien Chazelle film.

G.I. Joe and Transformers crossover film.

Bee Gees biopic directed by Ridley Scott.

Star Trek: Origins film written by Seth Grahame-Smith.

The Running Man remake directed by Edgar Wright and starring Glen Powell.

The Naked Gun remake starring Liam Neeson and directed by Akiva Schaffer.

A new original horror film titled Vicious starring Dakota Fanning.

A new musical from South Park creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone with music from Kendrick Lamar.

Paw Patrol 3.

Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Mutant Mayhem Sequel.

Aang: The Last Airbender with the voice cast featuring Eric Nam as Aang and Dave Bautista as the film’s villain.

A Quiet Place: Part One

Release Date: June 28, 2024.

Directed by Michael Sarnoski.

Exclusive Footage Description from CinemaCon 2024:

IF

Release Date: May 17, 2024.

Directed by John Krasinski.

Paramount Pictures debuted the final trailer for John Krasinski’s IF at CinemaCon 2024.

Transformers One

Release Date: September 13, 2024.

Directed by Josh Cooley.

Exclusive Footage Description from CinemaCon 2024:

CinemaCon 2024 got to see the very first trailer from the new animated movie Transformers One. The story follows a young Optimus Prime, still known as Orion Pax (Chris Hemsworth), and his brother-like relationship with a young Megatron, known as D-16 (Brian Tyree Henry). The two robots do handy work together in the underground world of Cybertron, but their friendship grows shaky when Megatron wants to rebel and find out why no robots are allowed on the surface of Cybertron. Optimus reluctantly decides to help him figure out the truth behind this mystery because he can’t help but support his best friend, even if it may not be the best idea. The two decide to embark on a journey together to unravel the secrets of Cybertron, a journey that will eventually make them rivals.

The entire scene shown at CinemaCon 2024 focused on Orion Pax and D-16 breaking into a train facility with the help of the not-so-helpful B-127 (Keegan-Michael Key), soon to be known as Bumblebee. They are eventually caught by one of their Autobot friends on patrol, Elita-1 (Scarlett Johansson). Elita-1 tries to report them to the authorities for breaking in, which leads to a colorful chase as the train the group was looking for actually takes off and sends them all on a scenic trip across Cybertron. Orion and D-16 catch up to Elita-1 as it surprisingly reaches the surface of Cybertron, which leaves them all stunned in amazement. The surface of Cybertron looks beautiful with its galactic views and electronic landscapes, which leaves perplexed and asking questions as to why none of them are allowed to be up here.

Suddenly, a large cybernetic force appears in the distance, almost as if the surface of the planet itself is morphing into a monster with tentacles that doesn’t want anyone to see what the outside world has to offer. Orion reveals to Elita-1 that they have found the “Matrix of Leadership,” which is the reason why they want to uncover more of what the leaders of Cybertron are hiding. The footage then ends when we see the group try to escape from the monstrous force on the planet’s surface. There were also other significant bits of footage shown, like D-16 molding the first-ever Decepticon emblem from lava. The 3D animation is incredibly vibrant and sleek, with loads of color and fantastical designs on full display. Cybertron is full of other kinds of cybernetic creatures and landscapes, which all look gorgeous in this film’s animation style.

Transformers One looks like no other film from the series, even the iconic animated from the ’80s. Fans will be happy to know that Chris Hemsworth is almost unrecognizable as Orion, aka Optimus. It’s hard to tell that he’s voicing the role. Meanwhile, Keegan-Michael Key brings his comedic charm to B-127 and Scarlett Johansson brings strong resilience to Elita-1’s voice. Brian Tyree Henry, however, sounds the most exciting as the soon-to-be Megatron as he goes from sounding like a loveable brother to Optimus to a suspicious adversary on a dime. Their robot designs, which borrow various elements from the classic ’80s cartoon, the Transformers: Animated series from the late 2010s, and the fan-favorite War for Cybertron video games, all match perfectly with the respective voice actors.

Sonic the Hedgehog 3

Release Date: December 20, 2024.

Directed by Jeff Fowler.

Exclusive Footage Description from CinemaCon 2024:

CinemaCon 2024 only got a very brief look at Sonic the Hedgehog 3 since it barely wrapped production. The brief teaser showed Jim Carry’s Dr. Robotnik in his lab, but he’s gained weight and has let the place go to the dumps with it being full of junk. He’s let his hair go crazy and now has a noticeable belly. Robotnik jokingly says that he’s been binging “carbohydrates.” His assistant, Agent Stone (Lee Majdoub), comes in and says, “We found him.” Stone presents Robotnik with one of Sonic’s blue electric quills, and, as he’s done before, Robotnik licks it and tweaks out. He yells, “Let’s do this!” to Stone’s face, which then cuts to a montage of Robotnik getting his hair cut by Stone and getting a fresh look with his game-accurate mustache, bald head, and depraved-looking eyes.

The Sonic the Hedgehog 3 footage then cuts to Robotnik and an entire gang of henchmen, all armored with laser guns, waking up Shadow the Hedgehog in a cryotube. Shadow opens his eyes, which are bursting with red electric energy. We then cut to Sonic (Ben Schwartz), Tails (Colleen O’Shaughnessey), and Knuckles (Idris Elba) facing off against Shadow in the middle of a huge city street at night. Shadow is noticeably dead silent as it’s still not revealed who the voice actor is. Knuckles jokes that this new Hedgehog is much stronger than the last one he faced, to which Sonic hilariously replies with, “You Mean me?”

The real money shot of the footage is Shadow the Hedgehog riding a motorcycle in the night sky over some skyscrapers and then using it to bounce himself towards Sonic, who is flying upwards at him at full speed. We see Sonic’s bright blue power clash with Shadow’s bright red energy in the night sky, looking like it’s straight out of an anime. The final shot of the exclusive footage showed Robotnik and Sonic away from a ring portal on an empty road. They both look grumpy and like they can’t stand each other’s company — implying that they’re going to have to work together to defeat Shadow.

Gladiator 2

Release Date: November 22, 2024.

Directed by Ridley Scott.

Exclusive Footage Description from CinemaCon 2024:

CinemaCon 2024 was treated to an early look at Gladiator 2, which featured unfinished footage since the film is still months away from release. The 5-minute reel started with footage from the first Gladiator as we see the iconic shot of Russel Crowe’s Maximus grazing his hand against a wheat field. We’re then introduced to Paul Mescal’s character, who recalls the impact that Maximus had in the Colosseum, “that a slave could get justice in the arena.” We see a hand grab a sword mounted on a wall labeled MAXIMUS. Gladiator 2 takes place 24 years after the original and follows Paul Mescal as Lucius, a renounced nobleman who enters the arena. Denzel Washington’s character is Lucius’ sponsor in the area, and he coaches him throughout the footage giving him advice and wisdom. “This is what they believe in… power,” he says.

We’re then introduced to Pedro Pascal’s character donning white and gold as he enters the scene riding on a chariot with an entire entourage. We see a pair of menacing emperors, similar to Joaquin Phoenix’s Commodus in the first Gladiator. Both have extremely pale skin and dark under-eye circles. One of the emporers is Joseph Quinn as we’ve never seen him before with blonde hair as he gives Pedro Pascal a crown. Quinn even does the iconic thumbs-down motion at the arena. Connie Nielsen returns as Lucille and is seen with Pascal mostly watching the arena. The arena is even bloodier as the Gladiators have to face a three-headed dog, baboons, and a giant rhino. Finally, it is revealed that Pascal makes his way to the Gladiator ring as he faces off against a group. In the end, Pascal and Mescal battle it out.