Bob Bryan, age 47, of LaOtto, passed away on Wednesday, December 28, 2022 at his home. Bob was born at the Lutheran Hospital in Fort Wayne, Indiana on March 17, 1975 to his loving parents, Terry Bryan and Donna (Gunsaullus) Bryan. Bob graduated from East Noble High School in 1994. He married his best friend and high school sweetheart, Kristie Leigh Edwards on December 23, 1995 at Immanuel Lutheran Church in Avilla. Bob was a 10 year 4-H member and rodeoed while in high school. He started Bobby Bryan Club Lambs 1993-1996. Always a hard worker, Bob worked for SRC construction while in high school and years to follow. Bob also worked alongside his dad, from 1995-1998, at his dad’s company, T & T Plumbing and Heating, LaOtto. In 1998, Bob started his own company Bn’B Earthwork, Inc. Bob lived by the motto, “Work hard, play hard” which he did alongside family and many friends who he cherished dearly. Bob’s girls, Kenzie and Maddie, were his entire world. He was the best dad and their best friend. Bob loved traveling with his family, helping his girls in 4-H and watching their activities, riding his Ranger, mushroom hunting, shooting guns, blowing stuff up, farming, and being the life of the party. Bob loved so well and to the fullest extent. He will be deeply missed by all who knew and loved him.

Survivors include:

Wife, Kristie Bryan of LaOtto.

Daughter, Mackenzie and Joshua Owens of Albion.

Daughter, Maddison and Chris Fort of Birmingham, Alabama.

Mother and father, Donna and Terry Bryan of LaOtto.

Sister, Terri Lea Bryan Pratt and her children, Amaya Pratt and Xander Pratt of Fort Wayne.

Brother-in-law, Lance D. Pratt of Fort Wayne.

Mother and father-in-law, Brenda and Bruce Anglin of Kendallville.

Mother-in-law, Carolyn Edwards of Kendallville.

He was preceded in death by his father-in-law, Robert Edwards on April 18, 2022.

Visitation will be held Tuesday, January 3, 2023 from 2:00 – 8:00 PM at Fairview Fellowship Church, 615 Professional Way, Kendallville, Indiana.

Funeral services will be held Wednesday, January 4, 2023 at 11:00 AM at Fairview Fellowship Church with Pastor Tyler Ward officiating.

Casket bearers will be Josh Owens, Chris Fort, Zander Pratt, David Wible, Jeff Wible, Doug Gunsaullus, Scott Gunsaullus, Kameron Wible, Nathan Wible and Nolan Wible.

Memorial donations may be made to Kristie Bryan.