California twins, both Grand Slam newcomers, make an early exit at the hands of Rafter, Agassi.

NEW YORK - Bob and Mike Bryan pulled out their computer and clicked through the U.S. Open draw late one night only to find they had met an astonishingly similar fate.

In first-round matches, Bob Bryan, a wild-card entrant, was to play Patrick Rafter, and Mike Bryan, a qualifier, was to face Andre Agassi, both in Arthur Ashe Stadium.

"Mike came out and hit with me this morning," Bob Bryan said Monday after losing to the sixth-seeded Rafter, 7-6 (3), 6-3, 7-5. "He went back, got a haircut. He's going to be looking good."

But Mike Bryan still lost to Agassi, 6-4, 6-1, 6-0.

For many, it provided an introduction to the affable, clean-cut Bryan brothers. Identical twins, they have played well in doubles this year, winning four titles on the ATP Tour, and they could land a spot on the U.S. Davis Cup team.

If they continue to impress, they could be a fixture on the team for years to come. At age 23, they are still young in their careers and able to recall how Agassi grew up in front of their eyes.

"We have posters of him in our room," Bob Bryan said. "... We've been looking up to the guy forever."

Now, they are part of the youth movement on Tour, in the same group as their good friend Andy Roddick. Recently, Roddick sang with the Bryan brothers' band.

"We didn't have a TV in our house, so we had to play music," said Bob Bryan, who was born in Camarillo, Calif. "I play keyboard. Mike plays drums.

"Andy Roddick is a rapper. Last weekend in Washington, D.C., he sang 'Ice Ice Baby' in front of the sponsors. Unbelievable."

Bob Bryan also leaked a little gossip. Pop singer Jessica Simpson asked for Roddick's phone number.

"He's all pumped," Bryan said. "He's going to call her, and maybe go to, like, the music awards with her."

VENUS WILLIAMS' ROLE MODELS: Fourth-seeded Venus Williams had a couple of tennis idols when she was growing up in Compton, Calif., including Monica Seles and Boris Becker.

"I used to serve like Boris Becker when I was in the juniors, with the rock back and everything," said Williams, who began defense of her Open title with a 6-2, 6-3 first-round victory over Lenka Dlhopolcova, a name she had trouble pronouncing all day. "It was Monica Seles for a while, too. That's why I grunt today."

As a child in one of the rougher parts of Los Angeles, Williams wasn't moved to imitate Becker's trademark diving volleys.

"There was glass on the court," Williams said.

Williams made 32 unforced errors yesterda was broken when she was serving for the match, but she converted her sixth of eight break points to win the match. Williams, on the cover of Time magazine this week along with Serena, is widely considered the favorite to retain her title.

A BREAK FOR DOKIC: Jelena Dokic cannot forget what happened last year, when her father and coach, Damir, went into a tirade on the third day of the Open. He was ejected for orall physically abusing tournament officials.

Damir Dokic, who also had confrontations at Wimbledon in 2000, was later banned from WTA Tour events for six months.

Though reinstated in May, he did not return to this year's Open, by his own choice. "He's taking a break," Dokic said. She said he stayed home in Australia to be with her 10-year-old brother, Savo, who is in school.