Bob and Mike Bryan held their annual charity event in Camarillo, CA this past weekend to raise money for charity. The Bryan Bros Foundation distributes money to support causes such as the Boys and Girls Club of Camarillo and Meadowlark Service League.

This year, the twin brothers were joined by the top American man in singles, Steve Johnson, as well as Mardy Fish and John Isner. A lifelong friend of the Bryan family Kaley Cuoco, star of The Big Bang Theory, showed up to lend her support. Two rock stars were in attendance and participated in the exhibition: James Valentine of Maroon 5 and Nate Ruess of Fun.

The players were in good spirits even in temperatures over 100 degrees. Asked how it feels to be the top U. S. man, Johnson joked, “It feels great. It’s always good to be ahead of John Isner so that’s all that really matters.”

The Bryans estimated that the event pulled in over $100,000 for the charities they support. Mike said, “It feels good to give back. Tennis has given us so much, and it’s put us in the position that we can actually raise some money and our Dad instilled that in us. Agassi was also a great role model with his foundation.”

The day started with a Pro/Am fundraiser while other patrons sampled wine, beer, and food from local businesses. A group of kids took the main court for some drills before the main event, an exhibition narrated by Kaley Cuoco. Even though the TV star said earlier in the day that she doesn’t play tennis anymore and she unequivocally does not miss it, she still knew all the tennis terms. At one point she offered to donate an additional $10,000 to the foundation if someone would hit a tweener.

After the tennis, the Bryans took the stage to perform. James Valentine told the crowd that the brothers are better at music than he is at tennis.

The brothers, now 38 years old, have long said that the Rio Olympics this summer would be a time for them to examine their futures on the pro tour. Even though they skipped the Olympics for health concerns, they did some soul searching after the U. S. Open. The result? They plan to play a full schedule in 2017 and they’re feeling fit and fresh.

“We’re hungry to get back on top. It doesn’t feel good to be 3 or 4, you always want to finish strong and that’s what we’re about,” Mike told Tennis View Magazine. “We want to finish like Kobe did with 80 points like Sampras won the US Open. We want to go out with a bang, I think we still can, we’re feeling good and we’re healthy.”

Asked what milestone would be appropriate, Bob pointed to the big number that they could easily reach before the end of the year. “In four or five matches we’ll hit 1000, that would be a great number. We’re going to play next year for sure, we’re going to have a great off season, work just as hard as we ever worked. Hire a trainer, get in the gym, get stronger, just get healthy for a grueling 2017.”