David Rebibo, the El Camino Real boys basketball coach for the past six years and leader of a remarkable turnaround from one victory in 2006 (two years before Rebibo took over) to three championship game appearances in the past four years, resigned Tuesday to take an assistant position at the University of San Francisco.

“At the end of the day, I have had dreams and aspirations to coach at the college level since I got into this and I simply couldn’t pass this up,” Rebibo said. “It all happened so fast.”

Rebibo, who took over in 2008, had the Conquistadores in the Div. III championship game in 2010, won the Div. II title against Garfield in 2012 and lost 65-59 to top-seeded Westchester in the Div. I championship this season.

ECR was also selected to play this season in the inaugural Open Division of the state playoffs.

Rebibo went 58-11 over the past two years. ECR has Julian Richardson, Maleke Haynes, Evan Wardlow, Julian Rochelin, Blair Orr and Kelton Conway all coming back with a City championship in mind.

“What made it really hard was the great group of guys I’ve had the honor of coaching,” Rebibo said. “They are very special to me. We have been through so much together.”

Rebibo would have liked to see this group through their senior years, but has no regrets.

“I feel we have accomplished a whole lot,” Rebibo said. “We went to three finals and one semifinal. We put ECR basketball on the map. It’s in a place it has never been. I feel real comfortable where the program stands.”

ECR athletic director Richard Yi now has the task of trying to keep things going in the right direction.

Yi confirmed former Kennedy standout and Boise State player Joe Wyatt will take over.

Wyatt has been Rebibo’s junior varsity coach.

“I think we all knew this day was coming when we hired David six years ago,” Yi said. “David impressed so much and has built a great structure. He couldn’t have passed this opportunity up. We are going to support Joe to the fullest and make sure he is successful.”