David Rebibo has been named boys’ basketball program head, the school announced Friday afternoon. He will also be a physical education teacher at the middle school, and will begin with the Wolverines after Spring Break.

Rebibo had been an assistant Ccach with the men’s basketball team at the University of San Francisco since 2013. Prior to coaching with the Dons, Rebibo was the head basketball coach at El Camino Real High since 2007.

“The opportunity to return to the high school level at one of the finest institutions in the country is a dream come true, and one that I could not pass up,” Rebibo said in the press release.

Rebibo turned around the El Camino Real basketball program around while coaching the Conquistadors; the team’s win total improved every season. In his first season there in 2007-08, the Conquistadors finished 0-10 in the West Valley League. Two seasons later, the team made it to the CIF Los Angeles City Section Division III championship game, and qualified for the State Division III tournament.

In his penultimate season, the Conquistadors won the CIF L.A. City Section Division II championship, qualified for the State Division II tournament, and advanced to the regional semifinal (round of 16). The Conquistadors played in Division I in Rebibo’s final season with the team in 2012-13. They lost in the championship game of the City Section playoffs and were one of just 14 teams in all of California to qualify for the state Open Division tournament.

Rebibo finished with an overall record of 109-72 (.661) after six seasons with El Camino Real.

In his first season at USF, the Dons finished tied for second place in the West Coast Conference, the program’s best result in conference play in the past 20 years. The Dons later qualified for the National Invitational Tournament that season for the first time since 2005.

“We are extremely excited to have Dave Rebibo lead our basketball program,” Head of Athletics Terry Barnum said in the press release. “He has a proven record of success and knows how to build an elite basketball program. His strong connection in Los Angeles and stellar reputation will be true assets for our school. The future of Harvard-Westlake basketball is bright.”

Rebibo will be the successor to Greg Hilliard, who stepped down from the head coaching position after 30 seasons.