Apply to the CDL program

For founders solving biological, medical, and healthcare problems using innovative applications of software, data science, cloud computing, and artificial intelligence.

The Computational Health stream at CDL-Seattle admits an annual cohort of pre-Seed and pre-Series A startups. The program brings together entrepreneurs, investors, and scientists with expertise building scalable computing-driven companies in a variety of fields related to biology, medicine, and healthcare. CDL startups work with these mentors to sharpen objectives, prioritize time and resources, raise capital, build networks, and engage with experts working on the frontiers of research.

Participating startups are provided additional support through this stream’s partnerships with Microsoft, Washington Research Foundation, Cooley LLP, the University of Washington’s Foster School of Business, College of Engineering, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, and CoMotion.

The startups attend five objective-setting sessions between October and June. CDL is a non-profit organization. There are no fees for participation and CDL does not take any equity. Learn more about the CDL program.

Who Should Apply?

The Computational Health Stream is particularly suited to founders who are capitalizing on trends in computer science, software engineering, data science, machine intelligence and cloud-computing to build viable commercial products in health. This stream is tailored towards early-stage companies (early venture or growth) or even projects (pre-incorporation); however, startups at all levels of maturity will be considered.

Example Innovation Areas

Computational Biology and Designed Proteins: The use of software like AlphaFold, Rosetta, RoseTTAFold to design novel medicines and next generation therapies.

Drug Discovery: Computing tools, techniques, software and platforms that help advance the speed of and capacity to discover new chemical or biological therapies.

Health Databases, Marketplace Platforms, and Workflow Tools for Providers: Methods for managing data or organizing clinical trends for the improvement of the patient experience or insurance outcomes.

Immuno-Oncology: Computational or data science-driven methods for discovering or developing biologics including monoclonals, antibody-drug conjugates, bi-specifics, or other antibody-like materials.

Biomanufacturing and Process Development: Tools and methods that improve speed, capacity, efficiency, purity and/or reduce the cost of producing biological compounds, protein drugs, and cell therapies.

Bioinformatics and -Omics: Approaches combining high-throughput biochemical assays and data-science methods to glean insights into drug development, clinical trials, or other biological applications.

Clinical Diagnostics and Tools: Technologies, algorithms, and software capable of monitoring biological indicators to improve therapeutic outcomes and clinical trials.

Image Processing and Radiology: Applications and computer-assisted methods that assist physicians and researchers including in image processing and analysis, and supporting surgical interventions.

Digital Therapeutics: Digital applications to track and assist in modifying human behavior, actions, or outcomes.

The list above is not exhaustive. Contact cdl-seattle@creativedestructionlab.com to discuss the program and your venture with someone from the Computational Health Stream.

Our Mentors

CDL mentors include accomplished entrepreneurs, experienced operators, active angel and venture investors, world-leading scientists, engineers, and economists. Mentors meet every eight weeks in Seattle to help founders set objectives over the program’s nine-month duration.

Companies accepted to the CDL Computational Health Stream benefit from meeting with these mentors periodically to evaluate their technologies, suggest improvements, and to explore formal advising engagements.

See all Computational Health mentors ▶︎