Synthesis and Other Virtual Real

Mary Rosenblum. Arkham House Publishers, $25.95 (280pp) ISBN 978-0-87054-170-4

Deserts, oceans, Antarctic wastelands--the locales in Rosenblum's first short-story collection and hardcover debut (after three paperback novels, most recently, The Stone Garden) tend to be extreme. Her characters, not surprisingly, live on the edge. Farmers struggle to survive in a drought-stricken future America. Sailors work to bring a captured iceberg to port. Virtual-reality artists throw everything into their work. Several of the nine stories are set in the arid universe of Rosenblum's widely praised first novel, Drylands. ""Water Bringer,"" for instance, concerns a disabled child who can work small miracles but who finds his talent rejected by his embittered father until a stranger brings temporary hope to their parched farming community. Moving from the desert to the ocean, ""Flood Tide"" concerns a father and son who argue bitterly over the son's decision to leave Earth for Tau Ceti. Also noteworthy is ""Synthesis,"" which involves a virtual-reality artist torn between his art and his loyalty to an aging, tyrannical father. Rosenblum writes about people caught up in painful conflicts, often intergenerational. Her characters usually achieve some form of reconciliation--with their parents, with their children or, at the very least, within themselves. Her prose is strong and her insights true; although more than one story here deals with virtual reality, the pleasures afforded by this collection are very real. Illustrations by Elizabeth L. Bourne. (July)

close

Details

Reviewed on: 07/01/1996

Genre: Fiction

Amazon

Apple Books

Barnes & Noble

Bookshop

Share

Tweet

Copy Link

Print

More By and About this Authorchevron_right

Mary Rosenblum

In this well-done tale of politics in near-Earth orbit from Rosenblum (The Stone Garden ), Ahni Huang, a class nine empath, cyborg and daughter of the ruler of Continue reading »

Mary Rosenblum

Rosenblum's compelling second novel examines the limits of reality and unreality in a universe whose business and pleasure are run from the confines of a worldwide network of virtual reality booths. Continue reading »

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR

THE BEST NEW BOOKS

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR THE BEST NEW BOOKS