Defy Distance: How to Use Virtual Reality to Engage Youth

Are your patrons craving connection? Are you looking for ways to engage middle and high school students through global awareness? Virtual Reality provides an opportunity to have agency, experience the world, and learn emerging technologies in public, school, and academic libraries. Laura McGinty and TuesD Chambers are staff members at Ballard High School with a goal of building community and encouraging global awareness by defying distance through VR. They will share protocols, lesson ideas, and ways to engage family and community members in virtual reality. And, in the process, create ways for people to connect with one another.

Ms. TuesD Chambers, Teacher Librarian: Ballard High School (she/her), Seattle Public Schools

Ms. Laura McGinty, Science Teacher: Ballard High School (she/her), Seattle Public Schools

Smart Facebook Marketing for Shoestring Budgets

Learn the most effective, free strategies you can use today to promote your library, programs, and services on Facebook. During this 60-minute workshop you'll discover how this powerful social media tool can be effectively used to build stronger relationships with patrons, grow your ties with the community, and develop local partnerships. By the end of this intensive session you will have a clear idea on how to position your library as a hub for your community and make it easier for your patrons to connect. We'll cover current best practices and discuss how Facebook can fit into your larger marketing strategy.

Rebekka Van Der Does, Copywriter and Media Consultant, Media Sundries

11:10 am–12:10 pm

Project LIT Leads the Way to School-Wide Reading Culture

Promote reading and build a school-wide reading culture with the student-led Project LIT Community, a national grassroots literacy movement. From in-school student and teacher challenges to LIT lunches and even parent involvement in the reading lives of students, we'll look at how the student-created Project LIT reading lists can center a school's reading culture around the lived realities of their students. In addition, the Project LIT Community focused on rewriting the narrative of what literature is deemed worthy of academic study and authentically advocates for greater diversity in our libraries and classrooms.

Rebecca Wynkoop, Teacher Librarian, Seattle Public Schools

Expanding Library Access Through Self-Serve Technology

Give your patrons what they want in small, rural libraries. More hours. More days. More convenience. More access to printing, internet, books, and quiet times. And do it without increasing staff. Learn how one library used expanded access hours, self-serve technology, and a remote security system to increase access from 27 open hours to 91 hours, 7 days a week.