Libya is known for its rich culture and contains some of the world’s most well-preserved ruins from ancient civilizations.

Libya is an oil-rich country located in north Africa; it is bordered by the Mediterranean Sea to the north and it shares borders with Egypt to the east, Tunisia and Algeria to the west, and Niger, Chad, and Sudan to the south. The country is known for its culture and history and contains some of the world’s most well-preserved ruins from ancient civilizations.

Libya has two major climate systems. In the south, the climate is hot and dry, characteristic of Sahara Desert. However, in the north, the Mediterranean Sea creates a milder climate.

The history of Libya comprises six distinct periods: ancient Libya, the Roman era, the Islamic era, Ottoman rule, Italian rule, and the modern era.

The Phoenicians were the first to establish trading posts in Libya where Phoenicians from Tyre, Lebanon established commercial relations and treaties with Libya's early inhabitants. In 630 B.C., the ancient Greeks colonized eastern Libya and founded the city of Cyrene. Within 200 years, four more important Greek cities were established, and Cyrene became one of the greatest intellectual and artistic centers of ancient Libya. It was also famous for its medical and philosophical schools and architecture.

The Romans ruled over what is now Libya from 146 BCE to the seventh century CE, starting with the fall of Carthage and lasting until the Muslim Arabs conquered it. Tripolitania and Cyrenaica were part of a cosmopolitan state whereby its citizens shared a common language, legal system, and Roman identity. Roman ruins like Leptis Magna and Sabratha attest to the vitality and greatness of this region.

Islamic rule started as early 642 when armies under the command of Amr ibn al-A'as conquered what was then Cyrenaica. During the Islamic civilization, the predominant religion in Libya became the Islamic faith and the official language became Arabic. The Berber languages are also spoken in various parts of the country. The Muslim empire, with its rich contributions to human civilization in the arts and sciences, added another rich dimension to Libya’s identity.

During the 16th century, Libya became part of the Ottoman Empire until the Italian occupation of the country in 1911.

From 1911 until 1951, Libya was under the rule of first the Italians then the Allied powers of World War II. In 1951, Libya declared its independence.

Despite the long and distinct rich Libyan history which was influenced to various degrees by the many diverse empires, including the Phoenicians, Carthaginians, Persians, Greek, Romans, Spaniards, Vandals, Byzantines, the Muslims and Ottomans, modern Libya is an emerging country that continues to develop its national consciousness, identity, and institutions.