The European Union has struggled to find a unified approach to the crisis in Libya, despite the country’s proximity to its shores.

Its inaction has increasingly left Turkey and Russia to call the shots in the oil-rich North African state — though their attempt to broker a long-term cease-fire stalled earlier this week.

However, Germany’s Chancellor Angela Merkel has invited powers with a stake in the Libyan war to attend a peace conference in Berlin on Sunday, the latest attempt to resolve the nine-year conflict. Ahead of Sunday’s conference, here’s a brief guide to the Libyan crisis and the conflict’s international dimensions.

Who’s fighting whom in Libya?

Two governments are vying for control of Libya. The Tripoli-based Government of National Accord (GNA), led by Prime Minister Fayez al-Sarraj, is recognized by the United Nations and backed by a host of militias. The rival administration in the country’s east is allied with warlord General Khalifa Haftar, who commands the so-called Libyan National Army (LNA).

Haftar, a onetime Gaddafi ally, presents himself as a bulwark against extremists, while opponents see in him a would-be dictator. The GNA, meanwhile, has struggled to assert its authority and is plagued by infighting. Both sides enjoy the support of foreign powers.

How did this conflict come about?

Libya turned into a failed state following the fall of dictator Muammar Gaddafi, whose overthrow in 2011 was aided by a NATO-led bombing campaign. Successive administrations have failed to control the country’s many militias, which wield the real power in Libya. Weapons proliferated in the rebellion’s aftermath despite an embargo.

Violence escalated in 2014, and after disputed elections that year the country became split between two administrations, with al-Sarraj taking the helm of the GNA in 2016. Meanwhile, Haftar launched a years-long military offensive that left him in control of large swaths of territory. The Islamic State briefly gained a foothold but was defeated.

In April last year, a Haftar-led push to take Tripoli led to another escalation. Nine months on, the offensive has resulted in a volatile stalemate. A temporary cease-fire brokered by Turkey and Russia last week appeared to be largely holding as of Thursday despite minor clashes.

Who’s backing Haftar and al-Sarraj?

In recent years, Libya’s conflict has turned into a proxy war, with a number of foreign powers joining in to defend ideological and economic interests. Al-Sarraj’s administration is backed by the U.N. and Western powers including the U.S., but mainly relies on Turkey, Qatar and Italy. Haftar enjoys the support of Egypt, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Russia, Saudi Arabia, Jordan and France.

The UAE has significantly aided Haftar with air support and advanced weapons, according to the U.N. Saudi Arabia has reportedly supported Haftar with generous funds, and Egypt has provided his forces with weapons and support through its porous border with Libya. France is widely thought to provide the general with military assistance; French missiles were found at an LNA base last year, but the government has denied supplying Haftar with weapons. Russia has been accused of deploying mercenaries in the country.

Ankara sent military advisers to Tripoli and on Thursday said it would deploy soldiers after the Turkish parliament approved a military mission in Libya earlier in January. The Turkish government has already provided Tripoli with equipment such as drones. There have also been reports of Syrian fighters allied to Turkey joining the fight in support of al-Sarraj.

What do the different countries want?

Italy, the former colonial power in Libya, sees stabilizing the country as a matter of national security. It bet on the al-Sarraj government to secure its interests, including access to oil reserves. Migration is another concern; Rome last year renewed a controversial migration agreement with the GNA. The French government officially denies supporting Haftar, but views the warlord as the best option to clamp down on extremism. France also has oil interests in Libya.

Saudi Arabia, Egypt and the UAE see in Haftar an ally against the spread of political Islam and in particular the Muslim Brotherhood, which they list as a terrorist organization. The GNA includes a Muslim Brotherhood-affiliated faction. Turkey and Qatar, on the other hand, are backers of the Muslim Brotherhood.

Besides ideological reasons, Turkey has another reason to support the GNA: Ankara and the al-Sarraj government recently signed a contentious maritime boundary agreement that would see Turkey claim parts of the eastern Mediterranean, an area thought to contain vast gas reserves, as its own.

The U.S. officially backs al-Sarraj, but has largely stayed out of the conflict under Donald Trump, though the president stunned allies last year when he praised Haftar in a phone call. Russia, meanwhile, has taken advantage to expand its influence in the region in the absence of unified Western engagement.

What role is Libya’s oil playing?

The rival administrations are also fighting for control of the country’s oil reserves, the largest in Africa and the backbone of Libya’s economy. Haftar has captured Libya’s so-called oil crescent, where most of the hydrocarbon reserves are located. U.N. resolutions name Libya’s state oil company, the Tripoli-based National Oil Corporation (NOC), as the only entity permitted to manage and sell the country’s oil, though there have been attempts by Haftar to break its monopoly.

Several international companies work with the NOC. Italy’s Eni is the largest foreign oil producer in the country, but it’s facing competition from France’s Total, which is expanding its operations there. Fighting forced Eni to suspend production at one oil field several times over the past months, and the precarious situation also delayed a deal between the Italian company and BP to boost production. Adding to the mix, Russia’s Taftnet resumed exploration activities late last year.

How is the EU involved?

Stabilizing Libya is a vital security matter for the EU and its member countries. The war-riven country currently serves as a major departure point for irregular migration from northern Africa to Europe, in particular Italy. Libya is also awash in weapons, and though the Islamic State affiliate there was defeated, extremism remains a concern.

Yet with France and Italy backing opposing sides, the EU has struggled to respond to the chaos unfolding in Libya; the French government last year blocked an EU statement calling on Haftar to stop his Tripoli offensive. An appeal for European support from al-Sarraj last year was left largely unanswered.

Brussels has largely focused on migration management, but its cooperation with the Libyan coast guard has come under intense criticism from human rights advocates. The Associated Press recently found that vast sums of EU money make their way into the hands of militants and coast guard officers who exploit and abuse migrants.

What’s being done to de-escalate the conflict?

This month has seen a flurry of diplomacy on Libya. Merkel went to Moscow to talk Libya, among other issues, and both al-Sarraj and Haftar traveled to Rome, though they did not meet. The U.N.-backed leader also came to Brussels for talks with EU officials, but European efforts have so far failed to yield any result.