(1914–2005). American director and producer Robert Wise made many commercially and critically successful movies that combine dramatic tension with the insightful depiction of character. Two of his films—West Side Story (1961; codirected with Jerome Robbins) and The Sound of Music (1965)—won Academy Awards for best picture and earned Wise awards for best director.

Wise was born on September 10, 1914, in Winchester, Indiana, but grew up in Connersville, Indiana. He studied journalism at nearby Franklin College before working at RKO Studios in Hollywood, California, in 1933. After serving as a sound, music, special-effects, and assistant editor, he rose to the rank of full editor in 1939, working on such films as The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1939) and My Favorite Wife (1940). Most famously, Wise edited director Orson Welles’s Citizen Kane (1941), for which he received an Academy Award nomination, and also significantly reedited Welles’s The Magnificent Ambersons (1942).

Wise’s first chance to direct was with The Curse of the Cat People (1944), an eerie, touching film about a young girl dangerously prone to fantasizing. His next film was Mademoiselle Fifi (1944), a loose adaptation of a pair of stories by Guy de Maupassant that focused on a courageous laundress (played by Simone Simon) during the Franco-German War. The Body Snatcher (1945) was a low-budget film based on a Robert Louis Stevenson story about a doctor who hires a grave robber (Boris Karloff) to supply him with cadavers for his experiments.

Wise’s next two efforts were unexceptional, but Born to Kill (1947) was a successful film noir in which Lawrence Tierney played a killer who tries to marry his way into respectability. In 1948 Wise directed the western Blood on the Moon, starring Robert Mitchum and Robert Preston, and the detective tale Mystery in Mexico. His next film, The Set-Up (1949), featured Robert Ryan as an over-the-hill prizefighter who refuses to take a dive. The movie is widely considered to be both an essential film noir and one of the greatest boxing films ever made.

After a few less memorable films, Wise directed the science-fiction film The Day the Earth Stood Still (1951). It had a considerable budget and a strong cast that included Michael Rennie, Patricia Neal, and Sam Jaffe. It also featured a memorable score by Bernard Herrmann and a philosophical screenplay by Edmund North with a subtext drenched in the dread of nuclear war.

Several lesser works followed before Wise directed Executive Suite (1954), one of the best-received films of the decade. The movie chronicled a cutthroat power struggle at a furniture company. It featured a large distinguished cast (including William Holden, Fredric March, Barbara Stanwyck, Walter Pidgeon, June Allyson, and Shelley Winters) and several subplots, the various strands of which were shrewdly woven together by Wise.

Wise directed several more films in 1956–57 before moving to United Artists. There he made the suspenseful submarine-warfare drama Run Silent, Run Deep (1958) with Burt Lancaster and Clark Gable. Attracting even more attention was I Want to Live! (1958), in which Susan Hayward earned the only Academy Award of her career (for best actress) for her portrayal of a hard-boiled prostitute who is seemingly railroaded into a death sentence. Wise was also honored with his first nomination for best director. His last project of the decade, Odds Against Tomorrow (1959), was a caper film that also explored racism.

Wise began the 1960s by codirecting the musical West Side Story (1961) with Robbins, who had directed and choreographed the long-running Broadway hit on which the film was based. The resulting film was a tremendous critical as well as commercial success and received 10 Academy Awards, including best picture and best director. The movie featured Natalie Wood and Richard Beymer as star-crossed lovers, with Academy Award-winning supporting performances by George Chakiris and Rita Moreno.

The romantic comedy Two for the Seesaw (1962), based on the 1958 play by William Gibson, was less successful. Wise then went to England to make the suspenseful psychological thriller The Haunting (1963). Julie Harris and Claire Bloom starred in that version of Shirley Jackson’s novel The Haunting of Hill House (1959), which is widely considered to be among the best ghost stories on film.

Wise’s next film, The Sound of Music (1965), was a huge hit that became the highest-grossing film in history to that date. It was based on the real-life story of the Trapp family, who escaped Nazi-held Austria in 1938. The film starred Julie Andrews as the family’s governess, a role first made famous by Mary Martin in the original Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II stage hit. Wise, who filmed in the Austrian Alps, won his second Academy Award for best director, and the film won for best picture, while Andrews was nominated for best actress.

In 1966 Wise directed The Sand Pebbles (1966), an epic adventure that starred Steve McQueen and Richard Attenborough as sailors on a U.S. gunboat in China in 1926 and Richard Crenna as their captain. The sprawling film was nominated for best picture, and McQueen was nominated for best actor. Wise’s return to the big-budget musical, Star! (1968), in which Andrews portrayed stage star Gertrude Lawrence, was a box-office failure.

For the remainder of his career, Wise limited the number of films he directed. After making The Andromeda Strain (1971) from Michael Crichton’s best-selling novel about a toxic virus from outer space, he directed the melodramatic Two People (1973), with Peter Fonda; The Hindenburg (1975), chronicling the events around the famous dirigible disaster; the thriller Audrey Rose (1977), with Anthony Hopkins; and the big-budget Star Trek: The Motion Picture (1979), the first entry in the franchise of movies based on the Star Trek television series. Wise took a 10-year hiatus and then filmed Rooftops (1989), a nonmusical variation on West Side Story that failed to find an audience. At age 84 he directed his last film, the made-for-TV A Storm in Summer (2000).