Cross-country is arguably the most consistent sport among Fort Collins-area prep schools.

Every year, there's elite success — and last year was the latest example.

Local runners accounted for seven podium finishes at the state meet, with Heritage Christian winning a Class 2A girls team title, Liberty Common's Isabel Allori repeating as 3A girls champ and the Fossil Ridge girls beating out nationally-ranked competition for a runner-up 5A finish.

This year should be no different. While a generational standout like Allori is gone, there are plenty of state contenders returning this fall.

More athletes to watch: Top Fort Collins-area softball stars this season

Here are a dozen Fort Collins-area cross-country runners to watch for the fall 2024 high school season:

Tatum Berg, Fossil Ridge

Berg is the top returning runner for a Fossil Ridge squad that brings back nearly its entire scoring roster from a remarkable 5A runner-up finish last fall.

The senior has been a SaberCats staple since she was a freshman and is poised for a big final season.

Berg had her best year yet as a junior, placing 12th individually at state cross-country while also earning top-five Class 5A finishes at state track in the one- and two-mile events.

Cadel Ruthven, Fort Collins

The Lambkins' junior had a breakout sophomore campaign, posting four sub-16 minute times and earning a podium finish (10th) at the 5A state meet.

He followed that up with a strong spring on the track, which included top-three state track performances (800 and 1,600 meters) and four new personal-record times at the Nike Outdoor Nationals.

Ruthven could help Fort Collins vault into the 5A top 5 with a junior jump.

Izzy Schimmelpfennig, Timnath

The rising Cubs' sophomore burst onto the scene as a freshman. She placed fifth among 2A runners at the state meet, won an event and had three other runner-up finishes during the season.

Schimmelpfennig has one of the 50 best times (18 minutes, 29.76 seconds) among all classes for returning Colorado girls runners, but the task gets tougher with Timnath moving up from Class 3A to 4A this season.

Carter Brazelton, Fossil Ridge

Brazelton could be a force this year, and he leads the returning local boys runners with the top time last year (15:30). He took third in regionals and 21st at the 5A state race and was also a top-20 distance performer at state track.

There are high hopes for the Fossil Ridge boys squad this fall, and the SaberCats' senior could lead that charge.

Mikaela Kendall, Heritage Christian

Kendall has already shined as an underclassmen, winning a state track title as a freshman and finishing runner-up in 2A cross-country last year. Oh yeah, she also helped the Eagles win their first-ever cross-country team title.

Heritage Christian returns much of that championship squad, so it should be another big fall for Kendall and co.

Mia Williams, Fossil Ridge

The SaberCats' senior forms a dynamic distance duo with Berg, and she's not exactly far behind.

She posted a top-20 finish among 5A runners at state last year and threatened the sub-18 minute mark (18:01) with a PR at the Liberty Bell Invite. Williams also posted two PRs at the Nike Outdoor Nationals in June, bringing momentum into her final prep season.

Tyson Bhalla, Rocky Mountain

The Lobos' senior is the picture of consistency, scoring eight top-10 finishes in his junior season and only going over 17 minutes once.

He set a new PR (15:52) in the Front Range League Championships and was a top-10 Class 5A performer in the two-mile run at state track last spring. Expect Bhalla to be Rocky's top runner for an improving boys team.

Leah McDonald, Poudre

McDonald surged in her junior season, winning the Andy Meyers Invitational in Greeley (with a new course and personal best time of 18:01.60) and earning four other top-10 finishes.

She narrowly missed out on 5A state qualifying despite an eighth-place FRL finish. McDonald should be among the state pick this time.

Lindsey Kaines, Rocky Mountain

Kaines will lead the Lobos' girls team this fall after a strong 2023 season that saw her place among the top-50 runners in Class 5A at state.

The senior has one of the top returning local times (18:26) and added a top-10 finish in the 800 meters at state track last spring. After several close class last year, it wouldn't be a surprise to see Kaines get a race win this season.

Ian Molgaard, Heritage Christian

The Eagles' junior looks like a contender this fall, coming off a seventh-place finish (and new PR of 16:48.20) in Class 2A at last year's state meet.

Molgaard was also runner-up at the Mile High/Foothills league meet and fifth in 2A regional action. Heritage Christian has a strong junior class, but expect Molgaard to lead the pack.

Sorrelle Salcido, Fort Collins

The Fort Collins senior could improve on a promising junior campaign, when she shaved over two minutes off her average time and posted three top-10 race finishes.

If Salcido shows similar improvement in her final season, she could challenge for city supremacy and help the Lambkins continue the school's proud distance running tradition.

Addison Geraets, Timnath

It's time for seniors to shine at Timnath, with the school finally having seniors in the school's third year.

Geraets has already made her mark, placing ninth and 22nd at her first two 3A state meets and winning a 300 hurdles track title while helping the Cubs win their first-ever team championship last spring.

She'll help Timnath adjust to Class 4A competition as a leader for the Cubs' deep, talented distance team.

Bonus names to know: