The Timurid Empire was a Turco-Mongol empire comprising modern-day Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, Iran, the southern region of the Caucasus, Iraq, Kuwait, Afghanistan, much of Central Asia, as well as parts of contemporary Russia, India, Pakistan, Syria and Turkey.

The empire was founded by Timur (also known as Tamerlane), a warlord of Turco-Mongol lineage, who established the empire between 1370 and his death in 1405. He envisioned himself as the great restorer of the Mongol Empire of Genghis Khan, regarded himself as Genghis's heir, and associated much with the Borjigin. Timur continued vigorous trade relations with Ming China and the Golden Horde, with Chinese diplomats like Ma Huan and Chen Cheng regularly traveling west to Samarkand to buy and sell goods. The empire led to the Timurid Renaissance, particularly during the reign of astronomer and mathematician Ulugh Begh.

By 1467, the ruling Timurid dynasty, or Timurids, lost most of Persia to the Aq Qoyunlu confederation. However, members of the Timurid dynasty continued to rule smaller states, sometimes known as Timurid emirates, in Central Asia and parts of India. In the 16th century, Babur, a Timurid prince from Ferghana (modern Uzbekistan), invaded Kabulistan (modern Afghanistan) and established a small kingdom there. Twenty years later, he used this kingdom as a staging ground to invade India and establish the Mughal Empire.

The power of Timurids declined rapidly during the second half of the 15th century, largely due to the Timurid/Mongol tradition of partitioning the empire as well as several civil wars. The Aq Qoyunlu conquered most of Iran from the Timurids, and by 1500, the divided and wartorn Timurid Empire had lost control of most of its territory, and in the following years was effectively pushed back on all fronts. Persia, the Caucasus, Mesopotamia, and Eastern Anatolia fell quickly to the Shiite Safavid Empire, secured by Shah Ismail I in the following decade. Much of the Central Asian lands was overrun by the Uzbeks of Muhammad Shaybani who conquered the key cities of Samarkand and Herat in 1505 and 1507, and who founded the Khanate of Bukhara. From Kabul, the Mughal Empire was established in 1526 by Babur, a descendant of Timur through his father and possibly a descendant of Genghis Khan through his mother. The dynasty he established is commonly known as the Mughal dynasty though it was directly inherited from the Timurids. By the 17th century, the Mughal Empire ruled most of India but eventually declined during the following century. The Timurid dynasty finally came to an end as the remaining nominal rule of the Mughals was abolished by the British Empire following the 1857 rebellion.

About TransAnatolie

TransAnatolie Tour (Multi-Lingual Cultural Tour Operator)

TransAnatolie Tour is a subgroup of Anadolu and is a Multi-Lingual Cultural Tour Operator in Anatolia (Asia Minor) Turkey.

TransAnatolie Tour has the ambition and the capacity to be become one of the leading provider and operator of archaeological, historical, belief (biblical) and cultural heritage tours and specialty travel with high Quality of Service (QoS) concept.

TransAnatolie Tour develops its programs with a network of Specialists, who are well recognized, local, regional, national, and international professionals at the top of their fields. These Specialists share their knowledge, insights and vision providing an in-depth insiders understanding of what distinguishes a particular culture and what factors shaped its evolution.

TransAnatolie Tours are executed in five languages (Dutch, English, French, German and Turkish) with high QoS concept by Tourism Professionals of valuable experience, intelligence and high intellectual capacity.

TransAnatolie Tour executive and operations teams have been at the cutting edge of international tour (holiday) operations and specialty travel since 1990s, working with organizations, universities and museums to provide unique travel experiences, cultural and belief (biblical) tours (holidays/trips) to their memberships.

Multi-Lingual TransAnatolie Tour team members have many years of valuable experience in providing individuals and organizations with high quality cultural, historical, belief/biblical, archaeological, architectural tours and travel experiences with high quality of service (QoS).

TransAnatolie has immersed travelers in Anatolia's most fascinating ancient cultures and provided enriching travel experiences.

TransAnatolie (International Multi-Lingual Cultural Tour Operator) has also been in small boat cruises, building exciting travel packages around these unique vessels.

TransAnatolie is now expanding its distribution by making these high quality, unique travel products and programs available to the public. Supported by our international network of offices and affiliates worldwide, the aim of TransAnatolie Team of travel professionals and passionate program specialists is to make your next 'vacation' a truly rewarding travel experience.

TransAnatolie Tour is a member of

Turkish Ministry of Culture and Tourism (Licence No. 4938)

Ankara Chamber of Commerce (Trade registry under No. 54/1024)

Turkish-French Cultural Association

Turkish Association at the United Nations

Union of Turkish Tour Operators (TÜRSAB)

Union of Multi-Lingual Professional Tourism Guides (TUREB-ARED)

Ankara Cultural Tourism Association (BATUDER)

Nigde Cultural Association

Aksaray Cultural Association

Arts & Cultural Association of Taspinar.

TransAnatolie info-webs (pages)

www.transanatolie.com

www.transanatolie.com/francais

www.transanatolie.com/deutsch

www.transanatolie.com/nederlands

www.transanatolie.com/turkce

www.transanatolie.com/tour

www.transanatolie.com/tour/francais

www.transanatolie.com/tour/deutsch

www.transanatolie.com/tour/nederlands

www.transanatolie.com/tour/turkce

www.turkey.transanatolie.com

www.tour.transanatolie.com

www.transanatolie.com/turkey

www.transanatolie.com/turquie

www.transanatolie.com/turkei

www.transanatolie.com/turkije

www.transanatolie.com/turkiye

www.instagram.com/transanatolie

www.facebook.com/TransAnatolieTour