Touted by critics as one of the best films of the year, The Nest is the tale of ambitious British financier Rory O’Hara (Jude Law) who uproots his American wife Allison (Carrie Coon) and family from their blissful life in New York in pursuit of the next big deal. Surprising his family with a centuries-old “to the manor born” estate in England—complete with grounds for Allison’s horse and the promise of a new stable—Rory assures better times are ahead.

The house becomes a metaphor—hence the title The Nest. It is the ultimate status-seeking symbol and peace offering from Rory to his wife, as well as a key figure in the family’s downfall. Rory rose from humble beginnings, but now evokes characters like the heady excess-filled “Master of the Universe” depicted in Tom Wolfe’s Bonfire of the Vanities, where conspicuous consumption and keeping up with appearances is the order of the day.

Depicting the worlds of America and the U.K. in the 1980s hit home for director Sean Durkin. “Growing up between America and England in the ’80s and ’90s, I experienced a stark difference in the atmosphere between the two places that has long stayed with me,” he tells AD. “I set the film in 1986 to explore the link between the two countries, [with the] pre-financial crash, the emerging global market, and London at the height of deregulation.”

Production designer James Price and set decorator Stella Fox (the two collaborated last year on the film Judy) created the period piece at the tranquil Nether Winchendon House located in Buckinghamshire, England. The designer was drawn to the grandeur of the early gothic medieval and Tudor architecture that dates back to the middle of the 12th century and supports the film’s underlying dark nuance. Forgoing the classic English country style looks of the period—floral chintz on chintz, gilt-framed dog paintings, and period antiques, for starters—the designer took an alternate route. “I did not want to go with gothic [designs] and chose the two avenues of Arts and Crafts and minimalism,” Price tells AD.

The designers selected pieces that would make an immediate impact in the imposing rooms with their oak linenfold wall panels and carved oak ceiling friezes. The result is Scandinavian meets Arts and Crafts with touches of midcentury that are undaunted by the scale of the house. “Since Rory made his money in the ’70s and bought a lot of nice design pieces in the States and shipped to the U.K., the furniture was midcentury, mostly American in style, and really stood out against the English architecture,” says Price.

Fox searched antique markets and prop houses for everything from Cesca chairs to midcentury bar carts, and she even found a fallen relic from the ’80s: the Rolodex. For the couple’s bedroom, she also paid homage to the Arts and Crafts movement with the selection of a William Morris wallpaper called the Brook. “Stella was keen on finding a deer print as it symbolizes a connection to the supernatural and is often featured in fairy tales,” says Price. “It also symbolizes the powers in nature, like the living, breathing house.”

As a contrast, Price worked with another set decorator, Joe Susin, to make sure the family’s place in upstate New York “was really homey and warm, where they had a great life and were blissfully happy.” (This house was shot on location in Toronto.)

Influenced by Stanley Kubrick’s 1980s classic The Shining, the U.K. house is a major contributor to the creepy, gloomy, and spooky aesthetic. And though this is by no means a horror film, Kubrick may just have been watching over them, as the crew also filmed scenes on the same London soundstage as A Clockwork Orange in 1971.

Join Now

Become an AD PRO member for only $25 $20 per month.

Arrow

Price concludes, “This isn’t what American audiences would expect to see, as it’s not very classic English. We chose another direction because it creates more interest and is unexpected. To me, the home in The Nest is wherever the family is—at the end, they realize this is as good as it gets.”

The Nest can be streamed on iTunes, Amazon, and most cable platforms on November 17.