This film screening, presented to complement the exhibition William Kentridge: In Praise of Shadows, is included with Museum admission. Seating is available on a first-come, first-served basis.

Lulu, written by Alban Berg from the late 1920s to early 1930s, examines themes of fragility and the fragmentation of desire. The stage designs and projections William Kentridge created for this collaboration with New York’s Metropolitan Opera capture the Expressionist mood of Berg’s opera, dramatizing the impossible quandary of a woman (Marlis Petersen) who finds herself forced into the roles of femme fatale, faithful wife, innocent girl, and abused victim.

The MFAH film department is supported by Tenaris; The June Leaf and Robert Frank Foundation; the Vaughn Foundation; The Consulate General of the Republic of Korea; Nina and Michael Zilkha; Franci Neely; Carrin Patman and Jim Derrick; Ms. Laurence Unger; L'Alliance Française de Houston; and ILEX Foundation.

All Learning and Interpretation programs at the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, receive generous support from Macey and Harry Reasoner; the Claire and Theodore Morse Foundation; and the Texas Commission on the Arts. Endowment funds are provided by the Louise Jarrett Moran Bequest; Caroline Wiess Law; Windgate Foundation; the William Randolph Hearst Foundation; Cyvia and Melvyn Wolff; the National Endowment for the Humanities; the Fondren Foundation; BMC Software, Inc.; the Wallace Foundation; the Neal Myers and Ken Black Children’s Art Fund; Mr. and Mrs. A. L. Ballard; Mr. and Mrs. Charles W. Tate; the Eleanor and Frank Freed Foundation; Virginia and Ira Jackson; the Favrot Fund; CFP Foundation; Neiman Marcus Youth Arts Education; gifts in memory of John Wynne; gifts in memory of Peter Lotz; and gifts in honor of Beth Schneider.

The exhibition “William Kentridge: In Praise of Shadows” is organized by The Broad, Los Angeles.

In Houston, major support is provided by:

Bobbie Nau

Additional generous support is provided by:

John R. Eckel, Jr. Foundation

Bettie Cartwright

JBD Foundation

Beverly and Howard Robinson

Leslie and Russ Robinson