Tommy Ladnier Collection 1923-39 (2CD)

£9.00

Stock Status: In Stock

Information Specifications

Tommy Ladnier was a trumpeter and cornetist who was active in the early years of jazz and recorded prolifically during the 1920s and early 30s and re-emerged after the depression years to make some very important recordings with the likes of Sidney Bechet and Mezz Mezzrow in the late 30s before his sudden and tragically early death in 1939 at the age of 39. A familiar figure on the early jazz scene in New Orleans, he moved to Chicago and recorded with many of the great female blues singers of the time, such as Ma Rainey and Ida Cox, as well as pianist Lovie Austins Blues Serenaders, before spending time in Europe.

Back in the USA he was in Fletcher Hendersons orchestra and Dixieland Stompers, and then with Noble Sissles orchestra in the early 30s after another stint in Europe, where he met Sidney Bechet. He teamed up with Bechet in the New Orleans Feetwarmers in 1932, and after a quiet time in the 30s re-emerged to record memorable sessions with Mezzrow, Bechet and other noted luminaries during 1938. Regarded as an exciting and powerful soloist as well as an excellent ensemble player, in some ways he provided a stylistic bridge between King Oliver and Louis Armstrong. This 2-CD set draws from the 180 or more sides he recorded during his career, selecting material which provides a showcase for his often overlooked and under-estimated talent in the context of some of the best jazz of his time.

REVIEWS

This is an exemplary collection. - Tony Augarde (The Jazz Rag)

This collection is a good overview of his career and covers most of the people he worked with over the years. This is where modern jazz came from. - Roy Booth (Jazz Views)

There's a wealth of great music here, way to much for a short to review to praise, so instead just buy it and stick it on. - Andrew Liddle (Just Jazz)

Disc 1 Track Title Artist 1 Play That Thing Ollie Powers' Harmony Syncopators 2 Ida Cox's Lawdy Lawdy Blues Ida Cox with Lovie Austin And Her Blues Serenaders 3 Black Man Blues Edmonia Henderson with Lovie Austin And Her Blues Serenaders 4 Bad Luck Blues Ma Rainey with Lovie Austin And Her Blues Serenaders 5 Lucky Rock Blues with Lovie Austin And Her Blues Serenaders 6 Kentucky Man Blues Ida Cox with Lovie Austin And Her Blues Serenaders 7 Jelly Roll Blues Edmonia Henderson with Lovie Austin And Her Blues Serenaders 8 Steppin' On The Blues Lovie Austin And Her Blues Serenaders 9 Traveling Blues Lovie Austin And Her Blues Serenaders 10 Charleston Mad Lovie Austin And Her Blues Serenaders 11 Heebie Jeebies Lovie Austin And Her Blues Serenaders 12 Mojo Blues Lovie Austin And Her Blues Serenaders 13 The Chant Fletcher Henderson And His Orchestra 14 Clarinet Marmalade Fletcher Henderson And His Orchestra 15 Senegalese Stomp Clarence Williams' Blue Seven 16 Sweet Thing Fletcher Henderson And His Orchestra 17 Snag It The Dixie Stompers 18 Tozo Fletcher Henderson And His Orchestra 19 Stockholm Stomp Fletcher Henderson And His Orchestra 20 Fidgety Feet Fletcher Henderson And His Orchestra 21 The Wang-Wang Blues The Dixie Stompers 22 Livery Stable Blues Fletcher Henderson And His Orchestra 23 The St. Louis Blues The Dixie Stompers 24 Goose Pimples The Dixie Stompers Disc 2 Track Title Artist 1 Hop Off Fletcher Henderson And His Orchestra 2 Loveless Love Noble Sissle & His Sizzling Syncopators 3 Basement Blues Noble Sissle & His Orch. 4 Sweetie Dear New Orleans Feetwarmers 5 I Want You Tonight New Orleans Feetwarmers 6 I've Found A New Baby New Orleans Feetwarmers 7 Maple Leaf Rag New Orleans Feetwarmers 8 Shag New Orleans Feetwarmers 9 Revolutionary Blues Mezz Mezzrow & His Orch. 10 Comin' On With The Come On Mezz Mezzrow & His Orch. 11 Swingin' For Mezz Mezz Mezzrow & His Orch. 12 Ja-Da Tommy Ladnier And His Orchestra 13 Really The Blues Tommy Ladnier And His Orchestra 14 When You And I Were Young, Maggie Tommy Ladnier And His Orchestra 15 Weary Blues Tommy Ladnier And His Orchestra 16 Royal Garden Blues Mezzrow/Ladnier Quintet 17 Everybody Loves My Baby Mezzrow/Ladnier Quintet 18 I Ain't Gonna Give Nobody None O' This Jelly-Roll Mezzrow/Ladnier Quintet 19 If You See Me Comin' Mezzrow/Ladnier Quintet 20 Gettin' Together Mezzrow/Ladnier Quintet 21 I Wish I Could Shimmy Like My Sister Kate New Orleans Feetwarmers 22 Stop It Joe Rosetta Crawford with J.P. Johson & His Hep Cats 23 My Man Jumped Salty On Me Rosetta Crawford with J.P. Johson & His Hep Cats 24 Double Crossin' Papa Rosetta Crawford with J.P. Johson & His Hep Cats

EAN:

824046206123

Discs:

2

Artist:

Tommy Ladnier

Brand:

Fabulous

Product Code:

FADCD2061

Weight:

0.12kg