By: Barbra Streisand

One of the most recognizable people in music and cinema, Barbra Streisand is an American singer, actress, director, and producer. She is the only recorded artist in history to have had #1 albums for six straight decades. She is the recipient of several honors, including the Presidential Medal of Freedom, America’s highest civilian decoration, the National Medal of Arts, the Kennedy Center Honor, the French Légion d’Honneur, and the American Film Institute’s Lifetime Achievement Award.

As the primary cause of death for women, she established the Barbra Streisand Women’s Heart Center at Cedars-Sinai, contributing to the cause of women’s heart disease awareness and pushing for additional research. She founded the Streisand Foundation in 1986, and since then, it has helped national organizations that promote women’s problems, nuclear disarmament, voter education, environmental preservation, and the defense of civil liberties and rights. She established the UCLA Barbra Streisand Institute in 2021, a progressive organization devoted to resolving the most important societal problems.

The eagerly anticipated autobiography of the legendary performer of theater, film, television, and records

By all accounts, Barbra Streisand is a living legend who has achieved success in every aspect of entertainment during her six-decade career. She possesses one of the most remarkable and identifiable voices in popular music history and is one of the select few EGOT (Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, and Tony) winners. With Yentl, she became the first female writer, producer, director, and star of a major movie. She has received 46 Grammy nominations.

She narrates her own life narrative in My Name Is Barbra, detailing her upbringing in Brooklyn, her early nightclub appearances as a rising star, her breakthrough stage performance in Funny Girl, which earned her an Oscar, and her incredible career. The years that followed saw a lengthy run of successes across all media. Like Barbra, the book is straightforward, humorous, opinionated, and endearing.