This is a book about Monte Carlo methods from the perspective of financial engineering. Monte Carlo simulation has become an essential tool in the pricing of derivative securities and in risk management; these applications have, in turn, stimulated research into new Monte Carlo techniques and renewed interest in some old techniques. This is also a book about financial engineering from the perspective of Monte Carlo methods. One of the best ways to develop an understanding of a model of, say, the term structure of interest rates is to implement a simulation of the model; and finding ways to improve the efficiency of a simulation motivates a deeper investigation into properties of a model. My intended audience is a mix of graduate students in financial engineering, researchers interested in the application of Monte Carlo methods in finance, and practitioners implementing models in industry. This book has grown out of lecture notes I have used over several years at Columbia, for a semester at Princeton, and for a short course at Aarhus University. These classes have been attended by masters and doctoral students in engineering, the mathematical and physical sciences, and finance. The selection of topics has also been influenced by my experiences in developing and delivering professional training courses with Mark Broadie, often in collaboration with Leif Andersen and Phelim Boyle. The opportunity to discuss the use of Monte Carlo methods in the derivatives industry with practitioners and colleagues has helped shaped my thinking about the methods and their application. Students and practitioners come to the area of financial engineering from diverse academic fields and with widely ranging levels of training in mathematics, statistics, finance, and computing. This presents a challenge in setting the appropriate level for discourse. The most important prerequisite for reading this book is familiarity with the mathematical tools routinely used to specify and analyze continuous-time models in finance. Prior exposure to the basic principles of option pricing is useful but less essential. The tools of mathematical finance include Itˆo calculus, stochastic differential equations, and martingales. Perhaps the most advanced idea used in many places in vi this book is the concept of a change of measure. This idea is so central both to derivatives pricing and to Monte Carlo methods that there is simply no avoiding it. The prerequisites to understanding the statement of the Girsanov theorem should suffice for reading this book. Whereas the language of mathematical finance is......

In this dissertation, we discuss the generation of low discrepancy sequences, randomization of these sequences, and the transformation methods to generate normally distributed random variables. Two well known methods for generating normally distributed numbers are considered, namely; Box-Muller and inverse transformation methods. Some researchers and financial engineers have claimed that it is incorrect to use the Box-Muller method with lowdiscrepancy sequences, and instead, the inverse transformation method should be used. We investigate the sensitivity of various computational finance problems with respect to different normal transformation methods. Box-Muller transformation method is theoretically justified in the context of the quasi-Monte Carlo by showing that the same error bounds apply for Box-Muller transformed point sets. Furthermore, new error bounds are derived for financial derivative pricing problems and for an isotropic integration problem where the integrand is a func...

In this paper, the pricing of a European call option on the underlying asset is performed by using a Monte Carlo method, one of the powerful simulation methods, where the price development of the asset is simulated and value of the claim is computed in terms of an expected value. The proposed approach, applied in Monte Carlo simulation, is based on the Black-Scholes equation which generally defined the pricing of European call options in a dynamic environment. Therefore, the main goal of this study is how can Monte Carlo be applied to finance? Although it is stated that because of being based on randomness, the Monte Carlo method has its obvious disadvantages and does not yield solutions for all possible stock prices, by applying Black-Scholes formula, it is efficient to use this method for calculating payoff. Hence, in the matter of this paper, we introduce the Black-Scholes model and Monte Carlo simulations as main tools to determine.