The Smooth Radio Network is set to launch its new marketing campaign across the country on Monday 12th October which will encompass 48 sheets and lower bus rears.

The new creative ‘Unwind’, devised by Smooth Radio’s creative agency Dye Holloway Murray conveys the simple message that listeners ‘Unwind’ when they tune into the Smooth Radio brand.

The creative shows the effortless way a ribbon unwinds, revealing the names of some of the brands key artists and illustrates the variety of music that Smooth Radio plays from the last five decades and today.

The outdoor campaign will include lower rears and 48 sheets in the West Midlands, Lower Rears in Glasgow, the East Midlands and North East and 48 sheets in the North West.

Smooth Radio in London will have 200 taxi super sides across the capital and will continue to focus on its below the line activity with its recent launch of ‘Love Live Music’ - a series of ‘up close and personal’ events with top artists for listeners and Independent readers to attend.

GMG Radio Chief Executive Stuart Taylor said: “Smooth Radio’s new ‘Unwind’ campaign simply portrays the brand as it is. Our listeners tune into Smooth Radio for many reasons, but central to its appeal is its relaxing and soulful music and a distinctive sound and mood that always brings a welcome change of pace into their lives”.

Mediacom handled the media buying for the campaign.

Whats a sheet?

...and can we try to steer clear of positive comments being brought down by mention of redundancies every five seconds too?!

A lot of talented and creative people have left GMG over the last few weeks, which is unfortunate, but lets try and keep this to opinions of the new station as if it were created, from scratch, on Monday morning!!

LONDON - GMG Radio has appointed full service marketing and communications agency Euro RSCG KLP to the ad account for the Smooth Radio brand following a pitch against Krow, CST and Hurrell Moseley Dawson & Grimmer.

The incumbent on the account, Dye Holloway Murray, did not re-pitch. The review was handled by the AAR.

GMG Radio spent £2.2m in the 12 months to the end of December 2009, according to The Nielsen Company, and Smooth Radio accounts for around half of GMG Radio's overall spend.

KLP will handle above-the-line creative work for the Smooth Radio brand as well as below-the-line and digital, for an initial contract period of two years. The agency will be charged with growing the Smooth Radio listener base across the brand.

Stuart Taylor, the chief executive of GMG Radio said: "KLP showed an understanding of the target audience and clearly have an affinity with the task in hand. They presented us with a series of engaging solutions demonstrated expertise in all areas of communication