A national marketing campaign from Smooth Radio will begin to run on Monday to promote the relaunch of Smooth Radio, which will become the second largest commercial radio station next week.

Running for six weeks, the new campaign by newly appointed KLP will run across TV, press and outdoor and depict eight listeners, nicknamed ‘the Smooth Ambassadors’, who reflect the audience of the station.

The eight listeners from the brand’s FM regions were chosen from thousands of Smooth listeners who applied to be part of the campaign.

The TV ad, with two 30 second executions each featuring four Ambassadors, will be broadcast in the North East, West Midlands and North West through October and November. This will be accompanied by a medium weight outdoor campaign in the North West, East Midlands and Glasgow with each 48 sheet showing a different Ambassador. Press advertising will run in a selection of women’s and national listings titles including Woman’s Own and TV Times.

Guess the station will have overtaken Talksport and Absolute for total listeners?

The eight listeners from the brand’s FM regions were chosen from a thousand Smooth lovers who applied to be part of the campaign. Each was asked to provide a highlight from their life as well as something interesting they are doing now; i.e. Rachel Cook from the north east once abseiled down the Tyne Bridge and is currently restoring a 1964 scooter, whereas Ann Munn from Glasgow DJ’d at the trendy Fleet Club in Hong King and now designs jewellery.

Nell Bryden forms the soundtrack to the TV ad, with two 30 second versions each featuring four Ambassadors. It will be broadcast in the North East, West Midlands and North West through October and November. Newspaper and press adverts will also feature.

GMG Radio Chief Executive Stuart Taylor said: “Smooth’s listeners are passionate about life and music and with a little more money in their pockets than your average commercial radio listener are highly sought after by advertisers. The Ambassadors in this new marketing campaign will have a real affinity with millions across the UK and will no doubt encourage new listeners to give the station a try as it becomes a national brand.”

Losing Tony at the weekend will be a blow, but suspect Mike Read's and DLT's managers are on the phone to Smooth!