I don't think anyone at smooth has much choice in what is played apart from the music programmers!

i used to listen to smooth 97.5/107.7 all the time when it started in the northeast about 2 years ago - but it's just full of adverts now

0

Just looking at the Smooth Radio live show playlists for the various regions and they're practicaly exactly the same apart from the odd different song here and there which is just as weird. Do they not have a choice in what they play. Same songs, just different voices in between.

Smooth Radio Glasgow

Smooth Radio Northwest

Smooth Radio West Midlands

The difference in the songs for the North West station is due to their format requiring jazz, soul, R&B and blues alongside easy listening.

As for the difference between Glasgow and the West Midlands (and it's only a couple of tracks), the only reason I could think is to avoid overlap in Glasgow (and the NE) between Smooth and Real in the former's local hours?

0

Actually, Smooth's problem in London is that the playlist is too wide.

As a result, Magic and Heart sound much better.

Actually no - Smooth London's problem is that it thinks by playing what Heart & Magic play, that will get them an audience. Wrong! When Smooth got it's act together as a decent, focused oldies station at the end of 2007, it saw its audience increase. Since then, they've done nothing but chop and change formats left right and centre trying to chase Magic and Heart audiences by playing loads of Williams, Boyzone, Westlife, Buble etc. that fits in badly alongside soul, Motown, disco and MOR pop - the very things they should be playing.

Smooth need to ditch the Magic/Heart staple stuff and make a name as a FM version of Gold

0

I think some people are hitting the Smooth problems on the head. I do like the oldies on Smooth (or have when they don't go to Heart). More variety, more lighter classic rock.

If Smooth gets a national DAB slot I think it should musically aim to be how some imagine Radio 2 to sound. A good/wide selection of oldies, with a couple of songs in an hour being current releases.

I prefer the news on Smooth. I cannot stand Heart's 60 second news, sadly the tannoy at work pumps Heart out as it is the only local station, and when it was Chiltern it was a safe, middle of the road hit station.

Of course it does beg the question what happens to the regional Smooths if it goes DAB.

Should GMG give up the licence or extend Real Radio? I have listened to Real and it stands out from Heart as it does play a slightly wider spectrum of music, eg the pop rock stuff. How would Real stand up against Heart in London/Birmingham and they too close musically?

Not sure if the Documenatairies should stay on Smooth or Real or both.

0

Thanks Martin. Your reply reads like someone close to London.

To be honest, from an outside view. When a brand suffers in London it is assumed it is because it is rubbish, not that it has more competition.

Also from what I understand London's population is younger that the nation as a whole (except within the House of Lords, or Lords Cricket ground).

Guess GMG will need to decide if Smooth goes DAB nationally how long to hold onto a London licence, because I don't feel they have any unique brands for London.

0