There were threads discussing Jessie Wallace and her past misdemeanours at the time of her most recent incident in June 2022

Not sure why the OP has decided to make a thread now 7 months later talking about her past. If the EE powers that be were satisfied with the outcome of that recent incident what’s the point of talking about it now? Also adding the phone hacking to her list of errors when that wasn’t even her fault, just to make her list of past crimes seem bigger than it is.

Who cares, she's a great actress and a great character who brings a lot to the show.

She's an OK actress. If she was a great actress she wouldn't be slogging her guts out on a four times weekly soap for relative peanuts. She's good at playing Kat Slater at least.

So you can’t be a good actress AND work on a soap. Only good actresses work in other mediums? There are good actresses everywhere regardless if they are in an amateur production somewhere in a tiny theatre in the back of beyond or in Hollywood. Working in soaps doesn’t preclude you from being good

One of the best soap actresses ever was Lindsay Coulson who played Carol Jackson in EE. Yes she’s no longer in a soap but she was still good whilst she was on it.

There were threads discussing Jessie Wallace and her past misdemeanours at the time of her most recent incident in June 2022

Not sure why the OP has decided to make a thread now 7 months later talking about her past. If the EE powers that be were satisfied with the outcome of that recent incident what’s the point of talking about it now? Also adding the phone hacking to her list of errors when that wasn’t even her fault, just to make her list of past crimes seem bigger than it is.

This is a soap discussion forum which talks about topics such as classic episodes of soaps, most hated characters etc Jessie Wallace is therefore not off limits to being discussed.

The phone hacking wasn't put in there to blame her simply to say that there was a level of mistrust between colleagues to the extent she and Richie fell out, I believe actually it was more about Shane and how people felt he had a big mouth, but it was still relevent to Jessie's story as she was involved. (Albeit not intentionally)

Since her introduction to the show (EastEnders) Ms Wallace has been in numerous incidents.

There is the incident with Elaine Jordan in which both actresses were suspended and I believe there was also a drink drive incident.

Then we have the fight between Jesse and Hannah Waterman where it was reported Hannah left the set in tears and refused to continue filming, I do not remember if this led to Hannah leaving though.

Famously we had fight between Barbera Windsor and Jesse with Barbera being unhappy with time keeping.

There was the Leslie Grantham scandal where he slated her amongst other cast members.

Steve McFadden was said to not want to work with her and campaigned for her to not return in 2010.

Then there is Shane Ritchie who said that they had a bust up over the phone tapping scandal.

Kym Marsh was vocal about her dislike to Jesse when she first arrived at elstree as she had made some remarks about Kyms husband Jack Ryder

Recently she was arrested and given a caution over a drink related incident.

Any one remember anything else and why do you think Jesse is given so many chances when she seems to be upsetting so many people? Is she really too big of a star to axe?