Jessie Wallace is reportedly in a relationship with her builder.

The actress, best known for playing Kat Slater in EastEnders, has been seen getting cosy with a labourer she booked for a job at her home.

Friends of the star say the pair have already jetted off on a romantic holiday abroad, and her new beau has already moved in, all in a matter of weeks.

"It’s like a plotline from the soap – a classic Kat escapade," a source told The Mirror. "Jessie seems to be over the moon."

In recent snaps taken by The Mirror, the pair have been spotted getting close at Jessie’s house in the north London suburb of Muswell Hill, taking his van for a spin.

While Jessie’s mystery man could be seen wearing a DeWalt body warmer and baggy trousers covered in paint, the actress, 50, donned a pair of designer sunglasses.

Later on, they were also spotted out in her Range Rover Evoque.

OK! has gone to Jessie's representatives for comment.

Get exclusive celebrity stories and fabulous photoshoots straight to your inbox with OK!'s daily newsletter. You can sign up at the top of the page.

Jessie hasn't yet made any mention of her new handyman beau on social media, despite posting regular life updates.

Sources suggest that Jessie will be hoping she has finally found the one, after being serially unlucky in love - much like her character, Kat.

When she was first cast in EastEnders in 2000, the actress was dating Majora-based billionaire Paul Whitworth, who had previously been jailed for fraud.

As she rose to fame, the pair split, and she went on to have a fling with an American, Andy Burton, who was six years her junior.

However, he later went on to embarrass her with kiss-and-tell stories about their relationship.

In 2003, she met policeman Dave Morgan after she was arrested for drink-driving. They went on to have a daughter, Tallulah, now 17. However, shortly after she was born, the couple broke up.

In 2011, Jessie was set to marry catering boss Vince Morse.

But just hours before they were due to wed, she called off their £300,000 wedding after finding out he had sent explicit photos of her to his ex-girlfriend.

And in 2016, she split from musician Tim Arnold after four years together.

Her most recent relationship was with father-of-five Paul Kempin, but they called it a day after two years in 2019.

Jessie and former partner Dave became grandparents this year, with their daughter Tallulah giving birth to son, SJ, in March 2022.

She revealed the news she'd become a grandmother in a sweet snap on Instagram.