They're two of the nation's most treasured soap stars.

And EastEnders actress Jessie Wallace enjoyed a heartwarming reunion with her former co-star Barbara Windsor on Thursday as they partied the night away at the annual Amy Winehouse Foundation Gala, held at the Savoy hotel in central London.

The 44-year-old actress was sporting a 1920s inspired pink silk slip and matching kimono jacket as she rocked the red carpet at the charity gala, hosted by the late singer's father Mitch Winehouse.

Scroll down for video

Jessie, who plays Kat Slater on the soap, looked delighted to be reunited with show veteran Barbara, 78, who played Peggie Mitchell and who was a close friend of Rehab hit-maker Amy.

The Carry On actress cut a smart figure in a nude coloured lace dress and coordinating beige blazer.

Meanwhile, Jessie set off her quirky flapper look with a layered silver necklace, chunky berry-coloured heels and plenty of silver eye shadow.

See the latest from EastEnders stars at the Amy Winehouse Foundation Gala

The overall effect was marred, however, since it appeared she had forgotten to iron her ensemble.

It was a star-studded turnout at the bash, with everyone from singer Charli XCX to panto legend Christopher Biggins showing their support for the charity, which helps vulnerable young people combating drug and alcohol abuse.

Amy died in 2011 aged just 27 after a long-publicised battle with drink and drugs, and her father Mitch has worked tirelessly to both uphold her legacy and raise awareness for substance addiction.

The gala included performances and an auction to raise money for the charity, and was naturally attended by her close friend and collaborator Mark Ronson.

Speaking on the red carpet, Mitch said: 'I hope this is her legacy - obviously her music legacy will look after itself. She was a wonderful singer and a great song writer as well as being a great human being.'

The patriarch also hit out at the makers of the film Amy, describing the documentary as 'very hurtful'.

Asif Kapadia's film has won rave reviews, but the singer's father said it focused too much on his daughter's battle with drugs and skipped over her 'sense of fun'.

He said: 'We are very disappointed, it missed a trick and it was very hurtful for the family.'

Mitch appeared to confirm rumours that he is planning to put together his own film about Amy's life.