WALLACE, James Corteen (Jim)

Passed away unexpectedly at the age of 70 on September 10, 2013 at his home in Coquitlam, B.C. James was born in Victoria to James and Jessie Wallace on April 2, 1943 and attended school in North Burnaby. He enjoyed a diverse career in the millwork industry beginning at Weldwood Canada and culminating in his ownership of a window manufacturing company, eventually retiring from a fourteen year career in automotive finance. James is survived by his two children, Noel Wallace (Alison) and Carla Emery (Colin), their mother Eleanor Wallace, and his three grandchildren, Makaela, Riley and Payton Emery, as well as siblings, Jeanne, Joyce, Jerry and Jeffrey. He will always be remembered by all who knew him as an outgoing, charismatic and fun loving individual. A celebration of his life will be held on September 21, 2013 in the Social Room at 3070 Guildford Way, Coquitlam, from 11:30 am to 3:00 pm. In lieu of flowers, donations can be made in memory of James Wallace to the Alzheimer Society of B.C. and/or B.C. Heart and Stroke Foundation.

Published online September 14, 2013

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of JamesHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of James

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree