2.4K

What they do: Corbin Hill Food Project is a food hub that actively manages the aggregation and distribution of farm fresh produce from local and regional farmers, with the purpose of strengthening farmers’ capacity and access to consumers. Corbin Hill goes a step further than many other food hubs, by ensuring the fresh produce that is aggregated from local farmers in New York goes to communities that need it the most.

How they do it: Corbin Hill bridges the gap between upstate farmers and communities downstate across four boroughs in New York City. These underserved communities represent new markets for farmers and an opportunity for these neighborhoods to have access to produce that is both affordable and nutritious.

Mission: The Corbin Hill Food Project’s mission is to provide food to those who need it most.

Latest project/campaign: The Corbin Hill Food Project’s latest project is the Power Food Program, led by Mt Sinai Hospital. Common Pantry and Wholesome Wave are also partners in this project; designed to link food as prescription, the project will involve 100 participants, and is targeted at adults with diabetes and children suffering from obesity. This program uses fresh fruit and vegetables to address health needs.

Major Funding: The W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Surdna Foundation, Farm Credit East, Jessie Smith Noyes Foundation, The Wallace Center, New World Foundation Local Economies Project, Laurie M. Tisch Illumination Fund and the USDA.

Profit/nonprofit: Nonprofit

Annual budget: N/A

Interesting fact about how they are working to positively affect the food system: Corbin Hill was founded by 11 investors half of whom were people of color and women, with the shared values of racial equity, food access and affordability and sovereignty. In the 2015 season CHFP provided food to 47,634 people, including 20,790 children, 87 percent of whom are considered vulnerable.

FACT SHEET

Location: Manhattan

Core Programs: Corbin Hill’s programs: Farm Share; Community Connect; and Community Health Partners; work to improve access and affordability of healthy fruits and vegetables.

Number of staff: 6

Number of volunteers: 9