The object of the Fraternity shall be to encourage a spirit of Fraternity and love among its members; to stand at all times for character, dignity, scholarship, and college loyalty; to strive for and support the best interest of the colleges and universities in which chapters are installed, and in no way to disregard, injure, or sacrifice those interests for the sake of prestige or advancement of the Fraternity or any of its chapters.

Alpha Omicron Pi was founded on January 2, 1897 at Barnard College in New York City, when friends Stella George Stern Perry, Helen St. Clair Mullan, Elizabeth Heywood Wyman, and Jessie Wallace Hughan all pledged themselves to one another in the Columbia Law Library. Alpha Omicron Pi was founded on the ideals of character, dignity, scholarship, and college loyalty. All members of the Fraternity, collegiate and alumnae, are expected to live these values to the fullest and carry the spirit of AOII into the world around them. In 1905, Alpha Omicron Pi became the 12th member organization to join the National Panhellenic Conference. Today, there are over 140 collegiate chapters across the US and Canada. Rather than a crest or shield, Alpha Omicron Pi is represented by an infinity rose.

Symbols of Alpha Omicron Pi:

Our Tagline: Inspire Ambition

Our Badge: A-O-II superimposed with a ruby at the apex of the A.

Our Color: Cardinal- a deep red.

Our Jewel: The ruby.

Our Flower: The 19th Century French rose, Général Jacqueminot, a deep red rose, was chosen as the flower of Alpha Omicron Pi because its color is the symbol of the central and essential virtue of the Fraternity.

Our Mascot: The Panda is AOII's mascot. The panda was chosen because panda’s have no natural enemies.

Serving the world around us is one of AOII’s founding principles. Since 1967, the Fraternity has enjoyed an important partnership with our international philanthropy, the Arthritis Foundation. Alpha Rho typically hosts three major philanthropy events during the school year in addition to various local philanthropist events; Strike Out Arthritis, Slice Out Arthritis, and Smoke Out Arthritis. Dollars donated to the Arthritis Foundation support arthritis research, Juvenile Arthritis Power Packs, Treatment plans for families affected by Arthritis, Juvenile Arthritis Camps and Conferences, and so much more. AOII members donate hundreds of stuffed panda bears each year, which are provided to children attending the two Juvenile Arthritis Conferences. Thanks to this long-time beloved tradition, AOII has become known as the Panda People to thousands of arthritis families across the world. To learn more about the Arthritis Foundation, please visit https://www.arthritis.org/. In addition to our international philanthropy, Alpha Omicron Pi was founded on a promise to serve not only one another but the greater community as well. This commitment reflects a philosophy of friendship, concern, and usefulness in the world. The promise to serve can be seen in the relationships within a collegiate or alumnae chapter as they work together to help a sister or as they contribute to the AOII Foundation to enable scholarships and aid to other members.