Kuala Lumpur : Joyalukkas, the globally renowned jewellery retail chain, expanded its presence in the Malaysia by opening its second showroom, located in LuLu Hypermarket, Capsquare Mall, Jalan Munshi area of Kuala Lumpur.

The showroom was inaugurated by Datin Paduka Seri Rosmah Mansor, wife of Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Tun Razak, in the presence of Joyalukkas Group Executive Director John Paul Alukkas as well as local dignitaries and VIPs.

Joyalukkas’ first foray into Malaysia was in 2014, with the opening of the biggest jewellery showroom in the country at the heart of Kuala Lumpur at Jalan Masjid India.

“When we first arrived in Malaysia, the response from the public was simply overwhelming. We set out to offer the best jewellery shopping experience to the residents and they have rewarded us over and over again with their eager patronage,” says Joy Alukkas, Chairman & MD, Joyalukkas Group.

“We are very grateful to the wonderful people of Malaysia and look forward to delivering more choices, better value and an even higher standard of customer service at our second showroom,” said John Paul Alukkas.

The jewellery retailer has also launched Mega Winnings campaign, where customers get the chance to win four diamond necklaces and up to 2kg gold till August 14, 2016.

Joyalukkas has presence in Singapore, London, UAE, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, Oman and India. It will soon open in two new countries.

The jewellery retailer currently has a customer base of over 10 million customers worldwide and offers over one million choices in all types of jewellery at each of its showroom.

The showroom features over one million dazzling collections and exquisite designs in gold, diamond, precious stones, platinum and pearl.

The collection is a mix of traditional, ethno contemporary and international designs that have won of hearts and following of customers around the world.

This international jewellery retail chain is also one of few retail chains to be recognised with many awards and accolades for its exceptional standards in jewellery retailing.

Joyalukkas has been awarded the prestigious ‘Superbrand’ status seven years in a row.