India-based jewellery retailer Joyalukkas will make its debut in Malaysia this Saturday with what it says will be the largest jewelry showroom in the country.

The showroom will be located in Jalan Masjid India, Kuala Lumpur. Popular Indian celebrity and actor R. Madhavan is scheduled to inaugurate the launch of the world-class showroom. “We are proud to present our first showroom to Malaysia. We decided to create the biggest jewellery showroom for Malaysia because we wanted to create a new experience in jewellery shopping. “We have global experience and understand the profiles of jewellery shoppers and we are ensuring the best for Malaysia. “We are now well established in Singapore and we feel this will also help us serve Malaysia better. We are a 25-year-old jewellery chain and our strength is we offer the best in choice, designs, value, service and convenience,” said Joyalukkas Groupchairman and managing director Joy Alukkas.

Located in Jalan Masjid India, the large showroom will offer ample parking space and feature a wide range of jewellery. The showroom will offer more than one million designs from around the world. The Joyalukkas Malaysia sales team have also been extensively trained by retail specialists to manage customer expectations. “I am excited to come to Malaysia for the opening, I have visited this country on many occasions for shoots and as a tourist. However, this will be first time I am here to represent my favourite brand, Joyalukkas. “I look forward to meeting and interacting with the customers on behalf of the jeweller,” Madhavan said.

Joyalukkas is spread across 10 countries around the world with 94 showrooms and has a following of more than 10 million customers world-wide. “The Joyalukkas vision is to ‘ornament the world’ and we intend to manage this with a perfect mix of product, price, choice, service and convenience. “Malaysia is a milestone for Joyalukkas and we are excited to be here. We have planned the best in jewellery for Malaysians and I am eager to invite them for a delightful experience,” said Joyalukkas executive director John Paul Joy Alukkas. The Joyalukkas jewellery showroom in Malaysia has been designed in the signature Joyalukkas format with stylish interiors to offer the widest choice of jewellery under one roof.

Joyalukkas is ISO 14001-2006 and ISO 9001-2008 certified and has been recognised with many awards and accolades for its standards in jewellery retailing. Its popular Chennai showroom is said to be the largest jewellery showroom in the world. Joyalukkas has been recognised with the ‘Superbrand’ status five years in a row in Dubai and in addition to this, has also been recognised by the Dubai government under its Dubai Quality Awards Programme for strict adherences to quality and procedures in all aspects of jewellery retailing. The brand has also won the “Middle-East retailer of the year” award from Images Retail ME magazine.

Source: Thestar.com