BENGALORE, Jan., 2019: Joyalukkas has announced its second edition of International Jeweilery Show, which will be held in Joyalukkas BENGALORE, M G ROAD Showroom from 1 th to 27th January 2019. Following up on the success of its flagship event last year, this year new brands and collections from countries across the world will be on display as well as for sale at the fest. Speaking about the event, Mr. Joy Alukkas, CMD Joyalukkas Group, said, “We are known as the World’s Favourite Jeweller for a reason, as we strive to bring global design trends to our patrans across the world, apart from catering to designs inspired from regional demograph- ics. International Jewellery show is a design confluence that lets customers access to view and own some of the stunning designs inspired by global traditions and cultures.”

Apart from Joyalukkas brands of jewellery inspired by Indian Heritage, Custom and Traditions, customers can look forward to a host of new glcbal design trends this year. Veda, designs inspired by the divine; Pride Diamond jewellery, Elegenza Uncut Diamond jewellery, Parvini, unique ball design jewellery; Lora, jewellery crafted using Turkish technalogy: Al Azeen, jewels from Arabia; Queen’s Pride, a traditional bridal collection fronm Gujarat; Flarentina and Impress, enchanting jewellery from Italy and Pauranik, antique designs are some of the brands that will be on showcase at this year’s show About Joyalukkas Group: Joyaluldkas Group is a multi-billion dollar global conglomerate, with varied business interests. The group operates its various business opcrations across UAE, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Oman, Kuwait, Qatar, Singapore, Malaysia, UK and India. The group businesses include Jewellery, Money Exchange, Fashion &amp; Silks and Malls.

Joyalukkas employs over 8,000 professionals across the world and is one of the most awarded and recognized Jewellery retail chains in the world. Joyalukkas http://www.joyalukkas.com World’s favourite jeweller INDIA USA UK UAE KSA GATAR BAHRAIN KUVIAIT CMAN SINGAPORE MALAYSA OVER ONE MILLION DESIGNS SPACIOUS PARKING OPEN ON SUNDAYS

City Today News

(citytoday.media)

9341997936