Joyalukkas has opened the largest jewellery showroom in Malaysia. The mega showroom located on Jalan Masjid India, Kuala Lumpur was inaugurated in the presence of Honorable Minister Dato Sri. Hasan Bin Malek (Minister Of Domestic Trade, Co-operative and Consumerism) by popular Indian celebrity & film-star R. Madhavan. Many local dignitaries and VIP’s also attended the grand opening ceremony organised by Joyalukkas for its foray into Malaysia.

“Firstly a big thank you to the esteemed Honorable Minister Dato Sri. Hasan Bin Malek for taking time of his precious schedule to attend our opening ceremony. Would also like to thank the residents of Kuala Lumpur for a very warm welcome. We have built the biggest jewellery showroom in Malaysia to offer the best experience in jewellery shopping to residents here. Our promise is the best in choice, designs, value, service and convenience for jewellery lovers here at all times,” said Mr. Joy Alukkas, Chairman & MD, Joyalukkas Group.

Conveniently located in Jalan Masjid India the large sized showroom offers ample parking space and features the widest range and most exquisite collection of jewellery in all precious forms i.e. Gold, Diamond, Precious Stone, Pearls, Platinum and Silver. Joyalukkas jewellery, Malaysia offers a choice of over One Million designs from around the world to meet all the dreams and expectations of jewellery lovers in Malaysia. The sales team have also been extensively trained by retail specialists to ensure a delightful experience to shoppers here..

“Thank you Malaysia for a warm welcome! I assure you with Joyalukkas you are sure of the best experience in jewellery shopping.” said R Madhavan.

“We are delighted to open our first jewellery showroom in Malaysia and are extremely grateful to the country and it’s lovely residents for the warm welcome they have given us. Our team is eager to serve jewellery shoppers here with the best and widest range in jewellery”, said Mr. John Paul Joy Alukkas, Executive Director, Joyalukkas Group.

The Malaysia Joyalukkas jewellery showroom has been designed in the signature Joyalukkas format with stylish and convenient interiors to offer the widest choice of jewellery under one roof.

JOYALUKKAS, JALAN MASJID INDIA, KUALA LUMPUR, MALAYSIA. TEL: +60 32694 5000