Kyle Korver was traded to the Memphis Grizzlies from the Utah Jazz in the Mike Conley deal on Wednesday, and one can only assume that Korver won't be in Memphis very long.

Who, then, should try to acquire him?

Well, what about the Los Angeles Lakers?

With their two major pieces already in place in LeBron James and Anthony Davis, plus potentially a third on the way, the Lakers will need to fill out the roster with capable pieces who fit well alongside of their stars, and Korver would be an outstanding pickup.

Here are three reasons why Los Angeles should pursue the sharpshooter, whether it's in a trade or in free agency if he becomes available.

3. Familiarity with LeBron

Kyle Korver spent parts of two seasons playing with James in Cleveland, as the Cavaliers traded for him during the 2016-17 campaign and the veteran ended up being a part of two runs to the NBA Finals.

James knows Korver's game very well and knows exactly how he plays and where he is going to be at certain times. Korver shot a ridiculous 48.5 percent from 3-point range in 35 games with the Cavs in 2017, and the following year, he made 43.6 percent of his triples over the course of a full season.

Obviously, James knows how to utilize Korver, and Korver knows how to play off of James. Plus, LeBron has a history of wanting to play with guys he has played with before, so Korver would be a perfect match.

2. Experience

While Kyle Korver was not present during the Cavaliers' championship win in 2016, he was, again, a part of two NBA Finals runs with Cleveland in 2017 and 2018. At 38 years old and with 16 years of NBA experience, Korver has seen pretty much everything.

His knowledge of the game would pay significant dividends for a Lakers team that, at the moment, doesn't really have much experience outside of James. Heck, even Davis has only been to a couple of postseasons and has won one playoff series.

The value that a veteran like Korver brings to the table in big games cannot be understated, and while he certainly wouldn't be the only experienced player LA would pick up this summer, he would be a big piece of the puzzle.

1. Floor Spacing

Even with the addition of Davis, the Lakers are still in dire need of floor spacing. This past season, they were among the worst perimeter shooting teams in basketball.

What does it say about your team when LeBron and Rajon Rondo are two of your best 3-point shooters?

Make no mistake about it: even with the massive starpower of James and Davis, the Lakers are going to need some shooters in order to make a run at the title, and Kyle Korver is the very definition of a shooter.

A lifetime 42.9 percent long-range bomber, Korver can let it fly with the best of them and has not shot under 40 percent from downtown since his rookie season all the way back during the 2003-04 campaign. That is a truly incredible feat.

Of course, Los Angeles would need more than just Korver, as it really lacks shooters up and down the roster. But Korver would be a huge addition that would make the jobs of James and Davis easier and would completely open up the floor.