CLEVELAND, Ohio -- For the first time during the Cleveland Cavaliers' winning streak, which extended to four thanks to a late-game rally against the Los Angeles Clippers Friday night, Kyle Korver failed to reach double figures in scoring.

And yet, his fingerprints were all over the win, leading LeBron James to flashbacks of another former teammate: Ray Allen.

"Absolutely. You've got two of the greatest shooters to ever play this game and I've been fortunate enough to play with them and been fortunate enough to be in big games with them as well," James said. "There's a lot of similarities in their approach and the way they approach shooting. The things you guys really don't see all the time, what they do before you guys get there. They take that craft, that marksmanship very seriously.

"He's been huge down the stretch for us as of late. He's been huge for us since he was acquired, let's be honest."

The fourth quarter hasn't always belonged to Korver. Remember last June? That missed corner 3-pointer in Game 3 against the Golden State Warriors?

That's a shot Korver kept replaying and it's one members of the Cavs organization still discuss, believing the view of the Finals would have been totally different had Korver buried perhaps the biggest shot of his career. The sting remains. Korver hasn't even been able to go back and watch.

But he's been able to use it as fuel this season, propelling him into Cleveland's best closing lineup and earning the nickname "Mr. Fourth Korver."

"I know, because I talked to him a lot over the summer, he beat himself up over that shot," James said. "Who's to say we would have been in that position without him? And the rest of the guys. We love Korver down the stretch, his energy, he's always moving, his ability to get guys off screens and also set screens for our bigs like you saw him do tonight late in the game as well."

On Friday night, Korver's performance was a bit more subdued -- at least when compared to the standard he's set lately with fourth quarter scoring outbursts.

Sure, he delivered an enormous four-point play, slicing an eight-point lead in half with less than seven minutes remaining. He made his only other triple about two minutes later.

But that was it for buckets. Two late free throws capped the scoring.

In all, Korver tallied nine points on 2-of-5 from the field. It's the fewest shots he's taken since last Thursday's loss against Houston. That's because he was one of the top names on Los Angeles Clippers head coach Doc Rivers' scouting report.

Lucky for the Cavs, Korver's true impact goes far beyond the box score.

"Just having him on the floor, I mean, he just causes a lot of confusion," head coach Tyronn Lue said. "Just his movement alone makes us a different team offensively and defensively he's always in the right spot team defense wise. Taking charges, boxing guys out, getting engaged rebounds. So, he's been great."

With Korver on the floor, the Cavs outscored the Clippers by a whopping 25 points Friday night. Few cut like him. Not many have the same attention to detail on screens. He draws as much attention as anyone on the Cavaliers, including James.

Gravity might be his most important trait.

Early in the fourth quarter, with the Cavs down 10 and in need of a basket to halt one of the Clippers' flurries, James got an uncontested dunk.

Korver made it happen.

After entering the ball to Channing Frye in the post, Korver set a solid screen on James' defender Montrezl Harrell and with Lou Williams unwilling to leave Korver, so concerned about his shooting prowess, James cut hard to the lane and trimmed the lead to single digits.

Moments later, Korver helped create another layup.

James started driving left and with Korver spotted in the short corner, Wesley Johnson stayed attached, allowing James to once again beat Harrell to the rim.

Think about that impact. The Clippers wouldn't send an extra defender at James, the league's best player who was shredding the defense in the fourth quarter, because Korver is that much of a threat.

James' dunk to cut it to two points with a little more than three minutes remaining? That came off Korver's outlet pass.

J.R. Smith's coast-to-coast slam in overtime where he dribbled without any resistance? Laughable defense by the Clippers. But Korver was part of that too, as Sindarius Thornwell ran straight to Korver in the corner when he could've been the closest player to stop the ball.

Defensive principles sometimes go out the window when a sniper like Korver is spotted up.

A little later in overtime, as the Cavs were finally finding their footing after a sluggish start, Korver created another look for James.

Even though James missed, he got a clean 3-pointer with about two minutes left that would've been the clincher. It all happened because Austin Rivers and Blake Griffin couldn't decide the best defensive approach with the Korver-James pick.

Kevin Love's 3-pointer was perhaps the biggest shot of the game, giving the Cavaliers a seven-point edge, the largest lead of the night.

As Lue told cleveland.com after the game, it was a set he typically uses for Korver and Channing Frye. This time, Love was in Frye's spot as the floor-spacing big man. The result was the same. Two dangerous 3-point shooters forced the defense into a no-win decision. Korver went around Love's screen and then picked Los Angeles big man DeAndre Jordan to give Love space for the dagger.

Sometimes the little things lead to the biggest moments. That's The Korver Effect. His movement and reputation forces countless defensive breakdowns.

Korver wasn't a usual member of Cleveland's closing lineup last season. He averaged just 3.4 points in the fourth quarter. But he's earned a prime spot this season, averaging 6.5 points on 58 percent shooting and 55.8 percent from 3-point range.

"I probably told him the obvious after the game. I said 'Kyle, you can shoot.' That's probably the most obvious thing anybody ever told him, but just seeing him up close and personal it's remarkable, man," Dwyane Wade said. "For him to be 37 years old, the condition that he's in. The way he works on it, and then goes out in the game and it seems like he's always making big shots. It seems like every time Kyle is coming through with some big shots. It's just a luxury to have a guy like that on the floor. But, his shot-making ability is remarkable."

James scored 16 points in the fourth quarter. He had three more in overtime. His brilliance should never be taken for granted. Wade tallied 23 points overall, his second-highest total this season. Love scored 25, including six in overtime. But Korver was the linchpin. Just as he has been during the team's best stretch this season.

Of the main rotation players, Korver has the best individual offensive rating (112.2) and the team's overall rating drops from 113.6 to 108.4 with him on the bench.

On Friday night, he even earned praise for his work on defense, the area of his game that sometimes keeps him from closing-time minutes.

"I've always said this, if Kyle's guarding me defensively he's one of the best position defenders in our league," Wade said. "People think that you can just go at him. But, position defender-wise he's actually one of the best so he can play late in games as well."