Kyle Korver is an American professional basketball player who has recorded impressive streaks throughout his career. Not only is Korver a Cleveland Cavaliers player, he’s also known for his outstanding NBA record with the highest three-point field goal percentage in a single season. With no less than 12 seasons in the NBA, here’s everything you need to know about Korver’s life and journey so far from the New Jersey Nets to the Cleveland Cavaliers.

biography, dude

Born Kyle Elliot Korver on March 17, 1981 inKyle Korver of Lakewood, California is the son of Kevin and Laine Korver. Raised initially in Los Angeles, Korver moved to Pella, Iowa in 1993 with his family and three younger siblings. From a young age he loved and was interested in basketball. He attended Pella High School and later Creighton University in Omaha, Nebraska, where he earned a bachelor’s degree in visual communication.

career

As a college student, Korver played for his school basketball team, where he was named to the MVC All-Bench and All Newcomer teams for scoring 8.8 points per game. He was also named to the MVC All-Tournament Team. Immediately out of college, Korver made the NBA draft the New Jersey Nets’ 51st overall pick. He later joined the Philadelphia 76ers, where he played for nearly four years before joining Utah Jazz in 2007. He played for Jazz for three years and then joined the Chicago Bulls in 2010. He later joined the Atlanta Hawks, where he scored a three-point shot in 127 straight games, setting the record for the highest three-point field goal percentage in a season at 53.6%. As a result, he was named his first NBA All-Star Game in 2015.

Kyle Korver family – brother sister

The NBA three-point specialist was raised in a Christian family with his father, Rev. Kevin, as a pastor at Pella Third Reformed Church, one of the largest churches in the community. Kyle is the eldest son of four brothers, Kaleb, Klayton and Kirk Korver. The Korvers are a basketball family as all four brothers have played at either the college level or above. While Kyle and Kaleb played at Creighton University, Klayton played with Drake in Des Moines, Iowa and Kirk at the University of Missouri-Kansas City.

Unfortunately, on March 20, 2018, Kyle and his family suffered tragedy when they lost their youngest brother, Kirk Korver, who died at the age of twenty-seven after an unknown sudden illness. Before his death, Kirk Korver played as a prep at Pella High School and was named to the All-State third team in his senior year. He also played for the University of Missouri-Kansas City as a forward for three seasons (from 2009 to 2014), recording 597 points and 267 rebounds.