Paul A. “Pooh” Davis, 60, of Prairie Village, KS, died August 16, 2023 at Overland Park Regional Medical Center.

A rosary service was held at 10:00 a.m., Friday, August 25 at St. Gregory's Catholic Church in Marysville. A funeral mass followed at 10:30 a.m.

Burial was in St. Gregory's Catholic Cemetery.

A Celebration of Life continued at the Marysville American Legion on the evening of Friday, August 25, from 7-9 p.m.

Paul was born March 18, 1963, the youngest of 6 children born to James E. and Dorothy (Cooper) Davis. During baseball season you would frequently find Paul at Royals Stadium. Win or lose, he was one of their most loyal fans. As a young child he would go to bed listening to a Royals game on an old transistor radio.

In 1975, he graduated from St. Gregory’s School and from Marysville High School in 1981. Sports played a large part in Paul’s life. In junior and senior high school, he was a basketball and football athlete. Paul also played Pee Wee, Midget, Pony and American Legion baseball. He was awarded a baseball scholarship at Cloud County Junior College in Concordia, KS, and graduated in 1983. In 1986, Paul obtained a Bachelor’s Degree in Education from Kansas State University and later a Master’s Degree in School Administration.

Paul began his middle school teaching career in Oberlin, KS, followed by teaching and coaching positions with Valley Heights USD 498 and Lyons Schools USD 405. During his tenure at Lyons (1994-2001) he developed and implemented a baseball program for the high school in 1997. While there, he also coached middle school girls’ basketball. Paul was the principal at Effingham Middle School USD 377. He spent the last 12 years teaching Industrial arts at Turner Middle School USD 202.

Paul was someone who left a lasting impression on one’s life. He was fun loving with a giving heart. He had that innate ability to make friends. His circle of friends was far reaching and ever enlarging. No matter where life took Paul, he made friends, never losing touch with old ones. His family was equally important to him. To quote Babe Ruth “…Heroes get remembered, but legends never die”. To his family, friends, students that he taught and coached Paul is a legend.

Survivors include his siblings, Greg (Mary Lou) Davis, Topeka; Ed (Kathie) Davis, San Antonio, TX; Elizabeth Davis, Topeka; Jan Davis (Tammie Blancett), Tulsa, OK; and partner, Theresa Miller, Kansas City, MO. Paul was a beloved uncle to 11 nieces and nephews and 12 great nieces and nephews.

He was preceded in death by his parents and brother, Jimbo Davis.

A memorial fund has been established and contributions may be made to the American Legion Post 163 Baseball Program, Lyons High School Baseball Program, or individual choice of donor. Contributions may be sent in care of Kinsley Mortuary.

To order memorial trees or send flowers to the family in memory of Paul "Pooh" A. Davis, please visit our flower store.