Once you step into this gorgeous town, you’ll be swooning over its captivating attractions, which include grand castles, breathtaking churches, and much more. You can’t afford to miss out on our Switzerland travel packages because it’ll take you to such hidden gems in the country that you might not have heard of.

Brig Tour Packages: An Underrated Swiss Town

Brig or Brig-Glis is a mystical town that is so down-to-earth with its simple charms and aesthetic beauty. This town isn’t as famous as the others, but that doesn’t mean it’s not worth visiting. If you want to enjoy some peaceful downtime with alluring views around you, then you must pack your bags and choose our Brig holiday packages for a merry time on your vacation. You must make the most of this opportunity.

A Glimpse of Your Vacation to Brig

Places to visit on your Brig trip package: Stockalper Palace, Thermalquellen Brigerbad, Simplon Pass, Old Town, and Swiss Guard Museum

Things to do in Brig: Relax in the thermal bath, go hiking, paragliding, visit the World Nature Forum

Famous food: Le Cordon Bleu

Languages: German or Alemannic Swiss German dialect

Currency: Swiss Franc

Airport: Sion Airport

Swoon-Worthy Places to See with Brig Travel Packages

Here are the most famous places that you must visit in the town of Brig in Switzerland.

1. Stockalper Palace: A Glorious Landmark in Brig

Once you visit Stockalper castle, you’ll be captivated by its old-world charm. With the three towers representing the three kings, the courtyard, the old stagecoaches, and so on enhance the allure of this place. This castle is right out of a storybook because visiting it is no less than a fairytale.

2. Thermalquellen Brigerbad: Relax in the Thermal Bath

After a day full of exploration, you’d want to relax and what better way to do that than by visiting the Thermalquellen Brigerbad. This facility offers a chance to indulge in the best spas and thermal baths of your life. All your exhaustion would vanish in these largest open-air thermal baths, so don’t miss out on this place in our all-inclusive Brig tour packages.

3. Simplon Pass: A Scenic Beauty in Switzerland

As they say, the journey is more important than the destination, the same way the route to Simplon Pass is what allures the tourists. With the cloudy skies, the view of the Alps, and a panoramic view of the city would captivate you. This pass which connects Switzerland to Domodossolo in Northern Italy is a fascinating location.

4. Old Town: Wander the Aesthetic Narrow Streets

Even though Brig is usually a starting point for excursions to other areas of the country, you should still take some time out to explore the old town. The cozy houses, stately buildings, shopping places, and so on, make it worth a visit and our best selling vacation packages for Brig offer that to you.

5. Swiss Guard Museum: Immerse in the History of the Country

This museum is an ode to the Swiss Guard soldiers who’ve protected the Vatican and the Pope for over 500 years. You’ll come across various artefacts and testimonies that would give you a glimpse of the history of the Swiss Guards and their role as the protector of the Vatican.

Travel Tips for a Trip to Brig

Try the local cuisine

Drink plenty of water

Keep sunglasses and hats handy

Wear comfortable shoes

Engage in the adventure activities

How to Reach Brig