THE DOCTOR WHO RATINGS GUIDE: BY FANS, FOR FANS Aaru Productions

Dr. Who & The Daleks

in colour!

Length 78 minutes Premiered 1965

With Peter Cushing as "Dr. Who",

Roberta Tovey, Roy Castle, Jennie Linden.

Screenplay by Milton Subotsky,

from the original BBC serial by Terry Nation.

Produced by Milton Subotsky and Max J. Rosenberg,

Directed by Gordon Flemyng.

Synopsis: Dr. Who brings us on an exciting journey through space aboard his spaceship Tardis. Dr. Who and his band of voyagers travel to an unknown world devastated by nuclear fallout. When the space adventurers are captured by the murderous, metallic Daleks, the action builds as the group tries to outwit the Daleks and escape. An enjoyable frightening adventure for all!

Reviews

A Review by Stuart Gutteridge BIG SCREEN ACTION! by Joe Ford Now on the big screen... by Tim Roll-Pickering A Review by Richard Radcliffe A Review by Finn Clark A Review by E. John Winner Technicolor of the Daleks by Matthew Kresal

A Review by Stuart Gutteridge 9/12/98

Depending on what you define as canonical probably has a lot to do with how much you enjoy this film, as its only real connection to the television series Doctor Who is that it is based on its second story. That said however, Dr Who And The Daleks still looks better than its television counterpart, boasting not only a bigger budget but also less padding, allowing the story to be told in roughly half the time than the BBC Dalek tale.

The first thing you notice when watching this are the production values. The Dalek city entrance, topped by a wide bank and featuring equally wide doors, looks impressive as does the eerily lit blue forest. The Daleks themselves, redesigned now look bulkier, their voices echo in the city, are just as imposing on the big screen as they were on the small screen. The Thals, however, haven`t aged very well; their make up and costumes appear dated.

The four leads are also impressive: Peter Cushing establishes himself as a gentle, eccentric Professor playing the scientist Dr. Who. Jennie Linden and Roberta Tovey (in particular) give convincing performances as Dr. Who`s granddaughters. Roy Castle has the most difficult task, however, in playing the romantic lead, Ian, in a comical way; however, it is to his credit that he is able to do this convincingly.

This may be the retelling of a familiar tale, but at least Dr Who And The Daleks is retold enjoyably.

BIG SCREEN ACTION! by Joe Ford 20/9/02

What is there not to like about this movie? It captures the spirit of the show more vividly than the TV movie and even gives the original broadcast a run for it's money. Its exciting, well paced and superb entertainment. It has four great leads and it's big, bold and full of Daleks!

I love The Daleks (that is the original TV broadcast) to pieces. But even I have to admit for all its menace and character work (which are both undoubtedly superb) it is a little slow (six episodes!) and more than a little creaky (in a way the black and white only can be). This movie tells the same story in half the time with double the excitement. Okay so it doesn't have the TARDIS crew character building but that isn't what a movie is about, it's about churning through Terry Nations marvellously escapist plot as quickly and effeciently as possible. With no time for this plodding character work the film comes out with much less depth but much more entertainment. That's not to say Nation's themes of genocide, pasifism and cowardice aren't touched upon (they are) but they are dealt with brilliantly fast and don't detract from the thrills and spills elsewhere.

Everything about this film is BIG! From the marvellously creative TARDIS set, not some alien device but a mess of wires and instruments to the huge alien forest to the impressive sets of the Dalek city. The Daleks themselves are giant and come in all manner of colours! Those huge flashing lights of theirs are great and oh so magically sixties! They glide through the city with their deadly exterminating blast (woah, fire extinguishers, cool!), such wonderful designs, you can see, even today, why they were such a success. Even the mountain and ravine look smashing, a far cry from the polysterene original. Visually despite some hysterical dating (lava lamps must have been the new thing!) which merely adds charm instead of detracting it the film is spectacular to look at.

Peter Cushing is just wonderful, a far cry from the bland cipher he would become in Daleks Invasion 2150AD. The first shot of him flicking through Eagle as his family read Science and Science and other rubbish is so endearing and wins you over to this gentle spin on our regular character. It's all there, his spirit of adventure when exploring, his deviousness as he sabotages the TARDIS on purpose, his manipulative nature when telling Ian to take the girl to the Daleks for experimentation... but he plays it so well, so adoringly you can't help but love this human version of the character. Roy Castle, of course, is lovely and such a dish (oh is that just me?), his comic relief can be grating (at times, sometimes it's quite effective) but he plays the role of the boyish hero so well. Roberta Tovey is so good, so much better than the whimperings of Carole Ann Ford it's untrue! She displays initiative, intelligence and bravery. How very refreshing. And Jenny Linden, the least of the four still makes quite a formidable Barbara (although nobody touches Jackie Hill, all right!). Together they make a hugely engaging team and the whole film is vastly watchable thanks to this intrepid foursome.

The set pieces are what make the film, of course. Attacking the Dalek in the cell, Ian trapped in the Dalek shell as they break down the door, the Thals walking into a trap, the attack on the city... all the joys of the original but with a juiced up budget, a more exciting score and some good direction. I just love the bit where Doctor Who and Susan are on the mountain when it splits open automatically and three Daleks appear from the city doors screaming "Do not move!" in unison.

Adventure, exploring the unknown, charismatic leads, great monsters and loads of excitement... yeah I'd say they captured the spirit of the series alright. And the fact that they do by upsetting so many fans by changing the whole premise of the show. it seems just for a laugh (Dr Who is just a doddery old man who invented TARDIS in his backyard!) makes it all the more fun for me. I don't really give a stuff for continuity when you can produce something as fun as this.

Personally I love it.

Now on the big screen... by Tim Roll-Pickering 22/1/03

The consistent failure to produce a cinema film over the last decade and a half has left many fans speculating on just what a large scale budget and other cinema effects could bring to Doctor Who to make for a brilliant adventure. But equally there is the danger that such a movie could ignore the basics of the series to the point where it becomes a film version of Doctor Who in name only. Alternatively the producers of such a movie might want to retell a story from the television series, as happened way back in 1965...

Dalekmania was at its height in that year and the appearance of a film comes as no surprise. The original trailers and movie posters focused heavily on the fact that the Daleks would appear on the big screen in colour and be more terrifying than ever before. Whilst the first part is true, the second unfortunately fails to ring properly. This film tells the same tale as the original Dalek story The Mutants but does so in barely 80 minutes. The only notable changes are that Kristas has been removed (though his character was extremely minor on television anyway), the Daleks' plan has been simplified to being to detonate another bomb and there's a clear Dalek hierarchy with both a Black and a Red Dalek appearing. Otherwise virtually every major part of the story is present even though it is told in half the time and also includes a sequence introducing the characters and TARDIS. Unfortunately the major cuts in the story have been the characterisation and tension that gave the television version so much of its weight is missing here. None of the Thals are given any depth whatsoever, with the relationship between Barbara and Ganatus being exorcised, whilst the Daleks are explained in a much more 'matter of fact' style than before. Ian is turned into a buffoon, tripping up and slipping so much that some scenes descend into slapstick, whilst Barbara is reduced to a helpless blond. Susie is shown as more intelligent than her television counterpart even though she is a younger girl, whilst Dr Who is now an absent minded human mad scientist but neither of these characters especially inspire. As a result the film is tedious to watch at times and reliant upon the sets and action for its impact.

Design wise it is clear that a lot more money was spent on the film than on the television series, but unfortunately not enough to make the surface of Skaro convincing in colour. The Dalek city exterior is a lot less visually impressive than its television counterparts in either The Mutants or The Evil of the Daleks, but the interior shows where the money has been spent. Although the claustrophobia of the television is lost, what is gained are sets that don't give away any sign of cheapness whilst also offering a grand scale. The Daleks suffer a little from their colour scheme being too friendly but with many more functioning casings than on television they are able to offer themselves as a credible army when they need to.

What is missing in particular from the story is the level of Nazi symbolism from the original. Here it manifests itself only briefly in a scene where the Black Dalek tells the other Daleks that the final end of the Thals is almost upon them and the camera work and placing of the Daleks suggests a political rally. Otherwise a lot of the concepts are ignored, whilst visually the Thals no longer look like Aryan supermen now that they have blue skin and eyelashes, an effect that just doesn't make them look impressive anymore.

The cliffhanger ending of TARDIS materialising in the middle of a Roman army on the march is a nice touch even though the stock footage of the Romans is clearly of low quality and on a different level to Ian as he looks out. However the final shot of Ian going crazy whilst the others all sit or stand about doing nothing is an unfortunate closing scene since it offers neither a sign of the liberation that has happened in the story nor a great promise of adventures that will exist only in the imagination.

Of the cast, Peter Cushing gives a good performance as Dr. Who and it is easy to see why he listed this as one of his favourite films since he is a far cry from his more traditional scary roles. Roy Castle is lumbered with the unfortunate role of Ian but wisely plays the character so that the buffoonery seems natural. Otherwise there are no especially inspiring performances at all in the film. The direction is reasonable but rarely builds up a sense of tension. The result is a movie that may have delighted fans in the 1960s by offering the big screen, colour and a greater budget but nowadays it comes across as a cheap cash in on the wave of Dalekmania. 2/10

A Review by Richard Radcliffe 22/3/04

The first "spectacular" Doctor Who movie, indeed both the Dalek 60s movies, were a glitch in my DW knowledge. It was almost as if I had forgotten about them - justifying the tag that Peter Cushing often has as the forgotten Doctor. It was time to remedy that DW absence in my life, and where better than Saturday afternoon - it was matinee time!

Going into the films all I knew was from a hazy remembrance from my long-distant childhood and the odd article in DWM. They were in colour (everywhere seemed to advertise that, even though their movie release was a few years before I was born - and I only saw them on colour TV anyway!), they had Peter Cushing as Doctor Who (an English gentleman who loved inventing things), they were the same stories as the first 2 Dalek TV serials with the original TARDIS crew, Roy Castle was in the first and Bernard Cribbins was in the second. That was it, that's all I remembered and knew. And so on that Spring Saturday afternoon, Dr Who and the Daleks entered the Video - and what a splendid time was had by all!

What strikes a chord from the opening credits is the music - that strange kind of 60s kitsch sci-fi stuff. Then we come across the Who Family. Mr Who, also an inventing Doctor, has 2 grandchildren who are visiting with him - Susan and Barbara. Susan is an young girl, not older than 10. Barbara is young woman, early 20s. Barbara's Boyfriend, Ian, comes to visit too - and off they go in the Doctor's invention - a time machine.

It's amazing that this is all taken at a fair old stride within the first quarter of an hour. No thought is given to why the TARDIS is shaped like a police telephone box, it just is. The TV show was, after all, mega popular back then - and police boxes are good ways to travel to other worlds. A fore-knowledge of the TV series then was useful. But then the TV series is changed. There's the same characters (Doctor, Ian, Barbara, Susan), but they are quite different from their TV cousins.

Peter Cushing's Doctor is an English gentleman. A human inventor who likes to read comics. He's your dippy old uncle who spends all his time in the garage meddling with gadgets. He's a very likeable old gent, and Peter Cushing is excellent.

Ian Chesterton is a bumbling young man. Roy Castle gets lots of the laughs, trips up lots and is ultimately very heroic against the monsters. It was great to see the versatile Roy Castle in Doctor Who, full stop. He's one of the great entertainers of British stage.

Barbara Who is a quiet young woman, shepherded by everyone around her. By far the weakest member of the foursome, she has very little to do, she doesn't even scream that much.

Susan Who is a likeable young girl. Roberta Tovey is a fantastic child actress, far better than most. She succeeds in coming over as clever, but also the sort of girl you want your kids or sister to play with.

The Daleks are magnificent. In glorious Technicolour they really are impressive. Helped by booming voices that echo off the metal walls of their city, this really is their film. They look great, they sound great. Their city is very impressive too - the set designers providing a real alien, metallic setting for our favourite monsters. Less successful are the Thals. Eye-shadow and pretty hairdos is great for the women, but the men look ridiculous. When DW is described as camp, this is where they were looking.

The script is the 7-part Dalek serial condensed into 80 minutes. Halving the Dalek script you would think much would be missed out, but it really doesn't seem that way at all. But it's unfair to compare the 2 - the Dalek TV serial was 7 25 minute segments and paced as such. The film is to be watched in 1 sitting, and is therefore much more urgent. Looking back now at the mass of DW, it's a shame they didn't give us an original story - but if a story is that good why not make it even better, and they definitely did that for the most part!

It all looks great in its Technicolour brilliance. The TARDIS could have been better inside, but the occupants (except Barbara) are very watchable and entertaining. The Daleks have never looked better. I could really see how Dalekmania took off in the 60s after watching this film - it really was quite exciting! I'm looking forward to the sequel in Earth 2150 AD already! 7/10

A Review by Finn Clark 8/6/06

Peter Cushing's first Dalek movie is one of the most kiddified things ever to appear under the Doctor Who label. That's not random abuse, by the way. I find it fascinating for precisely that reason. There have been more child-oriented products (colouring books, World Distributors annuals, Tom Arden's Nightdreamers) but you could go dizzy counting the changes they made to the BBC's original en route to the big screen.

It's cuddly! The original was an intense, claustrophobic production of a grim, survivalist life-or-death script from Terry Nation. Its themes included post-atomic armageddon, radiation-induced mutation, Nazi race hatred and the dangers of pacifism when facing extermination. The big-screen remake, on the other hand, has comedy with Roy Castle and a box of chocolates.

Susan (or "Susie" as Cushing also calls her) has become eleven years old and arguably the main character! If there's any action, she's usually at the heart of it. Certainly in the first half she seems to get all the big plot moments. Susan grabs the medicine, goes alone into the forest, meets Alydon, writes the letter, steals the pen, sabotages the camera and suggests that the cape be used to insulate the Dalek from the floor. Admittedly she's less prominent in the second half, but that's because the film stuck to Terry Nation's plot structure.

Admittedly one could also build similar arguments around Ian or the Doctor, but compared with their TV incarnations the three adults have all been watered down. Roy Castle's Ian is a timorous goofball, Jennie Linden's Barbara barely exists and Doctor Who [sic] is an absent-minded grandad. Nevertheless little Susan has become an improbable genius who spouts technobabble, reads high-level physics textbooks and has more brains and guts than the grown-ups around her. I don't see this as related to Carole Ann Ford's version of the character. I think someone crafted this brand-new Susan with the film's target audience firmly in mind.

The other leads are even mostly defined by their interactions with Susan. Barbara isn't lovey-dovey with Ian, is she? Similarly Ian may be Barbara's boyfriend, but you get a much stronger sense of his joking relationship with her little sister. Roy Castle brings schoolboy charm to his role, but unfortunately he also gets lots of physical gags of which not one is funny. He's like a black hole of anti-comedy. In fairness however I'm not convinced it's all Roy Castle's fault, since I don't find this film particularly well directed.

As for Peter Cushing... I've never felt Cushing had much acting range, but within his limitations the man was a genius. No one will ever out-Cushing Cushing. He breathes life into godawful fifth-rate British horror flicks simply by stepping in front of the cameras. Elegant, courteous, chillingly callous and either breathtakingly noble or deliciously evil, I worship his memory.

Here, alas, he's none of that. Cushing could have been awesome with a more Hartnell-like characterisation, but here he's just a grandad. My favourite actor to play the Doctor gives what's still the worst performance yet in the role, if you don't count Richard E. Grant. He doesn't command the screen. He stoops. He potters around. He gives a big wink whenever he's up to something dodgy, to reassure us. And, like everyone else, he's mostly defined by his relationship with Susan. She's his real companion, with Ian and Barbara just tagging along. He's an affectionate dodderer who loves playing with his granddaughter and only really comes alive when she's threatened. There's a line in the second film where he actually shows some steel: "You should have made them stay." He's very protective of the wee lass.

In fairness Peter Cushing was the sweetest, kindest man you could ever hope to meet and he loved playing this movie's Doctor. Furthermore, given the film's focus, this characterisation makes sense even if it's not what I'd have chosen. You couldn't put Hartnell's sinister old bastard into this kind of family film. However Cushing's Doctor isn't even a watered-down version. Apparently Cushing hadn't watched the TV series and just played it as "an eccentric scientist". Mind you, on occasion Susan's safely out of the way and Cushing almost becomes a different character. He's more Doctorish, relaxing into the situation as he acts more like Hartnell did. I enjoyed the "we'll give your girlfriend to the Daleks" scene, even if Cushing does give another of those bloody winks.

Of the main cast, only Roberta Tovey stands comparison with her TV counterpart. Hartnell, Russell and Hill are so far ahead of their replacements that it's not even funny, but Tovey is surprisingly capable. She has her glitches ("Coward, I for one am going to investigate!"), but it's the scriptwriter who needs shooting there. The screenplay credit says Milton Subotsky, but apparently Terry Nation only let them use his original scripts on condition that David Whitaker did the adaptation. If so, was he on drugs? How many children speak like that? And you thought Jake Lloyd had it bad in The Phantom Menace! Admittedly the BBC's Susan was a more compelling character, but this film puts its weight on little Roberta Tovey and if she'd cocked up then the film would be unwatchable and we'd have all been screaming for decades about the ghastly child actor who single-handedly ruined a classic. In fact Tovey was an experienced child actress who did eight films during 1960-66 and stayed in the business as an adult, unlike many child stars. As an incentive during filming, the director Gordon Flemyng paid Tovey a shilling whenever she did a scene in one take. This made her so much money that Flemyng retracted the offer for the sequel.

Visually this film is brash, colourful and less striking than the BBC TV original. (Did I mention the weak direction?) Its sixties kitsch is fun, but honestly! That TARDIS interior, the Dalek city... are those Christmas decorations? What's with the Thals' eyeshadow? However I like the petrified forest, with its two-tone colour schemes like cheap comic books of the period. Occasionally also the higher budget gives us a gem, with glass shots of Skaro's landscape or the cracking open rock face in front of the Dalek city.

I also love the music. It's hardly subtle, but it's fun and it fits.