Doctor Who is releasing a colourised version of a classic Daleks serial on home video for the first time. The BBC announced last year that its production team would be adding colour to one of the most notable 1960s black-and-white serials in honour of the show's 60th anniversary.

First broadcast by BBC Four last November, this colourised version of 'The Daleks' — a serial transmitted originally between December 21, 1963 and February 1, 1964 — will now be coming to home video in a special edition Steelbook boxset.

In this serial, William Hartnell's incarnation of The Doctor first encounters the Daleks when he accidentally lands the TARDIS on Skaro right in the middle of a cold war between the Daleks and their arch-enemies, the Thals.

Related: Here's how to watch Doctor Who's entire Whoniverse in the right order

The seven-episode serial also features original cast members William Russell (as Ian Chesterton), Jacqueline Hill (as Barbara Wright) and Carole Ann Ford as The Doctor's granddaughter Susan Foreman.

This remastered and colourised edition edits 'The Daleks' into a 75-minute movie with a new score by Mark Ayres, in addition to featuring the full seven-part serial in its original black-and-white format.

This colourised feature was developed by Doctor Who executive producer Phil Collinson, who said last year: "It’s been my absolute pleasure to spend this past 12 months working with such a talented team to breathe new life into this classic adventure — a story that is literally the foundation stone of all that Doctor Who has become.

"The original is a masterpiece of 1960’s television drama and this new version stands on the shoulders of the pioneering spirit of 1960's Doctor Who."

Related: Doctor Who Christmas specials ranked: Is Ncuti Gatwa or Matt Smith the best festive Time Lord?

Also included here are all of the special features from the original Blu-ray release of 'The Daleks', such as audio commentary with producer Verity Lambert and stars William Russell and Carole Ann Ford as well as a documentary on the creation of the Daleks and more.

'The Daleks in Colour' is available for pre-order from at £19.99 for the standard version , while the Steelbook is on and for £29.99 ahead of its release on February 19, 2024.

Doctor Who will return for its 14th series this spring. The show airs on BBC One in the UK and elsewhere.