Building on the ever-popular butter coffee trend, Picnik releases the first-to-market butter coffee creamer in the convenient combidome 750ml carton packs from SIG, soon to be available in the US.

Versatile product

The first of its kind, the creamer is the newest addition to Picnik’s product line made with the highest-quality ingredients. A blend of grass-fed butter, whey protein sourced from New Zealand and Medium Chain Triglycerides (100% derived from coconuts) provide benefits of healthy fats and sustained energy without the usual crash that comes with a regular cup of coffee. Effortlessly mixing with hot or cold beverages, the creamer offers the same convenience as classic half-and-half and is reminiscent of the taste, but enhances the consumption experience even more with its versatility, transforming a wide array of drinks and recipes into functional, nutrient-rich creations.

“Our butter coffee creamer was created with our consumers in mind. We wanted to blend the highest quality with the best taste for optimal experiences. This extends to having differentiated packaging for our differentiated product,” says Megan Lavorato, Director of Operations at Picnik.

Innovative packaging solution

A trendy product certainly calls for differentiated packaging. As a company, Picnik operates with emphasis on supporting a healthy lifestyle with wholesome food that’s convenient and nutritious. In partnering with SIG, Picnik finds a solutions provider that is up to the task in meeting their consumers’ ever-evolving needs. Forging strong and mutually beneficial relationships with partners such as Picnik is an element of SIG’s Value Proposition, which aims to drive Product Innovation and Differentiation to meet the changing needs of today’s consumers.

The combidome packaging is the perfect fit for the butter coffee creamer as it combines the innovative features of a carton pack with the best characteristics of a bottle. The single-action screwcap, known as the domeTwist, is positioned at the center of the package’s top, allowing easy access to the product. Altogether, the carton pack works to ensure ease of handling, smooth pouring, and convenience for consumers.

At Picnik, inclusion is prioritized as awareness of food sensitivities, diet restrictions, and varieties in lifestyle choices are valued. Their latest passion project has led to the creation of a creamer that aims to accommodate a wide range of preferences, by effortlessly adding simplicity and nutrition to a deeply personal routine. The product will be available starting in July 2018. Be it a ketogenic-friendly, paleo, or gluten-free diet and beyond, as stated on the eclectic carton, “Everyone deserves a radiant life.”

About Picnik

Founded by Naomi Seifter in 2013, Picnik is known for real food + good vibes. The Picnik philosophy is to fully embrace the yin and yang of why people eat: to nourish our bodies and experience pure enjoyment. For more company information, please visit picnikaustin.com or find Picnik on Instagram under @PicnikAustin.

About SIG

SIG is a leading systems and solutions provider for aseptic packaging. We work in partnership with our customers to bring food products to consumers around the world in a safe, sustainable and affordable way. Our unique technology and outstanding innovation capacity enable us to provide our customers with end-to-end solutions for differentiated products, smarter factories and connected packs, all to address the ever-changing needs of consumers.