We’ve all heard it a million times, “Home is where the heart is.” It’s true though, isn’t? Which is why we want to share a few places dear to our Siete Familia in the heartland, Austin, Texas. So our casa can feel like tu casa. Consider this a love letter to you, and the city that makes our heart melt (no, really. Hang around for an Austin summer and you might be playing con fuego).

Now, we don’t usually do this because it makes our cheeks blush and our eyes burn like forgot to wash our hands after dicing jalapeño; but, for those of you who want to know, we give you a list of stores and restaurants to enjoy during your time in Austin.

Picnik

Our familia has so much love for Picnik. You'll often see Alex, our Marketing Manager, with a Mayan Mocha in tow. Voted “Best Paleo Breakfast Tacos in Austin,” the Picnik trailers makes equally as tasty food as the brick and mortar store on Burnet Road. It’s a 100% gluten free restaurant that makes “good food that happens to be good for you.” Same dietary integrity, same good vibes. You can peep our Siete family dining at all locations ever so often, and not just because they use our tortillas.

Fresa’s Chicken Al Carbon

This Austin original will definitely hit the spot with their modern take on classic Mexican chicken. An office poll on what to order says you won’t go wrong ordering the power bowl, brussels sprouts, and sweet potatoes. Visit their South First location for it’s huge patio and kid-friendly nature, especially in the summer. But be warned, the heat may have you ordering a round of their famous frozen avocado margaritas!

Loro

Sushi meets barbecue, Texas meets Asia, for an unbeatable Asian Smokehouse. Loro has lots of gluten free options available on the menu, like theMalaysian Chicken Bo Ssam.Pro-tip: let the staff know what dietary restrictions you’re working with and they’ll help you out! Kudos to their accommodating team.

Casa de Luz

With a mission to build health and community, we give this place not one gold star, not two gold stars, but all of our gold stars. Nature is their menu planner and everything on the menu comes out to $12! They serve vegan, organic, gluten free, and whole/unprocessed foods that we lick, slurp, and lap up each time. We’re pretty sure Jamie, our Customer Delight Supervisor, lives here! Ask her about her love for Casa de Luz and you’ll see her eyes light up like the UT Tower after a Longhorn victory.

Greater Goods

Greater Goods is a beloved, local coffee shop, family-owned by husband and wife. With the baristas located in the center of the shop, this place feels like a friendly community. What’s more, they revolve around community, too! With an emphasis on giving back to others, Greater Goods does a world of good outside the cozy shop by working with a lot of different charities. (Speaking of, last Christmas, our familia had the pleasure of partnering with them to make a special Siete christmas coffee blend). They also host special coffee events, like “The Coffee Collaborative,” and have even had super cool latte art competitions. Can you tell that we like them a latte?

People’s Rx

For all your grab-n-go needs, there is People’s Rx. This timeless Austin pharmacy deli uses our Almond Flour tortillas for tacos in a scrumptious paleo taco. Perfect for fueling a day around town.

Whole Foods North Lamar

If you’ve never been to Austin, there’s still a chance you’ve seen photos of people picnicing at Zilker during sunset. Stock up your picnic basket with any or all of our products from the Whole Foods on North Lamar, kick back, and bon appetit!

Wheatsville Co-op