Sugiyama has been involved in many activities to give back to society since her career

"Good job! Letʼs hit with one hand now!"

Her cheerful voice echoes at Palm International Sports Club in Chigasaki City, Kanagawa. Ai Sugiyama, serving as the representative of the Club, coaches her beloved son. She currently works as a TV commentator and also coaches youngsters at the Club. When she holds a racket and runs on a court, it reminds us of her time as a professional player, while she comments, "If I play with Naomi Osaka, I wonʼt be able to even win a game. Maybe I can win a point if Iʼm lucky."

As a player, Sugiyama competed in 62 consecutive Grand Slam tournaments. Her carefree smile and enthusiasm for sport remains today, and Sugiyama is passionate about her role as an Ambassador for Laureus, the global organisation that uses the power of sport to transform the lives of children and young people.

"I believe that sports can create a better world, and is not just for winning and losing or having fun. It helped me to grow as a person by playing as a professional and traveling around the world. Therefore, I felt very privileged when I was contacted by Laureus, since sports legends and top athletes who not only achieved great accomplishments but also are wonderful people have already been active in this organization. At the Rugby World Cup last year, I participated in a rugby lesson hosted by Laureus and Special Olympics Nippon Tokyo for children with intellectual disabilities. I can see a lot of potential in these children from their sparkling eyes. I personally learned many things and spent valuable time."

Charitable activity was a part of Sugiyama's life throughout her professional career, as she often gave back financially to organizations close to her heart. As a player, she would donate 10,000 yen to the Japan Cancer Society for each win during a tour as well as donation of all the prize money she earned to twin sister players who suffered from severe illnesses. Most recently, she participated in a charity event to support the victims of the forest fires in Australia.

" Traditionally, itʼs been an implicit practice in the tennis world to give back to society when we become top players and can afford it. I had thought it was a wonderful thing to do ever since I was still new as a professional player, and naturally came to think that I would like to do whatever I can. For tennis, we constantly tour all over the world, and have opportunities to learn cultures of various countries different from Japan. In the beginning, I hesitated and felt homesick when my understandings were different from othersʼ. But I cannot compete without accepting differences. It was such a struggle until I eventually accepted that this world is where I live and play matches."

"Once stepping off the court, a rival is a "peer"

After all, she had peers. She does not go on a world tour by herself. Players she met every week at tournaments were also like peers in one team.

"A rival when I play matches becomes a peer once stepping off the court. Players come from many countries and are always willing to do charity events if a disaster occurs somewhere in the world, as exemplified by the Hanshin Great Earthquake in 1995 and Great East Japan Earthquake in 2011. I believe that strong awareness of our ability to contribute to society is one of the things that makes the tennis world attractive."

Sugiyama was known as a wonderful singles player as well as doubles player during her career days. She won three Grand Slam titles and also held the worldʼs #1 ranking.

"Singles is tough because I need to fight alone. For doubles, I had strong awareness to enjoy playing tennis. I would choose my partner because I liked the personʼs character not because I can win matches. I can say my true feelings and pay respect to my partner because we get along well and like each other. I can enjoy the process of team building with such a partner. I was able to tell what my partner was thinking just by looking at facial expressions; therefore, I might have been able to achieve good results."