Penn Badgley is a $12 million net-worth American actor and musician in 2023. He is well-known in the industry for his well-known acting parts, which have been well-received by audiences. He made his acting debut in The Fluffer, playing Young Sean McGinnis.

Biography & Profile Summary

Born on 1 November 1986, Penn Badgley’s age is 36 Years Old as of 2023. He was born and raised in a working-class family in Baltimore, Maryland, United States. He holds an American nationality and has his belief in the Baha’i Faith religion.

Penn completed his elementary education at Woolridge Elementary School and then went to St. Christopher’s School in Richmond, Virginia. Subsequently, he went to the Charles Wright Academy in Washington. As a kid, he was a part of the Seattle Children’s Theatre. He was home-schooled along with his Blake Lively.

Penn Badgley Family, Wife & Relationships

Penn Badgley’s parents are Duff and Lynne Murphy Badgley. Penn Badgley’s father’s name is Duff Badgley who is a newspaper reporter and later on became a builder. He was also a governor’s candidate from Washington in 2008.

He mother’s name is Lynne Murphy Badgley who is a housewife.

Penn Badgley’s parents separated when he was 12, and since then, he has wanted to be a musician.

Penn Badgley’s relationship status is married. He got married to singer Domino Kirke in 2017. They began dating in 2014.

The couple welcomed their first child in 2020 after suffering from two miscarriages. Penn is the father of Kirke’s son from her previous marriage named, Cassius Riley. He also dated Zoë Kravitz who is an American actress.

In the past, he also dated Blake Lively who is an American actress and model.

Penn Badgley Height & Weight

Penn Badgley is a handsome man with a very dashing personality. He has a good physique.

He is 5 feet 7 inches, weighs around 66 kg, and has brown eyes and brown hair.

Penn Badgley Career

Penn, along with his mother, moved to California so that he could focus on building his acting career. He began by lending his voice to vid games like Mario Golf 64 and Mario Tennis 64. His first credited performance was an episode of Will and Grace. Subsequently, he appeared in television shows like Daddio, What I Like About You.

He played the role of “Eddie Bauer” in the television series titled “The Brothers García”.

From 2000-2001 he appeared in a television serial called The Young and The Restless. His performance was highly appreciated in the series. In 2002 he played a role in a comedy series titled Do Over. Subsequently, he was a part of two more series called The Mountain and The Bedford Diaries.

His first feature film came in 2006, called John Tucker Must Die. In 2007 he appeared in another film titled Drive Thru.

He rose to fame in 2007 when he was cast in the super hot television series called Gossip Girl. He okayed the role of Dan Humphrey, and the show also starred Leighton Meester and Blake Lively.

Penn Badgley Net Worth

As of February 2023, Penn Badgley had an estimated net worth of about $8 million. He has made such an amount from his career as an actor and a musician.

1. Who is Penn Badgley?

Penn Badgley is known as an Actor. Penn Badgley was born on Nov 1, 1986, and presently, Penn Badgley is 36 years old.

2. What is Penn Badgley Net Worth?

Penn Badgley is an Actor with a net worth of $8 Million. Penn Badgley was born on Nov 1, 1986.

3. What is Penn Badgley’s weight?

Penn Badgley the successful Actor, weighs 73 kg.

4. How tall is Penn Badgley?

Penn Badgley is an Actor who stands 5 feet 8 inches tall.

5. How old is Penn Badgley?

Penn Badgley was born on Nov 1, 1986. Penn Badgley is 36 years old.