For some reason, a lot of us fancy Joe Goldberg. But maybe that’s because Penn Badgely, who plays him, is very attractive and a seemingly nice guy. You know, very much unlike the serial killer psychopath he is in YOU on Netflix. In real life, Penn Badgley has a colourful dating history, from relationships with his co-stars to being married now.

Yep, Penn Badgley is actually a very wholesome, non-killer, husband and father. Surprise! So here is a brief history of everyone Penn Badgley has ever been confirmed to be dating.

Blake Lively, 2007 – 2010

Penn dated his Gossip Girl co-star Blake Lively for three years, from 2007 to 2010. Their relationship was pretty on and off, and they went public at the 2008 Met Gala. They officially broke up two years later.

Zoë Kravitz , 2011 – 2013

In the summer of 2010, Penn was first linked to actress Zoë Kravitz, but they dated officially from 2011 to 2013. Their relationship was kept private at the time, but afterwards Penn reflected in an interview about “falling madly in love” with her.

According to US Weekly, they broke up in the summer of 2023. “It just wasn’t working,” a source said. “It really did end on good terms, though.”

Domino Kirke, 2014 – now

Domino Kirke and Penn Badgley have been married for five years, since 27th February 2017. They first started dating in 2014, and were first spotted together in New York, in the summer of that year.

Now, the married couple have a pretty low-key relationship, mainly out of the public eye. Domino co-founded Carriage House Birth and works as a doula – someone who assists a family before, during, and after birth. She also works as a singer. And yes, she is related to Jemima Kirke, who starred as Hope in Sex Education – the pair are sisters.

Penn and Domino welcomed a baby boy in August 2020, their first child together. Domino also has a son from a previous relationship.

Season four of YOU is available on Netflix now. For all the latest Netflix news, quizzes, drops and memes like The Holy Church of Netflix on Facebook.

Related stories recommended by this writer:

• Someone’s spotted a huge editing error in YOU season four, and it’s hilarious

• A deep dive into the incredible friendship between Penn Badgley and Cardi B

• How well do you remember season three of YOU? Take this quiz to find out