Penn Badgley and Blake Lively are some of Hollywood's most well-known stars. The two famous actors once worked together on a joint project that gave them great fame.

Advertisement

Blake Lively may be a star in her own right; however, the actress has become well-known as the wife of Ryan Reynolds, a top name in Hollywood. The couple recently revealed that they are expecting their fourth child.

On the other hand, Penn Badgley has also been married for the past five years. He's also making his mark in the entertainment industry and continuing to land leading roles. Lively and Badgley once had a relationship and dated for a few years.

Blake Lively and Penn Badgley at Philippe in New York on May 5, 2008. | Source: Getty Images

Penn Badgley and Blake Lively Began Their Relationship on the Set of “Gossip Girl”

Penn Badgley and Blake Lively have a long history together. The actors had known each other since Lively was 11 years old. However, the two only got close on the set of "Gossip Girl".

Advertisement

Their relationship wouldn't have become intimate if Badgley had continued to decline to be in the series. The actor was offered the part of Dan Humphrey in 2007 numerous times before finally agreeing to take the role.

Badgley and Lively only met during "Gossip Girl" filming in 2007, where their characters in the series, Dan and Serena, were a couple. By the end of the first season in 2008, there were rumors they were in a relationship. The co-stars initially denied the rumors, with Lively saying at the time that people always try to "create things that aren't there".

Penn Badgley and Blake Lively at Progress Energy Park, Home of Al Lang Field, on January 31, 2009, in St. Petersburg, Florida. | Source: Getty Images

She said they tried to keep their relationship low-key and pretended they were just friends.

They continued to hide their relationship but were spotted together in Mexico in May 2008 during a romantic getaway. During their vacation at a luxury resort, the lovebirds kissed numerous times while enjoying themselves in the sun and spending time at the beach and by the pool. They dated for three years before they went their separate ways.

Advertisement

Penn Badgley and Blake Lively Showed Professionalism after Breaking Up

Penn Badgley and Blake Lively were entirely private regarding their relationship, and the two stars were just as quiet about their breakup. The people on set didn't even notice that they were no longer together.

Penn Badgley and Blake Lively walk to the "Gossip Girl" movie set on the Upper East Side on August 11, 2009, in New York City. | Source: Getty Images

The former couple's co-star, Chace Crawford, spoke about what it was like on the set after their split on "Watch What Happens Live With Andy Cohen" in 2019. He revealed that Badgley and Lively were very professional and said there was no drama on the set. He described the former couple as the "most mature people in the world".

Following their breakup, the two eventually spoke about the split. The "You" star revealed in the "Men's Health" November 2009 issue that he enjoyed being in a relationship where both parties could "identify with what the other is expecting". He also stated that being involved with someone you work with "might not always be the smartest move".

Advertisement

Penn Badgley and Blake Lively at the Gramercy Park Hotel on October 12, 2009 in New York City. | Source: Getty Images

The "All I See is You" actress spoke to Vanity Fair in 2017 about the breakup. She said they tried to keep their relationship low-key and pretended they were just friends for fear of getting in trouble at work. The star further said:

"I remember there was one point where we were just afraid of how our personal lives overlapping our work life could be perceived by our bosses. [But then] we were like, 'Oh no, that's exactly what they want.'"

Blake Lively’s Life after Breaking up with Penn Badgley

Blake Lively went on to date a few other top Hollywood actors after her breakup with Penn Badgley. In 2010, the actress started dating Ryan Gosling; however, their relationship was short-lived. The stars never even confirmed if they were dating then, and rumors that they were a couple started after they went to Disneyland in October 2010.

Advertisement

The following year in 2011, "The Shallows" actress had a relationship with Hollywood heartthrob Leonardo DiCaprio. This relationship, which reportedly began in May 2011, was also short-lived and has been described as a summer fling. They spent the summer of 2011 together trekking across Europe, and a few months later, in September 2011, the couple was separated.

Advertisement

A month after the actors split, Lively started dating her now husband, Ryan Reynolds. Lively and Reynolds became husband and wife on September 9, 2012, and have three children together.

Lively recently revealed that she is expecting another baby. Due to the actress having three children and expecting her fourth, she hasn't starred in many major projects since the end of "Gossip Girl". Her most notable projects after the series were "The Age of Adaline" and "A Simple Favor".

Domino Kirke and Penn Badgley attend The Weinstein Company and Lyft host a special screening of "3 Generations" on April 30, 2017, in New York City. | Source: Getty Images

Penn Badgley’s Life after Breaking up with Blake Lively

Penn Badgley also dated other people after his breakup with Blake Lively. He had a relationship with Zoë Kravitz for two years from 2011 to 2013, and their split was reportedly amicable, with a source revealing that things were "good between them".

Advertisement

The "Here Today" actor met his now-wife Domino Kirke around 2014. After dating for three years, they married on February 27, 2017, and kept their relationship private. The couple doesn't have any kids together yet, but Kirke has a child from a previous relationship.

After gaining fame in the series "Gossip Girl", Badgley's most famous project is the series "You", where he plays Joe Goldberg. The popular series "You" will be renewed for a fourth season.

Penn Badgley and Blake Lively walk to their trailers at the "Gossip Girl" film set at the International House on March 8, 2011, in New York City. | Source: Getty Images

Are Penn Badgley and Blake Lively Communicating After the Breakup?

After Penn Badgley and Blake Lively broke up, they continued to work together on "Gossip Girl". During an interview with Elle magazine, Badgley revealed how the former couple remained very professional even when they worked together again years later.

Advertisement

Penn Badgley said they "were ultimately professional" when asked if it was difficult for him to work with Lively after she got married. The actor also said his relationship with the actress was a "learning experience".

The former co-stars didn't stay friends in real life after their breakup. Badgley told HuffPost Live's Alyona Minkovski in 2015 that the former couple hadn't spoken in a long time. He further revealed, "an amicable silence" between the two.