Who is Penn Badgley?

Penn Badgley is an American actor. He is popularly known for his portrayal of “Dan Humphrey” in the television series, “Gossip Girl” and more recently as “Joe Goldberg” in the Netflix thriller series, “You.” Penn Badgley has also starred in movies like “Margin Call” and “Greetings from Tim Buckley.”

Penn Badgley’s full name is Penn Dayton Badgley. He was born on November 1, 1986, in Baltimore, Maryland, the United States to his parents; Duff Badgley (father) and Lynne Badgley (mother). As of March 2023, Penn Badgley is 36 years old.

About Penn Badgley’s parents

Penn Badgley’s father, Duff Badgley was a newspaper reporter and a carpenter. In 2008, Duff Badgley was the Green Party candidate for the legislative leader of Washington. Penn Badgley’s parents separated when he was 12 years old.

Penn Badgley’s mother is Lynne Badgley. She served as the PTA president of Woolridge Elementary while Penn Badgley attended the school. To support her son’s acting career, Lynne Badgley worked various jobs, even starting a jewellery design business.

About Penn Badgley’s siblings

Penn Badgley is an only child and does not have brothers or sisters.

About Penn Badgley’s marriage and wedding

As of March 2023, Penn Badgley is married to his wife Domino Kirke. Badgley and Domino Kirke have been married since 2017. Before his marriage to Kirke, Penn Badgley also dated his “Gossip Girl” costar, Blake Lively.

Penn Badgley and Blake Lively dated in 2007.

Penn Badgley dated Zoë Kravitz in 2011.

Penn Badgley started dating Domino Kirke in 2014.

About Penn Badgley’s relationship with Blake Lively

Blake Lively (born Blake Ellender Brown) is an American actress. She was born on August 25, 1987, in Los Angeles, California, United States to her parents; Elaine and Ernie Lively. She is currently 35 years old. Blake Lively is popularly known for her portrayal of “Serena van der Woodsen” in the teen drama series, “Gossip Girl.” She has also appeared in several other successful movies.

Blake Lively and Penn Badgley dated during the second season of “Gossip Girl.” According to reports, Badgley and Blake Lively were together for three years (from 2007 to 2010). Their relationship was kept on the low and when they eventually broke up in 2010, their split was private as well. The breakup was kept so secret even the crew members of “Gossip Girl” were unaware. Speaking about her split from Penn Badgley, Blake Lively said it was becoming difficult to distinguish herself from her character, Serena van der Woodsen.

She said:

“I was wearing the same clothes and doing fashion shoots as my character and dating the same person my character was dating. What people were projecting onto me was that I was Serena.”

Blake Lively has since moved on and is currently married to actor Ryan Reynolds.

About Penn Badgley’s relationship with Zoë Kravitz

Zoë Kravitz (born Zoë Isabella Kravitz) is an American actress, singer, model and filmmaker. She was born on December 1, 1988, in Los Angeles, California, United States to Lenny Kravitz and Lisa Bonet. She is popularly known for her work in movies like “Divergent”, “Batman” and “After Earth.”

Penn Badgley and Zoë Kravitz were first speculated to be dating in 2011, after Badgley’s split from Blake Lively. Details of Badgley’s relationship with Zoë Kravitz are currently sketchy. However, in June 2013, the couple reportedly called it quits after dating for about two years. At the time, a source close to the couple revealed that the breakup was not a sad one and that the relationship just wasn’t working. The breakup was said to have been caused by Kravitz and Badgley’s conflicting careers and filming schedules which resulted in them not having time for each other.

About Penn Badgley’s marriage to Domino Kirke

Domino Suzy Kirke-Badgley is a British-American singer and doula (a person who supports women during pregnancy and childbirth). She was born on December 17, 1983, in London, United Kingdom and is currently 39 years old. Domino Kirke has a son, Cassius Kirke from a previous relationship.

Domino Kirke and Penn Badgley started dating in 2014. In a now-deleted interview, Kirke revealed that she wasn’t really serious at the start of her relationship with Badgley. But things later changed.

She said:

“I was sort of getting used to being a single mom, maybe a little too used to it. I had a good thing with my kid and we were like this little team. Penn and I were dating, but it wasn’t nearly as serious as it is now, of course. I didn’t think marriage was in the cards for us.”

In December 2014, Badgley and Kirke attended the Millions March in support of the Black Lives Matter movement together. In 2015, the happy couple attended a charity gala together. On February 27, 2017, Penn Badgley and Domino Kirke tied the knot in an intimate courthouse ceremony in New York.

On June 24, 2017, they married for the second time in a larger outdoor wedding. About the decision to have two weddings, Domino Kirke said:

“My first wedding was more of a civil ceremony with about forty people that were able to join us in a pinch. The second one was more planned. Two hundred people came from all over the world. It just felt necessary to have both.”

In February 2020, Badgley and Kirke announced that they were expecting their first child together after enduring multiple miscarriages. In August 2020, Penn Badgley and Domino Kirke welcomed their son. In February 2023, Badgley requested that the sex scenes of his character, Joe Goldberg in “You” be cut back.

He said:

“I asked Sera Gamble (the creator of the series), ‘Can I just do not more intimacy scenes?’ This was actually a decision I had made before I took the show. I don’t think I’ve even mentioned it publicly, but one of the main things is, do I want to put myself back on a career path where I’m always the romantic lead?”

Badgley added that his request was also out of respect for his wife. He said:

“Fidelity in every relationship, especially in a marriage, is important to me.”

About Penn Badgley’s children

As of the time of publishing this article, Penn Badgley has only one child from his marriage to Domino Kirke. The name of Penn Badgley’s son is James Badgley.

Penn Badgley is also the stepdad to Kirke’s other son (Cassius Kirke) from her previous relationship.

James Badgley – Penn Badgley’s son

James Badgley was born on August 11, 2020, to Penn Badgley and Domino Kirke. He has a half-brother, Cassius Kirke. James Badgley is currently 2 years old.