Attention, Upper East Siders—and the rest of the world—Gossip Girl's resident angsty loner Penn Badgley is now a married man. Yep, according to E!, the actor quietly wed musician Domino Kirke — sister of Girls actress Jemima Kirke — earlier today in a Brooklyn courthouse ceremony.

And while it appears to have been a pretty small affair, with only several close family members and friends present, the photos from the ceremony look gorgeous, with Domino in a white lace dress with three-quarter-length sleeves and Penn in a dapper navy suit.

And while there's no word on whether Taylor Momsen, Leighton Meester, Blake Lively or any other Gossip Girl stars were at the ceremony, there was more than enough love going around, as evidenced by Domino's sister Lola posting a sweet photo to Instagram. A picture of the three sisters and Domino's son, Cassius, she captioned the shot with an especially heartfelt message to her sister: "When someone gets married in a courthouse, it's really an open invitation to everyone, but the beautiful bride to explore all that fashion has to offer. Here, I try a look simply called 'Pants,' as Cassius goes for 'That Dude from #incubus' and Jemima experiments with 'Off to Therapy!' Congratulations @dominokirke. We love you."

Instagram content

This content can also be viewed on the site it originates from.

Another friend shared a photo of the happy couple together, with the sentiment "Congrats to a couple beautiful people ❤."

Instagram content

This content can also be viewed on the site it originates from.

Culture

On C,XOXO, Camila Cabello Is Overshadowed by Her Own Taste

But the reality of C,XOXO is more confusing and weirder than mere mimicry.

Celebrity Style

Emily Ratajkowski Just Took Tomato Girl Summer Very Literally

Another reminder that this is more than a passing trend.

Culture

How New Girl Group KATSEYE Grew From Dream to Debut

The members of KATSEYE sit down with Teen Vogue in an exclusive interview about their long-anticipated debut.

Celebrity Style

Megan Thee Stallion Approves the Silk Scarf for Hot Girl Summer

If it's good enough for the Hot Girl Coach, it's good enough for me.