Darlington Council will hold its Annual General Meeting on Thursday (May 25) where a new leader, cabinet and mayor are due to be chosen. The meeting is especially important following the outcome of the local elections on May 5.

It has been three weeks since the results were announced, however there is yet to be an agreement on which party/ parties will run the council. Labour holds the advantage of being the majority party after it won 24 seats, compared to just 15 seats won by a diminished Conservative Party.

What was the outcome of the Darlington Local Elections 2023?

Labour - 24

Conservative - 15

Green Party - 7

Liberal Democrat - 3

Independent - 1

But Labour is still short of the 26-seat threshold it needs for outright control and must reach an agreement with other political groups to help it operate - and the delay shows talks haven’t been straightforward. A breakthrough could come if Labour is able to agree a deal with either the Green Party and/ or the Liberal Democrats. An alternative coalition of Conservatives, Greens, Liberal Democrats and Independents is highly unlikely.

Labour leader Cllr Steve Harker opened the door for future team work with Peter Gibson MP and Tees Valley mayor Ben Houchen, despite representing opposing parties. “This local authority will work with the MP and the combined authority, it’s about what’s best for Darlington and the Tees Valley,” he said.

Another outcome could be a cross-party cabinet, with political leaders and key councillors from across the four main parties holding the highest committee roles. The formation of the council’s new cabinet could heavily rely on what agreement is struck and the new leader and deputy.

But while Peter Gibson is willing to work with Labour, he’s concerned about a potential coalition with the Green Party. “I worry that co-operation will be jeopardised by Labour and the Greens in a coalition refusing to work with me out of political differences rather than for the good of the town.

A new mayor will also be appointed for Darlington, replacing Anne-Marie Curry.