The elections on Thursday, May 4, will see the Conservatives look to strengthen their position in control of the council but face a fierce contest against a Labour Party eager to return to power.

Here is your guide and everything you need to know about the upcoming local elections in Darlington.

What election is being held?

All 50 seats on Darlington Borough Council are up for grabs for the first time since 2019. Political parties will battle it out for all 50 seats throughout the town, with 26 needed to form a majority council. The previous election, in 2019, returned a ‘no overall control result’ after no party reached the majority threshold.

Local elections typically reflect voters’ attitudes about neighbourhood concerns, such as when bins are collected, the state of parks and pavements, or access to libraries and hospitals.

But they can also be a verdict on the main political parties and their handling of big issues – which in 2023 is likely to mean the cost of living, the NHS and public services.

Darlington’s future on the line as parties battle for power at local elections.

Who is standing?

Hundreds of candidates have been confirmed to stand in the elections on May 4, with political representation from the Conservatives, Labour, Liberal Democrats, Green and Independents.

Click here for a full list of candidates, ward-by-ward.

And here is an insight into each parties campaign aims:

Conservatives

Labour

Liberal Democrats

Green Party

Where is my polling station?

Dozens of schools, community centres and village halls will open their doors on Thursday, May 4, to allow residents to vote. All residents eligible to vote should have received a polling card detailing where they can vote.

Click here for a full list of polling stations - and to find the one nearest to you.

When do polls open?

Polls open at 7am and close at 10pm. There is no specific time when residents should vote and can visit the polling station whenever throughout the day.

Do I need ID?

Yes. It is the first time that photo identification has been compulsory for elections in England, but only certain kinds of ID will be accepted. A passport, driving licence photocard or blue badge are all valid, as well as an older person’s bus pass.

The Electoral Commission said extra staff will be deployed at some polling stations to make sure voters are aware of the new rules and to help manage queues.

When is the count and results?

The count is taking place at the Dolphin Centre in Darlington on Friday, May 5. Vote counting is due to start around 10:45am, with the first declaration expected around 11:30am. In the past, an indication of the final result has been announced at around 3pm.

What happened at the last election?

In 2019, the Conservatives became the largest party on Darlington Borough Council after Labour suffered significant losses, including several seats to their arch rivals.

The result can now be viewed as extremely significant for the town, and one which lit the touchpaper for Conservative MP Peter Gibson to be voted in later in December.

Click here for more information on the 2019 local elections in Darlington.

Wards to watch

Four wards in Darlington will elect two new councillors after several currently in office said they will not stand for re-election. They are: Brinkburn and Faverdale, Cockerton, Harrowgate Hill, and Sadberge and Middleton St George.

Of particular significance is the Harrowgate Hill ward, which is being targeted by several parties after current Independent councillors Ian Bell (formerly Conservative) and Lynn Paley (formerly Labour) said they will not stand for re-election. Whoever is elected could be joined by Conservative councillor Jon Clarke, who is also bidding for re-election in the ward. The Conservatives gained one new seat in this ward from Labour in 2019 but vote margins were close, and with two new candidates set to be elected, it is expected to be one to watch.

There are also 10 people battling it out on the ballot paper for the Cockerton ward, with two new candidates hoping to join current Labour councillor Jan Cossins, who is also standing for re-election. They are all vying to replace Labour cllr Eddie Heslop and Independent cllr Paul Baldwin (formerly Labour). Before cllr Baldwin changed allegiances, the ward was represented by a trio of Labour councillors, but the party will be wary of a Conservative power grab after a close round of voting in 2019.

Much of the Conservatives success at the 2019 election came from the several gains it made from previous Labour seats throughout the borough. This was particularly apparent in Brinkburn and Faverdale as the party stole a march on Labour. But despite securing healthy majorities to elect three councillors, cllr Rachel Mills and cllr Lisa Preston will not stand for re-election. However, whether residents will be open to such a political shift remains to be seen.

Both cllrs Doris and Brian Jones will stand down from Sadberge and Middleton St George, however residents could elect two new Conservative councillors - but they face a potential tough contest from Independent candidates.