DARLINGTON — This week's city council races saw one new member elected and two incumbents welcomed back.

Angela McRavin is the only new council member to come out of the race. The two remaining seats went to council members Bryant Gardner and John Milling. The winners came out on top in a six-person race.

All three hope to accomplish their individual goals during the next term, but they’re all striving for one main vision: serve the community.

Gardner, Milling and McRavin received the most votes and took the seats. Gardner and Milling finished with 19.5 percent and 18.27 percent, respectively, of the ballots cast. McRavin received 17.2 percent and unseated Howard Nettles.

Angela McRavin

McRavin, a lifelong Darlington resident, has been attending city and county council meetings for more than two decades. She felt called to run after years of speaking up during city council meetings.

“I just felt a need to step up and take part in it,” McRavin said. “I so want to be a voice of peace and calm, and bring some to the entire council.”

McRavin hopes to be a champion for government transparency during her term, she said. Her main goal is to ensure city residents understand what’s going on in council and how money is spent.

A new voice in city politics, McRavin thinks her fresh perspective helped her earn votes. She ran with ideas like creating a local domestic violence shelter and increasing funding for the police and fire departments.

Bryant Gardner

Gardner, a middle school history teacher, has served on Darlington’s city council for eight years. His recent victory will mark his third term.

Today's Top Headlines

Story continues below

He first ran because he saw young people growing up and moving away from Darlington — he wanted to change that, he said. His track record and idea of enhancing Darlington to keep people there helped him keep his seat, he said.

“I sell a clear vision of quality of life and investing and moving Darlington forward, being proactive and not reactive,” he said.

Baseball field upgrades and a new playground at Hampton Street Park are part of Gardner’s plan to focus on young families. More than a dozen new businesses in Darlington and millions of dollars in investments let the community know the city is moving in the right direction, he said.

He hopes to continue adding activities, businesses and improved infrastructure during his next term.

John Milling

Milling, an attorney of 50 years and former circuit judge, has served on Darlington’s city council for eight years. His recent victory marks the beginning of a third term.

He turned toward city council after finishing up a decade-long run as a circuit judge. Despite years of public service, he felt he wasn’t finished yet.

“I thought I would run and, if elected, try to be a positive force for the city,” Milling said.

Milling believes he’s been the positive force he sought to be, he said. Five decades of service through law and church involvement have proved that he wants to make the city a better place, he said.

Downtown development is near the top of Milling’s list of goals for his next term. He hopes to help the council solidify a development plan and take steps to bring it to life.