The Perry Sisters

The ability to forge new song-writing territory that creates a remarkable

interest in the gospel music community, exciting a new generation of

listeners, as well as satisfying a core audience that has helped mold a very

successful ministry is a challenge to be taken seriously. This challenge has

been accepted by a talented group of individuals who have helped pave the

gospel music way. The Perry Sisters have committed their hearts to the

musical ministry of Jesus Christ, and have seen hundreds of thousands of

people come to know our Savior.

The Perry Sisters originated in Huntington, WV in 1974 with Diana Perry

Gillette and her two sisters, Bonnie and Carol. In 1984 they signed with a

major record label and officially became the first professional ladies trio

in southern gospel music. In 1990 Diana's sisters retired from the road,

leaving Diana as the remaining founding member.

The group has reorganized with Diana Perry Gillette in the lead position.

Diana has one of the most recognizable voices in gospel music today, and is

one of the best songwriters in the southern gospel industry.

Tammy Underwood, Diana's niece, holds the soprano position and plays acoustic

guitar. Tammy has a signature sound with dynamic tones and range. Tammy and

her sister, Tina, have also contributed to the Perry Sisters song-writing

efforts.

Rodney Underwood joins Tammy on stage. Rodney plays keyboards, bass guitar

and is the sound tech for the group.

In the alto position newcomer Jada Hite. Jada is originally from Lucedale,

Mississippi and was actively involved in a solo ministry. Her youth and

vitality is especially appealing to the younger audience.

The Perry Sisters have recorded 24 albums, and had 29 top forty hits, in a

career spanning 27 years. The Perry Sisters have been nominated for numerous

awards such as: Favorite Trio, Favorite Soprano, Horizon Award, and Favorite

Video. Considering that most gospel music material has been written with male

quartets in mind, these accomplishments are not to be taken lightly.

The Perry Sisters have met the song-writing challenges. Diana has been

penning songs since 1980, including as I Wonder How Mary Felt, There'll Be A

Payday, Resurrection Morn, Imagine If You Will, Heaven's Avenue, Only

Sleeping, More Like You, and That Wonderful Name.

With their love for the Lord, and their amazing harmonies, it is no wonder

The Perry Sisters have been named "The First Ladies of Gospel Music."

Everyone should take the opportunity to witness, for themselves, The Perry

Sisters in performance. The audience will see a family with a genuine love

for their craft, an honest approach to their fans, and an unbridled

dedication for writing and singing music for the Lord.