Some celebrity siblings are well-known in Hollywood, but some aren't in the spotlight as much. After all, they say that lightning never strikes the same place twice. Yulanda Wilkins is one of the siblings who aren't as famous as their well-known brothers and sisters.

Yulanda Wilkins is an American citizen and celebrity sister. She is famously known for being the sister of Emmitt Perry Junior, commonly known by his stage name Tyler Perry. Tyler is not a new name in the American entertainment industry. He is a renowned actor, filmmaker, director, producer, screenwriter and playwright.

Yulanda Wilkins’ profile summary

Full name Yulanda Wilkins NicknameYulanda Gender FemalePlace of birth New Orleans, Louisiana, United StatesCurrent residence New Orleans, Louisiana, United StatesNationality American Ethnicity African-American Religion Christianity Sexuality StraightHair colourBlack Eye colourBlack Mother Willie Maxine PerryFatherEmmitt Perry SeniorSiblings Three (Tyler Perry, Emmbre Perry, and Melva Porter)Relationship status Single Famous forBeing Tyler Perry’s sister

Interesting facts about Yulanda Wilkins

Yulanda Wilkins is a regular woman who is not a celebrity in her own right. However, she is the celebrity sister of Tyler Perry, a well-known actor. Here are some interesting facts about Tyler Perry’s sister:

1. She was born in the United States

Yulanda is an American celebrity sister. She was born and raised in the United States. However, she has not offered any information about her date and place of birth. As a result, her age is not publicly known.

Who are Yulanda Wilkins’s parents? Yulanda is the daughter of Willie Maxine Perry (mother) and Emmitt Perry Senior (father). Her father was a carpenter. Her mother had been unwell for a long time and passed away on 8th December 2009.

2. She has worked together with Perry behind the scenes

Yulanda loves to keep her personal life away from the media and the public's attention. She has not offered any information about her personal or professional. She gained public recognition for being the sister to Tyler Perry. However, it is alleged that Yulanda Wilkins and Tyler Perry have worked together behind the scenes.

3. Her brother is a celebrity

Yulanda is famous for being the sister of Tyler Perry. Born Emmitt Perry Junior, he is a legendary American actor, filmmaker and playwright from New Orleans, Louisiana. He was born on 13th September 1969; therefore, he is 53 years old as of 2022.

Tyler Perry is famously known for the creation and performance of the Madea character, a tough older woman. In addition, most of his stage-play films have been adapted into some of the most highly-regarded films.

Tyler Perry is famous for starring in numerous movies and TV shows, including:

Diary of a Mad Black Woman

Daddy’s Little Girl

I Can Do Bad All By Myself

Temptation: Confessions of a Marriage Counselor

Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows

The Haves and the Have Nots

If Loving You Is Wrong

The Passion: New Orleans

All the Queen's Men

4. She has three siblings

Even though Tyler Perry is Yulanda's most prominent sibling, she has two other siblings. Tyler Perry's siblings include Emmbre Perry, Melva Porter and Yulanda Wilkins. Emmbre Perry is an American actor and director. His works are as follows:

As a director

2009 – God Send Me a Man

2010 – Let God Be the Judge

2012 – No More Games

2014 – Two is Better than One

2015 – Every Family has Problems

As an actor

2006 – Madea’s Family Reunion as Man on the Bus

2012 – Supernatural Swamp Slaughter

2014 – Two is Better than One, as Papa Willie

2015 – Every Family has Problems as Papa Willie

Just like Yulanda Wilkins, Melva Porter has led a private life. However, she has successfully guarded her personal and professional life by keeping it private.

5. Her career and net worth are unknown

Apart from remaining private about her personal life, her career or professional life is unknown. She has not offered any information about her career or business ventures. As a result, her net worth is not in the public domain. Her brother's worth is estimated to be $800 million.

Despite being a celebrity sister, Yulanda Wilkins has kept her life away from the public's eye. However, she is one of the individual’s fans, and followers have gotten interested in knowing thanks to her connection to one of their favourite celebrities, Tyler Perry.

Tuko.co.ke shared an article about Sofia Bella Pagan. She is an American actress and reality TV star. She is widely known as the daughter of People Puzzler game show host Leah Remini and Swordfish actor Angelo Pagan.

Sofia Bella Pagan is an American teenager and actress. As an actress, Sofia has appeared in her mother’s reality TV series Leah Remini: It’s All Relative. Furthermore, she is the third Mean Girl in JoJo Siwa: Boomerang music video.

Source: TUKO.co.ke