Philadelphia, PA (September 26, 2012) – Lowell Perry Jr. has joined Philadelphia-based Big Brothers Big Sisters of America as Vice President, Corporate Partnerships effective October 1, 2012. In his new national role, Perry will be based in Nashville, where he has served since 2005 as President and Chief Executive Officer of Big Brothers Big Sisters of Middle Tennessee, one of the nationwide mentoring network’s 350 local agencies.

“Lowell’s success in Middle Tennessee is a testament to his outstanding leadership and fund development expertise,” said Big Brothers Big Sisters of America President and Chief Executive T. Charles Pierson. “With the national appointment, our entire network will benefit from his talent and authentic understanding of local agency operations.”

As the Middle Tennessee agency’s leader, Perry was Big Brothers Big Sisters’ large agency “National CEO of the Year” in 2007. The agency, which served more than 2,800 children in 2010, earned recognition in 2008 from the Department of Health and Human Services Family and Youth Services Bureau – Administration for Children, Youth and Families as a Top 5 benchmark Mentoring Children of Prisoners agency. He served on Big Brothers Big Sisters’ Nationwide Leadership Council for three years, where he chaired the Leadership & Human Resources Committee, and is a founding member and outgoing chairman of the African American Advisory Council.

Perry is an experienced business development and marketing executive with an extensive broad-based business background, which includes experience with strategic alliances, start-ups, turnarounds, general and performance management, with special expertise in minority business development as a viable growth strategy. In the nonprofit sector, he has developed a reputation as a visionary innovator.

Perry led a start-up automotive manufacturer from concept to $30 million in three years, developing and implementing marketing strategies for a worldwide consumer products company, introducing a new paradigm in minority business development focusing on the “end-game,” which saves jobs and leads to sustainable growth of disadvantaged businesses. He also created and implemented a successful statewide drug education prevention program targeting children in kindergarten through sixth grade.

Perry has been featured in numerous sales and marketing training films, and many commercials. He has also appeared in a number of feature films and television, including Déjà vu, starring Denzel Washington and Nothing but the Truth, featuring Kate Beckinsale, and most recently on the Lifetime Channel show, Drop Dead Diva.

Perry has a bachelor’s degree from Yale University. He is a member of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc., a board member of the Tennessee Education Lottery Corp, Leadership Nashville Class of 2009, and in 2011 was named one of Nashville’s 25 Most Beautiful People. Perry and his wife, Kathleen, are the parents of three beautiful children Trey, Tucker Nichol (Miss Tennessee USA 2010) and Trenton.

About Big Brothers Big Sisters of Middle Tennessee

Big Brothers Big Sisters provides children facing adversity with strong and enduring, professionally supported one-to-one relationships that change their lives for the better, forever. The organization holds itself accountable for children in its program to achieve measurable outcomes, including educational success; avoidance of risky behaviors; and higher aspirations, greater confidence and better relationships.

Partnering with parents, guardians, schools, corporations and others, Big Brothers Big Sisters carefully pairs children with screened volunteer mentors, and then monitors and supports these one-to-one mentoring matches in building safe, enduring relationships. The organization depends on donations to help recruit volunteers and reach more children. Funding is used to conduct background checks on volunteers to ensure child safety, recruitment and training of mentors, and provide ongoing support for children, families and volunteers.

Big Brothers Big Sisters of Middle Tennessee serves children all across Middle Tennessee in Metro Nashville/Davidson county as well as Williamson, Rutherford, Cheatham, Hickman, Dickson, Robertson, Sumner, and Wilson counties. To better serve children, the agency also has satellite offices in Murfreesboro and Springfield. The primary offices are located at 1704 Charlotte Avenue, Suite 130 in Nashville.

For more info, visit www.mentorakid.org or call (615) 329-9191.

About Big Brothers Big Sisters of America

Big Brothers Big Sisters, the nation’s largest donor and volunteer supported mentoring network, holds itself accountable for children in its program to achieve measurable outcomes, such as educational success; avoidance of risky behaviors; and higher aspirations, greater confidence and better relationships. Partnering with parents/guardians, schools, corporations and others in the community, Big Brothers Big Sisters carefully pairs children (“Littles”) with screened volunteer mentors (“Bigs”) and monitors and supports these one-to-one mentoring matches throughout their course. The first-ever Big Brothers Big Sisters Youth Outcomes Summary, released in 2012, substantiates that its mentoring programs have proven, positive academic, socio-emotional and behavioral outcomes for youth, areas linked to high school graduation, avoidance of juvenile delinquency and college or job readiness.