(1929–2024). British physicist Peter Higgs was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 2013. He proposed the existence of the Higgs boson, a subatomic particle that is the carrier of a field that gives all elementary particles their mass. Higgs shared the prize with Belgian physicist François Englert, who had also done work on such a carrier field.

Peter Ware Higgs was born on May 29, 1929, in Newcastle upon Tyne, Northumberland, England. He studied physics at King’s College, University of London. He received a bachelor’s degree in 1950, a master’s degree in 1951, and a doctorate in 1954. Higgs was a research fellow first at the University of Edinburgh in Scotland and then at the University of London. In 1960 he began teaching mathematical physics at Edinburgh. He spent the remainder of his career there, eventually becoming a professor of theoretical physics in 1980. Higgs retired in 1996.

Higgs’s earliest work was in molecular physics. In 1956 Higgs began working in quantum field theory. He wrote two papers in 1964 describing what later became known as the Higgs mechanism. He theorized that an invisible field present at all points in space gives particles mass. The journal to which Higgs submitted one of his papers rejected it. He thus revised the paper to include a theory that predicted the existence of a heavy boson. (Englert and Belgian physicist Robert Brout independently discovered the Higgs mechanism in 1964. Simultaneously, another group consisting of American physicists Gerald Guralnik and Carl Hagen and British physicist Tom Kibble also discovered it. However, neither group mentioned the possibility of a heavy boson.)

In the late 1960s American physicist Steven Weinberg and Pakistani physicist Abdus Salam independently incorporated Higgs’s ideas into their theories. By the early 1980s the only remaining part of their theories that needed confirmation was the Higgs field and its boson. Particle physicists searched for the particle for decades. In 2012 scientists at CERN—an international scientific organization concentrating on high-energy particle physics research—announced that they had detected an interesting signal that was likely from a Higgs boson. Confirmation that the particle was the Higgs boson was announced in 2013.