LOS ANGELES, Feb. 17 /PRNewswire/ -- Fontana, the independent distribution arm of Universal Music Group, the world's leading music company, has signed an exclusive distribution deal with Psychopathic Records, it was announced today by Ron Spaulding, President of Fontana, and Bill Dail, President of Psychopathic Records.

"Under Bill's leadership, Psychopathic Records has emerged as a truly innovative and successful entertainment company, and is exactly the type of entrepreneurial label that we like to be partners with," stated Mr. Spaulding. "We are looking forward to combining our expertise in sales, marketing, digital and distribution to help further develop their roster of artists."

"Psychopathic Records cannot state words that describe the excitement felt and portrayed around the company for our highly anticipated partnership with Fontana," commented Mr. Dail. "2010 marks the beginning of a successful, new era for Psychopathic Records."

Psychopathic Records, Inc., formed in Michigan in 1990, is home to the Insane Clown Posse (ICP), who debuted as Psychopathic Records' first artist with the Carnival of Carnage album in 1992 (up for Gold certification). ICP continues to be the highest grossing artist on the label, releasing many projects, including The Ringmaster (1994; Gold certified), Forgotten Freshness (1995; Gold certified), The Great Milenko (1996; Platinum certified), The Amazing Jeckel Brothers (1999; Platinum certified), The Wraith: Shangri-La (debuted at #15 on the Billboard Top 200, approaching Gold certification) The Wraith: Hell's Pit (debuted at #12 on Billboard Top 200, #1 Independent, 75,000 copies sold at debut), and most recently, Bang Pow Boom on September 1, 2009, which debuted at #4 on Billboard Top 200, #1 on Independent Chart, and has sold well over 100,000 copies to date.

Psychopathic Records also boasts a number of other cutting-edge artists including Twiztid, Blaze, ABK, Boondox and Mike E. Clark, while DJ Clay and AMB are signed to Hatchet House, Psychopathic's sub-label.

In addition to music, Psychopathic Records is also involved in sports, film and concert/video compilation DVDs. Psychopathic Records' Juggalo Championship Wrestling (JCW) was created in 1997, with several JCW tours and shows, as well as the release of two JCW DVDs: Slam TV! EPS 1-9 featuring West Side Wars and Slam TV! EPS 10-15 featuring Bloodymania. Film-wise, the company's first documentary, Shockumentary (1998; Platinum certified), tells the story of ICP and the Dark Carnival. The second documentary, A Family Underground (2009), gives viewers an inside look at the Juggalo subculture and their annual meeting, The Gathering of the Juggalos. Video and concert compilations include Insane Clown Posse: Bootlegged in LA DVD (2003; released/shipped out as Gold certified during debut week), and Psychopathic: The Videos (2007; Gold certified). Psychopathic Records first major motion picture, Big Money Hustlas was released in 1997, and its prequel, Big Money Rustlas, is planned for release sometime in 2010.

Coming up for 2010 is a special vinyl edition and gold edition of ICP's Bang Pow Boom, releases from DJ Clay, Boondox, Blaze, Twiztid and ABK, and the feature film Big Money Rustlas, the prequel to 1997's Big Money Hustlas.

ABOUT FONTANA

Fontana Distribution, the independent arm of UMGD, provides unparalleled sales and marketing support, as well as back office services, for a diverse roster of labels and their artists. Fontana distributes more than 80 labels including Eagle Rock, Downtown, Vagrant Records, American Gramophone, Kedar Entertainment, Last Gang, Savoy Label Group, ESL, Music World, Delicious Vinyl, Ipecac, Six Degrees, SMC, Upstairs Records, VP Records, and many others. In addition, Fontana distributes select projects from UMG labels worldwide.

SOURCE Universal Music Group