product sheet Smartplant® foundation The Intergraph® information management solution, SmartPlant® and support regulatory review; and enhance decisions with cross- Foundation, is the “e-Engineering integration hub” for the SmartPlant discipline, cross-referenced data and indices. Enterprise. This collaborative conduit ensures that valid, consistent, and high-quality engineering data is shared between applications and users when and where they need it. This engineering design basis is consistent and highly accurate on three fronts: 1) the physical asset information (what is there); 2) logical and functional information (what was designed to be there); and 3) regulatory and safety imperatives (what is required to be there). These are the pivotal tenets of engineering integrity. SmartPlant Foundation is multi-dimensional in its usage and deployment capabilities. These include: It reduces the cost and errors associated with multiple tools by eliminating the boundaries between them. SmartPlant Foundation is the single source of access to the engineering truth about a plant – its structure, tags, equipment, data, and documents. No other product on the market today supports such a wide scope and yet is deployable in a modular, incremental fashion. The Goal: Engineering Information Integrity Information is the basis upon which real-time decisions are made. Engineering information is abundant, dynamic, and complex. Keeping this information current, synchronized, and readily • Application integration to manage inconsistencies and reduce errors accessible is the challenge – whether it is used concurrently by • Engineering and technical data handover from execution multiple companies during plant design, by engineers during plant into operations • “Engineering companion” between operations, maintenance, and ERP systems for rapid decision support in time-critical situations • Client and Regulator remote review portal to minimize plant startup and ensure continued operations • Engineering Content Management (EngCM) including document and drawing management and control, list and sheet development, and exchange with suppliers and contractors • Plant configuration control and concurrent engineering to manage the evolving engineering design basis The solution supports global collaboration between clients, contractors, and suppliers. It streamlines business processes that share common information. These overarching and collaborative workflows through the internal and external value-chains construction and commissioning, or by maintenance workers on the plant floor. SmartPlant Foundation – Intergraph’s total solution for plant information management – ensures secure access to plant information whenever and wherever it is needed. It is a complementary offering to Intergraph’s industry-leading design tools – SmartPlant 3D, SmartPlant P&ID, SmartPlant Instrumentation, SmartPlant Electrical, SmartPlant Materials, and PDS®. SmartPlant Foundation provides: • Common integration architecture – Features all five tiers of integration: – resentation integration: Unified interface and information P presentation ensure rapid assimilation and understanding to provide a portal – a “single point of access to the truth” – ata integration: Consolidation and aggregation of data D deliver quality information to the desktop regardless of the source from multiple heterogeneous sources provide the single reli- application; audit activities and signatories to ensure completion able source of truth – the data repository

Open the catalog to page 1