HUNTSVILLE, Alabama - The Community Foundation of Huntsville/Madison County is going through a leadership change.

Lynne Berry is stepping down as executive director in June, and the organization's board of directors has tapped technology entrepreneur Stuart Obermann to replace her. Berry recently became engaged and is moving to Tuscaloosa

"With Lynne Berry, we had a visionary who in four years helped us create an organization with a solid foundation, using her many statewide contacts to incorporate the best practices of established Community Foundations," Community Foundation Board Chairman Bob Ludwig said Tuesday.

"Stuart has a wealth of experience in creating and successfully directing both private and non-profits in their formative years," said Ludwig. "As we enter year five, our foundation is primed for the future. Stuart will use his 30 years of startup experience to carry Lynne's efforts forward."

The Community Foundation has set up funds totaling more than $11 million in the past four years and currently manages over $7.5 million in donor-advised funds, according to a news release. It has distributed more than $2.2 million to charity on behalf of those donors.

Obermann co-founded the Alabama Chapter of the ALS Association in 2004 and is a national trustee for the organization. His son, Eric, died of ALS, or Lou Gehrig's disease, in 2010 at age 28. Obermann has been an executive with several Huntsville tech companies - dealnews.com, Mobular Technologies, MessageMedia, Revnet Systems, Intergraph and AEC Group - and is the owner/developer of the Oak Bluff on Green Mountain neighborhood.

He has also served on the board of directors for BizTech, Huntsville Angel Network and the Alabama IT Association.

"I am very excited about this opportunity to continue the growth of The Community Foundation of Huntsville/Madison County," Obermann said Tuesday. "This organization's mission, to increase giving in our community, falls directly in line with my personal objective of helping grow philanthropy in Madison County, thereby assisting many non-profit agencies in our community to provide help to those who most need it."

Obermann has a master's degree in mechanical engineering from Purdue University. He and his wife, Marcia, have a married daughter, Lauren Dauro, who also lives in Huntsville. The Obermanns have been members of All Saint's Lutheran Church on Bailey Cove Road since 1984.