Hexagon PPM is headquartered in Madison, Alabama, USA. Its 2,400 employees are located on five continents and serve customers in over 80 countries. The company provides engineering software for the design, construction, and operation of plants, ships, and offshore facilities.

Hexagon PPM aims to grow through constant investments in R&D and well-thought acquisitions. Last year, the company acquired CodeCAD Inc., MDE Network, and Alas Ingeniería. It also announced strategic collaborations with Black & Veatch, Utopia Global, OSIsoft, etc.

For the past 20 years, the company has been giving awards to customers who have used Hexagon PPM software in a creative way in the engineering and design fields. The company wants to widen the scope of submissions and allow customers of all segments to participate, therefore it is retiring the previous awards—Golden Valve, Platinum Pipe, and Drivers of Success awards. It has announced the new Hexagon Elite Awards to take the place of old awards. There will be the following six new categories in Elite awards:

Best in Design award will recognize the most innovative and well-executed uses of Intergraph Smart 3D, Intergraph Smart Review and/or CADWorx.

Best in Automation award will recognize the most innovative automation ideas for Intergraph Smart 3D, Intergraph Smart P&ID, Intergraph Smart Electrical, and/or Intergraph Smart Instrumentation.

Best in Analysis award will recognize innovative applications of CAESAR II, PV Elite, and/or GT STRUDL that helped successfully complete a project and meet design and engineering goals. Impressive project results are honored which showcase significant benefits from collaboration among disciplines and the integration of the products.

Best in Operations award will recognize customers who are true champions of progress and continue to move their company and industry forward in digital transformation in the Operations and Maintenance segments. This award will be given to customers who have shown progress in their digital transformation journey and success in operations while using any or a combination of the following solutions:

HxGN SDx Operations

HxGN SDx Projects

SmartPlant Foundation

SmartPlant Enterprise for Owner Operators

j5 Shift Operations Management

j5 Operator Rounds

j5 Mobility

j5 Action Management

j5 Dashboards, Reports and Views

j5 Connectors

j5 IndustraForm Templates

j5 Process Safety applications

Best in Project Performance award will recognize customers who use PPM and EcoSys solutions to successfully (a) complete a project and improve the performance of that project, or (b) improve project processes and performance across a program, division or enterprise.

Best in Procurement, Fabrication & Construction Management award will recognize the most innovative and well-executed uses of PPM PFC solutions to successfully complete a project or move the company and industry forward in digital transformation while using any or a combination of the following solutions:

Intergraph Smart Construction

Intergraph Smart Production Powered by NESTIX

Intergraph Smart Completions

Intergraph Smart Materials

Intergraph Smart Weld Quality Management System (WQMS)

Intergraph Smart Yard

Intergraph Spoolgen

Isogen

Isogen Publisher

There will be one winner from each category, who will get

$2,500 (or that can be given as a charitable donation in your name).

A beautifully engraved award.

Free registration for HxGN LIVE 2022.