- Several individuals as well as businesses and charitable foundations were honored for their service to the community at today's

. The Community Foundation Huntsville/Madison County hosted the summit, which was held at Adtran's Mark C. Smith Conference Center.

Each of the people or organizations were recognized for "their gifts of generosity," said Jennie Robinson, the summit director said. The honorees by category were:

Corporate: Intergraph received the "Corporate Thanks for Giving Honor" for its contributions to the community. Examples of the company's involvement include its sponsorship of the American Red Cross gala for past three years, sponsorship of the American Cancer Society's Relay for Life and the Liz Hurley Ribbon Run and for its support the Huntsville Hospital Foundation.

Intergraph employees also helped raise more than $100,000 for earthquake relief in Haiti and more than $70,000 for local disasters including the tornado that hit Alabama in April 2011. Ed Porter and Gretchen Everts accepted the award for Intergraph.

Individual/Family: Linda Smith was the honoree in this category based on her generosity and the work she continues to do in honor of her late husband, Mark C. Smith. Noted examples include contributions to the Von Braun Center's Mark C. Smith Concert Hall, the University of Alabama in Huntsville, HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, the Huntsville Botanical Garden , the U.S. Space & Rocket Center and Girls Incorporated.

Since Mark Smith's death in 2007, Linda Smith has continued her husband's commitment to Pope John Paul II Catholic High School and an endowed chair at Vanderbilt University.

Youth: The United Way of Madison County Youth Leaders Council received the honor for the time its members spend learning about the hardship faced by people in the community and for the hours they spend volunteering. Its 62 members from 11 high schools volunteer at least five hours a month and raise more than $10,000 over the last three years. Cassidy Elliot and Tori Florence accepted the award on behalf of fellow council members.

Foundation: The Jurenko Foundation was recognized for its support of the United Way of Madison County, contributing more than $250,000 to that agency's support of non-profit organizations. The Jurenko Foundation, lead by John and Ruth Jurenko, has also contributed the American Cancer Society, Girls Incorporated, the American Red Cross, Kiwanis Foundation, ALS Society, Junior Achievement, Women's Economic Development Council Scholarships, the YMCA, the Huntsville Museum of Art, Green Gate School.

The foundation has also funded endowed chairs, fellowships, scholarships and laboratories at the University of Pittsburg's School of Engineering as well as research at the University of Alabama at Birmingham-HudsonAlpha Collaborative Project in the Genetics and Genomics of Parkinson's Disease.

Professional Adviser: Chris Russell received this award, the first time it has been given in the summit's three-year history. Russell, who is vice president of wealth management for Wells Fargo in Huntsville. He often works with individuals in investment and trust management, leading, insurance and estate planning.

As an individual, he has an extensive history of volunteering and has helped create more than $10 million in charitable contributions in the Huntsville area. In 2008, he served as chairman for Huntsville Relay on Life, a year after recovering from his own bout with cancer. That race as well as other efforts netted more than $515,000, the highest total ever reached for a Relay of Life event in the six states that make up the mid-South Region of the American Cancer Society.

He has also served as a volunteer with many organizations, including Leadership Huntsville. He helped establish the Community Foundation Huntsville/Madison County and served as its founding board chairman. He also guided a $3.2 million donation for charity from Dynetic's Employment Stock Ownership Plan.

Dynetics received a special recognition with the Partners in Philanthropy Award, which is presented to a person, company or organization that has furthered the mission of the Community Foundation. In addition to the

, the company has created a company and employee giving program for the National Children's

Veteran's Memorial and has supported Leadership Huntsville with funds and participants.