Yul Chibuike Daniel Edochie, born January 7, 1982, professionally known as Yul Edochie, is a talented Nigerian actor, movie producer, director, businessman and politician. He was born in Lagos but hails from Anambra State and the son of veteran actor, Pete Edochie.

Wiki Profile

Early Life and Education

Yul Edochie is a native of Anambra State, born and raised in Lagos State, in the South Western region of Nigeria. He grew up with his siblings under the care of their parents.

The actor is the son of Nollywood actor, Pete Edochie while the mother is Josephine Edochie, a Nigerian businesswoman. He has siblings which he grew up with. He is the last child in a family of six.

Yul Edochie has five siblings Leo Edochie, Uche Edochie, Linc Edochie, Gene Edochie and a daughter who is the fifth child in the family.

The famous actor and producer attended Lillian’s Day Nursery School and Robinson Street Primary School in Enugu where he obtained his First School Leaving Certificate then proceeded to a secondary school in Enugu for his Senior Secondary School Certificate.

Yul Edochie applied and got admitted into the University of Port Harcourt, where he obtained a Bachelor’s degree in Dramatic Arts.

After completing his secondary education, Yul Edochie enrolled at the University of Port Harcourt, where he pursued a Bachelor of Arts degree in Dramatic Arts.

Career

Yul Edochie began his career while he was still in the University when he was cast in the movie The Exquires, and he gained the opportunity to act alongside veteran actors, Justus Esiri, Chidi Mokeme and other popular Nollywood actors.

The actor came into the spotlight in 2007 after he was featured in the movie Wind of Glory alongside notable Nollywood stars Desmond Elliot and Genevieve Nnaji.

In a bid to pave way for the upcoming acting generation, Yul Edochie launched his platform, Yul Edochie Academy in 2015. Since then the acting academy has become home of fast-rising Nollywood stars.

Following the footsteps of his father, Pete Edochie, the actor has featured in several Nollywood movies since he came into prominence in 2007. He has won numerous awards including Best New Actor of the Year (English) Award in 2009 during the City People Entertainment Awards.

Yul Edochie Net Worth

Yul Edochie is a popular Nigerian actor, movie producer, director and politician. He has an estimated net worth of $5million. He has amassed great wealth, appearing in several Nollywood video.

Personal Life

Yul Edochie is married to the love of his life, May Yul-Edochie. He got married at the age of 22, in a colorful traditional marriage which was held in 2004.

Their marriage is blessed with four children, Kambi Edochie, Dani Edochie, Karl Edochie, and Victory Zane Chukwubuike Yul-Edochie.

Yul Edochie also have a second wife, Judy Austin, who gave birth to Yul Edochie’s youngest child. The actor took to his social media channel to welcome his new born baby.

However, there have been controversies and reactions after Yul Edochie revealed her second wife, He has now reaffirmed that May Yul Edochie is the first lady and undisputed wife.

Social Media