Lottie M. Williams, 91, of Grove City, passed away at Orchard Manor on Wednesday, May 29, 2019, at 5:10 p.m.

She was born in Mercer, on Feb. 5, 1928, to Sara F. Urey.

Lottie enjoyed attending car races in Daytona and Indianapolis as well as water aerobics at the YMCA.

Lottie is survived by three children, Alan (Debbie) Asp in Kane, Sherry McCoy and Deborah Fischer, both of Grove City; one brother, Thomas (Carol) Sweetapple in Kennerdell; seven grandchildren; 18 great-grandchildren; and 10 great-great-grandchildren. She is also survived by Richard (Sandy) McCoy and Barb Williams.

Lottie was preceded in death by her mother; one brother, Frank Urey; one daughter, Linda Widmyer; one grandson, James Asp; and her husbands.

WILLIAMS

Lottie M., 91, of Grove City.

Calling hours: From 2 to 4 p.m. Friday (5-31-19) in CUNNINGHAM FUNERAL HOME INC., 306 Bessemer Ave., Grove City.

Service: Memorial service will be 4 p.m. Friday (5-31-19) in the funeral home, with the Rev. Willard Morse officiating.

Published on May 31, 2019

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of LottieHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Lottie

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree