California State University-Los Angeles is a 4-year public university and part of the CSU System. Cal State LA is home to seven colleges granting undergraduate degrees in 57 academic majors. A federally designated Hispanic-serving institution, Cal State LA was the first university to establish a Chicano studies department in the United States. To connect Cal State LA students to their surrounding environment, the university hosts the Center for Engagement, Service, and the Public Good and its I Serve LA initiative tracks volunteer hours for all students in the community.

Admissions

Key Admissions Stats

Institution Type

Public

Not for Profit

Coed

Need Blind

This school does not consider an applicant’s financial situation when deciding admission

Level of Institution

4 Year

Campus Setting

Major city

0

100

91%

Acceptance Rate

Admissions Requirements

SAT

No

ACT

No

Transcript

Yes

Important Deadlines

Application TypeApplication DeadlineReply DeadlineEarly Decision Acceptance is binding so student must attend college if accepted.November 30Fall Regular DecisionAugust 21OtherAugust 31

Admitted Student Stats

In-State Students

98%

Out-Of-State Students

5%

24%

Submitting ACT

97%

Submitting SAT

Average ACT Composite: 17

0

36

Average SAT Composite: 979

0

1600

Academics

Key Academic Stats

Highest Degree Offered

Doctorate

Total Number of Students

27,513

Total Number of Undergrads

23,536

Academic Calendar

Semester

See your fit

Classroom Sizes

2-19 Students

22%

20-39 Students

60%

40-99 Students

14%

100+ Students

2%

0

100

8%

Graduate in 4 Years US National: 28%

0

100

52%

Graduate in 6 Years US National: 52%

Student:Faculty Ratio

25:1

US National: 21:1

Tuition, Cost & Aid

Key Financial Stats

Average Net Price

$2,768

Calculate your net cost

Tuition

In-State Tuition In-state tuition is the tuition charged by institutions to those students who meet the state's or institution's residency requirements. In-district tuition is the tuition charged by the institution to those students residing in the locality in which they attend school and may be a lower rate than in-state tuition if offered by the institution.

$6,805

Out-of-State Tuition Out-of-state tuition is the tuition charged by institutions to those students who do not meet the state’s or institution’s residency requirements. Out-of-district tuition is the tuition charged by the institution to those students not residing in the locality in which they attend school.

$18,685

Additional Costs

Room and Board The weighted average for room and board and other expenses is generated as follows:

(amount for on-campus room, board and other expenses * # of students living on-campus.

+ amount for off-campus (with family) room, board and other expenses * # of students living off-campus with family

+ amount for off-campus (not with family) room, board and other expenses * # of students living off-campus not with family)

divided by the total # of students. Students whose living arrangements are unknown are excluded from the calculation. For some institutions the # of students by living arrangement will be known, but dollar amounts will not be known. In this case the # of students with no corresponding dollar amount will be excluded from the denominator.

$17,998

Books and Supplies

$1253

Aid & Grants

0

100

72%

Need Met

Students Receiving Gift Aid Percent of undergraduate students awarded federal gift aid. Federal gift aid includes any grant or scholarship aid awarded, from the federal government, a state or local government, the institution, and other sources known by the institution.

68%

Average Aid Per Year

$11,315

Students Receiving Grants Percent of undergraduate students awarded grant aid. Grant aid includes any grant or scholarship aid awarded, from the federal government, a state or local government, the institution, and other sources known by the institution.

68%

Average Federal Grant Aid Per Year

$5,493

Average Institution Grant Aid Per Year

$5,685

Student Loans

Students Borrowing Loans Loans to students - Any monies that must be repaid to the lending institution for which the student is the designated borrower. Includes all Title IV subsidized and unsubsidized loans and all institutionally- and privately-sponsored loans. Does not include PLUS and other loans made directly to parents.

14%

Average Loan Amount Per Year

$4,598

Average Debt at Graduation The median federal debt of undergraduate borrowers who graduated. This figure includes only federal loans; it excludes private student loans and Parent PLUS loans.

$12,304

Median Monthly Loan Payment The median monthly loan payment for student borrowers who completed, if it were repaid over 10 years at a 5.05% interest rate.

$131

Campus Life

Key Campus Stats

Student Gender

Male

Female

41%

59%

Student Organizations

146

Size of Town

Major city

LGBTQIA Student Resource Groups

Yes

On Campus Women's Center

Yes

Housing

0

100

2%

Undergrads Living on Campus

On-campus living required of freshman

No

Athletics

Divisional Sports Nickname

Golden Eagles

School Colors

blue and gold

Varsity Athletics Association

NCAA

Varsity Athletics Conference Primary

Not applicable

Campus Safety

24-HR security patrol

Yes

Campus emergency phones

Yes

After Graduation

Post Grad Stats

Top 5 Cities

Los Angeles

San Francisco

San Diego

New York

Seattle

Average Salary

6 years after graduation

$49,900

What Students Are Saying

I am currently attending California State University, Los Angeles since the Fall 2016 semester, and I just graduated in the Spring 2018 semester with a Bachelor degree in Psychology. I am grateful for the helpful faculty who have helped me achieve my academic goals. The faculty at Cal State LA is a reason why I will always recommend family and friends to attend the university.

Nicole

CSULA has excellent professors that care about their students' education. The material they teach focus on timely topics that are relevant to the real world and the professors are very responsive to inquiries via technological platforms. Though the CSULA administration system needs improvement, their teaching staff makes my overall experience in CSULA's MBA program well worth my time and money.

Nina from El Monte, CA

such an amazing school and campus. the professors i have had so far are very nice, friendly and very helpful. the campus is really big and there are many places to study, there is always a quiet place to study.

Jazmin from Huntington Park, CA

Similar Colleges

Pomona, CA

Carson, CA

Fullerton, CA

Long Beach, CA

Northridge, CA

Berkeley, CA

Irvine, CA

Los Angeles, CA

Riverside, CA

Santa Barbara, CA

San Diego, CA

Los Angeles, CA

See All