Avril Lavigne, born 27 September, 1984 (career 2002-Present), is a Canadian pop/rock/pop-punk singer-songwriter, clothes designer, and actress.

She released her debut album, Let Go, in June of 2002 when she was seventeen. It went quadruple platinum. Her second album, Under My Skin came out in 2004 and The Best Damn Thing in 2007. All three were number one albums in the UK. Goodbye Lullaby came out early 2011, but it did not match the success of its predecessors.

She's made cameo appearances in Sabrina the Teenage Witch and the film Going The Distance. She also played Beatrice Bell in The Flock and Alice in Fast Food Nation. In Over the Hedge she voiced Heather.

She also designs the fashion line Abbey Dawn for Kohl's and has one fragrance (Black Star) out and another (Forbidden Rose) on the way.

Avril Lavigne was inducted into Canada's Walk of Fame in 2023.

Discography:

Albums

Let Go (2002)

Under My Skin (2004)

The Best Damn Thing (2007)

Goodbye Lullaby (2011)

Fifth Album (2012)

Visual releases

My World (2003)

The Best Damn Tour (2008)

Avril Lavigne provides examples of the following tropes:

Adorkable: Watched her Under My Skin special dvd for all her dorkiness on display.

Banned In Malaysia: Nearly. For her "influence on youth".

Be Yourself: the greater message of "Complicated"

Break Up Song: Under My Skin as an album, particularly My Happy Ending and He Wasn't.

Canada, Eh?

Cannot Spit It Out: "Things I'll Never Say"

The Casanova: "One Of those Girls" is about a female variation on this trope, aimed at a crush.

Captain Obvious: "He was a boy, and she was a girl" YOU DON'T SAY!

Lampshaded by the next line: "Can I make it any more obvious?"

Cloudcuckoolander: "My World"

Cute Little Fangs: Her famous "vampire teeth", which reportedly made her so self-conscious, she allegedly had them shaved at some point circa-2008.

Cut Song: Let Go the song doesn't appear in the Let Go album.

Cover Version: 'Knocking On Heaven's Door', 'Hey Mickey' and 'Bad Reputation'.

Child Prodigy: She's been singing since the age of 2.

Development Hell: Her recording company pushed back Goodbye Lullaby by about a year.

Girliness Upgrade: Starting with The Best Damn Thing, although she claims she was faking the look of her previous albums.

Getting Crap Past the Radar: Gets some pretty explicit drug references in the song "Too Much To Ask", unless you really really really pay attention to it and are over the age 17. It sounds like any pissed off at you ignoring me song.

Green-Eyed Monster

Green-Eyed Epiphany: "Sk8er Boi" is a song about a girl who is in denial about her love for a boy she knows until he's already been claimed by another.

Hatedom: She has one, due to accusations of her skater-punk image being fake, not to mention being caught telling some lies.

I Just Want to Be Special: "Anything But Ordinary"

It Meant Something to Me: "Losing Grip" is this trope in song.

The Ladette: As any good Anti-Britney Spears would be. "My World" is all the proof you need.

Lighter and Softer: Her last two albums have almost bordered on romantic and loving and just based upon fun, instead of heart break as it's bitter center and sadness.

Lyrical Dissonance: Listen to "He Wasn't" or "Anything But Ordinary".

Meganekko: Briefly adorned Nerd Glasses in the "What the Hell" music video.

Obsession Song: "Hot", "Girlfriend", "Thing's I'll Never Say", "Contagious", "Fall To Pieces".

One of the Boys: mentions this in "My World".

Perky Goth: Well perky punk but perky nonetheless

Please Wake Up / Grief Song: "Slipped Away"

Precision F-Strike: Though the effect was somewhat diminished in the album The Best Damn Thing.

Piss-Take Rap: "Nobody's Fool"

The Red Stapler: Avril wears something in a music video->people want it->this.

Rockumentary: Avril Lavigne has three video albums.

Silly Love Songs: Things I'll Never Say, Fall To Pieces, Naked, Contagious

Unlucky Childhood Friend: The first girl in "Sk8er Boi."

With or Without You: In "Nobody's Fool":