Avril Lavigne

Profile

Chart History

Avril Ramona Lavigne ( ; born 27 September 1984) is a Canadian singer-songwriter, fashion designer, actress, and philanthropist. She was born in Belleville, Ontario, but spent most of her youth in the small town of Napanee. By the age of 15, she had appeared on stage with Shania Twain; by 16, she had signed a two-album recording contract with Arista (now RCA Records) worth more than $2 million. In 2002, when she was 17 years old, Lavigne broke onto the music scene with her debut album Let Go.

Let Go made Lavigne the youngest female soloist to reach No. 1 in the UK, and the album was certified four-times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America. By 2009, over 16 million copies had been sold worldwide. Her breakthrough single, "Complicated", peaked at No. 1 in many countries around the world, as did the album Let Go. Her second album, Under My Skin, was released in 2004 and was her first album to peak at No. 1 on the U.S. Billboard 200, eventually selling more than 10 million copies worldwide. The Best Damn Thing, Lavigne’s third album, was released in 2007, becoming her third No. 1 album in the UK Albums Chart and featuring her first U.S. Billboard Hot 100 No. 1 single, "Girlfriend". Lavigne has scored five number-one singles worldwide, including "Complicated", "Sk8er Boi", "I'm with You", "My Happy Ending" and "Girlfriend". With more than 30 million copies of her albums sold worldwide, Lavigne is one of the top-selling artists releasing albums in the U.S., with over 10.25 million copies certified by the RIAA. Her fourth studio album, Goodbye Lullaby, was released in March 2011. Goodbye Lullaby gave Lavigne her fourth top 10 album on the U.S. Billboard 200 and the UK Albums Chart and her third No. 1 album in both Japan and Australia. Three months after the release of Goodbye Lullaby, Lavigne began work on her fifth album.

Date Title Peak Position # of plays Smile 20 15 Wish You Were Here 3 26 Head Above Water 16 60

Our Partners

Tune in to the most interesting “hot” stories from the local and international music scenes. Serious industry news for serious music lovers.

Kylie Minogue on her new album and the art of writing happy songs about death It can’t be easy to write a song that’s equally suited for pre-games and funerals, but Kylie Minogue has... read more

Rihanna Unveils New Valentine's Day-Themed '#ColdHearted' Sock Collection While Fenty Beauty may be Rihanna’s most illustrious side project, it’s definitely not the only thing the... read more

The Spice Girls are planning a reunion tour, but without any new music As a wise group of young women once said, “if you wanna be my lover, you gotta get with my friends.... read more

Drake's 'God's Plan' Ties Record for Fastest Trip to Top 10 on Mainstream R&B/Hip-Hop Chart Drake’s “God's Plan” has ignited the streaming world, and the tune is now setting radio ablaze as well.... read more

Bob Dylan's Guitar Sells for Nearly $400,000 at Auction A guitar played by Bob Dylan at notable concerts in 1970s has sold at auction for nearly $400,000.... read more

OLT20 in Fit'n Style Magazine - July and August 2014 ... read more

OLT20 in Mondanite Mag - Month of July 2014 ... read more