Hungry Horse Dam Information

Hungry Horse Dam is a concrete arch dam located about 4 miles from Hungry Horse, Flathead, Montana.

The dam, which is on the South Fork Flathead River, was primarily built for flood risk reduction purposes, but also serves for Irrigation and Hydroelectric benefits.

The dam was designed by US Bureau of Reclamation and commissioned in 1952 and is currently owned by US Bureau of Reclamation.

Condition Assessment Classification

Satisfactory

No existing or potential dam safety deficiencies are recognized. Acceptable performance is expected under all loading conditions (static, hydrologic, seismic) in accordance with the minimum applicable state or federal regulatory criteria or tolerable risk guidelines.

Fair

No existing dam safety deficiencies are recognized for normal operating conditions. Rare or extreme hydrologic and/or seismic events may result in a dam safety deficiency. Risk may be in the range to take further action. Note: Rare or extreme event is defined by the regulatory agency based on their minimum

Poor

A dam safety deficiency is recognized for normal operating conditions which may realistically occur. Remedial action is necessary. POOR may also be used when uncertainties exist as to critical analysis parameters which identify a potential dam safety deficiency. Investigations and studies are necessary.

Unsatisfactory

A dam safety deficiency is recognized that requires immediate or emergency remedial action for problem resolution.

Not Rated

The dam has not been inspected, is not under state or federal jurisdiction, or has been inspected but, for whatever reason, has not been rated.

Not Available

Dams for which the condition assessment is restricted to approved government users.

Hazard Potential Classification

High

Dams assigned the high hazard potential classification are those where failure or mis-operation will probably cause loss of human life.

Significant

Dams assigned the significant hazard potential classification are those dams where failure or mis-operation results in no probable loss of human life but can cause economic loss, environment damage, disruption of lifeline facilities, or impact other concerns. Significant hazard potential classification dams are often located in predominantly rural or agricultural areas but could be in areas with population and significant infrastructure.

Low

Dams assigned the low hazard potential classification are those where failure or mis-operation results in no probable loss of human life and low economic and/or environmental losses. Losses are principally limited to the owner’s property.

Undetermined

Dams for which a downstream hazard potential has not been designated or is not provided.

Not Available

Dams for which the downstream hazard potential is restricted to approved government users.

Source: National Inventory of Dams