By acreage, Pelham Bay Park is the largest park in the city. Its namesake is English settler Thomas Pell, who “purchased” 50,000 acres of land from the Siwanoy natives in 1654. It has many elements such as a golf course, beach, athletic field, historic mansion, and police shooting range. The least visited section of the park is the Pelham Bay Landfill, where the Hutchinson River widens into Eastchester Bay.

Looking at the bay from Pelham Bridge, the tree-covered Rodman Neck contrasts with the grassy artificial hilltop that is the landfill. With Shirley Chisholm State Park and Freshkills Park as precedents, will the public eventually have access to this landfill too?

Where it Is

In this Google Earth screenshot, the landfill is easily visible for its absence of trees in this heavily wooded corner of the Bronx. Next to it is Pelham Bridge, which carries Shore Road; the Amtrak bridge, and the Hutchinson River Parkway. All three are drawbridges that allow for oil barges to access docks on the Hutchinson River.

Before the Landfill

On this navigational chart from 1896, we see the site of the landfill as a partial island at high tide containing a circular driveway leading to a mansion. This was Dorman’s Island, whose namesake is unclear as it also appeared on maps as Dormer’s Island, Taylor’s Island, and Hunt’s Neck, among other names. Located at a narrow in the Hutchinson River, it was a ferry crossing and then a bridge on the road connecting Fordham to Pelham.

The “island” had a mansion on it built in the early 19th century by the Lorillard family who made their wealth in tobacco and also had a mill on the Bronx River that stands today within the New York Botanical Garden. It later served as a hotel and after becoming parkland, was leased to the politically-connected Tallapoosa Club, whose membership included Louis F. Haffen, the Bronx Borough President. The club failed to maintain the mansion and by 1919 it was in such disrepair that the city had it demolished citing the cost of its upkeep. Pelham Bay Park had other mansions at Rodman Neck and Hunter Island. Only the Bartow Mansion stands today as a reminder of the park’s prior use as estates of the rich overlooking the Long Island Sound.

A map of Pelham Bay Park published in 1905 by Haffen’s office shows the former island as a neck of land where Eastern (now Bruckner) Boulevard merged to become Shore Road as it crossed the mouth of Hutchinson River. A grid of paper streets in red lines was charted on the site of the future Co-op City.

In this 1937 aerial survey of the park from the city’s Municipal Archives, we see the site of the mansion as a field in front of the circular driveway. The grove of trees on the edge of this photo is the Bronx War Memorial, build after World War One.

Fast forward to 1966 and we see Pelham Bay partially filled in favor of Orchard Beach, with Hunter and Twin islands fused to the continent. Curiously, the “area to be filled, 1965” is the beginning of the landfill at the former island and social club site. The Municipal Archives blog has more photos of the park’s transformation in the 1930s into The Bronx Riviera, as it was nicknamed.

At the Landfill

On a rare supervised visit, I ascended this 131-foot mound and took in its views of the Bronx and Pelham Bay Park. Looking north, Co-op City’s towers dwarf this landfill. Closer to it are Pelham Bridge and the Amtrak railroad crossing the Hutchinson River.

To the south on Eastchester Bay we see the Throgs Neck neighborhood, a very suburban part of the Bronx that has a few private streets and waterfront houses. It was hazy, making Throgs Neck Bridge nearly invisible during my visit. The cove separating the 89-acre landfill from the Huntington Woods portion of the park was recently redesigned to allow for a freshwater wetland to drain into the bay.

In 2019, the city Parks Department removed invasive plants and debris from the natural rocky shore south of the landfill, restored coastal habitats, and improved public access to the shoreline. During the project, Native pottery was found at the site and following consultation with local Native organizations, the items were documented and then buried back in the ground as intended centuries ago by their creators.

Near the entrance to the landfill is a pond that collects runoff from its slopes. It is an unnamed pond but if there would be a naming for the mound, the pond, or the access road, let it be Children’s Road, in memory of the three local children were dead, taken by childhood leukemia a few years after their symptoms had appeared. The landfill closed in 1979, but illnesses relating to its toxicity continued to be documented in the surrounding neighborhoods. A 22-year legal battle waged by their parents was settled in 2013 to the tune of for the city have agreed to settle the claims for a total of about $12 million.

Throughout the mound are gas wells that release small quantities of methane produced by the trash. The mound appears naturalistic but it must be continuously maintained to collect the gas, manage runoff, preserve the perimeter seawall, and other items.