Robert Downey Jr.’s mother is not a major character in Sr., the new Netflix documentary that began streaming today. After all, the focus of the movie is the Marvel star’s late father, filmmaker Robert Downey Sr., who died last July at the age of 85, and Downey Jr.’s mother, Elsie Ann Downey, died in 2014.

But though she couldn’t be physically present for an interview, Downey Jr.’s mom still gets a voice in the film. About halfway through the documentary, father and son look back fondly on their early years spent with Elsie Ann, an actor herself who starred in many of Downey Sr.’s films.

When asked by Sr. director Chris Smith if he learned anything about acting from his mother, Downey Jr. responded, “Pretty much everything, yeah. Seeing her being directed by Dad, she was wildly devoted to whatever creative stream of silliness he was onto. She had no problem doing something that’s exacting.”

Downey Sr. added that he put Elsie Ann Downey in any movie that he could. “She’d do anything, she’d try anything. She knew what to do.”

And that included 1972’s Greaser’s Palaces, an American Western which featured a scene in which a 7-year-old Robert Downey Jr. got to act in a scene with his mother. (You can stream the movie for free with ads on Tubi.) Downey Jr. played a boy who “got his neck slit by God,” as he describes it. But at the end of the film, the boy is brought back to life, and the mother and son reunite in a touching scene.

“He was so excited to do a scene with his mom,” Downey Sr. recalls fondly. Then, the audience is shown an adorable clip of the young Downey Jr. running into his mother’s arms.

Look at that tiny little smile!

“Greaser’s I had a lot of pride in,” Downey Jr., who is now 57, says in the film while on the phone with his father. “I was old enough to know I was in it. And I’m starting to feel like a little bit of a movie brat. It was a good time. I want to thank you. It got us out of town. Was that a happy time for you?”

“It was,” his father responds. “And then it all fell apart.”