Tom Gores founded Platinum Equity in 1995 and his guidance, core philosophies, and strong principles drive the strategic development and direction of both the firm and its portfolio.

Early in his career, Mr. Gores was an active investor in smaller businesses, where companies often trade principally on their good word and ability to follow through on what they promise. Here he developed his principles of empowerment, hard work, and integrity. As he delivered on commitments made to deal partners, investment bankers, and lenders, Mr. Gores's ability to continually execute larger transactions grew exponentially and made Platinum Equity one of the premiere private equity firms in the world, recognized as one of Forbes’s “Largest Private Companies” within just 4 years of being founded.

Believing that a team of outstanding people could meet almost any challenge, Mr. Gores began selecting the best and brightest he came in contact with to join him. The result is the Partners and Principals who lead Platinum Equity today. Strong relationships, trust in people, and open communication remain key to Mr. Gores's and Platinum Equity’s momentum.

When it comes to his business, Mr. Gores applies philosophies of swift and thorough diligence, sound acquisitions, effective management, and driving value through honest, intelligent operational improvement rather than financial engineering. M&A&O®, his pioneering vision of combining traditional M&A with operational insight, was the direct result of the combination of these philosophies.

Top business publications have recognized Platinum Equity as one of the most important private companies in America, ranking 22nd on the 2015 Forbes list of America's Largest Private Companies and #5 on the 2013 Los Angeles Business Journal list of LA's Largest Private Equity Companies. Mr. Gores appears on both the Forbes list of the World's Billionaires as well as the Forbes list of Richest Americans, and is among the youngest individuals ever to appear on either.

Mr. Gores was born in 1964 and resides primarily in Beverly Hills with his wife and children. When not serving in his role as Chairman and CEO of Platinum Equity, Mr. Gores is on either a soccer field or a basketball court coaching youth teams, applying the same principles of hard work and inspiration that he does to his business. Mr. Gores holds a Bachelor of Science degree from Michigan State University.