Tom Gores founded Platinum Equity in 1995 to acquire and create value in a diverse range of businesses. Platinum Equity is a global private equity firm that specializes in mergers, acquisitions, and operations of companies that provide mission-critical products, services, and solutions in diverse industries. Platinum Equity offers deep in-house resources and flexible acquisition solutions to sellers worldwide.

M&A&O®

M&A&O is Platinum Equity’s signature strategy. It applies operational insight to the traditional M&A process to find and create value. From diligence through deal execution, the Operations Team works with the M&A teams to go deep into the details. This collaboration and expertise provides a better understanding of the business, and often uncovers hidden value. The M&A&O strategy gives Platinum Equity greater ability to remain flexible in deal processes and to execute on unique transaction structures.

In-House Resources

Headquartered in Los Angeles, Platinum Equity has offices in New York, Greenwich, Boston, London, and Singapore. Platinum’s in-house business development, M&A, transition, legal, real estate, marketing, finance, and operations teams enable it to resolve complex issues quickly. The firm, which funded its initial investments with founder’s capital, has raised more than $25 billion from institutional investors since launching its funds business a decade-and-a-half ago. Platinum Equity raised its first private equity fund in 2004 with $700 million in capital commitments. That was followed by Fund II with $2.75 billion in 2007, Fund III with $3.75 billion in 2012, Fund IV with $6.5 billion in 2016 and now Fund V with $10 billion. The firm also manages a $1.5 billion Small Cap Fund pursuing similar private equity investments in the lower middle market.

Acquisition Solutions

Platinum Equity structures acquisition solutions to help sellers achieve their divestiture objectives. Our sellers include corporate sellers shedding non-core assets, public sellers seeking to maximize shareholder value, or private sellers seeking capital and operational support. Platinum has also developed alternative deal structures to meet the current capital environment. With Platinum, sellers get immediate and flexible solutions to meet their strategies.

Creating Value