Name: Poliça.

Age: Four years.

Appearance: Four-piece electronic outfit from Minneapolis.

It’s a band? I thought it was just a foreign word for police. According to Poliça’s frontwoman Channy Leaneagh, it’s the Polish word for “policy”.

Oh, well, that makes bags of sense. It makes even less sense when you find out that the Polish word for policy is actually “polisa”.

They’re enigmatic, then. Yes, but they have some pretty impressive fans.

Such as? Bon Iver, Jay Z, SamCam.

SamCam? Is that a hip-hop artiste who has appropriated Samantha Cameron’s nickname for satirical purposes? No, it’s Samantha Cameron.

The Mrs Prime Minister Samantha Cameron? David Cameron’s wife Samantha, yes.

What’s she doing liking cool music by people I’ve never heard of? SamCam’s eclectic musical tastes are no secret. In the past she has confessed a liking for Swedish alt-folk band First Aid Kit.

Then what’s she doing being married to David Cameron? Her musical sensibilities certainly pre-date him. She was friends with Bristol-based rapper Tricky during her university days.

Never heard of him either. Who else does she like? According to a recent interview in the Daily Mail she’s a fan of US band the War On Drugs, as well the “controversial” Poliça.

Why are they controversial? Their latest album, Shulamith, is named after the Canadian Marxist feminist Shulamith Firestone, who died in 2012.

So they’re not actually controversial. No.

Still, isn’t it dangerous for SamCam to reveal a cool streak so close to a general election? She’s cool for someone whose father is a baronet. The most controversial moment in the whole interview was probably when she said: “I’d happily pay my licence fee just for 6 Music.”

I’ll bet that’s not Tory polisa. It’s unlikely to turn up in the manifesto. But it’s not as if Samantha Cameron’s musical preferences have influenced her husband’s in any way. In 2012 he named Mumford & Sons’ second album as his favourite.

Do say: “Hi Samantha! Have you heard the new track by this obscure Belgian jazz/breakcore collective? Please like their Facebook page!”