United Crushers (4th March 2016, Memphis Industries) is POLIÇA’s third full length release and most remarkable album to date. The band, comprising Channy Leaneagh, dual drummers Drew Christopherson and Ben Ivascu, with Chris Beirden on bass and producer Ryan Olson at the helm, collectively wrote the album in Minneapolis in the winter of 2015 during their first true break from two years of touring. They recorded it at the renowned Sonic Ranch Studios in El Paso, TX, nestled just a few short miles from the US/Mexico border.

The first single from United Crushers, "Lime Habit," was premiered on Lauren Laverne’s BBC Radio 6 Music show. Channy says of the single: "these lyrics are most diary like of any of the other songs on United Crushers. It’s all observations on my mode of operation and how it affects where I go. I’m speaking to myself mostly; “never in the corner is the luck of life . . . so get out of the corner and . . . you see up higher but you’re never in style”.

The new album builds on POLIÇA’s signature synthesizer and percussion-heavy sounds with more complex arrangements and a bigger, more crisp hi-fi punch due to the new approach they took to writing and recording together, all in the same room. There's a tighter groove to these songs and a more vulnerable quality to them, especially in Leaneagh's singing. Her incredible vocal range is on display throughout, beautifully raw and less electronically-affected than on previous recordings.

The band will play a series of shows in the lead up to the album release kicking off in Berlin on 11th Feb, with stops in London (Feb 15th Feb at Village Underground), followed by a full US tour (including SXSW).

POLIÇA 2016 EU Tour Dates

11 February - Berlin, DE Berghain Kantine TICKETS

15 February - London, UK Village Underground TICKETS

The themes found and explored on United Crushers are political and personal, touching on social injustice, self-doubt and isolation, the urban decline and gentrification, overcoming music industry machinations, and finding true and honest love in the wake of it all. Even at its darkest, the record is musically the band's most upbeat and celebratory. It is a weapon meant to empower the weak, the forgotten, and the disenfranchised.

United Crushers is the follow up to 2013’s Shulamith which EW described as being "propulsive enough for dance floors, and dreamy enough for headphones" and MOJO said that it "proves that intelligent pop music still has the ability to seduce and enthral." Their first, 2012's Give You The Ghost, also garnered international acclaim, with Rolling Stone hailing it as "the sound of heartbreak and celebration happening simultaneously" and Q praising it as "a bewitching, urgent, magical debut." The band has conquered massive festivals around the world from Coachella to Glastonbury in addition to performing on Late Night With Jimmy Fallon, Later... With Jools Holland, and more.

United Crushers can be pre-ordered now with an instant download of "Lime Habit" from iTunes and on CD / LP from POLIÇA’s webstore with exclusive “Blacklight” poster and T shirt.

###