If you only listen to one song today, make it “I See My Mother” by Poliça (2012, from the album Give You The Ghost).

Poliça is an indie electronica band with a bit of R&B influence from Minneapolis. They released their debut album on Valentine’s Day in the United States. In Europoe, it’ll officially drop on April 23. The record has almost unanimously received high praise. Justin Vernon of Bon Iver went so far as to say “They’re the best band I’ve ever heard”. At least that’s how he was quoted.

The band rose out of the Gayngs collective. That “band” has approximately 25 members, including Justin Vernon and also Channy Leaneagh of this band. Ryan Olson, who founded Gayngs, also helped Leaneagh found Poliça.

They play with two full drum kits, a live bass guitar, a lot of programmed electronics, and autotuned vocals. I’ve never been a fan of autotune, and if I’m honest, I’m really looking forward to the day that autotune fades from fancy. I’d been hearing a bit of buzz about Poliça before I ever laid ears on them, and I was pretty skeptical when I discovered that they autotune singer Channy Leaneagh’s vocals. Still, though, I was drawn in by the intoxicating rhythms of the song “Wandering Star”. The walking bass line, the thick, cascading drums. And although they use autotune, I like Leaneagh’s produced voice. I’m reminded of Tracey Thorn from Everything But The Girl.

There’s a few reasons for me not to like this band. Not in 2012, anyway. The 1998 me is all over this. However, I can’t help it. After I was patient with this record, I discovered that there are many more reasons for me to really like them. I’m not going to go all bonkers and say that they’re the best thing I’ve ever heard. I’m not even going to say that they’re the best thing I’ve heard this year. Don’t be surprised, though, to see this record end up on my year-end lists.

Without further ado, I’ll just give you the song of the day.

“I See My Mother” by Poliça

http://thisisthatsongcom.ipage.com/music/Poli%e7a/I%20See%20My%20Mother.mp3

It’s about going after and getting what she wants, even if it means sacrificing long-term happiness and sanity for short-term pleasure.

if it looks good to me

i will make it mine

for the night

if it feels good

i will chase it

if it looks good to me

I will make it mine

for the night

oh what a web i have woven myself in

I’m always chasing after somebody else

all by myself

With music like this, though, it’s not really about any “message” in the lyrics. The music is fun. Infectious. It doesn’t need an agenda. Interestingly, while the dual-drum kit is one of the most compelling things about this band, they’re not as in-your-face about it with this song as they are with some of the others. Some of those others hit it with you right out of the gate. With this one, it’s sort of a payoff at the end of the song.