Last Updated: 09 Oct 2019 9:40am

Poliça is an American synth-pop band from Minneapolis, Minnesota, consisting of singer Channy Leaneagh and producer Ryan Olson, alongside Chris Bierden, Drew Christopherson and Ben Ivascu.

Formed in 2011, the group released their debut album, ‘Give You the Ghost’, in 2012. They signed to Mom + Pop in 2012, and released their follow up, ‘Shulamith’ in 2013, which reached #33 in the UK Albums Chart. The band released their third album, ‘United Crushers’, in March 2016.

The band have headlined their own shows and tours across the USA, UK, Ireland and Europe and have supported Bon Iver and Clap Your Hands Say Yeah on tour, as well as having played festivals such as SXSW and a recent tour with European orchestral collective Stargaze.

Poliça have confirmed a new album, 'When We Stay Alive' due in January 2020, and accompanying UK and European tour dates for early 2020. Catch them live by checking out the dates and ticket information below on Stereoboard.

Set Country & Currency

Upcoming Polica Events

Oops, Polica doesn't currently have any events scheduled. Get an ALERT when new shows are announced near you!

JOIN THE WAITLIST

No Polica tour dates, events or tickets listed at the current time. If you'd like to be kept informed, please "Join The Waitlist" to set a tour alert or register for our FREE weekly tour newsletter.

Polica History and Biography

Poliça is an American synth-pop band from Minneapolis, Minnesota, consisting of singer Channy Leaneagh and producer Ryan Olson, alongside Chris Bierden, Drew Christopherson and Ben Ivascu.

Formed in 2011, the group released their debut album, ‘Give You the Ghost’, in 2012. They signed to Mom + Pop in 2012, and released their follow up, ‘Shulamith’ in 2013, which reached #33 in the UK Albums Chart. The band released their third album, ‘United Crushers’, in March 2016.

The band have headlined their own shows and tours across the USA, UK, Ireland and Europe and have supported Bon Iver and Clap Your Hands Say Yeah on tour, as well as having played festivals such as SXSW and a recent tour with European orchestral collective Stargaze.

Poliça have confirmed a new album, 'When We Stay Alive' due in January 2020, and accompanying UK and European tour dates for early 2020. Catch them live by checking out the dates and ticket information here on Stereoboard.

Polica Comments & Feedback

Polica Concert & Event Reviews