Philip Emeagwali is a Nigerian computer scientist. He won the 1989 Gordon Bell Prize for price-performance in high-performance computing applications, in an oil reservoir modeling calculation using a novel mathematical formulation and implementation. He is known for making controversial claims about his achievements that are disputed by the scientific community.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Philip Emeagwali has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Intuitive, Loyal, Organized, Passionate, Creative, Intellectual, and Independent.

Smart and Sophisticated

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Philip Emeagwali is someone who is a smart, sophisticated, and organized person who displays kindness and grace in every day interactions, and who also has a passionate soul. A person who really cares about helping others make the most of what they have.

Charming and Sophisticated

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Philip Emeagwali well know them as someone who can be classy, glamorous, and worldly, like jewelry.

Organized and Achievement-oriented

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Philip Emeagwali as someone who is organized, goal-oriented, practical, and persevering.

Who is hardworking, intellectual, and easygoing, who loves higher education and learning and sharing ideas with others, and who loves healthy competition.

Perceptive and Visionary

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Philip Emeagwali is someone who has a natural awareness about what is going on in the surrounding environment and the world at large, and a refined vision of how to navigate it.

They are also someone who is balanced, stable, and energetic, who likes the idea of home and family, and who is very comfortable being the person in charge.

Altruistic and Purposeful

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Philip Emeagwali tends to be someone who has a desire to be of service to a higher calling and who is always trying to perfect things. Who can be practical and polished, reserved and methodical, and who tends to trust internal judgment before trusting anyone else at face value.

Some of Philip Emeagwali's challenges

While Philip Emeagwali has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Philip Emeagwali can be Selfish, Difficult, Perfectionist, Emotional, Standoffish, Rebellious, and Emotionally Distant.

Difficult and Perfectionist

One of Philip Emeagwali's key challenges is that they are someone who can be difficult and too much of a perfectionist.

Callous and Selfish

Philip Emeagwali is someone who can be standoffish, pessimistic, and ruthless, who can have difficulty concentrating and be impatient, can have difficulty discovering the keys to personal contentment, and who can have a tendency to overwork and hoard wealth and possessions.

Critical and Bossy

Finally, Philip Emeagwali also can be too focused on the small details of life, try to control whatever is happening, and be finicky and demanding.