A start-up company offering technology products [Oracle, Symantec, VMware, Hitachi and Novell (IDM), now Attachmate] and service solutions with annual revenues of up to $32 million and 60 employees with a focus on high quality, highly experienced professional services expertise with enterprise level clients.

Directed daily operations with accountability for corporate profit & loss, total sales, all budgets, vendor, distributor & client relationship management, in-house software development and data center teams, outside accounting, legal, banking and government lobbyist.

ACHIEVEMENTS

► Chief executive for 5 years when company received client scores of up to 96/100 as part of 2008 Dun & Bradstreet’s Past Performance Evaluation™ which rates on factors of reliability, cost, order accuracy, delivery/timeliness, quality, business relations, personnel, customer support and responsiveness. No area score was lower than 89.

► Re-negotiated contracts valued at up to $4 million covering professional services, pulling in Hyderabad Group in 2006 to reduce costs.

► Instituted Ohio STS for professional services. Honored as Sun Microsystems Government Channel Partner of the Quarter twice.

► Responsible for daily operation Fortune 300 global data center/disaster recovery (DR) site for nine years. Brought availability to 99.999%, decreased costs by 33% and response times by 40%.

► Created and populated data center with all intellectual property owned by Delta Energy – Ashland Chemical division spin-off ; migrated all IT operations from parent company’s data center to new independent data center.

► Data center migration of Delta Energy IT from Sawmill Road location to new building in Dublin with no business hours downtime.

► Annually sold $4 - $10 million in enterprise level infrastructure, disaster recovery and performance tuning professional services.

► Organically found a buyer for the company, negotiated and executed an agreement in 2013.

Member of Technical Staff January, 5 years

Information Systems Senior Staff Member, 6 years

Information Systems Staff Member, January, 4 years

Information Systems Designer, 1 year

Hired as Information Systems Designer (ISD) under Western Electric Corporation following graduation from college, moving into new role as Information Systems Staff Member (ISSM) within initial probationary period. Subsequently promoted to Information Systems Senior Staff Member (ISSSM) after only five years – despite fact that position usually achieved after up to 10 years of work – becoming first woman to attain position within entire Columbus organization of 150 professionals, ultimately transferred from Western Electric to Bell Laboratories and given new title.

Accountable for up to 10,000 lines of C & S (C-equivalent Assembler) code some of which was part of the UNIX kernel, lead for BX.25 communication protocol development and support, served as project manager directing up to 50 staff to complete designated projects, engaging in related software development, test and support groups, and software projects spanning geographically separated working groups aligned under various 3rd level management hierarchies.

► Served as only AT&T representative to Central Ohio Technology Day Committee – comprised of representatives from AT&T, Battelle, and American Electric Power – which organized and instituted Central Ohio Technology Day event held at Columbus convention center (1991).

► Chosen, over hundreds of technical manufacturing and software engineers at Columbus works, to speak at the 52nd Engineering Symposium at AT&T Columbus Works – despite having less than three years of comparable experience – also chairing AT&T Columbus works 53rd engineering symposium.