LEFT BIAS

Detailed Report

Bias Rating: LEFT Factual Reporting: HIGH

Country: USA

Press Freedom Rating: MOSTLY FREE

Media Type: Newspaper

Traffic/Popularity: Medium Traffic

MBFC Credibility Rating: HIGH CREDIBILITY

History

Founded in 1994, The Cincinnati CityBeat is an alternative weekly located in Cincinnati, Ohio. citybeat.com is the online domain covering local arts, food, culture, music, entertainment, and news for the Cincinnati Area

Read our profile on the United States government and media.

Funded by / Ownership

The Cincinnati CityBeat is owned by Euclid Media Group, which owns several alternative newspapers in the USA. Revenue is derived from advertising.

Analysis / Bias

The Cincinnati CityBeat covers local arts, food, culture, music, entertainment, and news for the Cincinnati Metro Area. Local news is generally reported via staff writers, with some in-depth pieces. Straight news uses minimally loaded words such as this: Fifty West Brewing Announces Reopening of Original Brewpub in Columbia Township. News stories are generally sourced through quotes, first-hand accounts, or hyperlinks.

Editorially, the Cincinnati CityBeat leans strongly left with progressive opinion/news pieces such as these: In Abortion Rights Victory, Kentucky Voters Shoot Down Constitutional Amendment and My Gift to my Grandson is to Sound the Alarm of the Impending Climate Disaster. Generally, story selection moderately favors the left, while opinion-oriented pieces use strong emotional wording to denigrate the right. Most information is sourced properly.

Failed Fact Checks

None in the Last 5 years

Overall, we rate the Cincinnati CityBeat Left Biased based on story selection that mostly favors the left and High for factual reporting due to proper sourcing and a clean fact check record. (D. Van Zandt 01/05/2023)

Source: https://www.citybeat.com/

Last Updated on May 19, 2023 by Media Bias Fact Check

Do you appreciate our work? Please consider one of the following ways to sustain us.

MBFC Ad-Free

or

MBFC Donation

Left vs. Right Bias: How we rate the bias of media sources