Sodagreen, the mando-pop’s hottest Taiwan indie band, are now celebrating the 10th anniversary – Air World Tour. Their first shows took place at the Hong Kong Coliseum on April 11-13. And I went to the one on April 11.

I have listened to their music for 8 years, and this was my second time of coming to their concert. In my view, Sodagreen is one of the most successful indie bands in Taiwan, since they have sparked the musical trend Xiao Qingxin, which use low profile and lyrics to describe simple emotions. When listening to their songs, you can feel the sincerity of their music, which is really inspiring. It seems like that your life has been written in their songs, and you are not only listening to a piece of music, but listening to yourself.

As this is their 10th anniversary world tour of their debut, this concert was a lot different from previous shows. They had rearranged the melody of their songs to build a fresh feeling. When we heard the intro we had no idea what the song was, and kept listening, it turned out to be a song that we are quite familiar with. What even surprising is that they set up a what-would-you-like-to-hear period for fans to order the song freely. And Wu Tsing-fong, the Vocal of Sodagreen, even went down to the stadium to ask the audiences what they want to hear. I have to say it was a very interesting and interactive concert. It’s really worth going!!

You may have the same feeling with me that when we grow up, we may leave our hometown and sometimes even separate from our parents, because we want to fight for a better life on our own. In this case, Crowd Lu’s new single becomes even more touching. In this song he says that even we are not staying with our beloved ones, we don’t need to feel that we are lonely. Actually, we are still with them to a large extent for they will always stay in our minds.

What needs to be mentioned is that the pictures in this music video reflect the daily life in Hong Kong, which surprised me so much!

This song is really encouraging.

Lyrics:

大人中

曲：盧廣仲

詞：盧廣仲、討海人、威廉霍華

安靜的人 想很多

說話的人 專心說

上班的人 在五樓

下班的人 獲得自由

勉強的人 不快樂

快樂的人 那就是我

你也想 跟我一樣

雨下起來唱了首歌

遠方 遠方 哪裡才是遠

原來愛人不在身邊 就叫

遠方 遠方

還好我愛的人永遠住在我心臟

長大後誰不是離家出走

茫茫人海裡游

抬起頭才發現

流眼淚的星星正在放棄我

請擁抱我

萬一我不小心墜落

不想勤勞 想放空

太常失敗 好想成功

車水馬龍裡我抓著

支持我活著的 快樂

長大後我們都離家出走

茫茫人海裡游

抬起頭才發現

流眼淚的星星正在看著我

他說：加油，讓我為你

感到光榮！

雨過天清涼涼的

我不用再擔心什麼

那些 花都 怒放了

愛人的人 獲得自由

Cheer Chen, one of my favorite Taiwan indie music artists, held two concerts in Hong Kong in March. I was so lucky that I bought the last one, which was on March 8th, because we encored 3 times and the concert was extended to 11:55!!!

The video I recorded that night is a song of her new album, named Peace & Revolution. I think it is a really interesting song for its international style. It conveys the modern thoughts through the melody and her murmur-style singing.

Hope you will enjoy it.

Taiwan’s No.1 outdoor music festival, Spring Wave Music and Art Festival came to Hong Kong last year. I was so excited, because this music festival is sooooooo Great!!!!!!!!! It’s an annual event which has been held in Kenting, Taiwan since 1995. Spring Wave Music and Art Festival promotes peace and love on earth, and every year it attracts more than 20000 people.

For their debut show in Hong Kong, many wonderful artists line-up for this event such as Jiajia, Jam Hsiao, Cheer Chen, Zhang Zhenyue, MC Hotdog, Khalil Fong.They are all very good Taiwan artists, which make the first Hong Kong show of Spring Wave Music and Art Festival Spring a blast. This is a great show that should not be missed by music lovers or anyone interested in different types of genres!

I’d glad that I went to this wonderful event. Let me show you how great the music festival was!

Over The Hill is a brand-new band in Taiwan. However, they are not THAT new, because this is a band formed by four experienced singers – Ciacia, Ze’ Hwang, Lisa and Cai Kunqi. They are all over fourty, so they named the band Over The Hill. This song describes an attitude that after spending many time and efforts on pursuing what we want, we could take everything easy when we are old.

It is AWESOME !!

Lyrics:

I’m over the hill, I’m over the hill

I’m over the hill, I’m over the hill

I’m over the hill, I’m over the hill

I’m over the hill, I’m over the hill

I’ve spent a lot of years trying to climb up the mountain

To reach the highest point of my life 不管多曲折

直到一雙雙破爛的鞋 我不再捨不得

直到我不再懷疑 可以把你丟了

詮釋一個角色 無論說甚麼做甚麼都是我的選擇

走過這一段旅程 失去的那個人已不重要了

I’m spinning around and around

Soon I have been over the hill

當我數著日子 How fast will they go?

Times 9.8 meters per second square

I’ve met a lot of jerks though I try to keep in distance

They burn the bridges down after they cross the river

直到一張張破碎的臉 我早已不記得

於是我不再擔心有到不了的城鎮

看過許多景色 那些生命裡錯過了留不住是緣份

走過了千萬哩程 該放的那個石頭 就讓它滾

Oh, I’ve been all over the world

And now I am over the hill

當我數著日子 How far will they go?

Divided by the numbers of my regrets

Divided by the numbers of my regrets

Divided by the numbers of my regrets

Divided by the numbers of my regrets

I’m over the hill, I’m over the hill

Do you like Taiwan indie music? There are tons of good music videos in Taiwan, which show not only the great melody but also creativity of the singers.

StreetVoice 街聲 selected 15 excellent music videos played by Taiwan Bands. How many have you watched?

http://tw.streetvoice.com/streetdesign/articles/1511653/

Category 1 – Field Recording

拍謝少年 －深海的你

Sorry Youth is a local Taiwan indie rock band, who devote themselves to Taiwan local music, trying to compose epic songs in Taiwan dialect.

來吧！焙焙！－迷路

Come On! Bay Bay!, formed in 2006, is a band of brother and sister. They are now active in performing at different places in Taiwan.

八十八顆芭樂籽- 比獸還帥

88balaz, formed in 1996, is a band playing different genres of music especially rock n’ roll. They were granted the first price of the Ho-hai-yan Rock Festival.

Category 2 －Creative Lyrics

Crispy －100 分

Crispy is good at the Folk music style. They have two vocals whose voices are very different, which make their songs quite interesting.

回聲樂團 – 今夜的秘密集會

Echo, a band of four people, released their first album in 2002 when they were still students and soon attracted people ears. And their drummer is very beautiful.

Category3 – Band Performance

大象體操 – 銀河

Elephant Gym is a bass driven, Math-Rock band from Kaohsiung, Taiwan, Formed in 2012. The Band is composed of Tif on bass, Tell on guitar and Chia-Chin on drums. The music of Elephant Gym is known for clear and memorable bass line, emotional guitar riffs and melodic drumming. Most songs are instrumental.

滅火器 – 欲走無路

Fire EX. is Punk Rock band of Taiwan. They would like to create their music in a self-reflective way which make their songs very inspiring.

這位太太 – 立場

Mrs. This is a band of 6. Their music style is very changeful but all very interesting.

熊寶貝 – 年年

Bearbabes, formed in 2000, has released 3 albums and performed for more than 500 times. They music style is a mixture of Blue, Jazz, Folk and British Rock.

觸執毛 – Good Night

Chochukmo is a 5-piece indie rock band. The members of the band have started contributing their talents and innovations into their music since the summer of 2005, with the current inventive line-up coming into their own in the spring of 2008.

Category 4 – Scenery

甜梅號 – 站在太陽上

Sugar Plum Ferry is a post rock trio formed in the March of 1998 in Taipei, Taiwan.Their ability to develop a mature sound and perform their songs as a sonic experience has propelled them to distant shores.

阿飛西雅 – 台北震盪

APHASIA is an exotic rock band of Taiwan. And their name is a transliteration of a disease which is disturbance of the comprehension and formulation of language caused by dysfunction in specific brain regions.

Category 5 – Story

Easy – Upset Underworld

Tizzy bac – 達特寇斯特米吐馬齊

Tizzy bac, an indie rock band, formed in 1999. What makes them special is that Tizzy bac is a rock band without guitar player. They usually compose their music by piano.

黃玠 – 下雨的晚上

Huang Jie, the base player of 929 band, is also an indie music singer, who is good at folk music.