It's All Gone Pete Tong(Directed by Michael Dowse , starring Paul Kaye and Beatriz Betarda)

The phrase "Its all gone Pete Tong" will immediately ring some familiar bells of doom in your ears.

Reviewer Kate Allen

Whether you've heard your kids utter it or you've lived it first hand from the dance floor, its pretty self explanatory.

The term translates as "it's all gone wrong", and is rhyming slang playing off the name of superstar DJ Pete Tong.

It automatically puts you in a particular era: the second Summer of Love, when club kids loved the music and each other, and partied hard as far afield as the island of Ibiza.

As the title suggests, though, all is not well in partyville! So what exactly could have gone so "Pete Tong"?

semi-naked people

Before I saw this film I knew relatively little about it. I knew that the main character was a DJ and was played by Paul Kaye, a personal favourite of mine from his Dennis Pennis days! I also knew it was set in Ibiza but knew nothing of its content or plot.

If I'm honest, I didn't really know what to expect. Although I am, or rather have been, a self-proclaimed party girl, the thought of spending a summer in Ibiza writhing around with gurning, sweaty, semi-naked people does not fill me with an urge to pack my bikini into my stylish yet affordable rucksack.

Cooome On

But it's good sometimes to see what you're missing.

The film is first and foremost a comedy, following the somewhat 'tragic' life of fictional superstar DJ Frankie Wilde, taking us through the highs - and quite considerable lows - that come with the territory.

Frankie is a turntable genius who has made it to the top of this very competitive profession. Money is no object, he has everything: a trophy villa, a trophy wife, trophy friends, an inexhaustible supply of trophy drugs.

And then one day he has to face some life-changing facts and have a re-think. For a cruel twist of fate has dealt Frankie with the biggest setback a DJ can face.

compulsive viewing

Amidst the sharp comedy, the film deals with fame and all that comes with it, the luxurious excess and the delicate grip on sanity. At times the audience is made to feel uncomfortable, but this all makes for compulsive viewing.

The closing scene is a little reminiscent of School of Rock, which only adds to its overall charm. Even I, the hard nosed BBC London travel reporter, was welling up with feelgood tears!

Paul Kaye is frankly (Frankie?) brilliant and has already been rewarded with the Jury Award for Best Actor at the US Comedy Arts Festival this year.

Superstar DJ

Director Michael Dowse has produced some wonderful performances from not only Kaye, but also from Beatriz Betarda, who you may know from Christopher Moraham's Beyond A Joke, for which she won a gold medal for Best Actress of the Year.

Needless to say, with this genre of film, the soundtrack is excellent. Supervised by Lol Hammond, resident south Londoner and founder of The Drum Club and Spiral Tribe, it includes tunes by Shapeshifters and the Beta Band that would fill any Ibiza dance floor.

Lol was also partly responsible for the 'DJ coaching' of the lead character and was Frankie Wilde's 'stunt hands' - an interesting concept!

It's All Gone Pete Tong will relate to anyone who has ever dabbled in club culture, on the dance floor and off it.