Director: Michael Dowse

The film: Part-mockumentary, part-melodrama, everything about this film is hard to pigeonhole. Although it claims to be based on fact, there's debate about whether the film's central character, DJ Frankie Wilde, ever existed. Although marketed as a comedy, and widely referred to as one, Pete Tong contains plenty of poignancy.

After an opening glimpse of a broken, unkempt man - Wilde, played by Paul Kaye (right) - real- life mega DJs appear in a series of recollections of the man they say was a favourite with clubbers on the Spanish island of Ibiza. These include Paul Van Dyk, Carl Cox and Pete Tong - he of the film's title, which translates from contemporary cockney rhyming slang as 'it's all gone wrong'. In this way, a picture is painted of a man who was as much a showman as a technical wizard, with an intuitive knowledge of how to wow each night's crowd with unusual effects.

Unfortunately, it's Wilde's inner ears that led to his demise. The film opens a year before the superstar DJ tributes that follow his disappearance from Ibiza, and Wilde is fast approaching complete deafness. Doctors say a birth defect has been exaggerated by the number of hours he's spent at volume-10 and the vast quantities of booze and drugs he wolfs down daily.

Wilde's deafness leads to his downfall at the decks and in his personal life. The beginning of the end is predicted, perhaps, with the repeated mishearing of the word 'husband' as 'arse band' by his wife, Sonya (Kate Magowan).

But with the support of his new, deaf Spanish girlfriend, Penelope Garcia (Beatriz Batarda), Wilde devises a new way to 'hear' and returns to the DJ booth.

Kaye's portrayal of Wilde's peaks and troughs is believable and the role, which gets tongue-in-cheek at times, bears similarities to his first lead feature role as an upstart lawn bowls hotshot in Black Ball (2003).

A winner of four awards in North America, the big-screen version got a better reception in Canadian director Michael Dowse's neck of the woods, but has a cult following in Europe. Dowse's previous feature Fubar (2002) - also in the humorous music-interest arena - was about the lives of two heavy metal fans in the 1980s. Pete Tong's co-producers, Allan Niblo and James Richardson (The Football Factory and The Business), and the fact that the real Tong is associate producer add cred factor.

The extras: There's a lot of entertaining stuff here - a 40-minute 'making of' and a handful of out-takes and deleted scenes. The one in which Kaye plays a rabbi who supposedly knew Wilde from his congregation and went out to save him in Ibiza is among the funniest.

The verdict: Funny in parts, wacky in others and occasionally sad, this makes entertaining viewing.