Everything about "The Man in the Moon," Robert Mulligan's effortlessly old-fashioned family drama set in a small Southern town, has a rosy glow. It's a reminder that Mr. Mulligan, a seasoned film maker whose credits include "To Kill a Mockingbird," "Summer of '42" and "The Other," can direct with real tenderness and without fake emotion. His latest film unfolds gently and gracefully, in a climate where the warmth isn't merely a matter of weather. Until its final reel, when it strains badly to accommodate an almost biblical stroke of retribution, "The Man in the Moon" is a small, fond film that achieves a kind of quiet perfection.

The story concerns two sisters, and Mr. Mulligan can find something evocative even in the way the elder braids the younger one's hair. The latter, 14-year-old Dani (Reese Witherspoon), is just on the verge of real beauty, while the slightly older Maureen (Emily Warfield) has already gotten there. The girls' family, which is beautifully evoked, exists at all different stages of development, from their toddler sister to their pregnant mother (Tess Harper) and the father (Sam Waterston) who is wary of his daughters' prospective suitors. In his or her own way, each member of this family longs for a boy.

When one arrives, in the form of a handsome teen-age neighbor named Court (Jason London), he affects the girls' family in powerful ways. The coltish Dani becomes smitten with Court, even though he thinks himself too grown up for her. Their meetings at a rustic swimming hole have the makings of adolescent girls' fiction at its most saccharine, but in fact these scenes have an authentic wholesomeness that's very sweet. Also remarkable is what's missing here: the sexual precocity that is the sine qua non of most current films about teen-agers. There's something refreshing and realistic in Court's anxious thought that he ought to remember how young Dani really is.

Once Court pays a visit to the girls' house and meets Maureen, the balance between the sisters shifts dramatically. The camera watches as Dani registers utter disbelief, never having thought twice about what might happen if her would-be beau met her pretty sister. In fact, the film closely observes such very small changes in its characters, and it lets them express their feelings in a decidedly down-to-earth way. "Maureen," asks Dani, "have you ever liked somebody so much that it almost made you sick?"