Basdahl ( Low German Basdaal or Basdohl ) is a municipality in the district of Rotenburg (Wümme ) in Lower Saxony. In addition to the main town Basdahl you also belong to the places Volkmarst and eyelet.

2.1 Basdahl

2.3 Volkmarst

3.1 municipal

3.2 Coat of Arms

3.3 Town twinning

4.1 traffic

5.1 Sons and daughters of the town

5.2 People who worked in Basdahl

History

From the 14th to the 17th century, the country days of knighthood, the towns and the clergy of the archdiocese of Bremen were in the " Hollow ground" on Steinengraben held in Basdahl. These estates have a continuity with the existing landscape today the duchies of Bremen and Verden, which to this day are carriers of the regional culture and identity maintenance in the Elbe- Weser Triangle in the framework of the Regional Association Stade and on behalf of the State of Lower Saxony.

On March 1, 1974, the municipalities Oese and Volkmarst were incorporated.

Local name, origin

Former place names of Basdahl were in the years 1297 and 1549 Bodesdal Baßdal. The second part clearly puts down for German dal 'valley'. The first part of the name, as do other local names, such as 1398 Basfelde, 1537 Bachsfeldtt, 1587 Bach field, 1590 Basfelt Village, 1715 Bassfeld; † Bass lives in Helmstedt, 952 Bassallo, 1150 Basselo; Baßberg, FlurN near Hameln (ca. 1470-80 ) na the Basberge mer; Basbeck in the east, about 1250 Basbeke; Balsbeke, 1280 Bastbecke, 1347 de Basbeke; Bassenfleth at Stade, 1255 in Bassenvlete, 1268 Bassenfleth.

Maybe derives the first part from Old High German from bar ( * baza ), lit. Basas " barefoot ", OCS. bosъ " barefoot " an approach bhes " rub, grind, sow ," including bhoso -s " naked " heard, " probably originally based on kahlgewetzte, scuff marks ". The Germanic has " mind share and indeed with the words broom as" the sweeper, sweepers, " bar " bar, blo " and the basic meaning " blank " and raffia.

The interpretation of the name as " grated, grated point " equal " out riebenes, worn Valley " remains uncertain.

Districts

Basdahl

In the district Basdahl that fills a midpoint function to primary school are with gym, kindergarten, two banking institutions and various commercial and service companies to meet the daily basic needs. There is an old legend about Basdahl. When Bremen Knight house is a stone that should tell you something about the legend.

Tower clock (south) "Time is grace"

Church clock (west) " Do not be deceived "

Kirchturmuhr (North) "His day is coming "

Church founders Christoffer von Issendorf with his wife and child

Leisure and meeting Oese ( former village school)

The district Oese is known as the former seat of the noble family Issendorff. The local Good Pogge mills, with the 1586 mansion built of brick with a steep gable roof, is a three-sided enclosed courtyard with moats and lime avenue. The estate is managed by Botho von Schwarzkopf and his wife Margaret of Schwarzkopf.

As sight is true but especially the small, from the Knights of Christoph Issendorff in brick, built in the years 1577/78 Patronatskirche. Right next to the church was built from the former village school Oeser leisure and meeting eyelet. Master of the house is the church circle Bremervörde - Zeven.

Volkmarst

Even in prehistoric times, there has been in the Rochester district Volkmar colonization. In Vörder register by 1500 it enrolled Volmerstede. Maybe a Volkmar decided at the time of settlement as the leader of the clan to found the village near the pond. Today it houses the town centers with recreational facilities such as playground, barbecue area, community center with Schützenhalle, Fire Station and sports court.

Policy

Parish council

Since the local elections on 11 September 2011, the municipal council is composed as follows:

CDU: 2 councilors

SPD: 7 Council Members

Wählergemeinschaft: 2 councilors

Coat of arms

The coat of arms Basdahls is split and shows the front of a silver background two red, crossed keys. Back on a red background is a silver sword with a golden knob shown, the symbol of justice is.

Twinning

Since 2 October 1990 is a partnership with the City Beetzendorf in Saxony- Anhalt.

Economy and infrastructure

Traffic

The federal highways 71 and 74 from Bremen Bremerhaven be merged into Basdahl and jointly continue to Bremervörde. The station in the district Kluste is operated by Moor Express, connects the village with Bremen, Osterholz- Beck, Bremervörde and Stade.

Personalities

Sons and daughters of the town

Johann Georg Olbers (1716-1772), German theologian and preacher Bremer

Those who worked in Basdahl