This tunnel runs along the sea bed, in a trench, under the Sydney Harbor, adjacent to the Sydney Harbor Bridge. This tunnel was constructed using preformed section, floated on barges into position, lowered and joined on the sea bed. Then the sea water was pumps out, the infrastructure was fitted, creating the road tunnel as you see it today. After construction the trench was filled in over the tunnel with river sand and permanently buried. The fire protection design in this tunnel was designed by others, using a unique design philosophy, see our "Interesting Tunnels" page for more details

This tunnel is protected by a Deluge System & fire hydrants and Fire hose Reels, all feed from a ring main system. The water supply is from town's main grade 1 supply and booster pumps located at the Lane Cove End, located at ground levle above the tunnel. There is an underground pipe from the pump room via a services tunnel to the road tunnel below.This tunnel is unique as it has a 90 metre down gradient from the Lane Cove end down, creating many hydraulic issues, mainly over pressurization that had to be solved during design, by using 2 sets of inline pressure reducing valve stations ensure that over pressurization did not occur during normal & fire scenario operations.

This tunnel is protected by Fire Hydrant System and Fire Detection only, as there is not fire fuel loads (i.e. vehicles and cargo), only for electric trains.There are considerable temperatures variation with the tunnel length, so we had to build in a expansion-contraction system. We anchored the piping at every 120 metre cross passage, and centrally between the cross passages place the expansion joints, based on calculations for the temperature fluctuations, applied for steel pipe, and gave this information Victaulic, whom supplied the expansion joint based on the required movement required. All bracket between the cross passage anchor points were slide type, as shown in the pictured below.

Fire Hydrant supply main typical expansion joint, using Victaulic Fire Protection Expansion Joint System, 2 off, one either side of a sliding bracket, located every 120m along the tunnel length, to allow for expansion and contraction issues, due to ambient temperature changes. This pipework is anchored every 120m using custom made thrust brackets, capable of withstanding up to 30KNforces (both longitudinal & axial).

The Cross City Road tunnel runs between Darling Harbor to Kings Cross under the main Sydney CBD. The tunnel is unique, as the ventilation system runs through a separate tunnel adjacent to the main bores, back to the single ventilation stack in Darling Harbor, the exhaust dispersal patten based on the prevailing winds drops in the middle of the Sydney river due north of darling harbor. This tunnel being located in the Sydney CBD, there was nowhere else to exhaust the gasses too. The water supply are taken from the Sydney CBD near Darling Harbor and Kings Cross, and consists of a grade 1 water supply with 100% capacity pumps at either end. Suitable fire brigade booster facilities were provided at the Darling Harbor and Kings Cross portal areas.

The M5 Road tunnel, is actually 2 separate tunnels, the M5 Road Tunnel joined by an overland road on a bridge over a swampy area a second smaller tunnel under the Cooks River near the airport.The water supply for the M5 Road Tunnel is taken from both ends of the main M5 tunnel, from a fire water tank and pump complex at both ends of the main M5 Tunnel, in a grade 1 configuration, with a separate singe main feeding the Cooks river tunnel.As with al tunnels there were initial issue of hydrant over pressurization at the lowest levels, this was solved by inserting hydrant valves with orifice plates, to restrict the pressure when the hydrant we running at 5.0 l/sec to what the fire brigade require.

Showing the Emergency Equipment (EEC) Cabinet (right) with doors open, on the left is the fire brigade section open (usually locked shut) containing feed fire hydrants & emergency intercom phone. On the right the general public section contains a fire hose reel, fire extinguisher and emergency phone linked directly to the Tunnel Operations Control Room Fire Alarm Panel & Emergency Warning Console