Speedy West with Jimmy Bryant

“Steel Guitar” & “2 Guitars Country Style”

Capitol Records T 1341 & T 520

align> This is the Capitol Records release 2 LP’s featuring Speedy West “Steel Guitar” & “2 Guitars Country Style”.

The Covers are in NM condition. On both the spine and seams are solid, no splits, no wear. The fronts and backs are very clean, beautiful covers.

The Vinyl, both discs, are in NM condition. Play graded, all four sides are spotless and play clean throughout.

ALSO LISTED THIS WEEK

This weeks listings include some Rock, Jazz and Classical LP’s. Please take a moment and check them out. Thanks!

SHIPPING

Shipping in the U.S. will be based on my lowest single rate plus $1.00 for each additional LP. International rates will be calculated as close to that as I can make it. I value repeat customers, U.S. and International, and will do anything I can to make it work better for you. Please save me on your Favorite Sellers list and check my listings weekly. Thanks again to everyone who has purchased from me in the past!

RETURNS

If you purchase a record from me and you are not satisfied with your purchase, I will refund your purchase price, including the shipping you paid to get it, when I have received the item back in it’s original condition. The buyer is responsible for the shipping on the return. Read the “The Important Stuff” section at the end of this listing for all the terms and conditions. I work hard to provide the best customer service I can, read my feedback and then bid with confidence.

GRADING

I take my grading very seriously, see below for a description of how I do it.

MINT

A mint record, both Cover & Vinyl should appear perfect with no visible wear, as if its never been used.

NEAR MINT

Near Mint Coversize> will only have a very minor imperfection, a slightly snubbed corner for example, but does not detract from the overall appearance, the majority of it is perfect. The Vinylsize> will also have an extremely minor cosmetic imperfection but will play as if new.

VG++

Very Good ++ for the Coversize> will have artwork close to perfect. There may be some minor ring impression, slight creases to the corners but not wrinkled. There should be no writing, seam splits or tape repairs. The Vinylsize> may have some minor scuffs/scratches, but should play close to perfect.

VG+

Very Good + for the Coversize> will be a virtually clean cover but may have small writing on it. The artwork should look clean with slight aging. Some minor wear to the seams or spine, but no tears or holes popping through. The corners could be slightly dog eared. The Vinylsize> will show wear, surface scuffs and some very light scratches. The vinyl should still have a great luster, but the flaws will be noticeable to the naked eye. It should play well with very little or no surface noise.

VG

A Very Good Coversize> will look worn, used. There may be some seam splitting (but not completely separated!). There will be some ring wear, where the ink has begun to wear off, giving the cover a look of snow falling. If the artwork looks snowy all over, it is less than VG condition. There may be some writing on the cover. It will look aged and more yellowish. Still it should be decent. The Vinylsize> will not really look very good, but should STILL play decent. There will almost always be some surface noise, but the Dynamics should still be excellent, overpowering the surface noise. With VG records, the surface noise will be minor crackle or a slight hiss, but should only be heard in between tracks or in low musical passages.

Good

A Good Coversize> will have just about everything wrong with it. It will have seam splits (possibly taped and repaired, but only with scotch tape. No duct tape or masking tape repairs). In essence, the cover will look virtually trashed, but some artwork will still be noticed. Good Vinylsize> will look very well played, dull, grayish and possibly abused. However good vinyl should still play. It will have distracting surface noise, such as crackle that is continuous or some hiss. Will also have some loss of dynamics caused from grooves being worn. It should play without any skips or any obtrusively loud pops or repeated clicks caused by deep scratches. Good means that it will play with some form of decency, so one can still enjoy the music even though you can still hear noise caused from the wear.

See my other auctions for LP’s to combine shipping. Please email me if you have any additional questions. Thanks for looking.

The Important Stuff

Please read before you bid

By Bidding on this item you are agreeing to the following terms:

align>

I sincerely want you to be satisfied with this item. If for any reason you aren’t, contact me within 3 days of receipt. I will refund your purchase price, including the original shipping, when I have received the item back in its original condition. The buyer is responsible for the cost of shipping to get it back to me. If you have any questions please ask before you bid. All payments must be received within 7 days of auction end date, or I reserve the right to re-list the item or offer it to the next highest bidder and post negative feedback. Items are normally shipped within 3 days of receipt of payment. Any shipping charges stated anywhere in this auction apply only to the continental United States, excluding Alaska. For charges outside this area contact me. I ship items by order of payment received. Feedback will be given when I have shipped the item. Insurance isn’t required but is highly recommended. I will not be responsible for items lost or damaged during shipment. Unless otherwise stated, buyer pays ALL shipping & handling costs including packing materials & boxes. Thanks for bidding and good luck!!!