The youngest empress, empress dowager, and empress dowager in history, caught in the struggle for power, but sit firmly on the queen throne from beginning to end, she is the Empress Xiaozhao.

Xiaozhao Shangguan Empress, namely the queen of Han Zhaodi Liu Fuling, Shangguan's younger sister Shangguan clan. Shangguan (88 BC-37 BC) was born in Longxi (now southwest of Tianshui City, Gansu Province). The daughter of Shangguan An and Huo's (named "Madam Respect"), his grandfather was General Zuo, Shangguan Jie, and his grandfather was General Sima Huo Guang, who was in power.

On February 14th in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty (87 BC), Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty, Liu Che, died of illness. Crown Prince Liu Fulin, succeeded as Emperor Zhaodi of Han Dynasty. Zhaodi Liu Fuling was only 8 years old at the time and had no knowledge of world affairs. Therefore, the officials discussed and decided that Princess Eyi should protect Zhaodi, and in the name of Zhaodi, they should respect Princess Eyi as Princess Eyi and let her stay in the palace. , Conserve Zhaodi.

On the day before his death, Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty ordered his neighbor Tuogu, appointed Captain Huo Guang as Grand Sima and General, and appoint Jin Rizhen as General of Chariots and General Jie of Taipu as General Zuo, Sou Su Du Wei Sang Hongyang is the Yushi doctor, who jointly assists the young master. Huo Guang and Shangguan married, and Huo Guang married the eldest daughter Huo Shi to Shangguanjie’s son Shangguan An as his wife.

Because of this relationship, and because they are all the ministers of Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty, Shangguanjie's power is not small, only slightly behind Huo Guang. Shangguanjie gained the trust of Emperor Zhao's sister, Princess Eyi, who was 12 years old and proposed to establish a queen. Shangguan'an's daughter was only 6 years old at the time. Shangguan An had already wanted to let her daughter enter the harem. Of course, his father, Shangguan Jie, also hoped that his granddaughter would enter the palace as queen.

Seeing that the Eyi eldest princess was being elected, Shangguan An consulted with his father-in-law Huo Guang and begged his father-in-law to come forward and let his daughter Shangguan enter the harem. Huo Guang also had his plans. For one thing, he felt that Emperor Zhao was still a nasty child who was not yet the age of an empress; secondly, his granddaughter was too young. In addition, he didn't want Shangguan'an's descendants to be emperors, even though it was hers. Granddaughter, so in the end did not agree.

Shangguan’an’s wife Huo Shi saw that her husband hadn’t gotten the job done, so she had an idea for Shangguan’an. She knew that Emperor Zhaodi of the Han Dynasty was raised by his elder sister, Princess Gai. Zhaodi obeyed what she said to her eldest sister. , Never refused, let Shangguan'an operate through Ding, a person trusted by Princess Gai.

So Shangguanan found outsider Ding and said kindly: "I heard that the princess has plans to choose a queen. I have a young daughter who is about the same age and has a beautiful appearance. Please love the eldest princess. It’s all up to your Excellency.” Seeing that Shangguan’an was very sincere, Outsider Ding happily agreed, and immediately went to the Princess Eyi to report. The eldest princess trusted outsider Ding very much and agreed to make Shangguan’an’s daughter the queen on the spot. .

The 6-year-old Shangguan clan was welcomed into the palace and named Jieyu. Jieyu was the second rank in the harem at that time, after the queen. In 83 BC, the Shangguan clan was named a queen and became the youngest queen in history. In the first year of Yuanping, Emperor Zhao of the Han Dynasty (74 BC), Emperor Zhao died of illness. He was only 21 years old and reigned for 13 years. Because he had no son, he appointed Liu He, the grandson of Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty, as the emperor of Changyi, and respected Shangguan as the emperor. Queen Mother.

At this time, Shangguan was only 15 years old and moved to Changle Palace and was revered as the Queen Mother. Liu He was obscene and innocent, and did not protect the society. He only served as the emperor for 27 days. The empress dowager of Shangguan decreed to abolish the throne and returned to his native Juye to become the king of Changyi. At the same time, another prince was established, that is, Liu Bingji, grandson of the prince of Han Wu, Liu Shi, was Emperor Xuan of the Han. Liu Bing has been renamed Liu Xun. Liu Xun is the great-grandson of Emperor Wu of the Han. Shangguan is the grandmother of Emperor Xuan of the Han. In this way, the 15-year-old Shangguan was revered as the Empress Dowager and became the youngest Empress Dowager in Chinese history.

From then on, the Empress Dowager of Shangguan, regardless of political affairs, stayed forever in the Changle Palace. In the second year of Jianzhao (37 BC), the Empress Dowager Shangguan died at the age of 52 and was buried with Emperor Zhao in Pingling.