BASED OFF OF THE DOG ISLAND FOR PLAYSTATION 2 AND WII

DEVELOPED BY YUKES

PUBLISHED BY UBISOFT

FANFIC STORY BY BROWNCRICKET :)

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Puroro Town was bursting with friendly dogs. It was a tiny town, but it was filled with kind folks who were often selling fish to earn Woofs, bones that they used to buy food, medicine, furniture, and clothes. It was kinda difficult to find Woofs, because you had to search deep in the dirt, and Puroro Town didn't really have any dirt. Most of the town was covered with concrete.

One day, an English Cocker Spaniel was stopping at Puroro Town on a huge ship. This dog was El Dorado, and he was a pirate dog. He had in his mouth a letter, and when he walked on the dock to the town, he stumbled up to an English Bulldog usually called Mr. Postman.

El Dorado dropped the letter and said,

"Ahoy there! So yer the new mail man?" Then he added,

"One of my boys kept this letter in the wrong place, so it got soaked, and now the address is all smudged. Can ya still deliver it?"

Mr. Postman replied,

"Hi Captain El Dorado! Let's see...aah, it's barely legible, but I'll give it a shot." Mr. Postman took the letter and ran off.

Mr. Postman bolted up the centre of Puroro Town. He spotted Knuckles and his girlfriend hanging out together, he noted Amedio relaxing by the huge fountain, and then he saw another dog. An intelligent dog that could help him.

Mr. Postman raced up to the dog.

"Hey, Ol' Donatello," he greeted the old Weimaraner.

"Could you help me...? It's about this name. Any ideas what it is?"

Mr. Postman showed the grey dog the illegible address.

Donatello looked carefully at the address.

"Well, well... umm? It's hard to make out, but..."

Donatello finally figured out who the envelope was for.

"Oh yeah! It's that boy's house! ...Now what was his name...hmm?"

Donatello thought for a brief moment. Then he remembered.

"Yep, it's Maxwell! I believe there was a brother or a sister. I wonder which was it..."

There was another brief moment.

"Yep," Donatello said. "I remember now. Both are nice kids. It's a shame about their father though... it was a very warm season. No, was it cold? Maybe cold ... perhaps it was in between, when the leaves were turning color... oh, it's a long story. Why don't you just take a seat there and I'll tell you all about it..."

"Oh, no thank you," Mr. Postman smiled. "You've been a big help already. Thank you Ol' Donatello."

And with that, the English Bulldog dashed off to 763 Puroro Street, a.k.a. Maxwell's home.