Bell, the first-term mayor of Toledo, Ohio, chuckled, too, knowing the drink (a Chinese concoction made from draining the blood of a venomous snake into rice wine) was an icebreaker that would build trust and aid his effort to attract Chinese investors to his struggling Rust Belt city. By the end of that 2010 visit, and during three subsequent trade missions to China, he was doling out bear hugs. "I'd grab them and give them a hug. I don't know if it's against protocol. It's just what I do."

Since then a parade of Chinese investors has been marching to Toledo, a working-class town of 286,000 that was not even on their radar until Bell showed up pitching its advantages: a transportation hub with a highly skilled labor force and a relatively low cost of living. So far the Chinese have spent more than $10 million to buy private and city-owned properties, including a downtown hotel, a restaurant complex beside the Maumee River and a 69-acre waterfront parcel dubbed the Marina District. Another commercial real estate deal has closed, and another is pending, and seven Chinese companies have opened sales offices in the Toledo area. "We're getting in front of companies that would not have given us the time of day before," says Paul Zito, an official with the Regional Growth Partnership, a quasi-private economic development group in northwest Ohio.

"We have found the people of Toledo to be supportive and welcoming," says Tina Yuan, of Dashing Pacific Group Ltd., a group of Chinese investors who paid $3.8 million for the Marina District property in 2011. "Mayor Bell gave us our first impression of Toledo--open, friendly, ready to grow."

Bell isn't courting just China. He's also traveled to Germany, Mexico and India and helped lure a Spanish solar-panel manufacturer and a Brazilian database-management company. Foreign investment is a key pillar of Bell's turnaround strategy for his hometown, whose fate, like Detroit's, has long been linked to the auto industry. Just 60 miles apart near the western tip of Lake Erie, both cities were French trading posts that later became industrial centers. Besides autos, Toledo was also home to Owens Corning , Libbey Glass and others, earning its nickname, "the Glass City."

Detroit and Toledo have another thing in common: economic misery. When the Great Recession hit, both were pummeled by high unemployment, crippling debt and spiraling costs. But while Detroit is now run by a state-appointed emergency manager who may hock the city's world-renowned art collection to avoid bankruptcy, Toledo looks to be on the upswing. Unemployment has fallen from 13.5% to 7.7%, and the city now has a budget surplus.

The resurgence of General Motors and Chrysler, with big plants in Toledo, is a primary factor. But Bell, 58, deserves credit, too, for pushing through unpopular political decisions while actively wooing foreign investors.

Given the role that outsourcing played in the region's decline, Toledo's decision to put out the welcome mat for China seems somewhat surprising. During last year's presidential campaign, both candidates looked to score points with swing voters in Ohio by bashing China for threatening U.S. jobs. But while they were trading barbs, the mayor was hosting 200 Chinese businesspeople at a conference downtown. "When your ship is going down, do you care who's bailing water? You only care that the water's going out."

An independent, Bell took office in January 2010 after 16 years as the city's fire chief and 3 years as Ohio's fire marshal. Facing a $7 million budget deficit and $48 million in debt, he forced city unions to accept wage concessions and cut a total of $17 million from the city's budget by privatizing trash collection, consolidating fire departments and selling city-owned properties.

The toughest challenge was getting people to face reality. "When Chrysler and GM cut wages, they didn't see that it would ripple back on us, in the form of less tax revenue. The government had to adjust," Bell says. "There were no good choices. All we tried to do was pick the least damaging ones."

At the same time, he has been pushing to improve Toledo's business climate. His strategy is to promote clusters of businesses around industries where Toledo is strong already: autos, alternative energy and logistics.

Thin-film solar panels, for example, were partially developed at the University of Toledo, making the region a natural hub for solar energy research. First Solar , a company with ties to the school, has a large plant near Toledo, as do several other solar companies. Spain's Isofoton is the newest player, opening a plant in nearby Napoleon. "Jobs in Napoleon, 40 miles west of Toledo, are just as important to him as downtown Toledo," says Rick Stansley, chair of innovation enterprises at the University of Toledo. "He has a very regional approach."

Bell's straight talk and charisma have won over the region's business leaders, many of whom are volunteering on his strategic planning initiative, Future of Toledo. "Mike is the first to say, 'I can't do this myself; I need your help,'?" said Jeannie Hylant, executive vice president of Hylant Group, a Toledo insurance company.

But Bell sees his role as merely opening doors; the rest is up to private enterprise. Sometimes that takes patience. Dashing Pacific's investment, for instance, helped pay off the city's debt, but so far there's no sign of development.

Despite facing reelection this fall, Bell isn't worried. "What I'm attempting to do is lay the foundation. I'm putting seeds in the ground, like a farmer," he says, adding: "Then I get out of it and let business do what they do."