Reviews and recommendations are unbiased and products are independently selected. Postmedia may earn an affiliate commission from purchases made through links on this page.

Article content

Calgary’s favourite expat film director Michael Dowse will apparently be at the helm for Goon 2, but there’s no word yet on a second sequel to FUBAR.

According to a series of profanity-laden tweets from writer and actor Jay Baruchel, who starred in and co-wrote the original Goon, Dowse has agreed to be involved in the hockey sequel (or, to be more specific, will be “directing the mother—–“). The original earned Dowse a nomination from the Directors Guild of Canada and was a hit, at least by Canuck Cinema standards.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

Try refreshing your browser, or

tap here to see other videos from our team.

Calgary director Michael Dowse lined up for Goon 2, no word yet on FUBAR 3 Back to video

Advertisement 2

Story continues below

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

THIS CONTENT IS RESERVED FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.

Unlimited online access to articles from across Canada with one account.

Get exclusive access to the Calgary Herald ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition that you can share, download and comment on.

Enjoy insights and behind-the-scenes analysis from our award-winning journalists.

Support local journalists and the next generation of journalists.

Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword.

SUBSCRIBE TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLES

Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.

Unlimited online access to articles from across Canada with one account.

Get exclusive access to the Calgary Herald ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition that you can share, download and comment on.

Enjoy insights and behind-the-scenes analysis from our award-winning journalists.

Support local journalists and the next generation of journalists.

Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword.

REGISTER / SIGN IN TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLES

Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.

Access articles from across Canada with one account.

Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments.

Enjoy additional articles per month.

Get email updates from your favourite authors.

Sign In or Create an Account

Email Address

or

Article content

Goon told the story of a nice but dim-bulbed hockey enforcer (Seann William Scott) in the minor leagues.

Alison Pill, Liev Schrieber and Eugene Levy also starred.

Dowse, who got his start in Calgary with FUBAR’s low-budget, mock-doc tale of headbangers Dean and Terry, is currently filming the indie rom-com The F Word with Harry Potter star Daniel Radcliffe.

Which means FUBAR fans may be waiting quite awhile for another sequel.

“I think there will be a third in our future, but it’s too early to know where and what. But there are two new members of the family now, so it would probably be sort of like, banger parents. That’s the next phase of these guys’ lives,” Dowse told the National Post way back in 2010.

Sounds good to us, but according to David Lawrence, who played Terry in the two FUBAR films, there is nothing “in the pipes for FUBAR 3, not yet anyway.”

Article content

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories