Thunderbolt and Lightfoot (1974)

One Friday afternoon in 1973, Clint Eastwood received a script called Thunderbolt and Lightfoot. It was written by a 30 year old ballet trained art student called Michael Cimino. Cimino wanted to direct the film but had only done commercials. Eastwood read the script over the weekend, liked what he called “the oddness”, the crazy characters and optioned it on Monday. Meanwhile Cimino agreed to do some much-needed re-writes on Eastwood’s upcoming sequel to Dirty Harry, Magnum Force. On the sets of his two epics films which were to follow this one, The Deer Hunter and Heaven’s Gate, Cimino got the reputation of being difficult to please. Not so here. Eastwood, who was by far the most experienced of those involved, would sometimes suggest a camera angle. Cimino would politely refuse. One night, Jeff Bridges, who was to get an Oscar nomination for his performance as Lightfoot, as he had done two years earlier for The Last Picture Show, came anxiously to Cimino’s door. “I can’t play this character,” he said, “he’s too nice”. Cimino reassured him that he could, that he was the best actor in the world for the part. Recalls Cimino, “Jeff walked out the door reassured and I threw up.”

The film had mixed critical reaction on its first release, but its eccentricities, which seem to have been diluted from the original script which Eastwood found so crazy, are remembered. Its buddy love, road movie story has at least five out-of-the-blue coincidences which give it a shaggy come-as-it-may feel. Jeff Bridges’ baby-faced, pistachio ice cream eating performance and scenes with things like car boots full of rabbits give the film a road runner cartoon quality.

One critic said that the essentially gentle Lightfoot and his air of the pre-socialised child constitutes the real threat to culture in the film. There are certainly many references to Bridges’ youth. George Kennedy’s character resents him for it and for his daffiness and maybe even his handsomeness.

Talk of Bridges’ looks gets us on to what people say is the film’s gay subtext. I’m not so sure. The amount of expressed affection between the two men is certainly a little unusual. One of the first comments Eastwood makes is about the colour of Bridges’ eyes. Bridges does dress up as a woman and the final song’s lyrics are rather romantic. But to 1990s eyes, where we’ve seen so much of this kind of stuff, the hints seem to me pretty minor.

The critic of Time Magazine said that the references to Eastwood’s service in Korea, the paranoid gas station attendant and the slightly comic book situations make this film a commentary on the values of ‘70s America. Again, I think that’s skewing the picture too much. It’s lighter than that. Bridges is called Lightfoot because he takes things lightly. Cimino says that he told Bridges to make Eastwood laugh because nobody’s ever seen him smile in a film before. That’s what I think this film is about. How innocence engages and unsettles.

- Mark Cousins’ original introduction, transcribed from the video below.

(thanks to Luke Meadley and Kaprisky for the video)

Brief thoughts

If there was an intended gay subtext (and according to Cimino there was), how could it be anything other than (in Cousins words) “minor” or subtle in a 1974 Clint Eastwood film? Why does George Kennedy hate Lightfoot so much? Because he’s young??? Note the revulsion of Kennedy, the angriest he gets at Lightfoot is in the scene where Lightfoot kisses him on the mouth. Added to the fact that Cimino himself said the gay subtext was intended from the beginning and that the script was inspired by Truman Capote’s In Cold Blood, once you realise such a reading is there, you see it all over the place, but it’s always extremely subtle and as it’s sub-textual it never impedes on the narrative - which is about two apparently straight friends.

The critic that Cousins cites is the great Robin Wood. From his book of collected works Hollywood from Vietnam to Reagan… and Beyond (it’s long but worth reading in full as Cousins quotes his final point but follows it with the stuff about gay subtext when the whole point of Wood’s piece is the subtext):

The film moves toward the climactic robbery sequence throughout which Lightfoot is disguised as a woman. The narrative pretext for this is fairly flimsy, its logical necessity seeming to lie rather in the development of the relationship. Lightfoot’s masquerade interestingly avoids the obvious twin temptations of female impersonation in the Hollywood cinema—on the one hand, the caricature of femininity, on the other, the playing up of masculine clumsiness and awkwardness in the interests of comedy: without being particularly graceful or ungainly, he makes an attractive and appealing young woman. Significantly, from the point where the disguise is adopted, the film keeps the two men apart for as long as possible, and the sexual overtones are restricted again to the implications of the editing. Lightfoot walking the street in drag is intercut with Thunderbolt removing his clothes in preparation for the robbery; Lightfoot’s masquerade is then juxtaposed with the “erection” of Thunderbolt’s enormous cannon. This culminates in the film’s most outrageous moment: in a washroom Lightfoot, back to camera, bends over the watchman he has knocked out, his skirt raised to expose his ass clad only in the briefest of briefs, from which he extracts a revolver; the film immediately cuts to Thunderbolt, fixing his cannon in its fully erect position. In its recent overt treatments of male homosexuality, the Hollywood cinema has never dared give us anything comparable to that.

The ending, with the bad couple destroyed, initially celebrates the union of the heroes with the abrupt discovery of the relocated schoolhouse and the recovery of the hidden money, a celebration clinched by Thunderbolt’s gift to his buddy of the possession he has always coveted, a white Cadillac. Lightfoot’s declaration that they are “heroes” crystallizes much of the spirit of the ??s interlocking road-movie, buddy-movie, gangster-movie cycles: the heroes of American culture can now exist and operate only outside the confines and norms of the American establishment, the schoolhouse a historical relic of an obsolete socialization. The definition of the heroism is not merely in terms of criminality, but in terms of escaping the constraints of normality. The two men drive off together, not to but away from home: there is no sense of a specific destination, rather of an extended honeymoon after what amounts to a wedding celebration complete with extravagant gift. Of course, Lightfoot is already dying (a delayed reaction to his brutal beating by Red): given the cultural constraints, it is one of the most necessary deaths in the Hollywood cinema. It is important that he be the one to die, rather than the stoical, resolutely and unambiguously masculine Thunderbolt, whose sexuality is, on the level of overt signification, of gender stereotyping, never in question (after all, he is played by Clint Eastwood). It is the essentially gentle Lightfoot, with his indeterminate sexuality, his freedom from the constraints of normality’s gender roles, and his air of pre-socialized child, who constitutes the real threat to the culture.

And in an addendum to the piece above Wood quotes Peter Biskind referring in an article in Jump Cut (Nov/Dec 1974) charmingly titled “Tightass and Cocksucker: Sexual Politics in Thunderbolt and Lightfoot” to the film’s “frank and undisguised contempt for heterosexuality” - (“without at any point acknowledging the 'frank and undisguised’ contempt for homosexuality that pervades our entire culture.” - Robin Wood)

In my opinion, there’s also a brief, playful reference to hanky codes in the way Eastwood and Bridges at different points have shirts tucked into a back trouser pocket.