THUNDEBROLT AND LIGHTFOOT MOVIE CAST

Still from the 1974 film showing Bridges and Kennedy unpacking a cannon, signed by each in blue felt tip. The film earned Jeff Bridges his second career Oscar nomination

Printed photograph signed in ink: "Jeff Bridges", "George Kennedy", B/w 10¼x8. JEFF BRIDGES (b. 1949) is the son of actor Lloyd Bridges and younger brother of Beau. He earned Oscar nominations for his performances in The Last Picture Show (1971), Thunderbolt and Lightfoot (1974), Starman (1984) and The Contender (2000). His other films include The Fisher King (1991), The Big Lebowski (1993) and Seabiscuit (2003). In addition to his acting achievements, Bridges has also written some 200 songs, a talent that he memorably incorporated in The Fabulous Baker Boys (1989), in which he starred as Jack Baker. He won the Academy Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role for his acting in Crazy Heart at the 82nd Academy Awards in 2010. GEORGE KENNEDY (1925-2016) has acted in over 170 movies and TV shows, including roles in Have Gun, Will Travel, Maverick and Rawhide as well as movies like The Dirty Dozen and an Oscar for his role as Dragline in Cool Hand Luke. He's probably best known to modern audiences for his appearance in 1970's Airport and its three sequels, not to mention his role opposite Leslie Nielsen as Capt. Ed Hocken in three Naked Gun movies. Small tears on top corners and bottom left corner. Light surface creases and dents (not seen head on). Slightly soiled. Slightly toned on outer edges. Photograph info attached on verso. Otherwise, fine condition.

This website image may contain our company watermark. The actual item does not contain this watermark

See more listings from these signers

Following offer submission users will be contacted at their account email address within 48 hours. Our response will be to accept your offer, decline your offer or send you a final counteroffer. All offers can be viewed from within the "Offer Review" area of your HistoryForSale account. Please review the Make Offer Terms prior to making an offer.

If you have not received an offer acceptance or counter-offer email within 24-hours please check your spam/junk email folder.