TopBilled:

I am not familiar with all of Clint Eastwood’s films of the 1970s. I found THUNDERBOLT AND LIGHTFOOT a few months ago on Starz streaming. There was no picture for it on the Starz movies page. So I clicked on it thinking it was going to be a western, since it seemed like a good title for a western. Boy was I wrong!

Instead THUNDERBOLT AND LIGHTFOOT is an action/road comedy with crime elements. Clint Eastwood and Jeff Bridges play the title characters.

It was made in 1973 and released in 1974 by United Artists (the last film Eastwood ever did for the independent studio). Supposedly the character names and title come from the Universal adventure film CAPTAIN LIGHTFOOT (1955) starring Rock Hudson. (Hudson’s costar Jeff Morrow played Thunderbolt.) It was director Michael Cimino’s favorite film as a kid.

While referencing classic adventures of yesteryear, Cimino likes to connect all his characters with the sky and with the earth. He does this a lot in HEAVEN’S GATE. It’s one of his trademarks as a director.

Clint Eastwood originally planned to direct THUNDERBOLT AND LIGHTFOOT but then decided to let Cimino do it. Cimino wrote the script and chose what its subject and themes would be.

After watching, I read some user reviews on the IMDb. One person, whose father is now deceased, loves the film but says his father hated it because of its homoerotic undercurrent. Another person, in another write-up, called it a precursor to THELMA & LOUISE, which if you recall had a lesbian undercurrent.

Are these buddy movies really movies about LGBT characters? Or are they mostly straight but made to be read in other ways by different audiences?

Re: the famous scene where Jeff Bridges dresses in drag…the character comes up with the idea all on his own, which leads us to wonder if he’s dressed like this before. It’s part of his “disguise” for the heist.

There’s a scene where he’s just finished dressing and he’s putting lipstick on in front of a mirror. The way he looks at himself is narcissistic. In an interview, Bridges said it was a mind-blowing experience…he claimed it’s like you become your sister in those moments. Supposedly his father Lloyd and brother Beau kidded him endlessly about it.

The on-location on-the-run scenes remind me of THE SUGARLAND EXPRESS. The print on Starz was uncut. Some IMDb reviewers have complained that it’s edited for commercials when it airs on TBS or AMC. I think it’s in need of restoration. It has a yellowed look to it, unless that was the intention of the cinematographer? But I don’t think so.

Here’s a more recent photo of Eastwood and Bridges:

***

Jlewis:

Only five minutes in, we get two great action set-pieces. Clint Eastwood as Thunderbolt poses as a preacher at a rural church with a congregation deeply focused on his sermon. Then he suddenly becomes a target for invading assassin Red Leary (George Kennedy) as the rest of the church clears out in panic.

He does not get so much as a bullet haze, probably because Red is such a lousy shot. Meanwhile, Jeff Bridges as Lightfoot convinces a used car dealer that he has a wooden leg so he can steal a brand new Pontiac under him. Yup, this film opens like Gangbusters.

Two con artists, a hustler and a bank robber, team up and get a bromance going. Ladies of the evening (Catherine Bach plays one and June Fairchild the other…I think) are involved just so you know that it is strictly…bromance…between the two.

The constantly smiling Lightfoot somehow manages to keep his trousers white without any Clorox seen on screen. The boy looks like he belongs on a golf course.

A few quirky incidents happen early on before this comedy crime caper gets much more serious. They change cars by high jacking an older couple’s Buick Riviera at a gas station, attended by hilariously grouchy Dub Taylor in a bit role. The two later hitch a ride with a real loony bin with a gun, a raccoon in a cage and a trunk full of Easter bunnies that he wants to make into bunny stew (but I don’t think any bunnies got hurt during filming).

It is later revealed that Kennedy’s Red is a former gang member with Thunderbolt who felt double crossed but also has an obsession for him that is quite bizarre at times. After he and his comrade Eddie Goody (Geoffrey Lewis playing the part fitting the name) manage to hold the two hostage, we then get the trademark Eastwood fist fight with Kennedy and our bromance now becomes a foursome.

Not that Red is happy about sharing Thunderbolt with Lightfoot since the two of them ”go way back” to their Korea days. Lightfoot teases Red for his homophobia with a mocking hand-over-mouth kiss and, as they say, payback is a b**ch.

Later Lightfoot must dress in drag as part of their job and Red is not so subtle in his reactions. Oh…should I also add that Red is still a virgin? He watches a couple (heterosexual) having sex with great fascination before roping them up accordingly. Oh yes, Red is worth plenty of psycho-examining and George Kennedy plays it all with great gusto.

The basic plot revolves around loot that Thunderbolt’s gang previously stole that is hidden in a one room schoolhouse, but a new school has been built where the old one once was, complicating the situation. In order to get Red from killing him, Thunderbolt convinces them to try robbing the same place with a different set-up to gain all new funds.

Beforehand, they all take on odd jobs, which I guess involve desperate employers who have little concern about past criminal records. Thunderbolt even forgets to include his social security number after he has already gotten his welding position. Lightfoot gets to be a landscaper, which suits him well since he favors the great outdoors.

The Frosty ice cream gig is a clever one for the other two who would have made an amusing Stan and Ollie duo had the character of Red not been written to be so sadistic.

The robbery scenes are well staged, but I didn’t find them any more special than the great many we have seen before in such films like THE ASPHALT JUNGLE and RIFIFI. A few highlights involve Thunderbolt posing as a cop bringing ”criminal” Red in to headquarters and I wasn’t clear how he found the uniform.

Lightfoot does his drag routine to distract and rope up a Western Union guard who spends his boring work hours reading naked girlie mags. The police catch up with them at a movie drive-in and there is that standard chase involving plenty of dented chrome, resembling chases in oh-so-many seventies films (more in that decade than any other, although the much later THELMA & LOUISE would certainly boast one of the biggest).

Regarding the chrome, I should add that Red’s personal car in this movie is a 1951 Mercury coupe, which I reckon is the same one he had when he started his career in crime and, therefore, hadn’t been doing well enough to get a newer model. Older vehicles play interesting roles here along side all of the vintage ’73 ones (i.e. filming ended just before the ’74 crop emerged from Detroit that September).

Our two leads hitchhike on an old rundown ’33 truck, which symbolizes the Great Depression and their state of mind in that moment. Thanks to the miraculous twist of fate, we see them later in a brand new Cadillac.

Endings are not always happy ones and, as we all know, crime does not…always…pay for those involved. Eddie suffers a million dollar wound but does not survive like Forrest Gump. Since Red is so downright nasty, his fate is the bloodiest and even involves one of the stars of THE DOBERMAN GANG franchise.

Paul Williams sings as a personal ode to Thunderbolt in closing, ”Where do I go from here?” Earlier his junior buddy tells Mister Ten Years Too Late, ”If you stick with me, kid, you’re gonna live forever.”

Hot from his success in THE LAST PICTURE SHOW, Jeff Bridges got Oscar nominated in a supporting role, which is curious since he is top-billed and takes up almost equal screen time as Eastwood.

He pretty much plays himself, even commenting on the steel head bass when they ride a boat through Rocky Mountain waters. It was if the star was eager for recreation and wildlife viewing once the cameras stop rolling. From what I gathered in reading, the two leads didn’t get along all that great, with Eastwood feeling upstaged.

I think Jeff was perfectly fine with Clint if not the other way around. Apparently the Big Box Office Star was not happy with way United Artists was promoting them all so his Malpaso quickly stopped using United Artists as a distributor and stuck mostly with Warner Brothers and Universal afterward. It is one of Eastwood’s rare semi-comedy roles and he does not look happy in this genre.

Lots of great Idaho and Montana footage. Director Michael Cimino and cameraman Frank Stanley love their mountain shots. Cimino would show plenty more in THE DEER HUNTER and HEAVEN’S GATE regardless if any mountains were even found in the states they were set.

TopBilled:

When THE MECHANIC was originally released it really underperformed at the box office. Made on a $10 million budget, it only earned back $80,000. Perhaps this was because of the very strongly implied homosexuality between the two main characters played by Charles Bronson and Jan-Michael Vincent.

Screenwriter Lewis John Carlino– whose resume includes other LGBTQIA2S+ stories like THE FOX and THE BROTHERHOOD– claims his original script for THE MECHANIC spelled things out clearly. The gay angle was watered down during production, but is still noticeable in some of the exchanges that take place on screen. One reviewer in 1972 identified the muted sexual orientation of the characters, as if it were a matter of fact.

In one interview Carlino said Steve (Vincent) was supposed to change from using sex to manipulate Arthur (Bronson) to falling in love with him. Not sure if he had a different ending in mind. The way the film ends now, there is a huge betrayal which results in a deadly climax.

Charles Bronson was brave to do the film. Others had passed on it, because they were too afraid of the material. One person that turned down the lead in THE MECHANIC was George C. Scott who would not do it unless all references to the homosexual nature of the characters were eliminated. James Coburn’s name was also attached to the project at one point, though his reasons for backing out are not known.

Maybe Bronson felt a need to stretch himself creatively by doing a different type of role. The most striking thing is how casually Bronson plays it. He has accepted the part knowing full well what the story is about, and he plays it honestly.

There’s a great scene where they go out on a range to shoot clay pigeons and a lot can be said about the symbolism of them shooting rifles together, where Arthur is teaching his young companion how to improve and “get better” at it. Later when they are facing adversaries on a European mountain, they both put their skills to use– almost as if they are united as a couple, and will blast anyone who opposes them.

The age difference between Arthur & Steve works to the story’s advantage– a mentoring process takes place and so does a May-December bromance. They are not shown like a father and son. In addition to the symbolism and the bonding, the seeds for betrayal are sewn. Mixed into this are a few martial arts scenes where Arthur takes Steve to watch two men fighting in a gymnasium.

Violent rituals surround them. Both actors are remarkably comfortable in their scenes together. It’s a brutal and sexy film.

***

Jlewis:

In the early scenes, I kept asking: how does Charles Bronson’s Arthur Bishop get into peoples’ apartments? Also why does everybody keep their curtains open? I realize society was far less paranoid back then, less cautious with their lives, but this is a bit extreme.

Also the characters played by Bronson and Keenan Wynn’s Big Harry McKenna are supposedly a good two decades or more apart in age but the actors don’t look that different in age. (In reality, there is just five years or so between them and the movie does cast Bronson’s character as a full seven years younger than he really is, with Arthur’s date of birth shown on screen.)

Then again, a lot of things in mainstream Hollywood movies make no sense to me.

***

McKenna has a son Steve played by Jan-Michael Vincent, who is so hedonistic that he doesn’t wait long after his dad’s funeral to throw a party. Oh…should I also note that Arthur bumped off Big Harry? Steve, in turn, accepts Arthur teaching him the ropes as a junior apprentice “mechanic” killer.

Yes, this is one of those weird kind of murder stories with nobody being honest with each other. Although Steve confirms it in the end, we wonder how long it will take for him to realize Arthur is his own father’s killer and that his own life is in equal jeopardy.

The body language between these two is all over the place. Sometimes Bronson looks fondly at Vincent as if he is the son he never had. Maybe both can relate with their intense, if very different, father issues? We never learn exactly how Arthur feels about his daddy but obviously Steve hardly bats an eye over the death of his.

Earlier, Harry mocks Arthur about an incident when he was eight and was too afraid to swim…and his own daddy mocked sonny boy in front of him. In contrast, Steve claims to be a good scuba diver, despite us never seeing him do it. Yet both sons follow in their fathers’ profession as Mafia oriented hit-men.

Nice use of the color red. Seats on the plane are red. Also, Bronson’s red bathrobe is a prominent wardrobe accessory. The very red wine that is poisoned is another highlight, the third wine drink showcased on screen.

The Ford Mustang driven by Steve that explodes in the final reel could not be any more scarlet.

Lots of car explosions. Also a car falling off an Italian cliff in semi-slow motion to resemble some sort of…ballet?

I do like all of the southern California and, later, Italian scenery. We see the Los Angeles Zoo and Pacific Marineland. Curious close-ups of various animals that may or may not add symbolism to the story. Survival of the fittest? Lots of birds and fish featured, displaying the same blank expressions on their faces as Bronson. In another scene, we see a man paint a portrait of his pet leopard. The painting shows the feline crouching over a dead deer…which does not exist outside the painting.

Death is very much an illusion to these people. Can happen at any moment. Bodies disappear quickly and without much evidence beyond the accidental for appearance sake. It all reminds me of another movie made in 1995 but set in the 1970s: Martin Scorsese’s CASINO covered the years 1973-79 and featured an ominous desert setting outside of Las Vegas where money was often hidden and bodies often disappeared. (THE MECHANIC was filmed a bit earlier, in the winter of 1971-72, but is a good match to the era that Scorsese recreated.)

A key early scene has Arthur allowing Steve to take charge of the controls in a small plane. Steve displays a bit of his reckless side, since he had never flown one before. Both men are in the profession of killing people and, of course, are unafraid of death themselves since they know nothing in life is permanent, least of all life itself.

Arthur faints at Marineland and almost ”dies.” Something sinister that is exposed later in the story goes on here. Yet we learn that he has no family anymore, long after daddy’s passing. Also no doctor to check in with. Life must not mean much to him, although he has a nice spread with many interesting antiques that will eventually go to somebody after his passing.

His girlfriend (played by Jill Ireland)…actually, she’s a hired sex worker whom he has no emotional connection with…has many interesting Hollywood posters on the walls. Not sure if this was her place or Arthur’s secondary paid-for home. Includes vintage Mary Pickford and KING KONG. Odd assortment. Maybe I am trying to read too much into this film, but it is all the fault of cameramen Richard Kline and Robert Paynter, along with director Michael Winner, who keep showcasing all of the Little Things as if they really matter.

Speaking of posters and paintings, The Garden of Earthly Delights by Hieronymus Bosch is also showcased a lot. Steve enjoys his earthly pleasures, but a print of it is owned by pleasure-less Arthur. Does Arthur study the painting in order to find Steve’s one vulnerable Achilles’ heel?

Overall I had mixed feelings about this movie and, to be honest, did not particularly like it all that much. It is nonetheless interesting in its style with a heavy emphasis on facial close-ups. What exactly is Arthur thinking at all times?

Director Michael Winner made many similar crime dramas in England and would later work on Bronson’s DEATH WISH, the blockbuster that made the star a household name. Yet this movie is rather slow in spots and none of the characters are terribly interesting, so I wasn’t terribly concerned about what happened to them in the end. A lot of early seventies films are rather lopsided in their character development, with too much focus on New Hollywood “artsy” appeal and there is often a certain dullness compared to films made a decade earlier and afterward, when filmmakers were more concerned about viewers actually liking the characters.

Yet I did enjoy the semi-surprising ending, despite sensing it ahead of time. At least it was a better ending than John Huston’s later PRIZZI’S HONOR which lets Jack Nicholson go due to his star power.

TopBilled:

Last week we reviewed THE VICTORS, a big budget war epic with American and European stars. This week’s film — IS PARIS BURNING? — also has an international cast that features big Hollywood names as well as important names from European cinema. A lot of care has been put into the production, so it seems quite “epic.”

The reviews of film critic Bosley Crowther can be found on the New York Times website. I am including Crowther’s picture, because until now, I didn’t know what he looked like (and am guessing most of our readers may not either). I read Crowther’s unflattering review of IS PARIS BURNING?, and I feel the need to address a few points.

In his essay, Crowther seems to get hung up on the question in the title. For him, it is obvious that parts of Paris have been burned during the Nazi occupation…but he also thinks viewers will get ‘burned up’ watching the movie. To be fair, we all have had experiences like this where something we watch on screen fails to live up to our expectations.

Crowther takes particular umbrage with the disjointed nature of the film, which may be a problem he has with the editing. He seems to want the individual characters and their individual subplots to connect more smoothly. Personally, I don’t think that is needed. Most epics work best when they are episodic in nature. IS PARIS BURNING? shows how disjointed and chaotic war can be.

One single event, a large-scale battle, ripples across a nation (or nations) and has lasting impact on a cross-section of people and cultures. Often, it’s effective to intercut between seemingly unrelated scenes, to get a greater sense of the widespread ramifications of the atrocities.

As such, I do not think it is necessary to understand each character or to even know them by name specifically. A film like this is sort of a tapestry of bloodshed and heroism, with many different facets of the wartime experience reflected on the faces and in the hearts of those involved.

We should also understand that someone watching this motion picture in 1966 had probably served in World War II, or was related to someone that had. The characters, especially the nameless ones, would be stand-ins for the real-life men and women that had served in battle. A story like this is always about casualties and survivors, and how life after war is supposed to be a chance for humankind to rebuild.

Crowther does not like the fact that some of the main stars disappear after their sequences play out on screen, with very little follow-up. Perhaps this is because the filmmakers are trying to include as many different subplots as possible, taken from the original source material. Or perhaps they only had some of these actors for a short period of time and all they ever intended to do was a few short scenes, to add to the tapestry. At any rate, I think Crowther is finding too much fault with it.

What I like most about IS PARIS BURNING?, and the reason I wanted to foster a discussion of it this month, is how alive some of the sequences are. Notably, the parts where Paris is liberated from the Nazis. It feels, to me, like a ‘you are there’ moment. Remarkable considering the story was produced two decades after the war ended.

It still seems fresh in the minds of the participants, and as such, it comes across vividly for the viewer. I don’t know about you, but I appreciate it when a movie transports me to a time and a place that occurred before I was born. It helps me learn history better, even with the usual cinematic distortions. But I think this film is actually free of most distortion.

***

Jlewis:

This is the story of a beautiful city – not as we know it today – but as it was in its most perilous and also its most glorious hours. Paris in 1944. after four years of bitter occupation, was seething on the verge of revolt against its Nazi oppressors. With the allies almost at the doorstep, the French resistance in the city, composed of many divergent groups, struggled bitterly among themselves to find the way to liberation.

While there is no questioning of the bravery of the French resistance, Marcel Ophuls suggested in his polarizing documentary full of interviews shot in 1969, LE CHAGRIN ET LA PITIÉ (THE SORROW AND THE PITY), that not all of the French citizens were…quite as…committed to fighting off their occupiers with equal gusto, at least not as much as many would claim they were years later in hindsight.

In a way, they were/are no different than all of the aging white Americans who insist that they always believed that ”black lives matter” even, if we take a time machine back to see how they really behaved decades ago, and find they weren’t quite as progressively minded back then as they may be now. (Side note: we get a fleeting shot of a black soldier among the American troops but don’t blink too fast or you will miss him.) It is common human nature to avoid personal and family danger by conforming with the masses as much as possible rather than take all of the risks.

Yet this 1965-66 production is essentially a Valentine to how most French moviegoers wanted to view themselves– and not try to rock the boat as Ophuls would do. It is backed with a marching score by Maurice Jarre to keep everybody watching feeling patriotic. Also we get plenty of vintage newsreel footage of Paris citizens doing their bit as they prepare for their liberation by the Allies. No wonder it was the fourth biggest box-office draw in France that year.

With all of that said, René Clément tries to be as historically accurate in all departments as possible and, at least in the opening scenes, even takes a few brief pot-shots at his country with vintage clips showing some French citizens doing their usual August sunbathing and other recreational pursuits despite a war still going on. Again, like THE VICTORS, the black and white cinematography (mostly credited to Marcel Grignon, but a whole crew was obviously involved) blends successfully with these vintage newsreel excerpts interspersed.

The gosh-darn-gorgeous Leslie Caron and Alain Delon play our center romantic pair here even though they aren’t together all that much: Françoise Labe and the Gaullist general and future Prime Minister Jacques Chaban-Delmas, who was certainly not bad looking in real life but must have been quite flattered to have Delon play him. Oh…how we must always root for the pretty people on our screens! Yet I should point out that Leslie gives one of the best performances of her career here, especially in her emotional reactions to fellow citizens getting shot suddenly in those final weeks.

The stars glitter this production like stars in the night time sky. Orson Welles plays Swedish consul Raoul Nordling, Charles Boyer is a doctor involved, Claude Rich has two roles but mostly plays General Philippe Leclerc, E.G. Marshall, Simone Signoret, Anthony Perkins (as a GI who dies after tasting his first Paris wine) and even George Chakris of WEST SIDE STORY fame.

In addition, we get all of the familiar who’s who of French celebrities in various historical roles: Pierre Vaneck (who gets the most screen time, it appears, as Maj. Roger Cocteau-Gallois), Jean-Paul Belmondo, Yves Montand, Bruno Cremer (who plays Col. Henri Rol-Tanguy, a leader of a communist faction Francs-Tireurs et Partisans Français working seperately from the Gaullists), Marcel Bizien, Michel Piccoli and Jean-Louis Xavier Trintignant. From the German cinema: Hannes Messemer and Ernst Fritz Fürbringer, among others.

Towering over the cast is the wonderfully poker faced Gert Fröbe (a.k.a. Mister Goldfinger in battle with 007 two years earlier) as Dietrich von Choltitz, the military governor of Paris who must decide whether or not to destroy the city as Germany retreats. The real man, who died within a month after this movie was released, was a very complicated character who disobeyed the orders of the Third Reich.

I feel that Fröbe plays him well with equal complexity, first showing little concern about a proposed destruction but gradually becoming more sympathetic and compassionate as time progresses. Fittingly, one of his first primary scenes shows him witness a rather depraved Hitler played by Billy Frick (this being after an assassination attempt on his life…and, later, we see a major character shooting bullets through his picture on display). He knows which side is losing right from the start and allows his conscience to just give in to the greater cause.

Of course, the biggest box-office draws all get to play the Allied generals involved: Glenn Ford as Omar Bradley, Robert Stack as Edwin Sibert and Kirk Douglas as George Patton. It is understandable why Douglas did not win an Oscar nomination for his role like George C Scott. This trio is all pretty wooden in their portrayals.

As if there isn’t enough novelty with the cast, we also have Gore Videl and Francis Ford Coppola involved with the screenplay. Unfortunately different languages of the international cast did prompt a great deal of obvious dubbing on the soundtrack. Since much of this was done intentionally, this film would have been far better, in my opinion, sticking to subtitles for two thirds of its running time.

1966 was a key year for the proliferation of graphic violence on American and European cinema screens and this production does not flinch away from all of the Nazi executions. In fact, despite being a far more optimistic and uplifting production than THE VICTORS, it is also far more explicit in depicting the carnage involved. Yet we must acknowledge that every death on screen is a heroic stance for future generations to live without tyranny in control.

I tend to see this one as a nice warm up success for the following year’s THE DIRTY DOZEN, perhaps the most financially successful of the guts-and-glory actioners of the decade. It is really all about action and more action, explosions and more explosions. While THE VICTORS stressed that war is hell, IS PARIS BURNING? reminds us also that war can also be the greatest adventure in the lives for those who survive it.

TopBilled:

I have been wanting to discuss THE VICTORS for awhile. It’s one that TCM never airs. As I looked up reviews, I found that most professional critics in 1963 panned it; however, in recent years it seems to have gained a cult following and amateur reviewers online seem to like the film very much.

Director Carl Foreman was a blacklisted writer and producer, probably most-known for writing HIGH NOON (1952). But his dream was to direct a big budget motion picture. He finally received a chance to do so, in the early 60s. As part of a deal with Columbia Pictures, Foreman was allowed to direct his script for THE VICTORS, which was based on a novel called The Human Kind by Alexander Baron.

One reason Columbia backed Foreman on this project is because as a producer on THE GUNS OF NAVARONE (1961), he had scored a huge hit. The studio expected another blockbuster with THE VICTORS. However, because the film was panned by critics and had its U.S. release delayed due to the Kennedy assassination, it did not do well with audiences and was a disappointment for the studio. Foreman never got the chance to direct again, though he continued to produce and was still an influential writer.

THE VICTORS is Foreman’s rebuttal to the glossy heroics of THE GUNS OF NAVARONE. In this picture, Foreman is interested in presenting the darker, grittier elements of World War II. The finished product closely resembles BATTLEGROUND (1949) in terms of how it presents such somber subject matter. There are barroom escapades and romantic dalliances, but the focus is on the psychological drama experienced by a squadron sent to Europe.

What an extraordinary cast. Critics seem to agree that Eli Wallach is most effective as a tough sergeant who crosses paths with a French widow (Jeanne Moreau). Though the real star is Columbia’s leading man Vince Edwards.

Edwards portrays a married soldier who must deal with temptation in the form of an Italian woman (Rosanna Schiaffino). Joining Wallach and Edwards, we have George Peppard and George Hamilton who previously played brothers in MGM’s HOME FROM THE HILL (1960). Hamilton is a likable sort who gets involved with a Belgian girl (Romy Schneider). He soon realizes he is in over his head.

It is discovered that she is not only a prostitute but a schizophrenic as well! Meanwhile, Peppard is assigned lighter material– a carefree relationship with a business woman (Melina Mercouri) who just so happens to sell goods on the black market.

The film is worth watching for all these fascinating characterizations. But it also has some stark realism that I find to be unmatched in most war movies from the 1950s and 1960s. For instance, there is a scene where a dog becomes target practice for a group of soldiers. The puppy had been found and adopted by a sensitive recruit, played by young Peter Fonda.

There is also a shocking scene where the men are propositioned by a nice French boy, who offers to do sexual favors for them in exchange for money. And, of course, I have to mention the film’s most famous sequence, in which an American soldier is placed in front of a firing squad and shot to death by his compadres.

The sequence is based on the real-life execution of Private Eddie Slovik. Slovik was a Michigan native who had gone to France with his unit, but decided he was not cut out for battle. After requesting to be reassigned and having his request refused, he deserted. He was later executed for desertion. Slovik was 24 years old, and his case is one of the rare examples of someone put to death by the U.S. army for this kind of military crime.

Foreman’s film examines cowardice, as well as the brutality of life in battle. None of the men are presented too sentimentally, and though parts of the film’s episodic nature may contain tropes familiar to viewers of Hollywood war films, this effort stands out for its more unflinching depiction of war-as-hell.

Jlewis:

Very much a product of its time with black and white cinematography echoing both the French New-Wave’s biggest hits and the recent 20th Century Fox blockbuster THE LONGEST DAY, this was Carl Foreman’s follow-up to his own previous blockbuster THE GUNS OF NAVARONE. Intriguingly that one, also bankrolled by Columbia, was less artsy and shot in traditional color wide-screen, which makes me wonder if Foreman’s decision with THE VICTORS being shot differently had something to do with THE LONGEST DAY’s success (since filming began in the summer of 1962 shortly after that film made its debut).

Emphasizing a certain Art House look, all of the ladies featured are international in importance: Greek star Melina Mercouri, Jeanne Moreau of JULES ET JIM fame, German goddess Romy Schneider, Italian bombshell Rosanna Schiaffino and equally sexy Elke Sommer, the most successful German import to the British film industry of that time.

Being a British-U.S. co-production, we get male stars from both sides of the big pond: George Hamilton, Vincent Edwards, George Peppard, Eli Wallach, Michael Callan, Albert Finney (appearing in the final three minutes as a Russian soldier!) and Maurice Ronet (adding a nice French-but-influenced-by-the-Nazis lieutenant role). Obviously I can not cover the full cast here since so many names are included in the opening credits, but should note a young break-out star named Peter Fonda playing a new recruit with the doomed-to-die dog.

As with THE LONGEST DAY, everybody seems to be competing for screen time. I have THE GUNS OF NAVARONE on DVD, but have only sat through it once since it was rather long and tedious in spots. Ditto here. Yet don’t get me wrong. It is still a good and generally entertaining effort, if a bit disjointed. Also very depressing, like many anti-war films intended to jolt the viewers.

First note of interest: I love the newsreels presented in the beginning before the main titles, providing a nice montage without any intrusive commentary. Just scenes of the Great War ending with Germany surrendering in 1918, followed by the rise of Hitler and…well, here we go again! Still more newsreels appear after we are introduced to the two young heart throbs of the era in uniform: our two Georges.

One of the newsreels feature the Rockettes in training (and I am clueless why this was included), followed by a mock one featuring our main cast as soldiers who start off in England and then end up either in Italy of 1943, post-Normandy France the year after and, finally, that brutal winter of ’44-45. Newsreels are used throughout to show the passage of time. JULES ET JIM was a bit like this, but only with its World War I scenes and I am sure Foreman was purposely making a few nods to Truffaut while also utilizing his top actress.

The music is quite interesting, if scattered in style. We have Christmas songs, including Frank Sinatra’s ”Have Yourself a Merry Christmas,” contrasting with a brutal winter scene of a traitor soldier being killed by a firing squad. I like the curious jazz choices, even if they sound more sixties-ish than forties-ish, that pop up when Italian children are thieving about and, later, in the liberated French dance hall where Romy Schneider’s Regine catches the eye of George Hamilton’s Trower.

This brings me to the ladies featured, all serving as ”love interests” to our completely heterosexual cast (although a gay scene was allegedly cut before release). Jeanne Moreau’s French maiden gives some nice speeches to Eli Wallach’s Craig in between bedroom scenes together, although I don’t feel she fits the narrative quite as well as Romy and Rosanna Schiaffino’s Maria, the she-may-or-may-not-be-a-widow having an affair with also married Baker (Vince Edwards).

The constantly smiling Michael Callan (whom I recognized instantly from one of my favorite Harryhausen special effects extravaganzas, MYSTERIOUS ISLAND) seems to woo everybody wearing a dress, but the one character getting the most screen time, George Peppard’s Chase, is the last to get his match in a Polish blonde bombshell (Greek accented Melina Mercouri in the best of the female performances).

Wind up toys are an interesting plot item: a music box with dancers is shown early on and later Baker plays with a moving teddy bear toy. Does this suggest that the soldiers feel like wind-up toys themselves in brutal warfare? Then there is some not so subtle religious symbolism: for example, a shot of a dead soldier with the sound of flies on the soundtrack precedes a shot of a crucifix with Jesus.

At the 41 minute mark, we get into some racial commentary (coinciding with and commenting on the civil rights movement of the early sixties) with one group of racist soldiers searching in a favored diner-place for ”c***s” and ”n*****s”. These offensive words were (and still are) apparently allowed in movie soundtracks as long as some sort of progressive message is involved. However, I was expecting to see how the black soldiers were coping in their still segregated troops, but such a scene must have been fleeting and I missed it.

Even if the film is all over the map with mis-matching clothes, much praise is due to the very authentic settings recreated here. The blending of newsreel footage with you-are-there location filming is most impressive. Certainly the firing squad sequence is the most memorable, despite being the simplest with a stark snow covered setting full of soldier witnesses…

War is hell. Simple point made here. Peppard’s Chase survives but is in crutches…and in much better condition than his sergeant Craig. This was certainly not the first of its kind but its timing is rather significant. It was released to British theaters the week before President Kennedy’s assassination and unleashed in the U.S. afterward, signaling an era when World War II epics would increasingly be presented in far darker, less glamorized presentations (echoing the future Vietnam conflict with all of its gritty presentation on TV).

There is also a final climax with both an American and Russian soldier shown dead in the streets in a stark post-war setting that adds commentary on a Cold War era where nobody wins in the end. (The Cuban missile crisis occurred during filming as well, so one can add that to the overall psychology here.)

TopBilled:

I will state upfront — this is a tricky film to write about. If you like it, they will think you’re demented; if you dismiss it, you have no serious credentials. TITUS has a high score on the IMDb…so there must be plenty of decent, demented folks out there!

Julie Taymor’s adaptation of Shakespeare’s first tragedy is almost beyond comprehension. It is bloodthirsty, vengeful and brutal. It’s a story about people who have been at war. They kill– they revel in carnage. They are sick in the head, especially Saturninus, the chief villain (Alan Cumming).

TITUS is Shakespeare’s most violent story, and Anthony Hopkins gives one of his finest performances. This ranks up there for him, with SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, NIXON and the more recent THE FATHER. Hopkins is skilled at playing unlikable but sympathetic characters in impossible situations. His Titus Andronicus is fooled by Saturninus into chopping off his hand in exchange for the return of his sons. Only his sons’ heads are returned, which is something old Titus did not anticipate.

In addition to this horror, Titus’s beloved daughter is maimed and raped. Yes, this is not a tale for the faint of heart. Taymor presents something that is macabre but glamorous. The production is dripping in excess from every conceivable vantage point. And by this, I mean dramatically (with overripe acting) and visually (with over staged set-ups that are accentuated by strange costuming and bold music).

Roger Ebert enjoyed the film, and so do I. No-no-no, we are not demented. I think Ebert says it best when he suggests he likes it because he has grown tired of good taste and restraint. Give us a movie that dares to go all the way, that’s what he says. TITUS has not one bit of good taste, and there is no evidence of restraint in anything Taymor puts on screen.

Case in point: a scene where the young brothers Demetrius and Chiron (Matthew Rhys and Jonathan Rhys Meyers) vamp it up. Taymor has them over-egg the pudding, throwing in homoerotic elements that may or may not have been suggested by Shakespeare. I appreciate how she lets the actors carry on in this kind of artistic freedom. But of course they have to refrain from being too bonkers, that’s part of the ‘fun’…they draw the line without making the characters too insane.

This applies to Hopkins’ portrayal as well. Despite the cartoonish aspects of the plot, he still has to depict Titus as the last real vestige of decency, if he can reach far enough and find it within himself.

Meanwhile, Tamora, queen of the goths is the epitome of dysfunction. She makes Queen Gertrude in Hamlet look like Mother Teresa. Tamora lacks decency and humanity. She’s a monster.

Tamora is played by Jessica Lange, who seems to find pleasure in being handed such a plumb role. The 1990s was a decade where actresses like Jessica Lange, Glenn Close and Sigourney Weaver found it difficult to hold on to their status as leading ladies. Stories about women over 40 were no longer being made by the major Hollywood studios.

TITUS is a film that is decadent, totally outrageous in its presentation of the main themes, and a lot of ‘fun’ to watch if you suspend disbelief (which is what audiences did in Shakespeare’s day).

It’s a shocking revenge story. Witness the revolting moment where Titus decides Tamora’s sons should be beheaded and served to her in a meat pie.

Strip away its “grandeur,” and you’ll discover an allegory about how society works. Often people are ready for the next big battle, justifying violence and loss of life. For war mongers, this approach is the only way to function and survive. And since we still have war mongers in high up positions of government, we can say without a doubt that Shakespeare’s story remains relevant.

***

Jlewis:

As mentioned previously, Shakespeare was the In-Thing in the 1990s, getting a new fresh upgrade with adaptations that were not necessarily set in the time frames of the original stories. We open TITUS with a kid in a modern day kitchen setting with all of his electronic super hero toys keeping him company. Squirting ketchup in his milk and smashing plates. Our story is set in Ancient Rome and, yes, we see the Colosseum here, but the atmosphere is a mix of 1999 with first century B.C. here, motorcycles included.

TITUS ANDRONICUS was one of Shakespeare’s most violent plays, a key reason why it failed to be popular during later centuries like the 19th and 20th, compared to others. Most fans view it as his one big flop and, consequently, it has received far fewer cinematic adaptations than the others.

I guess you could say that this film marked the very apex of the ”anything goes make-Shakespeare-YOUR-own-way” period. Props appear to be left overs from all kinds of movie productions: a Ford Thunderbird is driven alongside a 1930s coupe, plastic helmets abound alongside some rather authentic Ancient Roman ones, curious radio microphones must have been used in some Indiana Jones movie set in the 1930s and outfits are culled from all centuries.

Musically we get a big band jazz swing, compete with trumpets, along with a Studio 54 glitter dance hall. The cast is all multiracial, in conforming with our modern times, and many sport glittery gold eyeliners. This would have looked great as a Star Wars episode. Or a nice tour guide documentary through Cinecittà, the studio where it was shot.

It is a total visual mess, but an engaging mess to watch.

Old pornographic murals copied from the Pompeii ruins adorn some settings, making the atmosphere seem all the more depraved. A lot of, um, back door enjoyment is depicted on the wallpaper. Apparently this film was only rated R? Also no parental warnings on YouTube?

Anthony Hopkins is quite understated here as the lead commander of the Roman Empire seeing his downfall ahead of time. It is among his most memorable performances. Especially when he chops off his hand. Mind you, he is less crazy than the rest of the cast.

Jessica Lange’s Tamora, defeated Queen of the Goths, screams in crazy-cray defiance over her son’s killing (a very muscular Raz Degan, who at least displays the beefcake as he gets knived). You know she will get her revenge on Titus eventually. Also goes topless in one scene… good ol’ Jessica!

Swarmy Alan Cumming is the newly crowned emperor Saturnius who takes a fancy to her and elevates her to empress. Jonathan Rhys Meyers and Mathew Rhys play two of Tamora’s other sons, the latter is quite frisky in his affections for other boys. Harry Lennix is both servant and lover to her as well, plus narrator for us viewers on occasion. Since he is darker toned, a baby she has with him is carefully hidden.

Also the nurse bringing the baby to him gets murdered. She, by the way, is played by Geraldine McEwan who appeared earlier with Emma Thompson in HENRY V. This ties our two movie essentials together.

Lots of murders. Lots of torture. HENRY V ’89 was pretty gory too, but this film can’t get enough of it and goes at it again and again and again. Laura Fraser is quite good in her performance as Lavinia, the frantic daughter of Titus tortured by Tamora and her sons, getting her hands replaced with tree limbs and her tongue cut out.

Lovely! Earlier she was in cahoots with James Frain’s Bassianus, brother of Saturnius who is, of course, doomed like so many others.

Titus has many sons too, played by Angus Macfadyen (as Luccius, the one with the most story material here), Kenny Doughty, Colin Wells and Blake Ritson. Colim Feore plays his brother and a stoic Roman senator, appropriately dressed in suits while everybody else dresses like it is Mardi Gras.

Liked the fantasy scenes involving angels and a sacrificial lamb at altar. Also Lavinia’s dream sequence as she tells her father who her aggressors were. Also enjoy the goofy music score supervised by Elliot Goldenthal that sometimes plays the horrors on screen like it is Monty Python’s Flying Circus.

Besides all of that, well…

I really, really tried my best to like this movie. Honestly. Must admit that I started drifting off into La La Land midway through. There was way too much going on and so much torture (knives being used constantly) that I often struggled to maintain my focus. Everybody was too off the wall for me to feel much sympathy for them.

More than any other film we have profiled here as an essential, I found myself reading more summaries on Wikipedia just to keep up. Not that it was supposed to be terribly complicated and hard to follow necessarily. Just your usual revenge on others tale.

Sometimes a movie just doesn’t hit you the right way. I am sure TITUS deserves critical praise for its innovation and uniqueness. Maybe it just was a bit too avant garde for my tastes? Is it acceptable for me to say that I favored both ROMEO & JULIET and HENRY V over this one, even though they were far more conservative in their approach?

TopBilled:

Kenneth Branagh had a few supporting parts on screen before he directed and starred in his version of HENRY V. He had already been quite successful on the stage, appearing in a variety of roles that were not just limited to Shakespeare’s plays. However, he tends to be remembered for his Shakespearean efforts. Obviously he enjoyed playing the playboy leader King Henry V and that connection with the role translates well in his performance.

Again I read several reviews before re-watching the film. One review from Roger Ebert, and one review from critic Hal Hinson who examined the film in the Washington Post when it was first released, seem to be in agreement. They both consider it a triumph. The two reviewers concur that Branagh infuses the story with a great deal of emotion and sentimentality. More than Laurence Olivier probably did in 1944. Olivier presented some of the scenes a bit sardonically, especially the opening sequence involving the political intrigue prior to the British war against the French.

In terms of British history, this was a hugely significant win for the Brits. The king and his men had been outnumbered five to one by the French knights, yet managed to attain victory.

In terms of theatre history, Shakespeare wrote the play around 1599, nearly two hundred years after the Battle of Agincourt.

Laurence Olivier was a more mature 37 years of age when his film was made, while Branagh was a boyish 29. Branagh’s age was closer to the actual age of King Henry V, when the battle was waged, which was 27. Olivier was once quoted as saying a younger actor doesn’t have the advantage of life experience to appreciate the themes in Shakespeare’s play, but many (including Ebert) think Branagh did just fine. Perhaps Olivier was trying to justify being slightly “miscast.”

The 1944 version is quite restrained overall, and it is certainly a more dignified affair, while the 1989 version is somewhat edgier and contains a lot more violence.

One thing Ebert said– while there was no world war taking place during Branagh’s time, films made in the 1980s were much gorier and bloodier than films produced in the mid-40s. Ebert adds a comment that I think alludes to gang warfare, suggesting the 80s were a deadlier era than the 40s. Some may not agree with that, but the old expression that “men must fight” seems to be one that has significance in any decade. There are all types of full-scale wars.

Some reviewers feel the need to discuss Branagh the director versus Branagh the actor. I would say he’s a bit flamboyant in both regards, whether he is in front of the camera or behind the camera, which adds to his appeal as an entertainer. He likes to make the material meaningful for the audience, even if his skills as a director might be substantially less than his skills as a thespian. Of course he did several other Shakespearean adaptations after HENRY V, including versions of MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING and HAMLET.

Several of Branagh’s early films included his then-wife Emma Thompson in the lead female role. (Branagh and Thompson divorced after Branagh had an affair with Thompson’s costar from HOWARDS END, Helena Bonham Carter.) Despite their off-camera breakup, I would hope that Branagh and Thompson realize what a marvelous screen team they made in these special films. We believe it when Henry courts Katherine and finally proposes to her at the end, after he has cleverly defeated the French.

We also believe that these are two very real people having a very real relationship despite circumstances that might otherwise keep them apart.

***

Jlewis:

To be honest, I have seen my fair share of cinematic Shakespeare and, while I do respect them and appreciate all of the hard work that goes into them, I only watch them when I am required to and not because they are my go-to choice for entertainment. They are like those action adventures and super hero blockbusters that are loaded with endless explosions and poker faced heroes whom I struggle to relate to. I think a major issue for me is that there is often too much effort trying to ”do it right” that I often feel that those involved aren’t exactly enjoying themselves doing it.

On the other hand, I do feel that Kenneth Branagh had a lot of fun working on HENRY V and this fortunately shows on screen. Is he entirely successful in pulling it all off? Maybe not. Yet there is an energy here that is infectious. In addition, his enthusiasm sparked enthusiasm among others in Hollywood and the British film industries to make many more Shakespearian films, prompting an explosion in the nineties. Suddenly The Classics all became ”cool” again, with many alternative concepts tried, namely play adaptations updated to modern times rather than Renaissance times for a change of pace.

Before diving into the Branagh directed and performed version of HENRY V, successfully completed in three months flat in the autumn of 1988 at the famed Shepperton studios in Surrey, I should first reference Lawrence Olivier’s earlier version that involved a great deal more effort and exhaustion…and a full 13 months of production during wartime 1943 and ’44 at Alexander Korda’s Denham studios, involving the bulkiest of Technicolor cameras.

Although the later version may be more entertaining overall, I do favor the visual concept of the former more. We open with a set-in-1600 recreation of the Globe theatre with the performers working with bare sets and the women characters played by teenage boys, then gradually the sets become more realistic and actual women play women as we, the viewers along with the patrons attending the theatre, imagine the story come to life. Art deco sets with stylized backgrounds later morph into a you-are-there pasture where the 1415 Battle of Angincourt is waged.

It is important to note Olivier’s unique approach since Branagh both pays homage to it while also going off in his own direction. Instead of starting in a theatre, we begin with our narrator, one very animated and feisty Derek Jacobi, in the backdrop of a 1980s movie studio. Later Derek interrupts our story on occasion in various modern day settings in rural England. This brings back fond memories I have of those great 1970s Encyclopedia Britannica films shown on 16mm projectors in school that often featured a modern day host literally stepping into The Play so that we the viewers can get more acquainted with the characters.

Rather than get stylized in some of the sets, Branagh goes for gritty realism with battles full of mud and blood. Because the former film was filmed during wartime, the battle scenes were a little more impressionistic. 1989 was not a war year and audiences weren’t seeking ”escapist” entertainment, so nothing is held back in depicting the carnage. I read the following quote in a 2001 Halliwell Guide edited by John Walker but I am not sure of the original source periodical: according to Branagh, ”The more I thought about it, the more convinced I became that here was a play to be reclaimed from jingoism and its World War Two associations.”

A key plot point is the romance between King Henry and Catherine (or Katharine) of France, played by Branagh’s then wife Emma Thompson in this version. In the older version, Olivier was saluting British-French comradeship, despite the Hundred Years War setting, by showing how two nations could find common ground in the end.

Fittingly, his version wrapped production during the same summer of D-Day and the liberation of Paris, when it was important for the Allies to resurrect France from the ashes of Nazism. In Branagh’s case, there is no hidden message of solidarity among countries here. Instead England and France must keep wars going for the sake of…keeping wars going.

A very exhausted Henry seems to have even forgotten what causes he is fighting for as the battles get bloodier and bloodier. I guess Branagh is simply saying here that war is pointless regardless of what countries are involved, but romance can override any storm.

Getting more to the overall plot, Henry is one whose arrogance often gets the best of him. He claims he is the rightful heir to the French throne, but the French Dauphin (Michael Maloney), son of Charles VI (played by Paul Scofield, still going strong two decades after A MAN FOR ALL SEASONS), sends him golf balls as a critical attack gift.

This spurs our feisty ruler into action. Henry has plenty of luck on his side, including his survival of an assassination attempt (the famous Southhampton Plot). Patrons to the play in 1600 would have previously seen earlier Shakespearian hits involving Richard II and the 2-part Henry IV, so the ongoing saga of Henry V would have continued much like a prime-time soap Dallas or Dynasty with familiar recurring characters who need no re-introduction.

One plus that the later version has over the former is that the dialogue is slower and easier to follow. Characters talk here much like they do in GLADIATOR or LORD OF THE RINGS. Personally I feel the ’44 version has everybody, including Olivier and my beloved Robert Newton, speaking way too fast that you can not understand half of what they are saying. Obviously 1980s video-game button-pushing audiences had far less patience for this sort of thing and the newer version adapts accordingly.

Nonetheless the Chicago Film Critics Association awarded it ”best foreign language film.” Huh?!!

There are a lot of familiar faces in this version, besides Scofield and Thompson. Judi Dench and Christian Bale in his pre-BATMAN phase are featured in lesser roles, but will be recognized instantly in a before-they-were-famous way.

Dench already had a successful career prior to this film, including a previous HENRY V for TV almost three decades previously, but she still wasn’t a household name just yet in 1989. Ian Holm will be familiar to those who saw ALIEN and CHARIOTS OF FIRE. The older Alec McCowen, who plays the Bishop of Ely, also had a pretty fruitful career leading up to this, being a star in many fifties classics such as THE CRUEL SEA and A NIGHT TO REMEMBER.

I could run down through the full cast list (Robbie Coltrane and Brian Blessed, in particular, got plenty of praise at the time for their performances), but the main focus here is our lead star Branagh, who is…pretty good…as King Henry. It is fair to say that Branagh is a brilliant director and better at it than he is as an actor. It is his control over the other performances that makes this a good film, rather than his performance specifically.

Oh…he is still good. I certainly could not pull it off like he does! Yet there are some moments that prompt unintentional chuckles from my end, like the way he grits his teeth during his Crispin’s speech which reminds me humorously of Leonard Whiting going all out in ROMEO & JULIET with his ”I defy you stars” bit.

During the early parts of the movie, Branagh does come off a bit like Anthony Michael Hall in a John Hughes movie with a hair style to match (this film literally screams 1980s here despite its antiquated costumes), but he evolves as the war scenes get increasingly intense.

I love his later ”for I am Welsh, you know” speech with a face full of scars and dirt, almost like a Welsh miner who has just narrowly survived death on the job. Yes, I can understand why he earned an Oscar nomination for Best Actor (if losing to Daniel Day-Lewis in MY LEFT FOOT).

We do have some great chemistry between the lovebirds. I am sure Olivier would have rather wooed Vivien Leigh as Catherine/Katharine than Renée Asherson in his version, but Branagh was blessed with Emma Thompson here. I love Emma in just about anything she appears in, but she is a trifle bland here, despite flawless French.

Granted, her role just might have been shorter on screen than Asherson’s and even Judi Dench’s previously, although I would have to count the minutes to be certain. In typical Emma fashion, she at least does a great job playing hard to get, forcing Branagh’s Henry to work harder than usual in wooing her.

Kenneth MacMillan’ cinematography is far moodier and darker than the glossy colorful Shakespearean pics of yesteryear, including Olivier’s, but there are a few bright spots here and there. As was trendy at the time, a third of the film is shot with candle torches inside. The one shot repeated in all of the trailers shows Henry on his horse silhouetted against a fire red backdrop, a wonderful dramatic shot. Henry wears red while others often wear gray, brown and black in contrast, no doubt a decision of award winning costume designer Phyllis Dalton.

I must say that I’ve enjoyed both versions of HENRY V equally even if their concepts are radically different.