TopBilled:

I am not familiar with all of Clint Eastwood’s films of the 1970s. I found THUNDERBOLT AND LIGHTFOOT a few months ago on Starz streaming. There was no picture for it on the Starz movies page. So I clicked on it thinking it was going to be a western, since it seemed like a good title for a western. Boy was I wrong!

Instead THUNDERBOLT AND LIGHTFOOT is an action/road comedy with crime elements. Clint Eastwood and Jeff Bridges play the title characters.

It was made in 1973 and released in 1974 by United Artists (the last film Eastwood ever did for the independent studio). Supposedly the character names and title come from the Universal adventure film CAPTAIN LIGHTFOOT (1955) starring Rock Hudson. (Hudson’s costar Jeff Morrow played Thunderbolt.) It was director Michael Cimino’s favorite film as a kid.

While referencing classic adventures of yesteryear, Cimino likes to connect all his characters with the sky and with the earth. He does this a lot in HEAVEN’S GATE. It’s one of his trademarks as a director.

Clint Eastwood originally planned to direct THUNDERBOLT AND LIGHTFOOT but then decided to let Cimino do it. Cimino wrote the script and chose what its subject and themes would be.

After watching, I read some user reviews on the IMDb. One person, whose father is now deceased, loves the film but says his father hated it because of its homoerotic undercurrent. Another person, in another write-up, called it a precursor to THELMA & LOUISE, which if you recall had a lesbian undercurrent.

Are these buddy movies really movies about LGBT characters? Or are they mostly straight but made to be read in other ways by different audiences?

Re: the famous scene where Jeff Bridges dresses in drag…the character comes up with the idea all on his own, which leads us to wonder if he’s dressed like this before. It’s part of his “disguise” for the heist.

There’s a scene where he’s just finished dressing and he’s putting lipstick on in front of a mirror. The way he looks at himself is narcissistic. In an interview, Bridges said it was a mind-blowing experience…he claimed it’s like you become your sister in those moments. Supposedly his father Lloyd and brother Beau kidded him endlessly about it.

The on-location on-the-run scenes remind me of THE SUGARLAND EXPRESS. The print on Starz was uncut. Some IMDb reviewers have complained that it’s edited for commercials when it airs on TBS or AMC. I think it’s in need of restoration. It has a yellowed look to it, unless that was the intention of the cinematographer? But I don’t think so.

Here’s a more recent photo of Eastwood and Bridges:

***

Jlewis:

Only five minutes in, we get two great action set-pieces. Clint Eastwood as Thunderbolt poses as a preacher at a rural church with a congregation deeply focused on his sermon. Then he suddenly becomes a target for invading assassin Red Leary (George Kennedy) as the rest of the church clears out in panic.

He does not get so much as a bullet haze, probably because Red is such a lousy shot. Meanwhile, Jeff Bridges as Lightfoot convinces a used car dealer that he has a wooden leg so he can steal a brand new Pontiac under him. Yup, this film opens like Gangbusters.

Two con artists, a hustler and a bank robber, team up and get a bromance going. Ladies of the evening (Catherine Bach plays one and June Fairchild the other…I think) are involved just so you know that it is strictly…bromance…between the two.

The constantly smiling Lightfoot somehow manages to keep his trousers white without any Clorox seen on screen. The boy looks like he belongs on a golf course.

A few quirky incidents happen early on before this comedy crime caper gets much more serious. They change cars by high jacking an older couple’s Buick Riviera at a gas station, attended by hilariously grouchy Dub Taylor in a bit role. The two later hitch a ride with a real loony bin with a gun, a raccoon in a cage and a trunk full of Easter bunnies that he wants to make into bunny stew (but I don’t think any bunnies got hurt during filming).

It is later revealed that Kennedy’s Red is a former gang member with Thunderbolt who felt double crossed but also has an obsession for him that is quite bizarre at times. After he and his comrade Eddie Goody (Geoffrey Lewis playing the part fitting the name) manage to hold the two hostage, we then get the trademark Eastwood fist fight with Kennedy and our bromance now becomes a foursome.

Not that Red is happy about sharing Thunderbolt with Lightfoot since the two of them ”go way back” to their Korea days. Lightfoot teases Red for his homophobia with a mocking hand-over-mouth kiss and, as they say, payback is a b**ch.

Later Lightfoot must dress in drag as part of their job and Red is not so subtle in his reactions. Oh…should I also add that Red is still a virgin? He watches a couple (heterosexual) having sex with great fascination before roping them up accordingly. Oh yes, Red is worth plenty of psycho-examining and George Kennedy plays it all with great gusto.

The basic plot revolves around loot that Thunderbolt’s gang previously stole that is hidden in a one room schoolhouse, but a new school has been built where the old one once was, complicating the situation. In order to get Red from killing him, Thunderbolt convinces them to try robbing the same place with a different set-up to gain all new funds.

Beforehand, they all take on odd jobs, which I guess involve desperate employers who have little concern about past criminal records. Thunderbolt even forgets to include his social security number after he has already gotten his welding position. Lightfoot gets to be a landscaper, which suits him well since he favors the great outdoors.

The Frosty ice cream gig is a clever one for the other two who would have made an amusing Stan and Ollie duo had the character of Red not been written to be so sadistic.

The robbery scenes are well staged, but I didn’t find them any more special than the great many we have seen before in such films like THE ASPHALT JUNGLE and RIFIFI. A few highlights involve Thunderbolt posing as a cop bringing ”criminal” Red in to headquarters and I wasn’t clear how he found the uniform.

Lightfoot does his drag routine to distract and rope up a Western Union guard who spends his boring work hours reading naked girlie mags. The police catch up with them at a movie drive-in and there is that standard chase involving plenty of dented chrome, resembling chases in oh-so-many seventies films (more in that decade than any other, although the much later THELMA & LOUISE would certainly boast one of the biggest).

Regarding the chrome, I should add that Red’s personal car in this movie is a 1951 Mercury coupe, which I reckon is the same one he had when he started his career in crime and, therefore, hadn’t been doing well enough to get a newer model. Older vehicles play interesting roles here along side all of the vintage ’73 ones (i.e. filming ended just before the ’74 crop emerged from Detroit that September).

Our two leads hitchhike on an old rundown ’33 truck, which symbolizes the Great Depression and their state of mind in that moment. Thanks to the miraculous twist of fate, we see them later in a brand new Cadillac.

Endings are not always happy ones and, as we all know, crime does not…always…pay for those involved. Eddie suffers a million dollar wound but does not survive like Forrest Gump. Since Red is so downright nasty, his fate is the bloodiest and even involves one of the stars of THE DOBERMAN GANG franchise.

Paul Williams sings as a personal ode to Thunderbolt in closing, ”Where do I go from here?” Earlier his junior buddy tells Mister Ten Years Too Late, ”If you stick with me, kid, you’re gonna live forever.”

Hot from his success in THE LAST PICTURE SHOW, Jeff Bridges got Oscar nominated in a supporting role, which is curious since he is top-billed and takes up almost equal screen time as Eastwood.

He pretty much plays himself, even commenting on the steel head bass when they ride a boat through Rocky Mountain waters. It was if the star was eager for recreation and wildlife viewing once the cameras stop rolling. From what I gathered in reading, the two leads didn’t get along all that great, with Eastwood feeling upstaged.

I think Jeff was perfectly fine with Clint if not the other way around. Apparently the Big Box Office Star was not happy with way United Artists was promoting them all so his Malpaso quickly stopped using United Artists as a distributor and stuck mostly with Warner Brothers and Universal afterward. It is one of Eastwood’s rare semi-comedy roles and he does not look happy in this genre.

Lots of great Idaho and Montana footage. Director Michael Cimino and cameraman Frank Stanley love their mountain shots. Cimino would show plenty more in THE DEER HUNTER and HEAVEN’S GATE regardless if any mountains were even found in the states they were set.