Pinnacle Systems, Inc

Pinnacle Systems, Inc, a part of Avid Technology, Inc, is an industry leader in providing a complete set of home video editing and TV viewing tools for the consumer market. The company's product lines including Pinnacle PCTV, Dazzle, Pinnacle ShowCenter, and its flagship Pinnacle Studio line, including cover the needs and requirements of any level of video storytellers or consumers who simply want to enjoy TV from their computer. Pinnacle Systems has received nine prestigious Emmy Awards for its technical innovations and carries the commitment to help consumers enhance, preserve and share their memories with ease. For more information, visit www.pinnaclesys.com.

Avid Technology, Inc

Avid is a worldwide leader in tools for film, video, audio, 3D animation, gaming and broadcast professionals - as well as for home audio and video enthusiasts. Avid professional and consumer brands include Avid, Digidesign, M-Audio, Pinnacle Systems, Sibelius, Softimage and Sundance Digital. The vast majority of primetime television shows, feature films, commercials and chart-topping music hits are made using one or more Avid products. Whether used by seasoned professionals or beginning students, Avid's products and services enable customers to work more efficiently, productively and creatively. Avid received an Oscar statuette representing the 1998 Scientific and Technical Award for the concept, design, and engineering of the Avid Film Composer system for motion picture editing. For more information about the company's Oscar, Grammy and Emmy award-winning products and services, visit www.avid.com.

Product features, specifications, system requirements, and availability are subject to change without notice. Promotions and discounts are subject to availability and change without notice. All prices are MSRP for US only and are subject to change without notice. Contact your local reseller for prices outside the US Avid, Digidesign, Film Composer, M-Audio, Pinnacle Systems, Sibelius, Softimage, Sundance Digital, the Pinnacle Pinwheel logo, Pinnacle PCTV, Dazzle, Pinnacle ShowCenter, Pinnacle MobileMedia, and Pinnacle Studio are trademarks or registered trademarks of Avid Technology, Inc or its affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. Oscar is a trademark and service mark of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Emmy is a registered trademark of ATAS/NATAS. Grammy is a trademark of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, Inc. All other trademarks contained herein are the property of their respective owners.

1 Sources:

The NPD Group/Retail Tracking/Consumer Video Editing (Annual 2007) - US Based on consumer sales for four European countries (DE, FR, IT and GB cumulated) annual 2007 in the GFK Retail-Market.

2 Complete HD workflow with Blu-ray authoring available only in Pinnacle Studio Plus version 12 and Pinnacle Studio Ultimate version 12.

Phoenix Software