Pinnacle Studio is an excellent video editing software originally launched by Pinnacle Systems. It’s a powerful video editing tool that enables creators to make precise video productions and movies with a ton of professional-level editing features such as color correcting, time-lapse, motion tracking, multi-camera editing, video stabilization, screen recording, and so much more.

Now introducing Pinnacle Studio 26:

Pinnacle Studio 26 comes with a range of new and improved features to deliver the smoothest video editing experience to its users. Pinnacle Studio 26 is faster, finer, and more efficient than its older versions. Based on numerous customer feedback, it has upgraded the system and added concrete improvements to enhance user experience by changing the behavioral logic and resource management and introducing a new proxy codec. In this blog, we will explore all the latest features that are exclusive to the most advanced version of Pinnacle Studio, the Pinnacle Studio 26

New advanced features of Pinnacle Studio 26:

More stability:

Pinnacle Studio 26 promises improved product stability by performing dozens of bug fixes in more than 200 areas to improve overall performance. As a result, it can be counted as the most stable video editing tool to exist to date. It promises to deliver the smoothest and most streamlined video editing experience to its users.

Improved product performance:

Pinnacle Studio 26 has improved its software in various user-identified areas, including software launch time, interface, product preview responsiveness, launch time, resource utilization, as well as import and export speed. The features that are responsible for improved performances are:

Apple ProRes is a smart proxy format that introduces improved preview, timeline rendering, playback, and responsiveness in editing.

It has modified the behavioral logic to lessen rendering delays and eliminate unnecessary system refresh.

a dropdown displaying project preview quality options that customers can choose from to improve performance.

Exporting the final projects and importing clips to the library can be performed with more speed.

Keyframe editing:

There is a new keyframe management tool that enables users to modify groups of keyframes and add their unique customizations, including looping animations, zoom animations, light flashes, custom pan, color or brightness changes, and various others. Moreover, groups of keyframes spanning parameters, for example, brightness, transparency, or saturation, can be created, copied, pasted, and deleted to other clips or to some other parameter of the same clip.

Enhanced user interface:

With Pinnacle Studio 26, users can enjoy a streamlined editing experience and improved usability. The software comes with a better installation process, an advanced control panel, in-product help, and so much more. The advanced control panel gives users more editing control. This version of Pinnacle Studio includes revised tooltips and interface strings that improve clarity.

Range of exclusive and unique tools:

Video Masking:

With the video masking feature, you can now improve, combine, or alter video footage. This tool enables users to evolve their stories and edit each frame of their creative videos. This tool can hide any distracting objects that may appear on your clips to create pro-level videos. Moreover, with Mask Creator, you can blur the background, brighten faces from your clips, reveal text, and do much more with your creation. Possibilities are endless with the video masking feature, enabling creators to layer clips so that the video can create illusions or create new amazing scenery. Video masking allows creative professionals to create unique montages and clone characters on the clip. This tool has the power to seamlessly blend the transition of one clip to the next with amazing walk-by and wipe transition options.

Blend modes:

With Blend mode, creators can choose their preferred clip blending option. It offers numerous options, such as a superimposed effect, blending masked areas, and producing light bleeds or other special effects. Blend modes can combine the color or brightness of a selected clip with an underlying clip, giving your videos an artistic touch.

360-degree Video Editor:

This is an interesting video editing tool that gives a fun twist to your videos by introducing 3D effects and fun perspectives. With this tool, you can edit your 360-degree footage to create stunning visuals.

Color grading:

New color grading features have been integrated into the Pinnacle Studio 26 software. The color grading option offers users advanced control options such as Tone Curve, Color Wheel, Selective Vectorscope, and HSL Tuning so that they can adjust the color, shadows, midtones and the highlights.

Smart object tracking:

Smart object tracking is an intelligent tool that can perform shape-aware motion tracking, enabling professionals to apply masks, objects, or characters in your videos, such as pets, cars, or drones. Also, with smart object tracking, users do not need to re-create the selected masks to add to all the frames, as it can automatically add masks by identifying the masked object and tracking the rest of the selected frames.

Split screen template creator:

This tool is usually used to create promo videos and comparison videos where two or even more videos that were originally filmed separately can be displayed on a single screen. It can combine several videos to one screen and creatives can use it to highlight some portions of their stories.