Award Winning Comedian

Schalk Bezuidenhout had been building his career on the comedy club circuit when he got his big break being chosen to be the Supporting Act on Trevor Noah‘s Nation Wild Tour, he was featured on Comedy Central as a Support Act for Barry Hilton, he is a SA Comics Choice Nominee and Winner and he is fast becoming one of South Africa’s most sought after comedians.

Schalk Bezuidenhout was born in the very Afrikaans suburb of Kempton Park in Johannesburg. He grew up in a very Afrikaans family, in a very conservative way. He went to an Afrikaans pre-primary, primary, and high school. The traditional Afrikaans way of living was a good life. Your mother’s breast milk would be brannewyn en coke, you would walk kaalvoet toe school, and you’d hide your lunch money when a black man walked past. But by the age of 10, life started to become more and more difficult for poor old Schalkie.

His family and friends stood back as they watched Schalk evolve from an Afrikaans conservative caterpillar into a beautiful dramaqueen butterfly, complete with a moustache and furry afro. At first it was just doing cartwheels on the rugby field, and later more eccentric things like making friends with the neighbour’s daughter… who was black! It was thus obvious to Schalk’s parents that he would study drama, and to help numb the pain they sent him away to study at the University of Cape Town.

While studying in Cape Town Schalk slowly began to realise that there was so much more to life than boerewors and rugby. He quickly became conscious of the fact that he could still be a proud Afrikaans boy, whilst wearing skinny jeans.

Schalk did not make it into the Theatre and Performance course at UCT and was forced to do a general BA with drama as a major. During this ‘gap year’ of this, all he had was a witty brain and a dream, so he did what any person in his situation would do. That’s right, he went into comedy, in April 2011.

Schalk is not afraid to say it like it is and talks about how he perceives things through his De la Rey spectacles. On stage he is fun and energetic and appeals to people of all kinds and colours (and yes, even black people. As a matter of fact, especially black people!).

Schalk Bezuidenhout has come a far way in the short amount of time that he has been doing comedy. He has had the privilege to perform at some great venues, alongside some even greater comedians

On stage Schalk is fun and energetic and appeals to people of all kinds and colours.

“Bezuidenhout is known for his quirky dress sense and the way he lets the audience in on what it’s like to be an Afrikaans-speaking young person… His unique material and delivery allow him to stand out in a sea of stand-up comedians” – Helen Herimbi

Performance Highlights:

Made it to the finals of the Graca Comedy Showdown in Johannesburg

Stand-up performance every year at National Arts Festival since 2011.

Performed on the Live @ 5 on 5fm.

Performed at all the main comedy venues in Johannesburg, Cape Town and Durban.

Performed in “Gemengde Vrugte: Afrikaans stand-up komedie” at The Stage in Belville, Ou Meul Teater in Paarl, Die Skuur Teater in Hermanus.

Headline Act at Cape Town Comedy Club and Parkers Comedy & Jive.

Performed on Live @ Parker’s on Comedy Central with Barry Hilton

Winner of the Cape Town Graca Comedy Showdown

Performed at the CT Nandos Comedy Festival @ The Artscape Opera House

Performed at Blacks Only for 3 years in succession

Performed at Keeping You in Stitches 2 and 3 (with Riaad Moosa).

Various corporate and charity events.

Member of Four Young Whites (which has performed at various venues around CT and JHB).

Nominee and winner of the Savanna Newcomer Award at the Comics Choice Awards 2013

Nominee in Breakthrough Act at the Comics Choice Awards 2014.

Jive Cape Town Funny Festival (full run)

Voorkamerfest

Trevor Noah’s NationWILD Tour 2014 and 2015.

Trevor Noah’s opening act 2015.

Nominee and winner of the Intermediate Award at the Comics Choice Awards 2015.

Kanna Award for Best Up and Coming Artist 2015.

Recorded his own Comedy Central special