Robert Vaughn, the debonair, Oscar-nominated actor who portrayed superspy Napoleon Solo in the hit 1960s TV series “The Man From U.N.C.L.E.,” died Friday at age 83 after a brief battle with leukemia.

“Mr. Vaughn passed away with his family around him,” his manager, Matthew Sullivan, told entertainment site Deadline. “The actor is survived by wife Linda, son Cassidy and daughter Caitlin.”

He became a household name for his Bond-esque role on NBC’s “The Man From U.N.C.L.E.,” where his suave Solo was paired with David McCallum’s blond Russian Illya Kuryakin to battle the Cold War evildoers of T.H.R.U.S.H.

“Girls age 9 to 12 liked David McCallum because he was so sweet,” Vaughn said in a 2005 interview. “But the old ladies and the 13- to 16-year-olds liked me because I was so detached.”

The pop-culture phenomenon, which ran from 1964 to 1968, was part of a series of secret agent shows such as “I Spy,” ”Mission: Impossible,” ”Secret Agent” and the spoof “Get Smart.”

Vaughn’s big-screen career started 60 years ago as an extra in Cecil B. DeMille’s “The Ten Commandments.”

He was nominated for an Oscar for his supporting role in 1959’s soapy “The Young Philadelphians,” with Paul Newman, in which he played a wounded war veteran accused of murder.

The following year, he co-starred in John Sturges’ 1960 Western “The Magnificent Seven,” playing a traumatized gunslinger.

“We thought, ‘This picture’s gonna be the bomb of all time,’” he told The Hollywood Reporter in September about “The Magnificent Seven.”

”Well, not only was it a great success at the box office and continues to be, but after ‘Casablanca,’ it’s the most-often-shown motion picture on American television. It’s a good yarn, well told, with a lot of sexy young guys,” he said.

Vaughn shared an unsavory memory from the location shoot in Mexico.

“We pretty much were on the pot [due to food poisoning] when we weren’t drinking margaritas and smoking pot,” he said.

In 1968’s “Bullitt,” he appeared as ambitious politician Walter Chalmers, who’s out for the head of Steve McQueen’s San Francisco police Lt. Frank Bullitt.

During the heyday of disaster flicks, he joined an all-star cast and played another politician, Senator Parker, in 1974’s “The Towering Inferno.”

He received an Emmy for his part in 1977’s miniseries “Washington: Behind Closed Doors” on ABC. He also was nominated for an Emmy for his portrayal of President Woodrow Wilson in “Backstairs at the White House” on NBC in 1979.

In 1981, he took a comedic turn in “S.O.B.,” playing the head of Capitol Studios. And two years later, he was a villainous multimillionaire in the campy “Superman III” with Christopher Reeve and Richard Pryor.

Vaughn, who was born in New York City, went to high school in Minneapolis and attended the University of Minnesota, but quit after a year and moved to Los Angeles, where he studied drama and completed his master’s degree. He also earned a Ph.D. in communications at USC.

A liberal Democrat, Vaughn became passionately opposed to the Vietnam War and delivered anti-war speeches around the country.

His last movie, “Hoodlum & Son,” was released in 2003, and he appeared in his final TV show, “Coronation Street,” in 2012.

He had remained busy, though, and recorded a podcast for The Hollywood Reporter in September.

“Like most actors, I just go home and wait for the phone to ring,” he told the site. “And it’s been ringing for a long time.”

With Post wires