Actor Robert Vaughn, best known for playing suave spy Napoleon Solo in The Man From U.N.C.L.E., has died at age 83, according to his manager, Matthew Sullivan.

"Mr. Vaughn passed away with his family around him," Sullivan said. The actor had briefly battled acute leukemia.

He is survived by his wife Linda, his son Cassidy and his daughter Caitlin.

More recently, he had ongoing roles in TV series such as Coronation Street and Hustle, where he played the con man Albert Stroller.

Born on Nov. 22, 1932 at Charity Hospital in New York City, he was the son of Walter Vaughn, a radio actor and Marcella Vaughn, a stage actress.

His parents divorced when he was only six months old and he was sent to live with his grandparents in Minneapolis, where he said his childhood was miserable. "I cried all the time and I was always getting beat up."

However, he was bitten by the show business bug, he told The Independent in a profile in 2011.

"There was absolutely no question in my mind – from the first moment I was conscious of it, when I was about six, I wanted to be an actor," he said.

"It was so thrilling to watch people on stage saying lines and making people happy – even when I didn't know what it was, I could see what a pleasure it was for the actors and what a pleasure it was for the audience."

He later moved to Los Angeles, where he earned a master's degree in theatre at Los Angeles State College of Applied Arts and Sciences.

Vaughn did work occasionally in theatre, but his career began as a bit actor on television, in such series as Gunsmoke, Father Knows Best, Wagon Train and The Dick Van Dyke Show.

TV spy series was a hit

His first major role was in the 1963 TV series The Lieutenant, set on a military base. That work brought him to the attention of producer Norman Felton, who offered him the role of Napoleon Solo in The Man from U.N.C.L.E., a part that would secure his image as the debonair secretive operator.

The series, which ran from 1964-68, was one of the most popular television series of the 1960s and made Vaughn an international television star, with a big following in the U.K.

Vaughn's urbane superspy Napoleon Solo teamed with Scottish actor David McCallum's Illya Kuryakin, a soft-spoken, Russian-born agent.

The pair, who had put aside Cold War differences for a greater good, worked together each week for the mysterious U.N.C.L.E. (United Network Command for Law and Enforcement) in combatting the international crime syndicate THRUSH.

"Girls age nine to 12 liked David McCallum because he was so sweet," Vaughn remarked in a 2005 interview in England. "But the old ladies and the 13- to 16-year-olds liked me because I was so detached."

In his autobiography A Fortunate Life, Vaughn recalled that women would break into his Los Angeles home to wait for him.

The cheaply made series couldn't compete with the glamour of the James Bond franchise and the actor worried his career would go nowhere, until he got an offer from pal Steve McQueen to make Bullit in 1968.

Emmy for 1970s miniseries

Vaughn went on to make the transition to feature films and starred in 1974's The Towering Inferno, 1983's Superman III and 1986's Delta Force and Black Moon Rising.

He received an Emmy Award in 1978 for miniseries Washington: Behind Closed Doors in which he played a presidential aide and a nomination the following year for Backstairs at the White House (1979), where he took the role of President Woodrow Wilson.

A liberal Democrat, he was active in the movement against the Vietnam War and delivered anti-war speeches at colleges and other venues around the country.

In the 1980s, he played Gen. Hunt Stockwell on The A-Team and was also a regular on Murder She Wrote and Law & Order.