Andrew Pruett is a businessman and the ex-husband of Abigail Spencer. The couple got married in 2008; however, due to irreconcilable differences, they divorced in 2014. They also have a son, named Roman. Andrew was in a relationship with Kristin Chenoweth in 2015, which didn’t work.

Andrew Pruett, an American businessman, became famous due to his marriage to Abigail Spencer, a famous actress.

Even before his marriage to Abigail, he had a strong background in the business world. He has worked with different high-profile companies like Walt Disney Studios and NRG Esports.

Besides his professional career as a businessman what drew the attention of the public towards him is his personal life including his recent connection with actress Kristin Chenoweth.

Here in this article, I have mentioned all the details about the professional and personal life of Andrew Pruett. So, if you are interested in knowing him keep reading till the end.

Quick Bio

Andrew Pruett’s Early Life & Educational Background

Andrew Pruett was born on February 1, 1980, in the United States which makes him 44 years of age as of 2024. He belongs to the White ethnic group and holds an American nationality since he was born in the US.

Little is known about his early life, childhood, and his family since he has kept his personal information and family details private. However, it is known that he studied at John Brown University in Siloam Springs, Arkansas.

He graduated with a bachelor’s degree in broadcasting including TV, Radio, and Film with significant grades. His educational background indicates that he has been interested in marketing and business which he later joined too.

His Professional Career Journey

Though he graduated with a degree in the field of broadcasting he didn’t go straight into this field rather he worked at the Sonic drive-in restaurant for about 3 years.

In 2007, he got a call from the Walt Disney Studios where he found the opportunity to demonstrate his true skills and abilities. His connection with Walt Disney lasted for a long period of 8 years.

At Disney, he gained beneficial experience by holding several positions during his 8-year tenure including senior account manager, team leader, coordinator brand marketer, and many more.

His journey with Walt Disney ended in 2015 and he went on to work with several other companies including Quattro Wireless, Apple Inc., and iAd.

In 2016, he joined a famous esports company, NRG Esports, as a CEO and co-owner and he is currently serving at the same according to the last available information.

It is safe to say that, Pruett has enjoyed a successful professional career because of his dedication, hard work, and skills in the field of advertisement and other business operations.

Best Pick: Who Is Larry Marchiano? All About Linda Lovelace’s Ex-Husband

He Has An Attractive Physical Appearance

Andrew Pruett is a handsome man with an attractive physical appearance that makes her personality charming. He has a tall stature of 5 feet 9 inches and a weight of around 73 kg.

It seems like he has a proper workout routine since he possesses an athletic build with measurements of about 12.5-inch bicep, 41-inch chest, and 32-inch waist.

Moreover, Pruett has maintained a long golden blonde hairstyle and his striking blue eyes complement his overall look.

Quick Stats

He Got Married To Abigail Spencer In 2004

In the 2000s Andrew Pruett was introduced to Abigail Spencer by their mutual friend and in their first meetup they got interested in each other. Days passed and the two kept on meeting off and on until they started dating.

Soon, they found themselves in love, and after four years of dating, they decided to take their relationship to the next level by getting married.

So in 2004, Andrew Pruett and Abigail Spencer got married in a private wedding ceremony surrounded by their loved ones. It was a simple yet lovingly beautiful moment for both of them.

Best Pick: Who Is Stefano Catelli? All About Gemma Arterton Ex-Husband

They Got Divorced In 2013: What Was The Reason?

Despite the initial connection and love, Pruett and Spencer’s relationship faced challenges after a few years of marriage.

What initially seemed like a strong and unbreakable bond couldn’t stand the heat of their differences so they decided to go their separate paths.

In 2013, Andrew Pruett and Abigail Spencer got divorced and the reason they, cited for their separation was irreconcilable differences. After being together for almost a decade their divorce was finalized amicably.

They Were Blessed With A Son In 2008

During their time together, Andrew Pruett and Abigail Spencer were blessed with one child, a son named Roman Allen Pruett. He was born on September 19, 2008, so, as of 2024 he will be around 15 years of age.

Although Pruett and Spencer are divorced, they have tried their best to co-parent their son and to provide him with a stable and loving environment.

Although specific details about Roman relationship with his parents are not available, it is known that both Pruett and Spencer are on good terms for the sake of their son.

Best Pick: Who Is Sigmond Galloway? All About Mahalia Jackson’s Ex-Husband

Andrew Was In A Romantic Relationship With Kristin Chenoweth

Soon after getting divorced from Abigail Spencer, Andrew Pruett was romantically linked with actress Kristin Chenoweth.

The news about their relationship broke out in July 2015, however, they started dating in late 2014 after meeting through a mutual friend.

The couple also made their first public appearnce together at the Tony Awards of 2015, by walking on the Red carpet which surprised everyone.

However, after dating for about a year, things didn’t work for them as they broke up in 2015, and went their separate ways.

Is He Active On Social Media?

Andrew Pruett is not active on social media platforms like Instagram, Facebook, or Twitter. It seems like he dose not like to share details about his personal life on social media platforms.

He tends to keep a low profile life and has not been active in the media, and one of the reasons can be his busy professional life.

Andrew Pruett’s Net Worth