Andrew Pruett is an American celebrity who is well known in the business world when it comes to matters relating to advertising. Although he is a good businessman, most people outside the business world will easily recognize him as the ex-husband of American actress Abigail Spencer.

The former lovey-dovey couple married in 2004 to the admiration of their fans, but when the wedding worm of marriage crept in, not even their son’s existence could contain the union of love that once flourished between them. They have long separated in what is by some measure the saddest divorce story of their time.

Anyway, here’s everything you never knew about Abigail Spencer’s ex-husband and his late relationship with the Gilmore Girls actress.

Andrew Pruett Bio

According to available records, Andrew Pruett was born on February 1, 1980 in the United States of America. He is therefore an American national while his ethnicity would be said to be white. There are no reports yet on who his parents are and whether or not he has any siblings. Likewise, it is also unknown which school he attended and what his life was like as a young boy.

However, coming to his senior years, we know Andrew attended John Brown University in Siloam Springs, Arkansas, where he earned a bachelor’s degree in Broadcasting – Television, Radio, and Film with an impressive 3.8 performance. points. If we have to make any guesses based on his remarkable college accomplishments, it’s likely that Andrew could have been a mastermind from childhood.

After college, he began his career at SonicDrive-In, a company he started and operated for some time, before joining Disney Interactive Media Group in October 2007, as an employee in its advertising and sales. Andrew, while carrying out his duties here, marketed and drove sales for the company’s portfolio of websites such as iParenting.com, Disney.com, DisneyChannel.com, Family.com, etc. He grew up in the entertainment conglomerate, where he held various positions including sales associate, account executive, senior account manager and west coast team leader.

Andrew Pruett’s career with Disney spanned two years after which he joined Quattro Wireless. At this new company, he began serving as Vice President of Advertising in November 2009. The following year, Apple Inc. secured his services as Head of Advertising for Midwest and the south-central United States in Los Angeles for one year. Global Head of iAd Distributor Relations. Andrew spent at Apple Inc. from 2010 to 2016.

Since the beginning of 2016, he has been working as CEO and co-owner of NRG Esports. Andrew Pruett has undoubtedly done well in his career as he has proven time and time again, with real, real-world results, that he knows his onion in his area of ​​specialization regardless of the company that hires him.

Facts About Abigail Spencer’s Ex-Husband

his love life

Apart from his professional accomplishments, Andrew Pruett is best known to some people as the former partner of American actress Abigail Spencer. The duo started their romance in the year 2000 after getting to know a mutual friend. Their friendship turned into a couple affair after they married on April 3, 2004.

However, the couple’s marriage started to deteriorate over time and in 2012 they asked the court for a divorce. Their request was finally granted sometime in 2013.

However, when things went well between them, they gave birth to a son, Roman Allen Pruett, on September 19, 2008.

Salary and net worth

With a multi-year career in which he has repeatedly impressed and executed his work, it is certain that Andrew Pruett has been well rewarded over the years. Available documents indicate that the CEO earns between $99,568 and $112,768, while his net worth is estimated to be over $2 million.

Body measurements and features

Andrew Pruett stands at a height of 5ft 9(1.76m) and weighs 73kg (160lbs). His other measurements are his biceps which measure 12.5 inches, his chest – 41 inches and his waist – 32 inches. He has blond hair and blue eyes.