Andrew Pruett and Abigail Spencer were married for nearly a decade before divorcing in 2013. After splitting, they both focused on their careers, but the former Apple staff found love again with another actress.

Advertisement

There is little information about Andrew Pruett and Abigail Spencer's love story, but it ended on amicable terms in the early 2010s. The couple tied the knot in April 2004 and welcomed their son, Roman Allen Pruett, in September 2008.

News broke in February 2012 that the actress had filed for divorce. She cited irreconcilable differences as the reason for their split. Sources reported the couple had separated in August 2011.

Andrew Pruett and Abigail Spencer at the Uganda Project Fund Raiser Presented By Make Believe on May 13, 2011, in West Hollywood, California. | Source: Getty Images

Abigail also requested joint custody of their son. In September 2021, the mom of one shared photos of little Roman donning a Spiderman costume, with one showing the youngster doing his best pose as the Marvel superhero.

"My little one turns 13 today. My heart. What an honor to witness you in all your light. So proud of you. Becoming & being your mother is the great joy of my life," Abigail, who previously struggled with her mental health, sweetly captioned the post.

Advertisement

The "Cowboys and Aliens" star continued gracing screens but kept a lid on her love life. Her ex-husband also guarded his privacy but found new love a few years after their separation while making power moves in his career.

Advertisement

Andrew Pruett Has Extensive Experience in Marketing

Andrew did Theology and Biblical Studies at Ravencrest Chalet before moving to John Brown University in 1992. He attained a Bachelor of Science in Broadcasting Film, TV, and Radio in 1995 with a 3.8 GPA. He launched the restaurant Sonic Drive-In the following year, managing its entire operation until 1997.

He then worked as the Senior Coordinator of Brand Marketing at The Walt Disney Studios for two years, followed by a stint as a Media Associate for the Michael Ovitz Artists Management Group. Then in late 1999, Andrew joined the Walt Disney Internet Group, starting as an Executive Coordinator to Vice Presidents, Public Relations and Marketing.

He climbed the company's ladder in the following several years until he became Director of Advertising in 2007. That same year, he also received special thanks for the short comedy"Passing the Time," which starred his then-wife.

Abigail Spencer and Andrew Pruett at the Los Angeles premiere of "Draft Day" on April 7, 2014, in Westwood, California. | Source: Getty Images

Advertisement

Andrew Pruett Formerly Owned NRG

Andrew left the Walt Disney Internet Group in October 2009 and became the Vice President of Advertising for Quattro Wireless that November. The following month, he joined Apple Inc. as the Head of Western and South Central US Advertising.

He simultaneously held both positions but eventually left Quattro to focus full-time on Apple Inc. After almost two years working for the tech giant, he was promoted to Global Director of iAd Publisher Relations & Business Development.

In April 2016, he was named the new CEO of NRG Esports, following former CEO Gerard Kelly. Andrew said he felt honored and "ready to hit the ground running" when he joined the company he now co-owns.

Andrew Pruett and Abigail Spencer at the 2017 Vanity Fair Oscar Party hosted by Graydon Carter on February 26, 2017, in Beverly Hills, California. | Source: Getty Images

Advertisement

Andrew Pruett Dated Kristin Chenoweth Following His Divorce from Abigail Spencer

Andrew started dating Kristin Chenoweth in early 2015. The actress, who was 'saved' by adoption, had ended her romance with Hollywood producer Dana Brunetti in late 2014. She and Andrew made several public appearances as a couple; however, it's currently unclear if they're still together.

Although Abigail has kept her love life private, the TV star remains booked and busy. Her upcoming projects include the sci-fi series "Shatter Belt," the sports drama "One Heart," with Matthew Lillard, and the comedy film "Extended Family," with Jon Cryer and Donald Faison.