Kanye West made a surprise appearance at the 2022 BET Awards to honor Lifetime Achievement Award winner Sean 'Diddy' Combs.

Kenneth 'Babyface' Edmonds took to the stage to present the award to Combs, but he threw fans for a loop when he brought out Kanye West.

West took to the stage in his now-signature boots with a large coat, black glasses, black hat and black face mask before taking to the mic and honoring Combs.

Fans were treated to another surprise too when Mariah Carey took the stage to do a duet with Latto for her hit song Big Energy, which features a sample from Carey's hit song Fantasy.

'How do we crown our kings? How do we appreciate our kings? To think how far we could just make it off of inspiration,' West began.

'To hear the way somebody chopped a sample in. We are rushing in to see who could get the bad boy mixed tape and play back the original version of Benjamin's over an end over,' he added.

'Me sitting at M crib. To puff without knowing. That statement is not legally binding,' West said with a laugh.

'To go to New York and think that because I saw the videos, everybody had on Leath jackets. To see Puff in real life. Just like me tapping free as a little kid. I just need to meet this man. This is my favorite artist. You see what I'm saying?' he added.

' You know back then it was so many rules to hip hop. He broke all of them. Broke down all the doors. Understood contracts in a way a lot of us still don't. Understood money in a way a lot of us still don't. I go to him for advice to this day. He inspired so many of my choices. So many of my life choices. My wife choices. And here we are. Thanks for that, Puff,' he joked.

'You understand getting snuck into the club at 17 years old. In Chicago. Thinking we was part of Bad Boy. This man was so famous, it was just good enough for me to be Chicago's version of puff. You know, I took a little hiatus. I said I wanted to declare myself legally dead for a year. Nobody messing me. You know, I just want to be off the grid. Puff is pretty persistent. But I had to think. It's like people, they get amnesia. Like I should never have to call more than one time,' he said.

'Any of us in this room, if Puff ever needed us, we need to jump and be there. This man has been through and survived a lot of stuff. Broke down a lot of doors so we could be standing. I know for me, that I could be here today. He broke down so many doors of classism, taste, culture, swag. Puff, if I never told you I love you, you're my brother,' he concluded.

The 2022 BET Awards got off to a great start on Sunday, when Jazmine Sullivan won the first award of the night, Best Female R&B/Pop Artist.

Janelle Monae presented the first award, with Sullivan beating out Ari Lennox, Chlöe, Doja Cat, H.E.R., Mary J. Blige and Summer Walker at the Microsoft Theater in Los Angeles.

The singer delivered a passionate plea to all of the men to support them, after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade.

'Hey thank you all. I love you too. As always, I do this for the women. For my sisters especially. It's a hard time right now for us. I want to speak directly to the men. We need you all. We need y'all to stand up. Stand up for us. Stand up with us,' she began.

'If you have ever benefited from a woman making one of the toughest decisions of her life, to terminate a pregnancy, you need to be standing with us. This is not just a woman's This is everybody's issue. We need your support more than ever, okay, fellas. Y'all got us? We've got y'all. You all have got us? Thank you so much,' she concluded.

Will Packer and Idris Elba presented the Best New Artist, which was won by Latto, who beat out Baby Keem, Benny The Butcher, Muni Long, Tems, Yung Bleu.

'Oh, my god. Can y'all hear me? Oh, my go. I said I wasn't going to cry. Thank you, god. Thank you, mom. And we are watching. Thank you, mom. Thank you to my team. Oh, my go. Oh, my go. Never give in. A man policing my body,' she began.

'Hey, baby, I know you're watching too. Thank you, baby. I said I was going to cry, yell. I'm so grateful if you know me and my story. It's been a long time coming. I am so appreciative,' she added.

'My first award. And it's my first award by black entertainment television, period. Shout out to all the other artists in the category, you deserve it just as much,' she concluded.

Marsai Martin presented the Best Collaboration award, which was won by Wizkid Featuring Justin Bieber and Tems for their son Essence.

They beat out 'Every Chance I Get,' DJ Khaled Feat. Lil Baby & Lil Durk'Family Ties,' Baby Keem & Kendrick Lamar, 'Kiss Me More,' Doja Cat Feat. SZA, 'Way 2 Sexy,' Drake Feat. Future & Young Thug and 'Whole Lotta Money (Remix),' BIA Feat. Nicki Minaj.

Tems accepted the award and said, 'Thank you, BET. Thank you, everyone. I want to -- this award is for Africa. I just want to say the great thing is happening out of Africa right now. I just want to -- this is dedicated to Africa and Nigeria. Thank you.'

The Chi stars Luke James and Kandi Burruss presented the Dr. Bobby Jones Best Gospel/Inspirational Award, which was won by We Win by Lil Baby X Kirk Franklin

They beat out 'All In Your Hands,' Marvin Sapp, 'Come To Life,' Kanye West, 'Grace,' Kelly Price, 'Hallelujah,' Fred Hammond, 'Hold Us Together (Hope Mix),' H.E.R. & Tauren Wells and 'Jireh,' Elevation Worship & Maverick City Music.

Kirk Franklin accepted the award, stating, 'So blessed to have an opportunity. I've been blessed to be in front of the most beautiful people in the world, my people. My entire career. My people are the most talented, the most gifted, the most anointed.'

'And my job is to not only serve you but my job is to also serve the next generation. I have up here the next generation. And one thing that I have always had a problem with and it comes to our elders,' he said.

'A lot of times they will hold a position until they die and they don't pass the baton and they die with the baton. So many of us died in financial poverty. Those that had the wealth did not pass the baton,' Franklin added.

'So many black churches died in ignorance because the pastor would not step down and pass the baton. So tonight because I have been blessed, I want to be a blessing to the next generation. Maverick city deserves this baton. This award. Maverick city. The next generation of gospel music. Give it up for then. Give it up for them,' he said, handing the award to Maverick City.

Martin stars Tisha Campbell and Carl Payne presented the BET Her award, which was won by 'Good Morning Gorgeous' by Mary J. Blige.

She beat out 'Best Of Me (Originals),' Alicia Keys, 'Have Mercy,' Chlöe 'Pressure,' Ari Lennox, 'Roster,' Jazmine Sullivan, 'Unloyal,' Summer Walker & Ari Lennox and 'Woman,' Doja Cat.

'Thank you. Wow. Wow. Thank you so much, everybody. How are y'all doing? Good to see y'all. Give me a little bit of time. I won't take long,' she began.

'It's a blessing to still be doing what I love and to be in this category with all these amazing women who write songs that empower is a true honor. People always ask me, do I ever get used to winning awards and been nominated. I always say no because no matter how hard you work and even if you think you deserve it, you just don't know how it's going to go sometimes,' she said.

'So this is always an unexpected gift and blessing. Thank you. Almost done. These moments, these moments I never take for granted. Three years ago I was here receiving the lifetime achievement award and normally receive that award, that means you're about to retire or be done and here I am today by the grace of god still winning, still nominated,' she said.

'It's hard work on me every single day. It's my priority. It's not easy. But I have to look in the mirror and say good morning, gorgeous. No matter what I see that mirror, I have to say something to make me believe in myself. I thank god for the courage to do that and I thank god for everything. You are the greatest. Thank you to all my fans. I am -- I've beyond appreciate you. Bet, thank you so much for always being there for all of us,' she said, while also thanking H.E.R. and Lucky Daye for writing the song with her.

Eva Marcille presented the Best International Act award, which was won by Nigerian singer Tems.

She beat out Dave (UK), Dinos (France), Fally Ipupa (DRC), Fireboy DML (Nigeria), Little Simz (UK), Ludmilla (Brazil), Major League DJz (South Africa) and Tayc (France).

'BET, thank you so much for this. Thank you so much. It's an honor. This is my first award show that I am winning something. I just want to use this opportunity to speak to every single young, old, whatever, every single woman watching this,' Tems began.

'Every single girl watching this at home. Where I'm from, things like this don't happen. Where I'm from, Lagos, Nigeria, this is a dream. As you're watching me, I want you to imagine yourself as me because you are meant to be here too,' she said.

'I am dedicating this to every single young woman, every artist, everybody that is striving and dares to dream. I dare you to get up from your seat and go for your dream and fight for yourself. Because you can do it. You can do it. You can be here. Take this as a sign. If you are waiting for a sign from god, take this as that sign. It will be,' she concluded.

Nope stars Daniel Kaluuya and Keke Palmer presented Best Male R&B Pop Artist, which was won by The Weeknd.

He beat out Blxst, Chris Brown, Givēon, Lucky Daye, Wizkid and Yung Bleu, though The Weeknd was not present to accept.

Tyler Perry's Sistas stars KJ Smith, Mignon, Crystal Hayslett, Ebony, Obsidian and Novi Brown presented the YoungStars Award, won by Marsai Martin.

She beat out Akira Akbar, Demi Singleton, Miles Brown, Saniyya Sidney and Storm Reid.

'My god. Hi, guys. Wow, this is crazy. Thank you so, so much to BET. Of course I need to thank god. God is the reason for all of this so I am so, so so grateful,' Martin began.

'Thank you to my parents. I love y'all. Thank you to my amazing family and friends. Look. They mean the world to me, so thank you so much. Listen. Us young people, we have to continue to use our voice, use our power. Use every inch of our love. Hold on. Anyways. I love you all,' she added.

'I appreciate you all. To the fellow nominees, I am so proud of us, proud of all of us. Thank you,' Martin concluded.

Paula Patton took to the stage to present the Best Actress award, which was won by Zendaya for Euphoria and Spider-Man: No Way Home.

She beat out Aunjanue Ellis, King Richard, Coco Jones, Bel-Air, Issa Rae, Insecure, Jennifer Hudson, Respect, Mary J. Blige, Power Book II: Ghost, Queen Latifah, The Equalizer, Quinta Brunson, Abbott Elementary and Regina King, The Harder They Fall, though she was not present to accept the award.

Sanaa Lathan presented Album of the Year, won by An Evening with Silk Sonic by Silk Sonic, comprised of Bruno Mars and Anderson.Paak.

They beat out 'Back Of My Mind,' H.E.R., 'Call Me If You Get Lost,' Tyler, The Creator , 'Certified Lover Boy,' Drake, 'Donda,' Kanye West, 'Heaux Tales, Mo' Tales: The Deluxe,' Jazmine Sullivan and 'Planet Her,' Doja Cat.

Bruno Mars took the stage, stating, 'Hey. Thank you, guys, so much. It's bittersweet because my partner in crime, Anderson Paak, is overseas but he wanted me to tell you he loves you.'

'A lot of people we have to think. The silent third member of the group, Silk Sonic. Make some noise. Want to thank Julie Greenwald. Babyface, thank you. Thunder cat,' he said.

'I know everybody in this room knows how important this show is so I just want to thank bet for continuing support me in my career. And Paak's career and Silk Sonic. Please one more of these. We did it. Thank you so much. Love y'all. Good night,' he concluded.

A number of awards were quietly announced after the nearly-four-hour telecast, including Silk Sonic winning Best Group.

Megan Thee Stallion was named Best Female Hip-Hop Artist while Kendrick Lamar was named Best Male Hip-Hop Artist.

Silk Sonic won another award for Video of the Year, though they tied with Family Ties by Baby Keem and Kendrick Lamar.

Anderson Paak also won Video Director of the Year, while King Richard won Best Movie and Will Smith won Best Actor.

Naomi Osaka was named Sportswoman of the Year while Steph Curry won Sportsman of the Year.