Society News

GSA is pleased to announce the winners of the 2014 GSA Awards. The five geneticists honored are recognized by their peers for outstanding achievements and contributions to the community:

Frederick M. Ausubel (Harvard Med Sch and Mass Gen Hospital) has been awarded the Thomas Hunt Morgan Medal for lifetime contributions to the field of genetics.

Angelika B. Amon (MIT and HHMI) has been awarded the Genetics Society of America Medal for outstanding contributions to the field of genetics during the past 15 years.

Hugo J. Bellen (Baylor Coll of Med and HHMI) has been awarded the George W. Beadle Award for outstanding contributions to the community of genetics researchers.

Charles Boone (Univ of Toronto) has been awarded the Edward Novitski Prize for an extraordinary level of creativity and intellectual ingenuity in solving significant problems in genetics research.

Robin Wright (Univ of Minnesota) has been awarded the Elizabeth W. Jones Award for Excellence in Education for significant and sustained impact in genetics education.

Additional background about the awards and the recipients is available here. And look for more, including interviews with the award recipients, in forthcoming issues of GENETICS. Congratulations to the winners!

GSA has submitted Congressional testimony to the U.S. Senate Committee on Homeland Security & Governmental Affairs on conference and travel spending across the federal government. The testimony highlights the value of scientific conferences and expresses concern about the unintended and detrimental impacts of new regulations. The impact is especially dramatic on federal government employees, including intramural researchers at federal agencies like NIH and program directors who oversee federal investment in scientific research. GSA thanks the organizers of recent GSA conferences and other members of our community for providing helpful examples about the effects of these regulations. Read the full testimony here.

Registration and abstract submission are now open for the GSA-sponsored 16th International Conference on the Cell and Molecular Biology of Chlamydomonas, June 8–13, 2014, at Asilomar Conference Grounds in Pacific Grove, California. Organized by Krishna Niyogi (Univ California Berkeley) and Winfield Sale (Emory Univ), sessions at this conference will be organized to provide the maximum number of opportunities for interdisciplinary group discussion. Deadline for abstract submission, registration, and housing is March 13, 2014.

The GSA Journals

In the February issue of GENETICS, a pair of papers illustrate how fruit flies could be used as tools for understanding the genetics of complex human diseases. He et al. and Park et al. describe a Drosophila melanogaster model of neonatal diabetes, a human disease that can be caused by misfolded proinsulin.

Also in the February issue, Blumenstiel et al. propose a new approach to testing the neutrality of transposable element insertion that doesn’t assume a constant rate of transposition.

In G3, Gabdank and Fire (2014) present an examination of crossover interference using a large region of Caenorhabditis elegans linkage group V (LGV) as a test interval. In the examined region, the authors observe a gender-dependent difference in the extent of crossover interference, with near-complete interference in meiotic events from the oocyte lineage and incomplete interference in meiotic events from the sperm lineage.

Members in the News

The February 2014 issue of The Scientist includes a profile of GSA member Abby Dernburg (Univ of California, Berkeley, and HHMI), referring to her as a “meiosis maven.” Dernburg presented Larry Sandler Memorial Lecture at GSA's Drosophila Research Conference in 1997 based on her doctoral thesis using Drosophila, then switched to studying chromosomes in C. elegans for her postdoc. She received GSA’s Edward Novitski Prize in 2011, in part for her work on the mechanisms of chromosome pairing in C. elegans.

The PBS NewsHour has featured the research of several GSA members who conduct research on innate immunity using C. elegans as a model system. The coverage focuses on research conducted in the laboratory of Dennis Kim (MIT), including grad students Doug Cattie, Zoë Hilbert, and Joshua Meisel. This story is part of a new effort by the PBS NewsHour to cover more basic research, thanks to support from the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation.

Education and Professional Development