Dorothy Appleby, beloved wife of the late Frank Appleby, passed away in Edmonton on Wednesday, March 1 2017 at the age of 86.

Dorothy was born in Athabasca on June 17, 1930 to Bryce and Mary Minns. She grew up on the Minns farm in South Athabasca, and spent nearly her entire life in the Athabasca area. She married Frank in 1959 and they lived in town for many years, and then relocated to a farm near the present Multiplex, where they lived until moving into a condo in Athabasca in 2011. They also spent many wonderful summers at their cabin at Baptiste Lake. Dorothy spent her last few months in Edmonton where she could receive the care she needed and be near family.

She is survived and mourned by her step son Brian (Liz); grandchildren Erin (Mauricio) Echeverria and Kevin (Lauren) Appleby; four great grandchildren Lucas and Sofia Echeverria, and Eleanor Dorothy (Ellie) and Sadie Appleby; as well as her brother Ken Minns and his children Gerry, Dawn, Ralph, Sandra, and Rob and their families; and nieces Lori Ames and Wendy Appleby and their families. She was adored as “Ma” to Brian and his family, and as “Aunt Dot” to all her nieces and nephews.

She was predeceased by her husband Frank; her parents; and her brothers Jim and Allan.

Dorothy trained as an X-Ray technician and worked at the Athabasca hospital for many years. When Frank entered politics, Dorothy embraced the life of an MLA’s wife. She accompanied Frank on the campaign trail and was at his side for many events, from 90th birthday parties for local seniors to state dinners at Government House. Later she assisted Frank in performing nearly 300 weddings in his role as marriage commissioner. Dorothy was a faithful and valued member of both the Anglican Church and the Athabasca Lion’s Club, and organized local blood drives for many years.

A memorial service will be held at All Saints Anglican Church in Athabasca on Saturday, March 11, 2017 at 1:00 pm.

Those wishing to make a donation in Dorothy’s memory should send it to the St. Albans Memorial Fund, c/o Rhonda Guay, Box 2048, Athabasca AB, T9S 2B6.