It is with regret that we have to inform you of the death of Dorothy Appleby : (wife of Durham NARPO member Colin Appleby)

Dorothy died on June 16th, aged 75 years.

Dorothy was the dearly loved mother of Katherine and Malcolm, daughter in law Jom & granddaughter Jasmine.

The funeral service will be held at the Durham Crematorium at 11.30 am on Monday 1st July 2019 followed by refreshments at the Brambles Cafe, Poplar Tree Garden Centre at Shincliffe.

The funeral is not private and all friends and former colleagues of Dorothy and Colin are welcome to attend the service and the refreshment venue.

Our thoughts are with family at this sad time.

It is with regret that we have to announce the death of a retired Police Officer : Sgt 434 Malcolm Hall who died on 14th June 2019, aged 70 years.

Malcolm commenced his Police career on 14th April 1975, serving in various posts including Traffic, Motor School, Chester le Street & Easington Sub Division until his retirement on 2nd March 2001.

Malcolm was the much loved dad of Julie and Lisa, son-in-law Steven and a devoted grandad of Alex, Sophie and Oliver.

The funeral service will be held on Thursday 27th June at 2pm at St Andrews Church Blackhall, interment to follow at Blackhall Cemetery.

Refreshments will be available afterwards at Acre Rigg Club, Peterlee.

The funeral service is not private.

As Malcolm was a keen motorcyclist the family have requested an escort from any motorcyclists attending the funeral, Alan Bewley can provide details on 07581 293047

Donations in lieu of flowers have been requested to Alice House Hospice in Hartlepool and Macmillan Nurses Peterlee

Our thoughts are with the family at this sad time.

The Boat Cruise and Bar-be-cue on Saturday 22nd June is now open to all, not just NARPO members.

The function is very heavily subsidised by a grant from NARPO to ensure that we can all celebrate the Centenary of NARPO in our own areas.

To that end the function has been advertised in the Peeler and on the website.

To date the organising committee only have 43 people attending, sad really after all the effort that goes into the organisation of things like this.

The branch have therefore decided to open it up to all and have asked that it be circulated again to perhaps try and 'jog a few memories' and spur some members into action.

It is appreciated that June is holiday time for some, but surely not all the other 700 NARPO members in Durham Branch.

If you and your friends or family can spare the time for an evening cruise in Durham next Saturday night and in doing so help support your local Durham Branch NARPO and meet some ex colleagues then please contact the Branch Secretary :

Stu Ingram to book your tickets which are £10 per person on 01388 814768. or email him on sji1179@btinternet.com.

Cheques to be made out to "Durham Branch - NARPO" and sent to 2, Whitworth Close, Spennymoor, DL16 7LH. or speak to Stu to arrange payment by bacs.

Click this link for original posting : https://www.durhamnarpo.org.uk/2019/03/durham-river-cruise-to-celebrate-100.html

It is with regret that we have to announce the death of a retired Police Officer: PC 1049 Norman Hughes who died on 31st May 2019 aged 64 years.

PC Hughes was appointed on 28th July 1975 and served at various postings including Seaham, Traffic motorcycles ,Control room, Lanchester, Consett ASU until his retirement on 24th May 1998.

Mr Hughes leaves a widow, Dianne Hughes.

The funeral service is on Wednesday 12th June 2019 at 12:00pm at St Michael and All Angels Church, Hawthorn, Seaham followed by the burial in the Hawthorn Cemetery at 12.45 p.m. The funeral service is not private and everyone is welcome.

Our thoughts are with the family at this sad time.

Donations in lieu of flowers have been requested to the Village Nursing Home in Murton.

It is with regret that we have to announce the death of a retired Police Staff member, Stephen Mann (6068). Who passed away on the 31st May 2019. He was aged 58 years.

Stephen leaves a widow, Rita Mann.

Stephen joined Durham Constabulary on the 24th January 2000 and he retired from the post of Forensic Information Officer on the 29th November 2018.

The funeral service will be taking place on the 17th June 2019 at 11:30am at Durham Crematorium, followed by refreshments at Langley Park Sports and Social Club. The funeral service is not private and everyone is welcome.

Our thoughts are with the family at this sad time.

Donations in lieu of flowers have been requested to St Cuthbert’s Hospice

Please find attached the advert for ISO Technical Manager which is currently being advertised on behalf of Durham Constabulary. I would be grateful if this could please be circulated to your members and also be placed on your website if possible.

The link to our force website which includes more information on this role is: https://www.durham.police.uk/Join-us/Pages/Recruitment.aspx