KEE@FSWMAG.COM

AMY MASTURA, 40, IS ONE OF MALAYSIA'S MOST FAMOUS AND RESPECTED FACES AND HER MUSIC CUTS ACROSS ALL LEVELS OF SOCIETY AND RACIAL BARRIERS. LITTLE WONDER THEN THIS ADORABLE SONGBIRD AND ACTRESS WAS CHOSEN BY KOSE, ONE OF JAPAN'S TOP COSMETICS AND SKINCARE BRANDS, TO BE ITS AMBASSADOR LAST MARCH 2011.

Amy Mastura at the launch of Kose's Infinity collection. Both are 40 years old!

Kose's Infinity series is taking the world by storm!

After participating in Asia Bagus song contest in Japan in 1993, she released her debut album in the same year and there was no turning back!

Fame and fortune came fast as a mere two years later, she won Most Popular Female Actress award! Her albums 'Amy Mastura' and 'Pujaanku' went Double Platinum while 'Puteri' went Platinum. She was also chosen to duet with American pop idol Tommy Page. Her acting career also went great guns, with 'Kuala Lumpur Universiti' in 1995 and 'Trajedi Oktober' two years later which was a big hit and established her as a Sweet Young Thing any guy would love to bring home to see mother.

In 1998 she starred in 'Puteri Impian' which reinforced her image as lovable girl next door the same way some Indian stars are literally idolised after acting as gods in Hindu movies!

In March last year, Kose picked her to be its ambassador, the first time a Malay woman was selected as Kose is popular among Chinese. But Amy Mastura looks a bit chinky sometimes! Anyway, she looks gorgeous for her age and she will be 41 this May 2012 and her complexion is still dewy soft and radiant, doubtless from daily usage of Kose.

Amy Mastura launched the 'Forever Radiant, Forever Young' campaign to celebrate Kose's 40th anniversary which was perfect as both ambassador and brand are the same age! How cool and auspicious is that? Of course I am younger but I won't hold that against Amy Mastura and I promise never to call her an old bag but she doesn't look it so she has nothing to fear.

The star of the show (apart from Amy herself) is the Infinity range which uses alpine plants like edelweiss and kokeiten which grow in severe conditions with high winds, drastic temperature changes, intense ultra violet rays and low oxygen---exactly the climate that will dehydrate, diminish and destroy my complexion! These plants not only survive but thrive! Hence they must possess certain qualities stored in their flowers, leaves and stems! All these goodies plus a Chinese plant cnidium officinale combine to release protective enzymes to insulate skin exposed to violent conditions found at 5,000 metres in the Swiss Alps and Himalayan plateaus!

Amy Mastura looking good at 40

Amy Mastura being quizzed by handsome emcee

The party venue at MidValley

Takanobu Shimbo, Managing Director of Kose Malaysia and Amy Mastura signing the deal

A floral bouquet to seal the deal

Holding court

"These are the secrets to my youthful skin"

Amy with Infinity

Takanobu Shimbo knew his Infinity is in good hands

Both concurred

Just so you know how Kose counters look like

The Infinity range works wonders!

Fabulous at forty

One for the road

Interview with the media

HERE ARE THE DETAILS; INFINITY CLEAR FORCE 200mL

Retail : RM160

A mild alkaline wipe off beauty serum to wipe off old cornified layer that causes skin dullness and roughness. It is in a gel emulsion form, with high moisture and softening effect, toning to a soft skin and enhancing its translucency. Gentle usage with suppressed excessive abrasion. Refreshingly clears off dullness and roughness.

A wipe off beauty method, to meet a new skin.

INFINITY ASTRINGENT 160mL

The astringent lotion conditions and awakens every part of the skin texture by toning the skin with open pores, and creates smooth skin which enhances the look of the makeup. Provides moisture to skin damaged from UV-rays and sebum during the day, and maintains its translucency. Astringent lotion, which tones up the pore to prevent makeup from coming off

HERE ARE THE DETAILS;

Awakening Infinite Power of Your Skin

INFINITY

K O S É

It is said that we only use less than 10% of our innate ability.

It means that we leave 90% of our ability unused.

The same can be said in terms of "beauty".

Hoping to maximize the "power of women to pursue their beauty"

by drawing out the remaining 90% of such unused power,

KOSÉ created "Infinity".

Potential of unlimited beauty, represented in the name "Infinity".

KOSÉ believes that cosmetics that inspires both skin and mind

can make women glow from within and emerge with firm presence .

Find more beauty in you today than yesterday, tomorrow than today.

Focus of INFINITY

In order to enhance "color, texture and resilience of skin surface",

KOSÉ focused on "papillary layer / pillar fiber 'oxytalan fiber'",

the outermost layer of dermis, which is regarded as "base of skin".

"Oxytalan fiber" becomes gradually friable as a result of aging and UV-rays.

Papillary layer

Damaged oxytalan fiber

[Concept diagram of oxytalan fiber and papillary layer]

epidermis

papillary layer

dermis

oxytalan fiber

Main Compounded Components

"Kokeiten extract",

KOSÉ's original component, which enhances functions of pillar fiber 'oxytalan fiber'

Kokeiten is an alpine plant that grows naturally in the Himalayan Tibet Plateau. It grows in a severe environment where the altitude is 3,500 to 5,000 meters so that air is extremely dry and oxygen is thin and where UV-ray is intense and temperature difference is extreme. In order to adapt to such environment, Kokeiten stores various active components within itself.

oAntioxidant action

oCellular activator action

oEffect to prompt fibroblast cells and renew dermal base

oEffect to prevent degeneration of protein which would cause changes in skin colors

oEffect to prevent degeneration of oxytalan fiber which would cause loss of skin resilience

"Edelweiss extract",

a rare and unique component which inhibits carbonylation of cornified layer

Edelweiss is an alpine plant that grows naturally in chalk grass fields of Swiss Alps at 1,500 to 3,400 altitudes. It possesses a system to withstand intense UV-ray, extreme difference in temperatures and humidity.

It prevents dryness which causes various skin troubles and "carbonylation (oxydation) of cornified layer" which is an underlying cause of dryness, and conditions bare skin to become moisture-rich with the feel of newly-born cells in cornified layer.

It also enhances ability of cornified layer to embrace moisture, which gives additional softness and resilience to the skin. It further maintains normal barrier functions and keeps skin at the best condition for a long time.

"Cnidium Officinale Water"

which enhances skin circulation

Cnidium Officinale is an apiaceous-family plant listed in the "Materia Medica of Deity of Agriculture", and has been used through the ages as a traditional Chinese medicine with high medicinal effects. Cnidium Officinale water is an extract of roots of Cnidium Officinale distilled by way of steam distillation.

Various effects such as improvement of blood circulation, calming / antibacterial properties, antiallergic properties, inhibiting effect for generation of lipid peroxide can be expected.

Cnidium Officinale water normalizes blood circulation and improves circulation of inner skin, thereby delivering moisture and beauty agents to every cell and leading to healthy and fresh skin.

INFINITY KOSÉ Oil Cleansing Cream N

120g, RM 158

Duration of Use: Approximately 1.5 months

[For both wiping-off and washing]

High-functional cleansing which grants skin with brightness, translucency and silkiness without discoloration.

INFINITY KOSÉ Tone Up Wash

120g, RM 138

Duration of Use: Approximately 1.5 months for morning and night use

High-functional washing cream which grants skin with brightness, translucency and silkiness without discoloration.

INFINITY KOSÉ Lotion Concentrate 14

I Moist

II Very Moist

160g each, RM 238

Duration of Use: Approximately 1 month for morning and night use

Allergy Tested.

High-functional beautiful skin concentrate lotion which supports skin's function to maintain moisture in 14 cornified layers.

INFINITY KOSÉ Serum Completion

I Moist

II Very Moist

120g each, RM 238

Duration of Use: Approximately 1 month for morning and night use

Allergy Tested.

High-functional beautiful skin concentrate emulsion which revives resilience of the skin from deep within.

INFINITY KOSÉ Cream Excellent

50g, RM 748

Number of Times for Use: Approximately 100 to 167 times

Feeling of enrichment, as if directly applying beautiful skin concentrate onto the skin.

The most luxurious cream.

Compounded Moisture Retention Ingredients

- Edelweiss extract

- Akebia stem extract

- Jarool extract

- Cnidium Officinale water

- Asian ginseng extract

- Hydrolysis yeast

INFINITY KOSÉ Eye Cream

20g, RM 268

Number of Times for Use: Approximately 100 times

Focusing on decrease in collagen.

Eye cream that creates firmness on skin around eyes.

Compounded Moisture Retention Ingredients

- Edelweiss extract

- Akebia stem extract

- Evening primrose extract (Oenothera biennis seed extract)

- Cnidium Officinale water

- Potentila erecta extract

- Hyaluronan

INFINITY KOSÉ Vital Comfort Mask

20ml x 6 sheets, RM 238

Steam, soften and energize.

Serum mask which brings firmness and translucency.

Compounded Moisture Retention Ingredients

- Edelweiss extract

- Kokeiten (Kokeiten root) extract

- Acous calamus root extract

- Cnidium Officinale water

- Alkali hot spring water

- Poria sclerotium extract

INFINITY KOSÉ Realizing White XX

Eradicate dark spots from the roots with kojic acid.

A whitening serum is born aiming for glowing white skin.

A new whitening serum contains kojic acid which has a high whitening effect, blended with technology that delivers it to the roots of dark spots.

UV rays are not the only cause of dark spots.

It is said that increased melanin caused by aging, stress, and hormone imbalance, which is not excreted smoothly, is also a reason.

With INFINITY whitening serum, it is possible to protect the eye area and cheeks from persistent dark spots.

The added moisture and firmness will make ever-lasting beautiful skin a reality.

Made possible by KOSÉ, the pioneers of the beauty serum.

Skin will glow beyond your imagination.

With KOSÉ Original GL Kojic acid,

introducing a brand new Whitening Serum.

INFINITY KOSÉ Realizing White XX

[Non-medicated]

The world first* serum was made by KOSÉ

*As a special item called “Serum/essence” in the basic skincare category

1975, KOSÉ released a revolutionary skincare in Japan, with a hydrating effect added to the emulsifying effects of creams and lotions, that differed from all other skincare products in the market. It was a popular success for its creamy texture that was not sticky, and a reputation that a simple massage would result a beautiful skin made it a big hit. After that, a new skincare classification was implemented, and this product would be named “serum”.

At KOSÉ, we strive to improve our technology with pride, and continue to make products that are loved by women around the world.

Early 1970’s

Started product development to answer to the needs of the time. Focused on a type of moisture-retaining element NMF, the emulsifying agent of the amino-acid system that excelled in maintaining hydration.

November 1975

Developed an oil that resembled natural skin oil and introduced “Arphard R.C Liquid Precious”, make up that is creamy but not sticky.

February 1986

“Moisturizer” and “serum” were recognized and substituted the term “toner”, defined by a skincare classification system.

Finally, 11 years after “Arphard R.C Liquid Precious” was released, the genre “serum” was officially recognized.

[Reference Material]

What is kojic acid, the active whitening ingredient?

A naturally-derived active whitening ingredient that was discovered in Japan.

Kojic acid is a natural substance found in “koji (rice malt)” which is used to make sake and essential ingredients for Japanese cuisine like soy sauce and miso. It was discovered by the Japanese in 1907. After that, its whitening effects were researched, and in 1988, it was recognized as an active whitening ingredient. Kojic acid that is extensively purified with the use of biotechnology is said to have permeability that excels in comparison to other whitening ingredients.

Kokeiten (kokeiten root) extract [moisturizer]

Edelweiss extracts [moisturizer]

Cnidium Officinale water [moisturizer]

CLARIFY

REPLENISH

NURTURE

REVITALIZE

Daily Basic Care

Support Basic Care

Special Care

Cleansing・Wash -->

Lotion --> Emulsion

Cream

■ Mask

■ Serum

■ Eye Cream

Oil Cleansing Cream N Tone Up Wash

■ Lotion Concentrate 14 I/ II

■ Serum Completion I/ II

Cream Excellent

■ Vital Comfort Mask

■ Realizing White XX

■ Eye Cream

CLARIFY

REPLENISH

NURTURE

REVITALIZE

Daily Basic Care

Support Basic Care

Special Care

Wash -->

Lotion --> Emulsion

Cream

■ Serum

■ Eye Cream

Tone Up Wash

■ Lotion Concentrate 14 I/ II

■ Serum Completion I/ II

Cream Excellent

■ Realizing White XX

■ Eye Cream