I try

Eversince I have given birth to Emir, I always dream of the perfect shape like Amy Mastura or Ziana Zain. But, as we wanted to have another next bin/binti Emran soonest possible, so I just keep an eye of becoming the talk of the town .. haha!! Yelaa, penat-penat berdiet, last-last terbuncit pulak kan..

Actually, that is my plan, I want the age gap between Emir and his sis/bro tak banyak, so that they can clique together.. then when the third comes I dont mind if it is 5 years after..

But up until now, there is no news and no sign :(. Perhaps I am still breastfeeding my little Emir or I still didn't get my appropriate massage.. (orang kate ape - naikkan rahim).. I think laa..

So, if nothing happen until the end of this year, ini bermakna, saya akan lancarkan perang berhabisan untuk menurunkan balik apa yang terlebih-lebih.. but the question is... CAN I???? Cos no doubt that i loveeee to eat.. hehe

Selamat Hari Raya

Raya @ Malacca..

Ok, enjoy the pics..

One big family...

Us.. the same mirror as per last year

With Alia.. sangat mahu amik gambar with us..

Cucu-cucu Hj Mohd Tamil & Hjh Patimah - Emir the youngest

Cucu-cucu with Atok & Nenek

Ok, should i introduce?? :D

Emir.. the second Hari Raya in his life

Emir.. isnt he looks like a big boy??

Emir with his second cousin - Amir.. same age.. i loveeeeee this candid!!

Saat-saat sebelum terjelepuk kepenatan di petang raya..

And i bet my parents miss Emir very much :D. Ok, Baba, kiterang balik esok petang..

Memori Raya 2006. Emir baru 4 bulan setengah mase ni

Selamat Hari Raya

It looks like i will not update anything at least until at the end of this week. This year, we will celebrate our first hari raya in Malacca, and i really hope time permits us to be with my big family in Gerik, Perak. Since I am no longer have my phone, tak dapat lah nak SMS.

Oh ya, most possibly, we may postpone our HOUSEWARMING party. My parents are not around on that day and my sister is sitting for her exam. She promised me to make karipap, so since her karipap sangat best, so im willing to wait for her.. Then, my hubby is away for a week few days after 27 October. lagi tak best kan.. New date insyaAllah will be on Saturday, 17 November 2007. Whatever it is, we will update you ok.. Kiterang akan hantar kad, then that is the final date :D Luckily we dint send invitation card yet, dah siap print, ade yang dah siap stamp.. sorry erk..

So Selamat Hari Raya Aidilfitri Maaf Zahir Batin from Emran, Amira & Emir..