The actress Michelle Vieth will sue her colleague and ex-partner Héctor Soberón for the alleged leak of an intimate video. After 18 years of what happened, the Mexican woman said that the repercussions of the event are not erased and that she had to learn to live with it, highlighted the newspaper Milenio.

“Being able to have a consequence for an infringement of my sexual human rights, for having that exposure, that in other countries there are laws. When my case happened, the internet was not legislated, but today there have been many reforms. I no longer have the fear that I had when I was 15, 16 years old, to speak, to raise my voice," said the protagonist of "My little naughty" in an interview with Televisa's "Hoy" program.

Violation of your rights

As will be remembered, it was in 2004 when the driver was also the victim of a violation of her sexual rights, when a video was released without her consent, since then she has pointed to her ex-husband as the culprit of the leak.

“The consequences at the time, for breaking the law, are determined by a judge and his team. If it's my turn to be the spokesperson and if I was the first to have to live through a case like this, it was revenge porn, I wish I could be the last,” she said.

According to her statements, 43-year-old Michelle is not seeking financial remuneration but rather compensation for the moral and psychological damage she suffered as a result of this audiovisual leak, which was recorded when she was in the company of Soberón, and which was edited with the intention of hurting her.

The artist assured that she has not forgotten the unfortunate episode. “It's not that I got over it or left it in oblivion. It's something you learn to live with."

Michelle Vieth married Héctor Soberón in 2002, with whom she starred in 'My little naughty' in 1997. Although their marriage dissolved two years later, things did not end well.

after the divorce

As already mentioned, the leak of the actress's intimate video happened during her divorce process from the driver. As she said in a past interview with Yordi Rosado, the material came to light just one day after they signed the divorce.

“The day I took the plane to go to Puerto Vallarta, I met a reporter on the same plane and I greeted her: 'I've come to cover I don't know what concert.' We arrived with the judge, both with our lawyers (to sign the divorce), and when I went out with my lawyers I ran into this reporter and she told me: 'There is a rumor of a video leak,'” he recalled.

Until now, it has not been confirmed who leaked the intimate video of Michelle Vieth, but the actress has hinted that the possible culprit was her ex-husband Héctor Soberón, because of how things happened.

“It was a cut, edited material, from different years, where it is also pasted, without audio and where only I appear. The most characteristic thing is that they put 'Big Brother VIP' on it… If there is something that bothered my husband at that moment, it is that I was part of a project like 'Big Brother'”, he pointed out at the time.

"I did nothing"

The well-known actor spoke about the lawsuit that his ex-wife will file. Soberón made it clear that he will not contribute to this issue becoming bigger, since he prefers to remain silent as he has done for several years now: "I have remained silent and I will continue like this," he assured in a recent interview with the Mexican portal " The universal".

"He has been dealing with this issue for 20 years and on several occasions he has said that he has no way to prove what he said, and still he wants to take legal action?" he asked.

“I have not done anything and I refer myself to the tests. In a divorce, many people insult each other and in this case, she has only done it and I have remained silent and I will continue like this. I am not interested in giving anything to talk about, ”she said.