Mexican actor Héctor Soberón apologized publicly to his ex, actress Michelle Vieth. After almost 20 years of the scandal in which he was involved with the artist, the interpreter wants to leave the chapter behind and put an end to the issue that has haunted him.

As you may remember, in 2004 the ex-couple began a confrontation after an intimate video of the protagonist of “Soñadoras” was leaked. Since then, Vieth pointed out Soberón as the only person responsible for the incident.

“If Mrs. Michelle felt offended by something I have done or commented, I apologize,” he said in a meeting with the media, highlighted the Mexican portal Milenio.

The actors were married for two years in early 2000. The actor has denied all allegations. Last March he asked Michelle to stop pointing him out as the possible person responsible for the leak of the intimate images.

Photo: @hector_soberon

“We can't change it”

“Only she and I know what happened. We cannot change the past, there have been many interviews, television programs; There is nothing new that I can say, I continue to stand on the same line and you know that I have never attacked anyone,” she said.

Michelle Vieth, months ago, initiated legal proceedings against him. The actress indicated that she would seek legal action and advocate for the implementation of a law in Mexico that sanctions “revenge porn.” This term refers to the non-consensual dissemination of intimate material recorded between two people, generally after situations such as a breakup or infidelity.

“I am fighting for a law called the Revenge Porn Law, which exists in the United States, called Revenge Porn Law, in Mexico the initiative was submitted to the Senate in 2015 and we are simply looking for the applicability of this law. As soon as the law exists or is applied as such, then we can proceed in another way,” he said at the time.

“It makes me tired”

“I'm already tired of this topic… every four years, look how funny! Every four years they release something new. I don't know what you want, get over me, right? Turn the page, you have children. Have a little dignity towards your children, towards your family, towards your partner, then, be silent,” said Soberón in an interview with the program “Ventaneando” last March after the legal announcement made by the actress of "My little naughty" against him.

The 59-year-old Mexican, during the interview, assured that, thanks to this accusation made by his ex-partner, work doors were closed to him. "If I spoke right now, what would I gain? Would 20 years of attacks come back to me? Would 20 years of finger-pointing come back to me? 20 years of knocking on doors and having them closed, 20 years of threats," he pointed.

Likewise, Héctor took the opportunity to reiterate that Michelle was not a minor when they began a romance. “I already showed you that she was not 16 years old when I met her, she was born in 79 and in 97 when we made 'My Little Naughty Girl' she was 18 years old. “When the famous video was made she was 20 years old”; he emphasized.