Several years ago, the Mexican actress Michelle Vieth was involved in a great controversy when an intimate video his, with which to this day he continues to suffer sequelae. In an interview for the “Hoy” program, the protagonist of soap operas such as “My little naughty”, “Soñadoras” and “Amigas y rivales”, announced that will sue her ex-husband, actor Héctor Soberón, whom she accuses of allegedly leaking said videoapparently as a revenge after being separated.

Michelle Vieth, stated that their sexual human rights were violated“the power to have a consequence for an infringement of my sexual human rights, for having that exposure, which in my case when the internet happened was not legislated.”

We recommend you read:

The actress made it very clear that she no longer has the fear she had at 15 years of age, and that He does not seek economic remuneration, but he does expect a punishment from a judge for Héctor Soberón“I no longer have the fear that I had when I was 15, 16 years old to speak, to raise my voice.” According to Michelle Vieth, that intimate video was leaked by her ex-husband, after an argument over an alleged infidelity of the actor.

“It is a video that Héctor and I recorded in our house in Puerto Vallarta and that is cut with all the desire to do harm, I did not expose it, I did not bring it to light, I did not betray our privacy.”

We recommend you read:

Likewise, Michelle Vieth mentioned having been the first actress in Mexico to experience a case like this“which was the revenge pornography, which today in the United States is known as ‘revenge porn law’, the law that protects this type of event, yes, I would also like to be the last one”.

Michelle Vieth and Hector Soberon They met in the 90’s, when they worked on the soap opera “Mi pequeña traviesa”. Their friendship turned into love and they got married in 2001, when she was 22 years old and he was 37. Three years later they divorced, apparently due to the actor’s infidelity. Subsequently, the XXX video of the actress was leaked.

Until now, Héctor Soberón has not commented on the lawsuit that he will file against him Michelle Vieth.

Graduated from the Universidad de Occidente in 2010 with a degree in Communication Sciences, passionate about human journalism. After participating in the “La Oveja Negra” Talent Workshop given by the Máquina de Ideas, I was recruited by El Debate companies and months after graduating, I began working as a reporter for general and police information. I am the proud founder of Periódico La i (where I served as editor and reporter) in the city of Guamúchil, Sinaloa, the popular newspaper of El Debate. Two years later I became editor of the newspaper La Sirena, another of the company’s popular newspapers. Later I migrated from paper to digital, when I went to our web portal www.debate.com.mx, witnessing the evolution and growth it has had. I am currently a web reporter and entertainment journalist, conducting interviews with local, national and international singers, groups and actors, I have also specialized in K-Pop and K-Dramas. In these years working in the company, I have acquired knowledge about SEO positioning in Google and Analytics, as well as content development for social networks.

see more