It has been thirty years since the tragic death of Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain, who took his own life on April 5, 1994.

Cobain had risen past the status of a cult icon on the 90s grunge scene to find mainstream success, penning two critically acclaimed alt-rock albums and inspiring a generation of artists from the Arctic Monkeys to Lana del Rey.

But the singer was reportedly uncomfortable with the rise to international stardom. A day after his body was discovered, the LA Times referred to a 'deeply sensitive man' who 'found it hard to adjust to the sudden acceptance', as 'confused and troubled' as the millions of young people finding solace in his angsty songwriting.

Aged 27, Cobain was found dead in his Seattle home on April 8 with a self-inflicted shotgun wound to the head. A suicide note was found in the apartment, expressing a dearth of excitement for his craft. The coroner's report estimated his body had been there for three days. Cobain left behind his wife and a young daughter.

It would be another 27 years before the FBI would publish its 10-page report into the horror discovery of Kurt Cobain's body, including a number of conspiracy theories about the cause of death. The file revealed two letters sharing so-called 'evidence' of foul play - and the FBI's reply, deciding not to investigate the death as homicide.

The FBI's shock 2021 publication of letters related to the death of Kurt Cobain sparked a wave of contentious theories from Nirvana fans world over.

Two letters were included from individuals who believed Cobain's death was the result of homicide, against the judgment made by police in 1994.

The first, dated September 24, 2003, cited a California state licensed private investigator hired by Cobain's wife, Courtney Love, who allegedly believed foul play was involved, and that Love 'had something to do with it'.

It also referenced the 1998 book 'Who Killed Kurt Cobain? The Mysterious Death fo an Icon', and the 1998 film 'Kurt & Courtney', focusing on the singer and his wife.

The second letter, dated November 20, 2007, referenced the alleged lack of fingerprints on the Remington Model 11 20-gauge shotgun found on the body, purchased for Cobain by his friend.

It also claimed the handwriting used in part of the suicide note different from the rest, and referenced the 2001 book 'Love and Death: The Murder of Kurt Cobain'.

'The police who took up the case were never very serious in investigating it as a murder but from the beginning insisted on it being a suicide,' it read.

'This bothers me the most because his killer is still out there.'

The letter also claimed Cobain, in his suicide note, 'mentioned nothing about wanting to die except for the part of it that was in another handwriting and appeared to be added at the end.'

The FBI sent identical statements back to the authors of both letters, signed by Linda M. Trigeiro-Pabst from the executive secretariat office.

It read: 'We appreciate your concern that Mr. Cobain may have been the victim of a homicide.

'However, most homicide investigations generally fall within the jurisdiction of state and local authorities.

'In order for the FBI to initiate an investigation of any complaint we receive, specific facts must be present to indicate that a violation of federal law within our investigative jurisdiction has occurred.

'Based on the information you provided, we are unable to identify any violation of federal law within the investigative jurisdiction of the FBI.

'We are, therefore, unable to take any investigative action in this case.'

The response was also sent to a third person who spoke to US Attorney General Janet Reno about the matter. This was not included in the file.

Kurt Cobain is believed to have died on April 5, 1994, a matter of weeks after overdosing on champagne and Rohypnol.

The singer was released five days after what Love said was her husband's first suicide attempt.

Some two weeks later, on March 18, 1994, Love told Seattle Police Cobain was suicide and had locked himself in a room with a gun.

Police arrived and confiscated a 38-caliber revolver and a bottle of various unidentified pills.

Later that night, Cobain told them he had not been planning to take his own life, according to Rolling Stone.

Love, family members and band mates began talking to intervention counselors to help Cobain.

'He was using, up in Seattle,' one said. 'He was in full denial. It was very chaotic. And they were in fear for his life. It was a crisis.'

On March 25, Love threatened to leave Cobain as part of an intervention at his home. Bandmates Pat Smear and Krist Novoselic threatened to break up the band. After several hours, Cobain and Smear left to rehearse music together.

Love left to Los Angeles at the end of the first day of intervention, on March 30. In Seattle, Cobain asked a friend to buy him a gun, claiming there were trespassers on his property.

Police believe Cobain dropped off the firearm at his house before checking into rehab.

Cobain spent just two days at a clinic in Los Angeles before calling Love.

'He said, "Courtney, no matter what happens, I want you to know that you made a really good record,"' she later told an outlet in Seattle.

'I said, "Well, what do you mean?" And he said, 'Just remember, no matter what, I love you.'"

Cobain left the clinic and 'jumped over the fence', according to Love, on April 1. She subsequently canceled his cards and hired investigators to find him.

On April 4, Cobain's mother filed a missing person's report, telling police he could be suicidal.

Cobain appeared to have barricaded himself in the greenhouse of his Seattle home. He wrote a short note in red ink to his childhood imaginary friend and left his wallet on the floor.

It is believed the singer at this point sat down, took drugs and shot himself.

Upon the discovery of the body by an electrician on April 8, police ruled he had died on April 5 - although two people claimed to have spoken to him on April 6.

If you are affected by the issues raised in this story, contact the 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline, a hotline for individuals in crisis - and for those looking to help someone else.

To speak with a trained listener, call 988. Visit 988lifeline.org for crisis chat services or for more information.

The Crisis Text Line is a texting service for emotional crisis support. To text with a trained helper, text SAVE to 741741. It is free, available 24/7, and confidential.