THIRTY years have passed since rock music icon Kurt Cobain died in what was legally ruled as suicide.

Here's everything we know about the legendary Nirvana frontman's passing and what the note he left said.

How old was Kurt Cobain when he died?

Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain was found dead in his Seattle home on April 8, 1994, after dying from a gunshot wound to the head on April 5.

The beloved singer, who suffered from heroin addiction and mental illness, was discovered by electrician Gary Smith, who had arrived to install a security system.

Coming up to a room above the garage, Gary thought Kurt was asleep until he saw a gun was pointing at his chin.

The coroner ruled that Kurt — 27 at the time and father to one-year-old daughter Frances Bean Cobain — had killed himself.

A high concentration of heroin and a small amount of diazepam were found in Kurt's body.

The death came at the height of his fame, after the band he'd formed in 1987, Nirvana, had hit the big time with their track Smells Like Teen Spirit, and were all over MTV.

A public vigil for Kurt was held on April 10, 1994, at which his widow Courtney Love read sections of his suicide note to the gathered 7,000-strong crowd.

She later gave some of Kurt's clothing to mourners and attended a second funeral with Kurt's ex-girlfriend Tracy Marander.

On March 3, just over a month before his death, Kurt had attempted suicide in Rome by overdosing on champagne and Rohypnol.

After that, he was taken back to Seattle by his wife Courtney, but she was soon calling the police to tell them that Kurt had locked himself in his room with guns and bottles of pills.

When police asked him if he'd been threatening to kill himself, he claimed he was merely hiding from Courtney.

Kurt then agreed to go to a Los Angeles rehab facility, where he spent his last moments with daughter Frances - but he escaped the compound by climbing over a wall at the end of March.

He was thought to be missing for several days but had secretly flown back to Seattle, where his body was found.

Nirvana drummer Dave Grohl said of the death: "I remember the day after that I woke up and I was heartbroken that he was gone.

"I just felt like, 'Okay, so I get to wake up today and have another day and he doesn't'."

What did Kurt's suicide note say?

A suicide note — found near Kurt's body — was addressed to his imaginary friend Boddah, but bore messages for his wife, daughter, and fans.

It read: "Speaking from the tongue of an experienced simpleton who obviously would rather be an emasculated, infantile complain-ee. This note should be pretty easy to understand.

"All the warnings from the punk rock 101 courses over the years, since my first introduction to the, shall we say, ethics involved with independence and the embracement of your community has proven to be very true.

"I haven't felt the excitement of listening to as well as creating music along with reading and writing for too many years now. I feel guilty beyond words about these things.

"For example when we're back stage and the lights go out and the manic roar of the crowds begins, it doesn't affect me the way in which it did for Freddie Mercury, who seemed to love, relish in the love and adoration from the crowd which is something I totally admire and envy.

"The fact is, I can't fool you, any one of you. It simply isn't fair to you or me. The worst crime I can think of would be to rip people off by faking it and pretending as if I'm having 100% fun.

"Sometimes I feel as if I should have a punch-in time clock before I walk out on stage. I've tried everything within my power to appreciate it (and I do, God, believe me I do, but it's not enough).

"I appreciate the fact that I and we have affected and entertained a lot of people. It must be one of those narcissists who only appreciate things when they're gone.

"I'm too sensitive. I need to be slightly numb in order to regain the enthusiasms I once had as a child.

"On our last 3 tours, I've had a much better appreciation for all the people I've known personally, and as fans of our music, but I still can't get over the frustration, the guilt and empathy I have for everyone.

"There's good in all of us and I think I simply love people too much, so much that it makes me feel too f***ing sad.

"The sad little, sensitive, unappreciative, Pisces, Jesus man. Why don't you just enjoy it? I don't know!

"I have a goddess of a wife who sweats ambition and empathy and a daughter who reminds me too much of what i used to be, full of love and joy, kissing every person she meets because everyone is good and will do her no harm.

"And that terrifies me to the point to where I can barely function. I can't stand the thought of Frances becoming the miserable, self-destructive, death rocker that I've become.

"I have it good, very good, and I'm grateful, but since the age of seven, I've become hateful towards all humans in general. Only because it seems so easy for people to get along that have empathy. Only because I love and feel sorry for people too much I guess.

"Thank you all from the pit of my burning, nauseous stomach for your letters and concern during the past years. I'm too much of an erratic, moody baby! I don't have the passion anymore, and so remember, it's better to burn out than to fade away.

"Peace, love, empathy. Kurt Cobain.

"Frances and Courtney, I'll be at your alter. Please keep going Courtney, for Frances. For her life, which will be so much happier without me.

"I LOVE YOU, I LOVE YOU!"

What was the last concert before Kurt Cobain died?

Nirvana's last concert was on March 1, 1994.

The gig was at Terminal 1 in Munich, Germany.

Here's the setlist for their final show:

My Best Friend's Girl (The Cars cover)

Radio Friendly Unit Shifter

Drain You

Breed

Serve the Servants

Come as You Are

Sliver

Dumb

In Bloom

About a Girl

Lithium

Pennyroyal Tea

School

Polly

Very Ape

Lounge Act

Rape Me

Territorial Pissings

The Man Who Sold the World (David Bowie cover)

All Apologies

On a Plain

Blew

Heart-Shaped Box

Who announced Kurt Cobain's death on MTV?

Kurt Loder announced the news of the Nirvana legend's passing on MTV.

He was one of the first people to break the news of Kurt's death.

Loder started his report: “Hi, I’m Kurt Loder with an MTV News special report.

“The body of Nirvana leader Kurt Cobain was found in house in Seattle on Friday morning dead of an apparently self-inflicted shotgun blast to the head.

“Police found was is said to be a suicide note at the scene but have not yet divulged its contents.”

He went on to say Kurt had been missing “for several days” and that the LA Times had reported earlier in the week that Nirvana was “breaking up” and Cobain was “planning to undergo drug rehabilitation”.

Where is Kurt Cobain buried?

Kurt wasn't buried.

He was cremated and his ashes were scattered to the Pacific winds near the Wishkah River, Washington.

Therefore anyone wishing to to pay tribute to Kurt cannot visit a gravesite.

What was Kurt Cobain's net worth when he died?

Kurt’s wealth at the time of his death is debated.

An estimate of his wealth in 2014 was $450million (£355million.)

It was also estimated that he would earn approximately $4.4million (£3.4million) a year from album sales alone.

Who inherited Kurt Cobain's fortune?

Most of Kurt's fortune was inherited by his widow Love and daughter Frances.

In 2013, Frances inherited 37 per cent of her father's estate and had a net worth of over $11.2 million before turning 30, according to reports.

After celebrating her 30th birthday, Frances then reportedly inherited an even vaster sum from the Nirvana estate.

According to CelebrityNetWorth, as of October 2023 her fortune was $200million.