April 5 marks thirty years since the shocking death of Kurt Cobain - who took his own life at the age of 27.

At the time of his death, the Nirvana frontman appeared to have the world at his feet - having recently married singer Courtney Love, now 59, being the father to eight-month-old daughter Frances, and with two chart-topping studio albums under his arm. But on 5 April, 1994, the singer violently ended his own life leaving music fans heartbroken and his wife bereft.

In the three decades since Kurt’s death, music fans have continued to be intrigued by the details of his suicide - with many theories and conspiracies being formed in relation to his death. Last year, Nirvana fans were again stunned by the circumstances of Kurt’s passing as the American intelligence agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, confirmed they had a file on the star’s death.

With the third anniversary of Kurt’s tragic death arriving, the facts of his suicide continue to draw attention. Here are some of the details about the singer’s death - and the reasons why the FBI decided not to consider his suicide a murder.

FBI admits file on Kurt Cobain

Nirvana fans were surprised in April 2021 when the FBI released a file they had on Kurt Cobain and made the contents public. The file sparked theories and speculation about the details of Kurt’s tragic death - igniting theories that his death may not have been a suicide.

The FBI file was a mere 10 pages long but included letters that fans pounced on as they suggested the Smells Like Teen Spirit singer was murdered. The names of the authors of the letters were redacted by the FBI - but came from sources that urged the intelligence service to investigate the death as suspicious.

One letter, dated 2007, wrote: “The police who took up the case were never very serious in investigating it as a murder but from the beginning insisted on it being a suicide” - and suggested: “This bothers me the most because his killer is still out there.” The other letter also urged the FBI to investigate, stating: “Millions of fans around the world would like to see the inconsistencies surrounding his death cleared up once and for all.” Fans suggested Kurt’s suicide note was suspicious as it looked like it had been penned by more than one person as the final paragraph looked different to another.

The FBI declined to investigate

Rolling Stone magazine investigated the files shared by the FBI and discovered the intelligence agency declined the chance to investigate. A response to the letters from the redacted authors stated: “We appreciate your concern that Mr. Cobain may have been the victim of a homicide… However, most homicide investigations generally fall within the jurisdiction of state or local authorities.”

Rolling Stone went on to note: “The replies go on to say that ‘specific facts’ about a 'violation of federal law’ would have to be presented for the Bureau to pursue, but based on these letters, ‘we are unable to identify any violation of federal law within the investigative jurisdiction of the FBI’.” The report concluded that the FBI declined to pursue investigating Kurt’s death as a murder investigation.

How did Kurt Cobain die?

Kurt had been in rehab but left the centre on 1 April 1994 and the following day he visited a gun store in Seattle where he bought shotgun shells. When a taxi driver asked him why he had bought the shotgun shells, the singer reportedly told him he feared his home was going to be burgled.

Six days later, Kurt’s body was found in a room above his garage at his home in Seattle. His body was discovered by an electrician who arrived to install security lighting. They initially thought the singer was merely asleep, but then noticed blood and discovered a suicide note that had been affixed to a flower pot near his body.

A shotgun, owned by Kurt’s friend, Dylan Carlson - with reports later suggesting Kurt had asked his friend to buy the gun as he feared police would confiscate a firearm if he bought one himself as this had happened twice before.

Tests later found morphine in 1.52 milligrams per litre of his blood and also evidence of valium in his blood. Seattle police deemed the death as suicide by gunshot and his date of death was deemed to be 5 April 1994 - three days before his body was found.

What did Kurt Cobain’s suicide note say?

The Nirvana frontman stabbed a note into a flower pot - with a pen piercing the letter into the soil. The note said: “I have it good, very good, and I’m grateful, but since the age of seven, I’ve become hateful towards all humans in general…. Thank you all from the pit of my burning, nauseous stomach for your letters and concern during the past years. I’m too much of an erratic, moody baby! I don’t have the passion anymore, and so remember, it’s better to burn out than to fade away.”

Why are there conspiracy theories around Kurt Cobain’s death?

Aside from the fact the FBI released a file relating to Kurt’s death, fans have other reasons to be suspicious of the singer’s death. Journalist Richard Lee began airing a show titled Kurt Cobain Was Murdered a week after the star's death. In his reports, Lee questioned the validity of reports about the singer’s death, suggesting there had not been enough blood found at the scene of the death to be considered a death caused by a gunshot to the head. However, pathologists have since debunked Lee’s theory stating the amount of blood released by the body caused by a gunshot can change due to the location and direction of the bullet entering or exiting the body.

A private investigator named Tom Grant - hired by Kurt’s widowed wife, Courtney Love, to find the star after he skipped rehab - there was evidence of “lies, contradictions in logic, and countless inconsistencies” surrounding the facts of the death. He suspected Kurt would not be able to inject as much heroin as was found in his body and then be fit to shoot himself. However, police debunked Grant’s claim, with Sergeant Donald Cameron, stating: "[Grant] hasn't shown us a shred of proof that this was anything other than suicide."

A string of other investigators and fans have also pitched conspiracy theories about Kurt’s death - but Nirvana bassist Kris Novoselic is convinced his late friend fully intended to end his own life. In a Reddit post shared in 2023, he wrote: “I beg anyone who thinks they have any real evidence of foul play to go to the police. Finally, one of the reasons I am convinced Kurt killed himself is that he purchased a 20 gauge shotgun. Kurt was not interested in hunting birds or squirrels, he bought that firearm as a suicide device. Suicide is not rational.”