Today marks 30 years since Kurt Cobain died by suicide, with his sad passing being the subject of plenty of rumors over the years.

At the peak of his career, Cobain seemed to have it all - a recent marriage to singer Courtney Love, fatherhood to an eight-month-old daughter Frances, and two chart-topping albums to his name. However, on April 5, 1994, he tragically died by suicide, leaving the music world in mourning and his wife devastated.

Over the past 30 years, fans have remained fascinated by the circumstances of Cobain's death, with numerous theories and conspiracies emerging. Last year, Nirvana enthusiasts were shocked once again when the FBI confirmed they had a file on Cobain's death.

With the 30th anniversary of Cobain's death, the facts surrounding his suicide continue to draw attention. Here are some chilling details about the star's death and why the FBI did not classify his suicide as murder.

FBI admits file on Cobain

READ MORE: The Wallflowers' former guitarist Michael Ward dies aged 57 days before next performance

In April 2021, the FBI unexpectedly released a file they had on Kurt Cobain, revealing its contents to the public and speaking conspiracy theories regarding the rock icon's untimely death. The file, though only 10 pages long, contained letters which fans became convinced hinted at the possibility the frontman might have been the victim of foul play.

The names of the authors of the letters were redacted by the FBI - but came from sources that urged the intelligence service to investigate the death as suspicious. A 2007-dated letter expressed frustration: "The police who took up the case were never very serious in investigating it as a murder but from the beginning insisted on it being a suicide.

It continued: "This bothers me the most because his killer is still out there." The other letter echoed the call for action, proclaiming: "Millions of fans around the world would like to see the inconsistencies surrounding his death cleared up once and for all." Fans suggested Kurt’s suicide note was suspicious as it looked like it had been penned by more than one person as the final paragraph looked different to another.

FBI decline to investigate

Join the Mirror's SMS news service to get the biggest breaking stories delivered straight to your phone. Click here to subscribe.

Rolling Stone magazine delved into FBI files and discovered the declined the chance to investigate the circumstances surrounding Kurt Cobain's death. A response to the letters from the redacted authors stated: “We appreciate your concern that Mr. Cobain may have been the victim of a homicide… However, most homicide investigations generally fall within the jurisdiction of state or local authorities.”

The publication added: "The replies go on to say that 'specific facts' about a 'violation of federal law' would have to be presented for the Bureau to pursue, but based on these letters, 'we are unable to identify any violation of federal law within the investigative jurisdiction of the FBI'." Ultimately, Rolling Stone concluded that the FBI did not take steps to investigate the possibility of murder in Kurt's case.

How did the singer die?

Click here to follow the Mirror US on Google News to stay up to date with all the latest news, sport and entertainment stories.

Kurt had checked himself into rehab, only to leave the facility on April 1, 1994. The next day, he was seen at a Seattle gun store purchasing shotgun shells, explaining to a taxi driver that he was worried about burglaries at his residence.

On April 8, 1994, six days after buying the ammunition, Kurt's body was discovered in the space above his garage at his Seattle home. An electrician who came to install security lighting stumbled upon the scene, initially mistaking the singer for someone sleeping until they noticed blood and a suicide note left near his body, propped against a flower pot.

Kurt Cobain's tragic end came with a shotgun, purchased by his friend Dylan Carlson. It's been suggested that Kurt had Carlson buy the weapon because he was worried about police confiscation after previous incidents.

Toxicology reports revealed a high concentration of morphine, 1.52 milligrams per litre, in his bloodstream, along with traces of valium. The Seattle police concluded it was a suicide by gunshot, and determined that Kurt died on April 5, 1994, which was three days before his body was discovered.

What did Kurt Cobain's suicide note reveal?

The Nirvana frontman stabbed a note into a flower pot - with a pen piercing the letter into the soil. His suicide note said: "I have it good, very good, and I'm grateful, but since the age of seven, I've become hateful towards all humans in general.... Thank you all from the pit of my burning, nauseous stomach for your letters and concern during the past years. I'm too much of an erratic, moody baby! I don't have the passion anymore, and so remember, it's better to burn out than to fade away."

Why are conspiracy theories fascinated by Kurt Cobain's death?

Aside from the FBI's release of a file regarding Kurt's death, fans have further doubts about his death Journalist Richard Lee began publicly questioning the true cause of Cobain's death by launching a weekly show "Kurt Cobain Was Murdered" just seven days after his passing.

Lee questioned the validity of reports about the singer’s death, insinuating there wasn't ample blood evidence at the crime site to classify it as death by gunshot to the head, although such claims were later refuted by medical examiners agreeing the amount of bleeding varies according to bullet entry and exit points.

Private detective Tom Grant, employed by Courtney Love, also professed seeing signs of "lies, contradictions in logic, and countless inconsistencies" surrounding Cobain's death. Grant argued that the massive heroin quantity detected in Kurt's corpse would render him incapable to self-inflict a gunshot, but police dismissed this speculation with Sergeant Donald Cameron responding: "[Grant] hasn't shown us a shred of proof that this was anything other than suicide."