Leonardo Benvenuti also called Leo, was an Italian screenwriter. He wrote for more than 130 films between 1948 and 2000. He was born in Florence, Italy and died in Rome, Italy.

Leonardo Benvenuti was born on September 8, 1923, in Florence, Tuscany, Italy. His birth geographical coordinates are 43° 46’ 45” North latitude and 11° 14’ 47” East longitude, with an altitude of 50 meters above sea level. Leonardo Benvenuti passed away at the age of 77 in 2000.

Astrologically, Leonardo Benvenuti falls under the Sun sign of Virgo, with Scorpio as his Ascendant, Leo as his Moon sign, and Taurus as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Virgo Moon Leo Mercury Libra Venus Virgo Mars Virgo Jupiter Scorpio Saturn Libra Uranus Pisces Neptune Leo Pluto Cancer Ceres Aquarius Chiron Aries Eros Gemini Hygiea Pisces Juno Virgo Pallas Capricorn Vesta Libra Ascendant Scorpio Black Moon Lilith Taurus Midheaven Virgo North Node Virgo South Node Pisces Part of Fortune Libra Vertex Cancer

Sunin Virgo14° 45’ 54”

The Sun in Virgo in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for an assistant or researcher. You avoid the spotlight but love being helpful. […] Read more »

Moonin Leo12° 49’ 6”

The Moon in Leo in the Natal Chart makes you excitable and reactive. You are passionate and have a sensual and hedonistic nature. You are […] Read more »

Mercuryin Libra10° 59’ 7”

Libra Mercury in the Natal Chart makes you charming and romantic. You are sentimental and can be expressive and kind. Your gentle and friendly nature […] Read more »

Venusin Virgo14° 13’ 46”

Virgo Venus in the Natal Chart makes you helpful and innocent in relationships. You seek ways to nurture others. You are charming and can be […] Read more »

Marsin Virgo4° 43’ 45”

Virgo Mars in the Natal Chart makes you nurturing and warm. You are protective and can be warm and generous. You can be down to […] Read more »

Jupiterin Scorpio14° 28’ 11”

Scorpio Jupiter in the Natal Chart relates to a generation born with the mission to expose hidden secrets and find empowerment and vision. You are […] Read more »

Saturnin Libra18° 28’ 59”

Yet, when you face challenges, you can be a staunch advocate for others. You have a feisty side and can be passionate about your mission. […] Read more »

Uranusin Pisces15° 36’ 3”

Pisces Uranus in the Natal Chart is a generational placement indicating people born at this time are on a Karmic mission to bring breakthroughs in […] Read more »

Neptunein Leo18° 55’ 5”

Leo Neptune in the Natal Chart makes you eager to bring healing and compassion to others. You are artistic and passionate about your dreams. You […] Read more »

Plutoin Cancer12° 8’ 36”

Pluto in Cancer in the Natal Chart indicates a generation with powerful intuition and desires. You are part of a social group obsessed with re-evaluating […] Read more »

Ceresin Aquarius0° 45’ 17”

Aquarius Ceres in the Natal Chart indicates a generation dedicated to innovation and dramatic change. Your generation is comfortable being individualistic and independent. Your generation […] Read more »

Chironin Aries20° 12’ 56”

Aries Chiron in the Natal Chart brings passion and persuasiveness. You help others heal from old wounds by showing your strength and tapping into your […] Read more »

Erosin Gemini19° 34’ 21”

Eros in Gemini in the Natal Chart indicates an ideal placement for excitement and enthusiasm. You are passionate about your ideas and aroused by conversations […] Read more »

Hygieain Pisces7° 49’ 7”

Hygiea in Pisces in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for an intuitive healer. You can be a spiritual guide who encourages others to […] Read more »

Junoin Virgo3° 51’ 56”

Juno in Virgo in the Natal Chart makes you reserved and traditional. You take a cautious approach to settling down and are slow to fall […] Read more »

Pallasin Capricorn3° 19’ 14”

Pallas in Capricorn in the Natal Chart gives you a broad perspective and gift for organizing plans to improve your business and career. You can […] Read more »

Vestain Libra22° 13’ 17”

Vesta in Libra in the Natal Chart makes you caring and sentimental. You are motivated to help others and can be dedicated to your loved […] Read more »

Ascendantin Scorpio25° 36’ 28”

Scorpio Ascendant makes you eager to use your image and appearance to convey authority and power. You are determined to show your influence by speaking […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Taurus7° 58’ 25”

Taurus Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you daring and sincere. You are authentic and can be true to yourself, even when your […] Read more »

Midheavenin Virgo11° 16’ 48”

Virgo Midheaven in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for service and careers related to health and science. You are diligent and cautious in […] Read more »

North Nodein Virgo11° 4’ 47”

Virgo North Node in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for research and analysis. You are methodical and use your gifts to set a […] Read more »

South Nodein Pisces11° 4’ 47”

Pisces South Node in the Natal Chart makes you mystical and intuitive. You can be generous and use your instincts to heal others. You are […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Libra23° 39’ 39”

Libra Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you gentle and conscientious. You can be caring and romantic with an eye for beauty and […] Read more »

Vertexin Cancer8° 30’ 32”

Cancer Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you affectionate and loving. Your instincts can bring you closer to your purpose. Your destiny relies on your […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Ninth House Mercury Tenth House Venus Tenth House Mars Ninth House Jupiter Twelfth House Saturn Eleventh House Uranus Fourth House Neptune Ninth House Pluto Eighth House Ceres Second House Chiron Fifth House Eros Seventh House Hygiea Third House Juno Ninth House Pallas Second House Vesta Eleventh House Black Moon Lilith Sixth House North Node Ninth House South Node Third House Part of Fortune Eleventh House Vertex Eighth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 23 major aspects, alongside 10 minor aspects, as well as 8 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Sextile Jupiter Venus Sextile Jupiter Saturn Sextile Neptune Sun Conjunct Venus Sun Opposite Uranus Mercury Square Pluto Venus Opposite Uranus Jupiter Trine Uranus Moon Sextile Mercury Moon Square Jupiter Venus Sextile Pluto Jupiter Trine Pluto Sun Sextile Pluto Moon Quincunx Uranus Saturn Quincunx Uranus Uranus Quincunx Neptune Uranus Trine Pluto Jupiter Square Neptune Mercury Quincunx Uranus Moon Sextile Saturn Moon Conjunct Neptune Saturn Square Pluto Mercury Conjunct Saturn

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Leonardo Benvenuti’s life journey.

Sun Sextile Jupiterorb: 0°

The Sun sextile Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you idealistic and expansive. You are outgoing and love meeting new people and can be thoughtful […] Read more »

Venus Sextile Jupiterorb: 0°

Venus sextile Jupiter in a chart typically indicates that a person is generous, kind, and loving. They are optimistic, especially when it comes to their […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Venusorb: 1°

When the Sun is conjunct Venus in your Natal Chart, you are exceptionally romantic. Others see you as beautiful, and you have a gift for […] Read more »

Sun Opposite Uranusorb: 1°

The Sun opposite Uranus makes you unpredictable and creative. You are gifted and innovative, yet you don’t always follow through on your higher ambitions. You […] Read more »

Venus Opposite Uranusorb: 1°

Venus opposite Uranus in a chart creates a zest for life and excitement in romance. Any person with this in their chart will need a […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Mercuryorb: 2°

You are emotionally open and communicative if you’ve got the Moon sextile Mercury in your Natal Chart. You likely don’t find sharing your feelings challenging, […] Read more »

Moon Square Jupiterorb: 2°

The Moon square Jupiter in a chart can initially seem like a happy and positive influence. It might feel good for someone experiencing it, even […] Read more »

Venus Sextile Plutoorb: 2°

Venus sextile Pluto in a chart typically indicates a person is highly passionate about expressing love and affection. They are devoted friends and partners, though […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Plutoorb: 3°

The Sun sextile Pluto in a Natal Chart makes you powerful and self-assured. You are comfortable taking charge and prefer to lead others. You don’t […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Uranusorb: 3°

When the Moon is quincunx Uranus in a Natal Chart, this creates tension between the need to rebel and the need to find emotional security. […] Read more »

Saturn Quincunx Uranusorb: 3°

Saturn quincunx Uranus in a chart typically indicates there is a strong push and pull between security and change. It can be challenging to balance […] Read more »

Uranus Quincunx Neptuneorb: 3°

Uranus quincunx Neptune in a chart creates conflict between Neptune’s idealism and Uranus’ eccentricity. They may feel they are being pulled back and forth by […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx Uranusorb: 5°

Mercury quincunx Uranus in a chart typically indicates that someone can be rebellious, but they are a bit impractical and scattered regarding what they rebel […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Saturnorb: 6°

When the Moon is sextile Saturn in a Natal Chart, this typically indicates that a person is responsible and more on the serious side. They […] Read more »

Moon Conjunct Neptuneorb: 6°

The Moon conjunct Neptune blends your mystical and emotional gifts. You are artistic and have many creative outlets. You have an active imagination and may […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Saturnorb: 7°

Mercury conjunct Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you a practical and traditional thinker. You are stoic and hold firm beliefs. You are not adaptable […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Mercury Quincunx South Node Mars Conjunct Juno Mars Trine Pallas Saturn Trine Eros Neptune Trine Chiron Neptune Sextile Eros Pluto Sextile Midheaven Pluto Sextile North Node Pluto Trine South Node Saturn Opposite Chiron

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Leonardo Benvenuti’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Mercury Quincunx South Nodeorb: 0°

Mercury quincunx South Node in a chart typically indicates a disconnect between a person’s rational, intellectual mind and the karmic lessons they are meant to […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Hygiea Sextile Black Moon Lilith Midheaven Conjunct North Node Midheaven Opposite South Node Chiron Sextile Eros Hygiea Trine Vertex Juno Trine Pallas Vesta Conjunct Part of Fortune Black Moon Lilith Sextile Vertex

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Leonardo Benvenuti’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Vesta Conjunct Part of Fortuneorb: 1°

Vesta conjunct the Part of Fortune in a chart connects someone’s sense of devotion and sacred flame with what they need to feel fulfilled and […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilith Sextile Vertexorb: 1°

The Black Moon Lilith sextile Vertex in your Natal Chart makes you eager to explore your ambitious and independent nature. You are creative and expressive, […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.