Delmarva Public Media is a service of Salisbury University (WSCL 89.5, WSDL 90.7) and the University of Maryland Eastern Shore (WESM 91.3).

Delmarva Public Media offers the public the following information regarding our governance, financial accountability, reporting responsibilities, and statements of diversity and conduct.

Management

Judy Diaz

Interim General Manager, Delmarva Public Media

PO Box 2596

Salisbury, MD 21802

jdiaz@salisbury.edu

410-543-6895

Governance and Open Meetings

The licenses for WSCL 89.5 and WSDL 90.7 are held by Salisbury University in Salisbury, Maryland.

The license for WESM 91.3 is held by the University of Maryland Eastern Shore in Princess Anne, Maryland.

Both universities are governed by the University System of Maryland. The governing body for the University System of Maryland is the Board of Regents. The Board of Regents meets regularly in open, public meetings, and also approves the budgets for all 12 system institutions, including Delmarva Public Media's parent institutions (SU and UMES), typically in April or May of each year.

A full listing of all USM Board of Regents scheduled open meetings, including dates, times and locations – as well as additional Board information, is located below:

USM Board of Regents Overview

Board of Regents Members

Board of Regents Meeting Schedule

Board of Regents Meeting Agendas

Board of Regents Minutes

Community Advisory Board

The Community Advisory Board meetings are open to the public.

Current Members

Stephen Adams

Judi Billups

Eddie Boyd

Tammy Bresnahan

Nancy Carey

Charles Emery

Rick Givens

Armajeanne Harmon

Peter Jackson

Kel Nagel

Meeting Information

Upcoming:

7/25/2024, 12 pm

Henson Center, 2nd Fl - President's Reading Room

University of MD Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, MD

Past Meetings:

4/25/2024, 12 pm [Henson Center, President's Reading Room (University of MD Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, MD)]

01/25/2024, 12pm [Alumni House (Salisbury University, 1101 Camden Ave., Salisbury, MD)]

10/26/2023, 12 pm [Henson Center, 2nd floor (University of MD Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, MD)]

4/27/2023, 12 pm [Maroon & Gold Club conference space, East Campus Complex (Salisbury University, Salisbury, MD). Enter through Delmarva Public Media membership area, door EC-138.]

1/26/2023, 12 pm [Community Foundation of the Eastern Shore (1324 Belmont Ave Ste 401, Salisbury, MD 21804)]

10/27/2022, 12 pm [Ward Museum of Wildfowl Art (909 South Schumaker Drive, Salisbury, MD 21804)]

7/19/2022, 12 pm (Online via Zoom)

4/21/2022, 12 pm (Online via Zoom)

1/20/2022, 12 pm (Online via Zoom)

9/21/2021, 12 pm [Guerrieri Student Union, Nanticoke Room (Salisbury University, Salisbury, MD)]

Corporation for Public Broadcasting (CPB) Reports and Information

Delmarva Public Media stations receive funding from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. As a participant in the CPB grant program, DPM provides the public with certain reports and information, including the following documents filed with CPB (PDF viewer required):

WSCL/WSDL:

Audited Financial Statement FY 2023 (WSCL/WSDL)

Annual Financial Report FY 2023 (WSCL/WSDL)

Local Content and Services Report 2023 (WSCL/WSDL)

Employment Statistical Report FY 2023 (WSCL/WSDL)

WESM:

Audited Financial Statement FY 2023 (WESM)

Annual Financial Report FY 2023 (WESM)

Local Content and Services Report 2023 (WESM)

Employment Statistical Report FY 2023 (WESM)

Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Reports and Filings

Public Files:

WSCL 89.5 Public File

WSDL 90.7 Public File

WESM 91.3 Public File

EEO Employment Reports:

EEO Employment Report FY 2023(WSCL/WSDL)

FCC Applications:

WSCL/WSDL – There are no pending applications for WSCL 89.5 FM or WSDL 90.7 FM subject to posting requirements at this time.

WESM – There are no pending applications for WESM 91.3 FM subject to posting requirements at this time.

DPM Diversity Statement

As part of the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, a historically black institution, WESM 91.3 FM has traditionally embraced diversity. This has been a goal and element of UMES since its founding, and one that WESM, and by extension Delmarva Public Media stations, continues to promote.

Content

Delmarva Public Media stations air special programming addressing issues of concern for diverse audiences, including women and minorities. These special programs explore topics including, but not limited to, the history and culture of African-Americans, Latin-Americans, and other minority groups. Other topics feature socioeconomic challenges in society, religion, ethnic heritage, historical documentaries regarding civil rights, and other issues of importance to diverse communities. Special programming also includes long-form and some shorter-form segments aired during news-magazines (e.g. Morning Edition and All Things Considered). Delmarva Public Media promotes these programs on our web site, and links to the content providers.

Delmarva Public Media stations are firmly committed to promoting diversity by continuing to share and broadcast content which targets diverse audiences and interests. Our belief is that programming featuring diversity of thought and experience is helpful to our listeners, even when the issues featured are not obvious major concerns for our geographic region (e.g. border security, or when a minority group does not have major representation in our area). We believe it is our responsibility to provide a forum of expression for a variety of topics, voices and points of view, as they help to expose our listeners to new and different perspectives.

Employment

Our diversity policy mission is reflected in our workforce. Our parent institutions, Salisbury University and the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, both employ a diverse workforce.

https://www.salisbury.edu/administration/diversity-and-inclusion/

https://wwwcp.umes.edu/oie/diversity-and-inclusion/

Delmarva Public Media staff incorporates persons of diverse religious, linguistic, generational and cultural backgrounds, and gender expression.

Student Engagement

Delmarva Public Media stations have maintained a commitment to diversity goals via opportunities for students at both parent institutions, SU and UMES. We note the importance of helping UMES students, in particular, as part of a historically black institution, prepare to enter a broadcast industry that is not often reflective of American diversity as a whole.

Delmarva Public Media will continue to provide opportunities for diverse students who express an interest in the radio industry. These opportunities include, but are not limited to, internships, student workers, one-on-one career counseling, and resume help.

Conduct