The Humboldt Crabs will officially begin their 78th season Friday evening when they host the Novato Knicks for a three-game weekend series at Arcata Ball Park.

On the eve of the signature team’s return to the field, there’s also more clarity around the team’s roster for the 2023 season. A partially updated roster on the Crabs’ website shows many of the returning players from last year’s team in addition to several new faces, including multiple players from the University of Nevada and Sacramento State.

Catcher Kawananakoa Soares, infielder Mason Hirata and pitcher Clayton Ray all join the Crabs from the Wolf Pack. As reported last week, the Crabs will be bringing back Colby Lunsford and adding Jacob Cortez from Sacramento State. They’ll also be adding two more Hornets in Braden Frank, a utility player, and pitcher Benjy Tucker.

The team will also be adding several players from nearby Cal Poly Humboldt’s California Collegiate Athletic Conference. Although the ‘Jacks don’t participate in baseball, the Crabs will have a few players from the school’s rivals in the CCAA. The team is adding two players from Cal State San Marcos, infielder Luke Reece and pitcher Nolan Long. The team will also have two players from Cal State East Bay in returning pitcher Garrison Finck as well as incoming outfielder Luke Brown. Chico State outfielder Andrew Crane will also be joining the Crabs.

Rounding out the listed roster is outfielder Mike McKernan from Fresno State, infielder Peyton Miller from Pacific, pitcher Colton Wuelfing from Regis and catcher Griffin Myer from Washington State, which is also manager Robin Guiver’s alma mater.

“It’s kind of like Christmas for us coaches,” said Guiver. “We’ve been recruiting these guys and putting the team together and we kind of get to unwrap our presents and see what we got.”

While the entire roster will be available later this month, the Crabs will work with their current group of approximately 19 to 23 players in the opener against the Knicks this weekend. Humboldt will have to hit the ground running as the Knicks began their season last week on May 26. The Knicks are a somewhat unfamiliar face for Humboldt as the team has revamped itself as a college team and features a number of players from the Marin area.

“It’s been years since we’ve played them. I know when I was playing we used to play them and they were a kind of semi-pro team that had a bunch of ex-pro guys,” said Guiver of Novato. “I’ll know a lot more about them by tomorrow night’s game.”

Humboldt County and Del Norte County will also be hosting the Forest Moon Festival this weekend with the Crabs scheduled to take part in the vast Star Wars celebration across the North Coast.

As always the bar for success is high for the Crabs as they seek to add a 78th consecutive winning season to their history while creating a memorable experience for the team’s players and fans.

“For the guys that haven’t seen it, and they see that ballpark overflow on Friday night,” added Guiver. “Feeling the energy and seeing everyone line up on the street waiting to get in, their eyes are wide open and they’re going to be fired up.”

Jake Matson can be reached at 707-441-0526.