Mike Reed/Pages From The Past

Editor’s note: This feature takes a stroll down memory lane through the pages of the historic Novato Advance newspaper. To subscribe to the Advance today, see details on page 3A.)

100 Years Ago

May 1921

— Mrs. W.C. Miller, wife of the owner of the Grand View Hotel, at Grand View, was seriously injured when the automobile which she was driving, collided with a freight train that had been left standing on the track at Olive Avenue. Mrs. Miller, it is said, did not see the train until she collied with it.

— PICNIC AT NOVATO ON DECORATION DAY The Novato Center of the Marin County Farm Bureau is holding a community picnic on Decoration Day —May 30. It has secured grounds in the southwest corner of the Novato Valley, opposite the Harris ranch, and is inviting the residents of Marin county and Petaluma to spend the day at the picnic. To reach the grounds follow signs west from the bridge on the highway just south of town. Everyone is to bring his lunch but coffee, ice cream, and other refreshments will be available on the grounds.

75 Years Ago

May 1946

— Black Point is to have a new postmaster. The resignation of Mrs. Josie Bobo, forwarded to the Post office Department many months ago, has at last been accepted. Mr. Abe Zanelli has been acting postmaster and, doubtless, will receive the appointment to the office in due course. Mrs. Bobo has wished to give up the office for a long time. She tendered her resignation once before but, due to the manpower shortage, the department could find no one to take the office and finally she was prevailed upon to withdraw the resignation. She has held the office for over ten years and her courteous service has made her universally popular. It is with much regret that Black| Point sees her resignation accepted and she will be missed by all of us.

— Mr. and Mrs. Alfred Baiz have applied to the Marin County planning commission for the rezoning of their property at Simmon’s Lane and the Novato Boulevard to allow the rebuilding of the grocery store they have operated for nine years on Simmon’s Lane which is also to house a radio shop and the new radio station.

— C.S. Phillips of Petaluma holds the contract for the construction of a $45,000 retail store building proposed by the Pini Hardware Company, plans of which were filed with the Marin County planning commission by D.D. Phillips of the company. The firm seeks approval of a building permit that immediate construction on the project may be commenced. The structure will be built on Grant Avenue west of Highway 101. It will front on Grant Avenue 135 feet, be 200 feet deep and 15 feet high, housing one story. The walls are to be constructed of hollow tile with a concrete finished exterior and stucco interior, the plans reveal.

50 Years Ago

May 1971

— Jim Dolcini, son of Arnold Dolcini, dairy rancher west of Novato, retained his title last week as the wrist wrestling champion of the world at the international games in Petaluma. His brother, Mike Dolcini, who won the lightweight class last year, had to move up to a heavier division this year and was bested in the finals by defending light heavyweight champion Jim Pollack.

— The Coast Guard plans to take over on July 1 Two Rock Station, near Petaluma, being abandoned by the Army. The Coast Guard plans to establish training schools expected to graduate some 1500 students each year. Prior to choosing Two Rock Station, the Coast Guard investigated use of Hamilton Air Force Base. Both the city and county were contacted to determine their feelings about the matter.

— There’s no place like Novato, least that is the opinion of Hansten Warner. After his retirement from PG&E because of a heart attack in 1963 he moved to Bend, Oregon. The first time Warner came to Novato to live was as an 8- year-old boy who came with his parents to find a whistle stop of about 200 population. That was in the year 1910. In 1923 Warner went to work with the Novato Utilities Co. which was bought by PG&E Seven years later. Warner remained to work for them. In 1923 he also became a member of the Novato Volunteer Fire Department.

25 Years Ago

May 1996

Novato’s automobile-related business community is playing a game of musical chairs this month, as several companies in what is known as the “auto corridor” swap shops. The two largest companies involved in the location change are NAPA Auto Parts and Goodyear, but several smaller operations have also switched spots. According to Burt Hoffman, Goodyear’s manager, it all started with him. “I’m afraid I’m to blame,” he joked. “I had an opportunity to buy a building on Vallejo. NAPA, which is owned by Will and Renie Clymer, is moving from its present location at the end of Machin Avenue to a newly remodeled building on Redwood Boulevard, the former site of Goodyear. Some other changes taking place include Leonardi’s Auto & Electric, which has moved from 1011 Machin Ave. to share the new NAPA building. Taking over Leonardi’s old spot is Kindt Automotive.

— The Ambassadors of the Novato Chamber of Commerce will hold a ribbon-cutting ceremony on Wednesday, June 5 at the recently opened Taj India Restaurant at 750 Grant Ave. The restaurant specializes in North Indian cuisine.