"You and your Firm have provided, and continue to provide, excellent design services for both BCA and the District; we really appreciate your creativity on San Mateo High School." Project Architect, San Mateo High School

"I'd like to thank you for a great two years of working together. You have done incredible work on all of the Carneros projects and it has been a great pleasure to work with you." Sarah Regan, Project Administrator

"Thank you for the superb job you have done on the Millbrae Fields." Ralph Petty, Former Millbrae Community Development and Parks Director

"You are doing a great job with the downtown revitalization and Royer Saugstad Park Master Plan Update. You have showed a great deal of creativity with and responsiveness to the suggestions and goals of a complicated group with many different ideas." Mike Shellito, Assistant City Manager, Community Services Director (Retired), Roseville, CA

"I wanted to tell you how beautiful Tam High is looking these days. I periodically wander around the campus to see the new buildings and landscape; it looks so great. I see your hand in so much of the landscape design. I'm so glad you were involved in choosing the plants and determining the overall aesthetic of the plantings...it makes such a huge difference." Tamalpais High School Parent

"This letter is to thank you for your excellent contribution to Brenda Lopez Memorial Plaza. In the process of developing the design with your company, Agency staff were always very impressed by the crisp and methodical way in which you encouraged orderly decisions to get to a beautiful, practical project." Project Manager, San Jose Redevelopment Authority

"I will tell others how great you have been with the tennis court project. I think your firm is about the only one I've worked with that always responds and always follows-through." Project Manager, City of Novato

"The multi-use field at Miller Creek Middle School is amazing. From Day 1 the field has been used by students for PE during the school day and by local sports teams and the community after school hours and on weekends. It is a huge asset to our school district and community. " Dr. Thomas Lohwasser, Superintendent, Dixie School District

"My colleague raved about working with Carducci on Westmoor High School, she said that she loves your processes. We look forward to many more opportunities." Margot Kenney, AEDIS Architects

"I really appreciated your generosity in sharing your knowledge about what baseball players need and your thoughts about sensible steps for solving the grading issue. The information and tips you shared helped my team and I get Sonoma County Regional Parks a workable solution that the local little league is happy with." Professional Colleague