This thread is amazing!!

My future imaginary music career.....

I am a solo artist, kind of like a cross between nicki minaj, rihanna and lady gaga. I sing and rap, and in a scottish accent.. so the rapping is like nothing YOU'VE EVER HEARD BEFORE. I am called Jamsay, and in my rapping persona, JamZ.

I write all my own lyrics, which are all witty, stupid and extremely clever. My song-writing partner also plays some instrument in my band and when I'm 30 we realise we've always been in love, get married and live happily ever after. Until then I am regularly in the tabloids for my various affairs- I get in an awkward fight with Frankie Saturdays...but nobody really knows what (if anything) actually happened.

My music is run of the mill pop, the remixes are AMAZING and the online forums are always trying to analyse what I mean by my lyrics. I'm most known for my AWESOME music videos, each one better than the last.

I'm not crazy weird like Lady Gaga, more, understated artsy weird, but in not in a pretentious way. I'm never overly-sexualised and I don't go for big controversies. I'm not known for being a diva or a bore, just for my refreshing attitude and catchy pop. Years after, my shot for The Sunday Times 'Style' is still talked about.

I secretly give to charity, and am always in the press for doing random acts of kindness for fans. I regularly run competitions for fans to give me strange words to be in my next song (incidentally, "Ukelele Princess" went on to be a global SMASH).

By 30, after six years and four albums, I release a greatest hits, and just do the occasional rap in other people's songs. I then start a global fashion empire, with affordable clothing for people who don't fit regular clothes. It is all sustainably sourced and fair trade, but no more expensive than other high street stores. After a couple of years of this, I sell my economic model to New Look and our companies merge.

In my late thirties I take a slot on radio 1, then move to radio 2 later in life. I still have my catchphrase of "remember all the things you've forgotten".

I die at 93 and they make my ashes into glitter.

My music career is very complicated. Originally I am an actress who is the lead in an amazing, ridiculously British teen movie which is amazingly critically acclaimed and wins all sorts of awards etc. But then I take a break from acting to do my A-levels (education comes first!) and then I pursue a music career. As, by now, I'm fairly famous, my first single and album both go to #1 just about everywhere. I do a second and then a third album, which are both just as amazing and as successful. I am so well know by this point that I appear on the last episode of The Simpsons. Soon after, I get married (despite, in various interviews, stating 'I WILL NEVER GET MARRIED').

...I haven't decided what happens after I get married. *Comes back down to earth*

Bovvered said:

My music career is very complicated. Originally I am an actress who is the lead in an amazing, ridiculously British teen movie which is amazingly critically acclaimed and wins all sorts of awards etc. But then I take a break from acting to do my A-levels (education comes first!) and then I pursue a music career. As, by now, I'm fairly famous, my first single and album both go to #1 just about everywhere. I do a second and then a third album, which are both just as amazing and as successful. I am so well know by this point that I appear on the last episode of The Simpsons. Soon after, I get married (despite, in various interviews, stating 'I WILL NEVER GET MARRIED').

...I haven't decided what happens after I get married. *Comes back down to earth*

You get divorced after you get caught cheating on your husband/wife with a prostitute.

After which I start a feud with you calling you "wrote-off" and telling people I was "scarlet for you".

Seanie said:

Mvnl said:

Seanie said:

I dont think anyone ever made the actual backing tracks, just lyrics, some were amazing.

I can imagine, but whenever I write lyrics I always have an (extremely) catchy melody in my head, so they'd probably fall flat as lyrics only..

Ahh I was the same, but most members are Xenomania fans so aren't too adverse to out there lyrics.

Most of my number ones were lifted straight from the school of xenomania songwriting.

I loved writing No.1s (well, any songs :P) for you and Mike because it was so different to what I was writing for Russ!

'Russ Hooch' was my very un-popstar like popstar's name. But then he would never have been a Popjustice favourite. One for the Mums.

Oh this looks like fun.

So I'm an actor-turned-singer who originally played the role of Xavier in EastEnders. When I auditioned I panicked and put on an Australian accent and because they loved me they decided to make the character an Ozzy. At this point I couldn't very well come clean and so I had to keep putting this accent on in every interview I did. It was fucking exhausting.

One day one of the producers overheard me talking on the phone in my dressing room in my normal CHESIRE accent (!) and from then on they were determined to get rid of me, but the law wouldn't permit it. Unfortunately I sealed my own fate when I started performing in a band, Charity's Pringle, with two other singers, Carlos and Annie. We were an unlikely trio but we gelled. Our concerts consisted purely of covering existing pop songs and putting a twinkly electro-pop slant on them. A particular favourite with audiences at our gigs was Crash (the Gwen Stefani song) during which we dangled over feet over the stage and from the roof steering wheels were dropped for us to catch and do steering actions with whilst singing). Unfortunately the new-found success made me arrogant, and during one gig I referred to my co-star Rita Simons as 'a slut with a peroxide-leaking vagina'. This was picked up on in the press and I was promptly sacked.

This did however allow me to focus on my music career, and after one label exec came to a Charity's Pringle gig I was signed as a soloist. I wrote the entire of my debut album with the very talented Ester Dean but took all of the songwriting credits for myself by blackmailing her after discovering she was making it her personal mission to sleep with all of Rihanna's (many) boyfriends. The first single 'Back In The Day (When Whitney Was On Crack And So Was Mary J)' was a slow-burner but eventually peaked at #3. The follow-up 'Stomp (On That Manbastard's Balls)' was banned from virtually every radio station in the country though, and I had to change it to the much weaker 'La La La (No Words)' (which I did actually let Ester Dean take her credit for because she really didn't bring her A-game that day and I didn't particularly want to be associated with it). It's released to iTunes next week. The label don't think it's going to do very well because Chris Moyles has embarked on a vicious hate campaign against me but Scott Mills is my special friend (wink wink) and I've got him in my corner so I'm hopeful.

My imaginary music career would be starting off working as an independent film director, who after dabbling with film soundtracks, branched off as an electronica artist. My debut album would be a solid 11 track, wearing influences of The Knife, Goldfrapp, Nine Inch Nails, and Masive Attack. Each track of the album would have a music video, all of my music videos would have been directed by moi.

Because I have OCD, my next albums would all be under different pseudonyms each having a completley different style of music (some being more poppy than others, some lacking any traditional notion of music). It will get so confusing for the general public, that I might go under a new alias and people will genuinely think it's a completley new artist (especially because my private life would be completley shielded from public eyes). Leading to me accidentally being voted for BBC Sound of 2016, even after having numerous hits prior (all under different names of course).

Usage of font would be under strict protocol. Each era will have ONE specific originally designed font used for its entire album and singles campaign, until the next album campaign comes about, etc. No exceptions. Colors and visual thematics will be treated just as cohesively, as I will not stand for having one video for the 2nd album being about clowns in space and then the second one being a low key video with me in a room playing some mundane instrument. In other words, each album will be cohesive and visually distinct from the other albums.

If people ask me for a Greatest Hits / Best Of, I'll put a torrent of every single song that I have recorded in my life, all in super duper high quality .flac format, on some torrent site and say "make one yourself and piss off." Of course I'm sadistic and know some of my fans will actually patiently download for weeks this leviathan of a computer file.

I will release an album of purposely bad covers, covering artists I have been accused of copying even though I "consciously" did not rip them off.

As well as release a 2 hour epic alongside one of my albums.

Dreaming is fun, innit?