Anna Lee, a veteran actress whose career in films and television spanned nearly 70 years, died Friday of pneumonia at her home in Beverly Hills.

Lee was 91. Her son, actor Jeffrey Byron, was by her side.

Lee starred as Lila Quartermaine on the daytime drama "General Hospital" from 1978 to 2003. She played the role confined to a wheelchair after she was paralyzed in a car accident.

On film, she played Sister Margaretta in "The Sound of Music" and starred in such films as "King Solomon's Mines," "The Ghost in Mrs. Muir," "Fort Apache" and "What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?"

Apart from "General Hospital," Lee's other television credits included guest roles on "Peter Gun," "77 Sunset Strip," "Perry Mason," "The Alfred Hitchcock Hour," "Hawaii Five-O" and "Mission: Impossible."

Years ago, when Lee was young and touring with the London Repertory Theatre, she was known as "the British bombshell."

Maureen O'Hara said when Lee moved to the United States in the early 1930s, "everybody fell in love with her."

Born Joan Boniface Winnifrith in 1913 in Kent, England, Lee was married three times. Her marriages to director Robert Stevenson and George Stafford ended in divorce and her third husband, Robert Nathan, died in 1985.

Byron said a memorial service will be held in Los Angeles in several weeks.

Lee will be posthumously honored with a Lifetime Achievement Award at Friday's Daytime Emmy Awards.

RIP Anna Lee. Gone, but not forgotten.

Very sad news...

Beverly Hills, California

Sunday, May 16, 2004

On Friday evening, May 14, 2004 Anna Lee died at her home with her son Jeffrey (Bryon) by her side. "It was very peaceful and mom died with dignity and grace, just as she lived her life." Said Byron.

Anna Lee formerly Joan Boniface Winnifrith was born on January 2, 1913 in Great Britain. She became an actress very young in her life, did movies in Britain and even worked with Alfred Hitchcock before moving to the United States and doing such acclaimed hits as "How Green Was My Valley," "Fort Appache," What Ever Happened to Baby Jane" to name a few. She was most recently known as Lila Quartermaine on ABC's daytime drama General Hospital. A role she played for decades. A beloved actress, she married prolific writer Robert Nathan (Portrait of Jennie, The Bishop's Wife) in 1970.

In later years her health deteriated, however she continued working until recently. "We will miss mom very much but she will always be a part of our lives." Said the family.

Anna Lee will be missed.

The family requests no telephone calls at this time. However, we will gladly forward any wishes or interview requests and we will get back to you immediately. We are in the process of making arrangements for a memorial service and it will be announced at a later date.

Cards may be sent to:

The Family of Anna Lee

c/o Garrett Associates & ICONS PR

PO Box 215

New Canton, VA 23123