New Piston Lucas III happy to be back in NBA

Auburn Hills — The jet lag that comes with flying nearly 9,000 miles with a pit stop in Houston before arriving Monday morning in Detroit to take a physical before practicing was alleviated for John Lucas III, whom the Pistons signed to a 10-day contract.

He was able to hug his wife.

He was able to breathe American air.

He had YouTube and Gmail access.

All those things Lucas couldn't do while playing in China before the Pistons called last week, offering Lucas a chance to come back to The Show, even if there's no long-term guarantees attached to it.

"There's never any promise in the league. It's all up to me," Lucas said Monday. "When I step foot on the court, it's what I'm capable of doing. Nobody's promised me anything. For as long as they have me, 10 days or the rest of the year, but as long as I'm here I'll give 110 percent."

He's the third point guard on the Pistons' roster, behind starter D.J. Augustin and backup Spencer Dinwiddie. But he provides something in which those two aren't as adept, being a change-of-pace lead guard they've lacked since Brandon Jennings hurt his Achilles in Milwaukee.

"We wanted a guy with NBA experience, which he has, and complement what we have," Pistons coach Stan Van Gundy said. "We wanted a guy who would push the ball up and down the floor."

Although he's listed as the third point guard, Van Gundy could go to him instead of Dinwiddie, depending on matchups and if the Pistons need an energy boost for their second unit.

"Push the ball. Just be me," Lucas said. "Scoring PG, get everybody involved but push the tempo up. Any time to get an opportunity to get quick buckets, take the opportunity, the same thing Brandon was doing before he got injured."

Van Gundy isn't looking at Lucas as the end-all be-all to their problems, as trades for existing NBA point guards never materialized due to not wanting to take on salary beyond this year. And he's still scouring the trade market before the Feb. 20 deadline.

"We're happy with what we have but you're always exploring trades," Van Gundy said. "That's being honest and those guys know it. You're always exploring what's out there. There's nothing specifically we have to get done. We've got our roster. If somebody we feel makes us better, we'll do it."

Lucas played for Van Gundy's brother, Jeff, in Houston and for like-minded Bulls coach Tom Thibodeau in 2011-12, when he had his best year, averaging 7.5 points and 2.2 assists in the lockout-shortened season.

Many basketball fans may remember Lucas III for his lineage, as his dad John II played in the NBA from 1976-90 and after overcoming his problems with substance abuse, has become a mentor to some of the league's younger players with similar issues.

Or maybe they remember Lucas III for his days at Oklahoma State, where he and current Memphis Grizzlies swingman Tony Allen led an upset of St. Joseph's in the 2004 NCAA Tournament, against a team led by a Van Gundy favorite, Jameer Nelson.

Either way, that fast-paced style will be met with a hunger to stay on American land, and in the NBA, where just staying in the league is an accomplishment in itself.

"It's a big opportunity. I'm glad I went to China," Lucas said. "It was a difficult year for me. I had to fall back in love with the game. That's what I did in China. I always loved the game but I wasn't me. I lost my swag."

As a member of the Utah Jazz last season, the 32-year old guard posted a career-low in shooting at 33 percent and scored under 10 points per 36 minutes for the first time in his seismic NBA career (216 games in six seasons).

"I lost who I was when I was with the Bulls and Toronto," Lucas said. "By going to Utah it was a different system, different style that wasn't fit for me. I would never say anything negative about the organization but it just didn't fit me. So I went to China and tried to destroy whoever was in front of me. I tried to bring that mentality back here."

In China, he played against some NBA competition, as the likes of Michael Beasley, Andray Blatche and Sebastian Telfair are in his league. Former Piston guard Will Bynum is over there, and the two commiserated on their roads to the NBA.

"We played against each other and we talked about the league and everything," Lucas said. "Just how big it is to play the game you love in a different country. Basketball has taken me everywhere."

But he knows there's a difference between playing against a few NBA players and every guy out there is a bona fide player.

It's possible his aggressiveness can shake some of the dog-day doldrums NBA teams tend to go through this time of year, simply because in 10 days or even less, his future will be re-evaluated.

"Even if it's for two minutes (on the floor), just to get a feel, I'm gonna fight forever," Lucas said. "Because I've been somewhere where players haven't been and trust me, you want to stay here."

vgoodwill@detroitnews.com

twitter.com/vgoodwill

Heat at Pistons

Tipoff: 7:30 p.m. Tuesday, The Palace of Auburn Hills

TV/radio: FSD/WMGC