Board of Directors Chairman: Phebe N. Novakovic Deputy Chairman: Thomas W. Rabaut Thomas Arseneault Lisa Atherton Tim Cahill James “Jim” Cannon Theodore “Ted” Colbert III MG Patricia P. Hickerson, USA Ret. R. Andrew “Andy” Hove LTG Larry R. Jordan, USA Ret. Christopher “Chris” E. Kubasik MSG Leroy A. Petry, USA Ret. SMA Kenneth O. Preston, USA Ret. GEN Dennis J. Reimer, USA Ret. Mark C. Roualet GEN John H. Tilelli, Jr., U. S. Army Ret. Robert “Bob” Tyrer CW5 Phyllis J. Wilson, USA Ret.

National Officers

President & Chief Executive Officer

GEN Robert B. Brown, USA Ret.

Corporate Secretary

Ann Belyea

Treasurer

Manisha Patel

Region Presidents First: Greg d’Arbonne Second: COL W. Glenn Yarborough, Jr., USA Ret. Third: Rhonda Sutton Fourth: Gus J. Rodriguez Jr. Fifth: CSM Rick Morris, USA Ret. Sixth: SGM Jerry L. Glesmann, USA Ret. Seventh: LTC Vic Conner, USA Ret. Pacific: COL Benjamin D. Lukefahr, USA Ret. European: David V. Fulton

Leadership Bios

General Robert Brooks Brown, USA, Ret.

President & Chief Executive Officer

General Brown is an experienced commander who has led at every level, from platoon through Army Service Component Command. Serving as Commanding General of U.S. Army Pacific, General Brown led the Army’s largest service component command responsible for 106,000 Soldiers across the Indo-Pacific Region before his September 2019 retirement.

General Brown is a 1981 graduate of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, New York, where he was commissioned as an Infantry Second Lieutenant. His assignments took him across the globe including deployments in support of Operation Uphold Democracy in Haiti, Operation Joint Forge in Bosnia-Herzegovina, and two combat deployments in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.

Before U.S. Army Pacific, he commanded the U.S. Army Combined Arms Center at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas; I Corps and Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington; and the U.S. Army Maneuver Center of Excellence and Fort Benning, Georgia.

He also served as Chief of Staff for U.S. Army Europe; Deputy Commanding General for the 25th Infantry Division; Commander, 1st Brigade (Stryker) 25th Infantry Division; Commander, 2nd Battalion 5th Cavalry, 1st Cavalry Division; the Joint Staff, J-8; Army Staff, Strategy and War Plans Division G3/5/7 in the Pentagon; Aide-de-Camp, Vice Chief of Staff, U.S. Army; Executive Officer to Commander, U.S. Indo-Pacific Command; Assistant Professor and Deputy Director, Center for Enhanced Performance, West Point and Infantry Assignment Officer, HRC.

General Brown holds a Bachelor of Science from the United States Military Academy, a Master of Education from the University of Virginia, and a Master of Science in National Security and Strategic Studies (Distinguished Graduate) from National Defense University.

General Brown retired after more than 38 years of service. He was a Distinguished Senior Fellow at the Association of the United States Army before becoming President & CEO in October 2021.

He and his wife, Patti, have three daughters, three sons-in-law and seven grandchildren.

BG John “Jack” Haley, USA, Ret.

Vice President, Membership & Meetings

Brigadier General Jack Haley is the Vice President, Membership and Meetings for the Association of the United States Army.

Throughout his more than 30-year Army career, he served in tactical, operational, and strategic assignments worldwide to include three overseas assignments in Germany and three combat tours in Iraq. He was privileged to command America’s sons and daughters at numerous levels to include Company, Battalion, Brigade, Regiment and Corps.

His strategic assignments included tours at Army Human Resource Command, the White House, the Pentagon and Army Materiel Command. As a General Officer, he served as the 38th Chief of Ordnance and as the Commanding General of the 593d Expeditionary Sustainment Command. Following retirement, he was the CEO and President of Miltope Corporation until his arrival at AUSA.

BG Haley’s education includes a Bachelor of Science in Environmental Chemistry from Saint Lawrence University and a Masters in National Security and Strategic Studies from the U.S. Naval War College.

BG Haley and his wife Jennifer have been married for over 33 years and have two children.

LTG Leslie Smith, USA Ret.

Vice President, Leadership and Education

Lieutenant General Leslie C. Smith, US Army (retired) currently serves as the Vice President for Leadership and Education, Association of the United States Army, the Carter Chair for leadership at Georgia Southern, LV Smith Corporate Group CEO, and on several corporate boards. LTG Smith received his commission from Georgia Southern University (GSU) in 1983 as a Field Artillery Officer. In 1985, he graduated from GSU with a bachelor's degree in accounting and as a distinguished military graduate and branched as a Chemical Officer.

LTG Smith's final assignment on active duty from 2018 to 2021 was as The Inspector General, Office of the Secretary of the Army, the first Chemical officer to serve in that position. His early assignments include service in the Georgia National Guard; Chemical Staff officer in the 3-52d Air Defense Artillery Battalion; Division and DIVARTY staff officer and company commander in the 82d Airborne Division; Chemical Branch Assignments Officer, PERSCOM; S-3 and XO in the 23d Chemical Battalion; and the Joint Staff, J-5. In 2001, he assumed command of the 83d Chemical Battalion, where elements of the Battalion deployed in support of Operations Enduring Freedom, Iraqi Freedom and New Dawn.

Following command, he served on the Army Staff in the G-8 in the Full Dimensional Protection Division. In 2005, he assumed command of the 3d Chemical Brigade at Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri, and later served as the G-3, 20th Support Command (CBRNE). From 2008-2010, he was the 25th Chief of Chemical and Commandant of the United States Army Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear School. In 2010, LTG Smith returned to the 20th Support Command (CBRNE) as the Commanding General. In June 2013, LTG Smith became the first Chemical officer to serve as the Commanding General of the United States Maneuver Support Center of Excellence and Fort Leonard Wood. He served as the Deputy the Inspector General from 2015 to 2018.

His military education includes the Chemical Officer Basic and Advanced Courses, Airborne School, Jumpmaster School, Command and General Staff.

LTG Smith also holds master’s degrees from Central Michigan University and the National Defense University and is married to Vanedra, and they have two daughters.

SMA Daniel A. Dailey, USA Ret.

Vice President, Noncommissioned Officer & Soldier Programs

Sgt. Maj. of the Army Daniel A. Dailey, U.S. Army retired, joined the staff of the Association of the U.S. Army, where he serves as vice president of Noncommissioned Officer and Soldier Programs.

A native of Palmerton, Pennsylvania, Dailey enlisted in the Army in 1989 and attended basic training and advanced individual training as an 11B (infantryman) at Fort Benning, Georgia. During his career, Dailey held every enlisted leadership position in the mechanized infantry, ranging from Bradley Fighting Vehicle commander to command sergeant major. Dailey has served with the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Infantry Divisions stateside and overseas. In March 2009, he was selected as the 4th Infantry Division command sergeant major, where he served as both the command sergeant major of Fort Carson, Colorado, and U.S. Division‐North, Iraq. In 2011, Dailey was selected to serve as the command sergeant major of the U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC). Dailey was sworn in as the 15th sergeant major of the Army on Jan. 30, 2015, and relinquished the position on Aug. 9, 2019.

In addition to four tours in support of Operations Iraqi Freedom and New Dawn, Dailey deployed in support of Operations Desert Storm and Desert Shield. He earned the Bronze Star with Valor for his leadership during the 4th Infantry Division’s two‐month Battle for Sadr City in 2008.

Dailey is a graduate of class 54 of the U.S. Army Sergeants Major Academy and the Command Sergeants Major Course. Dailey holds a Bachelor of Science (Summa Cum Laude) from Excelsior College.

Dailey has been married to his wife, Holly, for 26 years. They have one son, Dakota.