Over a span of 3 minutes, the world's most famous arena transformed into a high-school gymnasium. As their Knicks put the finishing touches on a 20-point opening-night thrashing of the Miami Heat, the Madison Square Garden faithful turned their attention toward their team's newest player.

Seemingly shaking the arena, they chanted, "RA-SHEED WAL-LACE!"

It is a tradition practiced every winter in gyms around the country. Whether it's the undersized kid in high school or the walk-on in college, fans clamor for their favorite benchwarmer to get on the court in a blowout.

But Rasheed Wallace is no benchwarmer. He is an NBA champion, a 15-year veteran and a four-time All-Star power forward. And Madison Square Garden is no high- school gym. Nevertheless, after two years in retirement, the pride of North Philly's Simon Gratz High had brought the Garden crowd to its feet.

It was easy to explain. The title-starved Knicks fans, delirious at the sight of their team thumping the champs, splurged their adoration on Wallace accordingly. It was the right place and the right time.

Right?

That theory made a lot of sense, until about two days later. That was when it happened again. This time against the 76ers, Wallace got another curtain call in New York. And the day after that in Philadelphia, he received a standing ovation from his hometown crowd, even with his Knicks up big.

So at age 38, why does a player like Wallace - well known for his irascible demeanor and frequent run-ins with officials - get a hero's welcome any time or place that he steps onto the court?

"Because the type of player I am, and have been in the past," Wallace said after the opener. "That fierce competitor. Every time I came in here, I was always talking junk to the Garden fans. So they know the type of player that I am."

Wallace certainly has his issues. He has racked up 304 technical fouls in his career, 41 of which came in the 2000-01 season. Both are NBA records. He has always worn his emotions - and temper - on his sleeve, much to the chagrin of NBA referees.

The NBA has long suffered from an image problem. Given his fiery reputation, it would be easy to lump Wallace in as part of it. But for all his faults, the former Tar Heel has proven throughout his career to be a championship-type player.

He has always understood his responsibility, whether it is offense, defense or in the locker room. He plays hard on both ends of the court, he plays to win and he cares. It led him to the Final Four with North Carolina in 1995 and to an NBA title with Detroit in 2004. At Gratz, the 1993 graduate was a three-time Daily News All-City first-team selection.

It has made him the NBA's most lovable bad boy. And at no point has it been on display more than in his limited role as a New York Knick a month into this season.

"I will take whatever role coach [Mike] Woodson gives me," Wallace said. "I am too old to be trying to give attitudes or thinking I should be averaging 25 points or so-and-so minutes. It ain't even about that, it's about the overall win."

Woodson, whose relationship with Wallace blossomed nine years ago when they crossed paths in Detroit, couldn't help but acquiesce to the fans' request in Wallace's New York debut. Still concerned with Wallace's conditioning at the time, Woodson gave him 3 minutes against the Heat and 4 minutes against the Sixers.

Asked whether Wallace had any reservations about being inserted for garbage minutes, Woodson quickly replied, grinning. "Not at all," he said. "I think he is excited about being back."

On Nov. 5 in Philly, Wallace looked like his old self - complete with his favorite white headband that accentuates his signature bald spot. He hit two three-pointers and grabbed three boards, finishing with 10 points in 14 minutes.

Combined with Jason Kidd, Marcus Camby and Kurt Thomas, Wallace forms an old but experienced quartet of near-40 additions designed to provide the Knicks' star-laden core with defense and veteran leadership. While the game in Philly was his 2012 coming-out party, he has been contributing since he arrived.

"He has given us so much out there," said Tyson Chandler, whom Wallace will likely spell throughout the season. "Not even when he is on the floor, but when he is on the bench. Last year, a lot of the time, my voice was the only voice out there on defense. Now we have so many voices, so many defensive players."

Chandler says that Wallace's roar is unmistakable, whether he is on the court or the bench. It appears that two years out of the league has rested more than just his legs. For now, Wallace is working his way into the rotation and, most importantly, helping to install what Woodson hopes to be a championship foundation.

"It's about more than being out there on the floor," Wallace said. "Just being that cheerleader from the side, staying on guys from the side. Reminding them of all the little things we go over in the locker room."

Despite his retirement, Wallace says he never lost his passion for the game. He spent large chunks of his time off in Chapel Hill, N.C., taking in college basketball games at his alma mater and working out with high-school and college players. He said he finds the college game more entertaining because the players are hungrier.

After mulling several offers over the past few years, Wallace saw the Knicks as the perfect opportunity to reunite with a former coach and make one last run at a title. He signed an unguaranteed deal for the veteran's minimum in October.

"I was always near a court," Wallace said. "I took two years off from the NBA. I didn't take two years off period. That is what a lot of people think."

"I feel that I can [help this team]. But I am not one to rush it. Obviously, the wizard has a game plan and I am just one of the key ingredients."

"He took two years away from the game and again, he didn't walk away from the game because he couldn't play," Woodson said. "We were able to handpick some guys that we thought could come in and help us. We were able to sit down and discuss what free agents were out there."

In what little NBA action that Wallace watched, he saw something that got his competitive juices flowing: a leaguewide dearth of post play.

It is something the 6-11 Wallace knows a little something about. After all, he was one of the NBA's first big men who could block a couple shots and knock down a couple treys on any given night. Now it is commonplace. But Wallace, still confident in his toughness, considers it something that he can exploit.

"Sitting at home and watching these last two years, you have guys who were originally small forwards playing power forward and center now," Wallace told reporters after scoring in the post twice in Philly.

"There is no more posting up in this league. That is one thing [Woodson] and I were talking about before when I was thinking about coming out - beating guys up in the post."

Before he becomes a difference-maker in New York - in the low post or anywhere else - Wallace needs to work himself back into shape. Until he does, he will be relied upon as something in between a mentor and an emergency center. And of course, a fan favorite.

"When I was with Washington, Portland, Detroit, everybody still got love for me and I still got love for them," Wallace said, implying he always gets cheers in his former homes.

But what about Philly?

"I am thoroughbred here man, born and raised," he said.

With that, Wallace pulled a retro Phillies jersey over his 6-11 frame and left the locker room, no doubt headed for his next warm reception.