Jamie Redknapp has revealed Robbie Williams travelled on Liverpool's team bus to matches and recalled how the singer broke his self-imposed exile from the spotlight to sing karaoke after his shock exit from Take That.

Redknapp confirmed in 2020 that Williams had sought refuge at his house in Liverpool after leaving Take That in 1995.

Williams had called Redknapp when seeking an escape from London and the glare of the spotlight, after he had stunned the band's die-hard fans by announcing he was quitting prior to their 33-date Nobody Else tour at the height of their success.

The news dominated the front pages of newspapers across Britain and Williams went into hiding to evade the glare of the media.

Football Music and Me podcast host Geoff Shreeves described Redknapp as being at the the 'epicentre of one of the biggest stories in music in this country for decades'.

Redknapp admitted that Williams had travelled on Liverpool's first team bus at the time and regularly came into the club's training ground.

'He used to come to the training ground with us, he came to Liverpool and Roy Evans would invite him onto the team bus,' Redknapp said. 'Roy Evans would invite him onto the bus, we went and played Aston Villa and he came on the bus.

A stunned Shreeves replied: 'Robbie Williams was on the Liverpool first team bus for a game?'

Redknapp added that Williams had also briefly broken cover to sing karaoke on a night out with his Liverpool team-mates.

'At that time, when he was staying at our house, Don Hutchinson and I were good mates, with him and Phil Babb we took him into town,' Redknapp said. 'There was this area where they used to do a lot of karaoke, we went along and had a few drinks.

'Robbie loves karaoke, so he said “I am getting up”. I said “I don’t think it is a good idea, you are meant to be incognito”, but there was no social media then so you can imagine can’t you.

'He gets up on the karaoke and he is belting out some great song, not one of his, but a beautiful song and he sounds amazing.

'This old boy came up to man and said, “he’s good isn’t it. Is he your mate?”

'I went “yeah, yeah, he’s got a chance hasn’t he?”

'He went, “yeah, he could go right to the top this lad”.

Redknapp also opened up on how a night out with his former A League of Their Own star John Bishop led to Ed Sheeran staying over his house until the early hours.

The ex-England international and Sky Sports pundit told Shreeves they had met Sheeran after a 'brilliant' gig in Majorca, before the pop star joined them on night out with friends.

'At the time I had a house in Majorca and he said we have got to carry on, this is brilliant, I go, "everything is shut but you can come back to mine, I’ve got a few beers there and a bit of wine” and he’s like “okay let’s go”,' Redknapp said.

'I’m like "oh my god Ed Sheeran is coming back to my house, this is great".

'We get back and now we kicking on, it’s like two, three, four in the morning, start listening to music and it got to about six.

'Charlie, my eldest boy, he came downstairs and said “I couldn’t believe it, you and Ed Sheeran arm in arm, and you have got MTV on singing Luther Vandross.

'The two of us, we’re so drunk, we’ve had a right few drinks but we have had such a nice night, such a good laugh, I think he ended up sleeping on the sofa.'