FORMER England midfielder Jamie Redknapp has recalled the time Robbie Williams "hid" at his house.

Speaking to Geoff Shreeves on the Football, Music and Me podcast, Redknapp revealed the music icon turned to him after leaving Take That in 1995.

The ex-Liverpool star said: "He came and stayed in my house while all this went on, all the chaos, just to almost hide."

Redknapp went on to reveal that Williams would join him at Liverpool training and even travel on the team bus to matches.

"He used to come to the training ground with us. He came to Liverpool and Roy Evans would invite him onto the team bus when we played Aston Villa," he continued.

The former England star also recalled the time he and Williams went on a night out.

Redknapp added: "Even in that time when he was out, when he was staying at our house.

"So Don Hutchinson and I, we were good mates with him and Phil Babb so we took him into town and we end up in this area where they used to do a lot of karaoke.

"So we went along, we're having a couple of drinks with Rob. Robbie loves karaoke so he said, 'I'm getting up'.

"We said we didn't think it was a good idea, he's meant to be incognito. But there was no social media then, you can imagine.

CASINO SPECIAL - BEST CASINO WELCOME OFFERS

"Anyway, he gets up on the karaoke and he's belting out a great song, not one of his but a beautiful song. He sounds amazing.

"This old boy came up to me and went, 'He's good, isn't he. Is he your mate?'

"I went, 'Yeah, he's got a chance hasn't he?' And he went, 'Yeah, he could go right to the top this lad'."

Redknapp spent 11 years at Liverpool after joining in 1991 and made 308 appearances.

He then went on to spend three years at Tottenham and a short spell at Southampton before retiring in 2005.

Throughout his time as a player, Redknapp dated Louise Nurding from girl group Eternal.

The pair got married in 1998 and had two children before divorcing in 2017.

The ex-England star now works as a pundit for Sky Sports.