In the 1990s Robbie Williams was a megastar as part of Take That at the dizzy height of their success.

However, Williams, now 50, shocked the musical world when he announced he was quitting prior to their 33-date Nobody Else tour in 1995. And seeking to escape the hustle and bustle of London, Williams sought shelter with his good friend Jamie Redknapp.

Redknapp was on the books of Liverpool, forming part of their infamous Spice Boys squad. Speaking on the Football Music and Me podcast with host Geoff Shreeves, Redknapp recalled when he opened up his digs to the pop sensation.

READ MORE: Feyenoord star watches Liverpool in person in potential Arne Slot transfer clue

READ MORE: Arne Slot rejects Liverpool as Feyenoord boss names three Prem teams he loves to watch

"He used to come to the training ground with us, he came to Liverpool and Roy Evans would invite him onto the team bus," Redknapp said. "Roy Evans would invite him onto the bus, we went and played Aston Villa and he came on the bus!"

Speaking back in 2020, Williams recalled: "To be honest, I can’t remember a lot. Just Polaroid flashes, a bottle of Peach Schnapps, clubs... I remember your digs very well because it’s the only place I had been in at that time with a swimming pool in the house."

What do you think of Robbie Williams taking the Liverpool team bus to a game? Let us know in the comments section

However, the pair's fun didn't stop there and Williams joined the likes of John Barnes, Robbie Fowler, Neil 'Razor' Ruddock and Phil Babb on an end of season jaunt to Marbella in the mid nineties.

Redknapp recalled: “We had a spare seat on the plane, 'who should we invite? The biggest pop star in the world, Robbie Williams'. You came to join us in Marbella."

He also recalled a moment when an incognito Williams got up to sing karaoke in Liverpool. Redknapp joked: "He gets up on the karaoke and he is belting out some great song, not one of his, but a beautiful song and he sounds amazing.

"This old boy came up to me and said, 'he’s good isn’t it. Is he your mate?' I went 'yeah, yeah, he’s got a chance hasn’t he?' He went, 'yeah, he could go right to the top this lad'."