After serving seven years in prison for killing a man in self-defense, Antonio arrived in Llanview in 1995 on a quest to rebuild his good name.

Spending most of his youth in and out of gangs, Antonio tried to make a new life for himself. That's not to say he didn't get mixed up with trouble along the way. He worked for the notorious mob boss Carlo Hesser in order to pay off a debt and found himself again under the scrutiny of the law. Surprisingly, Antonio had had enough and went on to join the police force and help Bo Buchanan flush out the dirty cops and gangs in Angel Square. Antonio finally gave in to love and married co-worker Andy Harrison who ultimately broke Antonio's heart after having an affair.

He later was framed for the murder of his ex-lover Keri Reynolds Gannon (who actually committed suicide) and later found himself in a custody battle with rival RJ Gannon to get his daughter back.

Just when things started looking up for Antonio, he found out he was the son of noted crime lord Manuel Santi and later went on to inherit his late father's fortune.

Finally finding love again in Jessica Buchanan, Antonio faced another loss after Jessica fell hard for Nash Brennan, turning Antonio's world upside down. Over time, Antonio took another shot at love by allowing fellow cop, Talia Sihad, into his life.

While trying to uncover Lee Ramsey's illegal activities, Antonio pretended to be a dirty cop, even convinced Talia and John McBain to pretend to have an affair, in order to reveal the truth, which they did! Just when he thought things had simmered down, Antonio found out that Carlo Hesser, his longtime enemy, was Talia's father! Knowing Talia was nothing like her namesake, Antonio saved her from a life as the Queen of Mendorra and brought her back home to Llanview for good.

Through all the hardships, Antonio remained strong and proud. Known to be hot-tempered, when warranted, Antonio is a passionate man who is dedicated to his loved ones, and his badge, and will take extreme measures to keep Llanview safe!

In March of 2009, Antonio left Llanview on the hunt for Carlo Hesser - in an attempt to bring him down permanently, which in turn would protect his family from his grasp! However, he was forced to return when Talia was murdered by the Llanview Slasher. Antonio knew John McBain wasn't guilty, asked him to find the killer, let John out of jail then left Llanview behind.