Kamar de los Reyes was beloved as Antonio

The year 2023 has seen many beloved daytime actors pass away including Billy Miller, (General Hospital) Laura Parker, (Dark Shadows), Jackie Zeman, (General Hospital) Ellen Holly, and Mark Goddard both from One Life to Live. Sadly according to The US Sun there is another name to add to this growing list. Puerto Rican actor Kamar de los Reyes who portrayed gang member turned lawyer, and later a police officer Antonio Vega on the ABC soap One Life to Live has passed away. The news broke on Christmas Day.

Reyes died on Christmas Eve after a brief battle with cancer and his character Vega was a fan favorite on OLTL and beloved as a cast member. Antonio was the oldest son of Carlotta Vega, (Patricia Mauceri). He was a former gang member in Llanview PA's Angel Square, who was released from prison in 1995 after serving a seven-year sentence for murder. Antonio was well-known among the urban youth of Llanview and his nickname was "El Leon", leader of the "Prides" gang. Unfortunately he and family cannot seem to get away from his past crimes.

Antonio turns his life around

Eventually, Antonio proves that he killed his victim in self-defense and with the assistance of attorney Nora Buchanan (Hillary B Smith) he becomes a lawyer, and later a police officer. Antonio had many love interests but his most popular romance was with Jessica Buchanan (Bree Williamson) who he married but they later divorced.

Kamar de los Reyes career

De los Reyes appeared alongside Patrick Stewart as a "dashing, if thick-tongued" Ferdinand in a 1995 production of William Shakespeare's The Tempest.[2] In 1997, de los Reyes was named on People Magazine's "Fabulous 50" list.[3] In 2001, he starred in a television film, The Way She Moves, starring Annabeth Gish and fellow soap opera star Daniel Cosgrove. He also starred in the controversial film Love and Suicide and in Toni Braxton's video for her song "Spanish Guitar". (Wikipedia)

De Los Reyes has made numerous guest appearances on television shows including Law & Order, Valley of the Dolls, Touched by an Angel and CSI: Miami. In 1995, de los Reyes starred with James Woods, Ed Harris and Sir Anthony Hopkins in Oliver Stone's controversial biopic, Nixon, playing convicted Watergate burglar, Eugenio Martínez. He was also a contestant on a celebrity version of the game show Wheel of Fortune.

Additional roles for the talented de Los Reyes

The soap vet is also well-known for lending his voice to Raul Menendez in the Call of Duty II, Call of Duty 4 and Call of Duty Vanguard games. He portrayed Ryan Caradine in The Rookie and played Jobe in the series Sleepy Hollow. In 2013, he had the role of Los Lordes gang leader, Santana in the two-part season finale of season 3 of the CBS police procedural drama Blue Bloods.

Kamar is survived by a wife and 3 children

The Hollywood Reporter confirmed that a family spokesperson said Kamar de los Reyes died in Los Angeles on Christmas Eve after a brief battle with cancer. Kamar was born in San Juan, Puerto Rico to a Cuban father percussionist Walfredo de los Reyes and a Puerto Rican mother Matilda Page on November 8, 1967.