Forza Motorsport is getting closer to release, ready on the starting grid to make us feel the speed and enjoy the pleasure of driving. The Turn 10 Studios series intends to return in a big way, being one of Microsoft’s most notable releases in the final stretch of 2023. A game that has convinced all those who have been able to try it, with a renewed drive for the most demanding users who seek a racing experience as close as possible to reality.

The new Turn 10 Studios title comes as one of the flagships of the entire Microsoft catalog. The developer is recognized globally for its work in the Forza series, with a multitude of titles behind it and almost two decades working on it. The eighth installment of Forza Motorsport is one more step in it being the driving simulator per excellence, which alternates with a more arcade and relaxed approach with the Forza Horizon line of games.

Forza Motorsport release date and early access

Forza Motorsport will go on sale on October 10, 2023, and will be available for Xbox Series X|S and PC. In addition, as Microsoft usually does with all of its titles, Xbox Game Pass subscribers will be able to enjoy everything that the new Forza offers from day one on the service. A game developed for the current generation, it will not be available on Xbox One, so the Turn 10 Studios driving simulator is specially designed to take advantage of all the technology of current systems.

The game will also be available in early access from October 5, 2023, on all of the previously mentioned platforms. However, the early access period is only available for users who purchased the Premium version of the game, or if you’re playing on Xbox Game Pass, buying the Premium Add-Ons Bundle. These users can begin playing at 12:01 AM local time.

How big is the Forza Motorsport download?

Forza Motorsport is a significantly heavy title, mainly because of the ultra-realistic visual fidelity. Below is a list of platforms and their respective download size:

What are the different Forza Motorsport Editions?

Below you’ll find every edition of the game at launch, as well as what each of them includes.

Standard Edition

Deluxe Edition

Premium Edition

Premium Add-ons Bundle (digital upgrade only)