The prolific author of the latest Oprah’s Book Club pick, , published his first novel at the age of 35. Since then, he has published a dozen more books of fiction, 10 books of nonfiction, a poetry collection, three plays, an opera libretto, and, by his own estimate, “thousands” of articles. He has written and about his own harrowing battle with testicular cancer. But there some themes—and places—that the author keeps returning to and that readers of Long Island will recognize: his Irish hometown of Enniscorthy, the search for home and people to share it with, and the subtle workings of the human heart.

Read on for a selection of Tóibín’s novels that just might fill that Long Island–shaped hole in your life.

If you read Long Island without realizing that it’s technically a sequel to Tóibín’s 2009 bestseller, don’t worry; the two books in the “Eilis Lacey series” don’t need to be read in order—but reading them together deepens and expands both stories. In Brooklyn, we meet Eilis as a young woman leaving behind everything and everyone she has ever known to make a new life in America. She eventually finds more than her footing in this new country, falling in love with an impossibly sweet Italian American plumber. If you’ve read the first few pages of Long Island, you know how that one turns out, but even seeing Eilis and Tony’s relationship in dramatic midlife disarray doesn’t take away from the magic of watching it bloom in their youth. If anything, this longer vantage adds a poignantly human layer to the initial love story. The multiple-Oscar-nominated 2015 film starring Saoirse Ronan also captures the chemistry—and the city—perfectly.

Fans of Long Island and Brooklyn will recognize the setting (and even a few characters!) in Tóibín’s seventh novel, which centers around a mother who is rebuilding her life after her husband’s sudden death. Though the novel is fiction, Tóibín drew heavily from his experience living with his mother and siblings in Enniscorthy after his own schoolteacher father died (the same year as the fictional father in the novel). He began writing the novel in 2000, and got the idea for Brooklyn from a few sentences he wrote in the first chapter. He published Brooklyn—along with another novel, a biography, two collections of short stories, and two plays—before finishing Nora Webster. “It seemed in all these books that I was circling the story that was Nora Webster’s, working out ways of writing about family and loss and trauma,” he told The Guardian.