Westfield High School

550 Dorian Road

Westfield, New Jersey 07090-3390

2002-2003

HANDBOOK

For

STUDENTS and PARENTS

THE BOARD OF EDUCATION IS IN THE PROCESS OF REVISING ALL SCHOOL DISTRICT POLICIES. THIS HANDBOOK INCLUDES POLICIES THAT HAVE BEEN NEWLY ADOPTED OR REVISED BY THE BOARD OF EDUCATION AS WELL AS EXISTING POLICIES THAT ARE SUBJECT TO REVISION DURING THE 2002-2003 SCHOOL YEAR

Click HERE for Welcome Message from Robert G. Petix, Principal

Table of Contents

A

Absence Notes (samples)

Acceptable Computer Use Policy

Advanced Placement Programs

Administrative Advisers

Assemblies

ATHLETICS

Going out for a sport

Interscholastic Athletics

Varsity Sports

Eligibility Policies

Good Sportsmanship

Physical Education Exemptions

ATTENDANCE

Policy and Procedures

Excused Absences

Unexcused Absences

Attendance Regulations

Parent/Student Responsibilities

SARC

Sample Absence Notes

Awards, Honors, Scholarships

B

Basic Skills Curriculum/HSPT

Bedside Instruction (see Home Instruction)

Beepers/Paging Devices/Cell Phones

Bell Schedules

Blue Hallway Regulations

Bulletins and Announcements

Bicycles

C

Cafeteria Expectations

Change of Grade Policy

Changing a Course (see Course Schedules)

Cheating (see also Plagiarism)

Class and Organization Funds

Class Rank

Closed Campus

CLUBS

Clubs

School Social Functions

Unauthorized Clubs

Extracurricular Activities

Class Funds

CODE OF CONDUCT

Beepers, Pagers, Cell phones

Blue Hallway

Cheating

Courtyard/Student Center

Detention

Dismissal from Class

Dress Code/Hats

Drug/Alcohol Enforcement Policy

Extortion

Food/Beverages

Forgery

Gambling

General Rules and Regulations

Lateness to School

Leaving School Grounds

Open Lunch

Parking

Quiet and Order

Radios

Signing In/Out

Smoking/Chewing Tobacco

Suspension

Theft

Vandalism (see School Property)

Walkmen

Weapons

College Conferences

College Visitations

Community Service

Computer Use (see Acceptable Computer Use Policy)

College and Career Resources

College Night

Course Offerings (see Program of Studies)

Course Scheduling

Courtyard/Student Center

D

Delayed Opening Bell Schedule

Detention

Dismissal from Class

Discipline (See Code of Conduct)

Dress Code/Hats

Dropping a Course

Drug/Alcohol Enforcement Policy

Drug/Alcohol Prevention/Education

E

Early Dismissal Bell Schedule

Early Graduation

Eight Period Day Requirement

Elevator Key

Eligibility Policy-Activities

Eligibility Policy-Athletics

Employment/Working Papers

Equal Educational Opportunity

Exemptions, P.E.

Examinations

Extracurricular Activities

Extra Help

Extortion

F

Field Trips

Financial Aid Night

Fines (See School Property)

Fire Drills

Food/Beverage

Forgery

Fraternities and Sororities

Fund Raising

Folio

G

Gambling, Cards, Betting

Governor's School

Graduation Requirements

GUIDANCE PROGRAM & SERVICES

Course Scheduling

Dropping a Course

Class Rank

Program of Studies

College Conferences

College and Career Resources

College Night

Progress Reports/Interims

Report Cards

Financial Aid Night

Student Assistance Program

Independent Study

Advanced Placement Program

Basic Skills Curriculum/HSPA

H

Harassment

HEALTH SERVICES

School Nurse

Illness at School

Medication Policy

Physical Exam Requirement

Drug/Alcohol Prevention

Home Instruction

Elevator Keys

Exemptions, P.E.

Health Education

Hi's Eye

History of Westfield High School

Homeroom

Homework

Home Instruction

Honor Roll Requirements (see Report Cards)

HSPA Testing

I

Identification Cards

Illness at School

Independent Study Program

Interim Reports (see Progress Reports)

Internet Policy (see Acceptable Use Policy)

Interscholastic Athletics

Interscholastic Programs

L

Lateness to School

Leaving School Grounds

Library/Media Center

Literary Carnival

Lockers (See School Property)

M

Map of Westfield High School

Medication Policy

Mopeds

N

New Jersey Statutes

Nursing Services

O

Open Lunch

P

Parent Conferences

Parking

Peer Mediation/SAC

Philosophy/Goals of WHS

Plagiarism

Principal's Welcome

Program Changes (see Course Scheduling )

Program of Studies/Course Offerings

Progress Reports/Interim Reports

Project '79

Physical Education

Physical Examination Requirement

Publications

Public Address Announcements

Q

Quiet & Order

R

Radios, Boomboxes

Report Cards

Resource Centers (see Library)

S

SARC

SAC

Scheduling (see Course Scheduling)

School Closing

School Property/Vandalism

School Social Functions

School Songs

School Year Calendar Policy

Search and Seizure

Signing In/Out

Smoking/Chewing Tobacco

State Testing

Student Assistance Program/SAC

Student Council

Student Grievance Procedure

Student Rights

Substitute Teachers

Summer Reading

Suspension

T

Textbooks (See School Property)

Theft 2

U

Unauthorized Clubs

Use of Building/Grounds

V

Vandalism

Varsity Sports (see Athletics)

Visitors

Vocational/Technical Programs

W

Walkmen

Weapons

Withdrawal & Transfer

Working Papers

Y

Yearbook

...A BRIEF HISTORY OF WESTFIELD HIGH SCHOOL

The history of Westfield High School is a long and varied record of academic excellence. The oldest school on record was the old brick academy on Mountain Avenue opposite the Presbyterian Church, a town landmark. The minister of the church was the supervisor of it and all the schools in Westfield Township.

The history of the high school actually begins in 1869 with the opening of the old Prospect School which at that time had a staff of five teachers. For the few students who were preparing for college, the school principal taught Latin, Greek, higher mathematics and science. The other teachers taught the elementary subjects. On March 2, 1880, the Board of Education, in its formal minutes, made the first direct reference to a high school in Westfield. When the Lincoln School on Academy Place was erected in 1890, classes of high school level were transferred to it.

In 1900, the high school department was transferred to the newly opened Washington School on Elm Street. Shortly afterward, a regular full four year high school program which received state approval was organized.

The high school became an independent unit in January 1916, when it moved to the Elm Street building. The program, chiefly college preparatory, was offered to 306 students by 11 teachers. That year there were 39 students in the graduating class.

In 1926 when the present Roosevelt Intermediate School was opened, Westfield adopted the 6-3-3 plan and designated the Elm Street building, now containing grades 10, 11 and 12, as Westfield High School. Frank N. Neubauer was designated principal, and he remained in that office until his death in 1947.

During this period the high school established the enviable position which it holds today as one of the truly outstanding secondary schools in the state and the nation. In 1928 it was accredited by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools in the first group of high schools to be accredited by this association. It was also, at this time, established as a center for the College Entrance Board Examinations. Westfield High School is one of the enviable schools in the nation to hold over 60 consecutive years of accreditation by the Middle States Association.

During this time an excellent library was established, a rich program in athletics and physical education was developed, and opportunities for outstanding experiences in art, industrial arts, music, speech, and dramatics were expanded. It was in this period that guidance services became an integral part of the program, and pupil activities grew to include publications, clubs, social events and student government. In 1947 Robert L. Foose became the principal of the high school.

By the late 1940's the Elm Street building had become much too small for the ever-growing student body. Students were being housed in the Elm Street building, the old Washington School as an annex, and two portable buildings on Walnut Street. To maintain and expand Westfield's high educational standards and experiences, a new high school building became imperative.

The present building on Dorian Road was opened on February 4, 1952. The staff, consisting of 42 teachers, taught 725 students in three curricula: business education, college preparatory, and general. In the first commencement from the new building, 203 students were graduated.

Rapid growth in student enrollment necessitated further expansion. In September 1960, the high school gained an addition consisting of 17 new classrooms, two gymnasiums and a cafeteria. In the 1970's, four additional classrooms were added by the acquisition of the two portable buildings on Trinity Place.

With the retirement of Dr. Foose in 1969, Albert R. Bobal became the school's principal. During the 1970's each academic department opened its resource center where students could work independently or seek tutorial assistance from teachers. The Department of Special Services opened resource rooms at the high school so that specially trained teachers could help Special needs youngsters to succeed. In 1979 an alternative school was created for disaffected students of average or above average ability. Project 79, like the resource centers and resource rooms, remains an ongoing program.

In 1962 Westfield instituted its first summer school program which was approved by the State Department of Education. The summer school and the widely recognized performing arts program of the Summer Workshop are open to local residents.

In 1981 Dr. Robert G. Petix was named the principal of Westfield High School, leading the school into its second century of outstanding secondary education. In recent years, the school has undergone remodeling in its science labs and the newly expanded Robert L. Foose Library/Media Center.

With the opening of the 1989-1990 academic year, Westfield High School again welcomed a fourth level of students to its halls: NINTH GRADERS. With zestful excitement we continue to look forward to the excellence so evident at the school. At Westfield High School we look back with pride at many years of distinguished achievements; also, we look ahead to the excitement of a new millennium with confidence to a future in which we shall fulfill our role of thoroughly preparing students for work, for further education and for responsible citizenship.

WESTFIELD HIGH SCHOOL

550 Dorian Road

Westfield, New Jersey 07090-3390

(908) 789-4500

FAX: (908) 789-4230

Dear Students...

WELCOME TO WHS!

The policies and procedures contained in your Blue Devil Handbook for students and parents are the result of a concerted effort on the part of the administration, faculty and students! This information has been carefully prepared and presented so that it will be of great value in helping you and your parents adjust to our school and become an integral part of it.

The ultimate purpose of education is to help each student become an effective citizen in a democracy. To develop and accept the responsibilities and obligations of good citizenship will help us to participate successfully in the world of tomorrow. We hope that you will participate in our varied activities and thus live a better life and finally take your place in this complex society. Remember that your success in this school will be directly proportional to your efforts. Be proud of your school. Take good care of it, and feel free to make suggestions for improving it.

Our school and this administration welcome you, and we hope that you will always be conscious of its traditions and requirements. This school is what we, working together, make it. Let us always have the spirit to do the things that will continue to make it outstanding!

Robert G. Petix

Principal

Click HERE go to Table of Contents

Philosophy & Objectives of

Westfield High School

. . . PHILOSOPHY

As we prepare to enter the 21st century, Westfield High School redefines itself as a community of thoughtful learners: educators and students working together to seek connections, ask questions, and develop essential skills. Recognizing our mission to prepare young people for commitment to responsible leadership and citizenship, we seek to respect the unique skills, learning styles, and cultural backgrounds of all members of the school community.

We seek to emphasize as valuable approaches to learning: cooperation, respectful critique, meaningful academic rigor, hands-on experience, and serious reflection and self assessment. While educating students is the school's first mission, we are also committed to encouraging the professional growth and intellectual stimulation of educators and support staff. We stress, too, that all members of the school community should have structured opportunities to share in decision making and problem solving processes.

Students at Westfield High School should enjoy daily opportunities to read, write, and analyze; to think critically and creatively; to understand and use various technologies; to define and solve complex problems; to struggle with challenging questions within and across disciplines; to develop curiosity about and enthusiasm for the aesthetic and the practical; and to interact socially and collegially. With the adults in the school community as mentors and guides, young people should also come to recognize ethical contexts in which decisions and choices must be made.

We are committed to the vision that learning should take place in a comfortable, safe environment that provides a challenging curriculum, appropriate materials, flexible scheduling, and a code of conduct that promotes respect for self and others. Both the curriculum and extra-curricular activities must welcome and nurture students of varying backgrounds, academic abilities, and vocational aspirations. In addition, curriculum in each discipline and extra-curricular activities should honor diversity of race, class, gender, ethnicity, sexual orientation, age, and physical ability and appearance. All students should be able to learn and grow in an environment that protects, challenges, and nurtures each one as a worthy individual. When a student leaves Westfield High School, he or she should possess the skills and attitudes that lead to a productive and satisfying life.

. . . GOALS / OBJECTIVES

THE FOLLOWING BROADLY ARTICULATED LIST REPRESENTS OUR COMMITMENT IN ACTION TO THIS PHILOSOPHY:

* To provide each student with essential learning skills, including skills necessary to communicate through reading, writing, speaking, and technology; to understand mathematical models and their applications; to engage in the scientific process in order to understand the natural world; to learn and practice new languages.

* To foster in each student understanding of and sensitivity toward the world in which we live, including its histories, its arts and crafts, various languages and cultures, interactions between living things and environment, and the social and ethical responsibilities of human behavior.

* To develop and nurture in each student a sense of self-worth; of the importance of physical, social, and mental health; and of the challenge to explore, define, and commit to personal values.

* To introduce and maintain an articulated instructional program for students and staff that integrates current technology within and across disciplines.

* To provide all members of the school community -- educators and support staff as well as students -- with challenging and relevant opportunities to develop intellectually, professionally, and personally.

. . . EQUAL EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY

The Westfield Board of Education affirms its responsibility to ensure all students in the public schools of Westfield equal educational opportunity and all employees equal employment opportunity regardless of race, color, creed, religion, handicap, sex, ancestry, national origin, and social or economic status. To fulfill this responsibility, the Board shall direct the Superintendent of Schools to review and to recommend those modifications of the present school and classroom programs and employment/contract practices as may be necessary under the regulations 6:4-1.1-6:4-1.9 of Equality in Educational Programs.

. . . A

. . . ADMINISTRATIVE ADVISERS

During your stay with us, there are times when you need to seek advice, receive additional attention, to work out a problem, or simply stop and talk with an outside observer. This role is fulfilled by your administrative staff.

Dr. Petix. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . Main Office

Mr. Eyre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . Office A

Mr. Farinella . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .... . . . Office A

Mr. Tennant .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Office A

. . . ADVANCED PLACEMENT PROGRAM

Advanced standing in college via awarding of credit and/or placement is possible by taking Advanced Placement courses and performing successfully on the Advanced Placement examinations distributed and scored by Educational Testing Service. Honors grading applies in A.P. (See Program of Studies booklet).

Advanced Placement courses are college level courses, not merely college preparatory. Usually, Westfield High School offers the following Advanced Placement courses during the school year: Advanced Placement Computer Science, Advanced Placement English (Language and Literature), Advanced Placement Spanish, Advanced Placement French, Advanced Placement Biology, Advanced Placement Latin, Advanced Placement Calculus (BC and AB), Advanced Placement Physics, Advanced Placement American Government, and Advanced Placement European History.

Upon completion of these courses, students will take the appropriate Advanced Placement Examination. A score of 3 on a scale of 1-5 will often result in placement and/or credit at the college level. Some colleges may require a minimum score of 4 to be eligible for college credit.

As stated above, the Advanced Placement program offers the college level experience at the secondary school level. In keeping with this philosophy, Westfield High School endorses a privilege for those students involved in the May Advanced Placement testing as indicated below.

Attendance on Advanced Placement test days: when a student has an Advanced Placement examination, the student need only report to the scheduled exam. The student may choose not to attend other scheduled classes or may choose to attend those classes that he/she feels necessary. A student who chooses not to attend classes on a particular Advanced Placement test day must leave the building or report to a resource center study area commensurate with any further upcoming Advanced Placement exams. Dr. James Moriarty, guidance counselor, coordinates this program. A student choosing not to attend classes (a class) on an Advanced Placement test day will have his/her absence recorded as "Excused, Chargeable."

Students must maintain an "A" or "B" average in an honors or advanced placement course. The record of students earning a "C" or below will be reviewed immediately at the end of the marking period by the classroom teacher, academic department chair and guidance counselor. If it is determined that the student is unable or unwilling to meet the rigorous standards of the course, he/she may be rescheduled into a college preparatory section.

. . . ASSEMBLIES

Assemblies are a regularly scheduled part of the curriculum designed to be educational as well as entertaining experiences. They provide one of the few opportunities in school to learn formal audience behavior. Regardless of the type of program, courtesy demands that the student body be respectful and appreciative. In live entertainment, unlike radio television or movies, the performers are very conscious of their audience. Students/parents who wish to suggest possible programs should contact Dr. Petix's secretary in the Main Office.

1. Do not take books or coats to the assembly unless instructed otherwise.

2. Proceed to the assembly area quietly and promptly. Find your seat quickly.

3. When the chairperson of the assembly asks for your attention, give it immediately.

4. Be courteous to the performers and to your neighbors. Don't use an interval of applause or the short time between numbers

to start conversation. Talking, whispering, whistling, stamping of feet and booing are discourteous.

5. Applaud in keeping with the occasion. Applause should be generous and courteous.

6. Do not leave the assembly until dismissed.

7. Inappropriate behavior can lead to detention/suspension.

. . . ATHLETICS

. . . GOING OUT FOR A SPORT

Any person who wishes may try out for any Westfield sports team. The student must complete all forms enclosed in the registration packet, including a medical history form, which can be obtained from the coach of the sport the student wishes to join. All completed forms must be returned to the Athletic Office. Students must pass a physical administered by their family physician after July 1st. This will be sufficient for the entire school year. Days and times of practice are posted on gym bulletin boards, and every student receives a complete copy of the fall, winter and spring sports schedules. If you need information, see ED TRANCHINA, Athletic Director, in Office B.

Westfield High School is a member of the Watchung Conference and competes with other member schools in football, cross country, soccer, gymnastics, basketball, softball, wrestling, tennis, golf, baseball, and spring track. Also, varsity teams in swimming, gymnastics, volleyball, bowling, ice hockey, lacrosse, field hockey, and winter track are open to students in grades 9 through 12.

Although every sport does not field a junior varsity team, many of them do afford students an opportunity to play junior varsity. The following page lists the varsity sports offered at Westfield High School this year. A sport marked with an asterisk offers students an opportunity to compete at the junior varsity level. See Athletic Director for more details.

. . . INTERSCHOLASTIC ATHLETICS

The Westfield Board of Education believes individual students will benefit physically and intellectually through competitive interscholastic and intramural team and individual sports activities.

It is the Board's policy to provide secondary school students interscholastic athletic competition in a variety of team and individual sports. Students shall be allowed to participate in interscholastic sports subject to rules and regulations of the district and NJSIAA regulations. Qualified personnel shall be provided for coaching and supervising interscholastic sports. It is the policy of the Board to provide intramural athletic activities as an growth of class instruction in physical education and commensurate with the grade level of the student involved. Intramurals are available for students in grades six through twelve at their school.

The purpose of secondary school athletics is both educational and recreational. Major emphasis is to provide a valuable learning experience for the participant. Emphasis is placed on self-discipline and emotional maturity gained through respect for established rules and authority, and consideration of the rights of others.

A well-organized and well-conducted athletic program is a potent factor in the morale of a student body and an important phase of good community school relations. Winning, involving the spirit of competition, is an immediate goal in all athletic contests, but it is not an end in itself. The desire to succeed and excel as an individual and as a member of a team is more important.

1. Participation in NJSIAA interscholastic athletics is limited to senior high school students.

2. The Westfield High School is a member of the New Jersey Interscholastic Athletic Association (NJSIAA), and in all athletic matters will adhere firmly to the rules and regulations of that body and to the philosophy of sports which NJSIAA encourages. The eligibility of students to participate in the athletic program is determined in accordance with NJSIAA regulations.

3. A high school student who has been declared initially eligible for an interscholastic activity but, who after becoming involved in the activity or team encounters academic failures or demonstrates poor performance in his/her classes, will be subject to review for continued participation in the activity or sport.

The committee selected to review each case will be composed of the student's guidance counselor, the activity supervisor, the athletic director, a member of the Child Study Team, if necessary, and a principal from the school. Each case will be reviewed individually. The student may be placed on immediate probation for a period of up to two weeks. During the probationary period, the student can continue to participate in all extracurricular activities; however, the student's academic progress will be monitored. If the expected improvement is judged to be insufficient (sporadic completion of homework, disciplinary problems, tardiness, papers/projects submitted late, quizzes and tests failed, and excessive absenteeism) by the committee, he/she will be removed from participation in the activity or team.

If the student shows satisfactory improvement, the probation will be changed to conditional participation. Conditional participation will require the student to continue to show satisfactory participation in all academic areas for the entire season or the duration of the activity program.

If the student fails to meet the standards of conditional participation, that student will be subject to further actions, including removal from the activity.

4. No student may start practice for any athletic team until he or she has been examined and approved by a medical doctor and until written consent has been obtained from the parent. Good physical condition, freedom from injury, and full recovery from illness are prerequisites to participation in athletic competition and practice for such competition. HIV status shall not be screened as a part of athletic physicals or reported in school health records. A candidate for a place on an athletic team or squad must receive a medical examination conducted once in each school year by the school medical inspector or the designated team doctor, if any, not more than three hundred sixty five days prior to the first practice session. The school medical inspector may accept the report, on a form provided by the district, of a medical examination conducted, at no expense to the Board, by the pupil's personal physician. Each candidate whose medical examination was completed more than sixty days prior to the first practice session must submit a health history update completed by the pupil's parent or legal guardian.

The medical examination conducted to determine the fitness of a candidate for athletic competition and the health history update must include, as a minimum, the respective medical history information and physical assessments set forth in rules of the State Board of Education and incorporated in their entirety in regulations implementing this policy.

The school medical inspector or the designated team doctor shall approve or disapprove the pupil's participation in athletics based on the medical examination. Written notification of that determination, signed by the school medical inspector or team doctor, shall be given to the pupil's parent or legal guardian and shall include the reasons for disapproval of the pupil's participation. The health findings of the medical examination shall be filed in the pupil's health examination record, subject to Board policy on pupil records.

5. Expenditures for the athletic program are incorporated as part of the general budget of the Board. No expenditures for athletic purposes may be made in excess of those listed in the budget without approval of the Superintendent.

6. District participation in interscholastic athletics shall be subject to approval by the Board. This shall include approval of membership in any leagues, associations, or conferences and annual sports schedules.

7. Insurance for accident or injury shall be provided by the district for students engaging in interscholastic athletics.

8. Athletic coaches shall be trained in first aid and in the identification of pupil athletes who are injured or disabled in the course of any athletic activity.

9. The Board shall approve annually a program of interscholastic athletics and shall require that all facilities utilized in that program, whether or not the property of this Board, properly safeguard both players and spectators and are kept free from hazardous conditions.

The Board adopts as Board policy the rules and regulations of the New Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic Association and shall review such rules annually to ascertain that they continue to be in conformity with the objectives of this Board.

VARSITY SPORTS AT WESTFIELD HIGH SCHOOL

Females Males

FALL

Field Hockey* Football*

Soccer* Soccer*

Cross Country* Cross Country*

Gymnastics Tennis

Volleyball*

Tennis

WINTER

Basketball* Basketball*

Winter Track Winter Track

Swimming/Diving Swimming/Diving

Bowling (Co-ed)* Bowling (Co-ed)*

Ice Hockey (Co-ed)* Wrestling *

Ice Hockey (Co-ed)*

SPRING

Softball* Baseball*

Track Track

Golf (Co-ed) Golf (Co-ed)

Volleyball* Lacrosse*

Lacrosse* Tennis

Those teams marked with an asterisk (*) have junior varsity squads.

. . .ELIGIBILITY

WHS Eligibility Policy for Athletics and Major School Activities

Westfield High School Eligibility Policy for Athletics and Major School Activities: Policy for extracurricular eligibility in addition to the Westfield Board of Education and the Board's general eligibility policy. A student who has been declared initially eligible for an activity/athletic team but, who after becoming involved in the activity or team encounters academic failures or demonstrates poor performance in his/her classes, will be subject to review for continued participation in the activity or sport.

The committee selected to review each case will be composed of the student's guidance counselor, the activity supervisor, the athletic director, and a principal from the school. Whenever a student under the auspices of Special Services must be reviewed, a member of the Special Education Child Study Team will be present or the coordinator or the program at Westfield High School will attend. Each case will be reviewed individually. The student may be placed on immediate probation for a period of up to two weeks. During the probationary period, the student can continue to participate in all extracurricular activities; however, the student's academic progress will be monitored. If the expected improvement is judged to be insufficient (sporadic completion of homework, disciplinary problems, tardiness, papers/projects submitted late, quizzes and tests failed, and excessive absenteeism) by the committee, he/she will be removed from participation in the activity or team.

If the student shows satisfactory improvement, the probation will be changed to conditional participation. Conditional participation will require the student to continue to show satisfactory participation in all academic areas for the entire season or the duration of the activity program.

If the student fails to meet the standards of conditional participation, that student will be subject to further sanctions, including immediate removal from the activity.

. . . INTERSCHOLASTIC PROGRAMS

N.J. STATE ELIGIBILITY STANDARDS

The academic eligibility standards adopted by the N.J.S.I.A.A. for students wishing to participate in competitive athletics, are adopted as policy by the Westfield Board of Education.

1) To be eligible for athletic competition during the first semester (September 1 to January 31) or the second year of attendance in the secondary school or beyond, a pupil must have passed 27.5 of the credits required by the State of New Jersey for graduation during the immediately preceding academic year.

2) To be eligible for athletic competition which begins during the second semester (February 1 to June 30) during the ninth grade or higher, a pupil must have passed the equivalent of 13.75 of the credits required by the State of New Jersey for graduation at the close of the preceding semester (January 31). Full year courses shall be equated as one-half of the total credits to be gained for the full year to determine credits passed during the immediately preceding semester.

3) The above paragraphs (1 and 2) shall not apply to incoming students from grammar school (eighth grade).

4) Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph (1 ) and (2) above, a pupil who is eligible at the beginning of a sports season shall be allowed to finish that season. c.f. N.J.S.I.A.A.

5) Cannot be 19 years of age prior to September 1.

Further, these same academic standards are to be met by all Westfield students who participate in any extracurricular program which requires at least five hours of activity per week. If the student fails to meet the standards of conditional participation, that student will be subject to further sanctions, including immediate removal from the activity.

. . . GOOD SPORTSMANSHIP

In athletics, as in every other activity, nothing is as important as good sportsmanship. Your school and you individually will be judged by the manner in which you meet each new situation. Westfield High School traditionally has been known for the good sportsmanship of its teams and its students.

The Board of Education requires that all individuals involved in or attending the athletic and intramural programs sponsored by the Board exhibit sportsmanship when representing the school at any athletic event. Sportsmanship is defined as abiding by the rules of the contest as defined or accepted by the participating teams and the gracious acceptance of victory or defeat.

Student athletes are expected to adhere to the NJSIAA (New Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic Association) Sports Code of Ethics:

* Represent their school and team with the highest standards of proper behavior and conduct.

* Respect the integrity and personality of teammates, opponents and coaches.

* Abide by the rules of the game with modesty in victory and graciousness in defeat.

* Respect the decisions and judgment of officials.

* Refrain from using obscenities or profanities.

* Strive for maximum achievement in scholastic and athletic competition.

* Practice good health habits.

* Demonstrate good sportsmanship in both winning and losing.

* Abstain from use of unhealthy and illegal substances.

* Follow the rules of the New Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic Association.

Parents/spectators should:

* Show respect for all student athletes and coaches of both teams and their supporters.

* Refrain from using obscenities or profanities.

* Refrain from making disparaging remarks about players, coaches, officials and spectators.

* Respect the integrity and judgment of contest officials.

* Be a positive role model through his/her own actions.

Demonstrate an appreciation for the athleticism of all contestants.

.

. . ATTENDANCE

.

. . POLICY AND PROCEDURES

In accordance with guidelines established by the Board of Education of the State of New Jersey, Westfield High School has set a 90% attendance requirement for students. All absences for all reasons, inclusive of full-day and individual class absences, are recorded and charged toward a student's attendance record. Absences occasioned by religious observances or school sponsored activities are recorded but are not charged toward a student's attendance record. For an absence to be excused, a written note signed by a parent or guardian and specifying a legitimate reason must be presented to the Attendance Office. Unexcused absences (class cutting) are penalized and are also recorded and charged toward a student's attendance record. At any step in the attendance procedure the student and/or parent may appeal on the appropriate form any charged absence. BOB EYRE, located in Office A, coordinates the attendance regulations assisted by colleague JOHN FARINELLA.

More than EIGHTEEN (18) CHARGEABLE ABSENCES from a full-year course, more than NINE (9) CHARGEABLE ABSENCES from a semester course, more than FIVE CHARGEABLE ABSENCES from Health or Physical Education marking period courses or the SIXTH ABSENCE IN ANY COURSE DURING THE FOURTH QUARTER MAY RESULT IN DENIAL OF CREDIT FOR THE COURSE. On the EIGHTH and FIFTEENTH CHARGEABLE ABSENCE from a full-year course, on the THIRD and SIXTH CHARGEABLE ABSENCE from a semester course and on the THIRD CHARGEABLE ABSENCE in Health or Physical Education marking period courses, a warning notice to parents/guardians indicating the attendance status and the potential consequences of continued absences will be sent home.

A Review Committee will consider requests for appeals of the policy when absences are occasioned by cases of extended illness or extenuating family circumstances. The presence of unexcused class absences (class cuts) in an attendance record under appeal/review will adversely affect the committee's decision. It is strongly recommended that medical-dental appointments, college visitations, or other non-school-sponsored matters be arranged in such a way as to avoid absence from class.

EXCUSED CLASS ABSENCES

The following categories are considered legitimate but chargeable reasons for excused absence from class:

- illness - motor vehicle obligations*

- medical/dental appointments* - family illness

- death in family - college visitations*

- legal obligations* - family visitation*

* These excuses will be considered legitimate only when the note is presented in advance of the absence.

WITH THE EXCEPTION OF ILLNESS, ALL NOTES FOR THE EXCUSES LISTED ABOVE WILL BE CONFIRMED BY A TELEPHONE CALL FROM AN OFFICE "A" STAFF MEMBER.

UNEXCUSED CLASS ABSENCES

An absence from class (including homeroom) will be recorded as unexcused (cut) and charged toward the student's attendance record when:

- parents/guardians have not been aware of such an absence or understand the absence to be unexcused;

- a note is presented which is not acceptable to the administration;

- a student arrives 20 minutes late to class.

Unexcused and chargeable absences (cuts) will activate the following SARC (Student Attendance Review Committee) procedures:

1st Cut:

- Two hours of CENTRAL DETENTION will be assigned by the teacher of the class which has been cut.

- Parents/guardians will be notified by telephone or in writing of the class cut.

2nd Cut:

- Student will be referred to SARC for assignment of Saturday Suspension.

- Parents/guardians and guidance counselor will be notified by SARC.

3rd Cut and Multiple Cuts:

- Student referred to SARC for suspension process.

- Denial of credit in semester courses.

- Mandatory parent conference held with teacher(s) whose classes have been cut, assistant principal, guidance counselor, SARC representative, school social worker, and Child Study Team member (for classified students).

4th Cut:

- Student referred to SARC for suspension process.

- Confirmation letter sent to parents that fourth cut has occurred and warning that a fifth cut will result in denial of credit for the entire course.

5th Cut:

- Denial of credit for full year courses will occur.

- Parent conference with assistant principal, guidance counselor, and school social worker will be scheduled.

- Options for the balance of course:

- Remain in class and meet all course requirements to be eligible for summer school, provided student has no additional cuts in the class and does not exceed 90% class attendance requirements;

- Be scheduled for a semester course for the next semester if the master schedule permits;

- Written appeal exclusively through the principal on the appropriate form.

. . . PUPIL ATTENDANCE REGULATIONS

Based on law, the most recent court decision, Westfield Board of Education policies, experience, and common sense, our present attendance procedures have evolved. These procedures and the way they are administered are summarized for you below.

1. Attendance - Every student shall attend school and each class on all days approved by the Board of Education in the official calendar. Students must attend school a minimum of 90% of the days set by the official calendar. Further, students must attend each class a minimum of 90% of the time (162 of the 180 days in a full year course; 81 of the 90 days in a semester course; 40 of the 45 days in Health or Physical Education marking period courses).

2. Recording of Absences - All absences for all reasons, inclusive of a full day and individual class absences, are recorded and charged toward a student's attendance record. Absences occasioned by religious or school-sponsored activities are recorded but are not charged toward a student's attendance record.

3. Excused Absences - For an absence to be excused, a written note (see samples) signed by a parent or guardian and specifying a legitimate reason must be presented to the Attendance Office which will issue an admit to class slip. The following categories are considered legitimate but chargeable reasons for excused absence from class:

- illness - motor vehicle obligations*

- medical/dental appointments* - family illness

- death in family - college visitations*

- legal obligations* - family visitation*

* These excuses will be considered legitimate only when the note is presented in advance of the absence.

4. Unexcused Absences - When a student misses a class for other than a legal reason, the absence is charged toward a student's attendance record. On the first cut in a class, a student is automatically assigned two hours of detention. On the second and subsequent cuts from a class, up to and including the fourth cut, the student is referred to the Student Attendance Review Committee (SARC) for suspension and counseling. Parents of second and subsequent cut offenders and school staff (guidance counselor, school social worker, assistant principal in charge of discipline and attendance) are advised of the student's class cutting.

5. Denial of Credit - When a student exceeds 18 chargeable absences in a full-year course, 9 chargeable absences in a semester course, 5 chargeable absences in Health or Physical Education marking period courses or 6 chargeable absences in the fourth quarter, he/she will be denied credit in the course(s). Similarly, on the fifth cut from a full year course or on the third cut from a semester course, the student will be denied credit for the course.

6. Notification of Parents - When a pupil is absent from homeroom two consecutive days, or after a total of five absences (multiples of five), the Attendance Office representative telephones parents at home or at business to be sure they are aware of the pupil's absence. Parents will be notified in writing on the 8th and 15th absence from a full-year course, on the 3rd and 6th absence from a semester course and on the 3rd absence from Health or Physical Education marking period course. Parents are notified in writing or by telephone on each instance of class cutting.

7. Appeal Procedure - A Review Committee will consider requests for appeals of the attendance policy when absences are occasioned by cases of extended illness or extenuating family circumstances. The presence of unexcused class absences (class cuts) in any attendance record under review and/or appeal may jeopardize requests for waiver of the policy. At any step in the attendance procedure, the student and/or parent may appeal on the appropriate form any charged absence.

8. Leaving School Early - When a pupil has to leave school early for an acceptable reason with parental approval, the parent must write a note (in advance, in most cases), stating the reason for the early dismissal and the time the pupil is to be excused. The pupil shall be excused only if the PARENT himself/herself comes to Office A to pick up the pupil, or if the telephone number which can verify the validity of the excuse is included in the note. Absences from classes other than religious obligation or school-sponsored activity are charged toward a pupil's absence record.

9. Planned Absence - When parents know in advance that their child will be absent, (e.g., college visitation, a necessary family trip out of town), the student should submit a note to an administrator at least one day in advance. Then, an admittance slip indicating administrative approval should be shown to the classroom teachers so that all assignments can be completed on time with the class.

10. Emergency Absence - When an emergency arises and a note cannot be submitted in advance, parents should indicate in their note that the situation was unavoidable. Infrequent unavoidable occurrences shall be excused by administrators. Likewise, a family or individual problem of a personal nature need not be stated, but in such instances, the parent should telephone an administrator and inform him that the parent was aware of the child's absence and would prefer not to state the reason. Again, such reasons shall be excused by administrators and charged toward a student's attendance record.

... PARENT/GUARDIAN AND STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES AND RIGHTS

It is essential that students and their parents become familiar with the Westfield High School Attendance Policy. Understanding the attendance policy and the rights and responsibilities of parents and students will contribute to a successful academic year.

STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES...

to make regular and punctual attendance to school and individual classes your first priority for all 180 days;

to provide a dated note from your parent/guardian on the day you return that details the date of and reason for your absence;

to read and become familiar with the policies and procedures for absenteeism and class cutting;

to appreciate the correlation between regular attendance and academic achievement;

to keep and periodically review an accurate record of your absences;

to be aware of the total number of excused and unexcused absences that will result in denial of credit;

to know that class cutting and any other unexcused absence will result in a zero (0) for class participation and a zero (0) for any test /quiz missed without the opportunity for make-up;

to arrange immediately with your teacher(s) to make up work missed during a legal absence;

to schedule medical/dental appointments, college visitations, and other non-school matters outside school hours;

to notify the school as far in advance as possible through a note from your parent/guardian of any scheduled absences(s);

STUDENT RIGHTS...

to be informed of recorded class absences upon request;

to be notified on the appropriate form of any class cuts;

to have absences from school accurately recorded in Office A;

to know that absences occasioned by religious observances and school-sponsored activities are not charged toward your total absence record;

to examine any notes explaining absence provided by you;

to appeal in writing to the appropriate administrator any decision of the Attendance Review Committee;

to request at any step in the attendance procedure a review of any penalty imposed for cutting of accumulated absences;

to be permitted to make up work, quizzes, tests missed during a legal absence or suspension.

PARENT/GUARDIAN RESPONSIBILITIES...

to make your child's school attendance your first priority for all 180 days;

to support the integrity of the attendance policy by accurately and punctually reporting your child's absence from school;

to provide a dated note explaining the reason for and date of your child's absence immediately upon his/her return to school or, when possible, in advance (see suggested format);

to appreciate the correlation between regular attendance and academic achievement;

to be aware of the dates of your child's absences;

to inform your child that you do not condone illegal class absence (cutting);

to know that class cutting and any other unexcused absence will result in a zero (0) for the class participation and a zero (0) for any test/quiz missed without the opportunity for make-up;

to direct your child to meet with teachers about work missed during his/her absence;

to schedule medical/dental appointments, college visitation, and other non-school-sponsored matters outside school hours;

to participate in meetings/reviews cited in the attendance procedure.

PARENT/GUARDIAN RIGHTS...

to be informed by telephone or in writing of any instances of cutting of classes according to school procedure:

to be provided, upon request, with the dates of your child's absences;

to examine any notes explaining absence provided by your child;

to appeal in writing to the appropriate administrator any decision of the Attendance Review Committee;

to confer regularly with appropriate staff to determine and address the root of your child's absenteeism.

...STUDENT ATTENDANCE REVIEW COMMITTEE (SARC)

When a student misses a class for other than a legal reason, he/she will be asked to explain his/her absence to a faculty-administration committee. He/she will then be counseled, made aware of the seriousness of his/her offense, given detention, sent to his/her guidance counselor to have his/her schedule adjusted, or in the case of repeated offenses, suspended.

Students are required to attend school on all days approved by the Board of Education in the official calendar. Absence from school for invalid reasons or absences without a supporting written excuse shall be considered truancy and shall be treated as such. Absence from a class for an invalid reason shall be considered cutting and shall be treated as such.

Students may be excused for absence due to illness, religious obligations, professional treatment, and other reasons approved by the principal. When a student has to leave school early for an acceptable reason with parental approval, the parent/guardian must write a note (in advance, in most cases) stating the reason for the early dismissal and the student is to be excused. The student shall be excused only if the parent/guardian himself/herself comes to Office A to pick up the student or if a telephone number which can verify the validity of the excuse is included in the note. SARC is under the direct supervision of an administrator in Office A; faculty members assist him to facilitate as broad an understanding of all cases.

...AWARDS, HONORS, SCHOLARSHIPS

Awards, honors and scholarships are given, most generally, in all the major instructional areas. A variety of awards and scholarships are also offered by local school and community organizations. Further information is available in the Guidance Office.

...B

...BASIC SKILLS CURRICULUM AND HSPA REQUIREMENT

Each junior will be required to pass the State-required High School Proficiency Assessment in order to be eligible to receive a state-approved diploma. Testing takes place in the spring and will be administered to all juniors and to any seniors who failed any element of the test in the past. Transfer students from outside of New Jersey must also take and pass the State test.

Students who received below the minimum passing score on the State test must be enrolled in a basic skills improvement class in math and/or English in order to remediate the designated skills on the test. In addition, freshmen may be placed in basic skills classes as a consequence of their test scores on standardized tests administered in the eighth grade. The State Department of Education has set certain scores on standardized tests as minimum proficiency levels to determine success on the State test. Students below those levels are deemed in danger of failing the High School Proficiency Test and must be enrolled in basic skills courses in the freshman year and possibly beyond.

Students are not able to drop this course. Some of the basic skills classes are offered in place of regular math or English class, while others are supplemental and are taken along with the regular class. Credit for the supplemental classes is offered towards those credits needed for graduation, but credit is not given for the necessary English or mathematics curriculum requirements for graduation. Please see your Guidance Counselor for further information.

... BELL SCHEDULES

REGULAR BELL SCHEDULE

WARNING BELL 7:20 and 7:25 PERIOD 1 7:30 - 8:13 PERIOD 2 8:17 - 9:00 PERIOD 3 9:20 - 10:03 PERIOD 4 10:07 - 10:50 PERIOD 5 10:54 - 11:37 LUNCH

PERIOD 6 11:41 - 12:24 LUNCH

PERIOD 7 12:20 - 1:11 LUNCH

PERIOD 8 1:15 - 1:58

PERIOD 9 2:02 - 2:45

DELAYED OPENING BELL SCHEDULE

ARRIVAL TIME 9:15

HOMEROOM 9:30 - 9:39

PERIOD 1 9:43 - 10:13

PERIOD 2 10:17 - 10:47

PERIOD 3 10:51 - 11:21

PERIOD 5 11:25 - 11:55 PERIOD 6 11:59 - 12:29 PERIOD 7 12:33 - 1:03 PERIOD 8 1:07 - 1:37 PERIOD 4 1:41 - 2:11 PERIOD 9 2:15 - 2:45

EARLY DISMISSAL BELL SCHEDULE

PERIOD 1 7:30 - 8:13

PERIOD 2 8:17 - 9:00 HOMEROOM 9:07 - 9:16

PERIOD 3 9:20 - 10:03 PERIOD 4 10:07 - 10:50

PERIOD 8 10:54 - 11:37 PERIOD 9 11:41 - 12:24

. . .BLUE HALLWAY REGULATIONS

During periods other than lunch, unassigned students are free to move to any destination in the building. The hallways are for traveling only, not congregating. THE PRIVILEGE REFLECTS THIS SCHOOL'S RECOGNITION THAT A SYSTEM OF PRIVILEGES SERVES THE BEST INTERESTS OF STUDENTS AND STAFF ALIKE BY CREATING AN ATMOSPHERE OF MUTUAL TRUST AND RESPECT AND BY PROVIDING STUDENTS WITH AN OPPORTUNITY TO ASSUME FREEDOM AND MAKE RESPONSIBLE CHOICES.

The only areas in which students may gather during their lunch and free periods are:

* Courtyard

* Library and Resource Centers

* Cafeteria B

* Cafeteria A

The library and resource centers are reserved for academic pursuits during all periods.

During lunch periods, hallways only designated as "blue Hallways" can be used. After the first six minutes of lunch periods, hallways outside "blue hallways" are restricted. Doors outside the "blue hallway" traffic pattern, with the exception of the main entrances, will be locked to restrict juniors and seniors returning from Open Lunch from entering restricted hallways. Hallway monitors will periodically check ID cards of returning juniors and seniors.

STUDENTS WHO CONGREGATE IN NON-DESIGNATED AREAS AND HALLWAYS OR FAIL TO PRODUCE AN ID CARD WILL LOSE LUNCH PRIVILEGES AND BE ASSIGNED BY THE ADMINISTRATION TO A SPECIFIC TABLE IN THE CAFETERIA FOR A SPECIFIC LENGTH OF TIME.

Students from assigned classes will be required to carry blue passes issued by staff members to go to Guidance, the library, resource centers, the Health Office, and administrator's office or another teacher's classroom. The regular attendance procedure for obtaining an ADMIT SLIP for absenteeism and for signing in and out of the Attendance Office will still apply.

EXPECTATIONS OF STUDENTS

* Move toward an appropriate destination without congregation or wandering aimlessly in stairwells, foyer, bathrooms, hallways or outside the building

* Demonstrate respect for classes in session by not creating excessive noise in hallways or in the courtyard

* Honor and respect requests made by hallway monitors

* Address staff members with respect

* Carry ID at all times

* Produce ID when requested

* Replace lost/stolen IDs

* Be aware of and follow designated "traffic patterns" during lunch periods

* Return from Open Lunch through designated entrances.

...BULLETINS AND P.A. ANNOUNCEMENTS

All notices of club meetings, athletic and social events, general information for the day and specific instructions are announced on the P.A. system each morning. Pupils responsible for putting notices in this daily bulletin must have their notices approved by their adviser and in the Main Office the day preceding the notice.

Special notices are posted on the bulletin boards outside the Cafeteria, in the library, Guidance Office or posted as signs. All posters must advertise school sponsored events and must be approved by the administration. All signs posted will be taken down after a reasonable length of time.

...BICYCLES

Students who use bicycles/mopeds as a means of transportation are to park them in appropriately marked locations. Students are responsible for locking their property. If an item is damaged or stolen, students must report it to the administrative supervisor in Office A; however, the school can not be held responsible for theft. Bicycles/mopeds must be removed from school grounds no later than 6:00 p.m. daily. Any theft should be reported in Office.

...C

...CHEATING

Cheating is representing someone else's work as one's own, the use of prepared work in any form when none is permitted, or cooperative efforts when individual effort is required. Any form of cheating to any extent is wrong. This improper conduct is a disservice to one's own educational progress, as well as that of others.

Whether you give or receive information during an examination, or on certain assignments, the offense is the same; you will receive a zero (0) for the work. Parents will be notified.

The classroom teacher is the arbiter as to whether or not cheating has occurred. Incidents of cheating must be judged by the teacher, as always, in light of what the teacher has taught and what the teacher expects the student to know. The teacher will report all instances of cheating which involve formal and/or major assignments to the appropriate guidance counselors(s). The minimum consequence for cheating is a "zero" for the submitted work, and this applies to any student involved.

...CLOSED CAMPUS

We operate a closed campus policy with the exception of the Open Lunch privilege extended to seniors and juniors only. Students must stay on the school grounds from the time they arrive, even if the first period has not yet started, until dismissed or until they are picked up by the bus or dismissal for them arrives.

Students must bring a written parental request to the office to leave the campus for any reason unless they are 18 years old and are authorized to write their own notes. Only those students who live within walking distance may be granted permission to go home for lunch. If it is necessary to leave school for any other reason, a permission note must be obtained, signed by the parent, doctor or dentist and returned when the student returns to school. An 18 year old can write her/his own notes provided a parent/guardian FIRST writes a letter requesting his/her child be authorized to write his/her own notes. Students who leave the grounds without permission are subject to suspension.

. . . CLUBS

Our club program is designed to make available as many different types of clubs and activities as possible to meet the interests of the student body. All clubs meet in designated classrooms at times convenient to their members. The plans, activities and functions of each club are decided upon and carried out by the members and their elected officers with the help of an adviser. The success of each activity depends upon the loyalty and work of the members and the capabilities of the officers. A club is only as good as its members make it. Help make your club and your time fruitful by participating actively.

Many of our students and faculty are involved in a dynamic extracurricular program. Because we are always eager to involve additional students in these activities, we encourage you to study this list carefully. Also, Dr. Petix encourages you to check with him in the Main Office if you believe a club or organization we currently do not offer would be beneficial to the student body. A listing of clubs appears in the Agenda.

UNAUTHORIZED CLUBS/FRATERNITIES AND SORORITIES

"No secret fraternity or sorority shall be formed or maintained in any school." * (N.J. Statutes 18:14-110, 18:14-111). This prohibition includes any organization whether such organization exists within the student body of Westfield Schools only, or is composed of students and pupils of the Westfield Schools and of any other school, group, organization, or activity of any kind which is really related to school life and chooses any or all of its members from high school students. Symbols, letters or insignia indicating membership in a secret fraternity, sorority, or society may not be worn.

. . .EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES

Each student is urged to participate in one or more extracurricular activities, to be a "doer" and not a "watcher." Join activities that interest you. There are athletic, music, drama and subject-oriented clubs, Student Council, publications and interest groups. When you commit yourself to an activity, you owe it your best efforts not only to benefit the club but also yourself.

If you fall behind in your school work, extra help and teacher conferences take precedence over any extracurricular activity, and you may be requested to drop extra activities.

Nevertheless, while there is no disputing the important place grades hold in education today, the most vital factor is the total education an individual accumulates. In order to take advantage of extra learning opportunities, plan your activity schedule carefully. Don't become overloaded. Obligations at home, church and in the community should be considered in arriving at a program that will be most suitable for you. Discuss this with your parents/guardians. They are to be fully informed of each extracurricular activity in which you participate, its hours, schedules, practice sessions, performances.

Activities will be scheduled during the day or after school at times convenient to the group and its adviser. No students are to remain after school unless requested or participating in activities supervised by an adviser. Only officially recognized school groups may use the school building or its facilities.

Pupils must attend a full day of school in order to be eligible to participate in extracurricular activities for that day. Breaking of the rule will result not only in ineligibility for participation on the day absent, but could also result in further administrative action such as missing the next contest, performance, etc. Exceptional circumstances such as attending a funeral, a doctor's appointment, etc., will be considered on an individual basis when excused in advance.

. . . CLASS AND ORGANIZATION FUNDS

All class and organization activity funds are to be deposited with the Treasurer of Student Activities, MICHAEL SEILER, who is located in his office (Room 230). These funds will be credited to the proper accounts and receipts given.

A class or organization wishing to make a purchase, a donation, or contract with any agency for service or merchandise must have approval of its adviser. The adviser, in turn, must verify that funds are available in the account, and the adviser must acquire approval and a purchase requisition.

Individual class and organization treasurers or business managers are responsible for keeping accurate records of all deposits and purchases. Please check periodically with your adviser and confirm your accounts.

...COLLEGE VISITATIONS

Students should plan to visit a variety of institutions before settling on a particular type of college. An interview may clarify the focus of a particular college. Colleges often view the interview as a means of clarifying their academic standards, programs, and the degree of competition and selectivity for admission.

Some research suggestions prior to the visit are the following: familiarize yourself with the college catalogue and consider size, coed, public or private, church related , history of the college, student body, scholarship information, procedures for admission, housing, health facilities, R.O.T.C., campus regulations, curriculum, and extracurricular activities. Students should avoid asking question in the interview that can easily be answered by reading the catalogue.

Visits should, in most cases, begin no earlier than the junior year of high school. The late spring months are the best times for such visits. During the early fall of the senior year seniors should plan visits to those colleges they were unable to see in the spring. The New Jersey Educators' Convention would be an ideal time for many seniors to visit.

There is no better way to learn of educational programs, campus atmosphere, and facilities than to visit when classes are in session. Sometimes colleges by prior arrangement will permit students to attend classes. Colleges prefer that appointments be made several weeks in advance of the visit. Sometimes a last minute opportunity to visit a college may present itself and a phone call in advance may procure an appointment.

Large institutions may conduct only group interviews or open-house programs. The usual interview will be between the prospective candidate and the admissions' counselor. Sometimes parents are invited to sit in on the interview. It may be difficult for parents to remain listeners, but the interviewer is primarily interested in the candidate and his/her suitability to their college. Nevertheless, this is not to discourage parents from asking questions.

Most colleges will provide tours of the campus by student guides or admission counselors. This will give the student and the parents the opportunity to ask additional questions and observe the college atmosphere. While on tour of the campus you should try to visit classrooms, dormitories, the library, student union, and any other facilities of interest. Students are advised to visit departments of their major interest and to speak with both teachers and students majoring in their field.

Taking time to sit in the student cafeteria or in the student lounge will afford an opportunity to observe students in a relaxed, informal setting. Obtain, if possible, the college newspaper to read at a later time.

At the conclusion of your visit spend some time in the community to explore the resources of the town and see how each utilizes the others' resources. Discuss and review with your parents/guardians your impressions of each college. Also, you may wish to share these with your counselor when you return to school. A brief thank-you note should be sent to each person who extended courtesies to you while on campus.

PLANNING FOR COLLEGE EDUCATION

Each college has its own admissions' requirements regarding high school courses. Beyond specific course requirements most colleges emphasize the following important factors in making a decision on applications for admissions:

1. Four-year scholastic record (rank in class)

2. Recommendation of the school

3. Scores made on the College Entrance Examination Board tests (SAT I AND II) and the ACT

4. Appraisal of the applicant's personal qualities by his teachers

5. Strong academic program composed mainly of subjects in the fields of English, mathematics, foreign

languages, science and social studies

6. Results of other standardized tests

7. Extracurricular record

8. Four years of mathematics, and both chemistry and physics for students planning to major in engineering or

closely related fields

Foreign language requirements vary. Many colleges prefer three or four years of one language rather than two years of two languages. Some colleges do not require any foreign language, others recommend five years. College catalogues give specific information regarding this requirement.

The annual JUNIOR PARENT evening, a program for college-bound students and their parents/guardians, is scheduled for April 15, 2003, and the annual FINANCIAL AID NIGHT will be December 3, 2002. College Night is November 21, 2002. Both evenings are held in Cafeteria B and are hosted by the guidance staff.

...CODE OF CONDUCT/PUPIL DISCIPLINE

Westfield High School has established a code of conduct and discipline policies to promote mutual respect and appropriate behavior in school. The Board of Education believes that an effective instructional program requires an orderly school environment and that the effectiveness of the educational program is, in part, reflected in the behavior of pupils. The Board expects pupils to conduct themselves in keeping with their level of maturity and with respect and with a proper regard for the rights and welfare of other pupils, for school personnel, for the educational purpose underlying all school activities, and for the care of school facilities and equipment.

One of the most important lessons education should teach is discipline. While it does not appear as a subject, it underlies the whole educational structure. It is the training that develops self-control, character, orderliness, and efficiency. It is the key to good conduct and proper consideration for other people. With an understanding of the purposes of discipline in a school, you may form a correct attitude toward it and not only do your part in making your school an effective place of learning but also develop the habit of self-restraint which will make you a better person.

PUPIL DISCIPLINE

The Board of Education believes that the best discipline is self-imposed, and pupils must learn to assume and accept responsibility for their own behavior, and for the consequences of their misbehavior. Staff members who interact with pupils shall place emphasis on the pupils' ability to grow in self-discipline.

The pupils of this district are entitled to an education free from undue disruption. Pupils are required to conform to reasonable standards of behavior, to respect the rights, person and property of others, and obey those in authority. Pupils who disrupt the educational program shall be subject to the disciplinary procedures of this district.

Every pupil enrolled in this district shall observe the rules and regulations approved by the Board, and submit to the discipline imposed for infraction of those rules.

Information regarding disciplinary actions may be entered on a pupil's record to assist the work of the pupil's teachers and counselors. All information regarding discipline will be expunged from a pupil's record when the pupil is no longer enrolled in the district.

Disruptive Pupils

A pupil who displays chronic behavioral and academic problems may be referred to the child study team by the building principal for possible identification as a disruptive or disaffected pupil. Such referrals shall be made in strict accordance with due process regulations prescribed by the administrative code.

A pupil, whose behavior poses a continuing danger to persons or property, or an ongoing disruption to the academic process, may be suspended or expelled, following due process.

Pupil Assaults

Any pupil who commits an assault upon a teacher, administrator or other employee of the Board of Education shall be suspended from school immediately by the Principal according to procedural due process in accordance with Policy 5610. Suspension or expulsion proceedings shall begin no later than 30 calendar days from the date of the pupil's suspension.

Classified Pupils

Classified pupils are subject to the same disciplinary procedures as non-classified pupils and may be disciplined in accordance with their IEP. Before disciplining a classified pupil, it must be determined that: the pupil's behavior is not primarily caused by his/her educational disability. If upon completion of the re-evaluation the Child study team determines the pupil's behavior was not primarily caused by his/her educational disability, the district may suspend or expel the pupil.

If the child study team determines that the pupil's behavior was primarily caused by his/her educational disability, the district may not suspend or expel the pupil. The child study team may propose a change in the pupil's placement.

Disorder and Demonstration

The Board will not permit any willful activity by a pupil or group of pupils that interferes with the orderly operation of the schools or the rights of others. The Board specifically prohibits any assembly or expression that materially disrupts instruction; is obscene, slanderous, or grossly prejudicial; advocates the use of dangerous or harmful materials; advocates the use of force or the violation of the law or school rules.

The Board directs all staff members to attempt to resolve conflict through dialogue and mediation. Pupils who express dissent should be made aware of the appropriate procedures available to them for the resolution of their grievances.

STUDENTS ARE TO REFRAIN FROM THE FOLLOWING:

Smoking in the building or on school grounds and chewing tobacco as well .

Fighting on or near school property.

Disrespect of teachers.

Dress or appearance which is disruptive.

Destruction, defacing, negligent or improper use of school property and school events.

Eating or drinking outside the cafeteria.

Playing cards, gambling and betting, using/carrying dice.

Rowdy behavior or running/shouting in the building.

Dropping waste paper, candy wrappers, etc., in the building.

Locker misuse.

Using profane/offensive language.

Possession or use of alcoholic beverages/drugs/beepers on school property and school events.

Sitting in cars in the parking lot/surrounding streets during lunch periods/free periods and loitering.

Possession or use of anything that might be considered a weapon.

Vandalism or theft.

Loitering in lavatories.

Using skateboards and/or rollerblades inside the school or courtyard or on school grounds.

Possession/Use of laser pointers

Disruptive behavior/throwing food in the cafeterias.

Continued infraction of rules of conduct or attendance are penalized by giving such people:

1. Central Detention

2. Saturday Suspension

3. In-School Suspension

4. Out-of-School Suspension

5. Loss of privileges, e.g., Open Lunch, etc.

This school will not tolerate mass disruption by the student body in any form or for any reason. If such a situation does occur, the individual student will obey the class teacher, hall monitor or anyone in authority. Failure to do so may result in suspension.

DETENTION

Central Detention is assigned to students who show by their conduct that they have not sufficiently developed their own code of self-discipline and are, therefore, harming themselves and others around them by their actions.

DETENTION TAKES PRECEDENCE OVER ALL OTHER APPOINTMENTS AND IS HELD EVERY DAY EXCEPT FRIDAY FROM 2:00 P.M. TO 4:00 P.M. No student is excused from serving assigned detention except by a principal. Any detention obligation must be fulfilled before a student is permitted to take either mid-year or final examinations.

FAILURE TO SERVE DETENTION WILL RESULT IN ADDITIONAL PENALTY HOURS, SUSPENSION AND INELIGIBILITY TO TAKE MID-TERM /FINAL EXAMINATIONS.

SUSPENSION

Any pupil who is guilty of continued and willful disobedience, or of open defiance of the authority of any teacher or person having authority over him, or of the habitual use of profanity or of obscene language, or who shall cut, deface or otherwise injure any school property, shall be liable to punishment and to suspension or expulsion from school.

Conduct which shall constitute good cause for suspension or expulsion of a pupil guilty of such conduct shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following:

a. continued and willful disobedience;

b. open defiance of the authority of any teacher or person having authority over him;

c. conduct of such character as to constitute a continuing danger to the physical well-being of other pupils;

d. physical assault upon another pupil;

e. taking, or attempting to take, personal property or money from another pupil, or from his presence, by means

of force or fear;

f. willfully causing, or attempting to cause, substantial damage to school property;

g. participation in an unauthorized occupancy by any group of pupils or others of any part of any school or other

building owned by any school district, and failure to leave such school or other facility promptly after having

been directed to do so by the principal or other person then in charge of such building or facility;

h. incitement which is intended to and does result in unauthorized occupation by any group of pupils or others of

any part of a school or other facility owned by any school district,

i. incitement which is intended to and does result in truancy by other pupils; and

j. knowing possession or knowing consumption without legal authority of alcoholic beverages or controlled

dangerous substances on school premises, or being under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled

dangerous substances while on school premises.

k. Truancy and class cutting; leaving school property without permission;

l. Poor attendance and lateness without bona fide justification;

m. Use or possession of unsafe or illegal articles;

n. Use of any tobacco product on school property;

o. Use, possession or sale of a controlled dangerous substance, drug paraphernalia, anabolic steroids or alcohol;

p. Use of profanity or abusive language;

q. Turning in a false alarm;

r. Tampering with or damaging property of other pupils or staff members;

s. Selling or buying lottery tickets or any other gambling paraphernalia on school property.

t. Being convicted or adjudicated delinquent for possession of a firearm or a crime while armed with a firearm or

found knowingly in possession of a firearm on any school property, on a school bus or at a school-sponsored

function.

u. Engaging in conduct, which if committed by an adult, would constitute a crime or quasi crime according to

New Jersey statute;

v. Knowing possession or knowing consumption of alcoholic beverages or controlled dangerous substances

without legal authority on school premises, or being under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled

dangerous substances while on school premises.

Length of suspension will be determined by school administrators and will reflect the offense committed. Suspension options available to the administration include Saturday Detention, In-School Suspension, and Out-of-School Suspension. (Minimum 1 - 3 days).

Parents or guardians will be notified in writing of the action taken. They will have complete custody and jurisdiction of their child during an out-of-school suspension. A suspended student may not loiter or appear on school property or at any school-sponsored activity at or away from the school. The student will be required to make up all work and tests/projects/labs missed at the convenience of the teacher. Those in In-School Suspension will make up all class work during the school day while in the ISS room. A student will be readmitted to school after a satisfactory solution to the student's conduct is agreed upon by parents/guardians and administration.

BEEPERS/PAGING DEVICES/CELL PHONES

Westfield High School Discipline Code and New Jersey Law prohibit the possession of beepers paging devices/cell phones in school and on school grounds. Students found to be in possession of these devices will be subject to disciplinary actions and will be referred to the police.

COURTYARD/STUDENT CENTER

The courtyard and student center are open to all students before school, during lunch hours and after school. The courtyard and student center have been designated as an extension of Cafeteria A/B. The same rules and regulations apply. Eating, drinking, Walkmen, and quiet socializing are permitted. Students must refrain from the playing of games and loud, disruptive behavior. The student center/courtyard will be kept clean and free from litter at all times.

DISMISSAL FROM CLASS

If a teacher finds it necessary to send you from a classroom because of disruptive behavior, report immediately to Office A. To be reinstated in the class, you must confer with an administrator, your counselor and the teacher concerned. Your parents will be informed. If a second eviction from the same class occurs, a conference must be held with an administrator, your counselor, the teacher and your parents. If a third eviction occurs, you might be dropped from the class for the rest of the semester. In any of the above cases, suspension might be given as circumstances warrant.

DRESS CODE

All students are expected to dress and groom themselves neatly in clothes that are suitable for school activities. Any type of attire which attracts undue attention to the wearer, and thus causes a disturbance in the school, is in bad taste and not acceptable.

Thus, recognizing that school is a place of business and that pride in ourselves and in the entire student body is a worthwhile objective, we, the students, faculty, and administration, recognize the following dress policy:

* Responsibility for dress rests primarily with the parents. They should see to it that their children are properly dressed for attendance at school. If in doubt, be conservative.

* Our only guideline is that dress be in good taste. Shorts are acceptable providing that they are not too short (no short-shorts). Tops should not reveal bare back or midriff.

* If, in the judgment of the teacher or administrator, attire is disruptive to the educational process, the student may be sent home or be required to change.

Non-disruptive appearance, including the wearing of hats, must be respected in an educational community whose philosophy honors individual diversity. In the classroom, the educators' professional judgment should determine whether the wearing of hats or other apparel is appropriate and safe. NO HATS MAY BE WORN DURING MID-TERMS AND FINAL EXAMS. OFFENSIVE, OBSCENE, OR DISRUPTIVE CLOTHING OR HATS WILL BE DEALT WITH ON AN INDIVIDUAL BASIS.

DRUG/ALCOHOL ENFORCEMENT POLICY

Any pupil buying, selling, possessing or using drugs on school property or at school functions shall be suspended from school for a minimum of three (3) days and/or recommended for expulsion. Parents will be notified and a full report of the incident shall be made to the police. Pursuant to New Jersey Statute NJSA 18A:40A-12, the parents of a pupil who shall appear to be under the influence of illegal substances/alcohol to any teaching member, school nurse or other educational personnel shall be required by law to have their child immediately evaluated by a physician or taken to the emergency room of the nearest medical facility for a medical evaluation, the report of which evaluation shall be furnished to the school within 24 hours. If it is determined that the pupil was under the influence, the pupil may not resume attendance at school without producing a written report by the examining physician certifying that said pupil is physically and mentally able to return.

EXTORTION

Threatening other students or extorting money or property from them is prohibited. Extreme disciplinary action will be imposed upon those who attempt this. Students who are victims of such acts are asked and encouraged to report to teachers or the administration so that definite action can be taken. This is the only way to insure that incidents will not be repeated and that all such acts may be curtailed.

FOOD/BEVERAGES

Eating and drinking is confined to Cafeteria A and B, the courtyard, or in a classroom where permission is given to eat. Food or drink may not be eaten or carried in the halls. The only exception to this rule is during lunch periods when a student may carry food to a classroom because he/she has no lunch period and has been given permission to eat in classroom. Any inappropriate food item or food in the hall at an inappropriate time should be put away or thrown out. If a student refuses to cooperate or is a repeat offender, the student will be considered insubordinate.

FORGERY

Students are not to sign the name of parent, guardian, or teacher to any note of excuse. Such action is a forgery. When a forged note is used to excuse an absence, the absence will be considered unexcused with resultant penalties. Parents will be notified, and the student will be assigned 5 hours of detention. In those cases where a staff member's signature has been forged, the student will also be suspended. Penalties will be administered in the manner previously mentioned if students forge a teacher/administrator's signature on a document.

GAMBLING

Playing cards, flipping or matching coins, rolling dice for money or any other form of gambling will not be permitted. Teachers will confiscate any money or material and refer students involved to the office. Violations will be cause for suspension.

LATENESS TO SCHOOL

Students who are late to school (their first scheduled class) must first report to the Attendance Office to sign in, present a note and obtain a pass to class. Lateness to class for other than legitimate reasons will result in detention after class and/or suspension.

LEAVING SCHOOL GROUNDS

Only seniors and juniors during assigned lunch periods 5, 6, 7 or 8 may leave school grounds provided they comply with regulations governing Open Lunch. No 9th or 10th grade students may leave school grounds at any time, except for legitimate reasons stated in a written note from parent(s)/guardian(s) and approved in advance by the Attendance Office. Before leaving school for pre-approved reasons, students are required to sign out through the Attendance Office. Failure to follow these procedures will result in suspension.

QUIET AND ORDER

Whenever large numbers of people inhabit a small universe, there must be some rules of procedure to make it possible for them to live together in relative peace and harmony. Thus, it is necessary that traffic move in a reasonable manner and at a reasonable pace. Speeding in the halls, using the wrong traffic lanes on the stairways, and unnecessary use of your "horn" are considered breaches of the peace, as are littering and eating in the corridors or classrooms. There are four minutes between classes. Plan your trip for the day and don't loiter on the way.

RADIO/BOOMBOXES

Radios/Boomboxes are NOT permitted in school without the permission of the administration. Teachers will notify administrators about students who violate these regulations.

SIGNING IN/OUT THROUGH THE ATTENDANCE OFFICE

Any student who is late to school, who is leaving school or is returning to school after having been excused for pre-approved reasons must sign in or sign out through the Attendance Office. Not following this procedure will be considered cause for suspension.

SMOKING/CHEWING TOBACCO

The Board of Education policy governing smoking has been revised according to state law that bans smoking on school property and in school buildings. This regulation shall include Chewing Tobacco.

Students who violate this policy by smoking in or on school grounds will be subject to disciplinary action, including detention and suspension. VIOLATORS ARE SUBJECT TO MUNICIPAL FINES AS WELL.

THEFT

Any student who commits or attempts to commit a theft or breaking and entering at school will be suspended and/or referred to the authorities. Theft includes stealing school property from faculty, school employees or other

students. Breaking and entering includes the school building, lockers, locked rooms and other areas prohibited to you

because of time or specific reason. Stolen or lost property should be reported to Office A (administrator in charge) promptly.

WALKMEN

Walkmen are permitted in the school. Use in the classroom is at the discretion of the individual teacher. FOR SAFETY REASONS, STUDENTS MAY NOT USE A WALKMAN DURING FIRE DRILLS OR LABORATORY SESSIONS.

WEAPONS

Any pupil who is convicted or adjudicated delinquent for possession of a firearm or a crime while armed with a firearm or found knowingly in possession of a firearm on any school property or on a school bus or at a school-sponsored function shall be immediately removed from the school's regular education program for a period of not less than one calendar year. The chief school administrator may modify this suspension on a case-by-case basis. Each pupil so removed shall be placed in an alternative educational program or on home instruction and shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board. The hearing shall take place no later than 30 days following the day the pupil is removed from the regular education program and shall be closed to the public.

... E

...EARLY GRADUATION

The Board of Education may grant a high school diploma to a pupil who has not completed the twelfth grade. Each request for early graduation will be considered individually by the Board, which shall be guided by the recommendation of the Superintendent and the high school Principal.

A pupil will be permitted early graduation from high school only if he or she has satisfied all requirements for graduation established by Board Policy No. 5460, including accumulation of the number of credits required by this Board for graduation; demonstration of pupil proficiencies; a satisfactory attendance record; and completion of the courses necessary for graduation.

A pupil permitted to graduate before the end of the twelfth grade will be issued a state-endorsed diploma certifying that he or she has met all state and local requirements for graduation. The diploma will bear the date of its issuance. The pupil may be permitted to participate in graduation ceremonies with his or her classmates without formal readmission to the school district on application to and approval of the high school Principal.

...EIGHT PERIOD DAY REQUIREMENT

Guidance counselors are not authorized to change student schedules to accommodate students desiring to leave school for work during school hours. A full school day for students should include five courses, a period of physical education, a lunch period and a study period spent in one of the resource centers or the library. Furthermore, all students must be scheduled for courses during periods one and eight or periods two and nine. The administration of Westfield High School adheres to the philosophy that teenagers must be committed fully to their responsibilities and obligations as students. There are, however, circumstances in which accommodation for early dismissal will be made:

a. Pupils who must work during school time to sustain their families

b. Pupils who are engaged in a school-sponsored work-study program and vocational school

c. Pupils recommended by Special Services

Students who do not fit into the aforementioned categories shall not be accommodated unless they can prove "special need" to the principal.

. . . ELEVATOR KEYS

Elevator keys are available for students who, because of an injury and/or illness, are not able to use the stairways. To obtain an elevator key, the following rules and regulations must be followed:

1. Students must present a note from a physician or parent/guardian stating reason for needing an elevator key,

and the length of time the key will be required.

2. The physician or parent/guardian's note and length of time that the key is needed will be verified by Health Services.

3. Health Services will issue a key and AUTHORIZATION PASS (Student's name; effective date for using

elevator) and collect $5.00 deposit.

4. Student is required to return the key on the expiration date. If the elevator key is still needed, a physician or

parent/guardian's note will be required to extend the use of the elevator.

5. Health Services will follow-up unreturned keys by making contact with student. If the key is not returned the matter will be

turned over to the administration.

6. The $5.00 deposit will be returned when the elevator key is returned.

. . . SCHOOL YEAR CALENDAR POLICY

New Jersey State Law requires all pupils to complete 180 days of school; Westfield requires 181 days. The Westfield Board of Education established the 2002-2003 school year calendar, which sets June 20, 2003, as the final day for ninth, tenth and eleventh grade students, and Monday, June 23, 2003 as the final day for seniors. Therefore, no pupil should expect the final day of examinations to take place before Friday, June 20, 2003. As freshmen, sophomores, and juniors formulate plans for next summer, they are advised to avoid personal commitments requiring a departure from high school before Friday, June 20, 2003. Seniors should expect graduation to take place no later than Monday, June 23, 2003 (or June 24, 2003 rainout date), and will be required to rehearse that morning.

There are, however, circumstances in which accommodations for early administration of final examinations will be made. It should be noted, however, that these circumstances relate only to school-sponsored activities or academically -related functions:

a. Students who, under the auspices of the high school, have applied for and have been accepted in academically-related

programs at college.

b. Students who are representing Westfield High School in state or national programs.

c. Students who must attend summer programs in order to be admitted as freshmen at the college of their choice.

d. Students who must attend New Student Orientation programs at the college to which they have been accepted.

Anyone seeking permission to be excused from school prior to the 181st school day should see the principal as soon as the need is known. Finally, it should be noted that permission will not be granted to students who seek permission to leave school before the end of the year in order to secure a summer job.

. . . EMPLOYMENT/WORK PERMITS

The school frequently receives requests from employers for part-time help. These requests are posted in the building if you are interested.

If you are under 18 years of age, you must obtain a work permit in order to accept employment. The law has certain requirements concerning the type of work you may do, the hours and under what conditions you may work. Applications and all necessary information may be obtained at the Guidance Office.

...EXAMINATIONS

Mid year and final examinations are integral aspects of the learning experience at Westfield High School.

As a reflection of the learning experience, each examination should challenge students at their various levels of thinking abilities. Examinations should also evaluate students' mastery of specific skills taught in each course. The kinds of questions asked in examinations should, therefore, demand that students demonstrate mastery of specific skills like computation and reading; apply critical thinking at various levels from recall to synthesis and evaluation; express understanding of course content in cogent and intelligible writing.

We remain committed to the principle that learning should be measured in a variety of ways and that the experience of taking examinations is in itself a learning experience. As a learning experience, an examination must challenge students not only to recall, but also to think critically and to write clearly. Students must complete all detention requirements and must meet all financial obligations prior to taking examinations.

COURSE REQUIREMENTS WILL NOT BE CONSIDERED SATISFIED UNTIL EXAMINATION REQUIREMENTS ARE MET.

PROCEDURE FOR RESOLVING GRADES OF "INCOMPLETE" FOR MARKING PERIODS AND MID-TERM AND FINAL EXAMINATIONS

The prime responsibility for the resolution of a grade of Incomplete lies with the student. Students may make up scheduled mid-term and/or final examinations only if they missed the original examination for legitimate reasons, such as personal illness, death in family, unavoidable legal obligation, serious family illness; other reason(s), excused in advance by the principal.

Both mid-term and final examinations are considered to be an integral part of every course. Failures to take mid-term and/or final examinations will result in a failure for that course.

MID-TERM EXAMINATION

Any student who misses a mid-term examination for a full-year course must present a permission slip signed by an administrator to take a make-up examination after making arrangements with the testing administrator. The mid-term make-up examinations will be administered according to the following schedule:

Saturday, February 1, 2003

Session 1: English 8:15 a.m. - 10:15 a.m.

Session 2: Science 10:30 a.m. - 12:30 p.m.

Monday, February 3, 2003

Session 3: Social Studies 3:15 p.m. - 5:15 p.m.

Business

Tuesday, February 4, 2003

Session 4: Math 3:15 p.m. - 5:15 p.m.

Art

Wednesday, February 5, 2003

Session 5: Foreign Languages 3:15 p.m. - 5:15 p.m.

Since the mid-term examination is considered to be an integral part of any full-year course, failure to take the mid-term examination as provided above, will result in a failure for that course.

Appeal for exceptions to this procedure must be made to the principal through written request. The appeal process must include the reason(s) for missing the mid-term examination and an explanation of why .

FINAL EXAMINATIONS

All students must take their final examinations. Any student who misses a final examination must request permission from the principal to take a make-up examination by Friday, June 20, 2003. Upon presentation of a permission slip signed by the principal, subject area teachers may provide a make-up examination according to the following category and schedule:

MAKE-UP EXAM CATEGORIES

1. EXPRESS MAKE-UP EXAMINATION - This option applies in the case where a student missed the final examination during the exam week and needs to take the exam to determine passing or failing of the course for summer school attendance purposes.

2. REGULAR MAKE-UP EXAMINATION - This option applies in the case where a student who missed the final examination during exam week for legitimate reasons and will be making this examination up during the regularly scheduled make-up session. This exam will be administered during the scheduled make-up period days, June 25-27, 2003. The grading of the examination will be by the teacher or department chair as arranged before checkout. The student's final grade will be determined as soon as possible and parents will be notified by the Guidance Office.

3. LATE SESSION MAKE-UP EXAMINATION - This option applies in the case where a student missed the final examination during exam week for legitimate reasons and is unable to make up the exam during the regular make-up exam period in June. The grading of the examination will be by the teacher or department chair as arranged before checkout The student's final grade will be determined as soon as possible and parents notified by the Guidance Office.

4. PROFICIENCY EXAM - This option applies in the case where a student failed the course and has elected not to go to summer school. Instead, he/she has taken the option of self-education or private tutoring. The student must take a proficiency exam as well as complete other course requirements, as determined by the department chairperson. Anyone selecting the proficiency exam option must complete the Course Proficiency Exam Request/Approval form from the Guidance office by June 20, 2003.

Friday, June 20, 2003 - EXPRESS EXAMINATIONS

Wednesday, June 25, 2003

Session 1: English 8:15 a.m. - 10:15 a.m.

Session 2: Science 10:30 a.m. - 12:30 p.m.

Thursday, June 26, 2003

Session 3: Foreign Languages 8:15 a.m. - 10:15 a.m.

Session 4: Social Studies 10:30 a.m. - 12:30 p.m.

Friday, June 27, 2003

Session 5: Mathematics 8:15 a.m. - 10:15 a.m.|

Business

Art

Monday, August 11, 2003

Late session Make-up/Proficiency Assessments

Since the final examination is considered to be an integral part of any course, failure to take the final examination as provided above will result in a failure for that course.

Appeals for exceptions to this procedure must be made to the principal through a written request. The appeal 