Share

Tweet

Share

Share

Email

Westfield Gas + Electric and Whip City Fiber are providing FREE online access to The Westfield News from 2/16-2/22. Please support local journalism by getting a subscription to The Westfield News.

WESTFIELD – The New England League of Middle Schools announced today that Westfield Middle School, Westfield, MA was selected as a NELMS Spotlight School. Westfield Middle School was one of two schools recognized by the regional organization this year to receive this prestigious award. According to Kathleen Hill, NELMS Spotlight Schools Coordinator, “The school was selected because of its ability to create an excellent learning environment for young adolescents and its consistent observance of middle school best practices.”

In January, a team from NELMS visited Westfield Middle School, according to Superintendent of Schools Stefan Czaporowski. “The visiting team was very impressed with the staff and students. The school received fourteen commendations that acknowledged a positive school culture, a vibrant after school program, a collaborative staff that cares about students, and an active parent teacher organization. This is an exceptional achievement for the entire Westfield Middle School community.”

Criteria for the award included a review of curriculum and instruction, qualified middle level teachers, teaming practices, professional development, democratic governance, leadership, appropriate school environment and the level of involvement of parents and community. NELMS reviewers were very impressed with the excellence that was evident during the site visit. Permeating the culture and the environment of the school is the deep concern for and understanding of the young adolescents they serve. After learning of this unique distinction, Westfield Middle School Principal Paul Newton said, “Having the New England League of Middle Schools recognize Westfield Middle School as a Spotlight School is significant for two reasons. First, it provides well-deserved recognition to our teachers for their outstanding educational practices and their depth of caring about our students. Second, I hope that it provides our school community and the City of Westfield with a sense of pride, having our school recognized for excellence.”

The Spotlight Schools award and designation will be in place for three years. The school will be presented with this award and a Spotlight Schools banner at NELMS’ Annual Conference, March 20-22, 2019 in Providence, Rhode Island. There will also be a community celebration on Wednesday, March 27 at 6:00 p.m. at Westfield Middle School where the Spotlight School banner will be raised.

Westfield Middle School is one of only six Spotlight Schools in Massachusetts to be so designated by NELMS.