The Syrian Arab Republic exhibits low-range performance across all four categories of the Global State of Democracy (GSoD) conceptual framework. It falls among the world’s bottom 25 per cent of countries with regard to most factors. Compared to five years ago, it has experienced advances in Rule of Law, albeit from very low starting levels, as well as declines in Economic Equality. The country’s recent history has been marked by a civil war that began in the wake of the 2011 Arab Spring uprisings. The government’s violent suppression of those protests led to a civil war that has since ravaged the country. With GDP cut in half and access to main oil fields lost, the captagon trade worth an estimated $5 billion annually, has become a crucial economic lifeline for the regime. Some local businesses and informal markets endure the turmoil.

The GSoD Indices data only reflect events inside government-controlled territory.

Syria gained independence in 1946 after 26 years of French control. The country is home to a diverse population, with Sunni Muslims comprising the large majority, followed by Alawi Muslims, and Druze, Ismaili and Christian communities. Post-independence Syria saw recurrent coups, culminating in the 1963 coup by the socialist and Arab nationalist Baath Party. Baathist rule was consolidated in 1970 through Hafez al-Assad’s ‘Corrective Movement’ which relied heavily on the minority Alawi community to fill government positions, creating a system of patronage and politicizing sectarian divisions between Alawi and Sunni Muslims. The regime also involved Syria in the Arab-Israeli conflict and Lebanon's civil war to strengthen regional influence. President Bashar Al-Assad assumed power in 2000 after his father’s death, inheriting a legacy of centralization, sectarian co-optation, and violent crackdown of dissent.

The Syrian civil war, which erupted in 2011 with protests against President Assad, swiftly escalated into a multifaceted conflict involving multiple actors. Key fronts of the war have included the battle against the Islamic State, which was largely defeated by an international coalition and US-backed Kurdish forces in 2018. These Kurdish forces seized the remaining IS territory in 2019, leading the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) to maintain autonomy in those areas, although this has resulted in an uneasy détente with the regime. Additionally, there are ongoing government-opposition clashes and Turkish offensives against Kurdish forces.

The war has created the world’s largest refugee population with around 13 million people displaced. Syrian territory is now de facto partitioned. The Assad government, supported by Russia, controls approximately 70 per cent of the country but it continues to battle a coalition of Islamist militants in the northwest. In the northeast, the SDF often clash with local Arab tribes and face assaults from Turkey. Iran has also intervened in the war in various ways, including in majority-Druze areas like Suwayda.

Although elections take place in Assad-controlled territory, they serve to preserve the current regime. Syria lacks a formal gender quota system and in the 2022 parliamentary elections, women secured only 10.4% of the seats. At a broader level, women and girls have been particularly impacted by the war, representing 74 per cent of the six million Syrians requiring nutritional assistance.

In the coming years, the most pressing challenges are the unresolved fragmentation of the country, the humanitarian crisis and social grievances. Until these fundamental problems are resolved, addressing other democratic concerns will remain a distant goal.

Last Updated: June 2024