In 1953 Philips started a small-scale production facility in the centre of the Dutch city Nijmegen as part of its main industry group "Icoma" , followed by the opening of a new factory in 1955. By 1965 Icoma became part of a new Philips main industry group: “Elcoma”.

In 1975 Silicon Valley-based Signetics was acquired by Philips. Signetics claimed to be the "first company in the world established expressly to make and sell integrated circuits" and the inventor of the 555 timer IC. At the time, it was claimed that with the Signetics acquisition, Philips was now number two in the league table of semiconductor manufacturers in the world.

In 1987, Philips was ranked Europe's largest semiconductor maker. The year after, all Philips semiconductor subsidiaries, including Signetics, Faselec and Mullard, were merged into the newly formed product division Components. The semiconductor activities were split off from Components in 1991 under the name Philips Semiconductors. In June 1999, Philips acquired VLSI Technology, at the time making Philips the world's sixth-largest semiconductor company.

In December 2005, Philips announced its intention to divest Philips Semiconductors into an independent legal entity. In September 2006, Philips completed the sale of an 80.1% stake in Philips Semiconductors to a consortium of private equity investors consisting of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, Bain Capital, Silver Lake Partners, Apax Partners, and AlpInvest Partners. The new company name NXP was announced on August 31, 2006, and the company was officially launched during the Internationale Funkausstellung consumer electronics show in Berlin. The newly independent NXP was ranked as one of the world's top 10 semiconductor companies.

In February 2007, when NXP announced that it would acquire Silicon Laboratories’ AeroFONE single-chip phone and power amplifier product lines to strengthen its Mobile and Personal business. The next year, NXP announced that it would transform its Mobile and Personal business unit into a joint venture with STMicroelectronics, which in 2009 became ST-Ericsson, a 50/50 joint venture of Ericsson Mobile Platforms and STMicroelectronics, after ST purchased NXP's 20% stake.

In April 2008, NXP announced it would acquire the set-top box business of Conexant to complement its existing Home business unit. In September, NXP announced that it would restructure its manufacturing, R&D and back office operations, resulting in 4,500 job cuts worldwide. In October, NXP announced that it would sell its Home business unit to Trident Microsystems.

In July 2010, NXP announced that it had acquired Jennic based in Sheffield, UK, which now operates as part of its smart home and energy product line, using ZigBee and JenNet-IP. In August this year, NXP announced its initial public offering on NASDAQ, with 34,000,000 shares, pricing each at $14. In April 2012, NXP announced its intent to acquire electronic design consultancy Catena to work on automotive applications. NXP's first CEO was Frans van Houten; he was succeeded by Richard L. Clemmer on January 1, 2009. Since May 2020, Kurt Sievers serves as President and CEO.

In March 2015, a merger agreement was announced through which NXP would acquire rival Freescale Semiconductor. In view of this merger, NXP's RF Power activities were sold to JAC Capital for US$1.8 billion and rebranded as Ampleon, in a transaction closed in November of that year. Both NXP and Freescale had deep roots stretching back to when they were part of Philips and Motorola. Each had comparable revenue figures; US$4.8 billion and US$4.2 billion in 2013 for NXP and Freescale. NXP primarily focusing on near-field communication and high-performance mixed-signal hardware, and Freescale focusing on its microprocessor and microcontroller businesses, and both companies possess roughly equal patent portfolios. On December 2015, NXP completed its acquisition of Freescale Semiconductor; the merged company continued its operation as NXP Semiconductors N.V.

On June 14, 2016, it was announced that Nexperia would be divested from NXP to a consortium of financial investors consisting of Beijing Jianguang Asset Management Co., Ltd and Wise Road Capital LTD. In July, NXP was reported to have sacked union organizers. A campaign was started for their reinstatement. In April 2017, Qualcomm received approval from U.S. antitrust regulators for the acquisition of NXP for $47 billion. However, the acquisition has not received approval from Chinese authorities and Qualcomm has refiled an antitrust application and request to purchase with the PRC Ministry of Commerce.

In 2018, NXP announced acquired OmniPHY, a provider of automotive Ethernet subsystem technology. The next year, NXP completed the acquisition of the wireless connectivity assets from Marvell. On May 27, 2020, NXP announced that at its Annual General Meeting of Shareholders that shareholders overwhelmingly approved the appointment of Kurt Sievers as an executive director and the company’s chief executive officer effective immediately thereby replacing Richard Clemmer, who previously led the company for 11 years. In this capacity, Mr Sievers will also remain President of NXP.

In July 2020, NXP delivered secure and scalable edge-connected platforms based on its i. MX RT crossover processors and Wi-Fi/Bluetooth solutions. In August, NXP’s industry-first solution to combine UWB fine-ranging, NFC, Secure Element, and embedded SIM was included in Samsung’s new Galaxy Note20 Ultra