TEXAS is STRONG because of so many! …and the members of the Texas Aggregates & Concrete Association (TACA) are in that crowd of many. TACA recently held its highly anticipated 70th Annual Meeting, marking the most significant event of the year for the industry. This organization has members who are serious about their business and play a major role in ensuring all involved in the industry continue to operate and provide the highest level of service, expertise and quality possible. A truly successful annual meeting that featured a combination of informative sessions, community service/raising of funds for a cause and valuable networking opportunities. TxEDC looks forward to building on this relationship and at a point in the future, welcoming TACA to the TxEDC team! Our THANKS to President/CEO Josh Leftwich for including TxEDC in the annual meeting. Congratulations TACA on 70 years!

It’s a LONG…good looking…VIEW….in LONGVIEW TEXAS! TxEDC was invited to participate in the Longview Chamber of Commerce State of the TEXAS Economy Luncheon and it did not disappoint. The team continues to do phenomenal things on both a local and regional level! After the STATE of the TEXAS ECONOMY keynote, President/CEO Aaron Demerson joined a panel that included Lisa Denton-CEO of proud TxEDC Investor Kilgore Economic Development Corporation, and Wayne Mansfield with the Longview Economic Development Corporation. The panel was brilliantly moderated by Mark Robinson, External Affairs Manager at AEP SWEPCO and Longview Chamber of Commerce Board member. Congratulations to the Longview Chamber of Commerce on your continued accomplishments. The size of the crowd is a reflection of those committed and supportive of the work this team is doing. The LONGVIEW community has lots to look forward to as they continue to thrive, achieve and grow! We look forward to welcoming many of the partners in attendance into the TxEDC family as we continue to showcase the best that Texas has to offer!

Texas-Asia 2024 Business Mission Three Countries, Four Cities and meeting with world-class businesses and government leaders to strengthen our ties, build new relationships and share with the world how and why Texas is the #1 state for business and tourism. Governor Greg Abbott is leading a Texas delegation to Asia and the business mission officially kicked off in Taipei, Taiwan with a delegation welcome dinner hosted by Texas Economic Development Corporation investor Formosa Plastics Corporation, U.S.A. Formosa Plastics Group Chairman William Wong met with Governor Abbott prior to the dinner to officially welcome the Governor and the Texas team on behalf of Formosa Plastics Group. Jack Wu, Vice President of the Business Development Division for Formosa Plastics Corporation USA, also shared in welcoming the Texas delegation. Our investors are ready to go, and our great State of Texas is better off for it! Be sure to follow us here for updates throughout each country. Press release: https://lnkd.in/ghp57wWa

Namaste! Texas-India Business Mission Follow-Up!....Way to go COSTEP! We LOVE to see TxEDC investors taking advantage of opportunities presented at Texas Economic Development Corporation/Texas Economic Development & Tourism Office led events. In this case, TxEDC investor COSTEP did just that and had a very successful follow-up meeting with a team from India following the Namaste! Texas-India Business Mission. See the link to the article below and the original business mission press release for additional details. https://lnkd.in/g9iJnhMb Way to go COSTEP!….driving success in Texas and the South Texas region in particular!

The Future is Texas! Texas Economic Development Corporation President/CEO Aaron Demerson, Dale A. Robertson, Vice President of Business Development, and Veronica Beyer, Director of Marketing and Communications, attended the "Top Off” fireside chat with Texas icon and founder of the “Make It Movement”, Roy Spence. Roy Spence states the “Make It Movement” has a goal and is on a mission to empower the next generation, starting in Central Texas and expanding across the state and the nation”. By collaborating with educators, parents, and civic and industry leaders, the movement aims to harness the power of marketing as a force for good. Their goal is to inspire and motivate millions of young Americans to discover their purpose and pursue high-skill, high-income careers starting from middle and high school. By graduation, these young individuals will be equipped to achieve financial independence, doing what they excel at and love. In his talk, Roy Spence emphasized that this initiative would ensure young Texans—and eventually young Americans—don't just make it in Texas but make it in America. The labor force continues to be at the top of discussions with employers. We appreciate this innovative approach to weigh in as a part of the solution to ensuring Texas has the workforce our current and future employer’s demand. You can “Make It” in TEXAS!