Voting Rules

Vote up all of the Sonias you've heard of.

How many celebrities named Sonia can you think of? The famous Sonias below have many different professions, including notable actors named Sonia, famous athletes named Sonia, and even musicians named Sonia.

Sonia Sotomayor is certainly one of the most famous Sonias on this list. One of the famous judicial figures named Sonia, she has served as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court since 2009. She started her career working as an assistant district attorney in New York.

Another of the famous people with the first name Sonia is Sonia Gandhi. She is an Indian politician. She is also the widow of the former Prime Minister of India, Ravjiv Gandhi.

Did we forget one of your favorite famous people named Sonia? Just add them to the list!

Latest additions: Sonia Sahani

Help shape these rankings by voting on this list of Who Is The Most Famous Sonia In The World?

Birthplace : Toowoomba, Australia

Sonia Melissa Kruger (born 28 August 1965) is an Australian television presenter and media personality, who has been a prominent figure in the media for over 20 years. She is best known for co-hosting the popular Australian version of Dancing with the Stars and for the role of Tina Sparkle in the 1992 film Strictly Ballroom. She currently co-hosts Today Extra and hosts The Voice Australia. During her time at the Seven Network, Kruger also reported for numerous other events, including the network's coverage of the Olympics, Melbourne Cup & Australian Open.

2

Sonia Nassery Cole

12/05/1968

Birthplace : Kabul, Afghanistan

Sonia Nassery Cole is an Afghan American activist, director, writer, and producer.

Birthplace : India, Chandigarh

Sonia Agarwal (born 28 March 1982) is an Indian film actress known for her works predominantly in Tamil cinema and a few Telugu films. She is best known for her performances in super-hit films such as Kaadhal Kondein (2003) , 7G Rainbow Colony (2004) and Pudhupettai (2006) directed by Selvaraghavan.Featuring her brother-in-law Dhanush, the film became a huge success and she was widely appreciated for her performance as Divya in the film, which brought her into the limelight and fetched her several awards, including the ITFA Best New Actress Award. She acted alongside actors Silambarasan and Vijay in the films Kovil and Madhurey, respectively. After appearing in the films Oru Kalluriyin Kathai and Oru Naal Oru Kanavu in 2005, both of which failing to perform at the box office, she got roles in the films Thiruttu Payale and Pudhupettai. The former, directed by Susi Ganesan, became a highly successful film, whilst the latter, another Selvaraghavan film, received universal critical acclaim.

Sonia Sahni is an actor.

Birthplace : Thailand, Bangkok

Sonia Couling (also spelled Sonia Cooling, Sonya Couling or Sonya Cooling) (Thai: ซอนย่า คูลลิ่ง; June 18, 1974 in Bangkok, Thailand), nickname Pim (Thai: พิม; RTGS: Phim), is a Thai-English model, actress, and television personality. She has appeared in many Thai films and TV shows, been a VJ for MTV Asia, been a host for HBO Asia and has produced and hosted Thailand's Next Top Model in 2005. Couling has also acted in Hollywood and French productions.

Birthplace : Malad City, Idaho

Sonia Ann Johnson (born Sonia Ann Harris; February 27, 1936) is an American feminist activist and writer. She was an outspoken supporter of the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) and in the late 1970s was publicly critical of the position of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), of which she was a member, against the proposed amendment. She eventually was excommunicated from the church for her activities. She went on to publish several radical feminist books, ran for president in 1984, and become a popular feminist speaker.