MarkLogic, a data integration company and provider of enterprise NoSQL database, announced today it has acquired San Jose, California-based tech startup Smartlogic. The financial terms of the deal were not disclosed.

As part of the acquisition agreement, both companies will continue to conduct business as usual and Smartlogic’s founder and Chief Executive Officer, Jeremy Bentley, as well as other members of the executive team, will join the MarkLogic executive team.

Founded in 2006 by Jeremy Bentley, Smartlogic is a premier metadata management solutions provider and leader in semantic AI technology. Through its semantic platform, Smartlogic unifies structured and unstructured information to improve enterprise information management.

Smartlogic has deciphered, filtered, and connected data for many of the world’s largest organizations to help solve their complex data problems. Global organizations in the energy, healthcare, life sciences, financial services, government and intelligence, media and publishing, and high-tech manufacturing industries rely on Smartlogic’s metadata and AI platform every day to enrich enterprise information with context and meaning, as well as extract critical facts, entities, and relationships to power their businesses.

In a statement, MarkLogic CEO Jeff Casale said, “Enterprises are facing significantly more complex data challenges than ever before. By acquiring and integrating with Smartlogic, best-in-class metadata and AI platform, we provide our customers with the tools to more easily unlock the enormous value embedded in human-generated content. We’re very excited to work with Jeremy and his talented team as we grow the business and deliver better outcomes for our customers.”

“Smartlogic unlocks the value in important data sets many enterprises rely on by leveraging sophisticated semantic AI to enable better decision making,” said Stephen Goodman, a Principal at Vector Capital. “Smartlogic’s ability to deliver actionable intelligence is complementary with MarkLogic’s powerful offerings and we are excited to deliver a more complete and informed perspective to customers through this combination.”

Now owned by Vector Capital, MarkLogic was founded in 2001 by Christopher Lindblad, Frank R. Caufield, and Paul Pedersen, the Silicon Valley-based MarkLogic helps organizations eliminate friction at every step of the data integration process, enabling organizations to achieve a 360 view faster than ever. Its technology is used by 6 of the top 10 banks, 5 of the top 10 pharmaceutical companies, 6 of the top 10 publishers, 9 of the 15 major U.S. government agencies, among others.

Vector Capital is a San Francisco-based leading global private equity firm focused on transformative investments in technology and technology-enabled businesses. Founded in 1997, the firm oversees approximately $4 billion of capital across its private equity and credit strategies from a variety of investors including university endowments, foundations, and financial institutions.