In addition, Princeton Junction is home to many people who could be described as "urban sophisticates". Urban sophisticates are people who are both educated and wealthy, and thus tend to be older, richer, and more established than young professionals. "Urban sophisticates" is not just about being educated and well-off financially: it is a point of view and state of mind, one that you might call 'urbaneness'. But such people can and do regularly live in small towns, suburbs and rural areas, as well as in big cities. They read, support the arts and high-end shops, and love travel.

Because of many things, Princeton Junction is a great place for families with children to consider. First of all, many other families with children live here, making Princeton Junction a place where both parents and children are more likely to develop social ties with other families, as well as find family-oriented services and community. The town’s good public school district and large population of college-educated adults provide an environment conducive to academic values. With regard to real estate, Princeton Junction has a high rate of owner-occupied single family homes, which tends to reflect stability in the local community. Finally, Princeton Junction’s overall crime rate is lower than average for the country.

In Princeton Junction, however, the average commute to work is quite long. On average, people spend 33.08 minutes each day getting to work, which is significantly higher than the national average. One bright side is that local public transit is widely used, so it may be an option to avoid the headache of driving in the heavy traffic by leaving the car at home and taking transit.

In Princeton Junction, a lot of people use the train to get to work every day though Princeton Junction is a relatively small town. Those that ride the train are primarily traveling out of town to good jobs in other cities.

Do you like to read, write and learn? If you move to Princeton Junction, you'll likely find that many of your neighbors like to as well. Princeton Junction is one of the more educated communities in America, with a full 80.90% of its adults having a college degree or even advanced degree, compared to a national average across all communities of 21.84%.

The per capita income in Princeton Junction in 2022 was $90,679, which is wealthy relative to New Jersey and the nation. This equates to an annual income of $362,716 for a family of four.

Princeton Junction is an extremely ethnically-diverse town. The people who call Princeton Junction home describe themselves as belonging to a variety of racial and ethnic groups. The greatest number of Princeton Junction residents report their race to be White, followed by Asian. Important ancestries of people in Princeton Junction include Irish, Italian, German, European, and English.

In addition, Princeton Junction has a lot of people living here who were born outside of the US (29.43%).

The most common language spoken in Princeton Junction is English. Other important languages spoken here include Other Asian languages and Langs. of India.