Living in Princeton

The charm of Princeton offers the best of both worlds. A community of approximately 30,000 residents who live in tree-lined neighborhoods, Princeton also enjoys a central New Jersey location and transit network that put it a quick train ride away from New York City and Philadelphia.

The quality and diversity of Princeton's restaurant scene is continually on the rise. From noodle houses, sandwich shops and gourmet ice cream to farm-to-table fine dining, there are options for everyone. Princeton's cosmopolitan community ensures a mix of Asian, Middle Eastern, Mediterranean, Latin American and other cuisines. You'll also find a seasonal farmers market that operates just steps from campus and, during the warm-weather months, a farmers market on the plaza outside Firestone Library.

Regional Visitors Bureau Dining Guide

Princeton Online's Dining Guide

Downtown Princeton features a wide variety of retail outlets — everything from thrift shops and fashion boutiques to book stores and a renowned record exchange, all surrounding campus. Free transit shuttles also connect students with larger grocery stores and retail centers in and around Princeton.

Learn More

For arts lovers, the McCarter Theatre Center, winner of a Tony Award for the best regional theater in the country, is a campus treasure within easy walking distance for students. A few streets over is Morven Museum and Garden, which dates back more than 200 years and houses a distinctive collection of fine and decorative arts. Live music acts perform in restaurants, pubs and coffee houses throughout town, and the Princeton Garden Theatre shows the latest major motion pictures as well as classic Hollywood and foreign language films.

With easy access to parks, waterways and trails, Princetonians are found exploring the outdoors all year round. Students enjoy convenient jogging trails that line the Delaware & Raritan Canal, canoeing on Lake Carnegie, and biking and hiking on trails throughout the region. The beaches of the Jersey Shore and Pennsylvania's ski mountains are also just a short road trip away.

Seven Parks Within a Mile of Campus

TigerTransit shuttles and NJ Transit's local bus routes provide transportation throughout the Princeton campus and surrounding communities.

A train known locally as “The Dinky” connects campus (via the Princeton Station at Alexander Street) to Princeton Junction, where northbound NJ TRANSIT trains provide direct service to New York City and Newark Liberty International Airport. Southbound trains provide a transfer to the Philadelphia-bound SEPTA regional rail Trenton Line. Amtrak trains connect Princeton Junction to Washington, D.C., Boston and the broader region.