The year 2021 saw the most severe political crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) since the end of the 1992–95 war, with several competing issues grinding the country’s democratic processes to a near halt. The biggest issue was created by from Milorad Dodik, the Bosnian Serb member of the state-level three-way presidency and main leader of the Bosnian Serbs. Continuing to reinforce the position and practices of his party, the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), Dodik once again openly challenged the state-level institutions of the country by declaring a unilateral boycott by Bosnian Serb representatives. The decision came after Valentin Inzko, the outgoing High Representative (the internationally appointed officer responsible for administering the Dayton Peace Accord), instituted a law effectively banning genocide denial and glorification of war criminals in July. Dodik rejected Inzko’s decision, as did Bosnian Serb opposition parties, while also renouncing Inzko’s successor, Christian Schmidt, who took office on August 1.

What followed made matters even worse, as Dodik announced that he would use the entity of the Republika Srpska (RS) People’s Assembly (or NS RS)—the lower house of the entity-level parliament—to withdraw from several state-level institutions in order to create the entity’s own authorities, including a tax authority and a judiciary, and, most problematically, to reinstitute the Army of the RS. Despite Dodik’s claims that he is looking for a peaceful solution and simply demanding a return to the original Dayton agreement, his announcement triggered a state-wide crisis, with many seeing these moves as a preamble to a conflict. Although Dodik’s desires are legally or otherwise impossible to put into practice, the sense that he is trying to create an functionally independent parastate within BiH recalls the wartime Bosnian Serb Republic, and his accompanying petty populism and blatant fearmongering cannot be viewed simply as a continuation of his earlier disruptive behavior but, rather, as a clear escalation.

Dodik then followed up on his promise in December by having the NS RS vote in favor of proposals to draft entity-level laws that would allow the RS to create its own judiciary, tax authority, and army, albeit after an all-day session marred with arguments that prompted the opposition to walk out in protest. The coalition of SNSD and smaller parties had enough votes to push the decision forward, although it came with a six-month delay to draft the laws as well as other changes to the entity constitution. Although the laws will most likely be contested by the entity parliament’s upper house, and deemed unconstitutional by the country’s Constitutional Court, the fact that Dodik has gone forward with his threats regardless of extensive criticism and pressure from both domestic actors and the international community speaks of his willingness to wield even more destructive anti-state politics in 2022.

Another major issue that came to the fore in 2021 was the yet-unresolved electoral framework in the run-up to next year’s general elections. While demands to implement relevant European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) rulings—most notably in Sejdić and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina—have gone unheeded for years, the main Bosnian Croat party, the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) BiH, and its leader Dragan Čović renewed their push to introduce a preferential voting system based on the ethnonational majority in a given constituency or else they plan to boycott the 2022 elections altogether. HDZ BiH claims that changes to the state-level Electoral Law are necessary to preserve equality among ethnic groups; however, arguments over appropriate ethnic representation seem to override any impulse to create a truly democratic electoral framework that would finally guarantee that any citizen may be elected to any post, thus demonstrating that the proposed changes would fail to address the country’s larger political inequities.

The country’s impoverished and already overburdened society was further stressed by the authorities’ failure to provide timely COVID-19 vaccines due mostly to BiH’s complicated system of 14 distinct governments, each with varying degrees of authority, and the lack of a state-level health ministry. By the time confusion settled over who should procure vaccines, the country had gone through a massive surge in positive cases while the death toll—several times higher than during the Bosnian war in some parts of the country—incited protests in the capital Sarajevo in April.

The resignation of High Judiciary and Prosecutorial Council (VSTV) president Milan Tegeltija in the previous year was followed by the removal of the body’s Chief Prosecutor, Gordana Tadić, for professional negligence. With the VSTV suffering from a series of scandals and high-profile allegations of corruption for years, this was widely seen as a positive move, although the installation of her temporary replacement, Milanko Kajganić, was an ad hoc, in-house solution to the institution’s perennial problem of retaining a reliable and professional cadre.

The migrant crisis continued in 2021, with Amnesty International and other human rights organizations appealing to the Bosnian government to provide immediate help to around 2,500 people lacking even the most basic shelter in January after the closure of the Lipa camp in northwestern BiH in late 2020. The International Organization for Migration (IOM) has estimated that around 10,000 migrants and refugees are present in BiH at any given time because the country’s proximity to the European Union (EU), but existing camps have room for only about half this number, with reports showing that thousands live in makeshift circumstances in areas bordering Croatia. However, this did not prevent the usual ping-ponging of responsibility between the various levels of government, while Dodik reinforced his stance that no refugees would be allowed into the RS entity; meanwhile, increased xenophobia among the local population puts the lives of those in need in further jeopardy.

As widespread setbacks mounted during the year, the issue of emigration, mostly among the young and able, plagued the country yet again. Estimates by domestic organizations showed that at least 85,000 Bosnians left the country permanently by July 2021, almost double the previous annual average. Years of political insecurity caused by ethnonationalist bickering and constant blocking of the country’s functioning, as well as the inability or unwillingness of the various governments to tackle BiH’s major issues—from corruption, to crumbling or nonexistent infrastructure, to severe poverty—have made many reconsider whether it is worth giving the country’s leaders another chance. Some citizens have fled amid the pandemic, their hand clearly forced by a mix of desperation and outright resignation.

With the 2022 elections—if they take place at all—promising almost no possibility for change, and various ongoing crises deeply affecting the country’s basic functioning, it is hard to see the next year bringing any significant shift in the society’s prospects. Since the EU accession process is firmly stalled, to the point where BiH leaders are openly scolded by Brussels for their inaction over the past two years, it is difficult to envision how BiH in the near future might snap out of the limbo it has been mired in for years.