/Felix Hoffmann, illustrator (illustrator). CONDITION: Very Good in Fair jacket; no names or other marks, tight, straight, clean, corner tips worn through and edges rubbed, spine nice, pages clean and flat; in jacket with little loss of paper but very wrinkled closed 3-4" tears all across top, also spine bottom end; unclipped 3.50. Picture book hardback The busy life of the castle and its long sleep under the hedge of thorns are beautifully rendered. ABE Heritage Seller, since 1996: Search ABE Keyword: oldchildrensbooks. Conservative AB condition grading, secure packing, international shipping. /Felix Hoffmann, illustrator.

First UK edition, first printing. Original illustrated paper-covered boards with a cloth spine, in dustwrapper. Illustrated throughout in colour by Felix Hoffman. A very good copy, the binding firm and clean, a little rubbed to the extremities and very slightly bumped at the corners. The contents, with a previous owner's name to the title page, are otherwise clean throughout. Complete with the original torn and creased dustwrapper which has a significant chip to the bottom edge of the front panel and a smaller chip to the head of the spine. Not price-clipped (12s. 6d. to the front flap). A beautifully designed edition of Sleeping Beauty illustrated by the Swiss illustrator and stained glass artist Felix Hoffmann. Part of a series of Brothers Grimm tales illustrated by Hoffmann. Further details and images for any of the items listed are available on request. Lucius Books welcomes direct contact with our customers.

Illustrated Boards. Condition: Very Good. Dust Jacket Condition: Good +. Felix Hoffmann (Pictures by) (illustrator). First American Edition. Stated First American Edition. Original price of $3.50 printed on dust jacket front flap with lower front flap clipped. Jacket has edgewear, a couple of small chips and one tape repair along with archival repaired tears now protected with paper backed polyester film. Book has no writing or marking other than an ink stamped note "Printed in Switzerland" on the copyright page, .