Clark Gable’s only grandson Clark Gable III has died at his Texas home at age 30, his family has revealed.

The actor, model and TV host was found dead in his bed by his fiance Summer on Friday morning, local time. The pair have an 18-month-old daughter named Shore.

The cause of death is not immediately clear, with an autopsy report scheduled for tomorrow.

His mother, Tracy Yarro Scheff, confirmed the death on Instagram.

“It’s is with an extremely heavy heart we say goodbye to my beautiful son Clark,” she wrote. “He passed this morning. I will always be next to you my beautiful son. Mom.”

Mrs Scheff, 56, who was married to John Clark Gable, Clark Gable’s son, told US media her son had struggled with addiction in the past.

“I don’t know if that took his life, but I know that wasn’t what he wanted to do,” she said.

Kayley Gable, his sister, shared the tragic news on Facebook.

“My brother was found unresponsive this morning by his fiance and didn’t wake up,” she wrote on Facebook. “I LOVE YOU CLARKIE I’m so sorry we couldn’t save you my heart is broken and shattered RIP.”

Gable, who was filming a movie in Dallas at the time of his death, is best known for being the host of the reality show Cheaters in Seasons 13 and 14.

Gable’s official website revealed he embarked on a modelling career at age 5 and later studied at the New York Film Academy after completing his first film in Italy.

While he was often compared to his famous grandfather, known as “the King of Hollywood” during his reign, Gable wanted to be recognised for his own work.

“Acting in films — It’s in my blood, and I really want to do it just like my grandfather,” he shared on his page.

“But I don’t want to be compared to him in any way because I am different. I just happen to be born into these great circumstances, so I feel it gives me a great opportunity for what I want to do.”

He listed actor George Clooney as a major influence.

“His ability to take on and master such diverse roles is a real inspiration and strong influence on me, especially while growing up as a young model and aspiring actor as a teenager,” Gable noted.

According to his site, Gable was an avid lover of the outdoors and listed surfing, skateboarding, fishing, skydiving, and RC aerial photographer and drone videography as some of his passions.

He reportedly worked with Hollywood production companies and studios for his drone flying expertise for “special film and video projects and sometimes private lessons — or just to have some fun in between acting projects.”

Gable stirred headlines in 2011 when he was arrested for shining a laser pointer at an LAPD helicopter. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 10 days in jail.

In 2009, Gable was stabbed in the chest during a house party in the swanky area of Calabasas, in California.

TMZ shared Gable was defending a friend, who was being harassed by two men when he was stabbed in the left side of his upper torso.

At the time, Gable said he was suing for more than $25,000 in damages.

TMZ reported Gable is survived by his parents, John Clark Gable and Scheff, as well as his sister Kayley and a daughter named Shore.