John Clark Gable is a popular American actor. As a son of a former Hollywood legend - William Clark Gable, he had already experienced fame before his career took off. Unfortunately, he was born four months after the death of his father.

Growing up in the shadow of his father, he may have entertained thoughts of a non-showbiz career, but the call of the blood was stronger. He joined the entertainment industry, and he is now one of the most accomplished actors. Here is his biography to help you know more about him.

Profile summary

Full name: John Clark Gable

Date of birth: March 20th, 1961

Zodiac sign: Pisces

Place of birth: Los Angeles, California

Nationality: American

Ethnicity: White

Profession: Actor

Marital status: Married

Wife's name: Debra Hartsell

John Clark Gable biography

Clarke Gable son John was born on March 20th, 1961, in Los Angeles, California, to Kay Spreckels and William Clark Gable. He spent most of his childhood in Los Angeles. His father was one of the celebrated American actors of his time.

He had a sister called Judy Lewis (now deceased). She was an actress, writer, and producer.

At the age of one, John Gable was almost a victim of a kidnap attempt. Therefore, his mother kept him away from the public and made sure he always had security with him. As a result, not much information about his early life is in the limelight.

How old is John Clark Gable?

John Clark Gable's age is 59 years as of 2021. He celebrates his birthday on March 20th every year.

What does John Clark Gable do for a living?

He is an actor who is popularly known for Sunset at Dawn. He started his career fairly slowly, and he made few appearances in television shows. His breakthrough as an actor came in 1990, thanks to his performance in the film Bad Jim. He featured alongside veteran actors such as James Brolin and Richard Roundtree in the film.

Even though the movie was not a hit, it served as a stepping stone to more roles in showbiz. He has acted in the movies below.

Sunset at Dawn 1 and 2 as Costello.

Aliens from Uranus as Sheriff Herrera.

Bad Jim (1990) as John T. Coleman.

A Burning Passion: The Margaret Mitchell Story (1994) as Army Officer Terry.

How much is John Clark Gable net worth?

The popular American actor has made a significant amount of income from his acting career. According to Celebrity Net Worth, the actor is worth a whopping $5 million. His wealth affords him a luxurious lifestyle.

John Clark Gable wife and children

The American actor is a married man and a proud father. He has been married three times. In 1985, he married Tracy Yarro, but the marriage was annulled five years later.

On February 1st, 1999, he gave marriage another chance. He married Alexandria Remlin. However, this marriage was also not meant to last a lifetime. The couple divorced in 2002. He is currently married to Debra Hartsell Gable. The pair tied the know on September 5th, 2020.

Of the three marriages, only Tracy Yarro bore the actor's kids. Clark Gable children are Kayley Gable and Clark Gable III. They followed their father's footsteps and joined the entertainment industry as actors.

His daughter Kayley Gable has acted in The Cynical Life of Harper Hall (2011), Sunset Society (2018), and Winchell (1998). His son is deceased.

What caused the death of John Clark Gable son?

Clark Gable III was born on September 20th, 1988. He was the only son and the second-born child of the popular American actor. He was a model, actor, and television presenter.

He was known as the host to the reality television series Cheaters, which aims to expose people suspected of cheating on their partners.

His fiancee found him dead in his Dallas home on February 22nd, 2019. He died at the age of 30 years. According to an autopsy report obtained by FOX News, the young actor died from excessive use of fentanyl, ox*ycodone, and Xanax.

What happened to Clark Gable - John's father?

Clark Gable died at Hollywood Presbyterian Hospital Wednesday on November 16th, 1960, at 11 p.m. The then 59-year-old star had been hospitalized since he had a heart attack on Nov 6th, 1960. The hospital administrator said that he had died from another heart attack.

"He appeared to be doing fine," said the hospital administrator. "He was sitting up, then he put his head back on the pillow, and that was that".

At the time of his death, his wife, Kay, was asleep across the hall. She had stayed at the hospital since her husband had had the heart attack and had just shared dinner with him a few hours earlier.

John Clark Gable controversial arrest

In 2013, the American actor was arrested by Los Angeles County sheriff’s deputies for allegedly driving under the influence of alcohol and hitting several cars in Malibu. The actor had hit a vehicle near the Malibu Pier, whose driver then followed him while calling 911.

He later crashed his Ford Raptor into at least five parked cars in the 21300 block of Pacific Coast Highway. Fortunately, there were no reported injuries, but one of the parked cars was pushed into a garage door by the impact.

The Aliens from Uranus star was taken to a hospital for a blood test. Jail records showed that he was held on $15,000 bail and released from custody at 11:40 p.m.

Popular American actor John Clark Gable has been in showbiz for a while now. He has played a significant role in the success of various films. As a result, he is loved and respected by many people around the world.

READ ALSO: Eli Kay-Oliphant biography: Who is Marina Squerciati’s husband?

Legit.ng recently published an article on the biography of Eli Kay-Oliphant. Eli Kay is the husband of popular American actress Marina Squerciati. Because of his celebrity wife, he has also attracted the attention of numerous people worldwide.

However, unknown to many, their love-life dates back to their college days. His biography seeks to reveal more regarding who he is and how he met his beautiful wife.

Source: Legit.ng