When I was growing up, there was no music I wanted to listen to other than Hard Rock and ever-increasingly heavy metal, until I started to study music theory in high school. When you study it in academia, you're basically studying Bach. It's always been my argument that Heavy Metal is the closest thing to modern classical music that there is. Even Jazz doesn't resemble Classical in the way that Metal does, despite how snobby it's patrons can be about it (our own genre has it's snobs as well). Jazz theory (at least the theory that you learn if you go to a place like five towns college or Berklee) resembles pop music more than classical music; i.e. if you were going to cover a piece of music, there are plenty of substitutions for any given thing in the arrangement, other than the melody. In contrast, when making a rendition of a classical piece, any missing or changed notes in the piece are very noticeable. That having been said, think of how obvious it is when someone goes into guitar center and plays the wrong notes when playing Ozzy or Metallica. I submit a specific example; Halestorm's cover of Straight Through The Heart by Dio. When I first heard the track, I IMMEDIATELY noticed a change in the bassline and guitar for the opening riff. It's also been found in neurological studies that people who are fans of Metal have similar neurological "wiring" to classical music aficionados. Then there are bands like apocalyptica who, despite not having any guitar players, are most certainly metal. So where do some of you draw the line? obviously this is an ongoing conversation that the metal world has with itself, but when do you all personally stop calling something metal and start calling it something else? For me, it's not a defined line by any stretch. I feel that Metal, at least at this point in history, presents itself as "very loud, technical music, regardless of instrumentation." I even find myself listening to some electronic music and saying, "... the only thing seperating this from metal is instrumentation and the audience that is accepting it."

It's true that metal and classical are both heavily scripted (though Pyrrhon, an NYC band, is putting free improv sections into their songs...!). I'd say classical is more cerebral by a long shot - the underlying theory is more deeply understood, the available structures have been more thoroughly explored. And a much higher caliber of musicianship is required to play the stuff. Metal tends to be less cohesive, less centrally planned, and more intuitive; it often defaults to "verse-chorus-bridge-etc" pop structure, and some bands wind up mining the same boring melodic veins for years. At its best, its intuitive nature is a strength - classical composition can be so sterile. The success or failure of crossover acts depends on their sensitivity to the nuances of arranging for the instruments they're playing. That goes both ways; if the person doing the arrangement doesn't have a deep familiarity with the potential of the instruments they're writing for (or if they're just lazy), the piece will be lifeless. That's how I feel about Apocalyptica. I can't stand them. To the question of where one "draws the line" - I'd rather not. After my experiences of the past few months, I think it's a better approach to consider a piece on its own terms. That's vitally important when writing a crossover piece (and I'd say the same holds true for the genre-blending within metal, too). Very easy to wind up with unexplored potential, or a cheesy, predictable piece that's the worst of both worlds. The successes, though, can be transcendental. Earlier this year I did death metal vocals with a string quartet at a few shows in and around the city, and my take on mixing these genres is very much influenced by that association. They're all excellent musicians and playing with them has inspired me to take my own writing further. Here's a video, which I've posted to the forum before: https://vimeo.com/115837284

Two objections: A) classical doesn't equal classical, and metal doesn't equal metal. Of course, there's the obvious like Malmsteen or Rhoads or Emperor or much of melodic death metal who remind you of Bach or Vivaldi or Beethoven. Clearly that sort of heavy metal is closer related to classical music than any non-heavy metal modern music. Then there's the pathos and flamboyance of Judas Priest, Iron Maiden or Manowar, heroes with swords and dragons and shit. That's pretty much Wagner. I think Manowar mentioned Wagner as the first heavy metaller. But then for example, there's thrash metal and grindcore. I find it difficult to relate Slayer or Sodom or Napalm Death to anything classical, and I don't believe they are too well-versed in classical music anyway. Black Sabbath doesn't remind me much of classical music either. And then, there's "classical" music that goes far beyond classic classical music. Stravinsky's Le Sacre du Printemps, my favourite classical piece, is thoroughly composed savagery. It's about a human sacrifice no less, it's much heavier and more brutal than most metal, and perhaps it's no coincidence that it debuted one year before WW1 where "civilised" Europe collapsed and met its savage end. ooi7eomsTuc Funny enough, the only stuff I can think of that comes close is apocalyptic black metal like Mayhem or Blut aus Nord. Maybe there's the full circle. 7EVM3u8QsuI

One of the features of extreme metal composition is that it's often motif based beyond being "merely" riff based (though being riff based itself seems to lend a certain baroque/classical quality to it). The same ideas are repeated through a song or an album with minor variations (melodic or structural) relative to what's happened earlier on in the song/album... That's what makes it feel more tied together than a lot of other rock music which can be just licks thrown together without an ear for consistency or development. Classical is practically just motif development to a great degree, so that might be where a lot of the similarity lies.

Most of what people call "classical music" is through composed, whereas most metal is based on phrase repetition (like pop music). However, you do get an awful lot of classical music (esp. Baroque and Classical eras) which features phrase repetition in melodic structure even if keys modulate through the piece.. Thinking very much of Bach, Mozart, and I guess some Beethoven here. That's the stuff which usually reminds me of metal in terms of the structure of the music, if not the specifics of composition and intent. Wagner is where a lot of the feeling and "gravitas" of metal can be found.

Metal is also clearly a folk form, though. Most metal musicians for a long time learned riffs by ear, they weren't necessarily taught to play their instruments, they had a feel for the sound and went from there. That's why early metal can have diverse riff styles and sounds but still have a sense of being tied together somehow... Thinking also of bands like Hellhammer and Bathory who did certain things that other musicians then picked up on later and worked on, esp. Darkthrone, Burzum etc. The whole of death metal and black metal were based on musicians playing similar sounding things without having been "taught" any standard pieces (or any theory at all) - seems more like folk than classical at that point (I'm using "folk" in quite a loose sense, here).

I never found tabs or anything for songs I liked, I used to listen really hard to the music itself and work it out on a guitar. That's one of the differences between "classical" music and world music (incl. folk and country), in my experience - while the former is taught in quite a structured way, the latter is more about picking it up and learning as you go. Metal for me is healthily within the two bounds - there are aspects that clearly mimic classical structure and style, and there are aspects which are rooted in a folk tradition (namely "heavy metal," being its very own tradition!).

I could emphasise the origin in Blues, but I think that's overstated a lot... Black Sabbath really jumped out of that whole game in their first few albums, and as soon as NWOBHM hit the scene, metal was clearly its very own beast.

Edit: long story short, I think that structurally metal can come close to classical, historically it's a lot like its own kind of folk tradition, it's basically just its own thing as far as these two extremes go!