Address Certas Energy, Tryst House, Glenbervie Business Park, Larbert, Falkirk FK5 4RB, Scotland, UK

Ads

Telephone: 0845 604 6732

Email: Email contact form

Website: http://www.certasenergy.co.uk

The last few years have seen Certas Energy undergo an exciting and strategic acquisition process to position itself as one of the largest independent distributors of fuels and lubricants in the UK.

Scotland has seen a great deal of this activity. Certas Energy now owns Scottish Fuels, which was acquired in September 2001; this was closely followed by the procurement of Asco Fuels in 2003, Shell Direct in 2004, CPL Petroleum in 2007, Grampian Fuels in 2008 and, most recently, Brogan Fuels and Commercial Oils in 2010.

As well as fuels, Certas Energy understands that lubricants are an essential element to a large number of successful Scottish businesses in a variety of sectors such as agriculture, marine, fishing, industrial, as well as independent workshops and franchised workshops.

Certas Energy has a strong reputation for being a reliable and expert fuel distribution specialist, which is complemented by its premier lubricant distribution service comprising the finest products, a sales team with 200-plus years of experience combined, state-of-the-art delivery process and a focus on excellent customer service.

Certas Energy is proud to be affiliated with some the largest lubricant brands in the world. These companies are at the forefront of technology with research and development investment equating to billions of dollars.

Scottish lubricant partnerships include:

Scottish Fuels is an official Castrol Channel Partner and distributor of Gulf Lubricants.

Brogans Fuels is an authorised Shell distributor and winner of the Shell Lubricants Distributor Championships 2013.

Commercial Oils is the official Scottish distributor partner for Valvoline and Total Lubricants in Scotland.

As new machinery and engine units are developed it is the leading companies in the marketplace that invest in developing new products and this is leaving many companies unable to compete.

With some companies producing product that is below specification, the UK Lubricants Association created the Verification of Lubricant Specifications (VLS) as an independent subsidiary to examine and police the quality of the lubricants market in the UK. It aims to protect the public from not-fit-for-purpose lubricants, as well as guarding the reputation of the industry.

Major oil companies control their own base oil supply and blend in-house, guaranteeing consistency of quality; they will never reduce the additive content or buy cheaper base oils to reach a price point. Certas Energy supplies products from well known brands, providing peace of mind that the quality of the products used meets each specification required.

For more information or to place a lubricants order call: 0845 604 6732.As you visit ‘Certas Energy’, you may find interest in following listings . . .