The novel “Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman” by Walter M. Miller Jr. was published for the first time in 1997. It’s set in the same future of the novel “A Canticle for Leibowitz”.

In the XXXIII century, part of what was the U.S.A. is slowly rediscovering technologies dating back to before the nuclear war. Blacktooth is a monk at the abbey of Saint Leibowitz. Of nomadic origin, he was raised as a Catholic but his faith reaches a crisis point and asks to be freed from hir vows.

Thanks to his knowledge of various languages ​​and dialects, Blacktooth enters the service of Cardinal Brownpony. Thus he finds himself in the middle of the diplomatic intrigues of the various nomads tribes and nations, especially the powerful empire of Texark but also in the midst of power struggles within the Church, especially during the conclaves held to elect popes.

“A Canticle for Leibowitz”, published in 1959 putting together three novellas published in previous years, is Walter M. Miller Jr. masterpiece and is now considered a classic of science fiction. Not accidentally it received the Hugo Award as the best novel of the year.

After being a prolific author with many stories published in the ’50s, Walter M. Miller Jr. suddenly stopped writing but in the late ’80s he started writing a novel set in the same future of “A Canticle for Leibowitz” and in particular almost a century after the second part of that masterpiece.

Unfortunately, Walter M. Miller Jr. fell into a state of depression and got increasingly isolated from the world. The death of his wife was for him the coup de grace and on January 9, 1996 Miller took his own life.

At the end of 1995, Terry Bisson was contacted and asked to cooperate in the completion of the new novel by Walter M. Miller Jr. due to the difficulty for him to continue. The manuscript available included almost all the story but shortly after Miller committed suicide and Bisson completed the work writing the last part of the novel based on notes he had left. Bisson himself tells the story of his work.

The result was novel a completely different from “A Canticle for Leibowitz”. “Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman” takes place in a period of a few years and is mostly the story of Blacktooth in his travels following Cardinal Brownpony with some chapters centered around other characters.

Walter M. Miller Jr. had a quite pessimistic vision of the future. Like other writers who had personally experienced World War II, he thought that new technologies would be developed to create weapons that would lead to increasing destruction, in this case until a nuclear war.

In “A Canticle for Leibowitz” we see a new cicle of technological progress and destruction, however the end of the novel leaves some hope for a better future, perhaps far from Earth. For Walter M. Miller Jr. in these historical cycles the Catholic Church is a pillar of stability that allows the preservation of knowledge and its rediscovery in time.

In “Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman” the pessimism of Walter M. Miller Jr. seems to be stronger despite moments of irony. Perhaps this is due to the fact that this novel was written during the years of the author’s depression but the story also seems the result of his disillusionment.

Walter M. Miller Jr. took inspiration from the history of the Renaissance to write “Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman” adapting it to the situation of the remains of the U.S.A. in that postatomic XXXIII century. In the novel there are old technologies that are being slowly rediscovered, there are nomadic tribes and there are mutants created by radiation. However, the inspiration to the history of past centuries is clear with the power struggles within the Catholic Church, the Catholic Church’s involvement in the political events of the various nations and subsequent deals and / or clashes with their leaders.

In “Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman” there’s very little of saint in the Catholic Church. There are occasionally true spiritual leaders such as Pope Amen I but in general it seems as much a corrupt and power greedy organization as it was in the Middle Ages with some quite Machiavellian characters.

Walter M. Miller Jr. was always able to develop his characters very well, in the case of “Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman” this is an merit but also a flaw. For example, throughout the story we participate in all Blacktooth’s issues and inner doubuts, perhaps too much.

Blacktooth’s long journey among the nations of that chaotic future is also an inner journey but he’s a character with many weaknesses and this makes him very human but also weak as the protagonist of the novel. It comes natural to me to wonder how much of Walter M. Miller Jr. there is in Blacktooth, with his deep spiritual crisis and his search for answers.

“Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman” is a novel complex not only in his characters but also concerning its events described in great detail, perhaps even too much in some places that are not so relevant. Even in the names of various characters it’s heavy because some of them have names, monikers and nicknames which can create some confusion.

Terry Bisson decided not to touch anything that Walter M. Miller Jr. had written but probably a revision with some targeted cuts here and there would’ve made the story more fluid.

It’s always difficult to judge the sequel of a masterpiece and “Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman” isn’t really a sequel to “A Canticle for Leibowitz”. Waiting for decades to read this new novel may actually cause a shock and its flaws may overshadow its merits.

In my opinion, despite its flaws, “Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman” is overall a pretty good novel but it’s hard to recommend it because to appreciate it you need to almost forget “A Canticle for Leibowitz”.