When local businessman Ted O’Hara saw a video about the Make-A-Wish® Foundation back in 1985, he was hooked. He shared the video with some friends, with the idea of starting a local chapter, and by 1987 that idea became a reality. The first wish granted by Make-A-Wish® Northeast New York was for a girl from Amsterdam, whose wish was to visit Costa Rica to visit grandparents she had never met.

O’Hara said that those early wishes were challenging, especially as they were breaking ground for a new organization few were familiar with. Now, more than three decades years later, more than 2,000 wishes have been granted in our local area, with around 90-100 granted each year. Whether a heartfelt wish is for a Walt Disney World® Resort trip or a puppy, a treehouse or to meet a celebrity, it sparks hope, strength and joy in children, as well as families, donors, sponsors, the medical community, volunteers and whole communities.

Looking back at more than three decades, a future filled with amazing and meaningful wishes is truly something to look forward to for all of us. Join us as we follow the steps that were taken to bring smiles to the faces of those children and families.

1986

Frederic T. O’Hara, a local insurance agent, invites his friends and business colleagues to his home to discuss the Make-A-Wish Foundation. … The first fundraising event of the chapter is a black-tie party held on New Year’s Eve.

1987

The local chapter of the Make-A-Wish Foundation is formally established, with articles of incorporation filed with the State of New York.

1989

In its first three years, the chapter grants more than 15 wishes to local children with life-threatening illnesses. … John and Paula Ross form a volunteer group in the Plattsburgh area. The chapter’s newsletter is created.

1990

Original board member Arthur Place and Company provides office space for the foundation. … The wish-granting committee and speakers’ bureau are established.

1992

The Endowment Fund is created through the efforts of volunteer Donald Lussier. … A volunteer core is established in the Tri-County area (Warren, Washington, and Saratoga), led by Doris Lohfink and Lou McArthur.

1993

The chapter conducts the first Adopt An Angel holiday campaign, created by Charters Marketing with the support of BlueShield of Northeastern New York, WTEN-10 and the Times Union.

1994

The chapter hires its first executive director, Sharon Boswell. … Chapter headquarters are moved to space provided by Matthew Bender & Co. Inc.

1995

The chapter grants a record 58 wishes. … The first volunteer recognition event is held.

1996

The Corporate Genie Campaign, recognizing businesses and corporations for sponsoring a wish, is established in memory of wish kid Joey. … The chapter celebrates its 10th anniversary by holding a Gala and Silent Auction.

1997

A program coordinator is hired to assist and oversee volunteer wish granters in the wish process. … An advisory board is established.

1998

Chapter grants its 300th wish: Joey’s wish to visit Walt Disney World and meet Winnie the Pooh. … Bryan LaVigne is hired as executive director.

1999

The Board of Directors approves the chapter’s first strategic plan. … Make-A-Wish® Foundation of America launches its first national public service advertising campaign.

2000

Make-A-Wish Foundation of America celebrates its 20th anniversary and unveils new logo. … Donations to the Adopt An Angel campaign top the $200,000 mark for the first time, raising enough money to grant approximately 40 wishes.

2002

Chapter grants its 500th wish when Billy and his family enjoy a Disney Cruise Line Land/Sea Vacation. … Chapter headquarters moves to new office space in Latham. … Adopt An Angel celebrates its 10th year.

2003

Chapter grants a record number of children’s wishes: 66, a 61 percent increase over 2002.

2004

The chapter collaborates with more than 35 other community organizations to bring our message of hope, strength, and joy to over 10,000 people. … Chapter grants its 600th wish, to 8-year-old Lashanna from Schenectady. … Chapter also reaches another milestone, with second year in a row of record-high wish totals.

2005

America’s Greatest Brands features the Make-A-Wish Foundation as one of only three non-profit organizations recognized as among “America’s Strongest and Most Trusted Brands.” … The 700th wish to 6-year-old Benjamin of Glenville. Volunteer wish granter Toni Cowie is responsible for granting this milestone wish, as she is for milestone wishes 500 and 600.

2006

Chapter hires new CEO, William C. Trigg, III, PhD. Trigg is still in the position, the longest tenured leader in chapter history. … Chapter kicks off 20th Birthday Year of Celebration with World’s Largest Ice Cream Social at local Cold Stone Creamery stores. … 20th Birthday celebration is held at Hall of Springs in Saratoga Springs, featuring Kevin Sharp and original wish mom Linda Bergendahl-Pauling. … The chapter’s 800th wish is granted to Gary Selner from Leeds, whose wish for an adaptive hobby room came true in February.

2007

Night of Exquisite Tastes launches, an event that featured networking, music, great food, and fine cigars at the Saratoga Polo Club. … Make-A-Wish Idol karaoke event raised nearly $18,000.

2008

Adopt An Angel campaign marks 15th year. … Lindsay from Colonie becomes the chapter’s 900th wish -- and a published author. Her wish includes publishing of her book, “Cracked Up,” complete with a book signing and reception.

2009

The chapter’s 1,000th wish is granted, with 9-year-old Zachary being “slimed” at the Nickelodeon Hotel and Studios in Florida. … Kids for Wish Kids® program launches, enabling students to support Make-A-Wish through their own fundraising projects. The chapter website launches.

2010

Local wish kids who had wishes to visit Walt Disney World® Resort were invited to a “Princess for a Day” event held at the Glens Falls Civic Center. … “Racing for Wishes” Celebrity Bartending Event raised more than $70,000. … The 1,100th wish granted, with Kaitlin from Corinth receiving a customized bicycle and swing.

2011

Local wish child Justice White collects more than 31,000 letters to Santa to benefit the chapter through the Macy’s “Believe” campaign. … More than poker players participate in “All in for Wishes” Charity Poker Tournament. … Wish teen Julia is granted the chapter’s 1,200th: a trip to the Jersey Shore.

2012

Chapter kicks off Silver Anniversary Celebration with the annual “A Wishful Evening Gala” at the Hall of Springs in Saratoga Springs. … Megan, an 18-year-old from Wynantskill, and Melissa, a 16-year-old from Schenectady, each picked a shopping spree experience, and the pair together marked the milestone 1,300th wish granted by the chapter. … Events to mark this milestone year range from sharing a 25-foot-long ice cream sundae to a skydiving event featuring 25 Make-A-Wish supporters who were committed to “Leap for Wishes!” (later “Wish Jump”).

2013

An Albany International Airport celebration upon the return of wish kids Christopher, Austin, Zachary, and Emily and their families from Disney marks the chapter’s 1,400th wish. … “All in for Wishes” attracts 200 players for an exciting 12 hours of play. … Chapter starts “Wheels for Wishes” campaign seeking donations of old cars to help sponsor wishes.

2014

Chapter kicks off the inaugural “Walk for Wishes” event, raising more than $40,000. … “Wish Jump 2014” exceeds fundraising target of $40,000. … Chapter offices move to current location at 3 Washington Square in Albany.

2015

Wish teen Hannah’s wish to go to Los Angeles for the People’s Choice Award show is the chapter’s 1,500th. ... Channa’s Israel wish is granted, and she and her family travel to what she considers her homeland. ... The Tri-City ValleyCats hosted a “PhilanTropic” Wish Family picnic night at Joe Bruno Stadium for a night of baseball and fun.

2016

Lucia’s wish to visit Hawaii and swim with sharks is the chapter’s 1,600th. ... Chapter grants a record number of wishes, as 101 are completed in Fiscal Year 2016. ... “Wack’s Ride” became the largest motorcycle fundraising event in the North Country, with more than 600 participants and 425 motorcycles. ... Wish kid Landon is sent to Italy to meet and be blessed by Pope Francis.

2017

The chapter holds its 25th Annual Adopt-A-Wish Holiday Campaign. The Campaign, which started out as Adopt An Angel Campaign, is unique among Make-A-Wish chapters. ... The chapter’s 30th anniversary is celebrated. ... Cameron's wish to go on his senior class trip to Europe is the chapter's 1,700th wish granted.

2018

Before taking off on his wish – the chapter’s 1,800th – to Walt Disney World, flight enthusiast Ben, 15, got a complete tour of Southwest Airlines’ operation, from the ground crew operations to the cockpit. … The chapter raises a record amount during its 26th Annual Adopt-A-Wish Holiday Campaign, while also seeing a jump in medical referrals during the campaign. … The campaign also features its first-ever north country kickoff, telethon with CBS6-Albany and Evening of Giving with Colonie Center.

2019

The chapter hosts its inaugural Ski For Wishes in Lake Placid, hosted by Andrew Weibrecht, a three-time Olympian, two-time medalist and member of the Board of Trustees. … Wish kid Tiago from Florida wishes to go bobsledding, and comes to Lake Placid. The wish is featured on the international World Cup broadcast and highlighted at the Make-A-Wish National Leadership Conference. … Make-A-Wish co-founder Tommy Austin and his wife Kay are the featured guests at the annual chapter Gala. … Liam’s wish for an adaptive playset is the 1,900th granted by the chapter. A first-time wish granter on the wish is Justice White, who received her wish in 2005. … CEO William C. Trigg, III, is honored by the Capital Region Chamber with its Nonprofit Executive Leadership Award. ... Wish alum Luke Hoag delivers his 250,000th letter to Santa in his fifth year participating in the Macy’s “Believe” campaign.

2020

Cameron’s wish for a custom computer build is the first granted in the calendar year. He would latter make a video for the chapter chronicling the impact of his wish. … The coronavirus pandemic cripples much of the Make-A-Wish operation. Wish granting is halted in March, and offices close. The chapter’s When Stars Align Gala is postponed until June, and then pivoted to an online-only affair. … The chapter’s Walk For Wishes in August is also transitioned into a virtual event. … Between mid-March and mid-July, the chapter is only able to grant one wish due to travel and other restrictions placed on wishes.

2021

As the pandemic stretches into its second year, certain wishes continue to be curtailed. Travel wishes do not return until September, but only for wish families that are fully vaccinated. …. Macy's honors wish alum Luke Hoag with its Believe For Goodness Sake Award for his efforts in the Macy's Believe! campaign. ... For the second year in a row, the chapter’s annual wish Gala is held virtually. However, by late spring and summer in-person fundraising events return, including the Walk For Wishes. … Jaxon’s wish for a massive treehouse is granted, thanks to combined sponsorship of BBL Construction Services, Curtis Lumber and Delaware Engineering. … For the first time in three years, the chapter grants an I wish to give back wish, as 17-year-old Maria wishes to start an emergency fund so others like her with epilepsy can afford medication. … The chapter is able to hold its annual Holiday Party for wish families for the first time since 2019. … CEO William C, Trigg, III, is among the Capital Region nonprofit leaders to receive awards at the Capital Region Gives Back event. .... Diedrich’s RV in Coxsackie solicits area businesses to contribute extras to 6-year-old Amelia’s camper wish, and the community responds. Afterward, the Facebook post of this wish is the most popular social media entry in chapter history.

2022

Anthony's wish to go to Walt Disney World® Resort is the 2,000 granted in chapter history. ... Bill Trigg announces he is stepping down as CEO after a successor is named. Trigg is the longest-tenured CEO is chapter history, having overseen more than 60 percent of the chapter's wishes. He has been responsible for the establishment of the chapter's Walk For Wishes®, its Workshop of Wishes and three large wish endowments, and overseen a dramatic increase in the number of wishes granted on a yearly basis. By far he is the more transformative figure in chapter history. ... Esme''s wish to be the subject of a museum exhibit opens at the Arts Center of the Capital Region in Troy. Make-A-Wish America later bestows its Wish Innovation Award, its highest award for wishes, to the chapter for the wish. The award honors “chapters that have used exceptional creativity, imagination and innovation to fulfill the one true wish of a child.”