Looking forward to our annual Houston Construction & Development Trends and Innovations event next Wednesday, Nov. 15 at the iconic POST Houston! It is not too late to register and hear from industry leaders Acho Azuike, DC Partners; William Carter, WC Construction, Thomas Bayer, HOK; Hachem Domloj, CIVE®; Tadd Tellepsen, Tellepsen; Nick Pontikes, Pontikes Development, John Moody, Jr., Moody Law Group, PLLC discuss Advancements and Innovations in Construction on our first panel. Register at https://lnkd.in/gAs2fmVZ and use the code LAST23 for a $99 ticket!

From #Concept to #Completion, Construction Concepts is the proud builder behind Houston’s beloved Ume Sushi located in the Heights. We worked closely with chef and owner Chris Kinjo to bring his design vision to life, just as we did with sister restaurant MF Sushi. The approximately 3,000 square foot space is split into two main sections. The entrance and interior space feature a bar area with a large Hinoki slab communal table and high top seating. The main dining room, which overlooks the open kitchen and sushi bar, features booth and table seating, and is lit by a canopy of custom plum blossom chandeliers in various stages of bloom. What can we build for you? #BuiltByConstructionConcepts #ConceptToCompletion #UmeSushi #HeightsHouston #HoustonBuilder #HoustonConstruction

A BIG thank you to Construction Concepts and C&T Design and Equipment Co. for donating a refrigerator for our Snack Shack at Memorial Hermann Children's Hospital! 🏥 This new refrigerator will allow families to grab healthy snacks whenever they need at no cost. THANK YOU Construction Concepts and C&T Design and Equipment Co!

From #Concept to #Completion, introducing Picnik! Located in Montrose Collective, Picnik offers better-for-you products that taste amazing with the cleanest ingredients - at Construction Concepts, we're proud to stand behind this exciting and nutritious addition to the area. Be sure to add Picnik to your to-do list this summer and immerse yourself in our inviting indoor/outdoor spaces (don't miss out on the full bar!). What can we build for you? #ConstructionConcepts #constructionmanagement #constructionprojects

Our team is expectant for what 2020 will bring and we're already looking forward to more BLDit (Building Lives & Dreams in Texas) charity events in this new year! A huge thank you to everyone who continues to support our efforts to impact lives in our city and give back generously. “We were so fortunate to be able to celebrate the holiday season with so many partners and friends joining us in our mission to build better lives and dreams,” said Joshua Weisman, CEO of Construction Concepts. “My wife, Trisha, and I are grateful for the opportunity to give back and our team has personally volunteered alongside B.I.G. Love and know the tremendous impact they have on families with children battling cancer. A heartfelt thank you for everyone who donated and made the evening a success.”

Torchy's has become a Texas institution for tacos, and we were more than thrilled to partner with them in building their new locations in the Woodlands and the Galleria! Look how stunning this design and build is in Tanglewood. We've also heard this location is making all of their flour tortillas in house! #GeneralContractors #DesignandBuild #BuildingHouston