“I have always supported local businesses; it’s part of the foundation of my business philosophy. I have a long roster of carefully selected local suppliers and entrepreneurs that I work closely with, both in the Dubrovnik region but also throughout Croatia.

Local farmers, fishermen, cheesemakers, bakers, family-run wineries. I have favourite specialty shops such as ‘Life According to Kawa,’ florists, event organisers, tour operators, private guides, sailing and boating companies, and my preferred hiking and adventure tour colleagues at Hiking Dubrovnik. The list goes on!

Most crucially, given the current times, we all need to work together to stay strong and survive.”

“Her love of outdoor adventures and appreciation of the local gourmet fare led her to create Piknik Dubrovnik where she guides guests along scenic hikes or aquatic excursions, punctuated by a picnic meal.

"Dubrovnik and the Dalmatian coast have an exceptional combination of history, natural beauty and a bountiful harvest," says Cram.”

Here are her favorite places to experience jaw-dropping sunsets, hillside hikes and memorable food and wine.

There are more than 1,000 islands off the coast of Croatia. From Dubrovnik, the most accessible is Lokrum, a 15-minute boat ride from the city’s Old Port (round-trip tickets, 120 kuna). The verdant little Lokrum has a botanical garden, the ruins of a medieval monastery and the remnants of an old fort. Instead of relying on the few food options on the island, take a picnic lunch. Piknik Dubrovnik offers insulated backpacks filled with locally produced prosciutto, cheese, bread, olives, fruit, homemade ginger-rosehip lemonade, as well as other products from around Croatia, such as unctuous kulen sausage from the region of Slavonia, and wine from Istria, among other edible and drinkable delights (550 kuna for two).

“Eating outdoors, more precisely in nature, always brings with it a series of actions that we need to take. Find plastic containers and glasses, prepare food, clean fruit, stock up on thermoses with coffee, tea, water or wine and happily head to your destination. All those “little things” are now a thing of the past because it can all be done by someone instead of you. Picnic Dubrovnik is a concept that offers you an absolutely unfettered picnic, and it's up to you to choose what you want to reward your palate with and where you want to go out.”

If you don’t have the time to garner the ingredients yourself then consider contacting Piknik Dubrovnik (piknikdubrovnik.com), who will assemble a luxury picnic from fresh produce and their own delicious extras, put it all in a rucksack complete with groundsheet or rug, and provide you with directions to the best places to eat it. They can also hook you up with local hiking guides so you can latch the picnic experience onto an invigorating nature walk.

‘Picnics are the best possible antidote to the tourist crowds of the Old Town, and make for the perfect escape’ says “Piknik Dubrovnik’s Alex Cram. ‘Great food and breathtaking landscapes are both so essential to the Dubrovnik experience and it makes sense to put both of these together in the same basket, as it were’. One of the things that Alex Cram has noticed is that picnics are increasingly popular with couples who want a romantic meal – a point particularly well-made when one considers the Dubrovnik region’s natural way with ambient aphrodisiacs - fragrant summer breezes, lapping waves, ravishing sunsets… If picnics are the food of love, then munch on.”