Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has won a fourth term in office with 95.1 per cent of the votes in an election critics have said was marked by fraud.

Mr Assad's government said the election on Wednesday showed Syria was functioning normally despite the decade-old civil war, which has killed hundreds of thousands of people and driven 11 million people — about half the population — from their homes.

Head of Parliament Hammouda Sabbagh announced the results at a news conference on Thursday, saying voter turnout was around 78 per cent, with more than 14 million Syrians taking part.

The election went ahead despite a UN-led peace process that had called for voting under international supervision that would help pave the way for a new constitution and a political settlement.

The foreign ministers of France, Germany, Italy, Britain and the United States said in a statement criticising Mr Assad ahead of the election that the vote would not be free or fair. Turkey, an Assad adversary, has also said the election was illegitimate.

The win delivers Mr Assad, 55, seven more years in power and lengthens his family's rule to nearly six decades. His father, Hafez al-Assad, led Syria for 30 years until his death in 2000.

Mr Assad's years as President have been defined by the conflict that began in 2011 with peaceful protests, before spiralling into a multi-sided civil war that has fractured the Middle Eastern country and drawn in foreign friends and enemies.

"Thank you to all Syrians for their high sense of nationalism and their notable participation… For the future of Syria's children and its youth, let's start from tomorrow our campaign of work to build hope and build Syria," Mr Assad wrote on his campaign's Facebook page.

Mr Assad's biggest challenge, now that he has regained control of around 70 per cent of the country, will be an economy in decline.

Tightening US sanctions, neighbouring Lebanon's financial collapse, the COVID-19 pandemic hitting remittances from Syrians abroad and the inability of allies Russia and Iran to provide enough relief, mean prospects for recovery look poor.

Rallies with thousands of people waving Syrian flags and holding pictures of Mr Assad while singing and dancing took place all day Thursday in celebration of the election.

Officials have told Reuters privately that authorities organised the large rallies in recent days to encourage voting, and the security apparatus that underpins Mr Assad's Alawite minority-dominated rule had instructed state employees to vote.

The vote was boycotted by the US-backed Kurdish-led forces who administer an autonomous oil-rich region in the northeast and in northwestern Idlib region, the last existing rebel enclave, where people denounced the election in large demonstrations on Wednesday.

Mr Assad was running against two obscure candidates, former deputy cabinet minister Abdallah Saloum Abdallah and Mahmoud Ahmed Marei, head of a small, officially sanctioned opposition party.

Mr Marei got 3.3 per cent of the vote, while Mr Saloum received 1.5 per cent, Mr Sabbagh said.