Darius McCrary: Wiki, Bio, Age, Height, Actor, Parents, Wife, Net Worth: Darius McCrary is a popular American actor, rapper, singer as well as a producer. He was born on the 1st of May 1976 in Walnut, California, The United States of America. Darius is well-known for his role as Eddie Winslow in the long-running television series, named Family Matters. He got his recognition after appearing in the series. He is presently in the spotlight. There are rumors on the internet regarding Darius McCary and Sidney Starr being in a relationship. He has shut down those rumors by denying them. Darius and Sidney Starr are great friends. She is a popular American transgender rapper, actress, and Instagram star. Darius works in movies and television series as a popular actor. To know everything about Darius read this post!

Darius McCrary’s Life and Education

The birthplace of Darius is Walnut, California, The United States of America. Darius belongs to the American nationality. The name of Darius’s father is Mr. Howard McCrary. But the name of Darius’s mother is not yet disclosed on the internet. Regarding Darius’s siblings, he has a brother named Donovan McCrary. Darius’s current age is 45 years 5 months old as of October 2021. He is an American citizen.

Darius celebrates his birthday with his family on the 1st of May each year. The zodiac sign of Darius is Taurus as per his date of birth. Regarding Darius’s physical appearance, he is 6 feet 2 inches tall by height. The weight of Darius’s body is around 71 kg. He belongs to the African-American ethnicity. Darius is a dashing and confident man. He is a popular American actor, rapper, singer as well as a producer by profession. Darius has brown color eyes and black color hair. According to the sources, Darius received his schooling in his hometown.

Darius McCrary Career

As mentioned earlier, Darius McCrary is a popular American actor, rapper, singer, as well as a producer by profession. According to the sources, Darius started his acting career as a child actor at an early age. Later Darius became a popular actor with his ambition. As an actor. Darius has appeared in several movies and television series. Darius has gained massive success and fame due to his splendid acting in the entertainment industry. He is a popular actor who works in movies and television series. Darius is diligent, talented, and successful.

Darius McCrary Personal Life

Regarding Darius’ personal life, he married three times. Darius married his first wife, Juliette Vann in 2005. Darius and Juliette separated from a divorce in 2006. He married his second wife, Karrine Steffans in 2009. Darius and Karrine separated from a divorce in 2011. After that, Darius married his third wife, Tammy Brawner in 2014. Unfortunately, Darius’s third marriage was also broken. Darius and Tammy separated from a divorce in 2017. From their marriage, Darius and Tammy shared a loving daughter together named Zoey McCrary.

Here is the full bio of Darius, his family, mother, father, brother, sister, spouse, children, school, education, hometown, profession, nationality, body measurements, age, height, weight, eye colour, hair colour, gender, ethnicity, sexuality, cast, birthday, birthplace, hobbies, address, zodiac sign, date of birth, religion, net worth.

Darius McCrary, Bio, Height, Weight, Profile, Net Worth

Name Darius McCrary Nickname Not Known Gender Male Profession Actor, Rapper, Singer, and Producer Height (approx.) in centimeters– Not Known

in meters– Not Known

in feet inches– 6′ 2”

Weight (approx.) in kilograms– 71

in pounds– Not Known

Figure Measurements (approx.) Not Known Eye Colour Brown Hair Colour Black Date of Birth 1 May 1976 Age (as in 2021) 45 Years Birth Place Walnut, California, The United States of America Zodiac sign/Sun sign Taurus Nationality American Hometown Not Known School Not Known College/University

Not Known

Educational Qualification Graduate Religion Christianity Ethnicity African-American Caste Not Known Address Not Known Hobbies/Interests Not Known Marital Status Divorced Affairs/Boyfriends/Girlfriends Not Known Sexuality Not Known Parents Father: Howard McCrary

Mother: Not Known

Siblings Brother: Donovan McCrary

Stepsister: Not Known

Former Husband/Wife/Spouse Tammy Brawner Children Zoey McCrary Net Worth $100 Thousand

Social Media Accounts:

Facebook

Instagram

Twitter

Some Lesser Known Facts About Darius McCrary

Darius McCrary is from The United States of America.

Darius’s bio is available on the official page of Wikipedia.

Darius is close to his mother and often shares pictures with her on his Instagram account.

Darius is a devoted father to his daughter, Zoey McCrary.

Darius’s Instagram account is verified and has 487K followers as of October 2021.

Darius is a follower of Christianity.

Darius’s lifestyle is lavish and joyful.

Also Read: Lilian Nganga: Wiki, Bio, Age, Height, Career, Husband, Net Worth

Subscribe to us to get the latest updates about Darius McCrary!