Christian reconquest (1229–1245)

The first written references about the town are about the reconquest of the municipality's area by James I of Aragon and the arrival of Catalan-Aragonese troops to the "beyond the Xúquer" lands. These describe the "Great Islamic revolt of 1247–1248, after which James I of Aragon in 1248, besieged and conquered the castle of the Xiu. Subsequently, James I of Aragon gave the town to the conquering troops and established a permanent Christian population in Llutxent, while the farms located around the town's area kept their native Islamic population.

In 1276, the town is razed during Al-Azraq's revolt. Jaume I, in response to the town's razing, sent Christian troops which successfully re-conquered the town. Next year, the town's control and territory was given to the Italian noble "Joan de Proxita", who created the Barony of Llutxent.

Local Government

Llutxent's Municipal Council (Ajuntament in Catalan or Ayuntamiento in Spanish), is elected by universal suffrage according to proportional representation, in municipal elections held every 4 years, and it cannot be dissolved.

The law requires the Municipal Council to meet in full session at least every three months and extraordinary sessions can be called by either the mayor or by at least 1/4 of the Council Membership. The Municipal Council does not formulate major laws, but drafts regulations related to legislation from the Cortes Generales (The Legislative Body of Spain) or the Generalitat Valenciana (Regional Government). It oversees the budget, and it may raise taxes to supplement grants from the Central and the Regional Governments.

It is made up of 11 council members, who elect the Mayor of the Town (Alcalde, in Catalan and Spanish). If no head of the list of each party gets a majority of votes, the head of the list of the most voted party becomes Mayor. The Municipal Council retains the right to a Motion of no confidence to remove the Mayor and to install a new one.

The Mayor, in most instances, serves as the leader of the majority party in the council. In addition to being chairman of the Municipal Council, directing municipal administration, heading the municipal police force, and exercising extensive powers of appointment, the mayor plays a major public relations role and enjoys a great deal of prestige. The Mayor also organizes and elects the Local Government Team, composed of Municipal Council members usually of his or her political party, who assist him or her in his or her duties. Llutxent's Local Government is currently subdivided into 4 Departments:

Mayorship, headed by the Mayor.

Department of the Interior.

Department of Health.

Department of Tourism.

The municipal budget for fiscal year 2018 was of €3,092,766.42 ($3,465,753.58).