Signing up for the tour implies accepting the booking conditions.

When you submit the form, we'll send you a QR code for each person registered. Make sure you enter your email address correctly to receive them.

To access the Palau de la Generalitat it is essential:

Confirmation email with QR code

Identity document

Access to the Palace will be on the order of arrival in the queue.

20 and 21 April 2024

From 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. Open doors at the Palau de la Generalitat.

Entrance through Sant Sever and Sant Honorat street.

Free and mandatory registration.

April 23, 2024

From 12 to 20 h. Open doors at the Palau de la Generalitat.

Entrance through Sant Sever and Sant Honorat street.

Free and mandatory registration.

You can visit the institutional and monumental spaces of the ground and noble floors of the Palace, including the Clavé Room, the Press Room, the Torres-García Room, the Kings Room, the Governing Room, the Chapel of St. George, the Sacristy, the president's office and the deputies' room. It will also be possible to go through the Pati dels Tarongers, which will host carillon auditions at 1:00 p.m. and 7 p.m. to accompany the visit; the Gothic Gallery; the Gothic staircase, and the Gothic courtyard, where the sculpture El desconsol is located and where solidarity roses can be purchased. It will be exited by the Plaza de San Jaime.

12 h. Opening of the rose stalls of social initiative entities and the book stall of the Autonomous Entity of the Official Journal and Publications (EADOP) of an informative nature.

1 pm and 7 pm (45 minutes each) Auditions from the Carilló del Palau by Anna Maria Reverté. A folk and a pop one. Guess them! Catalan music for a festive day! A traditional Catalan song and a Catalan pop song. And so on! Traditional Catalan songs of all time and pop songs by Ginestà, Joan Dausà, Mishima, Txarango, Oques Grasses, Blaumut...

5 p.m. Dance of sardanas, organized by the Cultural Association Dos Per Quatre, with the performance of the cobla La Principal de la Bisbal, in the Plaza de Sant Jaume.