Rage Against The Machine Renegades (180 Gram Vinyl) [Explicit Content] - (M) (ONLINE ONLY!!)

$26.35

$27.99

Rage Against The Machine: Zack De La Rocha (vocals); Tom Morello (guitar); Tim Commerford (bass); Brad Wilk (drums).

Additional personnel includes: Sen Dog, B-Real (rap vocals).

Producers: Rick Rubin, Rage Against The Machine, Brendan O'Brien.

Engineers: Jim Scott, David Schiffman, Nick DiDia.

Principally recorded at Cello Studios, Hollywood, California and The Village Recorder, Los Angeles, California.

"Renegades Of Funk" was nominated for the 2002 Grammy Award for Best Hard Rock Performance.

Seemingly due to the hasty departure of vocalist Zach De La Rocha, what had originally been intended as a second disc complementing a live set finds its solo release in RENEGADES. Originally born in the lighthearted spirit of cover albums such as Metallica's GARAGE DAYS series, RENEGADES is an assembly of interpretations of protest songs that spans many musical styles.

From the funk treatment of the obscure "Pistol Grip Pump" (originally recorded by Volume 10), to the slowed-down, stomping groove of the MC5's "Kick Out the Jams," there is seemingly no song the band can't transform and make their own. Identifying closely with Rage Against The Machine's political ideals are Afrika Bambaataa's "Renegades of Funk," and the previously single-only cover of Bruce Springsteen's "The Ghost of Tom Joad." In what fans might optimistically interpret as a hint of what is to follow, two hidden live tracks round out RENEGADES' 60-plus minute assault.

Format: Vinyl

Genre: Rock

ABOUT US

Feels So Good started out back in 2007 as a passion project that has now turned into a full fledged screen printing and embroidery shop in Austin, TX.

FSG produces custom work for clients all over the world as well as for our online and retail store.

We showcase the works of over 100 different artists and vendors.

.

VISIT US

211 E. ALPINE RD AUSTIN, TX 78704

MONDAY - FRIDAY 10AM-6PM

SATURDAY & SUNDAY - 11AM-7PM

Stop by anytime to visit our retail store and ask for a tour of our production facility.