Beyond the

FRAMES

A Journey into the World of Cartoon & Animated Series

Animation describes the method of photographing a sequence of drawings, photographs, and models (depending on the technique) to create the illusion of movement.

Animation is a popular art form that has developed over centuries, providing us with entertainment, new ideas, and countless worlds bound only by our imagination.

Animation is a clever process, tricking the brain into blending a quick succession of images into a moving picture. There are a growing number of animation styles as technology develops, but it all started with traditional or 2D animation.

Traditional Animation

Traditional animation is the oldest and perhaps one of the most time-consuming techniques, with each frame being hand-drawn or painted onto transparent sheets (celluloid sheets, also known as a cel). Many early cartoons used this method; however, the industry has since moved towards more digital animation styles, such as CGI or 3D animation.

In this article, we will delve deeper into the history of animation and cartoons, discussing its origins and how animation has impacted the film industry as a whole. We will also look at some influential animations that have shaped and defined the industry, bringing attention to talented animators and filmmakers who have brought joy to countless people through their artistry.

The history

of animation

When you think of the glamorous and beautifully complex animated films that hit cinema screens today, you might be surprised that animation actually dates back many centuries. Humans throughout history have used various devices to achieve the illusion of animated scenes or characters.

1603

The Magic Lantern

The magic lantern is one example, invented in 1603 by a Dutch scientist named Christiaan Huygens.

It is the earliest form of image projection, using images on transparent plates, lenses, and a light source to project moving pictures as you place the slides together.

Thaumatrope

The thaumatrope is another device that creates the optical illusion of moving pictures. It was a popular toy from the Victorian era, consisting of a double-sided disk with a string attached to each end. To create the illusion, you must spin the disk using the string, and the images on both sides will blend into one.

1868

The Kineograph

The kineograph was another example of early animation, using the same concepts of traditional animation but on a smaller scale. Also referred to as the flipbook, kineographs were created in 1868 and are a booklet comprising a sequence of images. When you flip through the pages quickly, the images start to move.

Emile Reynaud

Emile Reynaud is the artist behind Pauvre Pierrot, the first animated film that was created using a picture roll made up of 500 individually painted images.

Emile Cohl’

However, there is some debate as to whether Emile Cohl’s film Fantasmagorie was, in fact, the first animated film, as this was done using traditional animation techniques that we are familiar with today.

1900

the beginning of animation as entertainment

The 1900s marked the beginning of animation as entertainment, as cartoons began to have theatrical showings, particularly in the United States. Animators began to form studios and teams of people to work on new projects.

Some of the most notable creations during the early 20th century include Gertie the Dinosaur, Felix the Cat, and Disney’s Steamboat Willie.

The Rise of Disney &

American Animation

For many, Walt Disney is considered the iconic symbol of animation, creating many family favorites that people hold dear to their hearts.

1930s

Disney Studios

From the 1930s onwards, Disney Studios set an impressive precedent for the industry. However, Disney was not the only noteworthy studio to appear at the time, with Warner Brothers and MGM also making iconic TV characters that would appear on screens over the next few decades (such as Bugs Bunny).

Walt Disney Studios takes the crown for creating the first feature-length animated film with Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937). Here the traditional animation method using cels was used (as we discussed previously), with each frame being entirely hand drawn.

Throughout the rise of television, the animation industry also began to adapt, with studios producing animated series and cartoons intended for television. Hanna-Barbera’s The Flintstones is an excellent example and was the first cartoon series to air on prime-time TV in the 1960s.

Computer animation

The 1990s also saw the widespread boom of digital technology as computers became more mainstream. Artists were quick to use computer graphics creatively, and graphic design tools became more refined as the years went by and computer technology developed. As the abilities of computer animation grew, it quickly integrated into most blockbuster films in the form of CGI (Computer-Generated Imagery) to create magical worlds and superheroes who can fly.

1995

Toy Story

Pixar’s release of Toy Story in 1995 was to change the industry’s landscape once more as the first entirely computer-animated feature film. To create this masterpiece, animators utilized innovative CGI techniques and inspired the future of animated film.

As technology continues to grow each year, so do the capabilities of CGI animation. Sometimes we witness the mind-boggling effects of clever CGI without even realizing it! They can make actors appear younger or older, create fascinating backdrops, and allow for ground-breaking special effects in film. Superhero films make particular use of CGI animation, helping actors live up to the expectations of their comic book counterparts by making their superhuman abilities appear real.

2009

Avatar

James Cameron’s visually captivating Avatar (2009) was another film to set the standard of CGI and motion capture techniques at the time. Motion capture is a clever technology that records actors’ actual movements and facial expressions to help animators build a catalog of motion for their characters. It is also often used in video game development to speed up the animation process.

Contemporary Animation

Around the World

The animation industry has grown massively outside of America, with many animation studios around the globe making their own mark and award-winning releases.

Hayao Miyazaki’s Studio

Hayao Miyazaki’s Studio Ghibli in Japan is just one example, releasing highly popular anime (Japanese animation) films such as Spirited Away (2001) and Howl’s Moving Castle (2004) which have become particularly popular in the West.

The US is home to several famous animation studios, such as DreamWorks Animation, which brought us titles such as Shrek (2001), Madagascar (2005), and Kung Fu Panda (2008).

Many US studios have also seen success through their classic cartoon series that are cherished by their audiences. For example, Nickelodeon shaped many people’s childhoods through animated series such as SpongeBob SquarePants, Rugrats, and Avatar: The Last Airbender. Many successful cartoons are also intended for an adult audience, such as Adult Swim’s Rick and Morty and Fox’s The Simpsons.

Now that we have a broad understanding of the history of animation and what helped develop the cartoons we know and love today, let’s look at how animation has impacted the film and TV industry as a whole.

How Has Animation Impacted

Film and TV?

Undoubtedly, animation has vastly changed and influenced the film and television industry. Animation extends the capabilities of filmmakers to produce visual effects and complex backgrounds that feel real. In the past, films relied heavily on the creativity of special effects, editing, and makeup artists to convince viewers that cars are flying, aliens are real, and spaceships fly around in space.

Illusions created by special effects were often necessary to the overall storytelling, creating the illusion that something is real and therefore suspending the audience’s suspension of disbelief (such as the lightsabers in Star Wars). Before technology developed to the point it is now, filmmakers relied on traditional props, elaborate sets, and costumes, which all contributed to special effects. Camera tricks were also used, utilizing perspective and other camera techniques.

These days, visual effects animation (VFX) and CGI are integral tools used in most modern films to create images that cannot be captured through cameras. These effects make the film appear more high-budget and realistic, from adding large explosions to a scene to creating the environment for the scene itself.

VFX and 3D Animation

VFX and 3D animation have transformed the industry and the way we make film and television. We can place actors in otherworldly environments, create creatures that don’t exist in real life, or turn the world into a dystopian nightmare. Audiences can become engrossed in fictional worlds like never before, with hyper-realistic effects that make it feel real.

While visual effects were once limited to large-budget blockbuster films like Avatar or The Avengers, it has since become much more affordable and accessible to indie filmmakers, with almost all current films utilizing the technology.

CGI & 3D animation

There are many ways that CGI and 3D animation have increased the possibilities of what filmmakers can produce. Here are just some of the ways the technology is used to revolutionize film and television:

Pre-Visualization

The process of creating storyboards, photographs, animatics, or shot lists as a means of conveying the director’s cinematic vision for the film before preparation begins. VFX artists often create 3D models to test the director’s visual approach before proceeding with production.

3D Modeling

The process of creating digital 3D models of objects, environments, characters, and more to make scenes from scratch or add characters to backgrounds.

3D Animation

The process of creating 3-dimensional moving images and environments to shoot an entire feature-length film in a virtual space

Special effects

Using computer-generated imagery to alter lighting, change the appearance of actors, or add various elements to the background, such as fire, snow, rain, or explosion.

It is safe to say that visual effects are changing how we make films. Actors interact with digital objects and surroundings in a fascinating feat of technology to make a fictional world feel real.

Digital animation continues to progress with experimentations of style and a hybrid of 2D and 3D elements, as seen in Academy Award-winning Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse. It is an ever-changing industry that excites us to see what they can make next!

Notable

Animators &

Filmmakers

It wouldn’t be fair to talk so much about ground-breaking animated films and television without mentioning their creators. This section will highlight notable filmmakers and animators, their contributions to the industry, and their various successes.

Walt Disney

Perhaps the most famous and well-known animator is Walt Disney himself. The name Disney is often used synonymously with animation, as his films were a hallmark in many people’s lives.

Walt Disney was born in 1901 and was a true innovator in the field. His sensational short film Steamboat Willie soon became a landmark in the history of animation, as it was the first cartoon to be released with synchronized sound.

Disney became known as one of the best motion picture producers in the world, cherished for creating beloved characters like Mickey Mouse, Goofy, and Donald Duck.

As mentioned previously, Disney was also responsible for the first feature-length animated film, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, solidifying animation’s effectiveness for entertainment and feature-length stories.

Some of Walt Disney’s most influential work include

1942

Bambi

1940

Pinocchio

1950

Cinderella

1937

Snow White and

the Seven Dwarfs

William Hanna and Joseph Barbera

The careers of animators William Hanna and Joseph Barbera intertwined when the pair co-founded their own studio after meeting in the animation division of MGM.

The two were responsible for some of the most infamous cartoons on television, including The Flintstones, Yogi Bear, and Tom & Jerry.

Tom & Jerry was Hanna and Barbera’s first venture which they worked on for over 17 years as part of MGM. At this time, the Cat and Mouse duo got nominated for 14 Academy Awards and won 7. After forming their own studio, Hanna-Barbera Productions, the pair saw real success by catering to both adult and children audiences with their prime-time hit show The Flintstones.

· TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards ·

· TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards ·

· TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards ·

· TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards ·

· TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards ·

· TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards ·

· TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards ·

· TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards · TOM & JERRY won 7 Academy awards ·

Some of Hanna-Barbera’s most influential work include

1971

Scooby-Doo

1961

Top Cat

1958

Yogi Bear

1962

The Flinstones

John Lasseter

John Lasseter was another influential animator who started his career working for Disney in 1979. Lasseter developed a fascination for computer-generated graphics and saw its potential within the animation industry. After leaving Disney, Lasseter became the chief creative officer at what became known as Pixar Animation.

Lasseter’s creative ambitions for CGI animation eventually came to life after he directed the influential Toy Story, the first feature-length film made entirely through CGI. After Disney purchased Pixar in 2006, Lasseter assumed his leadership position in Walt Disney Studios and went on to direct and produce other widely popular and critically acclaimed films like Toy Story 2, Frozen, and Inside Out.

These days Lasseter has some impressive roles directing, producing, screenwriting, animating, and voice acting in several films and projects. His aptitude for computer animation and storytelling has earned him a deserving mention on our list.

Some of John Lasseter’s most influential work include

1995

Toy Story

1998

A Bug’s Life

2006

Cars

2001

Monsters, Inc

2003

Finding Nemo

Hayao Miyazaki

Hayao Miyazaki is a Japanese director, animator, and co-founder of the world-famous Ghibli Studios. He is one of the industry’s most respected and admired animators for his unmistakable animation style and visual storytelling. Miyazaki has created legendary anime films that are vastly popular throughout Japan and the rest of the world.

1986

Castle in the Sky

The first film to release under Studio Ghibli was Castle in the Sky (1986). This film set Ghibli and Miyazaki on a formidable trajectory that would influence the rest of the animation industry. The grand appeal of Miyazaki’s work stems from his lovable characters, mesmerizing animation, and compelling storylines. He is undoubtedly one of the most famous animators in the world!

Some of Hayao Miyazaki’s most influential work include

2001

Spirited Away

1997

Princess Mononoke

2008

Ponyo

2004

Howl’s Moving Castle

Lotte Reiniger

Lotte Reiniger, a German film director and animator born in 1899, was famous for her silhouette animation style.

She created her famous silhouettes out of black cardboard cut-out figures. Each figure had hinged joints that she would move and manipulate to create movement. The larger the range of movement, the more hinges the figure would have. Reiniger would manipulate each movement frame-by-frame as it was shot using the stop-motion animation technique.

Reiniger wrote various screenplays during her career and contributed to several live-action films in varying roles, such as assistant director for Tosca (1941) and The Lady of the West (1942). She would create silhouette sequences for several feature films, including The Lost Shadow (1920) and The Beautiful Princess of China (1917).

Lotte Reiniger is undoubtedly one of the most influential female animators of her time, with her work still being celebrated today. Many filmmakers debate that her film The Adventure of Prince Achmed (1926) actually claims the title of the first feature-length animation and is one of the first animated films ever to be created.

Some of Lotte Reiniger’s most influential work include

1926

The Adventure of Prince Achmed

1954

Thumbelina

1954

The Grasshopper and the Ant

1954

Snow-White and Rose-Red

Careers in

Animation and

Film

Contrary to popular belief, there are plenty of jobs to be found in art. The animation industry alone has countless roles and opportunities for budding creatives to make their mark. Many might feel intimidated by the thought of entering such a competitive field, but the main thing you need is confidence in your work, abilities, and creative vision!

Here are just a few of the jobs you can enter with a career in animation

Character

Animator

2D

Animator

3D

Animator

Background

Artist

Key frame

Animator

Modeler

Storyboard

Artist

Image

Editor

Art

Director

Layout

Artist

Lighting

Artist

Rigger

Editor

Rendering

Artist

Each role has its own unique responsibilities and requirements, so make sure you look into all areas of animation to find the position you feel suits you best. Your typical day-to-day as an animator will depend on your specific role.

For example, storyboard artists must illustrate the sequence of events before production begins, while editors will be responsible for various elements during post-production.

Some general responsibilities of an animator might include the following

Designing characters

Using various computer software

Working with clients and other animation teams

Creating frames

Drawing and following storyboards

If you are looking for a career in film or animation, there are plenty of options to choose from. Find out what is available to you and narrow down your list of potential roles to ones that you think you will be happiest in.

Education and Qualifications

To join a career as an animation or special effects artist, you will typically require a bachelor’s degree in a related field, such as animation, fine arts, or graphic design. Having a strong portfolio of work is also beneficial to show employers and help you stand out from the other candidates.

Your portfolio might include projects from college that you have completed and are proud of. It can also include sketchbook work, life drawings, concept art, and photography. Your portfolio should ideally include a range of both traditional and digital drawings and demonstrate your passion for the subject.

Prepare yourself to talk confidently about elements of your portfolio at length with the interviewer. Never badmouth or put your own work down. After all, if you don’t have confidence in your work, why should they?

There are various scholarships available to help you get your bachelor’s degree in animation and kickstart your career. If you already attend an art school, try exploring their scholarship options, as art school colleges usually sponsor scholarships. Talking with a careers advisor, professor, or art instructor might help you find out more information about the options available to you through your college.

Another way to find animation scholarships is by researching businesses in the industry that are interested in funding the next generation of young animators.

Top Recruiting Studios

If you are currently studying animation, you might already know where you’d like to work once you graduate. However, it is useful to understand your options and which studios are the best to work for.

Walt Disney Studio Animation

Many young animators dream of someday working at the legendary Disney Studios. Naturally, landing a job here is highly competitive and requires some prior experience working in similar roles. A big studio like Disney will not hire you as a recent graduate, so it is worth gaining some paid experience before setting your sights on this prestigious studio.

However, working for Disney is certainly not impossible, so don’t get your hopes down! If you want to work at one of the world’s largest animation studios, contribute to globally impactful projects, and become part of the Disney legacy, then you must work hard and prove that your skills are worthy of consideration.

You can also apply to Disney’s internship program to get a foot in the door. Having an internship under your belt will help you significantly when applying for permanent roles with the company in the future.

Remember to keep your mind open when applying to jobs, as there are plenty of valuable alternative career paths out there.

Sony Pictures Animation

Sony Pictures Animation is another big studio based in America. This studio is responsible for titles such as Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs, Open Season, and the critically acclaimed Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse.

Like with any top animation studio, getting a job here will be competitive. To find their available roles, you can check out their website on the “Careers” page. Here you can enter your location to see what roles are popping up in your area. When applying to these jobs, you must give yourself an edge to stand out from the other applicants.

Networking with former employees at the company or reaching out to recruiters directly can help you gain some tips for impressing the interviewers and what to include in your portfolio. Of course, you will also need proficient and relevant skills for the job. You might also need to provide examples of past paid work experience.

Nickelodeon Animation Studio

Nickelodeon is another fantastic animation studio to work for, with a fun workplace culture and good pay. One way to kickstart your career with Nickelodeon is through internships, helping you gain valuable experience and give you an edge over other applicants. Internships can also allow you to network with employees who already work for the company, helping you grow your contacts and potentially increasing your chances of getting interviews.

Small Global Animation Studios

It is worth mentioning that while working for top animation studios such as the ones above is an end goal for many people, most start at lesser-known companies to build their skills and experience before landing that dream job. A lot of the time, many animators find these roles to be the most fulfilling and that they open the door to far greater opportunities.

Be open to applying to all different kinds of studios worldwide- you never know what hidden gem you might find! Smaller studios also offer a better opportunity for one-to-one mentorship with animation veterans, helping to accelerate your skills vastly.

Top animators at smaller studios will have more time to help you learn and boost your development. There will also be more room to grow in a smaller team, allowing you to challenge yourself and work on more complex projects.

Top Animations

in Their

Category

There are countless animated productions that have made a tremendous impact on the industry and people’s lives! This section will briefly examine the top-ranking animations in the following categories: adults, children, and genre.

Adults

Animated feature-length films targeted specifically for an adult audience are considered relatively niche. Most animated films are appropriate for children, although some include the odd subtle reference or joke that only adult audiences would understand to keep parents engaged.

2006

Sausage Party

There are, of course, a few exceptions, such as Conrad Vernon and Greg Tiernan’s bizarre R-rated comedy Sausage Party (2016). Set in a world where food is sentient, this crude comedy is certainly not for youngsters! The film also stars well-known comedic talent, including Paul Rudd, Jonah Hill, and Danny McBride.

2018

The Isle of Dogs

Films like Wes Anderson’s The Isle of Dogs (2018) touch on hard-hitting topics and have a more profound underlying message that adults would no doubt appreciate more than younger audiences.

Children

There have been some notable releases in the children’s animation category throughout the last few decades, and these feats continue to get greater as developments in technology expand the abilities of what animators can do. While it can be challenging to beat the Disney classics, several outstanding children’s animation films have made a mark on pop culture or revolutionized the industry.

Tim Burton

Tim Burton’s stop-motion masterpiece, A Nightmare Before Christmas (1993), demonstrates the value of stop-motion animation despite its time-consuming nature. The darker, more symbolic nature of Burton’s visual aesthetic would go on to define his work and was something entirely new for audiences at the time.

Spider-Man

More recently, we have seen limitless bounds of creativity and artistry with Sony’s new addition to the Spider-Man franchise. Spider-Man: Across The Spiderverse (2018) has set the bar high for future animated feature films, blurring the line between 2D and 3D animation. This highly stylized film was a breath of fresh air for the industry, and one couldn’t help leaving the cinema with a sense of admiration for all the creatives who had a hand in making it.

Some of the industry’s highest-grossing animated

films for children include

2019

Frozen II

2023

The Super Mario Bros. Movie

2013

Frozen

2018

Incredibles 2

2015

Minions

2019

Toy Story 4

2010

Toy Story 3

2017

Despicable Me

2016

Finding Dory

Genre

Much like traditional film and television, animation has many different genres that cater to various audiences. Some of these genres include action, comedy, comic books, science fiction, fantasy, and romance.

Many noteworthy animations in the action genre range from Disney’s take on superhero society in The Incredibles (2004) to the action-packed adventures in Big Hero 6 (2014). Although we already discussed it in the list above, Sony’s Spider-Man: Across the Spiderverse (2018) deserves another mention as one of the decade’s most ambitious and influential animated superhero action films.

romance genre

There is no shortage of choices when it comes to impactful animation in the romance genre. One only needs to glance at Disney’s impressive lineup with classic titles like Cinderella (1950), Beauty and the Beast (1992), and The Little Mermaid (1990).

A handful of Japanese animated romance titles have also caught people’s attention and tugged at the heartstrings throughout the last few years, including Your Name (2016) and A Silent Voice (2016).

Comedy genre

Comedy is also popular for animators as it is easy to keep animations light-hearted. There have been plenty of animated films that became popular for their ability to give the whole family a laugh with subtle humor and a talented cast of voice actors. Shrek (2001) is one of those films, earning itself somewhat of a cult following in the years following its release. Both adults and children can find themselves revisiting the franchise, as it pokes fun at and parodies the classic fairytale narrative.

Notable

Cartoons

Cartoons have long been a staple in film and television, with many early cartoon series helping to shape the animation industry as we know it today. From Bugs Bunny (1940) to The Simpsons (1989), let’s look at the most notable cartoon series in animation history.

Adults

Many adult-oriented animation tends to be in the form of cartoon shows. Many of the adult jokes in shows like The Simpsons are almost ‘hidden’ so that only adult audiences would understand them, and younger audiences can enjoy the jokes, even if they don’t fully understand them.

The Simpsons

Adult cartoons are a fun way for all the family to enjoy spending time together, as there is something there for everyone. It is safe to say that Matt Groening’s The Simpsons certainly paved the way in this category, proving the potential for catering to an older audience and opening new avenues for more adult comedy-style TV shows.

Some animation shows aimed at adults are unsuitable for a younger audience, with Family Guy and South Park being a few examples. However, their popularity speaks for itself, with new episodes of South Park being written and produced a week before it is broadcast and Family Guy reaching over 400 episodes this year.

In the last decade, several new adult animations have hit our screens as Netflix jumps on the bandwagon with titles like BoJack Horseman and Big Mouth. Streaming services have certainly contributed to the popularity of adult animation, giving it a new home that isn’t bound by certain regulations regarding television programming.

1989

The Simpsons

Matt Groening

1990

Family Guy

Seth MacFarlane

2013

Rick and Morty

Justin Roiland

1997

South Park

Trey Parker and Matt Stone

2014

BoJack Horseman

Raphael Bob-Waksberg

2017

Big Mouth

ennifer Flackett and Mark Levin

2011

Bob’s Burgers

Loren Bouchard

1999

Futurama

Matt Groening

2005

American Dad

Seth MacFarlane

Children

There is an abundance of children’s cartoon series that have graced our television screens throughout the years. Many of these animated masterpieces have shaped our childhood in one way or another and were a constant presence in our lives. While there are simply far too many appropriate choices for this section, we will mention some of the most prominent.

1999

SpongeBob Squarepants

2007

Phineas and Ferb

2012

Gravity Falls

2001

Fairly Odd Parents

1995

Blue’s Clues

1996

Hey Arnold!

2005

Avatar: The Last Airbender

Conclusion

The world of animation is vast and expanding. It is an art practice that has been around for centuries and continues to bring endless pleasure and entertainment to people’s lives.

The art of animation takes real passion and dedication but also offers a fulfilling career path that helps you make your mark in the world. With technology developing at a fascinating speed, one can only wonder how creative, innovative minds can utilize such technology to bring more visual masterpieces to our screens.