BARCELONA, Spain -- The reunited German Olympic team Sunday won its first Summer Olympics gold medal in 28 years with the aid of a courageous performance from its men's 100-kilometer time trial team.

Bernd Dittert, Christian Meyer, Uwe Peschel and Michael Rich snatched the gold from 1991 world champion Italy by exactly one minute. The foursome clocked 2 hours, 1 minute and 39 seconds on the demanding course, 15 miles northeast of the Catalan capital.

It was Dittert's second Olympic medal. He also won a bronze at Seoul four years ago in the individual pursuit for former East Germany.

Flavio Anastasia, Luca Colombo, Gianfranco Contri and Andrea Peron were the Italian riders who had to settle for the silver, while the bronze went to France in 2:05:25.

The course -- actually measuring 102.8 km -- featured several climbs and dangerous chicanes and took its toll on several of the 30 teams.

Sweden was forced to pull out of the event after a fall, which involved Michael Andersson and Johan Flagrell. Both riders had to be taken to Barcelona's Hospital del Mar.

The Scandinavians were placed fourth when the incident occured a quarter of the way through the race.

The United States, which finished 16th overall, was handicapped by two flat tires and a bike change.

Germany snatched the victory in the third quarter of the race by turning around a 14-second deficit to Italy after 50 km into a 13-second advantage at the 75 km mark.

With no dangerous crosswinds occuring on a perfect summer day, the Italians decided to perform with two disk wheels.

The move seemed to pay off, when they jumped to a 13-second lead over Germany on the 25 km mark, with the Unified Team following in third place.

Italy extended its lead by one second by the halfway mark. France moved up two spots into third place, while the Unified team dropped to sixth.

But the Germans, who chose a front three-spoke and rear disk wheel, then made the crucial move.

They went on to increase the advantage in the last quarter of the race to avenge last year's world championship defeat on home ground in Stuttgart.