Shane Hurlbut, ASC is a world-renowned cinematographer who shoots multimillion dollar blockbuster films. Shane brings a level of unparalleled passion and excitement to everything he does. He is an innovative cinematic pioneer who deploys new techniques on every project to challenge him and enhance the quality of his work. He seamlessly blends different camera emulsions to enhance storytelling. Shane writes extensively on filmmaking techniques at shanesinnercircle.com, where he publishes weekly articles, instructional videos, and podcasts. Pulling from 25 years of experience working on Hollywood’s biggest productions, he reveals industry secrets, opens his cinematography playbook, and exponentially accelerates your craft and career. Shane is a member of the prestigious American Society of Cinematographers and The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. He is among a select group of cinematographers recognized by Canon as an "Explorer of Light" and by the Tiffen Company as an "ImageMaker." These companies are especially known for recognizing film making innovators in how they use equipment and the results they deliver. The American Society of Cinematographers recognized Shane after his first feature film "The Rat Pack," directed by Rob Cohen in 1998. Over the course of the next decade, he lensed seventeen additional features including "Terminator Salvation" and "We Are Marshall," directed by McG, "The Greatest Game Ever Played," directed by Bill Paxton, and "Drumline," directed by Charles Stone III. "Act of Valor" (2012) was shot primarily using the Canon 5D Mark II camera and is the first HDSLR full-length feature released by a major studio. Recent work includes "Need for Speed," a much anticipated action-packed film about a revenge seeking street racer released in March 2014, teaming up again with director Scott Waugh. The cast includes: Aaron Paul, Dominic Cooper, Imogen Poots, Kid Cudi, Rami Malek, Ramon Rodriguez, Harrison Gilbertson and Michael Keaton. Shane wrapped "Fathers and Daughters" (2015) directed by Gabriele Muccino. The cast includes: Aaron Paul, Amanda Seyfried, Russell Crowe, Diane Kruger and Jane Fonda.

Read full bio