Ben Fong-Torres: What’s your strongest memory of your time at SF State?

Ben Fong-Torres: There are many, but I don’t remember them all. But being on the staff of the campus paper, The Daily Gater, led to many adventures. I joined just in time for the explosion of the Sixties. I covered Vietnam and civil rights rallies, visitors to the Speakers Platform on the Quad (while Cal was fighting for free speech, we had it), including proponents of legalizing marijuana. A few yards away was an art gallery, where, one summer day, I ran into Big Brother & the Holding Company rehearsing with their new lead singer, a Texas blues shouter, Janis Joplin.

At one point, I had a beat consisting of one person, Jefferson Poland of the Sexual Freedom League. He adopted “F***” as his middle name and seemed to be leading a different protest every week. And we covered homecoming queen competitions, including the campaign for Jane Dornacker, a freshman drama student who called herself “Earth Mother” and was transported around campus in a bird cage. She didn’t win, but went on to perform as the lead singer of Leila & the Snakes, who played clubs and worked with the Tubes. And she was a comic traffic reporter on KFRC here and WNBC in New York, where she worked with Howard Stern until she died in a helicopter accident.

But those homecoming stories also led to my meeting my wife. Dianne Sweet, a Sociology major who’d been a queen candidate, was in charge of homecoming activities and would bring publicity materials to my office. After a year as a reporter, I had become city editor, meaning I assigned stories. I happily accepted her photos of lovely coeds, but we would not meet again until maybe six years later.

At the Gater, I wrote a weekly three-dot column in the style of the Chronicle’s legendary Herb Caen, so I scooted around campus eavesdropping on people and gathering items. There was never a shortage.

How did you get to Rolling Stone?

You can credit SF State, to a great extent. In spring of ’68, maybe four months after the then-newspaper started, I got a brief item into the “Flashes” column of news tidbits, then began freelancing. Less than a year later, I was recommended for a job there by John Burks, who’d become the managing editor. John was a Gater editor a few years before me and suggested to Jann Wenner, the founder and editor, that he talk with me. We met, and that was that.

I always felt a link between SF State and Rolling Stone. [Below: Fong-Torres works the phone in his Rolling Stone office.] On campus we had freedom to experiment with the paper, as we rolled with the times. We were on an oasis … and Rolling Stone was another one. We were the only ones doing what we were doing, chronicling music and the counterculture with professional journalism, some great writers and a sense of humor.

What were some highlights of your decade or so at Rolling Stone?

Oh, man, too many. In fact, I’ve published two anthologies worth of my adventures there. I’ll just say that I often had flashes when I visited musicians. There I was with Ray Charles, or Marvin Gaye, or Paul McCartney, or Bob Dylan, or Jackie DeShannon, or Darlene Love, and I’d think, “I listened to them on the radio at the Bamboo Hut, our restaurant, while I was peeling snow peas and prawns! Quite the jump!”

Yes, quite a jump. But can’t you give us at least a couple of stories?

(Slightly irritated) Oh, all right. Let’s see. Bob Dylan was on tour with The Band in 1974, on the road for the first time since his famous motorcycle accident. At the beginning of our interview in a hotel room in Toronto, he glared at my tape recorder and said: “No tape.” He was having trouble with bootleggers and with people sifting through his garbage. So I had to scribble furiously while he talked. He spoke about the unending need for protest songs. “There’s still a message,” he said. “The same electric spark that went off back then could still go off again. Our kids will probably protest, too. ... There’s always a need for protest songs. You just gotta tap it.”

I remember wanting to hug Linda Ronstadt [pictured with Fong-Torres below] on Valentine’s night in 1975. She was riding high on “Heart Like a Wheel.” She was on tour, in Honolulu, and her boyfriend was in Los Angeles. After her concert, I escorted her to her hotel. While waiting for the elevator, she saw a couple holding hands. “Oh, I don’t have anybody to kiss me,” she said with a pout. And it just didn't seem fair.

George Harrison, in 1974, was off to a poor start of a major tour, due to health issues and taxation of his vocal cords. And he had an attitude about not playing Beatles music. The critics — and some of his own people — were all over him. When I brought that up, backstage at The Forum, he responded with defiance — and a chorus from Monty Python’s “Lumberjack Song,” to show that he was just another working man. Only he wasn’t.

You were a real-life character as a Rolling Stone editor in Cameron Crowe’s “Almost Famous.” And now you’re the subject of a documentary. Which do you prefer?

They’re entirely different animals. Cameron did a great job capturing a teenager’s love of rock music and the people who make and support it. I was a plot device in a loud shirt, giving the kid his first assignment, then chasing after him by phone to get the story submitted. The documentary, a 10-year project by Suzanne Joe Kai, the director, is factual and so thorough that I was surprised by a lot of it — especially what fellow journalists and musicians said about me. I like what the novelist Herb Gold said after seeing a screening. He said, “It’s four different streams. It’s an evocation of the Sixties and protest; of rock ‘n’ roll, of journalism and of a Chinese immigrant family and one son who became an editor at Rolling Stone.”