Click HERE or on the image below to launch the AUDIO PLAYER (this will open in a new window).

Below you can find biographies of all the acts who have contributed to this soundtrack.

Roger O’Donnell: Roger O’Donnell is an English keyboardist best known for his work with The Cure. Also a hugely respected solo artist, his track ‘Evensong’ was commissioned as an accompaniment to the ‘Disintegratio’ story – inspired by The Cure’s magnum opus ‘Disintegration’.

KITTCHEN: The Czech musician Kittchen debuted in 2011 with the album MENU, based on a combination of industrial kitchen sounds and alternative folk. He has kept his identity hidden and performs exclusively in a kitchen mask. He completes his dark vision of a post-apocalyptic world with projections, video clips and comics. Even though his second album RADIO was made pretty much as a DIY effort, it received nominations for all three of the most important Czech music awards and won the prestigious award Anděl for the best alternative album. Find out more about KITTCHEN and his latest music here: https://www.facebook.com/kittchen33/

Lobsterdamus: Lobsterdamus is a musical project from American composer James Kernick. A professional musician whose music has appeared in some of the world’s most known television shows. James has close links with Prague and the Czech Republic, having spent large periods of time living in The Republic.

And Even After All This We Still Won’t Have Any More Hope: And Even After All This We Still Won’t Have Any More Hope is a collaborative musical project founded by James Stafford. Farewell, Farewell, You Daughters of Prague was written by James Stafford with his good friend and former bandmate Adam Howells. The track was recorded by Adam based on a demo created by James. The ambient Zizkov field recording was provided by Petr Onufer and the track was mixed by Al Hughes.

Pretend Thrills: Pretend Thrills are a Welsh music project formed by Adam Howells, Al Hughes and Lloyd Roderick. You can also hear Adam and Al’s current work as part of sixdaydisplay at http://sixdaydisplay.bandcamp.com/

God is Awake: A US based project named after a Victor Hugo quote, God is Awake were a project led by Ben Wilson with Grant Beachy. You can hear more at: https://voirdiremusic.bandcamp.com/releases

You can listen to Ben’s current work as part of Wilson’s Reservoir at https://www.facebook.com/wilsonsreservoir/