Biography

Tzang Merwyn Tong made his debut film [e'TZAINTES], a no-budget teenage black comedy, when he was 19 years old, with no prior knowledge in filmmaking. It tells the story of social misfits who band together to stand up against oppression. The film was made guerrilla style, under tight budget constraints, with no professional actors, but attracted international attention when it premiered at film festivals, making its European Premiere as the Opening Night Film of the Berlin Asia Pacific Film Festival.

Soon after [e'Tzaintes] was released, Tzang embarked on his second film, A Wicked Tale, a psycho-erotic thriller based on the Little Red Riding Hood fable. The 45-minute film was described to contain "an amalgam of moods—innocence, seductiveness, surrealism and terror... (that combines) silent-era revivalism of Guy Maddin with the sadistic horror of AUDITION-era Takashi Miike". The film made its World Premiere to critical acclaim at the 34th Rotterdam International Film Festival. Tickets for A Wicked Tale's World Premiere were sold out.

A Wicked Tale went on to festivals in Berlin, Munich, Frankfurt, Tel Aviv, Melbourne, Montreal, Lund, Leeds and Florida, receiving rave reviews as the sold-out Closing Night film of the Montreal FanTasia Festival. It was described by Montreal Mirror as a "hallicinatory atmospheric film drenched in lust and dread".

In 2005, Tzang became the youngest Singapore director to ever release a film commercially on DVD/VCD. The copies of A Wicked Tale were sold-out within a year. Bootleg copies are still circulated in underground markets, contributing to its growing cult status. Plans for a new feature film began, but it will take him 7 years before he can finally raise enough money to make that film. The film was code named The FRVL Project.

In 2010, Tzang collaborated with a local Institute of Technical Education on a short film, a SciFi/Fantasy titled V1K1 – A Techno Fairytale. The film sees him working with a student crew from the school of Digital Audio Video Production, featuring music by Amanda Ling (formerly of Electrico). V1K1 is a homage to 70s Sci Fi movies, that favour wildly imaginative storytelling over an emphasis of special effects. The film is described as a "Techno-Fairy Riff on Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream", telling a story of a human scientist dead set on proving the existence of fairies. The film premiered at the 2nd Singapore Short Film Awards and is the winner of the Gold Remi Award in the Fantasy/Sci Fi category at the 2011 WorldFest in Houston, USA.

News that Tzang was working on a feature film Faeryville surfaced in The Business Times of Singapore in August 2012. The film was previously code-named The FRVL Project. Faeryville is described as "Fight Club meets (Baz Luhrmann's) Romeo + Juliet, set in a fictitious college that mirrors our increasingly surreal world". Faeryville took him 8 years to complete, largely due to its controversial themes involving college shootings and youth bullying.

In 2015, Faeryville made its red carpet World Premiere to rousing reception at the Downtown Independent Theatre in Los Angeles, with the LA audiences applauding it as a 'zeitgeist film'. In April 2015, Faeryville was given a pass with an M18 rating by the Media Development Authority of Singapore to have a limited theatrical run in Singapore. Tickets to the Singapore Gala Premiere was sold out on the same day it went on sale. Mothership.SG describes Faeryville as "unorthodox and inventive…flying the flag of alternative cinema in Singapore."

With Faeryville as a cultural talking point, Tzang became an ambassador to raise awareness for Coalition Against Bullying for Children and Youth in Singapore.

Filmography

Faeryville aka The FRVL Project (2015) (director / writer / producer)

V1K1 – A Techno Fairytale (2011) (director / writer)

A Wicked Tale (2005) (director / writer / producer)

[e'Tzaintes] (2003) (director / writer / producer)

Education

Tzang graduated from Curtin University in Western Australia with a Degree in Mass Communications. He also graduated from Ngee Ann Polytechnic's School of Film and Media Studies in 1999 with a Diploma in Mass Communication.