*please note that the films in this double bill are in English but will not be accompanied with subtitles

A Wicked Tale (2005)

Director: Tzang Merwyn Tong

Runtime: 45 mins

Language: English

Country: Singapore

Rating: NC16

Full Synopsis

A man in a hospital narrates a psychosexual take on the classic fairy tale The Little Red Riding Hood.

A Wicked Tale made its world premiere at the 34th International Film Festival Rotterdam and was selected as the closing film of the 2005 Montreal Fantasia International Film Festival. It also won the Gold Remi Award at the 38th WorldFest-Houston International Film Festival.

—

V1K1: A Techno Fairytale (2010)

Director: Tzang Merwyn Tong

Runtime: 28 mins

Language: English

Country: Singapore

Rating: PG

Full Synopsis

Set in a modern-day alternate universe, V1K1 tells the story of Gabriel, a human scientist, and his obsession to prove the existence of fairies. He accidentally captures one of them in his laboratory and gets invited into a dimension beyond his dreams.

Produced with the assistance of the staff and students from the Institute of Technical Education (ITE) College West, V1K1 is Tzang Merwyn Tong’s third film that won the Gold Remi Award in the Fantasy/Sci Fi category at the 2011 WorldFest-Houston International Film Festival.

Oldham Theatre’s opening hours

Tickets are now on sale.

Friends of AFA members may select the “Friends of AFA” option and enter your membership number if you wish to redeem your remaining complimentary tickets.

For further assistance, please contact us at ticketing@asianfilmarchive.org

Important Notice:

Do note that Oldham Theatre operates on a free seating arrangement. Doors will open 20 minutes before showtime so arrive early to choose a seat and avoid disrupting the screenings as AFA does not play ads and screenings will start promptly.

All patrons are encouraged to purchase your tickets online. If you choose to purchase tickets or merchandise at Oldham Theatre’s box office, cashless payment is preferred.

Measures will be taken to ensure the health and safety of all patrons at Oldham Theatre. Mask-wearing is optional as of 29 August 2022.

—

T&Cs

Concession tickets apply to Students (Local & Overseas), Full-time National Servicemen (NSF), Senior Citizens (55 years and above) only.

Please check film ratings before purchase of tickets. Please note that you may be asked to present your ID at the door (this applies to concession tickets as well). Only physical photographic identification is allowed, digital copies of identification are not allowed. AFA reserves the right to turn away any members of the public without physical photographic identification.

Upon confirmation of your order for Tickets, no exchange of Tickets will be made under any circumstances and Tickets are not transferable. No refund on Tickets will be made under any circumstances except due to cancellation of the event. The resale of Tickets at any price is prohibited.