MORE than 50 personal belongings and artefacts of Malaysia’s first prime minister Tunku Abdul Rahman Putra Al-Haj are on display at Paradigm Mall in Petaling Jaya, Selangor.

Among the exhibits is Tunku Abdul Rahman’s 1951 Red Nash Rambler, the red vintage car used during the reception ceremony after the return of the Merdeka team from London, England.

Also on display are a pen that was used to sign the Federation of Malaya Agreement between Malay Rulers and the British High Commissioner to Malaya, and the table that was used during the Merdeka declaration ceremony at Stadium Merdeka.

There is also a collection of Tunku Abdul Rahman’s old coins and paper notes, clothes including the one that he wore during the National Day ceremony, manuscripts and souvenirs that were produced during the late 1950s as well as photos taken with his family, friends and government officials.

The mall’s management, WCT Malls Management Sdn Bhd, partnered with the National Archives to hold the two-month-long pop-up memoriam that started on Aug 19, in conjunction with National Day and upcoming Malaysia Day celebrations.

The memoriam was launched by Tunku Abdul Rahman’s grandson, Tunku Muinuddin Putra on Aug 23.

During his speech, Tunku Muinuddin said his late grandfather was a special statesman in the history of Malaysia.

He said Tunku Abdul Rahman’s honesty and openness earned the trust of people of all races to lead the country towards independence on Aug 31, 1957, without bloodshed.

“With his ability to unite the hearts and souls of the people, he was later able to combine the Federation of Malaya with Singapore, Sabah and Sarawak to form Malaysia on Sept 16, 1963.

“In the Islamic world, he spread the brotherhood spirit among people, both in and outside the country. He was respected by Muslim leaders for his commitment and sincerity in the struggles of the Islam religion.

“As a prime minister, he contributed many ideas and planned various developments to form a sovereign and progressive country,” he said, adding that the Federal Constitution was one of the many initiatives that was still used today.

National Archives department of statesman archives director Hanizah Jonoh, who was also present at the launch, said the exhibition was in appreciation of the struggles and sacrifices by Tunku Abdul Rahman in his efforts to gain independence.

“We also want people to appreciate his greatness in governing the country as the first prime minister of Malaysia,” she said.

WCT Malls chief executive officer Selena Chua said the event was organised to cultivate the spirit of patriotism and nation-building, as well as raise awareness of the country’s history, especially among the young.

She said it was imperative for the younger generation to remember their roots and culture so that it would be passed down to future generations.

“The idea of having a pop-up memoriam in malls is a fresh and creative way to support local tourism by showcasing Malaysia’s rich culture, heritage and history.

“Hence, the collaboration with the National Archives. They are the main custodian of all the artefacts and the story of these artefacts of our founding father Tunku Abdul Rahman,” she added.

Visitors at the memoriam can also watch black-and-white videos of the journey to independence, as well as Tunku Abdul Rahman’s speeches at events. The videos are screened via a projector.

The exhibition is located at Lot GF-33 and will run until Oct 10.