2022

The Parish of Our Lady of Light in Cainta stands as one of the oldest churches in the Province of Rizal. It is located along A. Bonifacio Avenue in the Town Proper of Cainta it is near the famed jeepney stop Parola, and is very accessible through the jeeps that come from Cubao, Pasig, Tanay, Taytay, Binangonan and Eastern Rizal.

History

In 1707, Padre Gaspar Marco, a Jesuit priest, first built the stone church of Cainta. It was then dedicated to Saint Andrew the Apostle. The construction of the stone church was finished under the administration of Padre Joaquin Sanchez, S.J. in 1716. In 1727, a painting of Our Lady of Light was brought from Sicily, Italy and was chosen as the new patroness of the church. The church of Cainta was officially erected as a parish in 1760. From the Jesuits, the administration of the church was turned over to the Augustinians, then back to the Jesuits and was later turned over to the Congregation of the Immaculate Heart of Mary, more known as the CICM Fathers in 1931.This was one of the big churches in Politico Distrito de Morong. Unfortunately, in 1899, during the Philippine-American War, the Parish Church was burned together with the original icon of Our Lady. It remained a ruin into the 1960’s.

Filipino Painter and National Artist Fernando Amorsolo was commissioned to write a replica of the icon of Our Lady. The church was rebuilt and the facade was restored with a coat of Portland cement in 1966. The restoration and reconstruction of the Church of Our Lady of Light was completed and was blessed by Rufino J. Cardinal Santos, then Archbishop of Manila on the 25th of February, 1968. Except for the outer walls, it is now greatly renovated, and hardly anything remains of the old church. In 1975, the administration of the parish was turned over to the Archdiocese of Manila, with Msgr. Alfredo Sta. Ana as its first Diocesan Parish Priest.

Currently, the church is under the Roman Catholic Diocese of Antipolo, which was created in 1983.

The New Altar of Our Lady & Cainta Church Historical Marker

On the 1st of December, 2007, the Solemn Feast of Our Lady of Light, the blessing of the new and renovated altar of Our Lady of Light and the Unveiling of the Cainta Catholic Church Historical Marker took place, officiated by the Most Reverend Gabriel V. Reyes, Bishop of Antipolo and the Most Reverend Francisco M. De Leon, Auxiliary Bishop of Antipolo.

source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Our_Lady_of_Light_Parish

Map: (beside Cainta Catholic College)