View waymark gallery

Birthplace of Bing Crosby - Tacoma, WA

in Childhood Homes

Posted by: Tubatad

N 47° 15.935 W 122° 27.935

10T E 540427 N 5234816

This house at 1112 N J St in Tacoma, WA is the birthplace and first home of Harry Lillis "Bing" Crosby.

Waymark Code: WM17RNR

Location: Washington, United States

Published By: pmaupin

Views: 0

Harry Lowe and Kate Crosby lived in this house which Harry built and their 4th child, Harry Lillis (the nickname Bing came later) was born on May 3, 1903. The nickname came from a neighbor when he was about 7 years old. He was nicknamed Bingo after a comic strip of the day. That got shortened to Bing and it stuck.

The interior of the house has no memorabilia inside and has no connections to the Crosby family and their habitation at this location over 100 years ago.

There is a plaque on the stairs in front of the house placed by the Sons of the American Revolution. It has the incorrect date of birth for Bing, May 2, 1904.

Name of Famous Person: Bing CrosbyPhysical Address: 1112 N J St, Tacoma, WAWhat is this person famous for?:

Bing Crosby was one of the top music and film stars of his era. He has an Academy Award, a Grammy Award, a Golden Globe Award, three stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, and two World Series Championships as co-owner of the Pittsburgh Pirates. Website verifying legitimacy of site: [Web Link]Personal Experience:

I stopped by here as part of an adventure lab while picking up lunch a couple of blocks away. I snapped a few pictures while there and then noticed it wasn't in Waymarking yet, so here we are. Additional Website verifying Site legitimacy: Not listedOther information about area: Not listed

Visit Instructions:

New logs must include information regarding the waymark. This can include photos, information about tours or even the confirmation that the waymark is still in existence.

Search for...

Geocaching.com Google Map

Google Maps

MapQuest

Bing Maps

Nearest Waymarks

Nearest Childhood Homes

Nearest Geocaches

Create a scavenger hunt using this waymark as the center point

Recent Visits/Logs:

There are no logs for this waymark yet.