Bing Crosby Birthday – Bing Crosby was born on May 3, 1903 in Tacoma, Washington, USA. His family was of Irish descent, and he grew up in Spokane, Washington.

He got his start in music as a member of a local singing group called the Musicaladers in the early 1920s. He soon began performing solo and signed a recording contract with Brunswick Records in 1926. Crosby’s smooth, relaxed singing style and easy charm made him one of the most popular and successful singers of the 20th century. He had numerous hit songs, including “White Christmas” and “Swinging on a Star,” and also had a successful career in film and radio. Crosby died on October 14, 1977 at the age of 74.

Confusion over Bing Crosby’s Birth Date

There are several theories as to why Bing Crosby’s family celebrated his birthday on May 2nd, despite his official birth date being listed as May 3rd. One theory is that Crosby’s mother, Catherine, may have been confused about the date of her son’s birth and simply chose May 2nd as the day to celebrate.

Another theory is that Crosby himself may have preferred to celebrate his birthday on May 2nd for personal reasons. Some have suggested that May 2nd held special significance for Crosby because it was the day on which he won his first singing contest as a young boy. Others believe that May 2nd may have been the date of a significant event in Crosby’s life, such as the day he met his future wife, Dixie Lee.

Regardless of the reason, it is clear that May 2nd held a special place in Crosby’s heart, and he continued to celebrate his birthday on that day throughout his life. In fact, many of Crosby’s friends and colleagues also came to know May 2nd as his birthday and would send him cards and gifts on that day each year.

Ultimately, the reason for the discrepancy between Crosby’s official birth date and his family’s chosen celebration date may never be known for certain. However, the fact that May 2nd held such personal significance for Crosby is a testament to the importance of personal traditions and the power of meaningful dates in our lives.

Bing Crosby shares a birthday with these jazz musicians:

Alexander Hawkins

Andrea Brachfeld

Aryan Behnam

Barry Elmes

Bob Mamet

Bruce Klauber

Bryan McAllister

Chris Jentsch

Daniel Soro

David J White

Dustin Hill

Eli Degibri

Ethan Sultry

Frank Collett

Guillermo E. Brown

Harry Mitchell

Hristo Vitchev

James Brown

Jerry Léonide

Jimmy Cleveland

John Lewis

Jymie Merritt

Ken Avis

Larry Ochs

Larry Tamanini

Lucas Apostoleris

Magnus Ostrom

Maria Farinha

Maria Sandra Lim Viray

Matt Bauder

Matteo Ravelli

Matthew Ball

Michelle J. Carr

Monika Heidemann

Noam Lemish

Ozgur Yazici

Pete Seeger

Peter Rubie

Rob Whitlock

Ruud Jacobs

Sean Nowell

Ted Sirota

Tom Duncan

Tom Tallitsch

Tom Walsh

Willem Von Hombracht