$ 29.95

In his 2016 best-seller, The Stranger in My Genes: A Memoir, Bill Griffeth told of learning that the father who raised him was not, in fact, his biological father. In this sequel, Bill continues his journey to learn about his newly discovered biological family and shares some of the dramatic stories strangers and friends told him about their own shocking DNA discoveries. In the process, Bill stumbles on some closely guarded family secrets. Warning: It's another page-turner that may keep you up all night!

By Bill Griffeth

Published by NEHGS in June 2022

6 x 9 hardcover, 183 pages, illustrated

Reviews

"In Strangers No More, Bill Griffeth offers a moving portrait of coming to terms with the past after the discovery of a profound family secret. The journalist and genealogist blends dogged research with empathy to unravel his family’s complexities, reconstruct his own origin story, and connect with newfound kin. With home DNA testing bringing revelations to so many Americans, Griffeth’s fascinating memoir offers a clear-sighted and compassionate roadmap for us all." - Libby Copeland, author of The Lost Family: How DNA Testing Is Upending Who We Are

"With sensitivity and grace, Bill Griffeth tells the story of the family—his own—he only recently discovered. Like untold numbers of Americans, he learned through a casual DNA test that his biological father was not the man who raised him. In this tender, witty, and deft volume, Griffeth explores his ‘biological’ and ‘biographical’ families and their histories. Strangers No More is a book not only for those who learn unanticipated facts from their DNA searches. It is a book for us all." - Gabrielle Glaser, author of American Baby: A Mother, a Child, and the Shadow History of Adoption

“This book offers hope to the millions of people who experience a Not Parent Expected discovery. Validating and healing, Bill’s insightful books are trailblazers teaching others how to embrace DNA surprises in their families with compassion and kindness.” - Catherine St Clair, Founder ofNPE Friends Fellowshipand the world’s largest NPE Facebook community,DNA NPE Friends.

About the Author

Bill Griffeth was one of the country’s most respected financial journalists on TV until his retirement in 2019. He began covering Wall Street in 1981 on the Financial News Network (FNN). Bill joined CNBC in 1991 and anchored several programs, including Power Lunch, Closing Bell, and The Nightly Business Report which CNBC produced for public television. Since 2003, Bill’s hobby has been genealogy and he has traveled tens of thousands of miles in the U.S. and Europe researching his and his wife’s family histories. He currently serves as a Trustee of New England Historic Genealogical Society in Boston. Bill and his wife, Cindy, have two grown children.