Yahoo Statistics: Yahoo! Inc. is one of the leading Internet media companies in the world. The company helps Internet users navigate the World Wide Web, and the Yahoo website can be accessed freely using connected devices such as desktops, mobile phones, tablet devices, and others. In addition, the company offers various services to Internet users such as online chat platforms (Yahoo! Chat), free e-mail accounts (Yahoo! Mail), and demographic or geographic news (Yahoo! News) updates.

Yahoo! Inc. focuses on enabling rapid access to digital information and content discovery, and on connecting, entertaining, and informing users of its communications platforms. These include Yahoo Messenger and Yahoo Mail, Yahoo Search. Its digital content products include Tumblr and Yahoo Four core verticals namely: Yahoo Sports, Yahoo Lifestyle, Yahoo News, and Yahoo Finance). In addition, Yahoo offers the facility to advertise on its website or other sites through advertiser products namely, BrightRoll and Gemini.

Verizon Communications Inc. Overall Revenue from 2016-2019

On July 25, 2016, Verizon Communications Inc. acquired Yahoo! Inc. Through Its subsidiary known as Verizon Media Verizon Communications Inc. operates Yahoo. The overall revenue of Verizon Communications Inc. in 2019 was 131,868 US$ Mn.

User Offerings:

Search:

Yahoo Search: Helps users to discover trending information and stories on the Internet. In 2016, the company invested in platform enhancements and acquired new users through the home page set and default search set using its network and partners. In addition, the company also plans to invest in desktop and mobile search experience and behavior apps and allocate extra resources for the development of new search advertising technology through the Yahoo Gemini platform. Gemini anticipates user requirements and was added to leverage the power of mobile and native advertising combined. Through this interface, Yahoo provides commercial and personalized results for its users. Furthermore, Microsoft and Yahoo entered into a 10-year search-and-advertising agreement, which provides Yahoo with additional flexibility to choose among suppliers of search results and ads.

Communications:

Yahoo Mail: This is a primary driver for the engagement of users across the globe. Yahoo mail helps users to connect to other users across the globe, and users can access their mail accounts through various devices including desktops, laptops, or mobile phones. The account supports external mail providers including Outlook, Gmail, and AOL. In addition, the Yahoo mail account is integrated with features such as messaging, calendar, and contacts and has one terabyte of storage capacity. Features of Yahoo mail mobile apps include composing assistant, smart contacts, account key, and document preview.

Yahoo Messenger: Yahoo’s instant messaging service offers a personalized and interactive way for users to communicate, share experiences, and connect in real-time. It is incorporated with various existing platforms such as Xobni and Tumblr and comprises features such as “hearting” messages, GIF search, and unsend. In addition, Yahoo messenger is available on the web, as a mobile app, and is integrated directly with Yahoo Mail to drive deeper engagement with users.

Digital Content:

Yahoo News: Yahoo news can be accessed through the Yahoo homepage (Yahoo.com) and Yahoo App. Users can access, consume, and discover video and media content. In addition, Yahoo News continuously streams trending and current information and news from Yahoo’s original editorial and partner content. Yahoo News is optimized to provide an easy-to-use, consistent content discovery experience on desktop and mobile. Users can stay updated about the local weather, share stories, watch breaking news, and enjoy personalized content streaming.

Yahoo Sports: Yahoo Sports serves sports enthusiasts across the globe, and delivers experiences every day. In addition, it provides users access to Fantasy Sports, which is an app that has been named ‘Best Fantasy Sports Mobile App’ by the Fantasy Sports Trade Association five years in a row.

Yahoo Finance: Yahoo Finance provides a comprehensive set of information, tools, and financial data that helps to remain informed about financial decisions. In addition, the robust content on Yahoo Finance is a combination of Yahoo syndicated and original editorial news, through relationships with various third-party partners.

Yahoo Lifestyle: Yahoo Lifestyle brings together community, commerce, and content to attract users who are passionate about fashion, entertainment, and style. Furthermore, Yahoo View, which is a service offered through the same platform, allows users access to episodes of their favorite TV shows across desktop and mobile devices. Users can access various recaps of TV show episodes, and clips from the Tumblr platform.

Tumblr: Tumblr offers mobile applications and web platforms on Android and iOS systems and allows users to curate, share, and create content. In addition, Tumblr messaging permits users to engage with other users that share the same interests.

Total Visits to yahoo.com from March 2020 to August 2020

The total visits to yahoo.com combining all the devices like mobile, desktop, laptop, etc. were 3,549 million in March 2020 which increased up to 3,646 million visits in August 2020.

Advertiser Offerings:

Advertiser Products:

Yahoo Gemini: Yahoo Gemini is the company’s proprietary marketplace for native search advertising across devices. Also, it helps marketers to achieve measurable results with intent-driven advertising. Yahoo Gemini’s portion of search ads helps advertisers reach their target audiences to narrow their searches by using the relevant query. In addition, Gemini native ads are highly focused on matching the content that a user is searching for and is highly focused on brand awareness and target audience engagement.

BrightRoll: BrightRoll is its unified brand for programmatic advertising that offers a suite of media-agnostic tools for helping publishers, partners, and advertisers to connect with users through various ad formats and devices. BrightRoll DSP (BrightRoll Demand Side Platform) allows brand and performance advertisers to measure, optimize, plan, and execute programmatic digital advertising campaigns. Advertisers can reach directly to a target audience with the help of custom audience definition and are able to manage frequency on various devices with independent campaign insights and measurement. Furthermore, BrightRoll Exchange – on the same platform – is a high-quality digital advertising marketplace for selling or buying videos, accessing native inventory, and displaying ads.

Advertising Formats:

Search Advertising: Yahoo Gemini helps to connect advertisers with the target audiences across the globe through the network, with the help of strategic account teams, analytics, reporting, and broad campaign controls. In addition, the company continuously focuses on the development of new search ad formats, features, user engagement, and improving performance through the various devices, including location extensions, site link extensions, product ads, and click-to-call functionality. Moreover, Yahoo serves search ads from partners such as Google and Microsoft in order to deliver a better user experience.

Display Advertising: Yahoo display ads leverage a complete set of proprietary data signals to engage and identify the target audience. Also, Yahoo supports various brands for making meaningful connections and raising brand awareness among the right users.

Native Advertising: Yahoo Native Advertising is an advertising platform that helps users to connect directly via third-party publisher sites. In addition, Yahoo native ads are offered through platforms such as BrightRoll DSP and Yahoo Gemini and are available in formats, including video, image, and text, which provide measurable sales and branding results.

Video Advertising: Yahoo video advertising enables brand video advertising to align with premium and contextually relevant interactive video ads across third-party publishing partners and Yahoo properties. Also, the company leverages its unique user data to connect with the target audience through desktops, mobile apps, and others.

Premium Advertising: Yahoo Premium Advertising offers an engaging and unique canvas for brand storytelling activities. Also, it provides high-impact advertising opportunities and major event sponsorship programs on Yahoo Mail and Yahoo.com.

Audience Advertising: Yahoo Audience Advertising delivers the right messages to the right users and engages the target audience on the Yahoo

Traffic on Yahoo by Country as of August 2020

Yahoo is mainly used in the United States. Up to August 2020, 53 % of traffic on yahoo was from the United States. Also, most traffic on yahoo comes from countries like Taiwan, the United Kingdom, Canada & France.

History:

1994: The company began as “Jerry and Dave’s Guide to the World Wide Web”, and was founded by two Stanford University students – David Filo and Jerry Yang

1995: Yahoo was incorporated

1998: The company established Internet guides in Spanish and Chinese languages

1997: Yahoo signed a joint venture agreement with Softbank Corporation, which resulted in the formation of Yahoo! Japan

1999: Yahoo Inc. acquired Broadcast.com on April 1, 1999, for US$ 5.7 billion, and GeoCities in a stock deal worth around US$ 3.56 billion and US$ 1 billion in options

2001: Yahoo Inc. acquired the online job search engine, HotJobs.com

2003: Yahoo Inc. bought Overture Services Inc. in a US$ 1.63 billion deal

2011: Yahoo rebranded its video site as Yahoo Screen, and added new original web shows

2014: Yahoo launched 11 digital magazines, including sports, food, lifestyle, and tech. In addition, Yahoo acquired mobile app analytics and advertising firm – Flurry – in the same year for between US$ 200 and US$ 300 million.

2015: Yahoo signed an agreement with Google to place ads and search results. In addition, Yahoo partnered with the NFL to deliver a first-ever live stream of a regular-season NFL game broadcasting between the Jacksonville Jaguars and Buffalo Bills at London’s Wembley Stadium.

2016: Tumblr launched various video apps in partnership with YouNow, Kanvas, and YouTube to power live streaming on the site. Unlike similar efforts from Google, Facebook, and Twitter, Tumblr plugs into the existing video apps.

2017: Yahoo! Inc. was acquired by Verizon Communications Inc.

Traffic Sources for yahoo.com, 2020

Yahoo’s marketing strategy is focused on Direct with 82% of traffic coming from this source, followed by Search with 11%

Facts:

The full form of Yahoo is “Yet Another Hierarchical Officious Oracle”

Yahoo has purchased over 60 companies through mergers and acquisitions

Around 700 million people visit Yahoo websites per month

Yahoo Mail has 225 million active users per month

Yahoo is America’s largest video ad network

Yahoo earns around US$ 200 million in 1 second

Yahoo Mail is the most popular mail program in America

Yahoo is available in 30 languages

Around 18% of the search on the internet is done using Yahoo

Yahoo attracts a younger audience across the globe through the online blogging platform Tumblr which bought for US$ 1 billion in 2013

According to ComScore, Yahoo gets 204 million regular visitors in the US and Yahoo remains the most popular online destination for messaging, email, video, and news

Verizon Communications Inc. acquired Yahoo for US$ 4.83 billion in cash

Yahoo domain websites are still among the most popular, ranking 10th in the world according to the Alexa rankings as of October 2019.

Fun Facts:

In 2006, 22-year-old Mark Zuckerberg turned down a US$ 1 billion deal with Yahoo

In 2013, Yahoo CEO, Marissa Mayer, built a nursery next to her office and banned employees from working remotely

In 2016, Yahoo refused to buy Google for US$ 1 million

Yahoo is most widely used in Japan than Google

Before starting Google, Larry Page and Sergey Brin tried to sell their algorithm to Excite and Yahoo but were turned down because it was too effective

Upcoming Launches:

In April 2019, Yahoo launched the Daily Fantasy Cricket Game in India, and a prize offered is around US$ 1,470 or INR 100,000

In March 2020, Yahoo Mobile was Launched on Verizon’s Network

Related Statistics:

Read More Health and Food Related Statistics @ https://media.market.us/

Read More Technology Related Statistics @ https://scoop.market.us/

Related Market Research Reports

Search Engine Optimization Services Market

Internet Browsers Market

Remote Browser Market

Browsers Market

Website Builders Market

Content Analytics Market

Video Content Analytics Software Market

Marketing Analytics Software Market

Share This Statistics