Everything to Everyone: Monetizing A Global Media Business with Yahoo

With properties in news, sports, finance, search, email, and e-commerce, Yahoo is one of the world's few true “everything to everyone” brands. In the concluding episode of PLAY Season 2, Brightcove CEO Marc DeBevoise talks with Matt Sanchez, President and GM, Home Ecosystem at Yahoo, on the media giant's recent response to a changing industry landscape and why an ad-based monetization strategy makes the most sense for them. What challenges does Yahoo face? Where are their opportunities for growth? And with viewers having an endless variety of content to choose from, how does Yahoo plan to keep them coming back? Find out in this wide-ranging and informative episode of PLAY Season 2.

Meet The Guests

Guest: Matt Sanchez, President & GM, Home Ecosystem, Yahoo

Matt oversees Yahoo's Home Ecosystem, including Yahoo.com, Search, Mail, News, and Commerce, where he brings deep knowledge and experience in digital publishing, advertising, technology, and operations. Prior to Yahoo, Matt served as President of Hearst Autos and of CDS Global, subsidiaries of Hearst Magazines. Matt also was Co-Founder and CEO at Say Media (formerly VideoEgg), pioneering the industry’s first ad-in-video model and developing a managed publishing platform for mid-market media companies.

Guest: Marc DeBevoise, CEO and Board Director, Brightcove

Marc DeBevoise joined as our CEO & Board Director in March 2022 and is an accomplished leader with wide-ranging experience in the direct-to-consumer, media, streaming, and technology industries. Most recently prior to Brightcove, Marc led the global streaming, digital, and technology businesses and operations of ViacomCBS (now Paramount Global) as its Chief Digital Officer and CEO & President of CBS Interactive. During Marc’s leadership tenure, the company became a major player in direct-to-consumer streaming and a leading global Internet company, primarily driven by the founding and evolution of its streaming services, including Paramount+. Earlier in his career, Marc held executive positions at Starz and NBCUniversal and started his career in the Technology, Media, & Telecommunications investment banking groups at JPMorgan and Hambrecht & Quist.

Marc currently serves on the Board of The Door, a non-profit organization supporting at-risk youth in NYC and the Advisory Board of Antenna Group, a privately-owned international media and entertainment company in Europe.

Marc received his M.B.A. with distinction in Entertainment, Media & Technology, and Finance from New York University’s Stern School of Business and his B.A. in Economics and Computer Science from Tufts University.