By Fergal Maddock

CONSTITUENCY colleagues have wished Deputy GV Wright all the best for the future, stating that he had worked hard on behalf of the people in the area.

Swords-based councillor Michael Kennedy expressed ‘shock’ on hearing of Wright’s decision not to contest the next General Election.

He said Wright had been a ‘valued and effective public representative’ in the area for the past 25 years, adding that it was hard to imagine politics in this part of the world without him.

‘Throughout his political career, GV has remained a friendly and amiable presence, warm and welcoming, and totally dedicated to serving the people of his community,’ remarked Cllr Kennedy.

‘The many and excellent sporting facilities throughout North County Dublin are testaments to GV’s service. His interest in providing resources to our young people has extended in recent years to campaigning to ensure that those just starting out can afford to live in the areas they hailed from.

‘For my own part, I have always valued the sound counsel and advice he has given me as a colleague in the Fianna Fáil organisation and look forward to much more in the years to come.’

Cllr Kennedy said Wright had put many interests on hold over the years in order to pursue the life of a public representative, adding that he had little doubt but that he is looking forward to re-engaging them as he remained a man with immense energy.

Fellow TD Jim Glennon thanked Wright for his support and friendship in the past and wished him and his family the very best in the future.

He said Wright had served the people of the North County for almost a quarter of a century in many different capacities, as a member of, Dublin County Council, Fingal County Council, Seanad Éireann and Dáil Éireann.

‘I believe that GV at all times displayed a passionate interest in all matters

affecting the North County and in particular his beloved Malahide.’

Malahide councillor, Cllr Darragh O’Brien (FF) said he greatly regretted GV Wright’s decison not to stand for Fianna Fail in Dublin North at the next election.

Cllr O’Brien said: ‘I respect his decision not to stand, and I wish him well in whatever career path he undertakes when his term ends in some 18 months time.’

He added: ‘I have worked with GV on the ground in the Dublin North constituency and the Malahide Ward since I was 16 and I have experienced at first hand the level of commitment and hard work he has contributed to our area.’