THE political landscape in Dublin North is changing faster than some of the towns and villages around the region at the moment.

News that Fianna Fáil TD GV Wright is to stand down, while hardly a surprise but coming just months Labour’s long-time TD Sean Ryan revealed his exist, has now opened up the door for other contenders to claim a prized Dáil seat.

With two of the most experienced TDs stepping down in this four seater at the one time, the race for seats in the next General Election, unlikely to before next May, is going to be one hell of an interesting race.

Never again will the chances for Socialist Party councillor Clare Daly be so good, while Fianna Fáil’s Michael Kennedy will also be looking to grab a seat.

Daly, the Swords-based public representative and airport worker, has been knocking on the door since the 1998 by-election when she greatly impressed.

She backed this up with a very strong showing in the 2002 General Election when she gained 5,501 first preference and ultimately lost out on transfers after the elimination of Fianna Fáil’s Michael Kennedy went in their thousands to his running mates, Glennon and Wright.

But with Labour’s Sean Ryan now gone, and now Wright, it could well be her time.

Fianna Fáil are expected to run a three-person ticket which worked so well in 2002. Glennon and Kennedy will again be on the ticket and will most likely be joined by Malahide councillor Darragh O’Brien.

It is a great opportunity for Kennedy who did well in the 2002 General Election and was unlucky to lose out to Wright when it could have gone either way such was the narrow margin between them after the first count. If O’Brien, co-opted to replace Wright on Fingal County Council, gets on the ticket it will be a good chance to cut his teeth at national level.

An outsider on the ticket could well be Royston Brady, but he is unlikely to get the support locally.

Green Party leader and Dublin North TD Trevor Sargent is now the most senior TD in the constituency and he should be a safe bet next time round.

Poll topper last time round with 7,294 first preferences, he is highly unlikely to have problems next time out despite being at the centre of a leadership whispering campaign in some sectors of the media at the moment.

Labour have chosen the outgoing Sean Ryan’s brother Brendan and he will be looking to hoover up the huge personal vote his sibling always managed. But after Ryan’s shock defeat in 1997, nothing is certain.

Ryan will have to fend off the threat of Daly if he is to return the seat for Labour. She is a huge rival to the left-leaning voters of the constituency but he is organised and is working hard at building his profile, both through the media and at the grassroots.

And while other parties are primed, the same can’t be said about Fine Gael which is still undecided on who to run in the next national poll.

Almost four years after the devastating result for Nora Owen, there is still no clear successor to the former Minister for Justice.

Malahide councillor Sean Dolphin really damaged his chances when he elected to run in the Swords ward in the 2004 local elections, where he suffered a humiliating defeat. Since then his profile has dropped considerably and would be unlikely at the moment to take the seat for his party.

It could have been so different for the young cub had he run in his own backyard in Malahide, where he would have been a shoo-in.

Speculation abounds that FG MEP Mairead McGuinness may stand but speaking to the Fingal Independent at Christmas she refused to be drawn on whether she’d throw her name into the hat or not.

‘I’m in Europe now, representing the East constituency and I have a job to do there and that is what I’m concentrating on,’ she remarked.

In the absence of a big hitter though and no date yet for the selection convention, Fine Gael still has a long way to go in making up the ground it has lost since 1997.

The PDs are standing Tom Morrissey, who has moved over from the Dublin West constituency in a bid to cash-in on the changing nature of the political representation.

As the party’s spokesperson on transport, he has an excellent platform for soundbytes due to the proposed Metro and all the changes at the airport but whether he can really connect with the voters, only time will tell. He recently opened up a constituency in Swords to add to his profile in the area and he dragged out Justice Minister Michael McDowell to do the honours.

And so with roughly 15 months to go to the next General Election, things are shaping up nicely. But at this stage the only real certainty is the Dublin North voters. They are ruthless. Reputations mean absolutely nothing. Just ask Ryan in 1997, and of course Owen in 2002. Big fish mean nothing in the ever-expanding Dublin North pond. The race begins here...