The average SAT score for the top 10% of the Westfield class of 2023 was 1306 (compared to the state of Georgia average of 1045 and national average of 1050). The middle 50% range of the Westfield class of 2023 scored 1070.

The composite ACT score for the Westfield class of 2022 was 23.3 (compared to a state of Georgia average of 21.4 and national average of 20.7). The top 10% average was 30. Scores for the class of 2023 will be released in October 2023.

Scores among our Lower and Middle School students on national standardized tests exceed the national benchmarks for each grade.

Westfield is committed to the belief that technology instruction is an enhancement of the educational process. We are committed to integrating technology, where appropriate, in each academic discipline, grade level, and course offering. In addition to offering a wireless campus, Westfield offers a 1:1 iPad program for students in grades 6 through 12 and two computer labs for students in grades Pre K through 12. Classrooms and science labs are equipped with interactive SMART boards and LCD projectors.

Our Veracross student information database gives our students an electronic identity campus wide along with student/parent global access to track academic progress and attendance. All of these services are secured using state-of-the-art firewalls and comprehensive internet security programs to keep student data private and confidential.

Interscholastic competition in the Georgia Indepent Athletic Association (GIAA) is available from grades 7–12, and more than 80 percent of the Middle and Upper School students at Westfield compete in one or more of the 39 teams competing in 13 sports. Westfield’s varsity teams have won 22 state championships and 101 region championships.

Athletics is an integral part of the overall educational experience at Westfield. Sportsmanship, leadership, camaraderie, hard work, time management, and self-discipline are just a few of valuable lessons taught within the athletic experience at Westfield. Westfield is committed to helping our student-athletes reach their full potential in the areas of competition, leadership, and sportsmanship. Westfield also aims to develop strong moral character and strengthen Christian values through the pursuit of athletic excellence.