Academic Results

Westfield offers a rigorous curriculum to prepare every student for college. Our students’ SAT/ACT scores and 100 percent acceptance for college admission each year reflect the quality of our college preparatory curriculum. In 2024, nineteen students earned recognition for their exceptional achievement on the College Board’s Advanced Placement (AP) Program, including four AP Scholars with Distinction and four AP Scholars with Honor. Westfield is an AP Honor Roll Gold Level School.

Since 2007, Westfield has had two National Merit Finalists, three National Merit Semi-Finalists, ten National Merit Commended Scholars, fourteen Georgia Scholars, and two UGA Ramsey Scholars. Ninety six percent of the Class of 2024 received the HOPE Scholarship with 57 percent of the class receiving the Zell Miller HOPE Scholarship. Scores among our Lower and Middle School students on standardized tests exceed the national benchmarks for each grade.

LEARN MORE

Fine Arts

The fine and performing arts, including drama, music, and visual arts, offer opportunities for individual expression and group interaction at all ages. Music education begins at Pre-Kindergarten and continues through Upper School. The visual arts program begins in first grade and culminates with a four-year elective program in the Upper School.

Westfield students compete in the GISA AAA region and state literary meets which include One Act Play, essay, extemporaneous speaking, debate, trio, quartet, solo, and piano.

LEARN MORE

100% College Acceptance

Westfield has a 100% acceptance rate to four-year colleges and universities. Many seniors receive early acceptances to schools such as the University of Georgia and Georgia Tech.

Over 80% of the seniors in Westfield’s Class of 2023 earned the HOPE Scholarship based on their SAT score and GPA. Forty-eight percent earned Zell Miller HOPE.

Athletics

Westfield competes in interscholastic competition at the Middle, JV, and Varsity level in the Georgia Independent Athletic Association (GIAA). More than 80 percent of the Middle and Upper School students at Westfield compete on one or more of the 39 teams competing in 13 sports. Westfield’s varsity teams have won over 20 state championships and over 100 region championships.

LEARN MORE