Collection Summary

Creator

Rowley, Hazel

Title

Papers of Hazel Rowley

Date Range

1923- 2021 (bulk 1940-2021)

Collection Number

MS 9244

Extent

4.23 metres (28 boxes + 1 folder + 5 digital carriers)

Language of Materials

English

Repository

Special Collections (Manuscripts)

Introduction

Scope and Contents

This collection comprises papers pertaining to Rowley's biographies: 'Christina Stead: A Biography (1994)', 'Richard Wright: The Life and Times (2001),' 'Tête-à-tête: The Lives and Loves of Simone de Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre' (2005), 'Franklin and Eleanor: An Extraordinary Marriage' (2010). They include Rowley's correspondence with her subjects and those who knew them. In the first consignment the major correspondents are Edith Anderson, Leda and Stanley Burnshaw, Gwen Walker-Smith, Florence James, Jessie and Ettore Rella, Ruth Hall, David Stead, Ron Geering, Clifton Fadiman, Kate Llwellyn, Mary Bransten, Nadine Mendelson, Elizabeth Harrower, Gai Steel, Michael Bott, Margaret Harris, Michael Gold, Edith Anderson, Anne and Harry Bloom, Gilbert Stead, Fred Warburg, Oliver Stallybrass, Leah and Philip Harvey, and Aida Kotlarsky.In the second consignment of note is an original letter from Simone de Beauvoir, and original letters of Christina Stead. Other correspondents include Clem Christesen, Harper Lee, Simone de Beauvoir, Sylvie Le Bon de Beauvoir, William Vanden Heuvel, Constance Webb, Richard Wright, Barbara Baer, Oliver Stallybrass and Toril Moi, There are photographs, research files, transcripts and notes of interviews, manuscripts and papers for other work on topics such as 'The Hollywood Ten' and a copy of Rowley's thesis 'The Female Experience in the Autobiographies of Simone de Beauvoir and Violette Leduc'. Journals, diaries, notes and log books provide further insight into Rowley's research work conducted in Australia and overseas.

Conditions Governing Access

Access conditions may apply to this collection, please refer to the collection's catalogue record for further information (http://nla.gov.au/nla.cat-vn2817405).

Conditions Governing Use

Conditions for copying and publishing of this collection may apply, please refer to the collection's catalogue record for further information (http://nla.gov.au/nla.cat-vn2817405).

Preferred Citation

Items from this collection should be cited as '[Title or description of manuscript item], Papers of Hazel Rowley, National Library of Australia, MS 9244, [class/series/file/item number(s)]'.

Provenance

The collection was purchased by the Library from Hazel Rowley in 1996.

Arrangement

Rowley kept the papers in good order and the Library has retained this arrangement.

Finding Aid Source

Please note: This finding aid contains descriptive information provided by donors, researchers and/or volunteers.