Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, who rose to power vowing to clean up Japanese politics, announced Friday he would resign over the very type of money scandal that plagued his predecessors.

Hosokawa's sudden resignation over questionable financial dealings deepened the country's political confusion. His 8-month-old coalition is the first government not led by the Liberal Democrats in nearly 40 years."I have told the leaders of my coalition government and an emergency meeting of the Cabinet of my intention to resign," Hosokawa said. "I have received their approval."

Hosokawa, mired in a scandal over his personal finances that has paralyzed initiatives in Parliament, would be the fourth of Japan's past five prime ministers to step down because of scandal.

He said that although the questions regarding his finances relate to transactions that occurred before he took office, they were "something for which I must take moral responsibility."

"I apologize, and ask for your understanding," Hosokawa said after the Cabinet meeting. He said he made the decision to step down Thursday night after talking with his wife.

It was unclear when Hosokawa would actually step down. The Japan Broadcasting Corp. said members of Hosokawa's Cabinet could offer their resignations as early as Saturday. They would then become lame ducks until Parliament approves a successor.

Though no clear successor had emerged, speculation centered on Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata. Coalition leaders met Friday evening to discuss the succession but made no decision. They are to meet again Saturday.

Hata, who is also deputy prime minister, refused to comment on his own ambitions.

"It's all happened so fast, I haven't had time to think about it," he said. "The most important thing now is to resume our tasks and maintain harmony."

Hosokawa's resignation is a major blow to the Clinton administration, which had closely allied itself with the 56-year-old populist politician. Washington had hoped that Hosokawa would bring about a major shift of power in Japanese society, one that would favor consumers over producers and elected political leaders over bureaucrats.

President Clinton said he was sorry to hear the news, a spokeswoman said. She said the president looked forward to working with the new government.

Japan's political world had been in a state of confusion since two politicians who dined with Hosokawa earlier this week told reporters the beleaguered prime minister said he felt like quitting. Hosokawa was forced to hold a news conference late the same night to say he didn't plan to step down.

News of Hosokawa's decision stunned Japanese financial markets, sending the Nikkei Stock Average down more than 400 points, or about 2 percent, in just five minutes. The stock prices recouped those losses, however, to close slightly higher.

The news renewed investors' fears that budget legislation for the fiscal year that began last week will be delayed even longer.

"We hope that the situation will return to normal as soon as possible," said Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii.

Hosokawa's offer to resign also apparently caught many of his own coalition leaders by surprise. Socialist Party leader Tomiichi Murayama described it as "sudden."

Yuichi Ichikawa, chairman of the coalition Komeito, or Clean Government Party, said Hosokawa told coalition leaders he was resigning because of a scandal involving questions over his personal finances.

The scandal centers on a $970,000 loan Hosokawa received in 1982 from a mob-linked trucking company executive. Opposition lawmakers had charged the loan, from the head of Sagawa Kyubin, was actually a political donation.

Hosokawa also had been grilled by the opposition over the purchase of stocks in the name of his father-in-law that were later resold for a profit of $485,000.

The prime minister also disclosed a new potential scandal over personal investments entrusted to a close friend. Hosokawa said laws may have been broken but refused to say who the friend was or give other details.

Hosokawa's popularity has slipped in recent months amid struggles over political reform, taxes and revamping his Cabinet. But although his approval rating has fallen by about 20 percentage points, public opinion polls put it at around 50 percent, much higher than that of previous governments.