The following Victory To The Rising Sun page is under construction.

Please do not edit or alter this article in any way while this template is active. All unauthorized edits may be reverted on the admin's discretion. Propose any changes to the talk page.

Morihiro Hosokawa (細川 護煕, Hosokawa Morihiro, born 14 January 1938) is a Japanese politician and noble who served as Prime Minister of Japan and final leader of the New Frontier Party from 1999 to 2000, He previously served as leader of short-lived Japan New Party from 1992 to 1994, He is the most recent and final NFP politician to hold the office of prime minister.

In 1999, Ozawa resigned as prime minister and NFP leader, and Hosokawa was elected to succeed him in the 1999 New Frontier Party leadership election. During his premiership, he oversaw the implementation of several economic and social reform measures, including the privatization of state-owned businesses and the deregulation of housing policies. On the domestic and social policies, Hosokawa is known for his reformist policies, including the devolution of autonomy to the Formosa Prefecture via constitutional reforms. One notable devolution was the creation of the Formosa parliament, which enabled the formation of the independent administrative regions within the Formosa Prefecture based upon a provincial system. He also successfully improved relations with Korea, the United States, which had also taken back control of Hawaii since the handover in 1975, the Republic of China, and other countries. His administration pursued a more pro-USA and more open policy, which brought the country closer to the western bloc.

After the party suffered a major defeat in the 2000 general election, Hosokawa and his faction decided to join the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ). [UNDER PROGRESS]. He later ran unsuccessfully as a candidate for Governor of Tokyo in the February 2014 gubernatorial election as an independent supported by the Democratic Party of Japan. He has been, since 2005, the head of the Kumamoto-Hosokawa clan, one of the noble families of Japan.

Early life[]

Morihiro Hosokawa was born in Tokyo as the eldest grandson of Moritatsu, 3rd Marquess Hosokawa, and head of the Hosokawa clan. His maternal grandfather is the pre-war prime minister Prince Fumimaro Konoe. As a great-great-grandson of Prince Kuni Asahiko, he is a third cousin of the present emperor, Naruhito. He is also a descendant of Christian heroine Gracia Hosokawa.

Hosokawa received his LL.B. degree from Sophia University in 1961. After working for the newspaper Asahi Shimbun as journalist for five years, he made an unsuccessful run in the 1969 general election. He was elected to the House of Councillors of Japan as an LDP representative of Kumamoto Prefecture in 1971, with his campaign funded by party boss and former Chosen governor Kakuei Tanaka.

After serving two terms in the National Diet, he left in 1983 to become the governor of Kumamoto, where he served until 1991 following the LDP's defeat in 1990 general elections to Japan Socialist Party (JSP). During his term as governor, he complained about the powerful bureaucracy of the central government. Hosokawa pursued an aggressive economic policy and strengthened environmental laws. In May 1992, an ongoing campaign contribution scandal inspired him to form the reformist Japan New Party (JNP), which won four seats (one of which Hosokawa assumed) in the 1992 House of Councillors election.

[UNDER PROGRESS]

Hosokawa joined the New Frontier Party in 1994, [UNDER PROGRESS]

Prime minister[]

[UNDER PROGRESS]

Personal life[]

Hosokawa lives in Yugawara, Kanagawa. His wife, Kayoko Hosokawa, to whom he has been married since 23 October 1971, served as honorary chair of the Special Olympics Nippon Foundation and headed NPOs devoted to providing vaccines to children in developing nations and helping the intellectually disabled. He and Kayoko have three children: Morimitsu, Satoko and Yūko.