A suspected right-wing militant fired a shot near former Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa on Monday night in apparent anger over Hosokawa's apologies for Japan's behavior in World War II.

Hosokawa, who resigned last month amid questions over his financial dealings, was unharmed. The bullet hit the ceiling of a Tokyo hotel lobby as the former prime minister was leaving a party there.

Police immediately overpowered the assailant, who was identified as Masakatsu Nozoe, 52. Police said Nozoe had told them he was angry at Hosokawa's comments about Japan's role in World War II and at his economic policies, according to the Kyodo News Service.

In his first news conference upon taking office last August, Hosokawa called World War II a "war of aggression."

Japan has hundreds of right-wing groups that embrace the idea that the nation did no wrong in World War II. These groups do not have a wide following.

Chileans bid Honecker farewell

SANTIAGO _ Hundreds of communists and leftists attended a funeral service Monday for Erich Honecker, the former East German leader and architect of the Berlin Wall who died Sunday in self-imposed exile in Chile.

The crowd applauded, sang leftist songs and threw red carnations at Honecker's coffin, which was draped in the flag of former East Germany and escorted by his widow, Margot, and daughter Sonja.

A cemetery official said Honecker's body was to be cremated today.

In Germany, Honecker's lawyer said his ashes would be returned to Berlin or his hometown.

Germany returns paintings to France

MULHOUSE, France _ German Chancellor Helmut Kohl handed back the first of 28 masterpieces taken from France by the Nazis during World War II and later kept by East Germany.

Most belonged to Jewish families, seven of whom have been identified by the French authorities, officials said.

After the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, the French government requested the return of the paintings, including works by Monet, Cezanne, Corot, Courbet, Delacroix, Gauguin and Pissaro, kept in an East Berlin museum.

Most of the works will go on display in French public museums.