In 1942 Acting Flight Lieutenant A K Gatward with Sergeant G F Fern flew a Bristol Beaufighter over the streets of Paris at the level of third floor windows. They floated a Tricolour down on to the Arc de Triomphe in an audacious morale boosting exercise.

Alfred Kitchener Gatward (known as Ken) was born in Hornsey in1914 and lived at 27 Meadway Southgate. He enlisted as air crew in 1937 and was commissioned in 1940.

During WW2 he was awarded the DSO, DFC and bar.

The citation for bar to the DFC in 1944 states he “has led the squadron with great skill and gallantry in many sorties. In July this year he participated in an operation which resulted in the destruction of an enemy convoy”

In August Wing Commander Gatward led the squadron in an attack in the Gironde area. During this operation his aircraft was repeatedly hit by anti-aircraft fire and sustained serious damage.

In the same edition of the Enfield Gazette that reports Acting Wing Commander Gatward’s Bar to the DFC there is another article about his brothers:

Lieutenant Douglas Gatward killed in Italy

Corporal Frederick Gatward, Royal Marines, missing presumed dead.

After the war a replica Tricolour was presented to Wing Commander Gatward. The ceremony took place in Broomfield Park. The Flag is now in Christ Church, Waterfall Road.

During the First World War local authorities were unprepared for air raids on civilian targets. Enfield Urban District Council did not provide air raid shelters instead advising people to stay in their homes. Southgate set aside parts of Bowes Road and Winchmore Hill schools as shelters. Edmonton allowed people to shelter in the Town Hall and later in the railway arches on Bridge Road. Some people constructed their own shelters in their back gardens.

With the advent of the Second World War local authorities were much more aware of the danger to the civilian population from air raids. Preparations began at the time of the Munich Crisis in 1938. Trenches were dug for people caught in the open to shelter in.

People used many existing structures as shelters: the Underground, caves, basements and railway arches. Companies were legally required to provide shelters for their staff. In January 1939 a programme of shelter building began. The open trenches dug at the time of the Munich Crisis were lined and covered over with concrete or steel. The standard varied greatly. Some were dirty, smelly and prone to flooding. One of the better ones was beneath the car park of the Regal cinema in Edmonton.

For private shelters there were two main types. The Anderson shelter was like a miniature Nissen hut made of corrugated steel and sunk three feet in to the ground in the back garden and covered in earth. Two and a quarter million Anderson shelters were provided by the government before the blitz. They were free to people earning less than £350 a year. They were prone to flooding and cramped but could withstand anything but a direct hit. By October 1939 Enfield had delivered 4719 Anderson Shelters to local residents.

For those who didn’t have a garden there was the Morrison shelter. This was a steel framed box which could be used as a table during the day. Although this provided protection from falling rubble and flying glass during the Blitz it was no use against the V1s and V2s later in the war.

At the outbreak of War it was assumed that a gas attack was almost inevitable. Local authorities had to make provision for dealing with mass casualties. The plan below was intended for a church in Southgate. The centre of the plan shows provision for 66 bodies and there is a designated bay for dealing with contaminated bodies. Fortunately the expected gas attack never happened and although there were deaths not in the numbers anticipated.

Clothes and food rationing had a big impact on weddings during the Second World War. Wedding dresses were passed round from bride to bride. Many brides made do with wearing their best outfits. If a bride were very lucky or had the right contacts she might be able to acquire some parachute silk to make her dress.

Food rationing meant that coupons had to be saved up for months to get enough fruit to make a cake and icing was almost unattainable. Cardboard covers made to look like icing would cover a single layer of fruit cake. Petrol rationing made it difficult for relatives to travel.

Enfield Museum is presenting a new exhibition to celebrate the myriad variety of weddings that have taken place in the Borough over the years (including war time ones). It opens on Thursday 2nd April at the Dugdale Centre:

Rationing was introduced in 1940 and continued until 1954 on some items. Petrol, food and clothing were all rationed. The aim was to try and make the UK more self-sufficient. People were urged to ‘Dig for Victory’ and ‘Make Do and Mend’ to reduce the dependence on imports.

Food rationing started in January 1940 for butter, bacon and sugar. From 1942 this was extended to tea, cooking fat, jam, honey, marmalade, cheese, ham, milk, meat sweets and chocolate. Many foods that weren’t rationed were very scarce. This led to long queues whenever a rumour went round that scarce items were in stock somewhere

Clothes went on ration in 1941 and became more stringent in 1942. The basic ration would have allowed a man to buy an overcoat every seven years, a pair of trousers and a jacket every two years. This became more of a problem as the war went on especially for families with growing children.

Petrol rationing was introduced three weeks after the declaration of war. Each car was allowed between 4 – 6 gallons of standard petrol a month depending on whether they needed their car for work. Motoring for pleasure was frowned upon. Petrol rationing didn’t end until 1950.

The start of the V1 bombing campaign was severe blow to morale. At first the government censored any reference to the ‘flying bombs’. On16th June Herbert Morrison announced that London was under attach by pilotless planes. The scale of the destruction was hushed up in order to maintain morale and prevent the Germans from knowing how effective the campaign was. There were strict rules about reporting bombing incidents. There was to be no mention of the name of the road until three months after the incident. Photos of bombed streets had to show an intact building. All identifying signs had to be removed.

Chesterfield Road School was hit by V2 in June 1944. Below is the ARP report:

Date: 27.6.44 Message Time: 12.25 Incident Time: 12.07

Particulars: Damage ‘Fly’ Ordnance Road/Chesterfield Road.

Date: 27.6.44 Message Time: 12.40 Incident Time: 12.07

Particulars: Damage to school/Chesterfield Road.

Date: 27.6.44 Message Time: 12.58 Incident Time: 12.07

Particulars: Further details: – Part of school collapsed (some trapped).

Remarks: Extensive damage at Bradley Road/Preston Road. Casualties: 3 serious.

One of the fatalities was a teacher from the school. The Log Book from the school was found in the rubble after the air raid.

Carpenter Gardens was another place to be hit by a V2. ARP report:

Date: 7.7.44 Message Time: 01.09,01.39,02.17Incident Time: 01.05, 01.09, Particulars: Report ‘Fly’ Highfield Road.

Big incident. Fire Highfield Road/Carpenter Gardens. 765131. Details to follow.

Many casualties-Some trapped. Mutual assistance in operation. School damaged and food shops. Rescue 50 reports. Gas main on fire. Rescue operations still proceeding. Homeless accommodated in rest centre.

Remarks: Killed: 8; Seriously Injured: 10; Slightly injured: 14; Missing: Unknown.

The report makes grim reading.

Between June 1944 and March 1945 a total of 35 flying bombs fell in the three districts of the present day London Borough of Enfield: seven in Edmonton, twenty two in Enfield and six in Southgate. The first V1 recorded for the area was on16th June 1944. It crashed near Ferney Hill farm in Hadley Road causing only slight damage to crops and farm buildings. The first V1 to cause serious damage fell in Baker Street. Twelve people were seriously injured and four others slightly hurt. About four hundred houses were affected by the blast. At first any mention of flying bombs was censored to avoid panic. The government also wanted to prevent the Germans knowing how much damage they were causing. September saw the appearance of Long Range Rockets (V2s) launched from sites in Europe.There was no warning of its approach. Nine fell in Edmonton, eight in Enfield and four in Southgate. The first V2 was a mystery. It is recorded in the ARP reports as ‘missile, type unknown’. Parts were found in Warwick Road and York Road, Southgate. The last V2 to fall in this area was on 27th March 1945. It fell on the sewage farm in Montague Road. It killed one person.

We are looking for people to share their wartime memories. if you have a story to tell please get in touch. Details are on the flyer right.

The existence of airships and planes brought the war to the civilian population in a way not experienced in previous conflicts. The number of street lights was restricted and others partly darkened. The first bombs dropped in the area fell on the night of 2/3rd September 1916. At about 1.30 am airship SL11 dropped bombs on the Stud Farm at Clay Hill killing three horses. Bombs were dropped at Worlds End Lane, Chase Road and other areas of Enfield and Ponders End. The airship was shot down by Lieutenant Leefe Robinson and crashed in Cuffley. From 1917 the Germans used the long range Gotha bombers for raids on the country.

We only have a couple of photos of bomb damage from the First World War. As well as the one above we have a photo of a nurse pointing to the crater made by a torpedo.

If anyone has any other photos showing the effects of bombing in the First World War we would love to see them.

The Enfield Town First World War Heritage Trail is now available from all Enfield libraries.

On the evening of 15th March 1941 a bomb exploded in Tottenhall Road and a second bomb fell on the Princes Dance Hall in Green Lanes. There were 127 people in the Hall. Casualties were laid out in rows on the pavement. There were several casualties but only two people were killed. Many more people (41) were killed when a passing bus was caught in the blast. The ARP report for the incident read as follows:

Date: 15.3.41 Message Time: 21.05 Incident Time: 20.45

Particulars: Damage by High Explosives South Side of junction Green Lanes and Princes Avenue. Shops demolished and extensive damage by blast.

Remarks: LPTB overhead cables damaged. Considerable casualties.

Date: 15.3.41 Message Time: 23.11,03.10 Incident Time: 20.50

Particulars: Damage. High Explosives. Tottenhall Road, one house demolished and several damaged.

Remarks: 3 Casualties, 1 trapped, 1 killed, 3 seriously wounded.

Date: 16.3.41 Message Time: 03.07 Incident Time: 20.50

Particulars: Re: 22.54, Bombs fell as follows: In Green Lanes between Tottenhall Road and Princes Avenue, Green Lanes, Junction Green Lanes/ Sidney Avenue and 62/68 Green Lanes. Several shops demolished and several destroyed.

Remarks: A motorbus was destroyed. Casualties: Killed 43; Seriously Wounded 40; Slightly Wounded 26. Final figures from situation report M40 20.3.41 (G.Eng).

Date: 16.3.41 Message Time: 17.28 SR Incident Time: –

Particulars: Re: Incident 15.3.41.

14 shops properties demolished.

14 shops properties to be demolished.

35 shops properties damaged.

150 shops properties affected by blast.

Gas main also damaged, repaired 17.07.

SR 1.4.41

Trolley Bus service Green Lane restored.

Green Lanes fully open to traffic.

Date: 16.3.41 Message Time: 17.35,17.47 Incident Time: –

Particulars: 60-68 Green Lanes. Small explosion has occurred causing a small fire. Due to box of fireworks in shop under Princes Dance Hall.

Remarks: Fire under control.

The photos below show some of the resulting devastation.