iPad Air 5

10.5-inch, Wi-Fi, 64GB, Space Gray

Keyboard

Use to type on your iPad Air just like a laptop. Acts as a cover and it's easy to attach.

Apple Pencil, Second Generation

For making selections on your iPad Air, creating hand-written notes, drawing, and more.

AppleCare+

All devices come with a one-year manufacturer warranty. AppleCare+ is also included, which provides access to 24/7 technical support, hardware coverage, and software support for 3 years.

How do I get my iPad Air?

Each incoming, degree-seeking first-time and transfer student will have the option to receive a new iPad Air and accessories. Confirmed students who complete their orientation modules will receive an email to their UK email address the first week of classes. That email will have detailed instructions about how to obtain your iPad.

Who owns this technology?

Distributed iPads are the property of the University of Kentucky until the student graduates. The device is being managed by UK, and jailbreaking or selling the device will result in the device being locked and the students' account charged.

We do recommend students utilize their own Apple IDs and cloud services for the iPads.

Will this impact tuition?

This initiative has no impact on tuition. Over the last several years, the University has undertaken an initiative to generate additional revenues and savings through efficiency programs. For example, UK has developed an energy program in buildings throughout campus to more efficiently heat and cool facilities, which is generating significant savings. Those kinds of initiatives are creating revenues that the institution can re-invest into student success programs such as the Smart Campus Strategy. As such, tuition will not be impacted.

Moreover, between this current year and next year, UK will have the lowest tuition rate increases in more than 30 years, while investing a record amount in scholarship and financial aid that doesn't have to be repaid by students.

UK raised the $1.5 million for the iPads through campus efficiency projects. What are they?

UK has generated millions in savings over the last several years through greater efficiency in business operations. For example, UK has undertaken a campus-wide project to ensure that buildings use energy more efficiently. That program is generating significant savings. UK is using those resources, generated through cost savings, to fund this program. As such, tuition will not be impacted.