Robert E. Moritz ’85, chairman of PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) International Limited, will address "Global Trends and Building Skills for the Future" during an on-campus presentation from 4:30 to 6 p.m. Thursday, Oct. 12, in the Marano Campus Center auditorium.

Moritz, a member of the Oswego College Foundation and a graduate of Oswego’s accounting program, has spent his entire career at PwC, joining the firm in 1985, becoming partner in 1995 and serving as U.S. chairman of the company from 2009 to 2016.

His background is in assurance, primarily serving financial services companies. During his career he spent three years with PwC Japan, where he provided audit and advisory services to numerous European and U.S.-based financial services organizations operating in Japan and across Asia.

Moritz has held a number of leadership roles within PwC, including leading the U.S. Assurance practice as well as serving as the managing partner for the New York region. He recently completed two terms as the chairman of the Governing Board for the Center for Audit Quality, a non-partisan and non-profit group dedicated to enhancing investor confidence and public trust in the global capital markets.

He is certified as a public accountant by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, the New York State Society of CPAs and the New Jersey State Society of CPAs. In addition to his work with the Oswego College Foundation, he is a trustee of The Conference Board and a member of the Committee Encouraging Corporate Philanthropy.

In September, he joined global leaders to celebrate the third anniversary of HeForShe, serving as an IMPACT 10x10x10 Champion, a role that he shared with 10 heads of state, nine other global business leaders and 10 university presidents committed to achieving global gender equality. PwC moved the needle on leadership diversity with a gender-balanced Global Leadership Team and will continue to strive for that same degree of gender diversity across all levels and business areas of the PwC network.

A long-time supporter of his alma mater, Moritz is a 2012 recipient of the Beta Gamma Sigma business honor society honorary member award and a lead benefactor of the college.

Video of Alumnus Bob Moritz, PwC global chairman, speaks at Oswego