Roc Nation is an American record label owned by executive Rihanna. Founded in Season 10 of #PopIndustry, Roc Nation is the newest recording label to appear in the music industry, and the first to open since 2017. With the shutdown of several recording labels in late 2021, Roc Nation opened its doors to be one of only four major labels in the music industry.

Roc Nation's artist roster so far includes Rihanna, Doja Cat, Björk, Gwen Stefani, Chloe x Halle, Christina Aguilera, Demi Lovato, Erika de Casier, Kacey Musgraves, Megan Thee Stallion, ROSALÍA, and The Weeknd, and Megan Thee Stallion.

History[]

Pop superstar and actress Rihanna founded Roc Nation in early 2022. Throughout her career, Rihanna had at one point or another been signed to every major recording label besides Universal Music Group, perhaps a reason for the labels short lifespan.

Signed with Republic Records until its close in 2021, Rihanna established Roc Nation as a place to call home and as a way to help up and coming artist in the industry. Shortly after its creation, Roc Nation would receive their first number-one single with "Cold Hearted" by Demi Lovato, and would also achieve their first number-one album with "Pure Glow" by Kacey Musgraves.

Management[]

Rihanna spent a year planning for the launch of Roc Nation. Rihanna would purchase Doja Cat's contract from Interscope Records to hire Doja as the main representative and her prodigy. Gwen Stefani was also given to Roc Nation from RCA Records, dealing with handlings with Kandi Corporation and unable to release music within her contract due to a series of controversies. For most of 2023, Stefani's contract as a label representative was not renewed. It was later renewed in October 2023, when new artists St. Vincent and KAI potentially receiving a representative contract from Rihanna. The revolving door of label representatives continued moving in early 2024 when both St. Vincent and KAI were let go after only a few months. Once again, Stefani also left the label, and was replaced by new additions Keke Palmer and Manu Rios.

Artist Roster[]

Current Artists[]

Rihanna (Executive)

Björk (Representative)

Doja Cat (Representative)

Keke Palmer (Representative)

Manu Rios (Representative)

Beyoncé

Erika de Casier

Machine Gun Kelly

Olivia Rodrigo

Sabrina Carpenter

Shakira

Suki Waterhouse

The Blessed Madonna

Former Artists[]