'Oppenheimer' scooped the coveted Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture accolade at the Screen Actors Guild (SAG) Awards on Saturday (24.02.24).

The atomic bomb drama won the night's biggest prize - which is widely viewed as a predictor for the Best Picture honour at the upcoming Academy Awards - and the cast were delighted to celebrate working on director Christopher Nolan's "masterpiece".

Speaking on behalf of the cast - including Cillian Murphy and Robert Downey Jr., who had won individual honours earlier in the evening - Sir Kenneth Branagh said: "It's my honour to say a few words briefly on behalf of this incredible cast on stage and the extended family of 'Oppenheimer' who can't be here.

"Thank you so much Chris Nolan and Emma Thomas, thank you for the opportunity, the respect, the invitation to play a genuine part in making this scarily important film.

"Thank you to Donna Langley and Universal Pictures for believing in us and the film..."

The ceremony is organised by acting union SAG-AFTRA and the 63-year-old actor-and-director went on to reflect on the "full circle" moment of the premiere of the movie taking place at the start of last year's strike before coming together again at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles for the awards show.

He continued:

"And of course thank you, thank you SAG-AFTRA for this, thank you for fighting for us, thank you to every member who's support and sacrifice allows us to be standing here better than we wee before.

"When we were last together, it was the premiere of this film in July when the strike was about to begin and led by our fearless leader, Cillian Murphy, we went from the red carpet and we didn't see the film that night.

"We happily went in the direction of solidarity with your good selves so this is a full circle moment for us and to receive this recognition in a year of spectacular achievement from all the people in this room, our acting friends, our acting heroes, it means the world to us.

"We know how lucky we are. and we are grateful and humbled and we are proud, not just to be in Mr Nolan's masterpiece but proud to be in your company. Thank you so much."

The movie was shortlisted alongside 'American Fiction', 'Barbie', 'The Color Purple', 'and Killers of the Flower Moon'.