Rowan Robertson - Lead Guitar [DIO]

Raised in Cambridge, England, Rowan Robertson joined DIO in 1989 at age seventeen, recording and touring the album Lock Up The Wolves. Since then he has played on numerous albums and tours including VAST, AM Radio, Billy Ray Cyrus, and is a currently a member of Bang Tango.

Z Maddox - Lead Guitar [Rock of Ages Las Vegas]

Z Maddox grew up in war torn Yugoslavia and was inspired to play guitar by his father’s playing. A professional player by age 13, he made the rounds with top Yugoslavia acts like Griva and Laboratoija Zvuka. In time he made the move to the United States and in the last five years has performed with the likes of Sammy Hagar, Dee Snider, Lita Ford as well as the Las Vegas production of Rock of Ages.

Phil Soussan - Bass [Ozzy Osbourne, Last in Line]

British bassist and songwriter Phil Soussan is best known for his work with Ozzy Osbourne and for writing Ozzy’s mega hit, “Shot in the dark”. Phil has worked and written with many artists including Jimmy Page, Billy Idol, Vince Neil, JohnWaite, Edgar Winter, Peter Frampton, Steve Lukather, French legend Johnny Hallyday, Jani Lane and Richie Kotzen. Phil has been a Board member and Vice President of the Los Angeles Grammys.

Currently Phil is a member of “Last in Line”, the original band formed around the original DIO

lineup.

Blas Elias - Drums [Slaughter, Trans-Siberian Orchestra]

Blas Elias was a founding member of the multiplatinum rock group Slaughter. The band had several hit songs including “Up All Night” and “Fly to the Angels.” Slaughter won an American Music award and toured with many legendary acts including Kiss, Ozzy Osborne and Alice Cooper. Blas was also featured in the movie “Rock Star” with Mark Walberg and Jennifer Aniston. In addition to Slaughter, Blas has been a long time member of Blue Man Group and also tours with the Trans-Siberian Orchestra (TSO).

Michael T. Ross - Keyboards [Lita Ford, Missing Persons]

Born in Biloxi, Mississippi and raised in Southern California, Michael T. Ross has played keyboards for Lita Ford, Angel, Hardline & Missing Persons. Originally starting out on classical piano, Michael switched to rock keyboards at age 18 and has been performing throughout the U.S. and abroad since. In 2012, he joined Raiding The Rock Vault and has performed over 1300 shows in Las Vegas. In December of 2014, Michael performed in Singapore and in the summer of 2015, he did solo shows in Austria and Croatia. Although a diabetic for years, he has managed his condition and refused to let it slow him down.

Follow Raiding the Rock Vault Social Media

Todd Kerns - Lead Vocals [Slash]

Todd Kerns is a Canadian born multi-instrumentalist/ songwriter best known as the bassist/vocalist for Guns N Roses legend Slash’s solo band ‘Slash Featuring Myles Kennedy and The Conspirators’ as well as being the frontman of legendary Canadian group ‘The Age Of Electric’. Todd also has a successful solo career as a singer/songwriter/producer continually recording, touring and releasing new music.

Todd is a member of Canada’s BC Entertainment Hall Of Fame and has a star on Granville Street’s Star Walk in Vancouver alongside such luminaries as Bryan Adams, Michael Buble and Sarah McLachlan.

John Bisaha - Lead Vocals [The Baby's]

John Bisaha is the current lead vocalist and bassist for The Babys and sang the 2014 top 40 hit "I See You There".

Born in New York, John Bisaha is a pure vocalist who has worked within various forms of the industry for years. John has been honing his chops from a very early age, from fronting bands to television sitcoms, from character voice overs to equity-staged rock operas (Jesus Christ Superstar, Godspeed and Destiny Faire).

John Bisaha has performed around the world with artists including Roger Hodgson (Supertramp), Ricky Phillips (The Babys, Bad English, Styx), Dave Amato (REO Speedwagon), Simon Kirke (Bad Company), and Gregg Rolie (Journey, Santana).

Johnny Solinger - Lead Vocals [Skid Row]

From 2000-2015, Johnny Solinger was lead singer of multi-million album selling rock band SKID ROW, played to millions of rock fans, and toured the world many times over, sharing the stage with some of the biggest names in music including KISS, Aerosmith, Bon Jovi, Def Leppard, and Kid Rock.

He recorded four records with Skid Row: the albums “Thickskin”, “Revolutions Per Minute”, and 2 EPs "United World Rebellion: Chapter One" and "Rise of the Damnation Army: United World Rebellion Chapter 2".

Ever versatile, Johnny has added “Country Recording Artist” to his Rock and Roll resume. Growing up in the Dallas/Ft Worth metroplex, Johnny was exposed equally to Hard Rock and Country music - fell in love with both, and has been two timin’ them ever since.

Megan Rüger - Lead Vocals [NBC's The Voice]

Megan began her musical journey at the age of seven performing locally in her small hometown of Twin Lakes, WI. It wasn’t long until she found her way to the big stage opening for the likes of ZZ Top, Lynyrd Skynyrd and Rascal Flatts. As her desire to chase a dream deepened, she found herself with a one-way ticket to Nashville with no intention on returning - she’s never looked back.

In 2014, Season six of The Voice on NBC came calling and Megan accepted. Since then she has rocketed to success. Her days are filled with everything from national anthems at NASCAR events to sharing the stage with her idol, Joan Jett. Her most recent success is her new studio album, ‘Rockstar’.