Kim Newman

Novelist, critic and broadcaster Kim Newman has worked extensively in the theatre, radio and television. His novels include The Night Mayor, Bad Dreams, Jago, Anno Dracula, The Quorum, The Bloody Red Baron, Back in the USSA (with Eugene Byrne) and Life's Lottery. Under the name Jack Yeovil, he has written Drachenfels, Demon Download, Krokodil Tears, Comeback Tour, Beasts in Velvet, Genevieve Undead, Route 666 and Orgy of the Blood Parasites. His short stories are collected in The Original Dr Shade, and Other Stories and Famous Monsters. His fiction has been translated into German, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese and Japanese.

His non­fiction books are Ghastly Beyond Belief: The Science Fiction and Fantasy Book of Quotations (with Neil Gaiman), Horror: 100 Best Books (with Stephen Jones), Nightmare Movies: A Critical History of the Horror Film Since 1968, Wild West Movies and The BFI Companion to Horror. He edited (with Paul J. McAuley) an anthology, In Dreams. He has worked as a film and book critic for Beyond, Cinema 2, City Limits, Empire (contributing editor), Eyeball, The Guardian, The Independent, Interzone, Kaleidoscope, Knave, The Late Show, The Mark Radcliff Show, The Media Show, Million (Associate Editor), Monthly Film Bulletin, NME, The New Statesman, The Observer, Premiere, Q, Sheep Worrying, Shock Xpress, Sight and Sound, Smash Hits and many other publications.

He was the regular film critic of the Channel 4 Daily for three years, and appears frequently on radio and television. He has scripted the TV documentaries 'The Hero Strikes Back' (for Channel 4's Signals) and The Vault of Horror (BBC2), three seasons of BBC1's Dr Terror's Vault of Horror series, Radio 3's Film in the Forties: Out of the Dark - Val Lewton and Radio 2's The Rise and Fall of the House of Hammer. He has presented films for BBC2's 'The Film Club' and Sky Movies Gold's 'Branded X' season, appeared as a panelist on Space Cadets (Channel 4) and appeared in the film Headcase. His plays include Another England, My One Little Murder Can't Do Any Harm, The Gold Diggers of 1981, Deep South, The Roaring Eighties and "Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock, Rock" (with Brian Smedley, Eugene Byrne & Neil Gaiman). He has scripted in-development films of Anno Dracula, The Quorum and The Original Dr Shade.

He has won the Bram Stoker Award (presented by the Horror Writers of America) for Best Non Fiction (Horror: 100 Best Books), the British Science Fiction Award for Best Short Fiction ('The Original Dr Shade'), the Children of the Night Award (presented by the Dracula Society) for Best Novel (Anno Dracula), the Fiction Award of the Lord Ruthven Assembly (Anno Dracula) and the International Horror Critics' Guild Award for Best Novel (Anno Dracula).