This article examines Sasanian military architecture with respect to its integration with the four-region Spāhbed system (Ādurbādagān-Spāhbed, Xwarāsān-Spāhbed, Xwarbārān-Spāhbed and Nēmrōz-Spāhbed) for defending the empire. Following an overview of Sasanian military architecture within Iran, the article examines the Darband wall of the Caucasus in the context of the office of the Ādurbādagān-Spāhbed facing the empire's north and northwest (Ādurbādagān, Media Atropatene corresponding with the historical Azerbaijan in Iran's northwest), the Tammisha and Gorgan wall systems of the Xwarāsān-Spāhbed facing the nomadic warrior peoples of the Central Asia, the military architecture of the Xwarbārān-Spāhbed facing the western (Romano-Byzantine) frontiers, and the Khandaq-e Shapur of the Nēmrōz-Spāhbed facing the southwest, notably raiders from the Arabian Peninsula threatening the empire's southwest marches.

Which ancient army boasted the largest fortifi cations, and how did the competitive build-up of military capabilities shape world history? Few realise that imperial Rome had a serious competitor in Late Antiquity. Late Roman legionary bases, normally no larger than 5 ha, were dwarfed by Sasanian fortresses, often covering 40 ha, sometimes even 125-210 ha. The latter did not necessarily house permanent garrisons but sheltered large armies temporarily-perhaps numbering 10,000-50,000 men each. Even Roman camps and fortresses of the early and high empire did not reach the dimensions of their later Persian counterparts. The longest fort-lined wall of the late antique world was also Persian. Persia built up, between the fourth and sixth centuries AD, the most massive military infrastructure of any ancient or medieval Near Eastern empire-if not the ancient and medieval world. Much of the known defensive network was directed against Persia's powerful neighbours in the north-rather than the west. This may refl ect diff erences in archaeological visibility more than troop numbers. Urban garrisons in the Romano-Persian frontier zone are much harder to identify than vast geometric compounds in marginal northern lands. Recent excavations in Iran have enabled us to precision-date two of the largest fortresses of Southwest Asia, both larger than any in the Roman world. Excavations in a Gorgan Wall fort have shed much new light on frontier life, and we have unearthed a massive bridge nearby. A sonar survey has traced the probable terminal of the Tammisheh Wall, now submerged under the waters of the Caspian Sea. Further work has focused on a vast city and settlements in the hinterland. Persia's Imperial Power, our previous project, had already shed much light on the Great Wall of Gorgan, but it was our recent fi eldwork that has thrown the sheer magnitude of Sasanian military infrastructure into sharp relief.

Defensive structures have been applied as the permanent elements of the Iranian urbanism, from the first phases of sedentism in the Neolithic period onwards. Following the Iranian tradition in architecture, Sasanian fortifications having local features were constructed in adaptation with the regional circumstances. Nevertheless, we can find some similarities in the components of the defensive installations. The defensive structures located within the Sasanian territory turned Iran into the unconquerable fortress providing Sasanians with military, political, cultural, and economic dominance over a vast area of the ancient world for more than four centuries.

Our knowledge of Sasanian imperial strategy continues to grow as a result of a range of projects investigating the frontiers of the Sasanian Empire. Understanding of the north-western fringe of the Empire in particular is being increased by the Mughan Steppe Archaeological Project. Surveys have shown that the fortified settlement of Ultan Qalasi is the largest of a series of fortified sites that lie adjacent to irrigation canals that stretch across the steppe, and excavations have provided relative and absolute dating evidence for the establishment of the settlement during the Sasanian period. This paper introduces the Mughan Steppe Archaeological Project and presents the stratigraphy of Ultan Qalasi, It also situates this site within the broader socio-political context of the southern Caucasus in the first millennium AD, and the wider world of the Sasanian Empire. https://doi.org/10.1080/05786967.2011.11834429