Dear Santa Claus,

“Make a great gift to us sisters, that Sardinia will smile again, as always.”

**This photo was circulating Facebook early this morning, and it hit the soft spot we all carry in our hearts. I emailed Debora to get her permission for this photo and she happily obliged.

On November 18th, 2013 Sardinia was hit by a deadly cyclone, killing 17 people and leaving thousands homeless. Islanders have come out in full force in offering beds, clothing and a shoulder to cry on. The solidarity seen between the communities of Sardinia in the aftermath of cyclone Cleopatra just proves how strong, united and committed the islanders are in the wake of disaster.

The following map shows areas which were affected by Cyclone Cleopatra, people offering help, evacuations, emergency services, news, flooding, volunteer help, and stories.

60 communities were crushed by Cyclone Cleopatra:

11 communites in the Gallura: Arzachena, Berchidda, Budduso’, Golfo Aranci, Loiri Porto San Paolo, Monti, Olbia, Oschiri, Padru, Sant’Antonio di Gallura, Telti.

16 communites in Nuoro: Bitti, Dorgali, Galtelli’, Irgoli, Loculi, Lode’; Lula, Nuoro, Oliena, Onani’, Onifai, Orgosolo, Orosei, Posada, Siniscola, Torpe.

8 communities in Cagliari: Armungia, Ballao, Decimoputzu, Escalaplano, Siliqua, Vallermosa, Villaputzu, Villaspeciosa.

8 communities in Medio Campidano: Gonnosfanadiga, Guspini, Pabillonis, San Gavino Monreale, Sanluri, Sardara, Villacidro, Villanovafranca.

7 communities in Ogliastra: Arzana, Lanusei, Seui, Talana, Tortoli’, Ussassai, Villagrande Strisaili.

Here’s how you can help Sardinia pick up the pieces:

To make a monetary donation to the comune of Olbia please follow the banking details:

Account: n. 0540 – 070361388

IBAN: IT72U 01015 84980 000070361388

BIC/Swift Code: BPMOIT22XXX

Reference: Comune di Olbia Emergenza Alluvione

Alluvione = Flood

Related articles

‘Apocalyptic’ storm devastates holiday island of Sardinia (the-tap.blogspot.com)

Forza Sardegna. Forza.

Santa is listening.

Sardinia is still in shock from the deadly storm Cyclone Cleopatra which devastated the island on November 18th, 2013. Entire communities are gone, livelihoods which took decades to build are destroyed, entire road systems and bridges washed away in the raging tide.

Six months of rain slashed Sardinia in less than twenty-four hours, 400 millimeters of rain washed away lives, hopes and dreams.

A national day of mourning as been declared in Italy as residents come to grips in what has become one of the largest natural disasters to ever hit the Mediterranean island of Sardinia.

Islanders from all over Sardinia have come together to help those in need. Drop off centers for donating goods have sprouted up in every town across the island.

Here’s how you can help rebuild the lives for the people of Sardinia. The following links are in Italian – if you need help translating or have any questions then please leave your comment below.

Helpful links:

Comune = Town Hall or City Hall

Comune di Olbia

Comune di Nuoro

Comune di Torpe

SardSOS: Emergenza Meteo Sardegna (an interactive map of drop-off centers, where to volonteer and areas affected.)

To make a monetary donation please follow the banking details from the Comune di Olbia:

Account: n. 0540 – 070361388

IBAN: IT72U 01015 84980 000070361388

BIC/Swift Code: BPMOIT22XXX

Reference: Comune di Olbia Emergenza Alluvione

Alluvione = Flood

Sardinia needs your help.

The city council of Olbia have set up an emergency relief fund after the devastating floods on November 18th, 2013. Sardinia is still in a state of shock and 17 people have lost their lives in one of the largest natural disasters to ever hit the Mediterranean island of Sardinia.

If you would like to donate please follow the banking details below:

Bank details:

Account: n. 0540 – 070361388

IBAN: IT72U 01015 84980 000070361388

BIC/Swift Code: BPMOIT22XXX

Reference: Comune di Olbia Emergenza Alluvione

Residents in effected areas are in dire need of clothing, shoes, towels, blankets and toiletries. If you can donate please send a package to the following address:

Edoardo Padre

c/o Bar Baraonda

Via Mameli n.11

07026 Olbia (OT)

Sardegna, Italy

If you have any questions on how to help in the relief efforts please leave a comment below.

Sardinia and her residents thank you.

The death toll of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda in the Philippines) that ripped through parts of the Philippines is nearing 10,000. Thousands of houses have been destroyed and many areas are still cut off from transport, communication and power.

Hundreds of thousands of people are still coming to terms with this devastating storm and are trying to cope with the lack of clean water, shelter, food and medicine.

A good friend of mine recently married a beautiful woman from the Philippines. They now have nothing. There are young children without a roof, water and food. There are entire families and communities that are suffering from this natural disaster and they need your help.

Words from my friend Chris:

“Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda in the Philippines) is the most powerful Typhoon/Hurricane in recorded history. My wife’s family is from a rural fishing and farming village. The family home was destroyed by the winds and they, like many others in her village, will need to completely rebuild their homes. I do not know what the cost to rebuild a home is in the Philippines but I am certain any money will help.

If we can raise enough to get their house framed in, I will ask T. to start helping others in the area who have lost their homes as well!”

UPDATE: November 11th, 2013

“I have just been on Skype with Theresa (She is in Iloilo right now) and she said that they have been told that they are probably going to be out of power for 4 months. She is trying to get a generator so that they can power a refrigerator and have some lights and use some power tools.

They will need the generator and fuel for it. I have transferred some money and am waiting on the Fundraiser site to complete the transfer of what has already been raised. They said it will take a couple of business days for the transfer.” Chris Faulkner

How YOU can help rebuild Banate, Philippines.

If you are able to give even $2.00 then please click the following link:

Banate, Philippines Typhoon Relief and Renewal Fund

Your name, amount donated can be kept confidential or you can choose to publish your name and amount donated.

If you can’t donate then please help spread this message by sharing to Facebook, Twitter, Google+ and any other social media tools.

I thank you. The Faulkner family thanks you and the citizens of the Philippines thank you.