Dear Santa Claus,

“Make a great gift to us sisters, that Sardinia will smile again, as always.”

**This photo was circulating Facebook early this morning, and it hit the soft spot we all carry in our hearts. I emailed Debora to get her permission for this photo and she happily obliged.

On November 18th, 2013 Sardinia was hit by a deadly cyclone, killing 17 people and leaving thousands homeless. Islanders have come out in full force in offering beds, clothing and a shoulder to cry on. The solidarity seen between the communities of Sardinia in the aftermath of cyclone Cleopatra just proves how strong, united and committed the islanders are in the wake of disaster.

The following map shows areas which were affected by Cyclone Cleopatra, people offering help, evacuations, emergency services, news, flooding, volunteer help, and stories.

60 communities were crushed by Cyclone Cleopatra:

11 communites in the Gallura: Arzachena, Berchidda, Budduso’, Golfo Aranci, Loiri Porto San Paolo, Monti, Olbia, Oschiri, Padru, Sant’Antonio di Gallura, Telti.

16 communites in Nuoro: Bitti, Dorgali, Galtelli’, Irgoli, Loculi, Lode’; Lula, Nuoro, Oliena, Onani’, Onifai, Orgosolo, Orosei, Posada, Siniscola, Torpe.

8 communities in Cagliari: Armungia, Ballao, Decimoputzu, Escalaplano, Siliqua, Vallermosa, Villaputzu, Villaspeciosa.

8 communities in Medio Campidano: Gonnosfanadiga, Guspini, Pabillonis, San Gavino Monreale, Sanluri, Sardara, Villacidro, Villanovafranca.

7 communities in Ogliastra: Arzana, Lanusei, Seui, Talana, Tortoli’, Ussassai, Villagrande Strisaili.

Here’s how you can help Sardinia pick up the pieces:

To make a monetary donation to the comune of Olbia please follow the banking details:

Account: n. 0540 – 070361388

IBAN: IT72U 01015 84980 000070361388

BIC/Swift Code: BPMOIT22XXX

Reference: Comune di Olbia Emergenza Alluvione

Alluvione = Flood

Related articles

‘Apocalyptic’ storm devastates holiday island of Sardinia (the-tap.blogspot.com)

Forza Sardegna. Forza.

Santa is listening.