The Hausa Language:

Hausa is the most spoken indigenous language in the African continent. It has 80 million native speakers. It is also spoken by at least 20 million people as their second language. But sadly, this vernacular is not that popular in the world. Even the people who know it can’t tell where Hausa is spoken. Hausa is an Afroasiatic language primarily spoken in the Republic of Niger and Nigeria. The vernacular speakers can also be found in Ghana, Sudan, the Central African Republic, and Cameroon. It is the mother tongue of the Hausa people.

The vernacular belongs to the West Chadic subgroup of the Afroasiatic language family. It has borrowed words from various Benue-Congo languages. It used to be written in the Ajami Arabic script in the past. Today, it is written in a Latin alphabet modified to suit the needs of the speakers of this tongue. The official language of Nigeria is English, but it is Hausa spoken by the majority of the population. In Niger, French enjoys the official status, and Hausa is recognized as a regional language. The majority of Hausa speakers are Muslims. It is the lingua franca among the Sahelian/Muslim West Africans.

Influences on the Language:

Since Islam is the religion of most Hausa speakers, Arabic has had a significant influence on it. The most prominent way Arabic has changed this language can be seen in its pronunciation. Other regional languages that have influenced Hausa are Soninke, Zarma, Jula-Bambara, and Akan. Hausa has taken many loanwords from the English language, like every different language.

Dialects of Hausa:

Since the language is spoken throughout Central Africa, it has many dialects. There is a different dialect in every city where the vernacular is spoken. The famous northern dialects are Arewa and Arewaci. Western dialects are spoken in Sokoto, Katsina, Gobir, and Adar. The dialect spoken in Sokoto is considered Classical Hausa.

Although the language structure remains the same for the most part, the native pronunciation changes in every region; this is why the Hausa of Cameroon is different from the dialects spoken in Niger and Nigeria. The dialect variation increases with distance.

Translations of Hausa:

If a company from the United States wants to expand into Africa, they will need translations of their advertisements and essential documents into all the major languages. A European business will have to do the same even if English is spoken by many people in Africa. French is also one of the major languages in Africa, but it is the native tongue that is given preference by the continent’s people. A business cannot succeed if it doesn’t get translations in the proper tongue. Translation and alternate forms reliability of the Visual Analogue Scale in the three major Nigerian languages. Guidelines for the process of cross-cultural adaptation of self-report measures.

When it comes to Hausa, it is essential to remember that the variety spoken in the Nigerian city of Daura will be different from Ghanaian Hausa. Nonnatives will not be able to understand the language structure of Hausa. They won’t be able to keep up with all of its varieties. Since it is a tonal language, native pronunciation is also essential. Only native language experts should be hired to translate into the language. A company that wishes to impress the people of Hausaland should find qualified linguistic experts. Two independent bilingual Hausa translators translated the English version of the FABQ into Hausa which was back-translated by one independent bilingual translator. The second translator was professional and was unaware of the concept being examined.

Various Chadic languages are spoken globally, and each of them is equally unique. But if you want to attract the people of the Hausaland, you can’t hire a native translator from France or Germany. You cannot hire an African without confirming that they know the target language well. Since the end of the twentieth century, the internet has become a powerful resource in our hands. You can easily hire a language service provider through the internet. But it is essential to make the right choice.

The BBC, Deutsche Welle, Radio France Internationale, and Voice of America use Dauranci and Kananci to provide Hausa services on their worldwide news websites in Chinese version. Internal construct validity was assessed using exploratory factor analysis, and external construct validity was evaluated by examining convergent, divergent, and known groups’

The Hausa 12-item Short-form Health Survey (SF-12): translation, cross-cultural adaptation, and validation in mixed urban and rural Nigerian populations with chronic low back pain.

Validity. The Hausa version of the PCS demonstrated acceptable reliability and construct validity. According to the recommendations of the quality criteria for measurement properties of health status questionnaires, construct validity is supported when at least 75% of the predefined hypotheses are verified. None of the respondents reported any difficulty comprehending the questionnaire items during the pilot testing.

The expert committee ensured that the Hausa-BBQ attained semantic, idiomatic, experiential, and conceptual equivalence with the original English version. Percentages were used to summarize the age group, gender, tribe, marital status, educational status, and occupation of the participants.

Who Should I Hire?

Hausa has three different tones, high, low, and falling tone. But there are also dialects, like Nemadi and Imraguen, that are non-tonal. So, it is essential to find an expert who will be able to provide you with accurate translations. If you wish to connect with the population of the rural areas, you will have to hire someone from there. But you can’t visit the rural areas yourself to find a linguistic expert. You will have to find the right service provider through the internet. Before hiring an agency, you can confirm whether or not they have native experts on their team.

Our English to Hausa translator helps you learn or understand the introductory text of these languages when you are an expert in one and know the other.

A person can understand their spoken language better than anyone else. But knowing the cultural aspects is also very important. For instance, a native of Niger or Nigeria would see the importance of Islam in the everyday lives of the people of those countries. The importance of Islam is the reason the religion ended up influencing the culture of the region. For the Niger and Nigerian followers of Islam, it is essential to get the proper representation, and that’s not something a European can provide them with.

A native of Sub-Saharan Africa would know precisely how important Islam is for the region’s people. So, when you need linguistic assistance, turn to experts who know the difference between Nigerian and Nigerien dialects of the Hausa language and the cultural practices of the Sub Sahara African population. Concurrent validity was substantiated by confirming 83 percent (5/6) of the a priori assumptions. Internal consistency (Cronbach’s), intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC), standard error of measurement (SEM), minimal detectable change (MDC), and limits of agreement with a 95 percent confidence interval were used to assess the reliability (LOA95 percent ).

Translation, cross-cultural adaptation, test-retest, and cross-sectional study of psychometric analysis of the Hausa version of the PCS. Quality criteria were proposed for measurement properties of health status questionnaires.

Descriptive statistics of mean, standard deviation (SD), frequencies, and percentages were applied to summarize the data. Socio-demographic and clinical characteristics Of the 200 participants recruited, the response rate was 100%.

Letter to the editor in response to Sada, Abdullahi, and Hassan (Hausa translation, cross-cultural adaptation, and assessment of the motor activity log).Disabil Rehabil. 2021 Oct;43(20):2976.

Hausa translation, cross-cultural adaptation, and assessment of psychometric properties of the Stroke Self-Efficacy Questionnaire.Physiother Theory Pract. 2021 Nov 15:1-8.

Indiana, U.S.Quantitative methods in African Linguistics – Predicting plurals in HausaHausa Verb Tense – African Languages at UCLABernard Caron. Second Edition, March 1964″Hausa Language Variation, and Dialects.”African Languages at UCLA.

The Hausa-PCS was comprehensible with good content validity. This stage ensured face and content validity.

Validity was evaluated by exploring content validity, factorial structure (confirmatory factor analysis [CFA]), construct validity (Spearman’s rho for a priori hypotheses), and known-groups validity.

The objective of this study was to translate and cross-culturally adapt the PCS into Hausa and evaluate its psychometric properties in terms of internal consistency, test-retest reliability, and factorial, construct, and known-groups validity in mixed urban and rural patients with chronic LBP.

This is in concordance with previous studies demonstrating an association between back pain beliefs and education levels. In line with this finding, previous studies did not find age an essential correlate of back premises. The response categories vary from 2 to 6, and raw scores for items range from 1 to 6.

The instrument can be used clinically and for research in Hausa-speaking patients with chronic LBP. The results suggest that the device has adequate factorial invariance, construct validity, internal consistency, and test-retest reliability in Hausa-speaking patients with chronic LBP.

You would need the ability to communicate in foreign languages to understand the mind and context of that other culture. The second translator was a professional translator and unaware of the concept being examined.

Additionally, the psychometric evaluation was conducted and reported according to the COSMIN guidelines, even though we did not use the global rating of change scale to confirm the respondents’ stability when assessing the test-retest reliability—the Pain Catastrophizing Scale: further psychometric evaluation with adult samples.

The Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS), developed by Sullivan et al. in 1995, is perhaps the most widely used tool to evaluate pain catastrophizing in clinical practice and research. The correlation between pain, catastrophizing, and disability in subacute and chronic low back pain: a study in the routine clinical practice of the Spanish National Health Service.

Written informed consent was obtained from all participants before their involvement in the study. After applying informed consent, the participants’ demographic and clinical characteristics were collected and recorded.

The PCS is a valid and reliable measure of how catastrophizing impacts pain experience. The Hausa version of the ODI 2.1a was an accurate and reliable measure of functional disability in chronic LBP patients. A prefinal version was then produced. A pilot testing prefinal version was tested in 20 patients with chronic LBP recruited from urban and rural Nigerian communities to evaluate comprehensibility and acceptability.

These include female gender, high job demands, smoking, psychosocial factors, and co-morbid low back pain. Psychosocial factors are becoming more relevant in the onset, persistence, and recurrence of neck pain (Ariens, Mechelen, Bongers, Bouter, & van der Wal, 2001).

Internet J Allied Health Sci Pract. 2009;7:1–5. 55.Beaton DE, Bombardier C, Guillemin F, Ferraz MB.

Hartvigsen J, Hancock MJ, Kongsted A, Louw Q, Ferreira ML, Genevay S, et al.

PLoS ONE 16(4):e0249370.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0249370 Editor: Adewale L.

Terwee CB, Bot SD, de Boer MR, van der Windt DA, Knol DL, Dekker J, et al.

Mokkink LB, Terwee CB, Knol DL, Stratford PW, Alonso J, Patrick DL, et al.