Bloomsburg University Athletic Scholarships

Bloomsburg University in Columbia County, a mile south of Interstate 80, is one of the 14 public universities in the Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education. The university offers undergraduate minors (over 40 programs), undergraduate majors (more than 50 programs) and graduate programs (around 20 courses). There are more than 250 student clubs and organizations that help students develop their creativity and leadership skills.

Bloomsburg University is accredited by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business, American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education, American Society of Exercise Physiologists, National Association of Schools of Music, Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education, Council on Social Work Education, Allied Health Education Program, Council on Education of the Deaf, National Association of Schools of Theatre, National Association of Schools of Art and Design, Computing Accreditation Commission, Technology Accreditation Commission, Commission on Accreditation of Athletic Training Education and the Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anaesthesia Educational Program.

Athletics Department of Bloomsburg University

The Bloomsburg University Athletics Department is situated in a 103-acre athletic complex within the Upper Campus, about a half-mile away from the Lower Campus and accessible via shuttle service. Some of the facilities include the Nelson Field House, which was constructed in 1971 and renovated in 2007-2009, and as of this writing serves as the university’s home for indoor athletic events. The Robert B. Redman Stadium with 5,000 seating capacity, on the other hand, is the Home of the Huskies. The multi-purpose lighted field called Sports Stadium, which features cutting edge Fieldturf monofilament artificial surface, is used by the men’s and women’s soccer teams, women’s lacrosse teams and the field hockey teams. There’s also the Jan M. Hutchinson Field and Danny Litwhiler Field for baseball and softball, the Nelson Field House Pool with six competition-length lanes, which serves as the venue for varsity swimming and club water polo events, and the university’s 13 standard courts in the Tennis Center.

Athletic Programs of Bloomsburg University

Bloomsburg teams participate in the National Collegiate Athletic Association’s Division II. Men’s sports include basketball, football, soccer, baseball, swimming, wrestling, cross country and track & field. On the other hand, women’s sports consist of basketball, cross country, lacrosse, field hockey, softball, soccer, swimming, tennis and track & field. The university also offers a full slate of Sports Camps and Clinics to its student athletes.

OFFICIAL SPORTS TEAM: Bloomsburg Huskies

The Bloomsburg Huskies, the official sports team of Bloomsburg University, is a member of the Pennsylvania State Athletic Conference (PSAC). Historically, the Huskies excel in women’s swimming, men’s swimming, wrestling, track and field, tennis, softball and hockey.

Guide to Athletic Scholarships for Bloomsburg University

Bloomsburg University offers grants to students majoring in different disciplines and to those participating in music or athletics. To receive grant assistance, students must complete the application form and satisfy general eligibility requirements to qualify. Students do not need to repay the financial aid extended to them.