Kaspersky Lab, a leading developer of secure content and threat management solutions, announces that it has become a "Global Growth Company Industry Shaper" at the World Economic Forum. This will see Eugene Kaspersky, Chairman and CEO of the company, taking part in the 2012 World Economic Forum annual meeting in Davos, where he will share his experiences and his vision for the future of the IT security industry and the expected forthcoming threats, while networking with the world’s leading business and policy experts.

Emphasizing the importance of the Davos meeting, Eugene Kaspersky said: “I am very proud to represent Kaspersky Lab at the WEF meeting in Davos. Being among the Global Growth Company Industry Shapers is a great honor for us. It also brings us new business opportunities across industries and regions. We are happy that our technological and business success has been recognized by such a respectable organization as the World Economic Forum. We will do our best to make a serious contribution to the development of the IT security industry on a global scale!”

Global Growth Company Industry Shapers are 17 exciting new companies from around the world that have demonstrated strong potential to disrupt the value chain, displace incumbents and transform their respective industries. These companies play an important role in shaping specific industry issues and contributing to the Forum’s programs and projects through their innovative approaches.

The World Economic Forum’s GGC was formed in 2007 to engage dynamic high-growth companies with the potential to be tomorrow’s industry leaders and to become a driving force of economic and social change.

About Kaspersky Lab

Kaspersky Lab is the largest antivirus company in Europe. It delivers some of the world’s most immediate protection against IT security threats, including viruses, spyware, crimeware, hackers, phishing, and spam. The company is ranked among the world’s top four vendors of security solutions for endpoint users. Kaspersky Lab products provide superior detection rates and one of the industry’s fastest outbreak response times for home users, SMBs, large enterprises and the mobile computing environment. Kaspersky® technology is also used worldwide inside the products and services of the industry’s leading IT security solution providers. Learn more at www.kaspersky.com. For the latest on antivirus, anti-spyware, anti-spam and other IT security issues and trends, visit www.securelist.com.

About the World Economic Forum

The World Economic Forum is an independent international organization committed to improving the state of the world by engaging business, political, academic and other leaders of society to shape global, regional and industry agendas. Incorporated as a not-for-profit foundation in 1971 and headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, the Forum is tied to no political, partisan or national interests.