Kaspersky Lab, a leading developer of secure content and threat management solutions, and Tencent, China's leading Internet services provider, announced that they have recently signed an agreement to integrate Kaspersky Lab's mobile Anti-Virus technology into Tencent's QQ Security Expert. The two companies have launched a joint initiative to raise users' awareness of the need for smartphone protection and are developing technologies for mobile security aimed at providing smartphone users, with more advanced, bespoke security services.

In the past, mobile security has not been taken very seriously by device users, it simply wasn't a priority, but things are now very different. With the development of the 3G industry in China, mobile phones have evolved from a simple communication tool into a multifunctional and smart mobile endpoint. However, the latest technology is a double-edged sword, as a series of complex vulnerabilities in smartphone protection have come to light even while the technology has become an almost indispensible part of modern life and operational efficiency has improved considerably. In recent years, the emergence of SMS spam, mobile viruses, spyware and other malware aimed specifically at smartphones has become a serious threat to users' privacy, personal account information and even business information. There have, in addition, also been incidents of fraud against mobile devices initiated through the use of malware.

As the largest antivirus company in Europe, Kaspersky Lab has been delivering some of the world's most immediate protection against IT security threats, the company's goodwill in this industry is also widely acknowledged by Chinese users. Tencent, the leading Internet services provider in China has recently established mobile security system centers to operate the QQ Security Expert, in order to better serve its large user base in the country. The cooperation between the two companies will no doubt have a positive influence on the industry, where millions of users will benefit from it.

"Throughout the planning and preparation of this project I was impressed with the open attitude of Tencent and its customer-oriented thinking," said Harry Cheung. “It's a great pleasure to be working in partnership with Tencent, as we begin to provide smartphone users in China with even more professional security services.

Tel Liu, the President of Tencent Mobile Value Added Services Division said, "Kaspersky Lab is a leading global antivirus vendor, their reputation and strong technologies are the foundation of our partnership. We are fully confident that we will be able to provide users with professional and comprehensive mobile security protection by integrating Kaspersky Lab's antivirus technology with our own."

Providing effective protection to smartphone users will be an important task for antivirus vendors in the future. Through the partnership between the two companies, smartphone mobile phone users will experience a unique and more effective protection service which integrates Kaspersky Lab's mobile security technology and Tencent's own antivirus product. Through this partnership, Kaspersky Lab will enhance its leading position in the Chinese market, while providing its world-class antivirus technology to more smartphone mobile phone users.

About Kaspersky Lab

Kaspersky Lab is the largest antivirus company in Europe. It delivers some of the world's most immediate protection against IT security threats, including viruses, spyware, crimeware, hackers, phishing, and spam. The company is ranked among the world's top four vendors of security solutions for endpoint users. Kaspersky Lab products provide superior detection rates and one of the industry's fastest outbreak response times for home users, SMBs, large enterprises and the mobile computing environment. Kaspersky® technology is also used worldwide inside the products and services of the industry's leading IT security solution providers. Learn more at: www.kaspersky.com. For the latest on antivirus, anti-spyware, anti-spam and other IT security issues and trends, visit: www.securelist.com.

About Tencent

Tencent is one of China's largest and most popular Internet service portals. Since its establishment over the last decade, Tencent has maintained steady growth under its user-oriented operating strategies. It is Tencent's mission to enhance the quality of human life through Internet services. Presently, Tencent is providing value-added Internet, mobile and telecom services and online advertising under the strategic goal of providing users with "one-stop online lifestyle services". As of September 30, 2010, the active QQ users' accounts for QQ IM amounted to 636.6 million while its peak concurrent users reached 118.7 million. The development of Tencent has profoundly influenced the ways hundreds of millions of Internet users communicate with one another as well as their lifestyles. It also brings possibilities of a wider range of applications to the China's Internet industry.