Fleming: The story of William O. Collins, namesake of our city

When the Civil War started in 1861, many patriotic citizens resolved to fight to preserve the Union. As was the custom at the time, individuals and municipalities raised their own militia, which is why historians refer to military units in terms of the state they came from.

William O. Collins, an attorney in Hillsboro, Ohio, was among the first to gather troops after he enlisted. Soon the 11th Ohio Volunteer Cavalry awaited orders to the battlefields. But they were not to fight the rebels; instead they were headed for Fort Laramie, because when troops were called away from the West to defend the Union, Native Americans trying to preserve their hunting grounds saw an opportunity to make significant gains and stepped up their attacks, causing disruption and death.

Where, some of the soldiers inquired, was Fort Laramie? New Mexico? Arizona? No — eastern Wyoming. Despite their disappointment, the soldiers obeyed orders, somehow found their way to the fort and settled in to protect mail routes and travelers along the Overland Trail.

Collins faced myriad problems — lack of food and supplies, a longing among the soldiers for something to read, difficulty communicating with Oglala Lakota and other tribes, attacks along the trails and more, including the challenge of unauthorized interactions between soldiers and Native women. But he was popular with his troops: He was respectful toward Native Americans, wise and compassionate in leadership, tough when required, as often in the field as at his desk, and an unflagging advocate for his men.

In 1862, with the Overland Trail under siege, a new stage route, the Cherokee Trail, was established. The trail passed by Laporte. Led by Brigadier General James Craig, a small contingent of cavalry set up a military post at Laporte on July 22. Craig named the new post Camp Collins in honor of his colleague.

In the spring of 1864, Collins sent a contingent of troops from Fort Laramie to the small fort. But the new troops were not there long before melting snow drove the river beyond its banks, wiping away the entire encampment and necessitating a new location. The new site was soon found, farther downstream along the river on higher ground. On Aug. 20, 1864, Collins issued the order establishing the new fort. It did not take long for Camp Collins to become Fort Collins. Even though the fort did not remain much longer, civilians had come to the area. Despite innumerable setbacks before an organized community took hold, the seeds of the future town had been sown.

Col. Collins returned to Hillsboro after the war, resuming his law practice and civic involvements until his death in October, 1880. A century and a half later, the Ohio lawyer-turned-soldier, namesake of our city, remains an indelible part of our history.