About Snoop Dogg

Calvin Cordozar Broadus Jr. aka Snoop Dogg was born on October 20, 1971. Raised in Long Beach, California by his mother and step-father, he was nicknamed Snoopy as a child due to his love of, and likeness to, the Peanuts character.

Snoop began rapping in sixth grade and was a diligent student and avid churchgoer as a child, who helped his family make ends meet by selling candy, delivering newspapers, and bagging groceries. His love of music was also furthered by singing and playing piano at the Golgotha Trinity Baptist Church.

As a teenager, he was a member of the Rollin' 20s Crips gang in the Eastside area of Long Beach and was regularly in trouble with the law, finding himself frequently in and out of jail after finishing high school.

Under the name 213 (after the area code of his native Long Beach), Snoop recorded several tapes with his two cousins Nate Dogg and Lil' ½ Dead and friend Warren G. One of these mixtapes ended up in the hands of producer Dr Dre, who heard Snoop's freestyle over the song "Hold On" by En Vogue. Dre was so impressed that he called him to invite him to an audition. It was around this time that he was taught songwriting by former N.W.A. collaborator The D.O.C.

Career

1992-1998: Death Row, Doggystyle and Tha Doggfather

Choosing Snoop Doggy Dogg as a stage name, he began recording with Dr Dre in 1992, first on the theme song of the film Deep Cover and then on Dr. Dre's debut solo album The Chronic, alongside other members of the rap group, Tha Dogg Pound.

Doggystyle, his debut album, was released in November 1993, and was a huge hit, helped in part by his exposure on The Chronic. The album was released on Death Row and featured several other artists who were affiliated with the label including Daz Dillinger, Kurupt and Nate Dogg. It debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, setting the first week sales record for a debuting artist and the fastest-selling hip-hop album ever. It also launched the singles "Who Am I (What's My Name)?" and "Gin and Juice", which both reached the top ten most-played songs in the United States. The album is credited for introducing the hip-hop subgenre of g-funk to a mainstream audience and for furthering the popularity of West Coast hip-hop. It has since been certified seven-times platinum.

He fictional short film Murder Was the Case and its accompanying soundtrack in 1994, with the soundtrack debuting at number one on the Billboard 200 and launching the single "What Would You Do", which was also included on the Natural Born Killers soundtrack and was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group at the 38th Annual Grammy Awards in 1996.

He released his second studio album, Tha Doggfather, in 1996. The album also topped the Billboard 200, but featured a softer G-funk inspired sound than his debut, and did not featured production from Dr Dre, who had left Death Row over a contract dispute.

Wishing to move away from the "gangsta" lifestyle after the death of his friend and labelmate Tupac Shakur and the racketeering indictment of Death Row co-founder Suge Knight, Snoop also left the label.

1998-2006: No Limit and continued success

In March 1998, Snoop signed with Master P's No Limit Records, making his debut on the label later that year with Da Game Is to Be Sold, Not to Be Told, which was released under the name Snoop Dogg. His third consecutive album to debut at number one on the Billboard 200, it was followed by No Limit Top Dogg (1999), which debuted at number two, and Tha Last Meal (2000), which debuted at number four, sold over two million copies and was his final album on No Limit Records. 1999 also saw the release of his autobiography, Tha Doggfather.

2002 saw a change in direction for Snoop, who had moved away from his former "gangsta" image to become a "pimp". He released the album Paid tha Cost to Be da Bo$$, on Priority/Capitol/EMI, which launched the hit singles "From tha Chuuuch to da Palace" and "Beautiful", featuring guest vocals by Pharrell (the latter of which also featured vocals by Charlie Wilson).

Two years later, he signed his label, Doggystyle Records, with Geffen Records/Star Trak Entertainment and began working with producer duo The Neptunes (Pharrell Williams and Chad Hugo). He released R&G (Rhythm & Gangsta): The Masterpiece that years, launching the singles "Drop It Like It's Hot" (featuring Pharrell), which became his first number one single on the Hot 100, and "Signs", featuring Justin Timberlake and Charlie Wilson, which entered the UK chart at number two – his highest entry on the chart.

With Warren G and Nate Dogg, under the name 213, he released the album The Hard Way (2004). The album debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 and number one on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums, and included the single "Groupie Luv".

In 2006, Snoop appeared on two tracks on Ice Cube's album Laugh Now, Cry Later, including "Go to Church", and on several tracks on Tha Dogg Pound's Cali Iz Active. He also appeared on "Keep Bouncing" by Too $hort (with will.i.am of the Black Eyed Peas) and "Gangsta Walk" by Coolio. That year, he released his eighth studio album, Tha Blue Carpet Treatment, which debuted at number five on the Billboard 200 and launched the single "That's That Shit" featuring R. Kelly.

2007-2012: Ego Trippin', Malice n Wonderland and Doggumentary

In March 2008, Snoop released his ninth studio album, Ego Trippin', which debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 and launched the top ten single "Sexual Eruption".

He released his tenth studio album, Malice n Wonderland, in 2009, which was his first studio album to peak outside the top 20 of the Billboard 200.

In 2010, he appeared on several singles as a featured rapper, including: "California Gurls" by Katy Perry, "Flashing" by Dr. Dre, "Seat Change" by Curren$y, "Get 'em Girls" by Jessica Mauboy and "Mr. Romeo" by Emii. He also collaborated with American comedy troupe the Lonely Island the title track from their 2011 album Turtleneck & Chain.

2011 saw the release of his eleventh studio album, Doggumentary, as well as further collaborations, including Gorrilaz' "Welcome to the World of the Plastic Beach" with the Hypnotic Brass Ensemble from their album Plastic Beach, and "Pornographic" from Tech N9ne's album All 6's and 7's, which also features E-40 and Krizz Kaliko.

2012-2013: Reincarnated and 7 Days of Funk

In 2012, after spending time exploring reggae and Rastafari culture in Jamaica, Snoop reinvented himself under the stage name Snoop Lion, which he claims was given to him by a Rastafarian priest. His transformation into Snoop Lion was recorded in the documentary Reincarnated, which also featured a companion album of the same name. Both were released in spring 2013, and the album debuted at number 16 on the Billboard 200, stayed at the top of the Billboard Top Reggae Albums chart for 34 non-consecutive weeks, and was nominated for Best Reggae Album at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards.

2013 also saw the formation of 7 Days of Funk – a funk duo Snoop formed with musician Dâm-Funk under the name Snoopzilla. They released their self-titled debut in December 2013, which was well-received critically.

2015-2017: Bush, Coolaid and Neva Left

In May 2015, Snoop released his first album after his return to using the stage name Snoop Dogg. The album, Bush, was produced by The Neptunes and features guest appearances from Kendrick Lamar, Stevie Wonder, Charlie Wilson, Gwen Stefani, T.I. and Rick Ross. It debuted at number 14 on the Billboard 200 and at number one on the US Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart.

In 2016, he released Coolaid, his fourteenth studio album, which features collaborations with Too $hort, Swizz Beatz, Jeremih, Wiz Khalifa, Trick Trick, E-40, Jazze Pha, Suga Free and October London, and has an accompanying music film of the same name.

This was followed by 2017's Neva Left, which features several guest vocalists including Redman, Method Man, B-Real, KRS-One, and frequent collaborators Charlie Wilson and Wiz Khalifa, among others.

2018: Bible of Love

2018 saw another change in musical direction for Snoop, who released Bible of Love – a gospel album that was released on his newly founded All The Time Entertainment label, which was created to give opportunity to up-and-coming gospel artists. It topped the US Gospel Chart for seven non-consecutive weeks.

Snoop's Puff Puff Pass tour ran from November 24, 2018 to January 5, 2019 and featured Bone Thugs-n-Harmony, Too $hort, Warren G, Kurupt, and others.

2019: I Wanna Thank Me

In August 2019, Snoop released his seventeenth studio album, I Wanna Thank Me, which features guest appearances from Rick Rock, Chris Brown, Jermaine Dupri, Stresmatic, YG, RJ, Mustard, Slim Jxmmi, Russ, Wiz Khalifa, DJ Battlecat, Lil Duval, Swizz Beatz, Slick Rick, Trey Songz and the late Nate Dogg, among others.

On July 1, 2019, Vietnamese singer Son Tung M-TP released the song Hãy Trao Cho Anh (Give it to Me) featuring Snoop Dogg, which has since amassed over 158 million views on YouTube.