Orson Welles’ experimental ‘essay film’, F for Fake (1973), captures in short form what the prodigious director’s life expressed in grander gestures: a speculative geography for an accident- prone cinema. Documenting the fakery techniques of famed 20th-century art forger Elmyr de Hory and his biographer Clifford Irving, the film has been widely read as a showcase of Welles’ own ‘charlatanism’. Indeed, even Deleuze’s philosophy of cinema claims that the ubiquitous Wellesian ‘character’ – the forger, the faker, the double-dealer – culminates in F for Fake. But, along with Welles’ other late-life essay films, it also offers a pragmatic strategy for theorizing the sites of cinematic production on the basis of their constituent contingencies. For Welles the independent filmmaker, these uncertainties unfailingly manifested in financial, technological, and geographical disasters – problems that, I argue, he harnessed to cultivate a unique cinematic ‘style’. The resulting ‘Wellesian continuum’ illuminates the conspiracy of perception, thoughts, and accident in the production of cinematic space. Offering ‘how to’ guide on forging series from the contingencies of production, Welles’ meditation on fakery models the creation of such sites and lays out the conceptual architecture for theorizing their cinematic production. Welles’ resulting ontology of cinematic seriality describes technical problematics – ‘anti-techniques’ – that give rise to speculative geographies.

Gherardo Casale argues that the cinematic style crafted by Orson Welles for his productions of Shakespeare’s plays (Macbeth, 1948, Othello, 1950, and Chimes at Midnight, 1965) recreated an actualized poetic language that, through symbolic writing, retains the foundations of Shakespeare’s art. Although made at very different stages of his career and exhibiting diverse cinematic styles, Welles’s filmic adaptations of Shakespeare‐s plays share a peculiarity with many of his other works: an engaging incipit that sets the movie’s tone and mood in a uniquely powerful and assertive fashion, oftentimes deviating from the standard conventions of narration. From Citizen Kane (1941) to Touch of Evil (1958), Mr. Arkadin (1955) to The Trial (1962), Welles could have written an encyclopaedia about the opening sequences in the cinema. This essay closely examines these brief segments of film, and argues that they can provide a great deal of information on Welles’s strategies in adapting the ‘playhouse documents’ that we know as the works of William Shakespeare.

This article offers a cultural historical interpretation of The Third Man: The Lives of Harry Lime (1951-52) an internationally syndicated radio series based on the film The Third Man (1949). It argues that the series’ cultural meanings can only be fully assessed through accounting for the programme’s international framing or encoding, which critics have heretofore overlooked. As an internationally encoded series The Third Man has a high degree of interpretive openness in order to appeal to and resonate with heterogeneous audiences. The article examines the ways in which the series creates interpretive openness through its ambiguous characterization of the protagonist Harry Lime, use of Lime’s American nationality, international settings and how it drew upon the Cold War for dramatic material. The series’ international encoding, interpretive openness and broadcast during the Cold War ground interpreting its cultural meanings. The article claims that the series offers critical perspectives on the Cold War through Lime’s serving as a metonym for the United States, and plots that allegorically and satirically dramatize the Cold War milieu.

In November 1968, Jack Valenti, then president of the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), created the Rating System so that theater owners could indicate to families which films were suitable for children. New and talented young producers such as Bert Schneider took great advantage of the new opportunities this system offered. Orson Welles, still self-exiled in Europe, himself wanted to take advantage of the changed climate in Hollywood. Thanks to the support of his new partner, Oja Kodar, Orson Welles decided that his films would explore sexuality in a more explicit way. Nudity, corporeity, and sex (though already appearing in his previous films) are copiously dealt with in The Other Side of the Wind, whose initial conception and realization was largely due to Oja Kodar. One of the film's most iconic sequences, the "car sex scene", features well-known Wellesian techniques as applied to the depiction of dominant female sexuality.

Resumo: Este artigo lida com a produção do cineasta norte-americano Orson Welles e a sua atuação como um intelectual em seu contexto. Foram também mapeados a recepção da produção de Orson Welles, assim como das suas defesas de posição e opiniões, em alguns cineastas brasileiros para os quais a produção de Welles foi de suma importância, como Glauber Rocha, Eduardo Escorel e Rogério Sganzerla. Palavras-chave: Orson Welles; História e cinema; Crítica e recepção. It´s all Orson: the Brazilian reception on the Orson Welles Film work Abstract: This article deals with the Orson Welles filmography and his role as an intellectual in his context. The article also analyses the reception among brazilian filmmakers to whom the Orson Welles movie production was major, as Glauber Rocha, Eduardo Escorel and Rogério Sganzerla.

This article aims to present an understanding of modern Self according to Josef Früchtl in his work The Impertinent Self, in which he uses film as a medium of reflection. If we agree that film compels us to rethink our understanding of the Self, the world, time, motion and reality, and that this has been the mains emphasis in the ontological and epistemological approach to film philosophy, we could consider that this medium is able to engender understanding of the Self in the world in conceptual, historical and political terms. This seems to be the theoretical enterprise of Früchtl’s regard of the topic of modern subjectivity. I aim to contrast his perspective with some of Walter Benjamin’s observations on film.

The paper proposes an interpretation of Tom Tykwer’s and Andy and Lana Wachowski’s film Cloud Atlas through the lens of Nietzsche’s concept of eternal recurrence which serves as the overriding framework of the film. Within that framework other temporal scales are embedded: human time, evolutionary time, physics time, mechanical time and historical time. By juxtaposing the multiple time frames the film enacts the concept of transmigration of souls and a sophisticated reflection on the interconnectedness of individuals and the experience of time in the digital age.

Filmmakers compel rituals through the moving image. If film can represent, provoke, advance, be structured like and even invent or produce rituals, the question arises whether it might also be possible for a film to be a ritual. Can a ritual exist by means of moving image? Can one undergo a ritual through moving pictures? I will try to show that there are cases of movie-made rituals. And if there exists some movie-made ritual, then ipso facto movie-made ritual is feasible. To clarify cinema as a possible vehicle for a ritual to happen, I will firstly present the concept of REATUAL by the Cameroonian filmmaker Jean-Pierre Bekolo. Secondly, I will investigate briefly his film as a case in point of “cinema as reatual”. Thirdly, we will try to understand the “reatualistic” potentiality of cinema by means of an investigation into the nature of the ritual and thereby move away from cinema studies’ representational paradigm and see how the virtual (Deleuze) in reatualistic cinema confronts and intervenes in the real.