Orson Welles, the Hollywood ''boy wonder'' who created the film classic ''Citizen Kane,'' scared tens of thousands of Americans with a realistic radio report of a Martian invasion of New Jersey and changed the face of film and theater with his daring new ideas, died yesterday in Los Angeles, apparently of a heart attack. He was 70 years old and lived in Las Vegas, Nev.

An assistant coroner in Los Angeles, Donald Messerle, said Welles's death ''appears to be natural in origin.'' He had been under treatment for diabetes as well as a heart ailment, his physician reported. Welles's body was found by his chauffeur.

Despite the feeling of many that his career - which evoked almost constant controversy over its 50 years -was one of largely unfulfilled promise, Welles eventually won the respect of his colleagues. He received the Lifetime Achievement Award of the American Film Institute in 1975, and last year the Directors Guild of America gave him its highest honor, the D. W. Griffith Award.

An Unorthodox Style

His unorthodox casting and staging for the theater gave new meaning to the classics and to contemporary works. As the ''Wonder Boy'' of Broadway in the 1930's, he set the stage on its ear with a ''Julius Caesar'' set in Fascist Italy, an all-black ''Macbeth'' and his presentation of Marc Blitzstein's ''Cradle Will Rock.'' His Mercury Theater of the Air set new standards for radio drama, and in one performance panicked thousands across the nation.

In film, his innovations in deep-focus technology and his use of theater esthetics - long takes without close-ups, making the viewer's eye search the screen as if it were a stage - created a new vocabulary for the cinema.

Frequently Used Cliche

By age 24, he was already being described by the press as a has-been - a cliche that would dog him all his life. But at that very moment Welles was creating ''Citizen Kane,'' generally considered one of the best motion pictures ever made. This scenario was repeated several times. His second film, ''The Magnificent Ambersons,'' was poorly received, but is now also regarded as a classic, although the distributors re-edited it and Welles never liked the result. ''Falstaff'' and ''Touch of Evil,'' two of his later films, were also changed by others before their release.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.