Orson Welles’ experimental ‘essay film’, F for Fake (1973), captures in short form what the prodigious director’s life expressed in grander gestures: a speculative geography for an accident- prone cinema. Documenting the fakery techniques of famed 20th-century art forger Elmyr de Hory and his biographer Clifford Irving, the film has been widely read as a showcase of Welles’ own ‘charlatanism’. Indeed, even Deleuze’s philosophy of cinema claims that the ubiquitous Wellesian ‘character’ – the forger, the faker, the double-dealer – culminates in F for Fake. But, along with Welles’ other late-life essay films, it also offers a pragmatic strategy for theorizing the sites of cinematic production on the basis of their constituent contingencies. For Welles the independent filmmaker, these uncertainties unfailingly manifested in financial, technological, and geographical disasters – problems that, I argue, he harnessed to cultivate a unique cinematic ‘style’. The resulting ‘Wellesian continuum’ illuminates the conspiracy of perception, thoughts, and accident in the production of cinematic space. Offering ‘how to’ guide on forging series from the contingencies of production, Welles’ meditation on fakery models the creation of such sites and lays out the conceptual architecture for theorizing their cinematic production. Welles’ resulting ontology of cinematic seriality describes technical problematics – ‘anti-techniques’ – that give rise to speculative geographies.

Gherardo Casale argues that the cinematic style crafted by Orson Welles for his productions of Shakespeare’s plays (Macbeth, 1948, Othello, 1950, and Chimes at Midnight, 1965) recreated an actualized poetic language that, through symbolic writing, retains the foundations of Shakespeare’s art. Although made at very different stages of his career and exhibiting diverse cinematic styles, Welles’s filmic adaptations of Shakespeare‐s plays share a peculiarity with many of his other works: an engaging incipit that sets the movie’s tone and mood in a uniquely powerful and assertive fashion, oftentimes deviating from the standard conventions of narration. From Citizen Kane (1941) to Touch of Evil (1958), Mr. Arkadin (1955) to The Trial (1962), Welles could have written an encyclopaedia about the opening sequences in the cinema. This essay closely examines these brief segments of film, and argues that they can provide a great deal of information on Welles’s strategies in adapting the ‘playhouse documents’ that we know as the works of William Shakespeare.

For Rosenbaum, the historiography of Welles’s oeuvre should reflect a remediation of the textual and extra-textual factors of that history which can potentially be achieved through a prismatic methodology which organizes old and new, speculative and factual, words and actions to be focused for analysis and then historical (re-)construction. A complete picture of Welles (encompassing all textual and extra-textual facts, factors and interactions) will never form, but that is inherent in the concept of remediation, while the prismatic methodological approach to Wellesian historiography is apt for history’s inherent pluralistic nature.

This article aruges for a new periodization of film noir through seven films released between 1940 and 1942 called here "emergent noir," and including The Grapes of Wrath, The Maltese Falcon, Casablanca and Citizen Kane. These seven films defined the genre’s aesthetics, thematics, visual style, and moral ambiguity. Emergent noir created a new mode of rebellious individual masculinity -- noir cool, a public mask of stylish stoicism – through Humphrey Bogart, Robert Mitchum, Alan Ladd, and (later) Sterling Hayden. The crucible of this new figure was his masking of emotion -- his cool. To be cool suggested self-control to the point of detachment, and signified an insolent defiance as registered in facial expression and body language. The masking of emotion communicates an inner intensity critical to the self-presentation and a sense of inner suffering. Paramount Studios attempted to float a new term for rising star Alan Ladd in 1942: "the romantic heavy." At the time, the "heavy" meant the villain and the romantic lead was always the hero -- so this is an oxymoron – but it might be translated as the heroic badass. The romantic heavy was a rogue figure we now call cool, even if no one used the term at the time. The case studies here are of High Sierra and This Gun's For Hire.