Crooked Tree

Mar-1980

/ General Fiction

When, in Michigan's Crooked Tree State Forest, bears suddenly attack man with gruesome ferocity, the Ottawa Indians begin speaking of a malevolent intelligence controlling the bears and Axel Michelson tries to save his life and his Indian wife's soul...

Gypsies

Dec-1988

/ Fantasy

A family with the ability to enter alternate realities struggles to lead a normal life, but when the man responsible for several deaths in their family makes his presence known, they follow him into another realm...

A Hidden Place

1989

/ Fantasy

In the hard years of the Depression, young Travis lives with his uncle and aunt. Upstairs lives the mysterious Anna. Anna says she's going to be "changing," and she needs Travis's help...for purposes she won't explain. Robert Charles Wilson's A Hidde...

The Divide

Jan-1990

/ Science Fiction

Imagine losing your personality, feeling it slip and alter, steadily changing, until the person inhabiting your body is no longer recognizable as you. Imagine. . . and you will understand the feelings of John Shaw. 12,000 pr int....

A Bridge of Years

Aug-1991

/ Science Fiction

Tom Winter thought the secluded cottage in the Pacific Northwest would be the perfect refuge -- a place to nurse the wounds of lost love and happiness. But Tom soon discovers that his safe haven is the portal of a tunnel through time. At one end is t...

Mysterium

May-1994

/ Science Fiction

A TOWN ON THE EDGE OF TERROR... In the early hours before dawn, a small Michigan town vanishes from the face of the earth. That morning the men and women of Two Rivers wake up in a world strangely different from their own--a world of curfews, food...

Darwinia

Jun-1998

/ Steampunk

In 1912, history was changed by the Miracle, when the old world of Europe was replaced by Darwinia, a strange land of nightmarish jungle and antediluvian monsters. To some, the Miracle is an act of divine retribution; to others, it is an opportunity ...

Bios

Nov-1999

/ Science Fiction

A NOVEL OF BRAVERY, EXPLORATION, AND DISCOVERY IN A UNIVERSE CHARGED WITH AWE In the twenty-second century, starflight is possible but hugely expensive, so humankind's efforts are focused on Isis, a verdant, Earth-like world only a few lightyears ...

The Perseids and Other Stories

Aug-2000

/ General Fiction

Robert Charles Wilson's time has come. His first novel from Tor, Darwinia, was a finalist for science fiction's Hugo award, and a #1 Locus bestseller in paperback. His next novel, Bios, is a critical and commercial success. Now Wilson's brilliant sho...

The Chronoliths

Aug-2001

/ Science Fiction

Scott Warden is a man haunted by the past--and soon to be haunted by the future. In early twenty-first-century Thailand, Scott is an expatriate slacker. Then, one day, he inadvertently witnesses an impossible event: the violent appearance of a 200...

Blind Lake

Aug-2003

/ Science Fiction

At Blind Lake, a federal installation in northern Minnesota, scientists are spying on everyday life on an alien planet, using a technology they barely understand. No interaction with the aliens is possible. All the scientists can do is watch. Then...

Spin

Apr-2005

/ Science Fiction

"THE TIME IS THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, and three adolescents--Diane and Jason Lawton, twins, and their best friend, Tyler Dupree--are out stargazing. Thus they witness the erection of a planet-spanning shield around the globe, blocking out the universe...

Axis

Sep-2007

/ Science Fiction

THE WORLD NEXT DOOR Engineered by the mysterious Hypotheticals to support human life, it's connected to Earth by way of the Arch that towers hundreds of miles over the Indian Ocean. Humans are colonizing this new world -- and, predictably, exploitin...

Julian Comstock

Jul-2009

/ Steampunk

In the reign of President Deklan Comstock, a reborn United States is struggling back to prosperity. Over a century after the Efflorescence of Oil, after the Fall of the Cities, after the False Tribulation, after the days of the Pious Presidents, the ...

Vortex

Jul-2011

/ Science Fiction

Vortex tells the story of Turk Findley, the protagonist introduced in Axis, who is transported ten thousand years into the future by the mysterious entities called "the Hypotheticals." In this future humanity exists on a chain of planets connected by...

Burning Paradise

Nov-2013

/ Science Fiction

From Robert Charles Wilson, the author of the Hugo-winning Spin, comes Burning Paradise, a new tale of humans coming to grips with a universe of implacable strangeness. Cassie Klyne, nineteen years old, lives in the United States in the year 2015 ...

The Affinities

Apr-2015

/ Science Fiction

In our rapidly-changing world of "social media", everyday people are more and more able to sort themselves into social groups based on finer and finer criteria. In the near future of Robert Charles Wilson's The Affinities, this process is supercharge...

Last Year

Dec-2016

/ Science Fiction

It’s the near future, and the technology exists to open doorways into the past -- but not our past, not exactly. Each “past” is effectively an alternate world, identical to ours but only up to the date on which we access it. And a given “past...