Why do some content creators have more success than others? The answer might surprise you… Gil Green gives us 3 proven ways to get the gigs you want and success you’re looking for, today on The Doorpost Podcast Project!

BIO:

Raised in the cultural melting pot of Miami, director Gil Green encompasses a vast knowledge of music, sports, and style that transcends into a world of iconic imagery.

Gil’s first glimpse into the business, stemmed in high school as a DJ in Miami’s emerging Hip Hop and Dancehall Reggae scene. Underground battles and warehouse sound clashes set the stage for a cultural explosion. Along with his turntables, Gil was armed with a consumer video camera and some passion for filmmaking. He convinced his high-school teachers to allow him to submit short films instead of book reports, developing his love and craft for filmmaking. His school classmates were his first audience, showcasing engaging musical narratives on film. He continued to pursue an education in film at the prestigious New York University (NYU).

At the age of 19, Gil directed his first music video for his NYU thesis project. Inspired and persistent, Gil sold his car and took out student loans to cover production costs. The $5,000 video held it’s own next to the $500,000 videos at the time, and gained national media recognition on television channels such as MTV, BET and The BOX.

Gil went on to direct over 150 music videos spanning across the Pop, Latin, and European markets. His client roster includes multi-platinum artists such as John Legend, Chris Brown, Akon, Lil Wayne, Kanye West, Neyo, Nicki Minaj, Usher, Pitbull, Flo Rida, P-Diddy, Neyo, Timbaland, Natasha Bedingfield, Robin Thicke, Nelly, 50 Cent, Matisyahu, Brandy, Snoop Dogg, Busta Rhymes, Sean Paul, T-Pain, Rick Ross, Drake, Wyclef, Common, Trey Songz, Lupe Fiasco, The Roots, and Oscar award winners, Three 6 Mafia.

In 2007, Gil returned to Miami to set up a home-based production company along side seasoned Producer Judd Allison. 305 Films quickly became the recognizable brand for high quality productions in South Florida, South America, and the Caribbean.

Gil has had been honored with multiple awards and nominations for his work in Music Videos. In 2012, Source Magazine honored Gil for “Video of the Year.” Gil has been nominated for “Director Of The Year” for the 2008, 2009, and 2010 BET Awards and won the 2008 MTV Video Music Award for Best Hip Hop video for his direction in Lil Wayne’s “Lollipop.”

Gil continues to expand his directing talents into various mediums. He currently has directed the opening introductions for the Miami Heat for the past six years, featuring Dwyane Wade, LeBron James, and Chris Bosh. He also filmed commercials for international companies such as Pepsi, Timberland Boots, Bud Light, and Hasboro Toys.

Gil recently directed a short film called, “Who Is Lou Gehrig?” The inspiring film is set to hit the festival circuit in 2015.

From music videos to commercials, Gil’s creative palette is drawn from a inspiring well of music, sports, and lifestyle. Gil’s next step is to translate his unique vision into the world of feature films. “My goal as a film maker is for the viewer to see it once and think about it twice.”