Practical matters first: fire up your DVRs in a hurry, because John Ford’s last film, “7 Women,” from 1966—one of his best films, one of the great last films, thus one of the greatest of all movies—is on TCM tonight at 6:30 (Eastern Standard Time), and it isn’t on DVD. Ford didn’t mean for “7 Women” to be his last movie, but (as Joseph McBride relates in his terrific biography of Ford) it was such a critical and commercial flop at the time of its release that Ford couldn’t get funding for any of the other projects that he had in mind.

Last films are a remarkable genre; even though most of them aren’t, of course, intended as such, circumstances have a way of making certain credit appearances of “The End” feel like endings bigger than those of a single movie. Sometimes a filmmaker late in life rages at the dying of the light—so Ingmar Bergman did, in “Saraband,” and so did a contemporary of Ford’s, Carl Theodor Dreyer, in “Gertrud,” from 1964. So, too, did Allan Dwan, who will soon have a long-overdue retrospective at MOMA and whose last film, “Most Dangerous Man Alive,” from 1961, is also a graphically jangled vision of a world out of joint. The subject of these films is death, and Ford’s version of it is the most ferocious of all.

“7 Women” is, in effect, a Western in the fortress-under-siege genre, set in the Far East—in China, in 1935, in a Christian mission run by women. The only man on hand is a teacher and faux preacher, played by Eddie Albert; his wife (Betty Field) is pregnant and in need of a doctor, and the one who arrives—D. R. Cartwright—is a woman (Anne Bancroft), a hard-nosed, hard-living rationalist with a past. Her conflict with the mission’s leader (Margaret Leighton) quickly takes a back seat to her skillful handling of an outbreak of plague and then to the crux of the drama—the attack on the mission by a marauding band of Mongols. Unlike in a classic Western, the women of the title have no weapons with which to resist the cruel and wanton invaders; they are completely at the mercy of the violent men. Only Dr. Cartwright, though, dares to stand up to their sanguinary, willful leader, Tunga Khan (Mike Mazurki)—and it excites him. Rather than raping her (as he did to a Chinese woman in the group), he wants her as his concubine, in exchange for releasing the others.

Redemption through a sin or a crime committed in the service to an unwritten moral law was among Ford’s deepest and most enduring themes, served perhaps most gloriously and painfully in “The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance.” That, too, is an old man’s film of pain, renunciation, and death, of sacrifice for a higher cause. “7 Women” replaces that film’s glorious nation-building with mere survival; its very subject is life and death, and its prime subplots, of pregnancy and disease, starkly reducing the subject of the film to the biological (and one of the film’s most poignant lines of dialogue—I won’t spoil the source—is “I’m alive”). The ending of the film, of a shattering, angry sublimity, a single shot of slender action and enormous drama, is one of the very noblest in all cinema.