John Ford and I share two things in common: our birthdays (February 1 – he in 1894, me some years later) and poor eyesight (both of us with glasses, though he stepped it up a notch with an eye patch in 1955). Where we differ is that John Ford was one of the founding and most influential directors in Hollywood and had a career that spanned 60 years, including turns as film actor, writer, producer, and – on rare occasions – singer, while I have a cat named “Gentleman.”

John Ford was born John Martin Feeney in Cape Elizabeth, Maine. When later asked what brought him to Hollywood, he said, “The train,” though technically he was following in his older brother Frank’s footsteps as the primary hub for American film production moved from New York to California in the early 20th century. Frank renamed himself Francis Ford and began acting in films in 1909, then started directing in 1912. John followed a similar path, first renaming himself Jack Ford, then John Ford and appearing as an actor in his brother’s films starting in 1913 before he directed his first of 147 films in 1917. Along with D.W. Griffith and Cecil B. DeMille, John Ford helped established the tradition of American narrative fiction film. When Orson Welles was asked for his three favorite directors, he said, “John Ford, John Ford, and John Ford.”

John Ford never apologized for making entertainment rather than art, though he still managed to earn 6 Academy Awards. Until film critics in the 1960s focused their attention on Citizen Kane (1941), Ford’s The Informer (1935) was widely considered the best American film ever made, though it has not aged as well despite its six Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture, and four wins, including Best Director and Best Writing. Even so, Ford is best remembered for his westerns – especially for the nine Ford westerns starring John Wayne, starting with Stagecoach (1939) and including The Searchers (1956), regarded by many as the best western of all time (though my personal favorite is an earlier Ford/Way collaboration, She Wore a Yellow Ribbon, from 1949).

Of course, some of Ford’s best films aren’t westerns, including The Grapes of Wrath, How Green Was My Valley, and The Quiet Man, all of which earned Ford Best Director Oscars. Ford still holds the record for the most Oscars for directing, including an unprecedented four in a row when you include his Oscars for documentary filmmaking during WWII. Ford was honored with the first ever American Film Institute Life Achievement Award in April of 1973, just four months prior to his death on August 31. At the ceremony, he was also presented with the Presidential Medal of Freedom.

Though known for his abrasive personality and aggressive style (he regularly mocked John Wayne for not having fought in WWII and once punched Henry Fonda while on the set of Mister Roberts (1955)), he bucked the Hollywood trend and remained married to the same woman, Mary, for 53 years from 1920 until his death (though John was Mary’s second husband, having divorced her previous husband of two years before marrying John).

John Ford’s complete works and appearances from 1918 to 1973 can all be found in the EIDR registry, with links to other resources for further study and viewing.

John Ford’s Filmography