Colombo: A former Tamil politician was slain in northern Sri Lanka, police said on Monday, as international backers of Sri Lanka's crumbling peace process met to discuss the spiralling ethnic violence.

Sinnathamby Sivamaharajah, 68, was shot dead on Sunday night outside his house in northern Jaffna peninsula, police and members of the former lawmaker's party said.

Police said they were investigating the crime, but do not yet have a motive or suspect.

Sivamaharajah was a member of the Tamil National Alliance, a political party widely believed to be a proxy of the separatist Tamil Tiger rebels.

Sri Lanka's foreign ceasefire monitoring mission will temporarily withdraw to the capital, it said on Monday.

The mission had been designed to monitor a 2002 ceasefire, but the monitors have been caught in the middle of the fighting between government troops and Tamil Tigers.

A curfew clamped within the peninsula has curtailed the movements of residents. The curfew has been relaxed three to four hours enabling residents to visit the nearby markets and carry out purchases.

Civilians in the peninsula said they were unable to sleep due to incessant shelling and the sound of Kfir fighter jets flying overhead, causing the windows of their homes to shudder and causing trauma to little children.

The fighting has left thousands displaced, mainly from the southern coast of the peninsula overlooking the lagoon and in areas adjoining the Palaly High Security Zone in the north.

Food shortage

As the violence escalated, envoys from the European Union, Japan, Norway and the US were meeting with Sri Lankan President Mahinda Rajapakse on Monday, officials said.

A cargo ship bearing the International Committee of the Red Cross flag and carrying food, medicine and two ICRC delegates was scheduled to leave Colombo at about 6 pm yesterday for Jaffna, the ICRC and government officials said.

The boat was expected to arrive some time on Wednesday after a 50-hour journey.

The top government official in Jaffna, K. Ganesh, said the peninsula has enough food to last through August 24, according to the government's official website.