New Delhi (Urban Transport News): The Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA) and board of Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) has approved the induction of first Light Urban Rail Transit system 'Metrolite' on 19 km stretch between Kirti Nagar and Dwarka Sector 25 Exhibition-cum-Convention Centre. The Kirti Nagar-Dwarka Sector 25 corridor will act as a feeder line for the metro rail network.

Sources said that discussions on the 'Metrolite' system on 21.7 km long Rithala-Narela metro corridor which is part of Phase IV of Delhi Metro, would be held in the next board meeting of the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC). After approval from the DMRC board, the files will be sent to Central Cabinet as well as Delhi Government for final approval. Secretary, Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Durga Shankar Mishra said:

DMRC has approved the Metrolite corridor connecting Dwarka and Kirti Nagar. Now, the Delhi government has to give its consent and send it to us for final approval. This will be sufficient to handle passenger traffic on the route. The Centre will provide financial assistance in the ratio of 50:50 on the lines of regular metro rail projects.

Commenting on the 'Metrolite' system, Union Minister for Housing & Urban Affairs, Hardeep Singh Puri said:

In my personal view, we should try new models such as Metrolite and Metro on Tyre where the footfall is less. These are less capital-intensive and serve the same purpose. Huge stations, as is the case with metro projects, need not be built. We have set up a committee to suggest the standards for Metro on Tyre.

According to DMRC officials, the DMRC has already started work on preparing detailed project reports (DPR) for the two metro corridors. A 19 km long Kirti Nagar-Dwarka Sector 25 corridor will start from Kirti Nagar interchange metro station (connecting the Blue and Green Lines) and end with Dwarka Sector 25 (will extend from Dwarka Sector 21) to connect the Airport Express Line. The Rithala-Narela metro corridor which is one of the six proposed metro corridors of Phase IV of Delhi Metro is yet to be approved by the Central Government.

This corridor will extend Delhi Metro's Red Line from Rithala. The government thinks that Rithala-Narela stretch has no heavy passenger traffic, hence the 'Metrolite' would be better suited on this. Apart from Delhi Metro, NMRC and Chennai Metro are also proposed to have a Metrolite system in upcoming metro corridors.