Steven Gerrard has laid out his ambitions for Aston Villa to be ‘taken seriously’ in the Premier League.

And, he says, the sure fire way to achieve that is by going on a ‘European journey,’ following in the footsteps of his former Liverpool boss Brendan Rodgers who has guided today’s Villa Park opponents Leicester City to top end finishes in the league and the opportunity to compete on the European stage in the Europa League, having previously qualified for the Champions League after winning the league title under Claudio Ranieri.

Villa are one of the five English clubs to have won the European Cup, having lifted the trophy in 1982, but have not featured in any European competition since the start of the 2009/10 season.

Gerrard has spoken to his former Liverpool team-mate Jamie Carragher about his plans for the club to build on the foundations laid down by his predecessor Dean Smith.

“Dean [Smith] did some fantastic work here so I didn’t think an awful lot needed to change,” said the Villa boss, speaking to the Sky Sports pundit ahead of today’s game.

“When you come in and speak to existing staff who are staying around, everyone spoke well about Dean Smith.

“This hasn’t been a case at all of me saying, ‘it’s all been done wrong’. There’s been some fantastic work and he signed some top players. The recruitment has been good, so it’s very much a case of looking at what can be improved on and what we can tweak.

“Taking Villa from where they were to finishing last season in the Premier League was a superb job. Obviously, I came with the side having suffered five straight defeats but based on the performances I don’t think they deserved that.

“It’s now about building on the work Dean did and taking the club onto the next level. I’d love nothing more than to give these fans some good memories and some good times.

“That’s the challenge for all of us together and I feel the club is ready-made to achieve that. We need to crawl before we can walk and need to fix a few things first.

“I look at teams from afar before I took the job, like West Ham and like Leicester, who are now part of a European journey.

“I believe a club like Villa need to go on a European journey ourselves so we can be taken seriously. We have to be competing for the domestic clubs and I see no reason why we can’t. It’s a realistic aim and a target.”

READ MORE: Carney Chukwuemeka breaks silence as Steven Gerrard comments on Aston Villa contract

READ MORE: Aston Villa XI vs Leicester predicted: El Ghazi recall as Steven Gerrard forced into key change