K-9 is a 2009 - 2010 British-Australian science fiction adventure series that aired on Network Ten in Australia and Disney XD in the United Kingdom. A spinoff of the long-running British series Doctor Who, it centers on the robot dog known as "K-9" (or, more officially, "K9 Mark IV"), a former companion of the Doctor who joins forces with a group of teenagers in "the near-future London" to defend the Earth from worldly and otherworldly threats. The series costars Philippa Coulthard, Keegan Joyce, and Daniel Webber. John Leeson, who first voiced the character of K-9 in 1977, returned to the role for this series.

Siren Of Ceres (Season 1, Episode 5)[edit | edit source]

Jorjie's mother sends her off to a private school after she witnesses a CCPC robot harassing a protestor and impulsively throws a rock at it. Some of the students have undergone a significant personality change, which one of Jorjie's fellow students suspects is linked to the bracelets that all of the changed girls now wear. The bracelets contain a mind-controlling substance known as Cerulium, which K-9 identifies as being the substance that ultimately destroyed the free will and the civilization of the planet Ceres. At school, Jorjie gives in to peer pressure and accepts a bracelet, placing her under mind control as well. It's up to K-9 and his friends to free the girls and destroy the bracelets before the substance is used to enslave all of London.

Jorjie goes to private school Magadalena.

Hypnotized girls introduces herself and welcome Jorjie.

Jorjie is punished for bad behaviour in class.

The girls answer the teacher question.

The hypnotized girls are going to invite to Jorjie and her new friend to join them, but Jorgie and her friend...

but Jorgie and her friend refuse to.

Queen bee is controlled...

by Drake...

to laugh higher and higher...

Now Jorjie's friend was hypnotized.

Stark tries to rescue Jorjie.

So he manages to break the force field.

The hypnotized girl is very docile.

K-9 and Professor Gryefen and Darius learn about mind control bracelet.

Now it is Jorjie time...

Queen bee say to Jorijie:

I got something for you...

Jorjie is tempted to accept the bracelet.

Her friend says the bracelet is make her skin shine.

Jorjie puts the bracelet and become mind controlled too.

Jorjie is very polite and tries to seduce her friend.

K-9 destroy the bracelet.

And Jorjie is out of trance.

Curse Of Anubis (Season 1, Episode 10)[edit | edit source]

K9 meets the Anubians, an alien race he once helped in his long-forgotten past. Although they were peaceful at that time, they have since become aggressive and warlike, using mind-control technology to subdue their enemies. To distract K-9, they worship him as a God, while other Anubians hypnotize Gryefen, Jorjie, and Stark.