FIRST time round, the groom did not turn up for the wedding because the presents were not attractive enough.Two years later, the wrapping has been improved, a few small extras have been added but the doubts remain and some guests are threatening to stay away.

EUROPEAN carmakers have called on the Commission to take action against South Korean restrictions on imported cars. The Association of European Automobile Manufacturers (ACEA) said new registrations of European cars dropped by 33% in the first half of the year. South Korea has initiated an austerity campaign which has targeted foreign imports.

THE EU encountered its first diplomatic tension over Burma’s accession to south-eastern trading bloc ASEAN at a meeting between ministers from the nine ASEAN countries, the Union, the United States, Russia, China, Japan, South Korea, India, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. The ASEAN bloc now consists of Malaysia, Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei, the Philippines, Vietnam, Burma and Laos, and in general has a wary but constructive record of cooperation with the EU since 1977. The body’s Secretary-General Ajit Singh acknowledged some problems had to be worked out, telling a news conference that there were “some technicalities we need to look at. The European Union has made it known it would not be ready yet to see Myanmar (Burma) accede It is an issue we will need to address in the near future.”

NEWS IN BRIEFIN A ground-breaking move, the European Commission has sent an official warning to the German post office for allegedly carrying out anti-competitive practices. In a letter to Deutsche Post AG, the Directorate-General for competition (DGIV) declared that it was minded to uphold a complaint from United Parcel Services (UPS) that the post office was using predatory pricing to kill off competition in the package delivery market. DGIV claimed that the low rates on offer to customers through the cross-subsidy from Deutsche Post’s monopoly services over the past 12 years “indicated an intention by DPAG to eliminate its competitors”. The complaint was filed in 1994 by UPS, which claimed that its attempts to compete on the German express delivery market had been undermined by Deutsche Post’s practices. The Commission plans to send a formal statement of objections to the post office in April.

NEWS IN BRIEFCOCA-COLA’s purchase of British bottling companyCoca-Cola SchweppesBeverages Ltd has been cleared by the European Commission after an in-depth probe under its merger rules. The Commission said the deal would merely transfer a dominant position from a joint venture between Coca-Cola and Schweppes to Coca-Cola on its own andtherefore could not be blocked under the rules.

NEWS IN BRIEFTHE creation of Europe’s biggest television company has been given the regulatorygo-ahead. The Commission’s clearance of the merger of Compagnie Luxembourgeoise de Télédiffusion (CLT) and UFA – the broadcasting subsidiary of German publisher Bertelsmann – into a joint venture allows the formation of a major audio-visual company. After a short inquiry, the Commission found that the merger would not create a dominant position in any of the relevant markets. UFA owns, together with Canal+ and Kirch, the Premiere pay-TV station in Germany, but CLT has no pay-TV presence there. Moreover, while Kirch launched the digital pay-TV channel DF1 in July, CLT and UFA abandoned their plans to launch a competitor in the form of Club RTL. The strength of the Kirch group in television channels and film rights means that CLT-UFA will face major competition.

NEWS IN BRIEFTHE European Commission has opened an investigation into the creation of the biggest wholesaler in Finland. The merger between Kesko Oy and Tuko Oy would create a marketing giant active in the wholesale and retail of daily consumer goods as well as speciality goods. The Finnish authorities asked the Commission to begin an inquiry since it had no jurisdiction in the absence of major sales revenue outside Finland. After an initial inquiry, the Commission found that the merger could foreclose the Finnish market to potential competitors as well as suppliers of consumer goods seeking to market products in Finland. The Commission now has four months to decide whether to allow or block the deal.

NEWS IN BRIEFTHE European Commission has called for stronger global rules to tackle the creation of cartels and other anti-competitive practices that block access to markets. In a communication to the Council of Ministers, Commissioners Sir Leon Brittan (trade) and Karel Van Miert (competition) said the next ministerial meeting of the World Trade Organisation in December should consider these proposals. With a framework agreement, WTO signatories could adopt and enforce competition rules according to agreed principles. But they opposed the creation of an over-arching international competition authority.