The saga of Africans and their descendants who returned to the Bight of Benin from Brazil in the nineteenth century—known in Benin and Nigeria as Brazilians, Agudas, or Amaros—has long captured the imagination of scholars. The single most intensive phase of return occurred in the late 1830s, following a Muslim-led slave uprising in the province of Bahia known as the Malê rebellion. Many other freed people migrated during later periods of the century.Footnote 1 Islam helped catalyze the early phase of the returnee movement, and most towns with Aguda quarters have mosques founded by returnees at different points in the nineteenth century. Still, as Elisée Soumonni observes, Muslim returnees have received little attention from scholars, most of whom have emphasized Catholicism’s importance in Aguda identity. Lagos is no exception, even though many of its Aguda families are known to be predominately Muslim.Footnote 2

This article examines the history of Muslim returnees by reconstructing the life of Saliu Salvador Ramos das Neves, founder of one of the oldest “Brazilian” mosques in Lagos. Based on extensive archival and ethnographic data from both sides of the Atlantic, the paper investigates his path from enslavement in Oyo and life in Bahia during the time of the Malê uprising, to freedom and eventual return to Lagos, where he became a leader among Muslim returnees. In tracing the story of his individual life, we also examine the role of other Muslims in the history of return to Lagos, underscoring Islam’s centrality in the making of Lagos’s Brazilian quarter and relating Saliu Salvador’s biography to the experiences of other Muslim returnees, in Bahia and in Lagos. Finally, the paper demonstrates that Muslims played an active role in the dynamic commercial and affective relationships that linked Africans in Brazil and West Africa during the nineteenth century.

The biographical approach that structures our article yields fine-grained information about individual subjects and their worlds, which tends to remain opaque when macro-historical methods are used, as recent historiography of the Black Atlantic shows.Footnote 3 Saliu Salvador’s biography yielded crucial information about his family and other personal relationships that were critical to his success as a freedman in Brazil. Many of those relationships were still important when he died four decades after leaving Brazil, illustrating the vital role of such networks in returnees’ lives.

Given our subject’s geographic mobility, sources from both sides of the Atlantic are integral to our analysis. Working with disparate sources, however, creates challenges. Most basically, returnees often were known by different names in different places, which sometimes changed across time, complicating efforts to trace them. The founder of Salvador Mosque, for example, appears in Brazilian documents as Salvador Ramos das Neves, but in Lagos his descendants remember him as Ramos Saliu Salvador. When discussing his life in Bahia, we have opted to refer to him using the names that appear in records there; in the section of the article dealing with Lagos, we refer to him as Saliu Salvador, in keeping with popular memory.