Jason Maxiell's professional basketball career has taken him to three NBA cities, including Detroit, as well as China and even the Philippines.

It will officially end as a member of the Pistons. Maxiell will retire as a member of the Pistons organization, according to a release issued by the team.

The 6-foot-7, 260-pound power forward, who was an NBA draft first-round selection out of the University of Cincinnati in 2005, has signed a contract with the Pistons in order to make it official.

Per a team spokesman, Maxiell's signing is simply so he can retire as a Piston. He will be waived. His signing has nothing to do with the Pistons' current roster or anything team-related going forward.

"The best years of my professional career were spent in Detroit and it's important to me to retire as a Detroit Piston," Maxiell said. "This is a special franchise with great tradition and history. I want to thank all the fans who supported me during my eight seasons representing Detroit."

Maxiell spent eight seasons with the Pistons, averaging 6.1 points and 4.4 rebounds in 523 games as a key bench player. The Chicago native was a member of four Pistons playoff teams spanning 2005 to 2008, highlighted by three Eastern Conference Finals appearances. In 35 career playoff games, he averaged 4.7 points and 3.3 rebounds.

Maxiell was known mostly for his defense. He finished his Pistons career with 426 blocks, ranking ninth all-time in franchise history.

In his 10-year NBA career, Maxiell averaged 5.6 points, 4.2 rebounds and 0.8 blocks in 618 games. His best season came with the Pistons in 2007-08, when he averaged 7.9 points, 5.3 rebounds and 1.1 blocks in 82 games.

After Detroit, Maxiell spent the 2013-14 season with the Orlando Magic and 2014-15 season with the Charlotte Hornets. For the 2015-16 season, he signed with Tianjin Ronggang of the Chinese Basketball Association. Last June, he signed with the Tropang TNT of the Philippine Basketball Association.

"Jason and his representatives reached out to us regarding his desire to sign one last contract with the team in order to retire as a Detroit Piston," Pistons general manager Jeff Bower said. "Jason made an impact on and off the court with the organization, spending eight seasons in Detroit, many with deep playoff runs. We're pleased that Jason has chosen to remain connected to our organization and wish him well in the future."