Delrina Corporation

One of Canada's first and largest software companies, co-founded by Mark Skapinker. The team notably invented WinFax, one of the most popular Windows programs of all time.

Highlights

600+ tech jobs created

Public listing on the TSE and NASDAQ

Sold to Symantec Corporation in 1995 for over US$400 million

Brightspark Financial, Inc. is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Brightspark Capital Inc., and is registered as an Exempt Market Dealer (EMD) in Alberta, British Columbia, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Quebec and Ontario with the Provincial Securities Commissions in Canada.

Investment Opportunities

Companies displayed on this website may not equate to current live/in-progress investment offerings.

“Featured opportunities” on the unrestricted portion of the Brightspark website contain summaries of the investment opportunities. Such summaries are intended for informational purposes only and do not purport to be complete, and each is qualified in its entirety by reference to the more detailed discussions contained in the respective offering materials relating to such investment opportunity.

Nothing set forth on this website shall constitute an offer to sell any securities or a solicitation of an offer to purchase securities in any jurisdiction. Any offer to sell or solicitation of an offer to purchase shall be made only to accredited investors through a limited partnership agreement related to each offering, and will be required to execute a subscription agreement to effect an investment in such offering.

Performance

Past performance is not indicative of future returns. Not all early-stage companies will go public or get acquired, and not all IPOs or acquisitions will result in successful investments. There are inherent risks in venture capital investments, including the risk of loss of the entire investment, illiquidity, and fluctuations in value and returns.

Testimonials

Specific customer experiences are not representative of all customer experiences and are no guarantee of future returns or success.

Risk

Investing in venture capital funds involves significant risks. The investment is suitable only for persons who can afford to lose their entire investment. Furthermore, investors must understand that such investment could be illiquid for an indefinite period of time. No public market currently exists for the securities, and if a public market develops following the offering, it may not continue. You should read the Limited Partnership Agreement for each offering before making any decision with respect to such offering.

The information contained on the Brightspark’s website has been prepared by Brightspark without reference to any particular user’s investment requirements or financial situation. Potential investors are encouraged to consult with professional tax, legal, and financial advisors before making any investment into a Brightspark offering. All investments involve risk, including the risk of the loss of all of your invested capital. Please consider carefully the investment objectives, risks, transaction costs, and other expenses related to an investment prior to deciding to invest.

Diversification and asset allocation do not ensure profit or guarantee against loss. Investment decisions should be based on an individual’s own goals, time horizon, and tolerance for risk.

Read our complete risk disclaimer