This active flag is not intended to be used to mark an organization as temporarily closed or under construction. Instead the Location(s) within the Organization should have the suspended status. If further details of the reason for the suspension are required, then an extension on this element should be used.

This element is labeled as a modifier because it may be used to mark that the resource was created in error.

Organizations can be corporations, wards, sections, clinical teams, government departments, etc. Note that code is generally a classifier of the type of organization; in many applications, codes are used to identity a particular organization (say, ward) as opposed to another of the same type - these are identifiers, not codes

When considering if multiple types are appropriate, you should evaluate if child organizations would be a more appropriate use of the concept, as different types likely are in different sub-areas of the organization. This is most likely to be used where type values have orthogonal values, such as a religious, academic and medical center.

We expect that some jurisdictions will profile this optionality to be a single cardinality.

Over time locations and organizations go through many changes and can be known by different names.

For searching knowing previous names that the organization was known by can be very useful.

The address/telecom use code 'home' are not to be used. Note that these contacts are not the contact details of people who provide the service (that would be through PractitionerRole), these are official contacts for the Organization itself for specific purposes. E.g. Mailing Addresses, Billing Addresses, Contact numbers for Booking or Billing Enquiries, general web address, web address for online bookings etc.

Note that an organization might have endpoints listed in any of the referenced directory resources, not just at the top Organization level (i.e. sub Organizations, Locations, HealthcareServices, PractitionerRoles)

The Endpoint.managingOrganization property indicates the organization that is supporting/managing the technical endpoint.

The official certifications, accreditations, training, designations and licenses that authorize and/or otherwise endorse the provision of care by the organization.

For example, an approval to provide a type of services issued by a certifying body (such as the US Joint Commission) to an organization.

Qualifications often take time to attain and might be tracked during this time, and completed qualifications might not always be valid. This status concept has some overlap with period and both should be considered together. Refer to the descriptions of the codes for how the period should be interpreted.

If a qualification is revoked or otherwise cancelled, then the period is likely to be ignored, and might be related to when it was active.