We create world-class content, which we distribute across our portfolio of film, television, and streaming, and bring to life through our theme parks and consumer experiences. We own and operate leading entertainment and news brands, including NBC, NBC News, MSNBC, CNBC, NBC Sports, Telemundo, NBC Local Stations, Bravo, USA Network, and Peacock, our premium ad-supported streaming service. We produce and distribute premier filmed entertainment and programming through Universal Filmed Entertainment Group and Universal Studio Group, and have world-renowned theme parks and attractions through Universal Destinations & Experiences. NBCUniversal is a subsidiary of Comcast Corporation.

Here you can be your authentic self. As a company uniquely positioned to educate, entertain and empower through our platforms, Comcast NBCUniversal stands for including everyone. Our Diversity, Equity and Inclusion initiatives, coupled with our Corporate Social Responsibility work, is informed by our employees, audiences, park guests and the communities in which we live. We strive to foster a diverse, equitable and inclusive culture where our employees feel supported, embraced and heard. Together, we’ll continue to create and deliver content that reflects the current and ever-changing face of the world.

The NBC News Digital team is looking for an experienced editor to join its owned platforms team in New York. The editor will curate the NBCNews.com homepage and app, write breaking news alerts for app and email, and distribute content to partners such as Apple News, Yahoo and Flipboard.

The editor will handle stories from all sections of the newsroom, including breaking news, politics, business, sports and lifestyle. The ideal candidate will have strong editorial judgment and excellent writing and editing skills. They will know what drives audiences to engage with articles and video on mobile and desktop. Strong communication skills and a comfort working under tight deadlines are crucial.

This role’s hours are 8:30a to 4:30p ET, Monday to Friday. This position reports to the Deputy Director of Owned Platforms.

This position has been designated as hybrid, generally contributing from the office a minimum of 3 days per week. This position is represented by the New York NewsGuild - CWA. It is full-time, based in New York.

Job Responsibilities

Curate the NBC News homepage and app with a lively mix of breaking news, politics, enterprise reporting and video

Execute live coverage plans on the homepage and app, including liveblogs and video

Frame and package stories from all sections of the newsroom, including breaking news stories, features and counterprogramming

Coordinate plans with section editors to ensure their stories are promoted and distributed in all the right places

Write and edit headlines, app alerts and breaking news emails

Distribute and pitch stories to Apple News, Yahoo and Flipboard

Monitor analytics and audience behavior to inform story curation and strategy

Work with photo editors to ensure the homepage and app is always looking sharp

NBCUniversal's policy is to provide equal employment opportunities to all applicants

and employees without regard to race, color, religion, creed, gender, gender identity

or expression, age, national origin or ancestry, citizenship, disability, sexual

orientation, marital status, pregnancy, veteran status, membership in the uniformed

services, genetic information, or any other basis protected by applicable law.

If you are a qualified individual with a disability or a disabled veteran, you have the

right to request a reasonable accommodation if you are unable or limited in your

ability to use or access nbcunicareers.com as a result of your disability. You can

request reasonable accommodations by emailing [email protected].