We create world-class content, which we distribute across our portfolio of film, television, and streaming, and bring to life through our theme parks and consumer experiences. We own and operate leading entertainment and news brands, including NBC, NBC News, MSNBC, CNBC, NBC Sports, Telemundo, NBC Local Stations, Bravo, USA Network, and Peacock, our premium ad-supported streaming service. We produce and distribute premier filmed entertainment and programming through Universal Filmed Entertainment Group and Universal Studio Group, and have world-renowned theme parks and attractions through Universal Destinations & Experiences. NBCUniversal is a subsidiary of Comcast Corporation.

Here you can be your authentic self. As a company uniquely positioned to educate, entertain and empower through our platforms, Comcast NBCUniversal stands for including everyone. Our Diversity, Equity and Inclusion initiatives, coupled with our Corporate Social Responsibility work, is informed by our employees, audiences, park guests and the communities in which we live. We strive to foster a diverse, equitable and inclusive culture where our employees feel supported, embraced and heard. Together, we’ll continue to create and deliver content that reflects the current and ever-changing face of the world.

Role Purpose:

The Director, SAP S/4 Code Block Lead is a critical role for NBCUniversal’s SAP S/4 HANA implementation, “Project Keystone.” This position will work with colleagues across the global NBCU Finance and Technology organizations, playing an active role in our finance digital transformation from design to deployment.

NBCU legacy SAP ECC code block is not optimized for S/4 HANA. Therefore, significant work has been performed in pre-phase to redesign to code block to be able to streamline processes, improve performance, enhance reporting, and potentially reduce errors.

The role of the SAP S/4 Code Block Lead is responsible for the continuation of key code block activities including design, dimension clean-up, assessment on key boundary systems impacted and configuration/activation of new code block in NBCU S/4 environment. Additionally highlight reporting that can be driven from the new S/4 general ledger. This role will work closely with system integrators (SIs) to gain a deep understanding of suggested SAP best practices and evaluate in partnership with BU’s and process workstreams.

The new code block design needs to facilitate internal management reporting needs (both Controllership & FP&A) as well as external requirements including SEC, Tax, Statutory reporting

Responsibilities:

Provide strategic thinking based on subject matter expertise (SME) for next generation ERP Finance Solutions data design and migration.

Participate in Global Design workshops and interface with functional workstreams (RTR, STP, OTC), the S/4 leadership team, System Integrators (SI) and more to design, develop, test, and deploy of code blocks within SAP S/4 HANA.

Map code block dimensions currently used to future state, including activity held in boundary systems/subledgers; working with business users to ensure all activity is mapped appropriately.

Identify opportunities to streamline processes and reporting by leveraging SAP S/4 HANA functionalities and code blocks.

Manage projects related to code block development, ensuring they are delivered on time, within budget, and meet all functional and technical requirements.

Oversee system testing and troubleshoot functional issues.

Partner with the IT team to facilitate smooth system integration and data migration (if applicable).

Be a change agent for the SAP S/4 transformation.

Other responsibilities as directed.

NBCUniversal's policy is to provide equal employment opportunities to all applicants

and employees without regard to race, color, religion, creed, gender, gender identity

or expression, age, national origin or ancestry, citizenship, disability, sexual

orientation, marital status, pregnancy, veteran status, membership in the uniformed

services, genetic information, or any other basis protected by applicable law.

If you are a qualified individual with a disability or a disabled veteran, you have the

right to request a reasonable accommodation if you are unable or limited in your

ability to use or access nbcunicareers.com as a result of your disability. You can

request reasonable accommodations by emailing [email protected].