Horam in English dictionary

Sample sentences with "Horam"

Declension Stem

Horam and all his host were killed when they came to the aid of Lachish at the time of Joshua’s campaign against that city. —Jos 10:33; 12:7, 8, 12, 24.

Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.

And finally Horames has good news:

The village's name is of Latin origin: ad horam sexta, meaning "at six-hour", referred to its location south to Innichen.

33 ¶ Then Horam king of aGezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.

Maiorem noctis partem in convivio exigebat; usque in horam sextam fere dormiebat: hoc eius erat matutinum.

Kahorpam Horam shared still more photos from the scene of the mayhem in Ukhrul.

Also, Horam the king of Gezer, who came to the aid of Lachish, suffered defeat. —Jos 10:31-35.

Incertam frustra, mortales, funeris horam

Quaero circa horam octauam noctisquid sibi ille sonus rotarum uelit: gestari dicitur.

verse "33" Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.

‘Carpe horam, carpe diem,’ Danglard murmured, standing two paces back.

Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish. and Joshua struck him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.

JOSH 10:33 Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.

10:33 At that time Horam king of Gazer, came up to succour Lachis: and Josue slew him with all his people, so as to leave none alive.

33 Meanwhile, Horam king of Gezer had come up to help Lachish, but Joshua defeated him and his army--until no survivors were left.

33 At that time King Horam of Gezer went to help Lachish,† but Joshua struck him down along with his people, leaving no survivors. 34 Then Joshua crossed from Lachish to Eglon and all Israel with him.

33Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish.

And from there he passed on to Lachish to fight against it, and Horam king of Gaza went up to assist the men of Lachish, and Joshua smote him and his people until there was none left to him.

10:33 Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua struck him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.

Available translations

Irish

Welsh

Authors