Responding to the Crisis in East Timor

Address of

José Ramos-Horta

1996 Recipient of the

Nobel Peace Prize

José Ramos-Horta discussed the August 30th East Timor autonomy referendum, the ensuing violence, and the future of East Timor with Indonesia relations, amongst other topics.

Biography of José Ramos-Horta

The following 13 files contain the entire address. You may listen to them in series or separately.

Archived Audio (Available by Segment)

Ramos Remarks Part 1

Ramos-Horta discusses the mood of East Timorese towards the Republic of Indonesia and its possible participation in the UN Multinational Force.

Running Time - 2 min • 912K Download*

Ramos Remarks Part 2

Ramos-Horta discusses the difficulty of integrating Indonesian soldiers in the UN Multinational Force.

Running Time - 2 min • 888K Download

Ramos Remarks Part 3

Ramos-Horta discusses the Indonesian security forces, the militias, and the August 30 autonomy referendum.

Running Time - 2 min • 890K Download

Ramos Remarks Part 4

Ramos-Horta discusses violence in the East and West Timor border region, and its intended impact on the New York Agreement.

Running Time - 2 min • 970K Download

Ramos Remarks Part 5

Ramos-Horta discusses attacks by Indonesian forces in Dili prior to the referendum vote.

Running Time - 2 min • 876K Download

Ramos Remarks Part 6

Ramos-Horta discusses the destabilizing nature of the Indonesian Army; the the de facto independence of East Timor.

Running Time - 2 min • 888K Download

Ramos Remarks Part 7

Ramos-Horta discusses the New York Agreement; war crimes in East Timor.

Running Time - 2 min • 888K Download

Ramos Remarks Part 8

Ramos-Horta discusses war crimes on East Timor; the need for self-defense.

Running Time - 2 min • 964K Download

Ramos Remarks Part 9

Ramos-Horta discusses the self-defense on East Timor and deterring future atrocities; the forced removal of East Timorese.

Running Time - 2 min • 896K Download

Ramos Remarks Part 10

Ramos-Horta discusses the sanctions against Indonesia to force the return of removed East Timor; devastation on East Timor.

Running Time - 2 min • 924K Download

Ramos Remarks Part 11

Running Time - 2 hr 27 min • 33M Download*

Ramos-Horta discusses the personal impact of the violence since the referendum.

Running Time - 2 min • 1M Download

Ramos Remarks Part 12

Ramos-Horta discusses the future foreign relations of an independent East Timor.

Running Time - 2 min • 1M Download

Ramos Remarks Part 13

Ramos-Horta discusses state directed destruction on East Timor; Indonesian opposition to the UN Multinational Force.

Running Time - 2 min • 776K Download