The victory of Nobel Peace Prize winner José Ramos-Horta in the East Timorese presidential election, on Tuesday, April 19, not only marks the return to office of the former head of state (2007-2012) of this small country located at a strategic crossroad between Southeast Asia, the Pacific Ocean and Oceania. The recent success of this major political figure, who won 62.09% of the vote, compared to 37.91% for the outgoing president, Francisco Guterres, could also allow China to advance a little further in this vast regional geopolitical game of Go, where it has become one of the leading players.

The elected president of this island nation twice the size of Corsica, which shares its territory with the other half of the island belonging to Indonesia (West Timor), does not hide his pro-Beijing sympathies. He wants to see China continue its investments in Timor-Leste, the official name of the country. This includes the financing of an oil and gas mega-project off the southern coast, estimated to cost 18 billion U.S. dollars (17 billion euros). "China is not a threat, but an opportunity," Ramos-Horta insisted in September 2019, in an interview with Le Monde. "To think that we could end up the victims of the Chinese 'debt trap' is absurd!" he added.

However, if the People's Republic of China were to become the main – or sole – financier of a project to develop some 141 billion cubic meters of natural gas and extract 226 million barrels of oil, East Timor – with a GDP of $3 billion – would be in danger of becoming heavily dependent on Beijing. "Even setting aside questions of cost and viability, Ramos-Horta seems ready to intensify the search for Chinese investment," two U.S. experts on East Timor confirmed this week on the Nikkei Asia Review website. "Ramos-Horta is certainly not anti-Western, but he has adopted a more pronounced pro-Chinese bias than other local political figures," said experts Parker Novak and Jack Mullan. The likelihood of some pro-Chinese shift on the island has the neighbor Australia, with whom East Timor has had a long and ambivalent relationship, seething. Relations between Beijing and Canberra have deteriorated considerably in recent years.

Spokesperson for the resistance

José Ramos-Horta, 72 years old, belongs to the first generation of resistance fighters who fought for a long time, both internally and externally, against the Indonesian occupation of the former Portuguese colony: The regime of the former dictator Suharto occupied Timor between 1975 and 1999 and withdrew his troops only after leaving a bloody trail on the red earth of the island: 1,400 people were killed by pro-Indonesian militias and Jakarta soldiers in 1999, before an Australian-led peacekeeping force intervened. East Timor will celebrate the twentieth anniversary of its independence on May 20, 2002, a day that will mark the beginning of the five-year term of the new head of state of this semi-presidential system.