Accredited Drug Testing provides DNA testing in all cities throughout the State and in the event the parties for the DNA test are located in different cities or States, Accredited Drug Testing will coordinate and schedule all of the DNA tests to ensure that all parties are accommodated in a convenient manner. As an example if the mother and child are in one city, but the alleged father is in another, we will contact all parties to schedule the DNA test at a convenient location and time and report the results back to the authorized parties.

Accredited Drug Testing takes the stress, out of a stressful situation!

DNA testing Chateaugay centers are available to assist you in finding the answers you need, call (800)221-4291 to schedule a DNA test appointment.

The Accredited Drug Testing, DNA testing Chateaugay staff are committed to providing convenient, compassionate and confidential DNA testing Chateaugay services which will give you personalized customer service and will assist you in making these very important decisions, Call (800)221-4291 and speak to a DNA specialist.

Legal or NON-Legal DNA Tests

At times persons in need of a DNA test will look for the cheapest method or a home DNA kit, however a cheap or "do it yourself" DNA test many times are not accurate or will stand a legal challenge or can successfully defend a legal challenge in a court of law. Not all laboratory's or DNA testing centers are equal. Accredited Drug Testing only uses DNA testing Chateaugay qualified and certified testing centers and nationally recognized DNA testing Chateaugay laboratories.

When scheduling a DNA test regardless of the purpose, Accredited Drug Testing recommends always utilizing a legal DNA test procedure for current or future use. A legal DNA test has very specific Chain of Custody test procedures which insures that the DNA test results can be used in a legal proceeding. A non-legal DNA test will provide the results, but cannot be used in any type of legal matter. When conducting a legal DNA test all parties must present a valid form of identification, photographs will be taken of all parties, legal guardian documentation and or birth certificates of any minor children may be required. These procedures for a legal DNA test insure that should the DNA test results be used in a legal proceeding, the chain of custody is carefully followed and no challenge to the results can be successfully made, that's why it's always best to schedule a legal DNA test.

DNA testing can be used for the following purposes

Birth Certificate Modification

Child Support

Child Custody

Adoption

Wills/Insurance

Immigration

DNA Paternity Testing Chateaugay

A DNA test for paternity purposes determines the biological father of a child. Every human inherits specific DNA from both biological parents, half from the mother and half from the father. A DNA test examines a child's DNA pattern with that of a alleged father to determine if the child and the alleged father have the same DNA. Results of a properly administered DNA test utilizing a AABB accredited laboratory are 99.9% accurate. While DNA paternity testing maybe stressful for some parties involved, Accredited Drug Testing is committed to making the entire DNA paternity testing experience, professional, convenient, confidential and Stress Free.

Establishing a biological relationship is important and has many benefits including

Medical history for the child

Establishing legal, custodial and inheritance claims

Enhances the family unit and bond between father and other family members

When administering a DNA test to a child/minor, the legal guardian must be present and provide authorization for the DNA test to be conducted. The legal guardian can be the mother, father or other natural or court ordered person who has legal decision making authority over the minor child.

DNA Immigration Testing

DNA testing can be used for reasons relating to immigration and the biological relationship between a petitioner and affiliated individual. DNA immigration testing can be used for paternity tests, maternity tests, sibling relationship and other purposes required by the U.S Department of State. Accredited Drug Testing will coordinate the entire process, including scheduling the DNA test for parties located in the United States and forward the DNA collection kit to the U.S Embassy located in a foreign country where the other party is located. Once the DNA collection has occurred at one of our testing centers in the U.S and at the U.S Embassy where the other parties are located, Accredited Drug Testing will ensure that all specimens are sent to the lab for DNA testing and provide the results once the AABB laboratory has analyzed the DNA test.

What is a DNA test?

A DNA test is a procedure to determine if exact biological characteristics exist in one person's DNA and those exact same DNA characteristics in another person's DNA makeup. As humans each of us have different DNA makeup, however parents and children have the same DNA, siblings from the same parents have the same DNA and grandparents have the same DNA as grandchildren. A DNA test is a non-intrusive procedure usually utilizing a oral swab from all parties, which then follows a specific chain of custody process in which the oral swab specimens are sent to a certified and accredited AABB laboratory. The Laboratory than analyzes the DNA specimen and provides the results. DNA test results are 99.9% accurate.

AABB Laboratory Accreditation information - Click Here

How to schedule a DNA Testing Chateaugay?

It's simple, contact Accredited Drug Testing at (800)221-4291, and provide various information including the city you wish to take the DNA test, who will be taking the DNA test, mother, child and alleged father. When the parties are available to take the DNA test (Accredited Drug Testing will schedule the appointment with each available party). Once the results are received from the AABB laboratory Accredited Drug Testing will forward the results by email and U.S Mail (Hard Copy) to all authorized parties.

How long does it take for DNA test results?

Once all parties have completed the DNA test collection, the specimens are immediately sent to the certified AABB laboratory and results are usually available in 3-5 business days.

On-Site/Mobile DNA Testing Chateaugay

We come to you!, Accredited Drug Testing can provide on-site/mobile DNA testing at your home, office, hospital or other location. (Additional on-site fees may apply)