Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), comprised of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) and Republika Srpska (RS), is a federal democracy in the Balkan region of southeast Europe. Persistent divisions among ethnic groups, the Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats, occasionally lead to political deadlock and hinder the functioning of the federal government. Low-level inter-ethnic violence periodically occurs, although overall the country is regarded as a success story of international reconstruction efforts. BiH has made significant progress in the rebuilding of its infrastructure and economy, but high unemployment rates and insufficient economic growth have led to an increase in conventional and organized crime. Corruption is widespread. The country is committed to economic reform and increasing foreign direct investment. Protests and riots have occurred over socio-economic grievances. The country has a good network of roads linking major cities, although roads in more rural areas may be underdeveloped. The primary threat to travelers is from petty street crime.

BiH is a “potential candidate country” for membership of the EU and has formally applied for accession, although it has not yet been accepted as a member of NATO.

Relations with neighbors are generally stable. Low-level ethnic violence periodically occurs. The growth of Islamic State (IS) presents a low-level terror threat. Security forces have prioritized counter-terrorism efforts. Petty crime is the most prominent threat, particularly in major urban centers such as Sarajevo or Mostar. Violent crime is rare. Unrest frequently occurs in response to various political, economic, and ethnic issues. These are typically peaceful.

The EU has a standing deployment of military personnel to BiH, named Operation Althea. Around 600 troops have an executive mandate to maintain a stable and secure environment in the country.

The climate of Bosnia and Herzegovina varies from a mild Mediterranean climate in the south to a more temperate continental climate in the hilly interior and northern plains and a colder mountain climate in the Dinaric Alps. Flooding can occur in the spring due to snow and ice melt and following heavy rains, particularly in areas in the vicinity of the River Sava. Forest fires can occur during summer heat waves. Landmines remain present in many rural locations despite de-mining efforts in recent years; most minefields are well-marked. Air pollution is a problem in urban city centers. The country often experiences minor-to-moderate earthquakes and landslides.

Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is a federal multi-party parliamentary directorial republic. The country is divided into two federal entities, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) with a majority of Bosniaks and Croats, and the Republika Srpska (RS) with a majority of Serbs. The High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina is the highest political authority and holds important powers, including a veto right. The Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of three members of different ethnicities and serves as a collective head of state. The Bosniak and Croat members are elected in the FBiH and the Serb member is elected in the RS during general elections. The Chairman of the Presidency rotates every eight months. The Chairman of the Council of Ministers is the head of government and exercises executive power along with the Council of Ministers. The parliament consists of the House of Representatives (lower house) and the House of Peoples (upper house) and exercises legislative power along with the Council of Ministers. FBiH and RS have their own constitution, president, prime minister, executive and legislative bodies. General elections take place once every four years and elect the three members of the Presidency, the president of the RS and the members of the Houses of Representatives of the BiH, the FBiH and the RS. The judiciary is nominally independent of the executive and the legislature but is widely regarded as corrupt and vulnerable to external pressures.

Coalitions featuring a cross-section of political parties are typically required to form the federal government and the entities’ governments. Government collapses are uncommon. State institutions are moderately competent and effective and provide reliable services across most of the country.