Fazal Name Meaning in English

What does the name Fazal mean? What is the meaning of the name Fazal, lucky number, lucky stone, origin and religion.

Fazal also spelled Fazl, (Arabic: فضل ‎‎) is a given name meaning bounty. It may refer to: Abul Fazal Muhammad Ahsanuddin Chowdhury or A. F. M. Ahsanuddin Chowdhury, the ninth President of the People's Republic of Bangladesh.

Fazal Name Meaning, Origin & Details

Meaning: Grace Details: Excellence Gender: Boy Origin: Arabic Religion: Muslim Suitable for: Boys / Male / Guys Hardness: Easy to pronounce, Fazal is a short name Uniqueness: It is a common name Short & Easy: Yes Syllables: 5 Letters and 1 Words

Fazal Name Meaning in Urdu ⟶

Related or Similar Names

If you like the meanings or synonyms of name Fazal; we have created list of popular names that can be considered as alternative of the name Fazal.

Below names are with similar meaning as Grace. Explore the list below for names that not only share a similar meaning to "Grace" but also encapsulate the essence and significance associated with the name "Fazal."

Need Sibling Names For Fazal?

Brothers sibling names for Fazal can be chosen from the list below.

Fazal Name Lucky Number 2

Fazal Name Numerology And Personality

Fazal has the numerology 2. People with numerology 2 are known to be one of the most cooperative and that is because they are very quick to adapt to whatever environment they choose to be in. They do not keep overthinking everything rather they start to work immediately.

The gender of this Fazal is Boy these people are also very inclusive of everyone which makes them considering and they do not let the people around them feel left out. They are always very compassionate and affectionate towards everyone and that is why they are heart of any get together. The meaning of this Fazal is Grace.

These people are always the first ones to mediate whenever something serious occurs and they are also very good at partnering with people which definitely makes them one a kind.

Fazal Ethnicity Distribution

Popular personalities with Fazal Name.

Fazal Name Wallpaper

Fazal name 3D wallpaper and writing styles, Write Fazal name on photo online, Fazal name writing style online, Write Fazal name on image online, Write Fazal name pic & wallpaper, Fazal 3D name wallpapers editing, Fazal new wallpaper, Fazal 3d name creator online, Fazal name background maker, Create my name in style for Fazal

See Fazal Name Wallpaper ⟶

How People Search Fazal