This is a worthy remake of the 1967 Soviet fantasy-horror film, Viy, based on a story by Nikolai Gogol.

Both films feature the central story of a carnal, underachieving seminary student who unwittingly kills a witch that attacks him. Later he is asked, by the woman's father, to pray for three nights over her open coffin prior to her burial. Nobody but the student knows she was a witch....and he is not allowed to refuse.

However, this Yugoslavian remake takes the story much farther afield and includes an emphasis on sexual depravity that Viy hinted at but did not emphasize

The filmmakers had more freedom in 1990s than the Soviet creators previously enjoyed. I think the restraint observed in Viy…

After continuing on with the Viy blu-ray, I may have found an obscure classic (I am teetering the line on giving this a 4 1/2 perhaps). Whilst it doesn't devolve away from the source material, it does use a few differences, and it doesn't really take away from the story either, it just makes it its own thing.

It gives the witch a name, Katerina, and a back story and her father. Both of whom seem even more unpleasant than in the Russian film I just covered. Made by Yugoslavian (or in modern specifics, Serbian) director Đorđe Kadijević, he makes a more Gothic, almost Transylvanian tale, looking film. It is probably more outright creepier and more gothic than the Russian…

Memory fails me exactly but this Yugoslav version feels like a much closer adaptation of Nikolai Gogol's The Viy than the more famous Soviet film. Whereas Viy fully embraces notions of the supernatural and the (literally) monstrous, A Holy Place prefers to dwell in the borderlands of psychological horror and supernatural horror, where the existence of witches and the living dead seems to be confirmed but could easily be interpreted as delusion as well.

This one came as a special feature on the Eureka blu-ray release of Viy and, despite the film stock looking scratched-to-shit in the finest grindhouse tradition, this is a gorgeous looking film. The performances are strong all round, but I have to give special mention to…

My marathon through Severin's All The Haunts Be Ours: A Compendium Of Folk Horror boxset may be complete, but I still have a couple more films to finally get around to watching before I'd truly feel ready to move on to my next viewing plans. First up is another film from the director of Leptirica, Štićenik, and Devičanska Svirka.

I've owned a copy of Đorđe Kadijević's A Holy Place for a couple of years now (due to its inclusion in Eureka's release of Viy), but I haven't made the time for it until tonight. This is another adaptation of the same folklore that inspired the Soviet classic, so it feels appropriate to watch while the details of the more well-known…