John Torode, the straight-talking judge on MasterChef, has had quite a journey in love.

From a quick divorce to marrying his co-star from MasterChef, Lisa Faulkner, his love life has been full of twists and turns.

John, 58, and Lisa, 51, both have previous marriages. Lisa was married to Chris Coghill, known for his role as Tony King in EastEnders, and they adopted a daughter named Billie.

John, on the other hand, was married to a woman named Jessica with whom he shares two children.

The couple met when Lisa was a contestant on Celebrity MasterChef. They became friends and eventually fell in love.

However, Lisa insists there was nothing romantic between them initially as they were both in other relationships at the time.

"He was a judge on a show I loved and I was petrified of him. He was brilliant and gave us all tips so you didn't want to let him down," she previously said, according to The Mirror.

"All I could think was, 'That sauce hasn't worked'. I didn't see anything but food for three months. After I won, we did The Good Food Show and stuff. John and I always got on, but I never thought about me and him."

Revealing how they eventually got together, Lisa told the Daily Mail in 2013 that everything changed after John wrote her a letter and asked her out to dinner.

"John and I were friends. Neither of us thought of it as anything else until..." she said. "I don't know how things change, but something does. He asked me on a date. We went out for dinner. Then it was slightly different. I'm really, really happy. John and I are having such a nice time but we're taking things slowly. There are lots of other people to consider."

John has since confessed that his letter for Lisa was "cowardly" but it meant that there would be no awkwardness for him if she didn't want to date him.

He told the Daily Mail: "I'd separated from my wife [Jessica] which was awful, and I was reluctant to approach Lisa face to face as I didn't fancy the prospect of her saying no, so I wrote her a letter. If I'd got no response, it wouldn't matter. Cowardly? S***, yeah. I'm as cowardly as they get."

John shared the secret to his happy marriage with Lisa, saying: "A really well-made bed. You spend lots of time in it! Honestly, the bedroom having that sanctuary of a place to go to, I think that's really important. And nice towels... Looking after yourself is as important as looking after each other."

Lisa also gushed about their relationship in an interview, saying: "We really like and fancy each other!" She recently expressed her pride for John, who received his MBE from Prince William at Buckingham Palace in February. "I was really proud of John," she told OK!

"It's an amazing achievement and the fact he got to meet Prince William! Out of everybody in the royal family, that's who I'd have liked to have met!"