A TV chef well known for his work on MasterChef is now hosting a new show with his wife. Australian-British chef John Torode and his wife, Lisa Faulkner, have a new cooking show together called John and Lisa's Weekend Kitchen.

The pair met whilst she was a contestant on MasterChef and they often gush about how happy they are together. John had previously been married to a woman called Jessica since 2000, and the pair had two children together, but they split in 2011 and later divorced in 2014.

Lisa was previously married to Chris Coghill, who played Tony King in EastEnders and they have an adopted daughter together named Billie. The pair met in 2010 when Lisa was a contestant on Celebrity MasterChef, reports The Daily Mirror.

Should the TV Licence be scrapped? Let us know

The pair hit it off and remained friends after the show, with Lisa insisting there was nothing romantic between them at first. The 51 year old said: "He was a judge on a show I loved and I was petrified of him. He was brilliant and gave us all tips so you didn't want to let him down.

"All I could think was, 'That sauce hasn't worked.' I didn't see anything but food for three months. After I won, we did The Good Food Show and stuff. John and I always got on, but I never thought about me and him."

Revealing how they eventually got together, Lisa told the Daily Mail in 2013 that everything changed after John, now aged 57, wrote her a letter and asked her out to dinner. She said: "John and I were friends. Neither of us thought of it as anything else until..."

"I don't know how things change, but something does. He asked me on a date. We went out for dinner. Then it was slightly different.

"I'm really, really happy. John and I are having such a nice time but we're taking things slowly. There are lots of other people to consider."

John has since confessed that his letter for Lisa was "cowardly" but it meant that there would be no awkwardness for him if she didn't want to date him. He told the Daily Mail: "I'd separated from my wife [Jessica] which was awful, and I was reluctant to approach Lisa face to face as I didn't fancy the prospect of her saying no, so I wrote her a letter.

"If I'd got no response, it wouldn't matter. Cowardly? S***, yeah. I'm as cowardly as they get." However, the couple soon began dating and tied the knot in October 2019.

They have since shared that the secret to a happy marriage is a properly made bed. Asked what makes their marriage work, John, 57, said: "A really well-made bed.

"You spend lots of time in it! Honestly, the bedroom – having that sanctuary of a place to go to, I think that's really important. And nice towels... Looking after yourself is as important as looking after each other."

Lisa said in an interview: "We really like and fancy each other!" And Lisa has most recently shared how proud she is of her husband, who in February accepted his MBE from the Prince of Wales at Buckingham Palace, before celebrating with a fancy meal.