TV chef John Torode had an interesting way of asking his wife Lisa Faulkner out on a date.

John first met Lisa on the set of Celebrity MasterChef, and let's just say it wasn't love at first sight. They're now known for their popular ITV cooking show, John and Lisa's Weekend Kitchen, but not everyone knows how they first crossed paths.

It was all thanks to Celebrity MasterChef in 2010, where Lisa was a contestant serving up dishes for judge John. At the time, both were in other relationships, so they just became friends.

READ MORE: GMB's Susanna Reid in tears over Robin Windsor death as Strictly stars pay tribute

READ MORE: Click for more brilliant Daily Star TV stories

Lisa insisted there was nothing romantic going on at first. But when they were both single a few years later, John asked Lisa out and sparks flew. They got married in 2019 and have been happy ever since.

Before Lisa, John was married to a woman named Jessica, with whom he has two children - a son and a daughter. They split in 2011 and officially divorced in 2014, and it's said their union was dissolved in a matter of seconds at the High Court.

Lisa, an actress, was previously married to EastEnders actor Chris Coghill, and they adopted a daughter named Billie together. But eventually she found John, whom she met on Masterchef.

It seems he scared her at first, because Lisa said: "He was a judge on a show I loved and I was petrified of him. He was brilliant and gave us all tips so you didn't want to let him down," adding: "All I could think was, 'That sauce hasn't worked'. I didn't see anything but food for three months.

"After I won, we did The Good Food Show and stuff. John and I always got on, but I never thought about me and him." Lisa shared with the Daily Mail in 2013 how their friendship turned into romance after John sent her a letter and invited her out.

She explained: "John and I were friends. Neither of us thought of it as anything else until... I don't know how things change, but something does. He asked me on a date. We went out for dinner. Then it was slightly different. I'm really, really happy. John and I are having such a nice time but we're taking things slowly. There are lots of other people to consider."

John admitted to the Daily Mail that writing a letter to Lisa was a "cowardly" way to ask her out, but it saved him from potential embarrassment. He confessed: "I'd separated from my wife [Jessica] which was awful, and I was reluctant to approach Lisa face to face as I didn't fancy the prospect of her saying no, so I wrote her a letter.

"If I'd got no response, it wouldn't matter. Cowardly? S***, yeah. I'm as cowardly as they get." The pair started dating and eventually got hitched. John once revealed his secret to a joyous marriage - a bed made just right.

Revealing how their marriage works so well, John said: "A really well-made bed. You spend lots of time in it! Honestly, the bedroom – having that sanctuary of a place to go to, I think that's really important. And nice towels... Looking after yourself is as important as looking after each other."

The love between the couple is undeniable, with Lisa confessing in a chat: "We really like and fancy each other!" More recently, Lisa shared her pride for her spouse when he received his MBE from the Prince of Wales at Buckingham Palace in February.

In an interview with OK Magazine, Lisa said: "I was really proud of John," adding: "It's an amazing achievement and the fact he got to meet Prince William! Out of everybody in the Royal family, that's who I'd have liked to have met!"