Get Carter (1971)

Get Carter is a nasty British gangster film. For some reason, all British movie gangsters are extremely nasty - from Richard Attenborough’s Pinky Doyle in Brighton Rock in 1947 through Richard Burton’s and Bob Hoskins’ anti-heroes in, respectively, Villain (1971) and The Long Good Friday (1980), up to and including The Krays (1990). All our gangster heroes (unlike Edward G. Robinson or Jean Paul Belmondo) are schizoid, sadistic arseholes who shoot people in the kneecaps and sentimentalise about their mums. Rather like the real thing, in fact.

Jack Carter, a racketeer from London, goes up north to Newcastle to attend his brother’s funeral and wreak ‘orrific vengeance on the Geordies who did him in. Carter is played by Michael Caine, who’s really good as the fastidious brute, investigating an unseemly trail of cover-ups, bribes, double-crosses and sudden violence. He is an evil man; the only difference between him and his adversaries is that they are not as self-righteous as he. In that way, Get Carter resembles High Plains Drifter (in which Clint Eastwood pretends to save a western town in order to destroy it) or a Jacobean revenge play.

On the train up north, Carter reads Farewell My Lovely, but he’s no Philip Marlowe. Nor is he even a Yojimbo, Kurosawa’s samurai hired assassin in the film of the same name. Get Carter was directed by Mike Hodges in an energetic early 1970s’ style, at a time when American studios were investing heavily in British films. As well as splendid Newcastle locations, it features cameos by Ian Hendry (as Eric Paice, the scheming chauffeur) and the noted playwright John Osborne in the role of Mr Big.

- Alex Cox’s original introduction, from the first Moviedrome Guide.

Brief thoughts…

I’ve seen this one so many times over the last twenty years or so, yet it’s a film I’ll never get bored with.

It’s been a few years and so I wondered if I’d feel any differently about it now I’m a little older. The last time I saw it, I think, was maybe during or just before the film - or more specifically, the main character - became some kind of style icon in the Cool Britannia mid-'90s and included in magazines like Loaded and so on as something to look up to, which even then I thought was completely missing the point and extremely depressing.

I have to say, it’s lost none of its power, for me. The central performance by Michael Caine is astonishing in its quiet intensity and sporadic bursts of violence, and he really carries the whole film. Carter is almost entirely without redeeming characteristics, yet we’re still drawn to him and along with him on his quest to find out the truth.

What stikes me now is the clash between the old and the new, architecturally - which seems to reflect the exact period in which this film was made, at the end of the 1960s and into the dark '70s; the regional setting; the cold nihilism, the brilliant, brilliant score by Roy Budd.

Carter isn’t a cool movie gangster. He’s a cold psychotic; or as Alex Cox says, an evil man. It seems to me that the ending is inevitable. An inevitability which is presaged in the opening title sequence on the train up north…

There’s an interesting passage on Get Carter in this 2007 Grauniad article by Alex Cox: A very British cop-out:

We are told 10 Rillington Place “brilliantly embodies the seedy degradation of the real little Britain of the time”. Get Carter depicts “a Britain paralysed by strikes and a failing economy … in short, a nation on the skids”. Get Carter was made in 1971. I was a teenager then, and can assure the promoters of this depressing vision that, despite strikes and IRA atrocities, Albion was a long way from skid row. When I went to college, the government paid for it. I incurred no debt. The state owned the water pipes, the reservoirs, the airline, the lecky, the telephone system and the railways, which ran on time and were reasonably cheap. We weren’t engaged in two wars of colonial aggression. Muslims weren’t our enemies. And the weather was great!

Get Carter is an excellent gangster film. But there is no way that Mike Hodges’ fine script can be extrapolated into a condemnation of the unions, or of the economic policies of the time. Hodges would, I suspect, be offended at the suggestion. Both the choice of British films, and the condescending tone of the documentaries, push a very specific view of recent British history. To wit: the second world war, grit, duty and pluck, triumph over adversity. Good. The establishment of the welfare state and the development of trade unions. Bad. Thatcherite greed-years. Also bad. Blair and Brown greed-and-war-years. Excellent!

And another particularly brilliant bit of insight: “Billy Elliot could have been made specifically for Tony Blair, with his "meritocratic” fantasies and his contempt for the unions.“