Fresno Yosemite International Airport offers non-stop flights to these major cities. Whether for business or pleasure, we make travel easy, convenient and fast. Fly direct or connect to anywhere in the world.

The seventh most visited city in the United States is Atlanta, Georgia, in the southern state known for its peaches and vibrant food scene. A home for many Fortune 500 companies, this economic powerhouse of a city is home to Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport, the busiest in the world.

Chicago is the third most populous city in the United states, with more than 2.7 million residents. Chicago has often been called a global architecture capital and is considered one of the most important business centers in the world.

Dallas is the third largest city in the state of Texas and the ninth largest in the United States. With a population of approximately 1.3 million, the city is the main economic center of the 12-county Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington metropolitan area that according to the March 2009 U.S. Census Bureau release, had a population of 6.3 million.

Dallas is at the urban heart of the third fastest growing region in the U.S. Downtown Dallas is the home to AT&T's world headquarters and the AT&T Discovery District, a destination where tech, culture, and entertainment combine to create unique experiences.

Denver is the largest city in and capital of the state of Colorado. Known as "The Mile-High City", Denver sits at an altitude of 5,280 feet (1,600 meters), where the midwestern plains give way to the Rocky Mountains. The city officially records its Mile High Status by a gold band embedded in the steps of the state capitol, located in downtown Denver.

Guadalajara is the capital city of the Mexican state of Jalisco, and the seat of the municipality of Guadalajara. The city is located in the central region of the state and in the western-Pacific area of Mexico. With a population of 1,579,174, it's Mexico's second most populous municipality.

Las Vegas is the most populous city in Nevada and is an internationally renowned major resort city for gambling, shopping and fine dining. Las Vegas bills itself as "The Entertainment Capital of the World" and is famous for the number of casino resorts and other major entertainment attractions.

León is the most populous city and municipality in the Mexican state of Guanajuato with more than 1.5 million residents. Known as the “Shoe Capital of the World”, León is at the heart of Mexico’s leather industry, making it a shopping, leisure and food destination for travelers. The Historic Center in the heart of the city is the perfect place for visitors to walk, relax and take in the vibrant culture and architecture.

Los Angeles is the largest city in the state of California and the second largest in the United States. Often abbreviated as L.A. and nicknamed The City of Angels, Los Angeles has an estimated population of 3.8 million and spans more than 498 square miles in Southern California.

Located in the state of Michoacán in central Mexico, Morelia is famous for its architecture and city center. The city center includes more than 200 historic buildings from the renaissance, medieval and neoclassical periods, all built with a mesoamerican influence and Morelia's signature pink stone bricks.

Phoenix is the capital of the state of Arizona as well as the most populous city in the American Southwest and fifth largest city in the United States. Founded in 1871, it has become the region's primary political, cultural, economic, and transportation center. At an elevation of 1100 feet, it's situated in the biologically unique Sonoran Desert.

Portland lies about 70 miles from the Pacific Coast on the northern border of the state of Oregon, straddling the Willamette River just south of its confluence with the Columbia River at Vancouver, Washington. About 50 miles to the east lies majestic Mount Hood, which forms the perfect backdrop for Portland's skyline.

San Diego is the eighth-largest city in the United States of America and second-largest city in California. The city is located on the coast of the Pacific Ocean in Southern California, immediately adjacent to the Mexican border. The birthplace of California, San Diego is known for its mild year-round climate, natural deep-water harbor, extensive beaches, long association with the U.S. Navy, and recent emergence as a healthcare and biotechnology enclave.

San Francisco is a major city in California, the centerpiece of the Bay Area, well-known for its liberal community, hilly terrain, Victorian architecture, scenic beauty, summer fog, and great ethnic and cultural diversity. These are only a few of the aspects of the city that make San Francisco one of the most visited cities in the world.

Salt Lake City is the capital and largest city of Utah. It's one of the largest cities in the Southwest region of the United States, although its climate is more similar to the Rocky Mountain region. It lies in the Salt Lake Valley along the Wasatch Front urban corridor, located between the Wasatch Range to the east and the Oquirrh Mountains to the west, located on the border between the Rocky Mountain and Great Basin geographic regions.

Seattle, Washington, is the largest city in the Pacific Northwest. Located between Puget Sound and Lake Washington in King County, of which it is the county seat, and overlooking Elliott Bay, Seattle is nicknamed The Emerald City. The city is a damp green gem, with an abundance of evergreen trees throughout, and spectacular views of the Cascade mountains to the east and the Olympic mountains to the west.