CHILDREN AGES 5 – 11.

NOTE: See Section (E) of this Rule 12 for allowable use of a child restraint seat or booster seat on aircraft.

Unaccompanied Minors. Children ages 5 - 11 that travel alone or in the company of one or more other children ages 5 - 11 only are considered “Unaccompanied Minors.”Any child travelling as an Unaccompanied Minor must have reached his or her 5th birthday by the date of travel and will be subjected to the following:

Fees. The mandatory Unaccompanied Minor fee noted below is payable at the time of check in.

For Travel Within the State of Hawaii. In addition to the cost of the Ticket, there is a fee of $35.00 per Unaccompanied Minor for each segment from the designated point of origin to the designated destination, via the designated route of a Ticket. The parent or guardian of the Unaccompanied Minor will also be required to complete and sign Hawaiian’s Form HA O20 – Request for Unaccompanied Minor form located at apps.hawaiianairlines.com/Resources/FAQ/pdf/HA-Request-Unaccompanied-Minors.pdf.

For Travel between the Continental USA and Hawaii. In addition to the cost of the Ticket, there is a fee of $100.00 per Unaccompanied Minor for travel between the State of Hawaii and the Continental USA (each way). Unaccompanied Minors will only be accepted on non-stop direct flights operated by Hawaiian. For any interisland connecting flights, the Unaccompanied Minor fees of Section (C)(1)(a)(i) of this Rule 12 shall also apply. The parent or guardian of the Unaccompanied Minor will also be required to complete and sign Hawaiian’s Form HA O20 – Request for Unaccompanied Minor form located at apps.hawaiianairlines.com/Resources/FAQ/pdf/HA-Request-Unaccompanied-Minors.pdf.

NOTE: We will accept up to two (2) Unaccompanied Minors belonging to the same Immediate Family for a single fee provided that the drop-off and pick-up information and contact details are identical.

Documentation. The parent, guardian, or responsible adult for the Unaccompanied Minor(s) must complete our required paperwork and documentation, furnish a valid and unexpired government-issued photo identification, and provide us with the name, phone number and address of (i) the parent, guardian, or responsible adult who will be meeting the Unaccompanied Minor at his/her destination and (ii) where possible, an alternate responsible adult authorized to pick up the Unaccompanied Minor at his/her destination.

Prior to Flight. A parent, guardian, or responsible adult must escort the Unaccompanied Minor to the gate for his/her departing flight and remain at the gate until the flight has departed. We will provide a gate pass to the parent, guardian, or responsible adult to accompany the Unaccompanied Minor to the gate of departure.

Pick-up at Destination. A parent, guardian, or responsible adult must be present and available at the destination to receive the Unaccompanied Minor at the baggage claim or other designated area immediately upon arrival. If requested and there is adequate staff on duty, we will provide a gate pass to the parent, guardian, or responsible adult to meet the Unaccompanied Minor at the arrival gate. The receiving parent, guardian, or responsible adult must be one of the contact people listed on the Unaccompanied Minor form submitted at the time of departure. We will not release any Unaccompanied Minor to a person not named on the form.

Restrictions and Exceptions.

We may refuse to accept an Unaccompanied Minor for travel or change the Unaccompanied Minor’s flight schedule, including departure date, in our sole discretion when we believe there is any reasonable possibility that the flight upon which the Unaccompanied Minor holds a reservation could be diverted to another airport.

We may refuse to accept an Unaccompanied Minor for travel or change the Unaccompanied Minor’s flight schedule, including departure date, in our sole discretion if a flight is delayed and we believe that there is a reasonable possibility that the Unaccompanied Minor will not be able to make his/her connecting flight.

We will not accept any Unaccompanied Minors for travel on any Hawaiian flight departing between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless (i) travel is on a flight operating out of Honolulu, Hawaii, and (ii) the flight is the only flight to the Unaccompanied Minor’s destination for the day.

We will not accept any Unaccompanied Minors for travel on any flight connecting to any other flight when such other flight is the last flight of the day to the Unaccompanied Minor’s destination.

We will not accept Unaccompanied Minors where the connection time between flights is greater than two (2) hours or less than one (1) hour, except when there are no scheduled arrivals or departures that would allow for a connecting time within those parameters and we, in our sole discretion, determine to make an exception upon considering all the relevant information available to us.

We will not accept Unaccompanied Minors when any connecting flight would require an overnight stay.

We will not accept Unaccompanied Minors who are connecting to or connecting from any flight operated by any other air carrier other than ‘Ohana by Hawaiian.

We will not accept Unaccompanied Minors on any flight we operate that is ticketed by another carrier with a flight number other than that of Hawaiian’s.

We will not accept Unaccompanied Minors for travel in extra-comfort. Unaccompanied Minors may be ticketed in coach or first-class only upon payment of the appropriate fare in addition to the Unaccompanied Minor fees.

Other.

If we are unable to locate the person responsible for receiving the Unaccompanied Minor at the destination, you agree that we may contact the local police or government agency for assistance or to take custody of the Unaccompanied Minor.

You agree to reimburse us for any costs and expenses we incur that result from the receiving parent, guardian, or responsible adult not being present at the baggage claim or other designated area immediately upon arrival of the Unaccompanied Minor at the destination airport.

Accompanied Minors. Children 11 years of age or younger are accepted for transportation between the Continental USA and the State of Hawaii or for travel wholly within the State of Hawaii on flights operated by Hawaiian only, when accompanied on the same flight(s) and in the same compartment by a guest at least 15 years of age. Please see Section D of this Rule 12 as it relates to children under the age of 2.

INFANTS (LESS THAN 2 YEARS OLD) AND CHILDREN AGES 2 - 4.

NOTE: Child safety seats or restraint systems are not permitted in the front cabin of the 787 aircraft.

See Section (E) of this Rule 12 for allowable use of a child restraint seat or booster seat on aircraft.

Infants (Children Less than 2 years old). Children under the age of 2 are considered Infants. No infant under seven (7) days of age will be accepted for transportation without a signed physician’s letter stating that the infant is approved for travel. An infant may be carried on the lap (lap infant) of a person 15 years of age or older (qualified person) for no additional fee, provided that only one infant is permitted as a lap infant per qualified person. You may purchase a seat for an infant at the then applicable adult fare. If a seat is purchased for an infant, we recommend that the infant is placed in an approved infant safety seat during travel.

Children 2 - 4. Each child ages 2 - 4 must be ticketed at the then applicable adult fare, be accommodated individually in his/her own seat, and be accompanied by a ticketed guest at least 15 years of age.

CARES Harness. The FAA-approved CARES Child Aviation Restraint System harness is designed specifically for aviation use for children ages 1 and older who weigh between 22 and 44 pounds (10 - 20 kg). You may use a CARES harness for your child in the guest compartment of our aircraft only when a seat adjacent to you is available and/or ticketed for the infant or child and the CARES harness is properly secured to the aircraft seat.

USE OF CHILD RESTRAINT SEAT OR BOOSTER SEAT ON AIRCRAFT.

NOTE: Child safety seats or restraint systems are not permitted

in the front cabin of the 787 craft

in aisle seats on the A321 & B717 aircraft or Row 4 of B717 aircraft

in exit rows or rows immediately in front of or behind an exit.

in aisle seats for the A330/787 aircraft unless the child's traveling party occupies all seats in that row section A330: CDEG/ 787: DEF.

in any seat that blocks aisle access from individuals not in your traveling party.

EXAMPLE:

A330: A CRS may be accepted in seat 23 C/G if the traveling party occupies the entire row 23, all seats CDEG

787: A CRS may be accepted in seat 23 D/F if the traveling party occupies the entire row 23, all seats DEF

Child Restraint Seat. You may use a child restraint seat on the aircraft for your infant/child only upon the following conditions:

Hard-backed and Government Approved. The child restraint seat must be a hard-backed child safety seat that is approved by the Federal Aviation Administration or other government agency for use in an aircraft.

Adjacent Purchased/Ticketed Seat Available. You must have purchased and/or ticketed a seat adjacent to you for the infant/child’s seat, which seats may not be in an exit row.

Properly Secured. The child restraint seat can be and is properly secured by the aircraft seat belt and the infant/child can be and is properly secured in the child restraint seat.

NOTE: We reserve the right to make changes to your seat assignments in our sole discretion to accommodate an FAA approved child restraint seat.

Booster Seat. You may use a booster seat on the aircraft for your child only upon the following conditions:

During Flight Only. You may use a booster seat for your child during the flight only between (i) the time when the airplane has reached its cruising altitude and the flight attendants have first announced your ability to move around the cabin and (ii) the time the flight attendants have announced that the aircraft is preparing for landing and that the seatbacks and tray tables must be in the upright and locked position.

Adjacent Seat Available. You must have purchased and/or ticketed a seat adjacent to you for the child using the booster seat, which seats may not be in an exit row.

Properly Secured. The booster seat can be and is properly secured by the aircraft seat belt and the infant/child can be and is properly secured in the booster seat.

Stowage Space Available. The booster seat can be and is stowed beneath the seat or in an approved overhead compartment for all surface movement, during takeoff and landing, and at any other time other than for when its use is expressly allowed pursuant to Section (E)(2)(a) of this Rule 12.