08/02/2024

Planning a trip to Greece from the US in 2024 is easier than it sounds. But, when travelling with kids, you have to be methodical. This applies to almost every situation: from planning the best nonstop flights to booking the best accommodations and family activities in Greece, nothing should be left out.

At Kids Love Greece, we know that booking a direct flight from the US to Greece is a priority, especially for families. That’s why we have created a comprehensive guide that includes all non-stop flights from the US to Greece in 2024. To help you find the best flight, we have categorized this blog post by departure cities.

Non-Stop Flights from the US to Greece: How to Effortlessly Get to Athens?

First, we must mention that all non-stop flights from the U.S. to Greece in 2024 will have Athens International Airport as their destination. And that’s reasonable. The good news is that Athens is the cultural center of Greece and worth a visit.

If you want to spend a few days in the Greek capital, look at our fully customizable family-friendly tours in Athens.

Plus, if you land in Athens, you can visit any other region of Greece like the islands of Mykonos and Santorini in just a few hours. So let us take a look at the flight schedules for 2024.

1. New York to Greece: 2024 Non-Stop Flights

If you live in New York, you’ll be pleased to hear that Delta Air Lines and American Airlines offer several non-stop flights from New York to Athens.

Delta Airlines

Delta Airlines is offering the earliest non-stop flights between the U.S. and Greece. In fact, the first flight between JFK and ATH in 2024 is scheduled for March 11. The last direct flight will operate on December 1.

For more information, you can visit the official Delta Airlines website.

This is Delta’s main nonstop flight between New York and Athens for 2024, but due to increasing demand, Delta Airlines is also introducing a new daily nonstop flight from March 11.

Departure from JFK is scheduled at 7:30PM and arrival in Athens at 12:30PM (10 hours). For those wishing to use this flight to return to the U.S, DL213 departs Athens at 3:30PM and arrives in JFK at 7:25PM.

American Airlines

American Airlines will also offer a non-stop daily flight between New York and Athens from May 5 until October 28. The AA334 flight by American Airlines will have the following schedule:

For more information, you can visit the official American Airlines website.

2. Boston to Greece: 2024 Non-Stop Flights

Delta Airlines

If you are based in Boston or other parts of New England, you will be glad to hear that Delta Airlines has introduced a direct flight between Boston (BOS) and Athens (ATH). The flight was announced on October 3, 2021 and had a successful first schedule in 2022.

For 2024, the Delta flight will start on April 11 and it is expected to operate daily. This is also the fastest non-stop flight between the US and Greece for 2024.

For more information, you can visit the official Delta Airlines website.

3. Chicago to Greece: 2024 Non-Stop Flights

American Airlines

If you want to travel to Greece from Chicago via a non-stop flight, then American Airlines is your only option. Keep in mind that the Chicago (ORD) – Athens (ATH) flight is expected to operate daily between June 1 and October 5.

For more information, you can visit the official American Airlines website.

4. Philadelphia to Greece: 2024 Non-Stop Flights

American Airlines

American Airlines is the only airline that will offer nonstop service between Philadelphia and Athens in 2024. Flight AA 758-759 is scheduled to begin June 1 and operate through Sept. 6.

For more information, you can visit the official American Airlines website.

5. Atlanta to Greece: 2024 Non-Stop Flights

Delta Airlines

Delta Airlines has also introduced the first non-stop flight between Atlanta and Athens. Thankfully, this flight will start much earlier for 2024. Between March 25 and April 10, the daily flight will be operated on an Airbus A330. From April 11 until October 28, Delta Airlines will use an Airbus A350.

With that in mind, we should mention that the departure and arrival times will remain exactly the same during the 2024 season.

For more information, you can visit the official Delta Airlines website.

6. Washington DC to Greece: 2024 Non-Stop Flights

United Airlines

If you are based in Washington DC and need a non-stop flight to Greece, United Airlines has the solution for you. This flight operates from 2021. In 2024, the flight is scheduled to begin on May 5 and run through September 28.

For more information, you can visit the official United Airlines website.

7. Newark to Greece: 2024 Non-Stop Flights

For those that live near Newark, the city’s airport offers non-stop flights from the US to Greece. In fact, 2 different airlines host a Newark – Athens direct flight for 2024: Emirates and United Airlines.

Emirates

This direct flight is actually part of the EK209 flight from Newark to Dubai (EK210 for the return). Athens is the first (and only) stop of this flight.

For more information, you can visit the official Emirates website.

United Airlines

Another way to travel between Newark and Athens is through the non-stop UA124-125 flight operated by United Airlines. For 2024 United Airlines has decided to extend the flight’s schedule (April 6 – October 28). Still, keep in mind that this isn’t a daily flight until May 4.

Therefore, until early May, this flight will take place on Tuesdays, Thursdays, Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays. From May 6 to October 28, the flight will also operate on Mondays and Wednesdays. The departure and arrival times will remain the same throughout the 2024 season.

For more information, you can visit the official United Airlines website.

Wrap Up

It is becoming clear that 2024 will be another great season if you want to travel from the US to Greece on a non-stop flight. There are 7 different airports and cities in the US that offer direct flights to Greece: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Washington, Philadelphia, New York and Newark.

Choosing the best airline and departure airport depends on your personal needs and preferences. No matter which nonstop flight you choose, Greece should definitely be on your radar for 2024 and beyond. In other words, this is the best time to plan a unique family trip to Greece.

If you live in the US and Greece is on your radar for summer 2024 and beyond, contact our team and we will help you plan the most memorable family trip to Greece.

FAQ

Are non-stop flights the best way to travel from the US to Greece?

Absolutely. Non-stop flights from the US to Greece are the fastest, easiest and most effective way to travel, especially if you are planning a family trip.

Which Airline to choose for a non-stop flight from the US to Greece?

Even though this comes down to your budget, Delta Airlines and American Airlines are known to offer the best experience for their passengers. Still, all of the direct flights mentioned in this guide will offer a pleasant experience when traveling to Greece.

Which non-stop flight to opt for if you’re traveling with kids?

The truth is that a non-stop flight is the best way to travel with kids. Connecting flights are usually much more tiring and, in some cases, a quite stressful experience when traveling with kids. With that in mind, we can safely say that all of the above direct flights to Athens will cover your family needs.