ROCK band The Automatic have been signed up to play Cardiff’s Admiral Big Weekend.

The Cowbridge four-piece is the latest act to join the line-up on the Civic Centre stage for the free music festival from August 1 to 3.

Also playing at the City Hall event are Scottish band Glasvegas and singer-songwriter Beth Rowley, along with rock band Ash and ska act Prince Buster.

The Automatic will be showcasing songs from their new album This Is A Fix, which is released on August 25, the first single from which, Steve McQueen, is due out on August 18.

The new-look line-up, with Paul Mullen replacing keyboard player and vocalist Alex Pennie, will also play at this year’s Reading and Leeds Festivals before embarking on a full UK tour at the end of September.

Coun Nigel Howells, executive member for sport, leisure and culture, said: “It’s great to add the young Welsh band The Automatic to the bill for Sunday at the Admiral Cardiff Big Weekend. They went down a storm with the audience two years ago and I’m sure they’ll be just as popular this weekend.”

It will be a weekend bursting with activity in the city, with the start of the Royal National Eisteddfod in Pontcanna Fields.

And to celebrate it, the first night of the Big Weekend will be a twmpath or ceilidh, featuring folk-punk band The Men They Couldn’t Hang.

Most Read

{{#articles}}

{{title}}

{{/articles}}

Saturday night will be headlined by Prince Buster, one of the best known names in the history of ska and rocksteady music. Real name Cecil Bustamente Campbell, the Jamaican is regarded as one of the most important figures in the history of the music.

Some of the records he made, such as Oh Carolina, inspired a generation of other reggae and ska artists.

Britpop group Ash will take top billing at the weekend’s finale on Sunday night.

Show more

Families will also be able to enjoy a variety of white-knuckle rides at the Civic Centre’s funfair, which will be staged along the roads from the City Hall, Museum and Law Courts.

For a full list of acts during the Big Weekend, visit the website www.cardiff-festival.com

lisa.jones@mediawales.co.uk