LOS ANGELES, CA (Dec. 5, 2018) – The Los Angeles Sparks are excited to announce the hiring of five-time NBA champion Derek Fisher as head coach. Fisher played in the NBA for 18 seasons and helped the Los Angeles Lakers win five titles.

“I am thrilled to name Derek Fisher our next head coach,” Sparks Executive Vice President and General Manager Penny Toler said. “Derek is a champion and proven leader on and off the court. With his wealth of experience as a former player and head coach, I can’t think of a better steward for our basketball team moving forward.”

Fisher’s experience includes holding the NBA record for playoff game appearances (259), serving as the players’ union president and coaching the New York Knicks from 2014-2016.

“I’m excited to be the new head coach of the LA Sparks,” Fisher said. “There is no finer organization in the WNBA and I can’t wait to work with our ownership group, front office, talented players and staff to cement a culture of sustained excellence, which is what LA basketball fans demand – and deserve.”

Fisher becomes the 12th head coach in Sparks franchise history.

“Our ownership group is excited to welcome Derek to the Sparks family,” Sparks Managing Director and Governor Eric Holoman said. “Derek is a proven winner, tough under pressure and is a true believer in the power of the WNBA and the opportunities it provides for women on and off the court. I’m certain Derek will not only build on the Sparks championship culture, but also play an instrumental role in all the work we do in the Los Angeles community.”

Fisher takes over a talented team led by two-time MVP Candace Parker.

“Derek is a great basketball mind who brings a ton of high-level experience to our team,” Parker said. “I look forward to working with someone with championship pedigree and who has a track record of strong leadership. Derek has been a strong supporter of women’s basketball for quite some time, so it’s nice to officially welcome him.”

An introductory press conference will be held Friday, Dec. 7, with more details to come.