Woody Allen does Bergman again but this time its much lighter than Interiors. A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy focuses on three couples spending a weekend together at a cabin the woods. Despite the title, there's no actual sex featured but sex does underpin everything. All the drama stems from the interplay between the six characters, who are wonderfully brought to life by the ensemble which includes Allen himself and a first collaboration for Mia Farrow. The film has a period setting which basically just amounts to the costumes, but it bodes well with the woodland cinematography. The drama has some serious elements but it's entwined with comedy, which ranges from Allen's trademark neurotic wit to some more farcial elements that…

1982 In Review - July

#6

A wacky inventor and his wife invite two other couples for a weekend party at a romantic summer house in the 1900s countryside.

A Woody Allen film where the title is very misleading, there is no sex here and even less comedy.

Three couples spend a weekend together in the countryside, circa 1900 or thereabouts, and wind up falling in love with just about everyone else other than the person they're supposed to be with. This is the first film to feature Woody Allen along with Mia Farrow, who's a dazzling beauty named Ariel in this story and becomes the competing main object of desire between Allen and his philandering best friend, Tony Roberts.…

A drawing room comedy and send-up of the age-old debate between the metaphysical and the corporeal, which, really, is a thing, Woody Allen's "A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy" is not as fun at its title suggests. It is a solid comedy, however, and boasts the now-standard Allen convention of heaps of dialogue skewering or celebrating intellectuals, art, love, and physical relationships.

Taking place at country home over the course of an early 20th century weekend, the film follows a group of friends who come together to share two days of discussion, debate, and one another. It is a smart, funny affair that becomes bogged down with incessant bickering and philandering.

The film is handsome, and Allen focuses on nature, period…

Woody Allen's comedies sometimes make me wish things were just as simple in real life. His characters fall in love, suffer, get involved in romantic and sexual affairs, constantly question their lives and decisions, but eventually find their way. In A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy, a group of couples spend a weekend in a bucolic setting where contact with nature brings out their instincts and leads them to re-examine their present. It may feel slightly superficial in its treatment of some of Allen's favourite themes such as relationships, sex, and love, but overall I would say it is a solid entry in his filmography.

As an additional note, I must mention that it has been interesting to see this film…