Sex in Film - An Illustrated Cinematic History: In the following illustrated compilation are some of the most significant, memorable, and influential films in the display of sex and eroticism on the screen throughout cinematic history. The influential film milestones and their memorable sexual/erotic scenes are thoroughly described. Including portrayals of sex and/or nudity, these films were often considered quite erotic, groundbreaking, unique and/or controversial at the time and remain so today.

[Note: There are also a number of examples of some of the most sexploitational, bawdy, depraved and inferior films that emphasize sex, nudity, and T&A as selling points to attract viewers.]

Classic sex/erotic films and/or scenes throughout film history can be found in erotic dramas, erotic thrillers, sex comedies, coming-of-age films, romantic dramas, and many other film genres and sub-genres. Elements of Sexuality include: Nudity, Love-Making, Seduction, Sexploitation, Homosexuality.

Toplessness

Nudity

The Two Sexes

Seduction

Love-Making

Sexploitation

Seduction

Nudity

NC-17/R Ratings

Homosexuality

The following listing of these influential, memorable and classic sex scenes and films (chronologically by year) takes into account all of the available surveys of this type of material, and attempts to provide an informed, detailed, unranked grouping of the most influential and groundbreaking films and scenes. It also considers other films with sex-related scenes, including portrayals of sex and/or nudity, and factors in a film's (or scene's) notoriety and infamy and the stars involved. Some of the most notorious (or infamous) films are quite mediocre, usually made as an excuse to display nudity or eroticism of a star performer.

See also the multi-part Sexual and Erotic Films in Cinema, The Most Controversial Films of All-Time, Sexy Hollywood Bombshells, Sexiest Films of All-Time, and the Best and Most Memorable Film Kisses of All Time in Cinematic History.

Milestone Films With Scenes That Were Especially Notorious, Infamous, Controversial, or Scandalous