Duck Soup is a 1933 comedy film written by Bert Kalmar and Harry Ruby (who also wrote the music), with additional dialogue by Arthur Sheekman and Nat Perrin, directed by Leo McCarey. Released theatrically by Paramount Pictures on November 17, 1933, it starred the Marx Brothers (Groucho, Harpo, Chico, and Zeppo) and also featured Margaret Dumont, Louis Calhern, Raquel Torres and Edgar Kennedy. It was the last Marx Brothers film to feature Zeppo and the last of five Marx Brothers movies released by Paramount Pictures. Groucho plays the newly installed president of a fictional country, and Zeppo is his secretary, while Harpo and Chico are spies for a rival country's ambassador. Relations between Groucho and the foreign ambassador deteriorate during the film, and they go to war at the conclusion.

Plot[]

The wealthy Mrs. Teasdale insists that Rufus T. Firefly be appointed leader of the small, bankrupt country of Freedonia before she will continue to provide much-needed financial aid. Meanwhile, neighboring Sylvania is attempting to annex the country. Sylvanian ambassador Trentino tries to foment a revolution and to woo Mrs. Teasdale, and he tries to dig up dirt on Firefly by sending in spies Chicolini and Pinky.

After failing to collect useful information against Firefly, Chicolini and Pinky are able to infiltrate the government when Chicolini is appointed Secretary of War after Firefly sees him selling peanuts outside his window. Meanwhile, Firefly's secretary, Bob Roland, suspects Trentino's motives, and he advises Firefly to get rid of Trentino by insulting him. Firefly agrees to the plan, but after a series of personal insults exchanged between Firefly and Trentino, the plan backfires when Firefly slaps Trentino instead of being slapped by him. As a result, the two countries come to the brink of war. Adding to the international friction is the fact that Firefly is also courting Mrs. Teasdale, and, like Trentino, hoping to get his hands on her late husband's wealth.

Trentino learns from another spy, Vera Marcal that Freedonia's plans of war are in Mrs. Teasdale's safe and tells her to assist Chicolini and Pinky in stealing them. Chicolini is caught by Firefly and put on trial, during which war is officially declared, and everyone is overcome by war frenzy, breaking into song and dance. Chicolini and Pinky join Firefly and Bob Roland in anarchic battle, resulting in general mayhem.

After a fierce battle, the end of the film finds Trentino caught in a makeshift pillory, with the Brothers pelting him with fruit. Trentino surrenders, but Firefly tells him to wait until they run out of fruit. Mrs. Teasdale begins singing the Freedonia national anthem in her operatic voice and the Brothers begin hurling fruit at her instead.

Cast[]

Groucho Marx as Rufus T. Firefly who, at Mrs. Teasdale's insistence, becomes the leader of Freedonia

Harpo Marx as Pinky, a spy for Sylvania

Chico Marx as Chicolini, another spy for Sylvania

Zeppo Marx as Lt. Bob Roland, Firefly's secretary

Margaret Dumont as Mrs. Gloria Teasdale, a rich widow who underwrites the budget of Freedonia

Louis Calhern as Ambassador Trentino of Sylvania who schemes to have his country take over Freedonia

Raquel Torres as Vera Marcal, a femme fatale who is working for Ambassador Trentino

Edgar Kennedy as the lemonade vendor

Edmund Breese as Former President Zander, Firefly's predecessor

Edwin Maxwell as Former Secretary of War

William Worthington as First Minister of Finance

Davison Clark as Second Minister of Finance

Charles Middleton as prosecutor

Leonid Kinskey as Sylvanian agitator

Verna Hillie as Trentino's secretary

George MacQuarrie as first judge

Fred Sullivan as second judge

Eric Mayne as third judge

Wade Boteler as officer at battle headquarters (uncredited)

Carrie Daumery as reception guest (uncredited)

Songs[]

"When The Clock On The Wall Strikes 10"

"Just Wait 'Til I Get Through With It", Groucho's song about the laws of his administration

"This Country's Going To War"

"Freedonia National Anthem"

"Sylvania theme"

"All God's Chillun Got Guns" (parody of "All God's Chillun Got Wings")

"Oh Freedonia" (parody of "Oh! Susanna")

Trivia[]