Introduction:

Pilar Pallete is a Peruvian former actress who was married to John Wayne. Check out this biography to know about her childhood, family life, achievements and fun facts about her.

Alan Garcia

Alan Garcia Perez is a former president of Peru, and a lawyer by profession. This biography provides detailed information about his childhood, life, achievements, political & legal career, works & timeline.

Born: 23 May 1949 Peruvian

Martin De Porres

St. Martin de Porres was a Peruvian friar, loved and honored by many for his services to humanity. Check out this biography to know about his childhood, life and achievements.

Born: 09 December 1579 Peruvian

Atahualpa

Last Inca Emperor

Atahualpa was the final independent Inca sovereign. Check out this biography to know about his birthday, childhood, family life, achievements and fun facts about him.

Born: 1502 AD Peruvian

Alberto Fujimori

Alberto Fujimori is a former Peruvian President. This biography of Alberto Fujimori provides detailed information about his childhood, life, achievements, works & timeline.

Born: 28 July 1938 Peruvian

Mario Vargas Llosa

Mario Vargas Llosa is a Peruvian writer and the recipient of the 2010 Nobel Prize in Literature. This biography provides detailed information on his childhood, life, works, career, achievements and timeline

Born: 28 March 1936 Peruvian

Lina Medina

Worlds Youngest Mother

Lina Medina is the youngest mother in recorded history. This biography profiles her childhood, life story, timeline and other facts.

Born: 23 September 1933 Peruvian

Ricardo Palma

Ricardo Palma was a Peruvian author, historian, librarian and political figure. This biography provides detailed information on his childhood, life, career, works, achievements and timeline

Born: 07 February 1833 Peruvian

Ollanta Humala

Ollanta Humala is a Peruvian politician and the President of Peru since 2011. This biography profiles his childhood, life, political career, achievements and timeline

Born: 27 June 1962 Peruvian

Rose Of Lima

St Rose of Lima was a member of the Third Order of Saint Dominic, in Lima, Peru. She was first person to be born in the Americas who was canonized by the Roman Catholic Church. Check out this biography to know about her.

Born: 30 April 1586 Peruvian