K Surnames

KNOWLDEN, Mildred Agness

Mildred Agness Knowlden, age 74, died May 6, 1995, in Rock Springs, Wyoming. Born October 28, 1920, in East Ely, Nevada, a daughter of Charles Park and Agnes Addison. Married Ronald Leslie Knowlden on October 2, 1937, in Salt Lake City; he died September 2, 1973. Millie was a past-president of VFW Auxiliary. Following her retirement, she lived in Manila, Utah, for 14 years. Survivors include a son and daughter, Ronald P. (Karen) Knowlden of Hunter, Ruth Marie (Roy "Buff") Mast of Sandy; six grandchildren, 11 great-grandchildren; sister, Marie (Don) Christensen of Manila. Preceded in death by mother, husband, and brother Ralph R. Addison. Graveside services will be Wednesday, 1 p.m. at Fort Douglas Cemetery. Friends may call Tuesday from 6 to 8 p.m. and Wednesday from 11 a.m. to 12 noon at McDougal Funeral Home, 4330 South Redwood Road. [unk. newspaper, c. May 1995]

L Surnames

LAMB, Burnell

Funeral services were held Saturday ot 2 pm. In the Manila LDS Chapel for Burncll Lamb, 33, county commissioner, who accidently shot himself while inspecting a 30.06 rifle at his home Wednesday, October 28, 1970 of last week He was born September 23, 1937 in Rock Springs to Archie and Berneico Schofield Lamb. He attended Manila schools except for one year when he attended school in Rock Springs. As a boy he trapped animals for their fur pelts, and at the age of 12 began collecting scrap iron, he sheared sheep while attending school and following graduation from high school built his home. He was a construction worker and was serving as county commissioner at the time of his death. He married Evelyn Rogina in June of 1959. They were later divorced, he married Carolyn Sue Mann December 11, 1967. He is survived by his wife; sons, Bernnie, Gene and Todd Lamb, Holland and Walter Marcell Lamb, Manila; step-children, Ruby and Lee Lamb; parents; brothers, Duane and Elden Manila; sisters, Mrs, Gene (Ferl) Brlggs, Manila and Cherrll Bruce of Salt Lakc City. Milton Beck dedicated the grave. Interment was in the Manila Cemetery, Pallbearers were Neil Heikcs, Tom Jones, Kelly Ivcrson and George Bruce. Honorary pallbearers were Dewey Erich, John Despaln. Louis Potter, Levi Reed, Jr,, Milton Beck, Larry Beck, Duane Beck, Bert Lamb and Howard Bame. [unk. newspaper, c. Oct 1970]

LAMB, James R.

A survivor of Wyomings early day range wars and contemporary of famous frontiersmen and outlaws, James Roger Lamb 88, died Sunday September 12, 1948 at his home in Manila. Mr. Lamb played a large part in the settlement of lower Green river and Henrys Fork regions of Wyoming, where he spent the greater part of his life. It was he who first called attention to farming and ranching possibilities of the bottom lands along the two rivers. His memory reached back in the last days of Jim Bridger, Jim Baker and Jack Robinson, noted frontiersmen, who still lived in Wyoming when he was a boy. He was one of the last living men who were in their prime during the days when Wyoming was a wild frontier torn by cattlemens warfare and echoing in the six-shooters of the noted bandits of Browns park Butch Cassidy, Lant, tracy, Elza Lay and others. He was born in Salt Lake City February 14, 1860 a son of Horace and Naomi (Dewhurst) Lamb, an early pioneer and came to as a small boy in the Henrys Fork river with a group of families who first settled in the area. Surviving are four sons James Arthur Lamb, Dubois, Idaho, George Dewey Lamb, Archie Lamb, Manila, Theodore Lamb, Oakland, California, two daughters, Mrs. Ruth Hafner, Rock Springs, Wyoming, and Mrs. Edith Anson, Manila, 40 grandchildren, and 37 great-grandchildren. Funeral services will be conducted Thursday at 2:00 P. M. in the Manila ward chapel. LDS Church by Timothy J. Potter, bishop. Burial will be in the Manila cemetery directed by Rogan Mortuary, Rock Springs. [Source: Salt Lake Tribune, September 15, 1948]

LARSEN, Donald

Funeral services for Donald Larsen were conducted on Saturday, Nov. 11, 2006, at the Manila LDS Ward Chapel. Internment was in the Manila City Cemetery, Manila, Utah. Donald Larsen, 95, died Tuesday, Nov. 7, 2006, at his home in Washam. He was born March 15, 1911, in Lyman, the son of Joseph Edward Larsen and Mary Ellen McDonald. He attended schools in Lyman and graduated from Lyman High School with the class of 1929. After graduation, he was employed at the CCC camps at Sheep Creek in Daggett County, Utah. He married Esther Boren on April 2, 1938, in Manila. Bishop Cliff A. Christensen oversaw the ceremony. Their marriage was later solemnized in the Salt Lake LDS Temple on Jan. 21, 1948. They moved to Urie, were he ranched for Ross Reed and later worked in the coal mines in Winton during World War II. In 1945, they moved to Manila, where he worked for Marion Campbell. He purchased a small farm in the Washam District in Sweetwater County. There he built a home for his family on the Henry's Fork. He was a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He served as bishop of the Manila LDS Ward for 13 years. He worked as a custodian for the Manila Ward and Daggett School District. Coyne and Keith; six daughters, Duella, Mera Don, Margie, Renae, Ruth Ann and Blenda; 18 grandchildren; and 22 great-grandchildren. He was preceded in death by three sons, Darwin, Craig and Kerwin; five brothers; and one sister. [unk. newspaper, Nov 2006]

LARSEN, Esther Estelle

Esther Estelle Larsen, 89, of Washam, died Tuesday, Feb. 9, 2010, in Midvale, Utah.

She was born Oct. 14, 1920, in Roosevelt, Utah, the daughter of Alma LeRoy Boren and Thelma Potter Boren. She lived in the White Rocks area before moving to Manila, Utah. She attended schools in Manila and adopted Margaret Irwin as her sister. She had two older brothers, Lonnie and Farren; and a younger brother, Argie.

She met Donald Larsen, who had moved to Manila from Lyman to work on Civilian Conservation Corps projects. They were married on April 2, 1938, in Manila, by Bishop Clifford A. Christensen. Their marriage was solemnized in the Salt Lake Latter-day Saints Temple on Jan. 24, 1948.

They moved to Urie, where her husband worked for Ross Reed, and Winton, where her husband worked in the coal mines. A few years later, they moved back to Manila and worked for Marion Campbell. They purchased a small farm in the Washam District from Tim Potter, where they raised a family.

She was a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, where she held many positions and served as custodian of the chapel with her husband.

She worked for many years, cooking meals at the school.

Her interests included farming, raising cattle, pigs and chickens with her husband, gardening and bottling.

Survivors include six daughters, Duella, Mera Don, Margie Kay, Renae, Ruth Ann and Blenda; two sons, Coyne and Keith; numerous grandchildren and great-grandchildren; one brother Farren; and several nieces and nephews. She was preceded in death by her husband, Donald; three sons, Darwin, Kerwin and Craig; two granddaughters, Deborah and Jill; and two brothers, Lonnie and Argie.

Funeral services will be conducted at 11 a.m. Saturday, Feb. 13, 2010, at the Manila LDS Chapel. Friends may call from 9-11 a.m. Saturday at the chapel. Interment will follow in the Manila Cemetery. [unk. newspaper, Feb 2010]

LARSEN, Helga R.

Helga R. Larsen,93, passed away October 3, 1999. Born September 14, 1906 in Linwood, Utah to Marius Niels and Elna Ronholt Larsen. She was educated in Salt Lake City schools and graduated from Holy Cross School of Nursing. she was a nurse in Cedars of Lebanon Hospital in Hollywood, Calif. Former member of the U.S. Army Nurses Corps, stationed in the Philippines. Public Health Nurse in Sheridan, Wyoming until her retirement. She then returned to Manila, Utah and her beloved "Cedarhurst" for many years. She is survived by a sister, Ebba (Thomas) Field-Fisher, London, England; nieces, Joyce Christensen, Kathy Littlewood, Karen Bruce; nephews, George Larsen, Bruce Christensen, Mike Larsen, Dave Larsen, and Ken Larsen. Preceded in death by parents, sisters, Margaret, Ruth, Beulah and brother, Max Norman (Sonny). Graveside services will be held Thursday, October 7, 1999 at 12 noon at the Manila City Cemetery in Manila, Daggette County, Utah. Friends and family may call Wednesday from 7-8 p.m. at Holladay Cottonwood Mortuary, 4670 Highland Drive. Funeral directors, Holladay Cottonwood Mortuary.[Source: Salt Lake Tribune, October 5, 1999]

LARSEN, Muerl

Muerl Larsen, age 82, died peacefully in her sleep in Salt Lake City, with family at her side. Born October 17, 1911 the daughter of John and Ratie Searle in Manila, Utah. Married Max Norman (Sonny) Larsen October 7, 1933. He preceded her in death March 25, 1987. She will be remembered for her cheerful personality. She loved entertaining with music and poetry. Very active in her community and church in Manila, Utah. Volunteered for many organizations including many years for the American Cancer Society. Attended the University of Wyoming. Survivors include children: Mike (Karon), San Diego, Calif.; Dave (Carol), Danville, Kentucky; Karen (George) Bruce, Dugway, Utah; Kathy (Don) Littlewood, Ken (Bernie) Larsen, all Salt Lake City; 15 grandchildren, 17 great-grandchildren; sisters, Pat Hanks, West Valley City; Afton Walker, Kemmerer, Wyo. Preceded in death by sister, Lena Schofield, brothers, Jackie, Verl, Ralph Searle. Our deepest thanks to the outstanding staff of the Alzheimers Unit at Sandy Regional Convalescent and Rehabilitation Center for their kindness, care and devotion the last two years. "To know her was to love her" Services will be held Thursday, August 25, 1994 at 1 p.m. at the Manila Ward, Manila, Utah. Viewings will be held Wednesday, August 24, from 7-8 p.m. at Cottonwood Mortuary, 4670 Highland Drive and 1 hour prior to services. Interment, Manila Cemetery. [Source: Salt Lake Tribune, August 23, 1994]

LOWREY, Twila

Manila, Utah: After cremation at the Vase White Mountain Crematory, a memorial service for Twila Lowrey, 84, will be conducted at 1 p.m. Saturday, Jan. 13, 2007 at the L.D.S. Chapel in Manila, Utah. She died Jan. 8, 2007 at the Memorial Hospital of Sweetwater County in Rock Springs. A lifelong resident of Manila, Utah, Mrs. Lowrey had been in ill health for the past several years. She was born on April 13, 1922 in Manila, Utah, the daughter of the late Don and Ethleen Searle Twitchell. She attended school in Manila, Utah and was a graduate of Manila High School with the class of 1940. She married Virgil Earl Lowrey in Green River on Oct. 1, 1949. She was a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Her interests included fishing, cooking and spending time with her family. Survivors include her husband of Manila, Utah; one son, Ron Lowrey and wife of Highlands Ranch, Colo., and one daughter, Janet Leflet and husband of Dutch John, Utah; one brother, Burl Twitchell and wife of Manila, Utah; one sister, Des Luke of Layton, Utah; eight grandchildren; eight great-grandchildren and several nieces and nephews. She was preceded in death by her parents and one son, Lynn Lowrey. [unk. newspaper, Jan 2007]

M Surnames

MASTERS, William Rex

William Rex Masters, 95, of Escalante, Utah, died Jan. 21, 2006, in Cedar City, Utah. He was born Nov. 12, 1910, in Central City, Ky., to Ora Eldridge and Eliza Jane Slaten Masters. When he was 16, he moved to Linwood, Utah with his mother and stepfather, Albert Thompson. He graduated from Manila High School in 1933. Masters married Susie Anson on March 28, 1933. She preceded him in death on May 7, 1964. They had three children. He married Ray Reid on Jan. 21, 1965, and their marriage was solemnized in the Salt Lake LDS Temple June 10, 1966. They had 41 years together He was a heavy equipment operator most of his life and retired from Daggett County, Utah, as supervisor of roads. He enjoyed farming and cars. After retiring, he moved to Escalante, Utah, and enjoyed woodworking and sharing his creations with family and friends. Other interests included gardening and his yard. He also loved sports, especially basketball. Survivors include two daughters, Sheila and husband George Palmer and Linda and Tom Taliaferro; two stepsons, Vernon Hale and wife Janice Reid and Larry D. and wife Lorna Hale; 19 grandchildren; 28 great-grandchildren; and one great-great-grandson. He was preceded in death by his first wife, Susie; parents; son, James Ross Masters; and grandson, Thomas Seddon Taliaferro. Funeral services will take place Tuesday, Jan. 24, 2006, at 1 p.m. in the Escalante Stake Center. Friends may call at the Stake Center in Escalante on Tuesday, Jan. 24, 2006, from 11 a.m.-12:30 p.m. Interment will be in the Manila, Utah Cemetery on Wednesday, Jan 25, 2006, at 1 p.m. [unk. newspaper, Nov 2006]

MITCHELL, Steven Rooke

Steven Rooke Mitchell, 62, passed away Nov. 4, 2010 at his home in Evanston. He was born on Feb. 15, 1948 at Rock Springs, the son of Scott Bennett Mitchell and Grace Isibel (Lamb) Mitchell.

He married Donna Sorg in Green River in January of 2000. She preceded him in death on June 23, 2006.

Steven served his country in the Marines during Vietnam.

He loved his family, his dogs, and getting his mail. He was very generous and donated to various charities often.

He is survived by his sons, Steve, Timothy, Ryan, Shannon and Danny; his step-children, Chad Pacheco, Billy Figolah, Charlie Figolah, Lynn Pacheco, Julie Wieburg and Tammy Stuart; brothers, Stanley Mitchell, Victor Mitchell, and sisters, Linda Leith, Elizabeth Anderson, Karry Slaw, Valery Winter, and Denna Mitchell; and 18 grandchildren

He is preceded in death by his wife, Donna; and one son, Bryan Thomas Mitchell; brothers, Darrell and Victor; a sister, Myrna Collier; granddaughter, Bailey Morgan; and stepmother, Viaona Mitchell.

Funeral service will be on Tuesday at 11 a.m. in the Crandall Funeral Home in Evanston. Friends may call at the funeral home on Tuesday one hour prior to the service.

Interment with military honors will be in the Millburne Cemetery following the funeral. [unk. newspaper, Nov 2010]

MITCHELL, Viona LaDean

Viona LaDean Mitchell, 74, of Manila, Utah died Friday, Feb. 9, 2007, at Memorial Hospital of Sweetwater County in Rock Springs. A resident of Manila for the past 40 years, Mrs. Mitchell had been in ill health for the past three years. She was born March 19, 1932, in Salt Lake City, the daughter of Elias and Hettie Benzley Higbee. She attended school in Salt Lake City. She married Scott Mitchell on Feb. 7, 1967, in Manila. He preceded her in death on Sept. 28, 1993. Her interests included working puzzles, reading, being an avid Utah Jazz fan, taking trips to Wendover and spending time with her grandchildren. She was a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Survivors include three sons, Victor Mitchell and wife Gwen of Vernal, Utah, Stan Mitchell and wife Jackie of Kingman, Ariz., and Steve Mitchell of Evanston; six daughters, Lynda Leith and husband Stewart of Manila, Elizabeth Anderson and husband Kirby of Emery, Utah, Valerie Winter and husband Larry of Green River, Kerry Slaugh of Vernal, Deana Mitchell and companion Dave Skinner of Manila and Sheila Collier and husband Billy of Shawnee, Okla.; two brothers, Lionel Higbee of Mesa, Ariz., and Keith Higbee of Kearns, Utah; one sister, Arda Bradford of Salt Lake City; 42 grandchildren; many great-grandchildren; several great-great-grandchildren; and several nieces and nephews. She was preceded in death by her parents, Elias and Hettie; her husband, Scott; one son, Darrell Mitchell; one daughter, Myrna Collier; three granddaughters; one grandson; three brothers; and two sisters. Funeral Services will be conducted at 11 a.m. Tuesday, Feb. 13, 2007, at the Manila L.D.S.Chapel in Manila. Interment will be in the Manila City Cemetery. Friends may call at the church, one hour prior to services. [unk. newspaper, Feb 2007]

N Surnames

NEFF, Albert Hughes

Albert Hughes Neff, 84, passed away Monday, May 11, 2009 at his home in Manila, Utah, surrounded by his family. He was born April 2, 1925 in Salt Lake City, Utah to Julian and Nina Spencer Neff. Albert grew up in East Millcreek. He graduated from Granite High in 1943, and attended the University of Utah and LDS Business College. He was a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Albert learned in his youth the value of hard work and responsibility, and sheep ranching brought him to the town of Manila with his father, where they purchased a ranch to run their herds. He married Gloria Monson on August 17, 1948 in the Salt Lake LDS Temple, and they moved to the Neff Ranch in Manila to continue the family business. Albert was a faithful and dedicated member of his church, and he was called to serve the Lord and his fellow man in many capacities, including serving as counselor and then Bishop of the Manila Ward for almost two decades. In addition to serving on the High Council and as a counselor in the Lyman and Green River Stake Presidencies, Albert served many years as Stake Patriarch, and he and his beloved wife, Gloria, also served as temple workers in the Vernal Temple. He truly loved the Lord and his family, and he blessed his children and grandchildren by example, and with his testimony, honor and integrity. Albert was very involved in many aspects of his community and was well respected for his many efforts and contributions. He spent numerous years serving in the Soil Conservation District, Farmer's Home Administration, and as President of the School Board and charter member of the Lion's Club. He was a Daggett County Commissioner for 18 years, with a new courthouse being built during his time of service, and served 12 years on the Tri-State Development Committee, including eight as Chairman, and eight years on the Council of Governments and Community Affairs. While serving as an officer in Sheep Creek Irrigation, Albert was instrumental in the construction of Long Park Dam, after years of helping develop water supply infrastructure in Daggett County. He was involved with the construction and dedication of Cart Creek Bridge which runs across a bay of Flaming Gorge, and was beneficial to the reconstruction of the roadway through the Brown's Park, Colorado area, and pushed the effort to pave County Road 318. Albert was a cornerstone in the creation of the business of Union Telephone, where he was employed full-time for 49 years and served on the Board of Directors until his death. Albert's work with Union brought him much joy, with his love of communication, flying and photography as part of the job. He is preceded in death by his parents, Julian and Nina Neff, infant son David, and brother, Spencer Neff. He is survived by his wife, Gloria of almost 61 years, son Robert S. (Eileen) Neff, daughter Jane N. (Kenneth) Hullinger, son Stephen J. (Jill) Neff, daughter Margery N. (Eugene) Hullinger, daughter Louise N. (Greg) Gosar, 27 grandchildren and 26 great-grandchildren. He is also survived by brother Lorraine Neff and sister Nina Lou Hildebrand. Funeral Services will be held Saturday, May 16, 2009 at 11:00 a.m. in the Manila LDS Chapel, 130 North 1st West, Manila, Utah. Family and friends are invited to gather for a viewing on Friday, May 15, 2009 from 6:00 - 8:00 p.m. at Vernal Mortuary 15 E. 100 N. and on Saturday from 10:00-10:45 a.m., prior to the services at the LDS Church. Interment will follow the services in the Manila Cemetery under the direction of the Blackburn Vernal Mortuary. [unk. newspaper, May 2009]

NEIGENFIND, Rudolph

Rudolph Neigenfind, formerly a resident of Green River, but who for the past several years has resided with his family at Manila, died at the Wyoming General Hospital in Rock Springs last Sunday night, after an illness of several months, cause of death dropsy. The body was brought to this city, and taken to Manila Wednesday, where it will be laid to rest, Deceased leaves a wife and one son to mourn his departure from this life, who enjoy the sympathy of all in their hour of sorrow. [unk. newspaper, March 16, 1917]

NEILSON, Vernon

Vernon "Bish" Neilson, died Friday in a Salt Lake City hospital after a lingering illness. He was born April 21, 1916 to Oley and Ina Siler Neilson. He was an inspiration to some; almost totally blind, he attended for a time the School of the Blind in Salt Lake City. As a young man he lost a leg through a tragic accident, but he was always happy for the things that he had. He is survived by his Stepfather, Ernest Crosby of Manila, sisters Mrs. George (Eva) McWorter of Blackfoot, Idaho, Mrs. Lottie Jones of Priest River, Idaho, Mrs. Lonnie Crosby of Virginia. Funeral services were held Monday and burial was in the Manila Cemetery. [Source: Vernal Express, March 22, 1965]

NELSON, Arthur Ira

Arthur Ira Nelson, 87, died Wednesday, July 7, 2004 at his home in Ogden. Arthur was born in Manila, Utah in a log cabin with a dirt floor on April 26, 1917, the first child of Ira and Hattie N. Nelson. Art loved the mountains and knew every stream or lake there was. He and his brother Chet were inseparable and roamed the hills together. He was an avid hunter and fisherman and especially loved fly fishing. Art married Maryann Burnham in 1940 and they had two daughters. Maryann died in 1971. Art married Leona Coles in 1972. Leona died in 1998. Art was a paint contractor by trade and all would say he was a perfectionist at it. Looking for work during the depression, he would find something that paid at least $.50 cents a day. His family moved to Ogden around 1942 and during the winter months, Art would go to California or Arizona to find work. Art painted all the piers in San Francisco Bay one winter for $1.00 a day. In 1952, Art and his two brothers joined their father and became Ira Nelson and Sons Painting Contractors. They were well known and respected in Ogden. He was a good husband and father. His family loved him very much. The world has been a better place because of his example of service. When someone needed money, a train or plane ticket, or just needed a place to stay, he was there. If the shirt off his back was needed, he gave it willingly. His mind was very sharp and his grandchildren and great-grandchildren loved to hear the stories of his life, especially the ones about close calls with wild animals or hopping a fast train to town. What a horseshoe player he was in years past. He was the Utah State Champion and All Area Champion back in the 1960s. Surviving are two daughters, Shirley (Larry) Nye, Mountain Green, UT; Diane (Francis) Child, Syracuse, UT; 12 grandchildren and 25 great-grandchildren. Also surviving are one brother and three sisters, Dean (Irene) Nelson, Barbara Bouy, and Dorothy Killian, all of Roy; Darla (Leonard) Cevering, Pleasant View. Art was preceded in death by his parents, both wives, and his brother, Chester. Funeral services will be held at the graveside on Tuesday at 5 p.m. at Lindquists Washington Heights Memorial Park, 4500 Washington Blvd. A private family viewing will be held at Lindquists Ogden Mortuary, 3408 Washington Blvd., on Tuesday from 3 to 4:30 p.m. [Source: Standard-Examiner (Ogden, UT) July 14, 2004]

NELSON, Chester B.

Our loving father, grandfather, and great-grandfather, Chester "Chet" Bernett Nelson, 83, died Tuesday, January 1, 2002 at his home in Roy of causes incident to age. He was born October 2, 1918 in Manila, Utah, the son of Ira and Hattie Lillian Neigenfind Nelson. On June 28, 1938, Chet married Jana Loyd. They were later divorced. On June 22, 1949, he married Pearl Mae Watkins in Elko, Nevada. Their marriage was solemnized in the Salt Lake LDS Temple on February 10, 1960. Pearl preceded him in death on February 23, 1985. He had lived in Manila and Vernal, Utah; Sheridan, Wyoming; Ogden; and in Roy for the past 49 years. Chet was a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He was a veteran of World War II serving with the U.S. Navy. He was a self-employed painting contractor for over 60 years prior to his retirement. Chet enjoyed spending time with his family, the outdoors, hunting, fishing and camping. He also enjoyed country western music. Surviving are seven sons and four daughters, Chester Loyd (Shirley) Nelson, Warren; David A. (Anne) Nelson, Roy; Dale B. (Marilyn) Nelson, West Haven; Clair Dean (Cris) Nelson, Clearfield; Ronald L. (Kerry) Nelson, Syracuse; Steven L. (Tammy) Nelson, Clinton; Dennis C. (Donna) Nelson, Roy; Carol A. (Jerry) Campbell, Provo; Linda M. (Bryan) Wayment, Clinton; Carolyn (Thomas) Farrell, Layton; Marilyn (Kelly) Bodily, Clinton; 42 grandchildren and 43 great-grandchildren. Chet is also survived by two brothers and three sisters, Arthur Nelson, Ogden; Eldon Dean (Irene) Nelson, Roy; Dorothy Killian, and Barbara Bouy, both of Roy; Darla (Leonard) Cevering, Pleasant View. He was preceded in death by his wife, Pearl, and his parents. Funeral services will be held Monday at 11 a.m. at Lindquist's Ogden Mortuary, 3408 Washington Blvd., with President Jay Cottle officiating. Friends may call at the mortuary on Sunday from 6 to 8 p.m. and Monday 10 to 10:45 a.m. Interment, Lindquist's Washington Heights Memorial Park, 4500 Washington Blvd. [Source: Standard Examiner (Ogden, UT) January 4, 2002]

NELSON, Daniel M.

Impressive Funeral services were held on Monday at one oclock in the chapel for Daniel M. Nelson who died Saturday morning at 4:45 after a lingering illness.

Beautiful flowers were used in the decoration of the chapel. Verdin Johnson of the Bishopric conducted the services. Singing was furnished by a mixed double quartet rendering the songs "I'll go where you want me to go", "Beautiful Isle", "Invocation" by Mark M. Hall.

The first speaker Ernest Eaton told of his early acquaintance with Mr. Nelson of the good work he performed in ward offices. Verdin Johnson made a remarks. Benediction was offered by Thomas Bingham. A long cortege followed the remains to the Maeser cemetery, where he was laid to rest under a vast mound of beautiful flowers. The grave was dedicated by W. E. Bodily.

Daniel M. Nelson was born on January 12, 1854 in St. Louis , Missouri, and was the son of Edward Hanks and Agnes Nelson being one of ten children. He immigrated to Utah in 1884. His occupation was blacksmith, carpenter and farmer.

He was married October 8, 1876 to Miss Sarah Warby in the St. George temple. Six children being born to this couple. In June 1883 his wife died and on September 30, 1887 he married Miss Matilda Warby, his wifes sister and to this union thirteen children were born.

In August 1896 the family moved from Beaver to Manila where he filled many church offices, also county offices for twenty four years. From Manila he moved to Maeser ten years ago where he has since made his home.

Five years ago he was in a serious car accident from which he miraculously escaped unhurt, after falling nearly 600 feet over Brush Creek Canyon. He did a great amount of temple work in the temple for three years. Early last December he came home from Manti on account of failing health and has gradually grown worse until he passed away June 18, 1932 He had been confined to his bed since February 15, 1932. The cause of his death was cancer of the liver. He was a high priest at the time of his death.

Besides his widow he is survived by the following children D. F. Nelson of Linwood, Sarah Ann Smith of McKinnon, Wyoming, Jane Tolton of Rock Springs, W. J. Nelson of McKinnon, Harvey E. Nelson Ira Nelson, Mrs. Elsie Twitchell, of Vernal, Bertha Potter, Vernon Nelson of Linwood, Mrs. Tillie Jones of Vernal, Rueben Nelson of Linwood, Mrs. Mary Briggs of Mckinnon, Ike Nelson of Vernal, One sister Mrsl Martha Collett, of Clifton Arizona, two brothers John and James Nelson of Bowie Arizona. Fifty four grandchildren, twelve great grandchildren. One son George, was killed September 27, 1918 in the Argonne drive in France during the World War I. [Source: Vernal Express, June 23, 1932]

NELSON, Ervin R.

A funeral will be at 1 p.m. Friday, Dec. 30, 1994, in Finley-Sunset Hills Mortuary. Mr. Nelson, a resident of Mesa, Ariz., died Dec. 25 at age 83. He was born Dec. 14, 1911, in Manila, Utah, and had lived in Portland 35 years. He was a bus driver for Tri-Met for 33 years. In 1975, he retired and moved to Mesa. Surviving are his wife, Alyce L.; son, Robert of Beaverton; daughter, Linda Corbin of Beaverton; brother, George of Salt Lake City; sisters, Elva Erickson and Vernalia Olsen, both of Lyman, Wyo.; five grandchildren; and three great-grandchildren. Burial in Sunset Hills Memorial Park. Remembrances: favorite charity. [Source: The Oregonian, December 28, 1994]

NELSON, Harold

Harold Nelson, 77, died Friday, October 25, 1991 in an Ogden hospital. Born March 18, 1914 in Manila, Utah, a son of Daniel E. and Clara Neilson Nelson. He married Nellie Jarvie April 21, 1942 in Green River, Wyoming. Lived in Ogden since 1956. He worked as a rancher in Jackson, Wyoming, and as a burner for Ideal Basic Industries of Morgan, Utah. Army Veteran, World War II. Survived by wife, Ogden; three sons, Larry H. Nelson and Brad Nelson, both Ogden; Boyd C. Nelson, Kearns; four granddaughters. Preceded in death by his parents and one daughter, Diane Nelson. Graveside services will be hleld Monday, 2 p.m., Washington Heights Memorial Park, Ogden. Friends may call at the Larkin & Sons Mortuary, 496 24th Street, Ogden, Sunday 6-8 p.m. and Monday afternoon, 1-1:30 p.m. [Source: Salt Lake Tribune, October 26, 1991]

NELSON, Martha Rigby

Martha Rigby Nelson, age 90, passed away June 23, 1998, in Orem, Utah. She was born April 15, 1908 in Fairview, Sanpete County, Utah, to Charles Martin Rigby and Sarah Emma Pritchett Rigby. She married Laurel Daniel Nelson August 8, 1931 and he died July 27, 1967. Martha was preceded in death by her husband; her parents; one sister and four brothers. She is survived by one sister, Mrs. Maurice (Emma) Smith, of Orem; one son, Lloyd Nelson, of Bountiful; two daughters, Mrs. Glen (Clela) Harris, of Orem; Mrs. Levi (Carlene) Reed, of Manila; nine grandchildren; 24 great-grandchildren; and two great-great-grandchildren. Funeral service will be held Saturday, June 27, at 12 noon, in Manila, Daggett County, Utah, under the direction of Sundberg Olpin Mortuary. Burial will be in the Manila Cemetery. Viewing will be Friday, June 26th, at Sundberg Olpin Mortuary, 495 So. State, Orem, from 2-4 p.m. and again one hour prior to service in Manila, Utah. [Source: Salt Lake Tribune, June 25, 1998]

NELSON, Matilda Warby

Funeral Services were held Thursday of last week in the Maeser chapel at 10 a. m. for Mrs. Matilda Nelson who died Tuesday morning at her home after a weeks illness. The services were conducted by Bishop Lester Bingham.

Burial was in the Maeser cemetery by the side of her husband who was buried June 20, 1932. The pall bearers were Harvey, Ira and Ike Nelson, Elmer Swett, Wallace Twitchell and Fred Reynolds. The grave was dedicated by W. E. Bodily.

Matilda Warby Nelson was born February 10, 1866 in Beaver, Utah. Her parents were from Australia, coming to California for the sake of the Gospel. They later moved to Beaver. Mors Nelson made her home in Beaver for several years, coming to Manila August 1896. On September 30, 1887 she was married to Daniel Nelson. Mr. Nelson was a widower with five children of his first wife, an older sister of Mrs. Nelsons having died a short time before. Besides caring for the motherless children she was the mother of thirteen children. She worked diligently beside her husband in a shingle mill in Beaver, tying lath bundles.

After leaving Beaver they pioneered Manila their first home being a dugout, but later building a home which the young people danced in before a dance hall was built. Her henerosity was extended to everyone, often would she prepare food and feed fifty people during the dance.

Her service was given to all in need during sickness and sorrow she would go far and near to administer to their wants. In Manila she took an active part in church work, being a counselor in the Relief Society and later a teacher for many years in the same organization. After coming to Maeser in 1922 to make their home, her good work has kept on, being a Relief Society teacher up to the time of her death. Her life has been one of usefulness and love.

Last summer, June 18, her husband passed away after several months of intense suffering. In August a son Reuben died in Colorado after a short illness and operation. Her faith was never wavered and she went her way, bravely meeting the trials in her life.

Mrs. Nelson has been in practically good health until December 20, when she contracted a light cold. Although not serious at first, everything possible was done that loving hands could do but she passed away December 27, 1932 of heart trouble. She leaves to mourn the following children: Ira Nelson, Mrs Elsie Twitchell, Mrs. Tillie Jones, Ike Nelson all of Vernal, Mrs. Bertha Potter, Vernon Nelson, of Linwood and Mrs. Mary Briggs of Mckinnon Wyo. Also 32 grandchildren and four brothers Stephen and James H. Warby of McKinnon, Isaac of Beaver and Samuel of Bountiful. [Source: Vernal Express, January 1933]

O Surnames

OLSON, Celinda Jane

Celinda Jane Olson of Gresham, who claimed to have known outlaw Butch Cassidy, was buried Wednesday in Manila, Utah. She died Friday September 30, 1977 at age 103. She was born in Beaver, Utah, December 13, 1873. and had homesteaded in Manila, on the Utah and Wyoming border, where she lived with her husband Charles for more than 60 years. A member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latterday Saints. Mrs. Olson was a Portland-area resident for 15 years. According to her nurse of 10 years, Utahna Kerr, Mrs. Olson spoke of a childhood schoolmate named Rob Parker, who later became known as Butch Cassidy. Survivors include five children, Mable Neilson of Evanston, Wyo.; Margaret Davidson of Manti, Utah; Kent Olson of Manila, and Charles Olson and Mary Almond, both of Gresham; 25 grandchildren; 9? great- grandchildren, and 24 great-great Grandchildren. [Source: The Oregonian - October 5, 1977]

OLSON, Charles Frederick

Charles Frederick Olson, 95, prominent Daggett County Utah church and civic leader and oldest resident of the Manila area died Wednesday July 2, 1958 of a cerebral hemorrhage at the home of a daughter, Mrs William D. Field in Evanston He was born in Sweden on April 28 1863, a son of John Nels and Margaretha Nelson Olson He came to the United States in 1890 He married Celinda Jane Twitchell on Aug 4, 1897 in the St George LDS Stake and was twice sustained as a bishop In 1907 - 1909 he served a church mission to the middle western states. Mr Olson was county attorney when Daggett County was formed He also served as justice of the peace and represented the county in the State Legislature in 1921. Survivors include his wife, six sons and daughters, Edgar Olson, Brigham City, Utah, J. Kent Olson, Manila, Charles II Olson and Mrs Mary Almond, Oresham, Ore, Mrs Mabel Field, Evanston, Mrs Margaret Davidson, Ogden, 27 grandchildren and 44 great-grandchildren. Burial was held in the Manila Cemetery. [unk. newspaper, c. July 1958]

OLSON, Sara Frances Harris

Sara Frances Harris Olson, 99, of Manila, Utah, died Jan. 20, 2003, at the home of her daughter in Roosevelt, Utah. She was born Feb. 22, 1903, in Cumberland, Lincoln County WY, to Samuel and Elizabeth Morris Harris. The family moved to Evanston where she grew up and met her husband, J. Kent Olson. They were married June 4, 1927, in Coalville, Utah. They were sealed Sept. 7, 1928, in the temple in Salt Lake City. After living in Evanston a short time, they moved to Manila, where she and her husband raised their children on the Circle Bar Ranch. Mrs. Olson was a seamstress, homemaker and mother and wife. Her interests included gardening and reading. She was active in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, having many positions of service including Relief Society president and lesson leader as well as various primary and Sunday School callings. She is survived by 8 children, 64 grandchildren; 75 great-grandchildren; and seven great-great-grandchildren, and one sister. She was preceded in death by her husband April 29, 1991; nine brothers and sisters; and three grandchildren. Funeral services will be conducted Saturday, Jan. 25, 2003, in Manila at the LDS Chapel at noon where friends and family may gather one hour prior to the service for viewing. Burial will be in the Manila Cemetery. [unk. newspaper, c. Jan 2003]

OPPERMAN, Susan Ann Riggs

Susan Ann Riggs Opperman, 73, passed away on January 9, 2005. Susan was born on October 20, 1931 in Manila, Utah to William Nathaniel Riggs and Edith Edna Deck. She married Leonard Albert Oppermann in June 1949 in Oklahoma. A simple woman made oof unbreakable will and candor, Susans most prized accomplishment was her family. She felt sincerely blessed to spend time with her two children and three grandchildren and bragged endlessly about their achievements. She took great pride in the growth of her garden. She also was an excellent seamstress, unbeatable at canasta, an avid reader, and would have made an excellent movie critic. Susan is survived by her two children, Karen (Jerry) Judkins, Kevin (Kathy) Opermann; three grandchildren, Tasha, Cody and Casey; brother, Dean (Lavon) Riggs; sister, Evelyn (Russ) Narramore and Judy Montgomery. She was preceded in death by her husband Leonard; brothers Pete, Warren and Bobby Riggs; sisters, Pearl, Delores, Faye and Ruth. Funeral services for Susan will be held on Wednesday January 12, 2005 at 1:00 p.m. at the Holbrook Morturay, Interment will be at the Elysian Burial Gardens. [unk. newspaper, c. Jan 2005; Submitted by Pat White]

P Surnames