full name: Scott Hastings Beckett

nickname: Scotty

born Oct. 4, 1929, in Oakland, CA

died May 10, 1968, in Los Angeles, CA, of undetermined causes

Special note: The cause of Scotty's death is unclear. He checked himself into a Hollywood nursing home on May 8th after suffering a severe beating and was found two days later, dead in his room. Investigators found pills and a note, but the coroner ruled that the cause of death was unknown, in spite of an autopsy being performed.

Also of note: These filmographies primarily focus on the professional lives of the Our Gang kids. Included is information about jobs they held outside the world of show business, but this is mainly to explain what was going on during the times when they weren't in the public eye. Personal biographical details are kept to a minimum, since they're largely outside the scope of this project. We do make a few exceptions here and there, mentioning marriages and divorces, and including some of the more trivial anecdotes (true or untrue) that made their way into the newspapers while they were child performers, but for the most part, it's really about their careers. That being said, it's commonly known among Our Gang fans that Scotty had a very troubled existence as an adult, going through numerous arrests, divorces and suicide attempts, and ultimately dying at the age of 38. And let's face it: This is a very interesting subject when you dive into the details. So to satisfy whatever curiousity you might have about this aspect of Scotty's life, I've linked a separate page that was created just for this purpose, which you can access by clicking here.

1929

On October 23rd of this year, The Highland Park News-Herald of Los Angeles reported the following: "Mrs. J. W. Beckett, 156 South Avenue 57, left recently on the H. F. Alexander to visit (for) three weeks her new grandson, Scott Hastings Beckett, born Friday, October 4."

1933

Scotty and his parents moved to Los Angeles probably sometime during this year. This appears to have been for the purpose of getting his father the medical treatment he needed for whatever (ultimately fatal) ailment it was he was suffering from. This is also where Scotty's paternal grandparents had lived since 1920. But where was Scotty living between his 1929 birth in Oakland and his 1933 arrival in Los Angeles? The answer isn't entirely clear, but it seems that he lived in California for the whole period. One reference mentions his father living in Visalia in 1927, but this was presumably not the case by the time Scotty was born. The same reference says that he then moved to Salinas (where another source says he was an aviator) and then to Los Angeles, but this leaves out at least one other city they reportedly lived in. This would be Mt. Shasta, where Scotty's father worked as a depot manager for an oil company. A 1943 fan letter to Scotty asked him if it was true that he had lived in Mt. Shasta, and he replied that he had indeed lived there at the age of three.

During the fall of this year, Scotty entered the movie business. The Detroit Free Press of April 24, 1934, described it this way: "The ways and means to motion picture fame are devious and strange. Last September Walter Lang, Columbia director, was a patient in the Cedars of Lebanon Hospital in Hollywood. A little four-year-old tot, Scotty Beckett, strolled into his room. Although Scotty had never seen Lang before, he decided to cheer up the director. He sang 'Shuffle Off to Buffalo' and 'In the Good Old Summer Time.' What is more, he sang them in pig Latin. Lang gave the boy a toy dog, and a great friendship was begun." The Venture Free Press of December 28, 1935, stated that it was an assistant director, and that he heard Scotty singing to other patients. The Spokesman-Review of September 4, 1936, stated that "the nurses delighted in showing young Scotty off to the movie stars who happened to be in the hospital at the time." The Modesto Bee of July 28, 1947, stated that both Lang and assistant director Philip Karistein heard him sing. The World Wide news syndicate of August 2, 1942 described it this way: "The opening chapter finds Scotty, age three, visiting with his mother at a hospital where his father lay dying. A fairly good singer and comedian, Scotty, too young to understand his father's condition, occasionally visited rooms of other patients and tried to cheer them. One day Scotty met Phil Karlstein, an assistant director at Universal, who also was a hospital visitor, and introduced him to his father, who said he hoped some day Scotty would be in pictures, too. After the father's death, Karlstein got Scotty a contract with another studio." John Brunas, in his 1970 article that wound up in Leonard Maltin's Hollywood Kids book in 1978, said that it was a casting director who noticed Scotty, and that he then suggested to Scotty's mother that she take him for a screen test. The test was successful and Scotty was registered with Central Casting. On June 1, 1934, Dan Thomas stated in his syndicated column that this all happened 7 months prior, placing it in October 1933 at the earliest. This might be a bit too late, though, considering the release dates of Scotty's first films.

Very early on, Scotty was trained in the Ethel Meglin Studios.

Gallant Lady (small part: Deedy at age 2)

prem. Dec. 7, 1933 - 20th Century/UA - 9 reels - Ann Harding feature

©Jan. 1, 1934. Released Jan. 5, 1934. Also starring Clive Brook. Scotty played a younger version of Dickie Moore's character.

I Am Suzanne! (role: child in hospital)

Dec. 25, 1933 - Fox - 98 min. - Lilian Harvey feature

©Dec. 20, 1933.

1934

According to Maltin & Bann, Scotty interviewed for Our Gang in January of this year. His first day of work in the series was on January 20th.

On March 20th, the Los Angeles Times reported the following: "Meet filmdom's newest 'gangster.' He is Scott Beckett, 4 years of age, and declared to be one of the most promising of his profession yet to be recruited for membership in Hal Roach's little band of 'rascals' popularly known as 'Our Gang.' The son of Mrs. Ruth Beckett, 'Scotty' yesterday was awarded a five-year optional contract."

On March 21st, the Illustrated Daily News of Los Angeles reported the following: "Scott was given a tryout with the juvenile unit during the production of its two most recent pictures. So well did the young man conduct himself that Henry Ginsberg, vice president and general manager of the studio, signed him under exclusive contract."

On March 22nd, the Highland Park News-Herald of Los Angeles reported the following: "Dickie Moore, Baby LeRoy, Jackie Cooper and all the other juvenile stars of the screen had better look to their laurels. A new child sensation, said to possess even greater possibilities than these young headliners, flashed across the film horizon Tuesday (Mar. 20th) when four-year-old Scott Beckett was signed on a five-year optional contract for Hal Roach's 'Our Gang.' Highland Park can't claim 'Scotty,' but it can claim his grandparents, Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Beckett, who have resided for many years at 156 South Avenue 57. The youngster, whose father is dead, lives with his mother, Mrs. Ruth Beckett, at 1185 Tremaine avenue. Grandma and Grandpa Beckett proudly announced yesterday that Scotty already has appeared with Ann Harding in 'Gallant Lady,' his first picture, and will be seen soon in an Our Gang comedy, 'For Pete's Sake.' They did not announce the terms of his contract, but hinted that it stated 'a pretty good figure.' "

On March 28th, the Spokane Daily Chronicle (WA) reported the following: "The southland's newest 'gangster' is the four-year-old grandnephew of Mr. and Mrs. E. C. Blanchard, W2319 Mallon, Spokane. Mrs. Blanchard has received word that Scott Beckett, son of her nephew, the late Ralph Beckett, formerly of Spokane, has been given a five-year contract with the Hal Roach studio in Hollywood as a member of 'Our Gang' of movie comedy fame. 'They say Scotty has all the charm of Jackie Cooper, Jackie Coogan and Dickie Moore combined,' Mrs. Blanchard said. 'At any rate they seem to have accepted him as a "reg'lar feller".'; Scotty's new good fortune is tinged with tragedy, for it was at the hospital when his father was dying last fall that the movie managers first saw him and asked for a test. Ralph Beckett was the son of Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Beckett, well-known pioneers who first came to Spokane in 1889. He was a graduate of Lewis and Clark high school. The family moved to Los Angeles in 1920."

On April 14th, the Evening Vanguard of Venice, CA, reported the following: "Four-year-old Scott Beckett has been awarded a five-year contract as a full-fledged member of Hal Roach's 'Our Gang.' He is said to possess the whimsical appeal of Dickie Moore, and the alertness of Jackie Cooper, according to studio attaches. Between scenes the other day at Roach's studio where I watched 'The Gang' work, members entertained their mothers, electricians, and cameramen with songs and dances. Scotty sang, 'I Want to Go Back to My Little Grass Shack in Kealakekua Hawaii,' and really got in all those DIFFICULT words that you and I stutter over!"

On May 2nd, the Daily News of New York reported the following: "The movie contract which the local courts legalized for 4-year-old Scott Beckett show the child drawing $75 a week now, with raises up to $250 a week before the contract expires in 1939."

On June 1st, Dan Thomas reported the following in his syndicated column: "Seven months ago 4-year-old Scotty Beckett went to a hospital to visit his father, who was suffering from a serious illness. Once inside, Scotty wandered about the hospital and took it upon himself to cheer up some of the other patients. Among them was Walter Lang, screen director. Lang liked the youngster and as soon as he left the hospital he arranged for a screen test. Today Scotty has just completed his seventh feature picture 'Whom the Gods Destroy,' directed by Lang."

On July 1st, it was reported that both Spanky McFarland and Scotty Beckett had stand-ins, both of which were dummies that were used when shots were being set up. Presumably, these were the same dummies seen in the latter part of "For Pete's Sake!"

On August 14th, The Spokesman-Review of Spokane, WA, reported the following: "Scott Beckett, the attractive little boy who plays in 'Whom the Gods Destroy,' now visible at the Orpheum, is the son of the late Robert Beckett, formerly of Spokane. Robert Beckett was the grandson of Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Beckett, Spokane pioneers, and was brought up in Spokane. He graduated from the Lewis and Clark high school and during the World war served as an aviator. Two aunts, Miss Alma Scott and Mrs. E. C. Blanchard, 2319 Mallon, live in Spokane. Mr. Beckett's widow lives in Los Angeles. It was while young Scott Beckett was visiting his late father in his illness in a Hollywood hospital that a Hollywood director saw the child and recruited him for pictures. He is under contract to Hal Roach but was loaned for the making of 'Whom the Gods Destroy.' "

On October 4th, The Hollywood Reporter reported the following: "The Hal Roach 'Our Gang' staged a double birthday party yesterday for 'Spanky' McFarland and 'Scotty' Beckett."

On December 18th, The Hollywood Reporter reported the following: "Fox yesterday borrowed Scotty Beckett from Hal Roach to play the part of Spencer Tracy's son in 'Dante's Inferno.' Bernard and Meiklejohn handled the deal."

126. Hi'-Neighbor! (supporting role)

Mar. 3, 1934 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-19 - Our Gang series

Filmed Jan. 20 to 30, 1934. ©Feb. 24, 1934.

George White's Scandals (role0 child)

Mar. 16, 1934 - Fox - 80 min. - feature

©Mar. 16, 1934. Starring Rudy Vallee, Jimmy Durante, Alice Faye, Adrienne Ames, Gregory Ratoff, Cliff Edwards and George White.

127. For Pete's Sake! (featured role)

Apr. 14, 1934 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-20 - Our Gang series

Filmed Feb. 23 to Mar. 3, 1934. ©Apr. 4, 1934.

Stand Up And Cheer! (small part: Scotty)

prem. Apr. 19, 1934 - Fox - 9 reels - Warner Baxter feature

©Mar. 23, 1934. Released May 4, 1934. Also featuring Shirley Temple. Working title: Fox Movietone Follies Of 1934.

Mrs. Barnacle Bill (small part: child singer)

Apr. 21, 1934 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. B-7 - All Star series with Eddie Foy, Jr.

©Apr. 17, 1934. Also featuring Billy Gilbert and Spanky McFarland. IMDb separately lists a film called "Sailor Made Widow," which is an alternate title for this short.

128. The First Round-Up (featured role: Scotty)

May 5, 1934 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-21 - Our Gang series

Filmed Mar. 19 to 24, 1934. ©May 1, 1934.

129. Honky-Donkey (featured role: Scotty aka Scott)

June 2, 1934 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-22 - Our Gang series

Filmed Apr. 2 to 7, 1934. ©May 25, 1934.

Whom The Gods Destroy (small part: Jack Forrester at age 4)

July 12, 1934 - Columbia - 7 reels - feature

Filmed Apr./May 1934. ©July 13, 1934. Starring Walter Connolly, Robert Young and Doris Kenyon. Credited as Scott Beckett.

Romance In The Rain (role: child specialty)

Aug. 13, 1934 - Universal - 8 reels - Heather Angel feature

Filmed June 1934. ©Aug. 10, 1934.

130. Mike Fright (featured role: Scotty)

Aug. 25, 1934 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-23 - Our Gang series

Also listed for Feb. 25, 1934. Filmed May 29 to June 7, 1934. ©July 25, 1934. Scotty takes part in singing "The Man On The Flying Trapeze."

131. Washee Ironee (supporting role)

©Nov. 13, 1934 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-24 - Our Gang series

Also listed for Sep. 29, 1934. Filmed Oct. 1 to 9, 1934.

Babes In Toyland (small part: schoolkid)

Nov. 30, 1934 - Roach/MGM - 9 reels - prod. F-5 - Laurel & Hardy feature

Also listed for Dec. 14, 1934. Filmed Aug. 6 to 16, Aug. 27 and 28, and Sep. 24 to Oct. 17, 1934. ©Nov. 28, 1934. US reissue title: March Of The Wooden Soldiers. The payroll ledger reveals that Scotty's salary was charged to this production during the week ending Aug. 11. Presumably, he took part in the classroom scene that was deleted from the finished film (the one in which Jean Darling did some singing), as he's nowhere to be found in the available prints. It's also likely that the numerous delays in production led to his departure from the cast, since he was soon due to rejoin the Our Gang unit.

1935

On February 14th of this year, the Brooklyn Times Union (NY) reported the following: "Undeterred by wholesale visions of damage suits for shattered windows, Comedy Producer Hal Roach blithely announces plans for the national mobilization of 1,000 juvenile 'Our Gang' baseball teams. With 1,000 dozen uniforms already manufactured, and with Master Spanky McFarland, 'Our Gang' star, as national honorary president, Hal Roach's army of diminutive ball players will go into action the major leagues' opening day." On February 22nd, The Montclair Times (NJ) carried the same story, but added: "In the fall, if all goes well, an 'Our Gang' world series is a Hollywood possibility." Publicity photos include Scotty with the rest of the boys, all in uniform.

Near the end of March, Scotty's salary was raised to $100 a week.

On July 19th, the Los Angeles Times reported the following: "Boys will be boys, opines Chester Morris. He was out on location with M.-G.-M.'s 'Pursuit' unit yesterday when two young actors Scotty Beckett and Meyer Bupp, both about 5, started using their fists. Maybe it was the heat. Chester parted them but couldn't learn the cause of the feud. They ceased hostilities when he promised to buy them boxing gloves as soon as the picture is over." Meyer was actually Moyer Bupp, better known as Sonny Bupp.

On July 25th, Dan Thomas reported the following in his syndicated column: "They were shooting a scene for 'Pursuit' in which Scotty Beckett, tiny comedian borrowed from 'Our Gang,' was supposed to cry. But Scotty didn't want to cry. 'I guess I'll have to spank you to make you cry,' jokingly suggested Director Edwin Marin. 'I guess you will, Mr. Marin,' agreed Scotty to the flabbergasted director. 'But you'd better spank me hard. I don't cry easily.' "

On August 13th, The Montclair Times (NJ) reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, diminutive 'Our Gang' comedian, has blasted C. Henry Gordon's reputation for good and all. 'He ain't a bad man at all - he's a swell guy,' says Scotty of the famous screen 'menace.' When the saturnine Gordon joined the cast of 'Pursuit' at the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer studios, Scotty took an immediate liking to the screen 'heavy.' Next to Chester Morris, Scotty insists, Gordon is quite the nicest man he's ever met. 'I don't care what he looks like on the screen,' stoutly asserts Scotty, 'or the things he's supposed to do. He's not like that at all. He took me to location in his car, he showed me how to hit a ball with a golf club, and he can tell the funniest stories!' Scotty is the pal of everyone in the company, and is getting a great kick out of the many locations as the studio motorcade is filming the story largely on highways and in auto camps. It is a fast-moving adventure romance in which Chester Morris and Sally Eilers are supposed to smuggle Scotty, center of a guardianship suit, out of the State. Gordon plays the private detective engineering the exodus of the trio."

On August 29th, the Courier-News of Plainfield, NJ, writing about the popularity of current child stars, mentioned Scotty in a list of kids that were well-known by sight, but who hadn't received much 'name' publicity.

On September 21st, Scotty, along with Spanky, Alfalfa, Buckwheat and Darla, hosted an event at the California Pacific International Exposition at Balboa Park in San Diego, in which droves of young kids could gain admission for only a nickel and meet their heroes. The kids were also scheduled to lead a parade of home-made cars.

On September 25th, the Hollywood Citizen-News reported the following: "When Scotty, borrowed by M-G-M for 'Pursuit,' was requested by Director Ed Marin to cry, he told the little 6 year old, 'Scotty, you'll just have to feel it down in your heart, and then you'll grow up to be a big actor.' 'I don't want to be an actor,' protested Scotty, 'I want to be a deep sea diver, so on hot days like this, I'll be out in the ocean.' "

On October 12th, the Spokane Daily Chronicle (WA) reported the following: "Twenty-four dahlias in full bloom were 'guests' along with an equal number of children five to seven years old at a novel garden party this afternoon. The party, arranged by Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Beckett, W2319 Mallon, was 'just a little get-together to remind us of our five-year-old grandson, Scotty Beckett, now appearing with Hal Roach's "Our Gang" in Hollywood,' Mr. Beckett explained to the Chronicle. 'Each of the 24 dahlias growing in our garden had been named for one of the 24 children who attended the party,' he said. 'There is a stake with the child's name as a support for each of the growing plants.' Scotty Beckett is the son of Ralph Beckett, formerly of Spokane, who died a year ago in Hollywood, just about the time Scotty began to break into prominence in the movies, the grandfather said. 'We lost our son, but we've got our grandson, and we're mighty proud of him,' he added."

According to child actor Billy Mahan, writing in 1973, he and Scotty vied for the role of Bobby Evers in the Jones Family series, which started with "Every Saturday Night." Billy got the part.

On November 16th, Scotty's time at Hal Roach Studios came to an official end, though he would return in the 1950s for TV work. With his departure from Our Gang, he would no longer be attending the Our Gang school at the studio. At some point, he went to a private school called Marquand School for Boys.

On December 13th, the Los Angeles Times reported that Scotty would be working in the upcoming production of "Anthony Adverse."

132. Mama's Little Pirate (supporting role: Scott)

©Jan. 5, 1935 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-25 - Our Gang series

Also listed for Nov. 3, 1934. Filmed Nov. 15 to 24, 1934.

133. Shrimps For A Day (supporting role: Scotty)

©Feb. 20, 1935 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-26 - Our Gang series

Also listed for Dec. 8, 1934. Filmed Dec. 15 to 22, 1934.

134. Anniversary Trouble (supporting role: Scott)

©Mar. 13, 1935 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-27 - Our Gang series

Also listed for Jan. 1, 1935, and Jan. 19, 1935. Filmed Jan. 25 to Feb. 1, 1935.

135. Beginner's Luck (supporting role)

©Apr. 8, 1935 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-28 - Our Gang series

Also listed for Feb. 23, 1935. Filmed Feb. 20 to 28, 1935.

136. Teacher's Beau (supporting role)

Apr. 27, 1935 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-29 - Our Gang series

Filmed Mar. 13 to 20, 1935. ©May 1, 1935.

137. Sprucin' Up (supporting role: Scotty)

June 1, 1935 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-30 - Our Gang series

Filmed Apr. 2 to 9, and May 7, 1935. ©June 12, 1935. Working title: Good Night Ladies!

Dante's Inferno (supporting role: Alexander Carter aka Sonny)

prem. July 31, 1935 - Fox/20th Century-Fox - 11 reels - Spencer Tracy feature

Filmed Dec. 1934 to Jan. 1935. ©Aug. 23, 1935. Released Aug. 23, 1935. Credited as Scott Beckett. Also featuring Claire Trevor, Henry B. Walthall and Alan Dinehart.

Pursuit (role: Donald McCoy "Donny" Smith)

Aug. 9, 1935 - MGM - 6 reels - Chester Morris & Sally Eilers feature

Filmed June/July 1935. ©Aug. 6, 1935.

139. Little Papa (supporting role: Scotty aka Scott)

Sep. 21, 1935 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-32 - Our Gang series

Filmed June 3 to 10, 1935. ©Aug. 20, 1935.

I Dream Too Much (small part: boy on carousel)

Nov. 29, 1935 - RKO - 11 reels - Lily Pons feature

©Nov. 28, 1935. Credited as Scott Beckett. Also starring Henry Fonda.

141. Our Gang Follies Of 1936 (supporting role: Scotty)

prem. Nov. 27, 1935 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-34 - Our Gang series

Filmed Sep. 9 to 14, and Sep. 23 to 28, 1935. ©Oct. 29, 1935. Released Nov. 30, 1935.

1936

On January 3rd of this year, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette erroneously reported that Scotty's contract with Hal Roach had been renewed for another year.

On March 26th, The Detroit Free Press reported the following: "After tests were made of more than 150 boys, diminutive Scotty Beckett was chosen to play Little Boy Blue. The picture is from an original story based on Eugene Field's famous poem, 'Little Boy Blue.' "

On March 28th, the Portland Sunday Telegram and Sunday Press Herald (OR) reported the following about "The Case Against Mrs. Ames": "The child in the picture is Scotty Beckett - he works a lot in the Hal Roach Comedies. He is the central figure in the court fight (a la Gloria Vanderbilt) and he's darling. Every time director Seiter says, 'Well done, Sonny!' he pipes up with a 'Thank you!' In true star fashion his car awaits on the lot. It's just large enough to seat Scotty but it has a real one-cylinder gasoline motor! He spends part of his lunch hour riding around in it, with a man perched precariously on the back for safety's sake. The man irks Scotty, who explains seriously that he'd like to ride it all by himself, he 'knows how' but they won't allow it! That seems to be a serious problem in his young life."

On March 31st, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (PA) reported the following about "Little Boy Blue": "Chic Sale, who is featured in the picture, presented Scotty with a tiny, canvas-backed director's chair on the back of which was lettered 'MR. BECKETT.' "

On April 3rd, a benefit show and fashion parade was presented by the Junior Trouper Club at the Hollywood Masonic Temple. Scotty was among several child actors scheduled to participate.

On May 16th, Sheilah Graham reported in her syndicated column that 15 boys were tested for the role of Prema Sing in "The Charge Of The Light Brigade," with Scotty winning the role.

On June 21st, Preston Sawyer of the Santa Cruz Sentinel wrote the following while "Old Hutch" was being filmed in his area: "Little Scotty Beckett, blond, blue-eyed and 6, beloved of the troupe, is the 'babe' of the synthetic family." On June 23rd, he wrote: "Lovable little Scotty Beckett, formerly of 'Our Gang,' and now the youngest of the Hutchens family, approached this scrivener last night in the hotel lobby. 'Thank you, Mr. Sawyer, for the writeup,' said he, his great brown eyes dancing mischievously through perfect lashes. 'But you said I have blue eyes' - And the scribe appropriately faded, amidst the fancied tones of a Major Bowes gong."

On July 31st, The Hollywood Reporter reported the following: "Sam Katzman is negotiating to team Tom Tyler and six-year-old Scotty Beckett in six westerns for his victory program this season. Both are represented by William Meiklejohn. Papers are expected to be signed by the first of the week. Young Beckett played in 'Anthony Adverse' for Warners." It appears that Scotty never wound up in these westerns.

On September 4th, The Spokesman-Review of Spokane, WA, stated that Scotty had worked with 'Our Gang' for two years and was now freelancing.

On November 11th, The Dayton Daily News (OH) reported the following: "Taking his own life in his hands, Errol Flynn, Warner Bros. star, saved Scotty Beckett, 5-year-old screen actor, from serious injury. It was during the filming of a scene of 'The Charge of the Light Brigade,' which is showing on the screen at the Victory this week. The company was on location above Lake Malibu. The horse on which the child was riding stumbled, throwing other horses in the scene into confusion. Flynn jumped off his mount and grabbed the boy just as he was about to fall to the ground under the hoofs of 25 stampeding horses. The youthful actor was not injured but Flynn suffered leg bruises."

142. Divot Diggers (archival sound)

Feb. 8, 1936 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-36 - Our Gang series

Filmed Nov. 18 to 25, 1935. ©Feb. 6, 1936. The sounds of the kids yelling near the end of this short derive from "Washee Ironee," so presumably we're hearing Scotty somewhere in the chaos.

138. The Lucky Corner (supporting role: Scott)

Mar. 14, 1936 - Roach/MGM - 2 reels - prod. G-31 - Our Gang series

Filmed May 13 to 20, 1935. ©Feb. 19, 1936.

The Case Against Mrs. Ames (role: Bobbie Ames)

May 8, 1936 - Wanger/Paramount - 10 reels - Madeleine Carroll & George Brent feature

Filmed around Mar./Apr. 1936. ©May 8, 1936.

Anthony Adverse (small part: Anthony's son)

prem. May 19, 1936 - Warner Bros. - 15 reels - Fredric March & Olivia de Havilland feature

©July 15, 1936. Released Aug. 29, 1936. This film won the Oscar for Best Supporting Actress (Gale Sundergaard), Best Cinematography, Best Score and Best Editing. It was also nominated for Best Picture, Best Assistant Director and Best Art Direction-Set Decoration.

Little Boy Blue (role: The Boy)

May 28, 1936 - MGM - 1 reel - M-G-M Miniatures series

Filmed around Mar. 1936. ©May 22, 1936. Costarring Charles "Chic" Sale.

Old Hutch (role: Roy Hutchins)

Sep 25, 1936 - MGM - 8 reels - Wallace Beery feature

Filmed around June 1936. ©Sep. 23, 1936.

The Charge Of The Light Brigade (small part: Prema Singh)

Oct. 20, 1936 - Warner Bros. - 12 reels - Errol Flynn & Olivia de Havilland feature

Filmed around May/June 1936. ©Nov. 4, 1936. Scotty was one of 15 boys that were tested for his part.

1937

On January 15th of this year, Scotty was one of the celebrity guests of honor at Highland Park Ebell Club as part of their Husband Night. As the Highland Park News-Herald put in on January 22nd: "The first one introduced by Mrs. Goldsmith was the diminutive Scotty Beckett, who amazed the audience by his well worded and humorous speech as he stood on a table. Scotty, who has appeared in a number of outstanding pictures such as Anthony Adverse, bids fair to become a starlet of prominence. His lovely mother, his grandparents, Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Beckett and his great aunt, Mrs. T. R. Welch were introduced."

On March 16th, the Los Angeles Times reported that Scotty was among the guests of honor at the Women's Athletic Club.

On May 21st, the Los Angeles Times reported that Scotty had been cast for "Walewska," which was a working title for "Conquest."

On June 20th, the Los Angeles Times reported that Freddie Bartholomew had recently thrown a party for Tommy Kelly at the MGM studio's executive bungalow. Scotty was among the hundred or so movie kids that attended.

During this year, a comic book featuring the Our Gang kids called The Dandy debuted. Among the characters was Scotty.

On July 14th, the Oakland Tribune reported the following: "'Scotty' Beckett, seven-year-old Hollywood motion picture actor, is one up on his playmate, Freddie Bartholomew, now. 'Scotty' did yesterday what every child actor in the cinema city has been wanting to do for some time. He climbed around on the Hawaii Clipper, Pan-American Airways' giant flying boat. It was quite a treat for the little star, for he has spent most of his two weeks' vacation in Oakland lying in bed recovering from a brain concussion. 'Scotty,' whose real name is Scott Hastings Beckett, came to Oakland a little more than a week ago to visit with playmates, with whom he was raised. The youngster was born here, at Merritt Hospital, October 4, 1929. The day after he got here, 'Scotty' was playing on a scooter with an Oakland friend, when the vehicle upset, spilling the little actor on his head.

"So it really was a happy ending to his misfortune when he got the chance to watch the Clipper land yesterday and to make a personal tour of the craft. He did just the things any seven-year-old would, clamboring up on the aluminum back of the ship, dropping down into the cabin, asking the attendants a host of questions, and he even got to sit in the pilot's seat and hold the controls, right where Capt. W. G. Culbertson had been a few moments before. Principally, though, 'Scotty' slipped one over on his pal, young Bartholomew. And as soon as he gets back to Hollywood, 'Scotty's' going to look up Master Freddie and tell him of the coup. It seems a bit of rivalry exists between the child actors, rivalry that was climaxed several weeks ago at a party.

"The youngster has an older brother attending U.C.L.A. now, and 'Scotty' intends to go to college himself some day and to study aviation. He would like to be a Clipper pilot. 'He wanted to be a deep-sea diver a week ago,' said his mother, Mrs. Ruth Slavan Beckett. Young 'Scotty' will have Clipper information at his finger-tips when he returns to report to friend Freddie. To prove he wasn't reading Pan-American publicity releases, 'Scotty' had his picture taken with the big ship.

"The Beckett boy, as Pan-American crew members will testify, is extremely smart for his age. He's in the high fourth grade at school, and while not featured like Bobby Breen or Freddie Bartholomew he has had some good picture parts. He played Prema, the little Indian boy in 'Charge of the Light Brigade'; Frederic March's son in 'Anthony Adverse'; and a host of other similar parts. He was with Greta Garbo in 'Countess Waleska,' to be released soon. He was her son in that, and is now a great friend of the actress. His latest picture, also unreleased, was with Jean Parker in 'Life Begins With Love.' His father, Ralph E. Beckett, an oil man, died four years ago. 'Scotty' and his mother are visiting here with her cousin, Mrs. J. H. Slavan, at 921 East Twenty-first Street."

On July 28th, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reported that Scotty had been cast in "Wells Fargo."

On August 19th, the Oakland Tribune reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, Oakland youngster, returned to Hollywood from his vacation here to draw the child lead in 'I'll Never Forget' at M-G-M." I have no idea what movie this is supposed to be, but it seems to have never been made.

On October 4th, the Salinas Index-Journal (CA) reported the following: "Scotty Beckett is a typical Salinas boy, or for that matter, a regular boy in any town. True, he succeeded in Hollywood, and four years of work before the cameras have proven he is there to stay. He has kissed Garbo, palled with Spencer Tracy, held Virginia Bruce's hand and studied with Wallace Beery in the 12 pictures in which he has played featured roles. But all this success can't change Scotty, because he's a regular fellow. He would as soon pal around with a Salinas playmate, as play his favorite game, 'robbers and cops,' with Shirley Temple.

"Wallace Beery, working with Scotty in 'Bad Man of Brimstone,' said of his fellow worker, 'Scotty is a great actor, because he doesn't act. He is the same before the cameras, and dozens of critical eyes, as he would be playing in a vacant lot with no one except his playmates watching. Though only five when he left Salinas, Scotty remembers one thing particularly well about this city - its rodeos. Aside from being an aviator, his ambition, he would like to be a cowboy.

"Like other ranchers living within a 25 mile area of Salinas, his parents used to ride into town several days before the rodeo. It was a regular cowboy's convention, he says. And Scotty felt like one of them as he rode into town with his cowboy hat on and a cap pistol in each hand. 'The Bad Man of Brimstone' set at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer is the closest thing I've ever seen to a real rodeo,' says Scotty."

On November 20th, Scotty participated in a "studio tea and talent party" co-hosted by Clella Van Pelt and Harry Hoffman, the latter being Scotty's guitar teacher. Scotty was among several of Hoffman's students to perform on this day.

On November 25th, the St. Louis Star-Times (MO) reported that Scotty would be among the kids attending Shirley Temple's Thanksgiving garden luncheon.

When You're In Love (role: little boy with whistle)

Feb. 12, 1937 - Columbia - 11 reels - Grace Moore feature

©Mar. 1, 1937. Also starring Cary Grant.

A Doctor's Diary (role: Billy)

Feb. 16, 1937 - Paramount - 8 reels - feature

©Jan. 22, 1937. Starring George Bancroft, Helen Burgess and John Trent.

Slave Ship (role: boy)

prem. June 16, 1937 - 20th Century-Fox - 10 reels - Warner Baxter & Wallace Beery feature

©July 2, 1937.

It Happened In Hollywood (role: boy)

Sep. 7, 1937 - Columbia - 7 reels - Richard Dix feature

©Aug. 16, 1937. Also starring Fay Wray. Working title: Once A Hero.

Life Begins With Love (role: young boy)

Oct. 7, 1937 - Columbia - 7 reels - Jean Parker & Douglass Montgomery feature

Filmed around June 1937. ©Sep. 27, 1937.

The King Without A Crown (role: King Louis XVII, the Dauphin)

Oct. 9, 1937 - MGM - 1 reel - Historical Mystery series

©Nov. 1, 1937. This was no. 1 in the series.

Conquest (role: Alexandre Walewska)

Oct. 22, 1937 - MGM - 113 min. - Greta Garbo & Charles Boyer feature

Filmed around May/June 1937. ©Oct. 26, 1937. Working title: Madame Walewska.

Wells Fargo (role: young Nick Pryor)

prem. Dec. 30, 1937 - Paramount - 12 reels - feature

Filmed around Aug. 1937. ©Dec. 31, 1937. Released Dec. 31, 1937. Starring Joel McCrea, Bob Burns and Frances Dee.

The Bad Man Of Brimstone (small part: Sammy Grant)

Dec. 31, 1937 - MGM - 9 reels - Wallace Beery feature

©Dec. 27, 1937. Working title: Arizona Bill.

1938

On January 19th of this year, the Hollywood Citizen-News reported that Scotty was recently among several "Meglin Kiddies of the past" that attended a surprise luncheon in the Colonial Room of the Ambassador Hotel in honor of their former teacher, Ethel Meglin.

On March 22nd, the Hollywood Citizen-News reported that Norma Shearer was "the pleased recipient of a ruby ring. She had told young Scotty Beckett that she wanted most a ruby ring and a yacht. Scotty gets $1.50 a week for spending money. He took 49 cents and bought her the ruby ring!" It was later reported that Scotty and co-star Marilyn Knowlden pooled their money together to buy the ring.

On April 4th, the Daily News of Los Angeles reported on Dickie Jones' 10th birthday party, held recently in the diner of the Santa Fe Chief. Among the guests was Scotty.

On April 14th, the Harrisburg Telegraph (PA) reported the following: "Director Ray McCarey prides himself on always being ready with a swift comeback, but during the making of Universal's 'Hell's Kitchen,' eight-year-old Scotty Beckett threw him for a twenty-yard conversational loss. The camera was ready to turn when Scotty piped up, seriously: 'Listen, Mr. Director. Do I do this scene like I was mean, or as if I was just exasperated, like you get sometimes?' McCarey could only stutter after that one!"

On July 13th, the Harrisburg Telegraph (PA) reported that Scotty had been added to the cast of "Listen, Darling."

On September 1st, The Greeley Daily Tribune (CO) ran an article about a visit to the MGM studio: "Indoors in a wood are Scotty Beckett, a very small boy, and Judy Garland, rehearsing in a cut-away trailer for Listen, Darling. The cameraman is shooting thru the trailer window. The director tells him a couple of times not to breathe on the window, cooled by rainfall amid lightning and thunder. Finally Scotty asks: 'Mr. Marin, where shall I breathe?' A good question."

On September 15th, the Los Angeles Times reported the following: "Hollywood is on the verge of developing a new boy chess genius. He is Scotty Beckett, 8 years old. Scotty, who is the miniature 'villain' in 'Listen, Darling,' has trimmed every chess pretender in the company crew. He took Freddie Bartholomew and Judy Garland into camp with consummate ease and has issued an open challenge to Director Edwin L. Marin, Walter Pidgeon, Mary Astor and the rest of the cast."

On September 20th, The Philadelphia Inquirer reported the following: "If he were ruler, he'd make it a practice to dress up unemployed extras in the costumes of a picture that had just been completed, like, for instance, Ronald Colman's 'If I Were King.' That, he thinks would make tourists happy and send them home convinced that Hollywood is a land of story books, which it really is to a large extent - inside the gates. Few young men in Hollywood could match the boasts of Scotty Beckett. He has kissed Garbo, held hands with Virginia Bruce, had tea with Joan Crawford. And now he has been hugged by Norma Shearer. However, when asked whether he enjoyed being embraced by such a famous star, he merely shrugged, said that Miss Shearer was 'awfully nice,' but that he'd rather watch a good cowboy picture.

"Scotty, as you may have surmised, isn't old enough to appreciate the adverntures he has had. He's only nine and he never misses a Saturday Western matinee, which he insists upon attending wearing his cowboy hat and carrying his cap-gun. Appearing as the little Dauphin in 'Marie Antoinette,' which opens tomorrow at the Boyd, with Tyrone Power sharing stellar honors with Miss Shearer, Scotty was the pet of the set."

On October 20th, the Portland Press Herald (ME) reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, finishing 'Listen, Darling' was given his first wrist watch by his mother. He woke up once every hour that night to find out what time it was."

On October 21st, The Evening Sun of Baltimore, MD, reviewing "Listen, Darling," had this to say about Scotty: "The principals do what they can, but the Indian sign is on them from the very beginning. We except the precocious Scotty, who is everlastingly playing Daniel Boone and comes a cropper when he mistakes a family of skunks for what he argues are striped badgers. Scotty is stellar material for juvenile epics, because, for one thing, he wades through this photoplay with engaging unconcern, and when he is visible makes the elders take a seat away back."

On September 25th, the Harrisburg Sunday Courier (PA) reported the following: "The entire Our Gang cast arrived on the set of 'Listen, Darling' at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer at noon, announcing they had come to attend the birthday party for Scotty Beckett, a former fellow Gangster, who is appearing with Freddie Bartholomew and Judy Garland. Director Edwin L. Marin referred the matter to Scotty's mother. 'But,' protested Mrs. Beckett, 'Scotty's birthday isn't until October 4.' Alfalfa and Porky Lee muttered something about a mistake. Scotty whispered something to his mother and Mrs. Beckett was 'stuck' for ice cream and cake for the mob anyway. Now, she's wondering if there wasn't collusion somewhere in the incident."

No Time To Marry (role: Junior)

Feb. 5, 1938 - Columbia - 7 reels - feature

©Dec. 26, 1937. Starring Richard Arlen, Mary Astor and Lionel Stander.

The Devil's Party (role: Mike O'Mara as a child)

prem. May 20, 1938 - Universal - 7 reels - Victor McLaglen feature

Filmed around Mar./Apr. 1938. ©May 23, 1938. Released June 2, 1938. Working titles: Hell's Kitchen, Hell's Kitchen Has A Pantry and Riot Patrol.

Marie Antoinette (role: The Dauphin)

prem. July 8, 1938 - MGM - 17 reels - Norma Shearer & Tyrone Power feature

Filmed around Mar. 1938. ©Aug. 14, 1938. Released Aug. 26, 1938. Running time for original road show print: 157 min.

Smashing The Rackets (role: Franz's boy)

prem. Aug. 8, 1938 - RKO - 69 min. - Chester Morris feature

©Aug. 19, 1938. Released Aug. 19, 1938.

Listen, Darling (featured role: Billie Wingate)

prem. Oct. 18, 1938 - MGM - 8 reels - Freddie Bartholomew & Judy Garland feature

Filmed during the summer of 1938. ©Oct. 19, 1938. Released Oct. 21, 1938. Scotty takes part in singing "On The Bumpy Road To Love."

1939

On March 29th of this year, the Akron Beacon Journal reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, Norma Shearer's son in 'Marie Antoinette' and Garbo's in 'Conquest,' returns as a member of Our Gang, after four years." This had taken place in the middle part of March.

In early May, Scotty again worked with Our Gang, after which he departed the series for good.

On May 31st, the Daily News of Los Angeles reported the following: "Few youngsters can boast of more than one mother, but 8-year-old Scotty Beckett can proudly point to six. The young screen actor has portrayed the role of son to Greta Garbo, Norma Shearer, Ann Harding, Olivia DeHavilland and Madeliene Carroll on the screen, but he still believes that his real mother is best of all."

On June 2nd, The Southwest Wave of Los Angeles reported the following: "Popular child actor, Scotty Beckett, received a 'deodorized' skunk for a pet from a fan in Hemet, California. Scotty's mother took no chances on the success of the deodorization operation and promptly returned the animal, but with thanks."

On June 8th, the Daily News of Los Angeles reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, 8-year-old screen actor who will soon be seen in MGM's 'Pups and Penguins,' has been invited by the graduating class of the Salinas public school to attend the graduation exercises. Salinas was Scotty's home before coming to Hollywood and the films." "Pups And Penguins" was the working title for "Dog Daze," Scotty's last film with Our Gang.

On June 23rd, the Daily News of Los Angeles reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, who celebrates his eighth birthday this week, received eight different gifts from eight boys in eight counties of Ohio, Scotty's home state. Upon receiving the gifts Scotty's only comment was, 'Gee, I hope they keep this up until I get to be an old man of 27.' " This item was in the film section of the newspaper, so it's presumably about the same Scotty Beckett that's the subject of this filmography, but if so, than it's wildly inaccurate.

On June 24th, the Daily News of Los Angeles reported the following: "Through the generosity of 'Scotty' Beckett, child motion picture actor, orphans of the Los Angeles Orphans home at 815 North El Centro street will be treated to a gala summer vacation party tomorrow afternoon on the occasion of the annual 'little big brothers day.' A treasure hunt, grab bag, candy, games with prizes donated by 'Scotty,' and many other entertainment features are planned to bring cheer to the 77 orphans ranging in age from 3 to 14 years."

On July 12th, the Hollywood Citizen-News reported that Scotty was currently under personal contract to producer Charles R. Rogers. The contract called for Scotty to make two films per year for Rogers.

On July 13th, the Hollywood Citizen-News reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, juvenile actor, is selling lemonade to the cast and crew of 'Our Neighbors, the Carters.' "

On July 28th, The Southwest Wave of Los Angeles reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, 8-year-old child actor at Paramount studios, will be host to Young Gohenee, young son of the postmaster general of India, now making a world cruise."

On August 2nd, the Daily News of Los Angeles reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, 8-year-old actor, is organizing a polo team made up of 8-year-olds, who will go into the fray on pintos. His teammates are Tommy and Sonny Bupp and Bobbie Watson. The young riding four will play Black Foxe, Urban and Page military academies."

On August 3rd, the Daily News of Los Angeles reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, 8-year-old actor, is the publisher of his own neighborhood paper. The paper is four pages and includes all local gossip as well as an 'Advice to Parents' column. It carries no advertising, and sells for 2 cents."

On September 1st, the Daily News of Los Angeles reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, eight-year-old actor, won the annual junior sailboat prize given by the Catalina Island association for the best homemade sailboat."

On September 23rd, the Waterbury Evening Democrat (CT) reported the following: "Little Scotty Beckett today had had it emphatically brought home to him that Cecil B. DeMille is not the only Hollywood director who uses bathtub scenes. Appearing for Paramount in 'Our Neighbors - the Carters,' the boy actor had to be 'dunked' into a bathtub seven times for one of Director Ralph Murphy's scenes."

On November 13th, Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Beckett celebrated their golden anniversary with an elaborate dinner in their home for 28 guests. As the Highland Park News-Herald (CA) put it: "Receiving at the door was the 10-year-old grandson, Scotty Beckett, of movie fame."

On December 6th, the Daily News of Los Angeles reported the following about the filming of "My Son, My Son": "At the last minute there was a switch in casting among the children. Scotty Beckett was to have played Rory as a boy, but the sudden illness of Daryl Hickman, who was to have been Oliver, necessitated a quick change. So Scotty was rushed into Oliver's part and Teddy Moorwood was called in to play Rory. The change wasn't upsetting in the least to 8-year-old Scotty Beckett. He fed lines, offstage, to the slightly nervous Teddy with the calm of a veteran."

Love Affair (small part: boy on ship)

prem. Mar. 16, 1939 - RKO - 88 min. - Irene Dunne & Charles Boyer feature

©Mar. 16, 1939. Released Apr. 7, 1939.

The Flying Irishman (small part: Henry Corrigan at age 7)

Apr. 7, 1939 - RKO - 71 min. - Douglas "Wrong Way" Corrigan feature

©Apr. 7, 1939.

Blind Alley (role: Davy Shelby)

prem. Apr. 21, 1939 - Columbia - 8 reels - feature

Filmed around Mar. 1939. ©May 2, 1939. Released May 11, 1939. Starring Chester Morris, Ralph Bellamy, and Ann Dvorak.

180. Cousin Wilbur (lead role: Wilbur Nesbit Newcomb II)

Apr. 29, 1939 - MGM - 1 reel - prod. 2618 - Our Gang series

Filmed Mar. 13 to 17, 1939. ©May 4, 1939.

182. Dog Daze (supporting role: Wilbur)

July 1, 1939 - MGM - 1 reel - prod. 2631 - Our Gang series

Filmed May 1 to 5, 1939. ©July 13, 1939.

Mickey The Kid (role: Bobby)

July 3, 1939 - Republic - 7 reels - feature

©July 3, 1939. Starring Bruce Cabot, Ralph Byrd, ZaSu Pitts and Tommy Ryan.

The Escape (role: Willie Rogers)

Oct. 6, 1939 - 20th Century-Fox - 6 reels - feature

Filmed around Apr. 1939. ©Oct. 6, 1939. Starring Kane Richmond, Amanda Duff, June Gale, Edward Norris, Henry Armetta and Frank Reicher. Working title: East Side, West Side.

Our Neighbors - The Carters (role: Dickie Carter)

Nov. 24, 1939 - Paramount - 9 reels - feature

Filmed around June/July 1939. ©Nov. 24, 1939. Starring Fay Bainter, Frank Craven, Edmund Lowe and Genevieve Tobin.

The Royal Rodeo (role: The King)

Nov. 25, 1939 - Warner Bros. - 2 reels - Technicolor Specials series

©Nov. 25, 1939. Filmed in Technicolor. No. 2 in the series. Also starring John Payne, Lucile Fairbanks, and Cliff Edwards.

Days Of Jesse James (role: Buster Samuels)

Dec. 20, 1939 - Republic - 7 reels - Roy Rogers feature

©Dec. 20, 1939. Also starring George "Gabby" Hayes.

1940

On February 7th of this year, The San Francisco Examiner included the following tidbit about the making of "My Favorite Wife": "Scotty Beckett broke up the set when, in his anxiety to emerge from an automobile he tumbled out, unintentionally, head first."

On February 13th, the Los Angeles Times reported that Scotty would be playing Rudi Roth in MGM's The Mortal Storm.

On February 24th, The Miami Daily News (FL) reported the following: "It's a touching little father-and-son moment in "The Mortal Storm,' at M-G-M. Frank Morgan is explaining to his 9-year-old offspring, Scotty Beckett, one of the age-old problems of the world. Even hardened grips are getting a kick out of this scene. They're all hovering close by as the camera rolls. 'You must be strong where others are weak,' says father Morgan to the little fellow. 'Stones hurt most those who throw them. Are you afraid my son?' The child looks up, lips quivering, real tears trickling down his cheeks. (Scotty's a Hollywood lad who can turn 'em on and off). 'No, father,' he says in a small voice, 'not now.' On these words, Director Frank Borzage, who seems strangely affected, too, quietly says 'cut.' There isn't a stir among the grips. A wardrobe woman daubs at her eyes with a square of cloth. But Scotty is immediately out of character. 'Say, Frank,' he inquires. 'Is that a real beard you're wearing or a phoney?' "

On February 24th, The Miami Daily News also reported the following: "Judith Anderson and Scotty Beckett have been dropped from their roles as mother and youngest son in Metro's "The Mortal Storm" because, according to the studio, they did not fit the parts. They have been in most of the scenes filmed to date, and the change will necessitate nearly a week's retakes."

On March 11th, Scotty applied for membership in the American Federation of Radio Artists. This may have had some connection to a program called Quiz Kids, which debuted during this year. According to kid actor Billy Mahan (writing in 1973), he was at the same audition as Scotty, an audition that Scotty won, resulting in him becoming a Quiz Kid. According to the application, Scotty was currently living at 1087 Meadowbrook.

On March 12th, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reported that Gene Reynolds had replaced Scotty in "The Mortal Storm." Of course, shooting had already begun with Scotty, so because of this, some of the reviews of the film later in the year mistakenly identify Gene as Scotty.

On April 4th, the McAllen Daily Press (TX) reported the following: "Little Scotty Beckett, appearing in 'The Mortal Storm,' has invented a new game which he does in between scenes of the film. It is 'ping pong badminton,' played with badminton birds and ping pong paddles. To date Scotty has managed to trim all members of the cast who cared to challenge him, including Margaret Sullavan and James Stewart."

On May 9th, The San Francisco Examiner reported the following: "Scotty Beckett is viewing Mother's Day with no little trepidation. He hopes to honor each of his 'screen mothers' with a gift - or hoped to until he stopped to make up a list that included Ann Harding, Norma Shearer, Olivia de Havilland, Madeleine Carroll, Greta Garbo, Irene Dunne and Josephine Hutchinson, in addition to his real mother, Mrs. Ruth Beckett. After considerable head scratching and lengthy computation the 10 year old lad decided that his allowance would stand the purchase of a package of chewing gum for each of his 'mothers.' "

On June 26th, Harriet Parsons reported the following in her syndicated column: "Cute kid actor Scotty Beckett, heading for six weeks of summer camp at Catalina, says when he returns he'll organize a little theater group and call it the sarong circuit."

On July 24th, Louella Parsons reported that Scotty had a front tooth knocked out while surfing at Catalina.

On September 7th, Film Daily reported in a syndicated piece on a joint exhibitor-newspaper critic poll conducted by themselves, determining the outstanding players in film between May 1, 1939, and Apr. 30, 1940. Mickey Rooney got the most votes among juvenile actors with 3,162.5. Scotty was tied for fourth place among the boys (with Billy Lee), with 275 points.

The Blue Bird (small part: unborn child)

Jan. 15, 1940 - 20th Century-Fox - 9 reels - feature

©Jan. 19, 1940. Mostly filmed in Technicolor. Starring Shirley Temple.

My Son, My Son! (role: Oliver as a child)

Mar. 22, 1940 - Small/UA - 12 reels - feature

Filmed around Dec. 1939. ©Mar. 22, 1940. Starring Madeleine Carroll, Brian Aherne, and Louis Hayward.

My Favorite Wife (supporting role: Tim Arden)

prem. May 2, 1940 - RKO - 88 min. - Irene Dunne & Cary Grant feature

Filmed around Feb. 1940. ©May 17, 1940. Released May 17, 1940.

Cinderella's Feller (role: The Young Prince)

June 8, 1940 - Warner Bros. - 2 reels - Technicolor Specials series

©May 31, 1940. No. 6 in the series. Costarring Juanita Quigley. Scotty takes part in singing "In The Land Of Let's Pretend."

The Mortal Storm (deleted role: Rudi Roth)

prem. June 13, 1940 - MGM - 12 reels - feature

Filmed Feb. 1940. ©June 10, 1940. Released June 14, 1940. Starring Margaret Sullavan, James Stewart, Robert Young and Frank Morgan. Scotty's role was taken over by Gene Reynolds, who wound up in the finished film.

Gold Rush Maisie (role: Harold Davis)

July 26, 1940 - MGM - 8 reels - Ann Sothern feature

Filmed around Apr./May 1940. ©July 22, 1940.

The Flag Of Humanity (role: Johnny Wilson)

Oct. 19, 1940 - Warner Bros. - 2 reels - Technicolor Classics series

©Oct. 19, 1940. No. 4 in the series. Starring Nana Bryant.

Street Of Memories (role: Tommy Foster)

Nov. 15, 1940 - 20th Century-Fox - 71 min. - feature

©Nov. 15, 1940. Starring Lynne Roberts, Guy Kibbee, and John McGuire.

1941

On June 26th of this year, the Los Angeles Times reported that Scotty was slated to play Robert Cummings as a boy in "Kings Row." Shooting for the film, however, would wait until Cummings was available.

On September 29th, Erskine Johnson, writing for his syndicated column, reported that "Scotty Beckett and Juanita Quigley are a juvenile item."

On October 3rd, Hedda Hopper reported the following in her syndicated column: "Scotty Beckett, the engaging kid who played Jon Hall as a boy in 'Aloma of the South Seas,' celebrates his birthday as Coach Sam Barry's guest at the S.C.-Ohio State game. Scotty is the S.C. mascot."

On October 9th, Harrison Carroll reported the following in his syndicated column: "Scotty Beckett, former mascot of the U.S.C. baseball team under Coach Sam Barry, now has been promoted to mascot of the football team."

On October 21st, Hedda Hopper reported the following in her syndicated column: "Ten-year-old Scotty Beckett handed his physiology teacher a jolt last week in a short composition on 'The Uses of the Nose,' which the class was asked to write. Scotty said, 'The nose of a man is very necessary because it serves as a handle for the barber when he shaves underneath it.' "

On November 26th, the Grant County Herald of Lancaster, WI, reported the following about Notre Dame's recent game against the visiting USC: "The mascot of USC is 'Scotty' Beckett, a 12-year-old movie star. He was formerly in the Our Gang comedies, but is now appearing in feature pictures in roles that require boys of his age. He played the part of the dauphin in 'Marie Antoinette' with Norma Shearer, etc. He became mascot of the team when at the first game he attended they won. The football players are very fond of this handsome child and of course 'Scotty' is keen to gain the knowledge experience acquired by traveling with them."

On December 15th, the Hollywood Citizen-News reported the following: "Santa Claus will have plenty of company on his ride down Hollywood Blvd. today at 7 p.m. He will be joined in the $25,000 sleigh by June Duprez and Lola Lane, actresses and Scotty Beckett, juvenile player."

On December 21st, the Los Angeles Times reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, swimming enthusiast of note, is plotting a Christmas Day dip in the ocean before his family celebration with his mother, Mrs. Ruth Beckett, and his brother Jim."

Father's Son (role: Danny)

prem. Feb. 12, 1941 - Warner Bros. - 6 reels - John Litel & Frieda Inescort feature

©Feb. 1, 1941.

Aloma Of The South Seas (role: Tanoa as a child)

Aug. 27, 1941 - Paramount - 9 reels - Dorothy Lamour & John Hall feature

Filmed around Mar./Apr. 1941. ©Aug. 29, 1941. Filmed in Technicolor.

1942

On August 2nd of this year, the Wide World news syndicate reported the following: "After seven years, 10-year-old Scotty Beckett is working for the man who was instrumental in getting him started on a motion picture career. The opening chapter finds Scotty, age three, visiting with his mother at a hospital where his father lay dying. A fairly good singer and comedian, Scotty, too young to understand his father's condition, occasionally visited rooms of other patients and tried to cheer them. One day Scotty met Phil Karlstein, an assistant director at Universal, who also was a hospital visitor, and introduced him to his father, who said he hoped some day Scotty would be in pictures, too. After the father's death, Karlstein got Scotty a contract with another studio. Scotty did well. Then recently Karlstein, promoted to associate producer, needed a boy in a picture and thought of the youth. A deal was reached and Scotty now is playing the part of a 10-year-old Prince Leopold at the court of 82-year-old Queen Victoria. And what kind of a salary does this young 'prince' knock down? Just $750 a week, that's all!"

On December 28th, Harrison Carroll reported the following in his syndicated column: "Add to reasons why producers get gray hairs. Scotty Beckett and Bobby Samarzich, two youthful members of the 'Boy From Stalingrad' troupe, went on location in the Santa Suzanna mountains and contracted cases of poison oak. A publicity man and another person in the unit also are victims."

The Vanishing Virginian (role: Joel Yancey)

prem. Jan. 23, 1942 - MGM - 10 reels - Frank Morgan & Kathryn Grayson feature

Filmed around Sep. 1941. ©Dec. 2, 1941. Released Feb. 1942. Starring Frank Morgan and Kathryn Grayson.

Kings Row (supporting role: Parris Mitchell as a boy)

prem. Feb. 2, 1942 - Warner Bros. - 127 min. - feature

Filmed during the summer of 1941. ©Apr. 18, 1942. Released Apr. 18, 1942. Starring Ann Sheridan, Robert Cummings, Ronald Reagan, and Betty Field.

It Happened In Flatbush (role: Squint)

May 28, 1942 - 20th Century-Fox - 80 min. - Lloyd Nolan & Carole Landis feature

©May 5, 1942.

Between Us Girls (role: Little Prince Leopold)

Sep. 4, 1942 - Universal - 9 reels - Diane Barrymore & Robert Cummings feature

Filmed around July/Aug. 1942. ©Sep. 8, 1942.

1943

On February 26th of this year, the Detroit Evening Times (MI) reported the following: "Thirteen-year-old Scotty Beckett of 'The Boy From Stalingrad,' today was doubly qualified as the hard luck kid of the troupe. The day the picture started on location, Scotty, alone of the six juvenile principals, got a case of poison oak for which he had to be treated daily throughout the entire shooting schedule. With his role completed, and recovered from the ailment, Scotty joined his fellow players on the roof of the studio's tallest building, to pose for still photographs. In the midst of it a bee stung him on the right knee."

On March 2nd, the Los Angeles Times reported the following: "Conrad Binyon and Scotty Beckett who reputedly have done fine work in 'The Boys From Stalingrad,' will also be seen in 'Right Guy' at Columbia."

On June 21st, the Daily News of Los Angeles reported that Scotty had been signed by Universal to appear in "Ali Baba And The Forty Thieves."

On September 25th, Mother's Day opened at the Geary Theater in San Francisco. Among the cast in this stage play was Scotty Beckett.

On October 2nd, the San Francisco Examiner reported the following: "Lots of youngsters look with envy upon the children who act in pictures or upon the stage, thinking their lives are made up of footlights, publicity and fun; but if they knew the work and strict routine of professional children they would count themselves lucky. Consider the case of Scotty Beckett and Jimmie Smith appearing in 'Mother's Day.' They have long parts to memorize and late hours. But most importantly, they have to keep up in all their school work. Scotty and Jimmie are both in high school, and every day they spend several hours with a private tutor who hears their lessons and assigns them home work. Perhaps the boys don't have much fun, but people who see them in 'Mother's Day' at the Geary do. Appearing with Scotty and Jimmie is a notable New York cast, including Leon Ames, Leona Maricle and Mona Barrie."

On October 11th, the Oakland Tribune reported the following: "Scotty Beckett was given a surprise party by his mother backstage at the Geary Theater on the occasion of his 14th birthday. Young Beckett is in 'Mother's Day.' The other youngsters in the company, Jimmie Smith, Patty Pope and Chick Parnell, enjoyed the party no less than the adults who came to wish Scotty health and happiness and what seems certain, a long run in 'Mother's Day.' "

In mid-October, Mother's Day closed its San Francisco run. After this, the company moved to New York and started preparations for the play's Broadway run, during which the title would be Slightly Married.

On October 24th, The Tacoma Sunday Ledger (WA) reported the following: "Glamorous gals don't cut any ice with the 12 year old male members of the cast of 'Good Luck Mr. Yates,' the Columbia picture now showing at the Beverly. During a lull in production the kids challenged Jinx Falkenburg, Jeff Donnell, Marguerite Chapman, Ann Savage, Leslie Brooks and Claire Trevor to a basketball tournament to be held on the court which had been constructed on the Columbia lot for scenes in the picture. The losers had to buy lunches for the winners for a week straight. The girls tried hard, but the embryo leading men won two games out of three. 'Chivalry had no place in this tournament,' declared Scotty Beckett firmly. 'We tried to beat 'em.' "

On October 25th, Slightly Married opened at the Cort Theater. This was Scotty's only Broadway role, for which he got second billing. After a successful run in San Francisco, New York critics panned it, but gave Scotty good reviews.

On October 30th, Slightly Married closed after only eight performances.

On November 5th, The Dunsmuir News (CA) reported the following: "In reply to a fan letter written by Ed F. Carter to Scotty Beckett when he was appearing in a stage play in San Francisco recently, Mr. Carter received a reply and an autographed photo of the youthful motion picture star. Mr. Carter, in his fan letter, asked Young Beckett if he had not lived in Mount Shasta when he was very small and mentioned several of his pictures he has seen him in and enjoyed. In his reply to Mr. Carter, he wrote he had lived in Mount Shasta and left there when he was three and that he remembered it because 'he had fun there.' The reply was written in a childish handwriting and was the same as that on the autographed picture. He told the Dunsmuir fan the names of his recent pictures - 'Good Luck, Mr. Yates,' 'Boy From Stalingrad' and 'Ali Baba and Forty Thieves.' Upon completion of the stage play in San Francisco, Beckett went to New York."

On November 19th, the Los Angeles Times reported that Scotty would be working in the next Barbara Stanwyck film, "My Reputation." This film wasn't released until early 1946.

On December 29th, the Bristol Herald Courier (TN) reported the following: "Bill McKenzie, Bristol youngster who recently passed a Paramount Pictures test in New York City, had another big moment Monday night (the 27th) when he talked over long distance hookup with Scotty Beckett, well-known Hollywood boy actor, who complimented Bill on his Paramount showing. Young Beckett also talked with Dick McKenzie and Hugh Dunbar, who are members of the Bristol Juvenile Review under the direction of Gene Thomas of WOPI."

The Youngest Profession (role: Junior Lyons)

prem. Feb. 26, 1943 - MGM - 8 reels - feature

©Mar. 2, 1943. Starring Virginia Weidler, Edward Arnold, John Carroll, and Jean Porter.

The Boy From Stalingrad (role: Pavel)

May 20, 1943 - Columbia - 8 reels - feature

Filmed around Dec. 1942. ©Apr. 30, 1943. Also starring Bobby Samarzich, Conrad Binyon, Mary Lou Harrington and Steven Muller.

Good Luck, Mr. Yates (role: Jimmy Dixon)

June 29, 1943 - Columbia - 7 reels - Claire Trevor & Edgar Buchanan feature

Filmed around Mar. 1943. ©June 21, 1943. Working title: Right Guy.

Heaven Can Wait (role: Henry Van Cleve at age 9)

prem. Aug. 4, 1943 - 20th Century-Fox - 12 reels - Gene Tierney & Don Ameche feature

©Aug. 13, 1943. Released Aug. 13, 1943. Filmed in Technicolor.

1944

On February 17th of this year, the United Press reported the following: "Top members of the cast of 'My Reputation' were on the sick list today with Scotty Beckett, 14, at home with the measles, actress Barbara Stanwyck suffering from a relapse of the flu, and actor George Brent under observation for a possible case."

Ali Baba And The Forty Thieves (supporting role: Ali Baba as a child)

Jan. 14, 1944 - Universal - 10 reels - feature

Filmed around June/July 1943. ©Dec. 31, 1943. Starring Maria Montez, Jon Hall, and Turhan Bey. Filmed in Technicolor.

Musical Movieland (archival)

Sep. 9, 1944 - Warner Bros. - 2 reels - Technicolor Specials series

©Oct. 6, 1944. No. 6 in the series. Filmed in Technicolor. Includes footage from "Cinderella's Feller."

The Climax (role: The King)

prem. Oct. 11, 1944 - Universal - 9 reels - feature

©Oct. 25, 1944. Released Oct. 20, 1944. Starring Frances Foster, Turhan Bey, and Boris Karloff. Filmed in Technicolor.

1945

On February 6th of this year, the Los Angeles Times reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, who does splendidly in 'Circumstantial Evidence,' will appear in 'Junior Miss.' "

On March 15th, the Daily News of Los Angeles reported the following about Peggy Ann Garner: "She's fallen before - Gregory Peck and John Hodiak are only two of her recent flames - but this time Peggy has it bad - young Scotty Beckett, 15, whom she met earlier in the studio school."

On June 14th, Scotty escorted his mother to an invitational dinner dance held by the Motion Picture Mothers, Inc., at the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel.

On September 22nd, the Citizen-News of Hollywood reported that Scotty would be playing "Junior" that evening on the KFI radio program The Life Of Riley. This series had moved to NBC on September 8th, and continued there until 1951, by which time Scotty was no longer part of the cast.

On October 24th, the Los Angeles Times reported that Scotty would be playing Al Jolson as a boy in the upcoming production of "The Jolson Story." The Seattle Star of November 10th reported that dozens of boys were tested for this part.

On November 4th, The Knoxville News-Sentinel ran an ad for Genuine Hugger Caps, showing a photo of Scotty wearing one of the caps. "Smooth as a 3-point landing. Air Force visor, flaps worn up or down. Alpaca trim....fluffy ear muffs." Scotty wore this cap in "My Reputation," and ads like this began to appear elsewhere in the country over the next few weeks.

On November 11th, the Kingsport Times-News (TN) reported that Scotty was currently a senior at Los Angeles High School.

On November 12th, the Hollywood Citizen-News reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, who plays the boy, Al Jolson, in 'The Jolson Story,' and Peggy Ann Garner have been going places together."

On November 26th, the Pittsburgh Press (PA) reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, the script son of Bill 'Life of Riley' Bendix, has been voted 'Dream Boy of Radio' by gals in a Brooklyn school. No Frankie?"

On December 29th, the Daily Dispatch of Moline, IL, reported the following: "By virtue of getting the part of Al Jolson as a boy, Scotty Beckett recently moved into what he thinks is a Hollywood championship. No less than five leading screen actors have had the boyish counterpart of their roles portrayed on the screen by Beckett, aged 11. The pictures are his present one, Columbia's Technicolor The Jolson Story, in which Larry Parks plays the mature Jolson; and films in which he has played the roles which Don Ameche, Louis Hayward, Robert Cummings and Robert Young assumed as adults."

Circumstantial Evidence (role: Freddy Hanlon)

Feb. 16, 1945 - 20th Century-Fox - 68 min. - Michael O'Shea & Lloyd Nolan feature

©Feb. 16, 1945. Already in theaters on that date. Premiered Apr. 20, 1945. Released Apr. 22, 1945. These last two dates according to IMDb.

Junior Miss (role: Haskell Cummings, Jr.)

prem. June 16, 1945 - 20th Century-Fox - 94 min. - Peggy Ann Garner feature

Filmed around Feb. 1945. ©June 16, 1945.

1946

On March 15th of this year, the Hollywood Citizen-News reported the following: "Schooling in classes conducted between 'takes' on film studio lots has proved no scholastic disadvantages to Scotty Beckett, Columbia Pictures actor, of 639 S. Mansfield Ave. At the age of 16, he is today enrolled in the freshman class at UCLA, where he will take a liberal arts course. He is two years younger than most of his classmates on the Westwood campus. Except for a brief interval at Los Angeles High School, all of his schooling from kindergarten up has been on film sets under the tutelage of studio teachers." Reportedly, Scotty had graduated from high school during this year.

On March 23rd, The Capital Times of Madison, WI, reported the following: "Comely Sharon Douglas, who plays 'Babs' Riley on 'The Life with Riley' show over WIBA Saturday nights received a whole bowl of shamrocks from an unknown admirer in celebration of St. Pat's day. After much detective work on Miss Douglas' part, as well as the rest of the cast, it turned out that Scotty Beckett, 16-year-old Junior Riley had sent them."

On April 11th, The Pittsburgh Press reported the following: "Four Al Jolsons, not pictures but real persons, appeared one day on a Hollywood motion picture set. One of them was Jolson himself, another was Larry Parks, who plays him in a current film based on his life; a third was Scotty Beckett, who plays Jolson as a boy in the same picture, and the fourth was Robert Gordon, who played the boy Jolson in the early-day 'The Jazz Singer.' Gordon, known as the 'best Jolson imitator in the world' during his vaudeville days, was engaged to help Parks portray Jolson in the Technicolor music drama, 'The Jolson Story,' now before the cameras."

On August 17th, The Pittsburgh Press reported the following: "Rita Hayworth is acting as a 'college broker' these days. No sooner had she helped in her brother Vernon's enrollment at Los Angeles City College than she performed the same chore for Scotty Beckett at UCLA. Beckett is the child actor who did almost all grammar school and college 'prep' work on film sets, his last being done when he played Al Jolson as a boy in 'The Jolson Story.' Miss Hayworth arranged for a second brother, Eduardo Cansino, Jr., already on the Westwood campus, to usher Scotty through the complexity of registration."

On September 10th, the Des Moines Tribune reported the following: "Tommy Cook has been added to the 'Life of Riley' cast as 'Junior.' He replaces Scotty Beckett." The following day, The Pittsburgh Press explained that "Scotty's voice 'grew up' along with him. This may have been surprising news to some, as the St. Louis Post-Dispatch had reported on September 1st that the supporting cast for the new season would be the same as before, including Scotty. Radio listings continued to list Scotty in the cast until at least the 14th.

On September 12th, Scotty attended The Jolson Story Hollywood Preview Party at Schwab's Drug Store in Hollywood. From there was broadcast a radio special called the Jolson Story Radio Preview, which included interviews with cast members, including Scotty.

On December 30th, Louella Parsons reported on a party that was given for Peggy Ann Garner. Escorting Elizabeth Taylor to the party was Scotty Beckett.

My Reputation (role: Kim Drummond)

prem. Jan. 25, 1946 - Warner Bros. - 94 min. - Barbara Stanwyck feature

Filmed Nov. 1943 to Jan. 1944. Screened for military audiences during the war (no specific dates available). ©Jan. 26, 1946. Released Jan. 26, 1946.

Movieland Magic (archival)

Mar. 9, 1946 - Warner Bros. - 2 reels - Technicolor Specials series

©Dec. 26, 1945. No. 3 in the series. Released in Technicolor. Includes footage from "The Royal Rodeo."

Her Adventurous Night (role: Junior Fry)

June 5, 1946 - Universal - 8 reels - Dennis O'Keefe & Helen Walker feature

©July 8, 1946.

White Tie And Tails (role: Bill Latimer)

Aug. 30, 1946 - Universal - 9 reels - feature

©Sep. 19, 1946. Starring Dan Duryea, Ella Raines, and William Bendix. Reissued as The Swindlers.

The Jolson Story (role: Al Jolson as a boy)

Oct. 10, 1946 - Columbia - 128 min. - Larry Parks & Evelyn Keyes feature

Filmed late 1945/early 1946. ©Sep. 12, 1946. Filmed in Technicolor. Scotty is seen singing "On The Banks Of The Wabash," "Sabbath Prayer," "Ave Maria," "When You Were Sweet Sixteen," "After The Ball," "By The Light Of The Silvery Moon" and "Blue Bell," but in each case the vocal is dubbed by Rudy Wissler.

1947

On February 20th of this year, The California Eagle of Los Angeles reported the following: "Under the auspices of B'nai B'rith Boris D. Bogen and City Terrace Lodges, a Brotherhood rally will be held Monday, February 24, at the Jewish Community Center, 213 N. Soto st., 8 p.m. The purpose of this meeting is to promote in the eastside community the spirit of religious and racial understanding. The program will include such notables as Rev. A. E. Worthy, Clarence Muse, Dr. Villagran, Scotty Beckett - young Jolson in film - Rabbi A. Greenberg, Molokan church choir, and the honorable William Rosenthal."

On March 27th, Scotty accompanied Peggy Ann Garner to the Bel Air mansion of Atwater Kent, who threw a large, star-studded party for aviation executives.

On May 10th, News-Pilot of San Pedro, CA, reported the following: "Scottyettes held a meeting at the home of Josephine Guglielmo, 224 Fourteenth st., to discuss their club ideal, Scotty Beckett, and to plan future activities."

On July 8th, Hedda Hopper, writing in her syndicated column, reported that Scotty would be appearing in the upcoming "Dangerous Years."

On July 18th, Scotty was interviewed on the ABC radio program Junior Junction.

On July 28th, the Hollywood Citizen-News reported that Peggy Ann Garner had introduced Scotty to Betty Sullivan (Ed's daughter) and that the two were now going steady.

Also on July 28th, The Modesto Bee reported that Scotty was now enrolled at the University of Southern California.

On August 2nd, the United Press reported the following: "Five young movie veterans - who've made 421 movies and $1,750,000 between 'em - hunched together over strawberry shortcake today and let the picture business have it straight. These 'teen-agers think 90 per cent of the epics turned out nowadays are 'just plain lousy.' The kids oughta know. They've been making movies since the days when a nurse used to feed 'em pablum on the set between takes. They've seen many a movie queen come and go - but they're still around - from Our Gang comedies to juvenile parts. Altogether , they've cleaned up an average of $350,000 each during their careers. Movie-making is the only life they know. But, as far as they're concerned, the 'good old days' were better. The old-timers were Scotty Beckett, 17, Ann E. Todd, 15, Darryl Hickman, 17, Harry Shannon, 17, and Dickie Moore, the only one who shaves every day. He's 22. To a man (with apologies to Miss Todd, who's growing up to be a beauty) they blasted the current crop of movies as 'grade A stinkers.' Even cited names and titles and box-office receipts. 'Personalities are taking over the screen,' Scotty declared. 'In my day (he started in the business at the age of 3) the stars had to do some acting. They don't nowadays. Look at Van Johnson. He's a swell guy, personally, but he sure can't act.' "

On August 17th, Ed Sullivan, writing in his syndicated column, gave the results of an informal poll conducted by his daughter, in which she asked young people in the movie colony to give their favorites among their peers. Scotty was rated "best of the boy actors."

On September 10th, Belle Ayer's Film Fanfare voted Claude Jarman, Jr., for best juvenile actor. Scotty was one of four runners-up, for his work in "The Jolson Story."

On September 15th, Ed Sullivan, writing in his syndicated column, included this tidbit: "Starmaker W. Wanger testing Film Daily poll winner, Scotty Beckett for one of the young brothers in Bergman's 'Joan of Lorraine.' "

On October 26th, the Chicago Sunday Tribune reported the following: "Fourteen years is a long time to have been in movies - especially if you're only 18! But that's the story of Scotty Beckett, who divides his time equally on work before the cameras, sophomore studies at the University of Southern California, and tinkering on his souped up car. Scotty (or Scott Hastings, to be formal) considers himself a 'professional son,' because so many of his performances on the screen have been in the role of sons, ranging from his first appearance at 3 as the offspring of Otto Kruger and Ann Harding in 'Gallant Lady' to the child of Cary Grant and Irene Dunn in 'My Favorite Wife.' And naturally he played the young boy in 'My Son, My Son!' His reel life parents number well over a hundred.

"Among his other roles, Scotty has portrayed many stars 'as a boy,' including Jon Hall, Don Ameche, Robert Cummings, and Louis Hayward, climaxing the series as young Jolson in 'The Jolson Story.' ('I don't really sing - they dubbed in the voice,' he hastens to explain.) Young movie fans remember Scotty as Peggy Ann Garner's date in 'Junior Miss' and as the other man in 'Cynthia,' with Elizabeth Taylor. He recently finished 'The Difficult Years.'

"Movies are a secondary career with Beckett, now very much tied up with classes and extracurricular activities at U.S.C., where he is majoring in business administration and is a member of the naval R.O.T.C. Now he is too engrossed with school to think much about his ambitions, but he is sure about one thing - after his appearance in 'The Jolson Story' Scotty has high hopes of growing up to look like Larry Parks!"

On October 31st, Scotty appeared on the KMPC radio program Teen And Twenty Time.

On December 4th, Sheilah Graham, writing in her syndicated column, reported that Scotty was set to work in the upcoming "A Date With Judy."

Cynthia (role: Will Parker)

prem. July 23, 1947 - MGM - 98 min. - Elizabeth Taylor feature

Filmed around Feb./Mar. 1947. ©May 14, 1947. Released Aug. 29, 1947. Working title: The Rich Full Life

Dangerous Years (role: Willy Miller)

Dec. 7, 1947 - Wurtzel/20th Century-Fox - 7 reels - feature

Filmed during the summer of 1947. ©Dec. 23, 1947. Also starring Billy Halop, Ann E. Todd, Jerome Cowan, Richard Gaines and Anabel Shaw. Also in the cast were Dickie Moore and Marilyn Monroe.

1948

On February 8th of this year, Ed Sullivan reported the following in his syndicated column: "Scotty Beckett in from the coast to eye the shows. He played the part of Jolson, as a boy, in the flicker. Now he's over 6 feet tall, still growing."

On February 22nd, Ed Sullivan wrote about Heart Night At The Copacabana, which "played until 3:30 A.M. and paraded the top stars of Broadway and Hollywood under the blinding spell of one Milton Berle." Scotty was among those assisting "choral disciplinarian" Tony Canzoneri.

On February 29th, Ed Sullivan reported that Scotty was "back to the coast."

On March 4th, the Daily News of Los Angeles reported that Scotty won the title role in "Michael O'Halloran,' which was due to begin shooting on March 15th.

On March 9th, the Los Angeles Times reported that Scotty would probably be reprising his role from "The Jolson Story" in the upcoming production of "The Babe Ruth Story." This, however, never materialized.

On April 29th, Scotty appeared on the MBS radio program Family Theater in an episode called Their Only Son.

On June 26th, Hedda Hopper reported the following in her syndicated column: "Scotty Beckett and Father Harold Fitzgerald became friends during the shooting of 'Michael O'Halloran.' When Father Fitzgerald, who is a teacher at Loyola High School, underwent a very serious eye operation, it was Scotty who drove him to the hospital and took care of him during his stay there."

Sometime during this year, a 78rpm single was released on the BRT label. The A-side (BT1000A) was a song called "Judaline" performed by Scotty Beckett and The Melodiers. It was featured in the film "A Date With Judy," but this was a different version. The B-side (BT1000B) was called "Bop Goes My Heart" and performed by Scotty Beckett and The Buddy Bergman Trio.

On August 6th, the Salt Lake Telegram (UT) reported the following: "Easiest way to get a poke in the nose is to tell Scotty Beckett to be himself. 'I've been trying for 15 years,' he sighs, 'and I am only 19 now. But at last I've succeeded.' The young actor refers to 'A Date With Judy,' in which he portrays a teen-age boy of an average American family who likes music and girls. He doesn't have to pretend he is a well-known personality as a child or be anything but what he is. 'I have a face that seems to resemble the baby pictures of every star in Hollywood,' he points out. Scotty isn't imagining things, either. In the 15 years since his screen bow he has been Louis Hayward as a small boy in 'My Son, My Son,' John Hall as a fledgling in 'Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves,' Robert Cummings as a young sprout in 'King's Row,' Don Ameche in short pants for 'Heaven Can Wait,' and the adolescent Al Jolson in 'The Jolson Story.' Scotty has been acting on the screen since he was 4 years old. A native Californian, he made his screen debut in the 'Our Gang' comedies, grew up on studio lots, has appeared in more than 40 films, and can boast one of the 'hottest' collections of boogie-woogie recordings in town."

On September 24th, The National City News (CA) reported that Scotty had attended something called the Hi-Debber Jamboree in that city.

On October 21st, Scotty again appeared on the MBS radio program Family Theater, this time in an episode called The Story Of John Sager.

There is some indication that Scotty may have been under contract with MGM at this time. He certainly appeared in more of their films than anybody else's during this period.

On October 23rd, Citizen-News columnist Sidney Skolsky's Movie Boner of the Week was as follows: "The Best Movie Boner is from Neil Gordon of New York who writes that in 'A Date With Judy,' Scotty Beckett portrays a character called Oggie(sic) Prindle. There's a scene in the picture in which Scotty Beckett wears a sweater with the initils S.B. instead of O.P. on it.&quot On November 2nd, Skolsky reported that Neil Gordon had been wrong about the previous week's Movie Boner: "The readers...insist that in the picture it was evident that Scotty Beckett, attending Santa Barbara High School, was a letterman and therefore entitled to have on his sweater the initials 'SB.' "

On October 27th, Hedda Hopper reported the following in her syndicated column: "Hearing that Peggy Ann Garner was going to elope with Scotty Beckett, I called to check. She laughed like any 16-year-old, and said, 'His girl friend would be mighty put out if that happened. I have a boy friend, but we're not eloping."

On November 6th and 7th, Scotty took part in the First Annual Lamont Fall Festival, crowning the winner of the Queen's award and escorting her during the festival and also on her trip to Hollywood shortly thereafter. He was also scheduled to do some sort of singing and dancing routine at the festival.

On December 14th, Scotty won a role in the upcoming Clark Gable/Myrna Loy film "Any Number Can Play."

On December 20th, Scotty was arrested on a drunk-driving charge, which ultimately resulted in the payment of a fine. On December 24th, Danton Walker of the Daily News of New York speculated the following: "Scotty Beckett's front page antics (drunken driving charge) may cost him an MGM build-up. He was set for the role of Clark Gable's son in 'Any Number Can Play.' " However, on December 25th, Ed Sullivan revealed the following in his syndicated column: "Dear Boss - Metro Producer Arthur Freed, Mervin Le Roy and Clark Gable agreed completely with your analysis of the Scotty Beckett accident. He gets the role of Gable's son in Clark's next flicker. The wire from Clark: 'Have talked to Arthur and Mervin and they have assured me Scotty set for part, as everyone here is in sympathy with the boy. Merry Christmas, Clark.' Then on December 29th, Sheilah Graham shared the following in her syndicated column: "Good news for Scotty Beckett! After the 19-year-old former child star was arrested on a charge of drunkenness, I checked to see whether Clark Gable would still want him to play his son in 'Any Number Can Play.' 'Of course,' said producer Mervin Le Roy. 'It is the poor kid's first offense.' Now it is up to Scotty to justify this sympathy and keep his nose clean."

Pantomime Quiz episode (appearance)

May 16, 1948 - KTLA - 30 min. - TV episode

This program was still being aired locally in Los Angeles, becoming a network show the following year.

A Date With Judy (role: Ogden "Oogie" Pringle)

July 29, 1948 - MGM - 113 min. - feature

Filmed around Dec. 1947 to Feb. 1948. ©June 29, 1948. Starring Wallace Beery, Jane Powell, Elizabeth Taylor, Carmen Miranda, Xavier Cugat and Robert Stack. Filmed in Technicolor. Scotty takes part in singing "I'm Strictly On The Corny Side," "Judaline" and "It's A Most Unusual Day."

Michael O'Halloran (lead role: Michael O'Halloran)

Aug. 8, 1948 - Windsor/Monogram - 8 reels - feature

Filming began Mar. 15, 1948. ©Aug. 8, 1948. Also starring Allene Roberts.

1949

On February 25th of this year, Scotty performed as a vocalist at a YWCA benefit at Grauman's Chinese Theatre.

On March 24th, the Southwest Wave of Los Angeles reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, teen-age star of pictures, was the guest of Manual (College) recently when he spoke to the combined group of the Daily Staff, the Masquers club, and the Players company. Journalism in the theater was his topic and at the end he sang two popular hits of his recent picture, 'A Date With Judy.' They are 'Pop Goes My Heart,' and 'Judaline.' "

On April 3rd, Scotty was a guest on the radio program Hollywood U.S.A.

On April 15th, Erskine Johnson reported in his syndicated column that Scotty had secured a role in the upcoming production "Battleground."

On May 4th, The Sacramento Bee ran an ad for Hollywood Star Records, which was releasing 12 eight-inch discs, each with a spoken message from a popular star. One of these featured Scotty.

On May 7th, Harrison Carroll reported the following in his syndicated column: "Two of Roddy McDowall's pals, Richard Long and Scotty Beckett, tied him down and shaved off that mustache of which he was so proud."

On May 27th, Scotty played "Franz Joseph" in a one-time performance of Tales Of The Vienna Woods at the Kingston Armory in Wilkes-Barre, PA.

On June 20th, the Associated Press reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, who played Young Al Jolson, has given up his college career to devote his time to pictures. He attended six semesters at USC, but film assignments were always interrupting his finals."

On June 22nd, Sheilah Graham reported the following in her syndicated column: "Scotty Beckett is knocking 'em for a loop at Metro as a song-and-dance man with Jane Powell in 'Nancy Goes to Rio.' The former child star will be teamed with 'Janie' in another musical."

On July 6th, Scotty was one of several celebrities to attend the opening of a new ice cream parlor in Burbank run by Jane Powell's father.

On July 8th, Scotty became engaged to tennis star Beverly Baker.

On August 4th, Bob Thomas of Associated Press reported the following: "Enough of this kid-stuff smooching on the screen says Jane Powell. She wants the real thing. 'It's time I was getting more than a quick smack from Scotty Beckett,' she said on the set of 'Nancy Goes to Rio,' in which she has another puppy-love romance. 'How long can I go on like this?' "

On August 31st, Hedda Hopper reported in her syndicated column that Scotty would soon be working in "You're Only Young Twice." This was a working title for "The Happy Years."

On September 6th, the Citizen-News of Hollywood reported that Scotty had "made a couple of records as a be-bop singer." It's not clear whether or not they're referring to the BRT single released the previous year.

On September 28th, Scotty and Beverly eloped to Las Vegas.

Any Number Can Play (role: Paul Kyng as a boy)

prem. June 30, 1949 - MGM - 112 min. - Clark Gable & Alexis Smith feature

Filmed around January 1949. ©May 25, 1949. Released July 15, 1949. Scotty was originally slated to play Gable's son, but grew so tall prior to shooting that Darryl Hickman wound up with that role.

Battleground (small part: Pvt. William J. Hooper)

prem. Nov. 9, 1949 - MGM - 118 min. - feature

Filmed during the spring of 1949. ©Oct. 19, 1949. Released Jan. 20, 1950. Starring Van Johnson, John Hodiak, Ricardo Montalban and George Murphy.

1950

On January 10th of this year, The Miami Herald reported the following: "Scotty Beckett and his bride Beverly are in San Francisco on a delayed honeymoon. The young couple eloped to Yuma during the filming of 'You're Only Young Twice,' and had to forego a honeymoon due to Beckett's work in the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer film."

On January 12th, the Valley Times of North Hollywood reported that Scotty had won one of the featured roles in the upcoming "Louisa."

On February 9th, the Citizen-News of Hollywood reported the following: "Scotty Beckett's spending all his time on the 'Louisa' set at UI denying two rumors: that his tennis star-wife is expecting the stork, and that he's 21."

On February 10th, Beverly filed for divorce. She was awarded temporary alimony on March 17th.

On April 19th, Scotty was one of the guests of honor at a luncheon at the Jewish Home for the Aged in Los Angeles.

On May 31st, Beverly received a lump-sum settlement in her divorce case against Scotty, though the divorce would not be finalised for another year.

On July 14th, E.V. Durling reported the following in his syndicated column: "In 1936 that subtly sophisticated screen siren, Andrea Leeds, established a Hollywood record for being kissed the most times in one day during the making of a film. On that day Andrea was kissed 437 times by four leading men. That record held for fourteen years. It was recently broken when starlet Piper Laurie was kissed 524 times in one day, by one leading man, Scotty Beckett." Now, just in case anybody thinks there's any accuracy to this anecdote, the March 12th Democrat and Chronicle of Rochester, NY, described it differently (and probably more accurately) when it said that she was kissed 524 times "by a quintet of aspirants for the part."

On July 20th, Scotty appeared on the KHJ radio program Lynn On Hollywood.

On September 4th, the Valley Times of North Hollywood reported that Scotty was one of many celebrities who attended "a cocktail and buffet-dinner party to celebrate the opening of the new Marine Room and open air pavilion" at Dudley Murphy's Holiday House in Malibu.

On September 16th, the Los Angeles Times reported that Scotty had landed a role in the upcoming "Gasoline Alley."

On November 13th, Edith Gwynn, writing in her syndicated column, reported on the engagement of Scotty Beckett and screen actress Sunny Vickers, whose real name was Beverly Jane Vickers.

On December 5th, the Citizen-News of Hollywood reported that Scotty and Sunny attended the birthday celebration of writer Norman Winter at the Cherry Cove in Los Angeles.

Nancy Goes To Rio (role: Scotty Sheldan)

Mar. 10, 1950 - MGM - 100 min. - Jane Powell & Ann Sothern feature

Filmed during the summer of 1949. ©Jan. 31, 1950 (in notice: 1949). Starring Jane Powell and Ann Sothern. Filmed in Technicolor. Scotty takes part in performing "Nancy's Goin' To Rio."

Louisa (role: Jimmy Blake)

May 31, 1950 - Universal-International - 90 min. - feature

Filming started Jan. 30, 1950. ©June 9, 1950. Starring Ronald Reagan, Charles Coburn, Ruth Hussey, Edmund Gwenn and Spring Byington.

The Happy Years (role: "Tennessee" Shad)

July 7, 1950 - MGM - 110 min. - Dean Stockwell feature

Filmed in late 1949. ©May 24, 1950. Filmed in Technicolor. Working title: You're Only Young Twice. Reissued in 1973 as The Adventures Of Young Dink Stover.

1951

On January 7th of this year, Louella Parsons reported the following in her syndicated column: "Scotty Beckett telling pals at the King's that he is eloping with Sunny Vickers to Mexico tomorrow."

On January 15th, Erskine Johnson reported the following in his syndicated column: "Brunet beauty Sunny Vickers, who's under contract to Columbia, will be the next Mrs. Scotty Beckett when the former child star's divorce from Beverly Baker becomes final in June."

On February 7th, Louella Parsons reported the following in her syndicated column: "Scotty Beckett, who yesterday was a child actor, is today old enough to be classified 1-A. So it looks as if it's the Army for Scotty, who is under contract at Columbia. Not only is Scotty's screen career to be postponed, but his marriage to Sunny Vickers, Columbia actress, will not take place until Scotty is out of the service."

On February 19th, The Daily Clintonian of Clinton, IN, reported the following: "Army doctors found Scotty Beckett subject to so many allergies they ruled him as 'status undetermined.' Scotty expects to be called sooner or later but he says, come what may, he and Sunny Vickers will be married in June."

On March 25th, The Detroit Free Press reported that Scotty and Sunny had recently attended the Photoplay Awards.

On March 31st, Harrison Carroll reported the following in his syndicated column: "After almost eloping to Mexico a while back, Scotty Beckett and Sunny Vickers have called off their seven-month engagment. She's gone to Florida and Scotty certainly didn't seem to be carrying any torch at the Saddle and Sirloin. His date was pretty Terry Higdon."

On May 8th, Erskine Johnson reported the following in his syndicated column: "Scotty Beckett, whose divorce from Beverly Baker is final May 31, has been rejected for military service because of an asthmatic condition."

On June 21, the Los Angeles Times reported the following: "Scotty Beckett, 21-year-old film actor reportedly yesterday wed for the second time. Yesterday brought about entry of a final decree of divorce from his first wife, tennis-playing Beverly Baker, 20. Miss Baker won the interlocutory decree in Superior Court May 31, 1950, when she testified that Beckett was 'insolent, arrogant, abusive, belligerent and jealous.' She received $5750 in lieu of alimony. She and Beckett were married in Las Vegas Sept. 28, 1949. The final decree was entered at Beckett's request, presumably because Miss Baker is now playing in European tennis tournaments. Beckett, it has been reported in Hollywood, now plans to go through a second marriage ceremony with Sunny Vickers, film starlet to whom he was secretly wed in Mexico five months ago."

On June 25th, Harrison Carroll reported the following in his syndicated column: "Scotty Beckett tells me he and Sunny Vickers will have a second marriage ceremony in Las Vegas. He says they were married secretly in Mexico last January and are expecting a baby in November." It was reported by the Associated Press on Aug. 2, 1957, that this second wedding took place on June 27th in Phoenix, AZ.

On July 11th, Scotty appeared on the MBS radio program Family Theater in an episode called The Funny Man. Scotty played the lead role.

On November 8th, Scott Hastings Beckett, Jr., was born at St. Vincent Hospital in Los Angeles.

Somewhere around this time, Scotty joined the U.S. Naval Reserve.

Gasoline Alley (lead role: Corky Wallet)

Jan. 2, 1951 - Columbia - 76 min. - feature

Filming Sep. 20 to Oct. 4, 1950. ©Jan. 31, 1951. Also starring Jimmy Lydon.

Life Of St. Paul series (supporting role: Jacob)

1951 - Cathedral - 36 reels - series of 12 featurettes

Filmed in Dec. 1950. Starring Nelson Leigh. This was a series of 12 half-hour featurettes produced and released from 1949 to 1951. Scotty was working in the series in December 1950, when it was filming at the Chaplin studio. If this was the extent of his involvement, then he couldn't have appeared in any more than the last three episodes, all of which came out in 1951. But there is a possibility he could have been involved earlier.

1. Stephen, The First Christian Martyr aka The Martyrdom Of Stephen (1949)

2. The Conversion Of Saul Of Tarsus (c. Mar. 1949)

3. The Years Of Apprenticeship aka Apprenticeship Of St. Paul (c. Mar. 1949)

4. Return To Jerusalem (c. Sep. 1949)

5. Ambassador For Christ (c. Nov. 1949)

6. The First Missionary Journey Of St. Paul aka Paul's First Missionary Journey (c. Nov. 1949)

7. The Stoning At Lystra (c. Jan. 1950)

8. The Second Journey In The Life Of St. Paul (c. Mar. 1950)

9. Visit To Corinth (c. Oct. 1950)

10. The Third Missionary Journey (c. Feb. 1951)

11. Trial At Jerusalem (c. Feb. 1951)

12. Voyage To Rome (c. June 1951)

IMDb simultaneously indicates that the series had both 12 and 20 episodes, but newspaper accounts from the era show that 12 is the correct number. The initial releases of these films were to schools and churches. Theatrical distribution rights were acquired by Producers Representatives in Dec. 1951. This resulted in a theatrical release in 1954 called Magnificent Adventure.

TV-Radio Marathon (appearance)

June 9-10, 1951 - ABC - 15 hr. - TV special

Scotty was one of over 300 celebrities who took part in this marathon, which was presented by ABC and the Greater Los Angeles Press Club in aid of the City of Hope Medical Center in Duarte. In addition to the telecast on KECA-TV, it was broadcast over radio station KECA.

Corky Of Gasoline Alley (lead role: Corky Wallet)

Sep. 17, 1951 - Columbia - 80 min. - feature

Filmed in June 1951. ©Sep. 28, 1951. Also starring Jimmy Lydon.

1952

On January 18th of this year, Scotty attended the Coast premiere of "The Medium" at the Laurel Theater in Los Angeles.

On March 4th, the Daily News of Los Angeles reported that Scotty would be appearing in a new TV series due in the fall, "Rocky Jones, Space Ranger." I don't know the reason for the delay, but the show didn't debut for another year after this. The series had been in the planning stages at least since November 1951, and was reported to be in production in January 1952 and filming at Hal Roach Studios in late February. This resulted in the pilot episode, which was followed by a long period of inactivity before the main series was shot.

On March 27th, the Citizen-News of Hollywood reported that Scotty was present at the Crystal Room of the Beverly Hills Hotel as his mother was elected president of the Motion Picture Mothers Club. A newspaper photo shows Scot