Marilyn Knowlden, a child actress in the 1930s, played the daughter of many famous stars in that decade, and appeared in 6 Oscar nominated films. She was born in 1926.

With Claudette Colbert in “Imitation of Life “(1934).

With Katharine Hepburn in “A Woman Rebels” (1936). Marilyn also appeared in two other Hepburn films, Morning Glory and Little Women.

With Lewis Stone ( playing her father) and Freddie Bartholomew in “David Copperfield” (1935).

As the young ‘Cosette’ in “Les Miserables” (1935)

With Allan Jones in SHOW BOAT. Allan and Irene Dunne were her parents.

With Scotty Beckett and Norma Shearer in “Marie Antoinette” (1938).

Marilyn revealed that she has an autographed photo of Norma Shearer, with the inscription:

“To remind you of the good old days at Versailles.”

Marilyn’s first role , aged 4, was in “Women Love Once” and she played the daughter of Paul Lukas.

In “The Conquerors”(1932), Marilyn was yet again in the role of a daughter – this time Richard Dix and Ann Harding were her parents.

Benita Hume was her mother in “Rainbow on the River” (1936), but for once Marilyn wasn’t the sweet young girl but a spoiled brat!

In “Angels with Dirty Faces”, Marilyn played Ann Sheridan as a child.

In 1940, she was one of Bette Davis’ s students in “All This and Heaven Too.”

Marilyn had a small role in “Little Women”

In “The Cisco Kid”, Marilyn was described as ‘one of screendom’s youngest heart breakers.’

Marilyn’s mother kept scrapbooks of her daughter’s career.

When Marilyn married in 1946, she left the screen permanently.

From her comments over the years, her years in Hollywood were happy ones for her.

Marilyn, in 2010 at the annual Cinecon Classic Film Festival,was presented with an career achievement award by Marsha Hunt.

Marilyn’s 2011 autobiography covers her life in Hollywood and afterwards. Her father , an attorney , looked after her career. She was never contracted to one studio and went to public school rather than a studio school.

Marilyn has her own website which is www.marilynknowlden.com

Her daughter has taken all the clippings and pictures Marilyn’s mother saved and digitised them for the website.

An amazing autographed page by the cast of “DAVID COPPERFIELD..Marilyn signs herself as ‘Little Agnes’. Other autographs include Lewis Stone: Elizabeth Allen; Jessie Ralph; Freddie Bartholomew; Edna May Oliver: Madge Evans; Jean Cadell; Lionel Barrymore; W.C.Fields; Roland Young; Basil Rathbone; Hugh Williams; Una O’Connor; Maureen O’ Sullivan.

What a cast!

Each star put their character name after their signature.

Other signatures – George Cukor, David Selznick, Cedric Gibbons , Douglas Shearer and names from make-up( Jack Dawn),camera (Oliver Marsh), Hal C. Kern ( not listed as the film’s editor but he was a supervising editor), Edwin B. Willis (Art Dept.) and lights, props.