CCTV and increased safety measures have been added to plans for a new bus station in Durham city.

Durham County Council has unveiled new designs for Durham bus station, which will lead to the existing station on North Road being demolished.

It would be replaced with a modern and spacious transport hub that will include CCTV and a two-storey mezzanine overlooking the passenger waiting area.

The decision to install extra security measures comes after a consultation that identified safety and reducing the fear of crime as a priority.

If planning permission is approved, demolition of the existing bus station is expected to begin in late summer or early autumn before construction begins on the new facility in early 2021.

During this period, all bus services will be moved on-street with stop locations and timetables advertised in advance.

Councillor Carl Marshall, Durham County Council’s Cabinet member for economic regeneration, said: "Ultimately, our aim is to create a modern and welcoming transport hub that fits the historic nature of Durham city and shows we are very much open for business.

"We want to provide residents with a safe and attractive space, while ensuring visitors to the city get the best first impression possible.

“High quality transport infrastructure is vital for a prosperous economy and a key factor for businesses considering investing in an area. Our plans for Durham bus station are part of a wider vision to improve transport links and enhance towns and villages across the county.”

Residents and commuters are now being asked to give their views on the plans at two drop-in sessions.

Many of the design features are in response to feedback received from a consultation in 2019, when the council asked the public what they felt should be done to improve the facility.

Along with the drop-in sessions, questionnaires will be available online from Friday and council officers will be visiting the bus station to talk to passengers about the plans and complete surveys during the consultation period.

Once the consultation closes, comments will be passed onto the designers and the design will be reviewed ahead of a final planning application being submitted.

It is anticipated the new bus station would be completed and open to the public in late 2021.

Coun Marshall added: "We have listened to what residents told in previous consultations and think the new plans will appeal to residents and commuters alike.

"However, we are keen to find out what the public think."

Sessions will be held in the Church Hall at North Road Methodist Church on Friday, January 17 from 1pm to 6.30pm and Saturday, January 18 from 10am to 2pm.

To take part in the consultation online, visit www.durham.gov.uk/consultation from Friday, January 17 and comment by 10pm on Sunday, February 9.