The opening of Durham’s new bus station has been delayed until next year. The new facility, which is located on the site of the former bus station, is being developed by Durham County Council.

It was initially due to open in summer 2023 but was delayed until November 2023. Now, the local authority has set the new opening date of early 2024. Temporary bus stops have been in operation along North Road and Milburngate in the years since the former station closed.

The £10.4m bus station’s structure is now fully in place, with some exterior and interior works left to be completed. It is hoped the new bus station will attract shoppers and tourists to the city. Explaining the reason for the delays, Durham County Council admitted the work has been complex.

Read more: Government plans to relocate jobs from Westminster to Darlington brought forward three years

Keep up to date with all the latest local news from County Durham with our free newsletter

Mark Jackson, Durham County Council’s head of transport and contract services, said: “The new Durham Bus Station has been an innovative yet complex project and we know bus users are keen for it to open. Testing of the bus station and the completion of final minor works delayed the original planned opening in November.

"However, we anticipate opening the bus station at the beginning of the new year and will be delighted to welcome passengers when this happens.” The new station comes amid ongoing concerns over cuts to bus services and their reliability in the region.

What the new bus station will offer

The council says the new bus station has been designed to increase the overall space for passengers, which includes increasing the reversing area for buses leaving bays and widening the exit onto North Road to improve visibility, with additional pedestrian access also being created.

Inside, there will be increased seating and space in the passenger waiting area. The plans also include a two-storey area with office space. The new building will include a green roof and wall.

Why it is being redeveloped

The former bus station was built in 1970 and needed updating, the council said. The new building design has been created based on passenger feedback, considering issues around security, safety and accessibility raised about the former building.