Part of the series Maronite Church ' History Organization Population Maronite Church (Video)

Maronites (Arabic: الموارنة‎, Lebanese: Marune, Syriac: ܡܪܘܢܝܐ, Latin: Ecclesia Maronitarum) are members of one of the Lebanese or Syriac Eastern Catholic Churches, with a heritage reaching back to Maron, the Syriac Monk in the early 5th century. The first Maronite Patriarch, John Maron, was elected in the late 7th century. Although reduced in numbers today, Maronites remain one of the principal ethno-religious groups in Lebanon and they continue to represent the absolute majority of Lebanese people when the Lebanese diaspora is included. Unique amongst Eastern Rite Catholics, the Maronites are Eastern Christians who have always remained in communion with the Bishop of Rome.

Before the conquest by Arabian Muslims reached Lebanon, both those Lebanese people who would become Muslim and the majority who would remain Christian spoke a dialect of Aramaic.< Syriac (Christian Aramaic) still remains the liturgical language of the Maronite Church.

See also[]

Part of a series on

Particular churches sui iuris

of the Catholic Church

Roman cross and Byzantine Patriarchal cross Particular churches are grouped by rite. Latin Rite Latin

Byzantine Rite Albanian · Belarusian · Bulgarian

Croatia and Serbia · Greek · Hungarian

Italo-Albanian · Macedonian · Melkite

Romanian · Russian · Ruthenian

Slovak · Ukraine Alexandrian Rite Coptic · Ethiopian · Eritrean Armenian Rite Armenian West Syriac Rite Maronite · Syro-Malankara · Syriac East Syriac Rite Chaldean · Syro-Malabar

Cypriot Maronite Arabic

List of Maronites

Maron

Saint George: Devotions, traditions and prayers

References[]

Monasterio San Charbel Caracas Venezuela

Further reading[]

R. J. Mouawad, Les Maronites. Chrétiens du Liban, Brepols Publishers, Turnhout, 2009, ISBN 978-2-503-53041-3

Kamal Salibi - A House of Many Mansions - The History of Lebanon Reconsidered (University of California Press, 1990).

Maronite Church. New Catholic Encyclopedia, Second Edition, 2003.

Riley-Smith, Johnathan - The Oxford Illustrated History of the Crusades (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1995)

[]

Congregation of the Lebanese Maronites Missionnaries

World Maronite Union

CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY IN LEBANON

Lcnj.com

JESUS CHRIST OUR SAVIOR

Beith Souryoyé Morounoyé

Maronitecensus.net

Maronite Rite diocese based in Sydney, Australia

Eparchy of Saint Maron of Brooklyn

Eparchy of Our Lady of Lebanon

Saint Therese of the Child Jesus

NEW ADVENT

Catholic Culture: News — Maronite population discussed

The Maronite history and culture worldwide: Maronite Worldwide Knowledgebase

el Khazen Family Prince of Maronites: Lebanese Families Keserwan Lebanon

Ain-Ebel

Maronite History

The Maronite Monks of Adoration, Most Holy Trinity Monastery

The Druzes and the Maronites under the Turkish Rule from 1840 to 1860 Cornell University Library Historical Monographs Collection. [Reprinted by] Cornell University Library Digital Collections

Maronitische Christliche Union Deutschlands (German)