Auburn Hills Map — Satellite Images of Auburn Hills

original name: Auburn Hills

geographical location: Oakland County, Michigan, United States, North America

geographical coordinates: 42° 41' 15" North, 83° 14' 3" West

detailed map of Auburn Hills and near places

Welcome to the Auburn Hills google satellite map! This place is situated in Oakland County, Michigan, United States, its geographical coordinates are 42° 41' 15" North, 83° 14' 3" West and its original name (with diacritics) is Auburn Hills. See Auburn Hills photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Auburn Hills in United States. Auburn Hills hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Auburn Hills or add new placemark for Auburn Hills.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Auburn Hills hotel reservations

Book hotel in Auburn Hills online and save money

Auburn Hills hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in United States »

Auburn Hills hotels – sortable list of all Auburn Hills hotels »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Auburn Hills hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Auburn Hills, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Auburn Hills, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Auburn Hills hotels map

The location of each Auburn Hills hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Auburn Hills hotel map is available where all hotels in Auburn Hills are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Auburn Hills hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Auburn Hills hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Auburn Hills hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Auburn Hills hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Selected Auburn Hills hotels

Hilton Suites Auburn Hills (at 2300 Featherstone Road in Auburn Hills)

Crowne Plaza Hotels & Resorts Auburn Hills (at 1500 North Opdyke Road in Auburn Hills)

Candlewood Suites Detroit - Auburn Hills (at 1650 Opdyke Road in Auburn Hills)

Staybridge Suites Detroit-Auburn Hills (at 2050 Featherstone Road in Auburn Hills)

Hampton Inn Detroit/Auburn Hills (at 1461 North Opdyke Road in Auburn Hills)

Courtyard Detroit Auburn Hills (at 1296 Opdyke Road in Auburn Hills)

Fairfield Inn Detroit Auburn Hills (at 1294 Opdyke Road in Auburn Hills)

more Auburn Hills hotels »

Auburn Hills car rental

Compare Auburn Hills car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Auburn Hills rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Auburn Hills car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Auburn Hills — we will do it for you!

Car hire Auburn Hills and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Auburn Hills the city centre. Compare Auburn Hills car rental offers by various suppliers.

Auburn Hills car rental (distanced approximately 3.7 km)

Lake Orion car rental (distanced approximately 8.5 km)

Rochester Hills - 914 S ROCHESTER RD car rental (distanced approximately 8.5 km)

Rochester Hills car rental (distanced approximately 10.0 km)

Sylvan Lake car rental (distanced approximately 10 km)

more offers and Auburn Hills car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Auburn Hills

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Auburn Hills »

Overview of flights to and from United States »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Auburn Hills. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Auburn Hills and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Auburn Hills are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Pontiac Airport (distanced approximately 15 km) – airport hotels

Troy/oakland Airport (distanced approximately 16 km) – airport hotels

Detroit/white Lk Airport (distanced approximately 19 km) – airport hotels

Selfridge Angb Airport (distanced approximately 34 km) – airport hotels

Detroit City Airport (distanced approximately 36 km) – airport hotels

Auburn Hills 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Auburn Hills in United States

You can also dive right into Auburn Hills on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Auburn Hills 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Auburn Hills, United States in Google Earth »

Get more out of Auburn Hills map

Add placemark to Auburn Hills

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Auburn Hills map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Auburn Hills google map link options

link to us:

small Auburn Hills google map image link

medium Auburn Hills google map image link

large Auburn Hills google map image link