Silverdome

The Silverdome (formerly known as the Pontiac Silverdome) was a domed stadium located in the city of Pontiac, Michigan. The stadium complex, which opened in 1975 and had its first closing in 2006, sat on 127 acres (51 ha). It was the largest stadium…

The Palace of Auburn Hills

The Palace of Auburn Hills (commonly referred to as The Palace) is a sports and entertainment venue in Auburn Hills, Michigan, a suburb of Detroit. Opening in 1988, it is the home of the Detroit Pistons, of the NBA.

KUKA

KUKA is a German manufacturer of industrial robots and solutions for factory automation. The KUKA Robotics Corporation has 25 subsidiaries worldwide, mostly sales and service subsidiaries, including in the United States, Canada, Mexico, Brazil, Chin…

Oakland County, Michigan

Oakland County is a county located in the U.S. state of Michigan and located northwest of Detroit, in that city's metropolitan area. As of the 2010 census, its population was 1,202,362, making it the second-most populous county in Michigan. The coun…

Oakland University

Oakland University (OU) is a public university located in the cities of Auburn Hills and Rochester Hills, Michigan. Situated on a 1,443-acre (5.84 km2) campus, it was co-founded by Matilda Dodge Wilson and John A. Hannah. It is the only major resear…

WXYZ-TV

WXYZ-TV virtual channel 7 (UHF digital channel 41) is an ABC-affiliated television station located in Detroit, Michigan. Owned by the E. W. Scripps Company, WXYZ is a sister station to MyNetworkTV affiliate WMYD (channel 20).

Rochester Hills, Michigan

Rochester Hills is a city in northeast Oakland County of the U.S. state of Michigan, in the northern outskirts of Metropolitan Detroit area.

Southfield, Michigan

Southfield is a city in Oakland County of the US state of Michigan. It is a northern suburb of Detroit, MI. As of the 2010 census, the city had a population of 71,739. Southfield is adjacent to the city on the north side. A part of Metro Detroit's u…

Royal Oak, Michigan

Royal Oak is a city in Oakland County of the U.S. state of Michigan. It is a suburb of Detroit.

Novi, Michigan

Novi (/ˈnoʊvaɪ/ NOH-vy) is a city in Oakland County in the U.S. state of Michigan. As of the 2010 census, the population was 55,224, an increase over the 2000 census count of 47,386. The city is located approximately 25 miles (40 km) northwest of th…

Sterling Heights, Michigan

Sterling Heights is a city in Macomb County of the U.S. state of Michigan, and one of Detroit's core suburbs.

Macomb County, Michigan

Macomb County is a county located in the eastern portion of the U.S. state of Michigan. As of the 2010 census, the population was 840,978, making it the third-most populous county in the state. Of Michigan's five largest counties, Macomb experienced…

WDIV-TV

WDIV-TV virtual channel 4 (UHF digital channel 45) is an NBC-affiliated television station located in Detroit, Michigan, United States. The station serves as the flagship broadcast property of the Graham Holdings Company subsidiary Graham Media Grou…

Volkswagen Group of America

Volkswagen Group of America, Inc. (sometimes referred to as Volkswagen of America, abbreviated to VWoA), is the North American operational headquarters, and subsidiary of the Volkswagen Group of automobile companies of Germany. VWoA is responsible f…

Lawrence Technological University

Lawrence Technological University, also known as Lawrence Tech or simply LTU, is a private university located in Southfield, Michigan. The school offers undergraduate, masters, and doctoral programs in engineering, science, mathematics, architecture…