Sky Italia has acquired the co-exclusive rights to 3 matches per match day for a total of 114 Serie A games in the 2024/2029 seasons. The package also includes highlights of all 380 matches, archive rights for the current seasons, and exclusive rights to all Serie A matches for bars, hotels and other public venues.

This acquisition strengthens Sky’s football offering and reaffirms Sky as the home of sport in Italy with over 20 sports on offer including motor sports, tennis, basketball and more.

From the 2024/2025 season, Serie A will be featured on Sky, with three evenings of great Italian football: Saturdays at 8:45 p.m., Sundays at 6 p.m., and Mondays at 8:45 p.m. The package will also include four big matches for each season and includes a more favourable pick system, which will ensure that Sky broadcasts some of the most important matches for each round.

All matches will also be available in ultra-high definition 4K and, with the highlights of all 380 matches, Sky Sports will also offer quality analysis with pre-match and post-match commentary and updates on Sky Sport 24.

As for Sky Business customers in bars, hotels and other public venues, Sky will offer all Serie A matches on the Sky Sport Bar channels.

Marzio Perrelli, Sport Executive Vice President at Sky Italia, said: “We have decided to increase our investment in Serie A to offer our subscribers a significantly greater number of top matches”.

“From next season we will, in fact, have many more top matches between the big teams in Serie A, broadcasting at least 30 of the best 76 matches in the league. We will offer three great evenings of football that, together with exclusive Champions League matches, the entire Europa League, the Conference League, and Premier League and Bundesliga matches, will allow fans to experience, six evenings a week, the thrill of great national and international football”.

From 2024, the top players in European football will be playing on Sky and NOW in Italy: from all 51 UEFA EURO 2024 matches to 527 European cup matches, with exclusive coverage of 185 of the 203 matches per season of the UEFA Champions League and all UEFA Europa League and UEFA Europa Conference League matches, also thanks to Diretta Gol. Plus, the drama of the Premier League and Bundesliga, both of which are exclusive until the end of the 2024/2025 season.

Sky will therefore continue to be the home of sport in Italy and guarantee the widest choice of sports in Italy with F1, MotoGP, tennis with Wimbledon, NBA basketball, rugby, golf and much more. All shown with passion and the editorial and technological quality of Sky Sports, which has always added value for our subscribers.