Hollywood was left almost deserted of stars over the weekend as a who's who list of celebrities headed to Washington DC for the White House Correspondents' Association dinner.

Desperate Housewives actress Eva Longoria joined power couples Tom Cruise and Katie Holmes and Demi Moore and Ashton Kutcher at the annual event, while Gordon Ramsay and his newly made-over wife Tana led the British contingent.

The black-tie gathering of journalists, politicians and celebrities watched Barack Obama serve as comedian-in-chief, delivering what is traditionally a humorous and light-hearted presidential speech.

Starry night: Gordon Ramsay and wife Tana (left) rubbed shoulders with Eva Longoria Parker at a cocktail party prior to the White House Correspondents' Association dinner in Washington D.C. over the weekend

Common ground: The trio share a mutual friend - Victoria Beckham

And he didn't disappoint his many famous fans.

'I must confess I really did not want to be here tonight,' Obama told guests as he took to the podium at the Hilton hotel. 'But I knew I had to come. That's one more problem that I inherited from George W. Bush.'

Former vice-president Dick Cheney could not make the dinner, Mr Obama joked, because he was writing his memoir, How To Shoot Friends And Interrogate People – a reference to Mr Cheney's support of harsh interrogation and his accidental shooting of a hunting companion.

Dressed to frill: Tana - sporting newly dyed brown locks - opted for a black full-length dress while Eva settled on light pink ruffles

Mr Obama noted he and secretary of state Hillary Clinton had once been rivals but he assured the audience 'these days, we could not be closer'.

'In fact, the second she got back from Mexico, she pulled me into a hug,' he said in reference to the threat of a spreading swine flu.

Alluding to his reputation for staying cool and on message, Obama ticked off a series of goals he hoped to achieve.

Working the crowd: President Barack Obama charmed the A-list audience with his light-hearted speech

Right to bare arms: Michelle Obama flexed her famously toned arms in response to a joke about her habit of wearing sleeveless dresses during the dinner

In the next 100 days, he said, he would learn to go off the teleprompter and Vice President Joe Biden, famous for verbal gaffes, 'will learn to stay on the prompter'.

Obama said he also expected to house-train his new, seven-month-old Portuguese water dog, Bo.

'The last thing Tim Geithner needs is someone else treating him like a fire hydrant,' he said, referring to his treasury secretary.

Power couples: Tom Cruise with wife Katie Holmes (left) and Ashton Kutcher and wife Demi Moore, who looked stunning in a Grecian flowing dress

Geithner was forced to pay $34,000 in unpaid back taxes before being confirmed to his job and he has been criticised for his handling of the financial crisis.

'Finally, I believe that my next 100 days will be so successful that I will be able to complete them in 72 days. And on the 73rd day, I will rest,' he joshed.

In a dig at the press, Obama said: 'We look for you for truth - even if it's always an approximation.'

'Most of you covered me. All of you voted for me,' he then told reporters before quipping: 'Apologies to the Fox table.'

Brit pack: Sting and Trudy Styler attended the event along with Colin Firth and his wife Livia

Obama later endured some ribbing from stand-up comic Wanda Sykes.

She shared the head table at the dinner that brought together some 2,700 people at the $200-a-plate event - proceeds of which went to charity and to fund journalism scholarships.

Sykes, known for her blunt take on current events, mused about her pride in Obama's being the country's first black president.

Obama fans: Designer Donatella Versace poses with actor Jonathan Rhys Meyers (left) while Christian Slater took along a brunette companion

And, action! Director George Lucas was joined by partner Mellody Hobson while Steven Spielberg was accompanied by his wife Kate Capshaw

Natalie Portman looked sensational in a black, while Tyra Banks, Kerry Washington and Natasha Bedingfield were also among the glamorous guests.

The White House Correspondents' Association was formed in 1914 as a liaison between the press and the president.

Every president since Calvin Coolidge has attended the dinner.

The association will donate more than $23,000 to the charity So Others Might Eat, including money raised by skipping formal dessert for guests.

Quick wit: Obama dished out the one-liners in his speech and (right), with Michelle

Critics' verdict on President Barack Obama's stand-up routine...

President Obama killed, as comedians like to say, in his own lead-in routine. Indeed, the President exuded a Johnny Carson-like aplomb in delivering his lines, chuckling at some of the punchlines as though he appreciated how well his joke-writers' material was going over.

- Entertainment Weekly

The president still delivered one-liners fit for Jay Leno.

- Variety

Ham in chief! Comic Obama brings down the house.

- New York Daily News

Jokes about Rahm [Emanuel] swearing are getting a bit tired, I think, though Obama's - 'he's not use to saying the word 'day' after 'mother'. - wasn't bad.

- Ben Smith, Politico.com

Yes, there is something he’s not very good at: he doesn’t do funny at all well. Last night Obama’s routine was very flat. The audience laughed and was clearly willing him to do well, although it just didn’t work. Perhaps his speech writer can only do the rhetoric of hope and has never been asked to do jokes – it certainly sounded like it.

- Ian Martin, Telegraph