Opening Today

Opening Today

Bernie

The latest from Texas filmmaker Richard Linklater. Jack Black portrays the title character, Bernie, an assistant funeral home director in Carthage, Texas, who befriends affluent widow Marjorie Nugent (played by Shirley MacLaine), known for her sour attitude as much as her fortune. Bernie progresses to one day managing her financial affairs. Everyone loved and trusted Bernie so much that they were shocked, many months later, when it was reported that Marjorie had been dead for some time and Bernie was charged with murder. Matthew McConaughey rejoins Linklater, this time to play a blustery, real-life district attorney determined to solve the crime. The film was co-written by Linklater and Skip Hollandsworth.

Rated PG-13 for some violent images and brief strong language - Movies 16.

For Greater Glory (original title:

Cristiada)

The film, directed by former Oscar winning visual effects master Dean Wright, focuses on men and women who risked everything for the future of their country and religious faith. Oscar nominee Andy Garcia stars as General Gorostieta, a retired military man who initially thinks he has nothing at stake when he and his wife (played by Eva Longoria) watch Mexico fall into violent civil war. Yet he becomes the resistance's most inspiring and self-sacrificing leader when he sees the cost of religious persecution. The Cristero War (Cristiada) of 1926-1929 was an uprising against the Mexican government in power. The rebellion was ignited by the persecution of Roman Catholics, and strict enforcement of anti-religious provisions in the Mexican constitution. During this time, Mexican forces, with support from the government, sought to eradicate "superstition and fanaticism" by desecrating religious objects, persecuting clergy and writing anti-clerical laws. Also starring are Oscar nominees Peter O'Toole and Catalina Sandino as Father Christopher and Adriana, respectively, as well as Oscar Isaac, Bruce Greenwood, Ruben Blades as President Plutarco Elias Calles and Bruce McGill as U.S. president Calvin Coolidge.

Rated R for war violence and some disturbing images - Tinseltown 17 and Movies 16.

Snow White and the Huntsman

Designed as an epic adventure film starring Kristen Stewart as the only woman in the land who is more fair (beautiful, that is) than the evil queen (played by Oscar winner Charlize Theron) who intends to destroy her. What the wicked ruler never imagined is that the one girl threatening her reign has been training in the art of war with the same huntsman (Chris Hemsworth) who was assigned to kill her. Sam Claflin co-stars as a prince long enchanted by Snow White's beauty and power. State-of-the-art visualist Rupert Sanders directs.

Rated PG-13 for intense sequences of violence and action, and brief sensuality - Tinseltown 17, Movies 16 and the Stars and Stripes Drive-In.

Continuing

this week

(Marvel's) The Avengers (in 3-D and 2-D)

Kerns Rating: Four stars.

Under Joss Wheedon's direction, "The Avengers" winds up a super-cool summer movie, and not just because all those Marvel movie teasers from prior years pay off. What sets this picture apart from so many of its visual effects-driven predecessors is that these particular super heroes desire not only purpose, but deep-seeded friendships that range beyond family hopes or governmental orders. We're even introduced to Agent Phil Coulson as a fan-boy collecting super-hero trading cards and, in some ways, he turns out to be super, too. Be assured that Wheedon has spared no expense in battles between the Avengers and forces commanded by Thor's brother, Loki. Yet performances by Chris Evans (Captain America), Mark Ruffalo (Hulk), Jeremy Renner (Hawkeye), Chis Hemsworth (Thor) and especially Robert Downey Jr. (Iron Man) - oh, and let's not forget Samuel L. Jackson's Nick Fury and, Clark Gregg as Agent Coulson - all are believably funny, deadly and caring, and help make "The Avengers" better than even fans expected.

Rated PG-13 for intense sequences of sci-fi violence and action throughout, and a mild drug reference - Tinseltown 17, Movies 16 and the Stars and Stripes Drive-in.

Battleship (in 3-D and 2-D)

Kerns rating: Two and

one-half stars

Director Peter Berg manages to create a visual effect that will remind some of the old Hasbro "Battleship" board game, and just about as believable is a cheese-filled, flag-waving final chapter in which our Greatest Generation finds enough power in their old battleship to help them save the world. Star Taylor Kitsch was much more believable on Mars as "John Carter" than he is being introduced as a good-natured barfly who, upon being ordered by his brother to join the Navy, seemingly winds up earning rank on his brother's destroyer in no time. Oh, and he's also now engaged to the scary admiral's beautiful blonde daughter (Brooklyn Decker). But first there's the problem of commanding the only modern Naval vessel located inside an alien force field. Military exercises allow him to call on the Japanese for help; being in Hawaii comes across as a cruel inside joke. Nothing makes sense if you look or listen too closely, so just embrace the expensive visual and sound effects, and root for global victory over the nasty aliens' superior technology.

Rated PG-13 for intense sequences of violence, action and destruction, and for language - Tinseltown 17, Movies 16 and the Stars and Stripes Drive-In

The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel

Directed by John Madden, the film follows a group of British retirees who decide to "outsource" their retirement to less expensive and seemingly exotic India. Enticed by advertisements for the newly restored Marigold Hotel and bolstered with visions of a life of leisure, they arrive to find the palace a shell of its former self. Though their new home is less luxurious than imagined, they are forever transformed by shared experiences, discovering that life and love can begin again when you let go of the past. Stars Tom Wilkinson, Judi Dench, Dev Patel, Maggie Smith and Bill Nighy.

Rated PG-13 for sexual content and language - Movies 16.

Chernobyl Diaries

An original horror tale by Oren Peli, who wrote and directed "Paranormal Activity." The new film, directed by Brad Parker, follows a group of six young tourists who, wanting to go off the beaten path, hire an "extreme" tour guide. Ignoring warnings, he takes them into the city of Pripyat, former home to those working on the Chernobyl nuclear reactor and deserted since the 1986 disaster. After a brief exploration of the abandoned city, the group soon finds itself stranded ... and the tourists discover they are not alone.

Rated R for violence, some bloody images and pervasive language - Tinseltown 17 and Movies 16.

Dark Shadows

Kerns Rating: One star.

Director Tim Burton takes an American soap opera and attempts to rewrite it as comedy by way of a witch who transforms Johnny Depp's playboy into a vampire and then has him buried alive. Two centuries later, workers find Depp's coffin, free him and are killed for their trouble. (After 200 years, says Depp, he was really thirsty, which is about as funny as this script becomes.) Might I add that any film in which Helena Bonham Carter has no impressive scenes could not be more poorly written, and, while bringing Alice Cooper on board seemed semi-inspired, Burton cannot think of anything to do with him. Even a goofy sex scene is boring and seems to belong to a different movie. It wasn't that long ago that we were yawning at the Burton/Depp adaptation of "Alice in Wonderland." Here's hoping this is not a trend.

Rated PG-13 for comic horror violence, sexual content, some drug use, language and smoking - Tinseltown 17, Movies 16 and the Stars and Stripes Drive-in.

The Dictator

The film tells the story of a dictator, played by Sacha Baron Cohen, who risks his life to ensure that democracy never comes to the country he so lovingly oppressed. Larry Charles directs. Ben Kingsley, Anna Faris, John C. Reilly and Megan Fox co-star.

Rated PG-13 for strong crude and sexual content, brief male nudity, language and some violent images - Tinseltown 17 and Movies 16.

The Hunger Games

An unflinching, honest adaptation of book one in Suzanne Collins' trilogy. Jennifer Lawrence, so good in "Winter's Bone," is equally compelling as teenager Katniss Everdeen, who volunteers to take her younger sister's place in "games" that find her forced to fight for her life. Affection felt for her by fellow Tribute Peeta (Josh Hutcherson) creates both personal confusion and higher TV ratings. The true "Hunger Games," after all, is a futuristic reality program. The story: Every year in the ruins of what was once North America, the nation of Panem forces its 12 districts to choose a boy and girl to compete. Part twisted entertainment, part government intimidation tactic, the "Hunger Games" are a televised event in which the 24 representatives, or Tributes, must stalk and kill one another, for the television cameras, until only one survivor remains. It is a reminder that the Capitol controls hope in the districts. Gary Ross directed "The Hunger Games," but since has been replaced by Francis Lawrence for the first sequel "Catching Fire."

Rated PG-13 for intense violent thematic material and disturbing images, all involving teens - Movies 16.

Men in Black 3

(in 3-D and 2-D and Movies 16's XD)

Director Barry Sonnenfeld waited 10 years to make a second sequel, and advance reviews are positive. Agent J (played by Will Smith) and Agent K (Tommy Lee Jones) return. J has seen some inexplicable things in his 15 years with the Men in Black, but nothing, not even aliens, perplexes him as much as his wry, reticent partner. But when K's life and the fate of the planet are put at stake, Agent J will have to travel back in time to put things right. J discovers there are secrets to the universe that K never told him - secrets that reveal themselves as he teams up with a young Agent K (Josh Brolin) to save his partner, the agency and the future of humankind.

Rated PG-13 for sci-fi action violence and brief suggestive content - Tinseltown 17, Movies 16 and the Stars and Stripes Drive-In

What To Expect When Expecting

TV fitness guru Jules (Cameron Diaz) and dance show star Evan (Matthew Morrison) find that their celebrity lives do not stand a chance against the surprising demands of pregnancy. Baby-crazy author/advocate Wendy (Elizabeth Banks) gets a taste of her own militant mommy advice when pregnancy hormones ravage her body. Her husband, Gary (Ben Falcone), struggles not to be outdone by his competitive alpha-Dad (Dennis Quaid), who is expecting twins with his much younger trophy wife, Skyler (Brooklyn Decker). Photographer Holly (Jennifer Lopez) is ready to travel the globe to adopt a child, but her husband Alex (Rodrigo Santoro) is not so sure, and tries to quiet his panic by attending a male support group, where new fathers tell it like it really is. And rival food truck chefs Rosie (Anna Kendrick) and Marco (Chace Crawford) hook-up by surprise, which results in an unexpected quandary: what to do when your first child comes before your first date? Chris Rock co-stars.