LIKE EVERYTHING else in our celebrity-saturated society, the White House Correspondents Dinner has become a red-carpet affair.

Kim Kardashian and Lindsay Lohan were invited, courtesy of Fox's Greta Van Susteren, and other news stations, magazines and news services now bring so many celebrities to the event, it's a wonder there's room for any journalists.

For example, Politico invited Charlize Theron and Eva Longoria. Newsweek/The Daily Beast brought in Reese Witherspoon and Viola Davis. Penn alum John Legend came courtesy of NPR. People nabbed Josh Hutcherson and Diane Keaton. Time saved seats for George Clooney and Steven Spielberg. USA Today made room for Martha Stewart and Kelly Ripa. Zooey Deschanel, Rashida Jones and the cast of "Modern Family" were also in the house. What was Reuters thinking inviting only politicians and ambassadors. They ain't getting any paparazzi photos with the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

No matter. The White House Correspondents Dinner is just a chance for Democrats and Republicans to yuck it up with the beautiful people. For the Beltway Bubble to throw a party, hosted by Jimmy Kimmel, for Hollywood swells. For President Obama to crack wise on Hillary Clinton and Mitt Romney, and receive a thumbs-up from Rick Santorum.

It's the type of evening in which the president can thank the GOP leadership in attendance "for taking time from their exhausting schedule of not passing any laws" — and the GOP leadership will laugh.

We're all friends here.

By the way, before it became the political equivalent of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, the WHCA was formed in 1914 as a liaison between the press and the president. Every president since Calvin Coolidge has attended the dinner. Some of the proceeds from the dinner pay for journalism scholarships for college students — but we won't be needing those soon, when the big meal is taken over by the "Partisan Flame-Throwers Blogging from Our Basement" Dinner.

Britain's best-dressed

The UK edition of Glamour has chosen Kristen Stewart as "Best Dressed."

We're sure the desire to put the star of "Twilight" on their cover had nothing to do with it.

"Kristen is always effortlessly on-trend," said the editors. "Her evolution from awkward teen to style queen has made the 'Twilight' star a fashion icon every girl can relate to."

Emma Watson finished second in the mag's poll, Victoria Beckham third and Kate Middleton fourth.

Younger sister Pippa Middleton, who turned heads at the royal wedding, did not turn heads at Glamour. She finished 47th.

In a BFF battle, No. 33 Selena Gomez edged out No. 34 Taylor Swift.

Beyonce? A distressing No. 27, just behind No. 26 Lady Gaga and well behind former Destiny's Child mate Kelly Rowland, No. 14. The Brits have warmed to Kelly now that she's a judge on one of their many TV karaoke contests.

"Fashion Star" fashionista Jessica Simpson did not crack the Top 50.

TATTBIT

"Access Hollywood" reports that now that he's "dating" Kim K., Kanye West is acting like a member of the Kardashian family. Is it possible to become more self-centered?

— Daily News wire services contributed to this report.

Email gensleh@phillynews.com