On May 29, 1754, Congregationalists and Baptists came together for a synod (or formal gathering of ministers and laymen) in Stonington, Connecticut. Leaders and members of churches from each of these traditions were there to decide whether they could continue in mixed fellowship among their churches. Can Congregationalists (paedobaptists, or infant baptizers) church together with Baptists (credobaptists, or believers only baptizers)? Or must the Christians who differ on this point of doctrine and practice separate from one another to join or form distinct churches?

Congregationalists in colonial America were the descendants of those Puritans who had separated themselves from the Church of England in the 17th century. In the New World former “Separates” became the establishment, and now Baptists were among those considered “Separates” in eighteenth-century America. It’s a bit complicated, but among the Separates gathered in Stonington, there were both Congregationalists (formerly associated with the establishment Congregationalist churches) and Baptists (also formerly associated with establishment churches). The whole group was known to the broader public as “Separates,” but Separate-Baptists specifically distinguished themselves from other Separates in their practices of baptism and church membership.

Congregationalists baptized believers and their infant children into church membership (this is paedobaptism), and Baptists baptized only believers who possessed what they believed to be a credible profession of faith (this is credobaptism). However, both shared a congregational practice of church polity or governance. In fact, Baptists and Congregationalists shared quite a lot of both doctrine and practice, but their differences were causing real trouble at the local church level.

During their synod in Stonington, both sides accused the other of sin. From the Congregationalists’ perspective, the Baptists sinned by cutting off or excluding the children of believers from baptism. Conversely, the Baptists accused the Congregationalists of sin because of their practice of knowingly baptizing unbelievers (infants can neither understand nor believe the gospel). Based on each side’s view of baptism (its meaning and purpose), they seemed to be consistently calling the other side to repentance and conformity to what they each believed was the biblical command.

Once arguments were made and anecdotes were shared, the deciding vote was a bare majority. The synod voted in favor of excluding Baptists from the Separate churches and associations. Separate-Congregationalists decided not to commune or fellowship with Separate-Baptists. In response to this decision, Baptists formed self-consciously Baptist churches, admitting only baptized believers into membership, and baptizing only those with a credible profession of faith.

This episode reminds us that secondary doctrines matter a great deal. Those primary doctrines shared by all Christians are essential to the gospel and to Christianity. To lose or compromise on a primary doctrine is to lose Christianity altogether. Secondary doctrines are not essential to the gospel, but they are essential to the function and unity of a local church. To avoid clarity or to reserve judgment on secondary doctrines at the local church level (such as baptism, church membership, church leadership, and polity) is to sow seeds of disunity that will sprout divisive and self-destructive results.

As long as people are free to read the Scriptures for themselves, we will inevitably come to different conclusions about various points of doctrine. Sometimes this means we ought to simply be patient and loving with one another as we church together. And sometimes this means that we must part ways to join with other Christians who share our doctrinal convictions. Battles over secondary issues have been fought before, and we would do well to learn from them - both the battles themselves and the outcomes. Wise churches and Christians learn from the mistakes and victories of those who have gone before.