Over at the Pestle home, there's a video of 6-year-old Hana belting out tunes in an exaggerated lounge singer style.

Now, Hana Pestle is 18 and on the verge of releasing her first CD, but you can still see a glint of that giddy kid when she talks about her new life in Los Angeles. A year ago, her fledgling career found a fast track when she moved to L.A. to work with Ben Moody of Evanescence. Just 17 and a senior at West High School, Pestle was a commuter student during the 2006-07 academic year. She'd spend nine days out of the month in L.A., then return to Billings to attend classes, rehearse with the choir, and pick up another batch of homework to complete in L.A. She still managed to perform with West's top choir, the Meistersingers, and attend prom with her classmates, graduating with her class in May.

Even though it was a grueling year, with Pestle writing and recording songs and shopping her music to four record labels in Los Angeles and New York, it was worth the wild ride.

"I feel comfortable and I feel like that's where I was meant to be," Pestle said. "I just can't describe how much fun it is to be onstage. It's what I want to do."

Within the next month, Pestle expects to ink a record deal, releasing up to 17 songs that she has composed with the help of her new friends, Moody and music producer Michael "Fish" Herring. Six of the songs were recorded with a quartet, six were recorded with a 12-piece orchestra and the others were recorded with a 32-piece orchestra, with help from composer David Campbell.

"I've always been obsessed with orchestra music," Pestle said. "I love the sound of a cello. So we got to put all these strings on some of my music. It is amazing how full it sounds."

Pestle, who played a show dubbed "Women of Song" in mid-December at Yellowstone Valley Brewing Co., is planning her second show in Billings before she heads back to L.A. in early January. She opens for Left Of Center on Monday at the Garage Pub, singing and playing acoustic guitar.

Composing was a natural extension of Pestle's intense connection with music. She picked up a guitar at a garage sale when she was in grade school and got her first real guitar in 2001. She studied with the instructors over at Hansen Music for years until she got comfortable enough to sing and play at the same time.

Listen now and subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Google Podcasts | Spotify | YouTube | RSS Feed | Omny Studio

"I always loved Incubus and one of the first songs I learned to play was theirs. Then when I was 15, I started writing music. It gradually got better."

One of her favorite original compositions, "What Makes Things Break Like They Do," was written as part of an English project.

"I wrote it as a response to the book, 'Lord of the Flies.' The title of the song is actually a line from the novel."

Her compositions are melodic, without being sappy, and her warm vocals show off an impressive range. She honed her style at open mic nights around Billings and at shows at Double Edge and MontanaFair. It was a 2005 show at Double Edge that first drew the attention to Herring and he invited her to visit L.A. in December, 2005 to discuss recording her music.

"I was freaked out because I was only 16 and from Billings and here I was in L.A. recording music," Pestle said.

One of the biggest highlights of her life was opening for Collective Soul in Las Vegas in May where Pestle said she was nervous but happy. A stage performer as well as a vocalist, Pestle said she feels an intense connection with her audience. It wasn't always that way.

"I remember in seventh grade when I did a solo at the Christmas concert. I was so nervous that I stood there trembling."

Her sophomore year in high school, Pestle landed a leading role as the sour kangaroo in "Seussical, the Musical," stealing scenes with her bluesy voice.

The competition in L.A. is intense, and even though Pestle has supporters who carry clout in the music industry, the road to making a hit record has been a rough one. She's been performing at coffee houses in L.A., including trendy Irish pub Molly Malones, where she played twice in November, and bringing in thousands of fans across the country through her MySpace page. When she returns to California, Pestle plans to make plans to tour in support of her record.

"I just want to get these songs out so people can hear them. I'm dying to get this record out."

Love

0

Funny

0

Wow

0

Sad

0

Angry

0

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.