Information about «El Tiempo» media

Newspaper Name: El Tiempo Newspaper name in English: The Times Owner: Grupo Planeta Publisher: Casa Editorial El Tiempo S.A. Country / Region: Colombia (Bogota) Language: Spanish Format type: Newspaper Category: General Political alignment: Centrism Frequency: Daily Publication Years (print version): 1911 — now (112 years) Publication Years (digital version): 2000 — now (23 years) ISSN: 0121-9987 Circulation: 240,000 (2015) Official Pages: Website: www.eltiempo.com [read with translation]

This Colombian newspaper was created in 1911 by local activist and politician Alfonso Villegas Restrepo. Just 2 years later, he sold it to his half-brother Eduardo Santos Montejo, and from this moment the main story of the newspaper and the active political activity of the Santos family in Colombia begins. The Santos family has repeatedly been in power, members of this family have led the country 2 times (Eduardo Santos, 1938-1942; Juan Manuel Santos, 2010-2018), as well as less significant posts, for example, Francisco Santos served as vice president from 2002 to 2006. The Santos family owned the newspaper until 2007, after which the majority stake in the newspaper was bought out by the Spanish media holding «Grupo Planeta». We can safely say that the history of this newspaper is actually the entire political history of Colombia in the XX century. From 2001 to 2008, «El Tiempo» was the only national daily newspaper in Colombia.

Today the newspaper is published in 6 versions: Bogotá (Bogota), Caribe (Barranquilla, Cartagena, Santa Marta, Sincelejo, Rioacha, Valledupar), Medellín (Medellin), Café (Pereira, Manizales, Armenia), Cali (Cali, Popayan, Pasto); Regional (other cities of the country). «El Tiempo» is a active member of the Press associations: «Grupo de Diarios de América», «Asociación Colombiana de Medios de Información», «Interactive Advertisement Bureau», «Superintendencia de Industria y Comercio». Many supplements are published to the newspaper, which are actually independent publications: Deportivo, Habitat, Portafolio, Carrusell and others. The newspaper's activities are marked by many different awards and prizes.

Translate the latest edition of the Colombian newspaper «El Tiempo»

Latest issue of the «El Tiempo» (The Times) may be translated in English language now.

For request latest edition of this media, click «Translate» button in front of the selected translator.

Translation result will be opened in your browser on new window (or tab).

Select one of the translators below.

available 3 translators

⇓

Translate «El Tiempo / The Times / www.eltiempo.com» newspaper into English by Google Translate

Click on this button to begin translation of the media ⇒

Read «El Tiempo / The Times / www.eltiempo.com» newspaper online in English with translation by Yandex Translate

For request translation result click on this button ⇒

«El Tiempo / The Times / www.eltiempo.com» in English by Bing Translator

Click on button this for translate media ⇒

...

English version of «El Tiempo / The Times / www.eltiempo.com», latest issue from SysTran Translation Service

Translator currently not available x

English edition of «El Tiempo / The Times / www.eltiempo.com», fresh translation by PROMT Trans

Translator currently not available x