Cesar Tiempo is the pen name of Israel Zeitlin, a naturalized Argentine born in the Ukraine in 1906. A Russian pogrom drove the Zeitlin family to Hamburg, and soon after, they set sail for America. When the ship reached New York there were difficulties about details of passport regulations that thwarted their hope of entering the United States, so the Zeitlins went on with the ship to Buenos Aires.

Thereby we lost a Jewish poet and Argentina gained a Jewish and a national poet. Israel Zeitlin would have been a Jewish poet in any land, but he has become, in Argentina, not only a poet of his people, but of his adopted country as well.

Jewish writers have played a very important part in 20th century Argentine literature, and it is noteworthy that this contribution to Argentine letters does not come from the Sephardic Jews, who have preserved for centuries the Judeo-Spanish cultural tradition. The Argentine group is of East-European descent, first-or second-generation immigrants, like Cesar Tiempo, who have come to the New World seeking refuge and freedom. Brought to Argentina at the beginning of the 20th century through the generosity of Baron Moses Hirsch of Austria, who purchased a great extent of territory in the Argentine province of Entre Rios, these Russian Jews grouped themselves in colonies in this and in other provinces, and soon made a valuable contribution to the economic life of their new country.

And not only economic. In a remarkably short time some of these immigrants and their children became a part, and a leading part, of the literary life of Argentina, in spite of the handicaps of language and of cultural traditions so alien to those of their adopted land. Much of this assimilative tour de force was due to the genius of the writers themselves, but conditions in Argentina were peculiarly favorable to it.

It is unlikely that the same writers would have achieved a comparable leadership in Europe or the United States, despite their great talents and their eagerness to fuse their old and their new cultures. For it must be noted that the “assimilation” of this group of writers did not involve a rejection of their Jewish heritage. They were not interested in becoming Argentine instead of Jewish, but in adding Argentine qualities to their Jewishness, and in explaining their Jewishness to the Gentile world. Indeed, the work of these authors, and especially that of Cesar Tiempo, is deeply concerned with Jewish traditions and culture.

_____________

What are the factors that made this literary growth less difficult in Argentina than it would have been in Europe or in the United States? One was certainly economic. Argentina needed immigrants, especially agricultural workers, and she welcomed those who, like the Russian Jews, were good farmers. Established in colonies, they quickly won respect and friendship through their skill and industry. Twentieth-century Argentina, like the United States a half-century earlier, was a relatively empty land of opportunity, going through a tumultuous evolution. The balance of power was shifting from the feudal, cattle-raising aristocracy of the outlying provinces to the farmers of the provinces near Buenos Aires, and to the merchants and intellectuals of the capital. In this struggle all aid was welcome, and men of foreign birth and ancestry rose quickly to leadership, if they were able men. There was no xenophobia or anti-Semitism; the Jew-baiting that afflicts Argentina in recent years is part of the pseudo-Nazi movement by means of which the reactionary cattle-owning aristocracy hopes to regain its lost power.

The upheaval in Argentine economic life early in the century was paralleled by a revitalized and intensified literary activity. Spanish-American literature as a whole has been slow in maturing, to an even greater extent than in the United States. And the coming of age of Argentine literature was of even more recent date, so that foreign writers were on the scene as modem Argentine literature began to mature and expand. Having taken a full share in the development of other phases of national life, it was natural that they should participate fully in its cultural life as well. The Jewish writers, moreover, were impelled by a desire to explain themselves and their traditions to their fellow Argentines, and by a deep sense of gratitude toward the nation that had offered them a chance to live and grow as free men.

The outstanding figures of this Jewish flowering in Argentine literature are Alberto Gerchunoff, Samuel Glusberg, Samuel Eichelbaum, and Cesar Tiempo. Gerchunoff has perhaps the greatest prestige; through his editorial work in La Nación of Buenos Aires, one of the four or five great American newspapers; through his two collections of short stories, Los gauchos judíos (The Jewish Cowboys) and Cuentos de ayer (Tales of Yesterday); and through a series of critical and philosophical studies. Samuel Glusberg has done a great deal for the spread of Argentine literature with his publishing house, the Editorial Babel, and with his stories and novels, written under the pen name of Enrique Espinoza. Samuel Eichelbaum has written short stories and critical works, but his greatest fame comes to him through his plays, which have won him the unanimous praise of the critics and first place among the dramatists of Argentina, and perhaps of all Spanish America. An excellent study of his work by Theodore Apstein appeared in the summer 1945 Books Abroad.

_____________

Among these authors and many others worthy of mention no one has worked with greater diligence and success than Cesar Tiempo. More than any other of them, he has made himself the interpreter, the defender, and the conscience of the Jews of Buenos Aires. As the publisher of the newspapers Crítica and El Sol, and the literary review Columna, Tiempo opened their pages to young Jewish writers, and he has fought for independence and sincerity, justifying the noble motto of his review: “Ready to make any sacrifice, save that of truth.” He did everything possible to fight the infamous anti-Semitic campaign promoted several years ago by Hugo Wast, a campaign and a promoter that at one time enjoyed the official support of the Argentine government, which gives, by this support and by the consequent persecutions, the definitive proof of its barbarity.

In his dramatic and poetic work Cesar Tiempo continues and strengthens his mission of Jewish champion and interpreter. Two plays of his have been produced, El teatro soy yo (I Am the Theater) and Pan criollo (American Bread), both high in artistic and even poetic value, treating Jewish themes with nobility and sincerity. But Tiempo is above all a poet, and in his poetry we can see most clearly his double mission of interpreter and champion.

His first book of poems, Versos de una . . . , was published in 1923 under the pseudonym of “Clara Baker.” The critics received it with praise, and then with amazement on discovering that its author was only seventeen. His second collection of poems, Libro para la pausa del sábado (A Book for the Sabbath Pause), won the First Municipal Prize for Poetry in 1930. Since then he has published two other collections: Sabatión argentino (Argentine Sabbatyon) in 1933, and Sábadomingo (Sabbath-Sunday) in 1938.

_____________

What are the main themes of Cesar Tiempo’s poetry? As an interpreter of his people, he speaks to us of the Jewish Sabbath, of family affection, of Jewish maidens, of life in the ghetto of Buenos Aires. As a defender and champion of the Jews, he speaks of pogroms, of the suffering of his ancestors; he makes us look upward to the greatness of the Jewish tradition, and punishes with the lash of his irony his brothers when they forget this greatness through their petty, and worldly concerns.

His principal theme is the Sabbath of pause and meditation, sacred day when the Jews, turning their eyes away from daily worries, forsake the bustle of the streets to withdraw into the synagogue and the home and, by the light of the seven-branched candelabra, contemplate the eternal glory of God. As we have seen, the titles of three of his volumes of poetry refer to this Sabbath pause: A Book for the Sabbath Pause, Sabbath-Sunday, and Argentine Sabbatyon. The latter refers to the legend of the River Sabbatyon, whose waters do not flow on the sacred day of rest. In a language filled with religious emotion, his poetry, like a psalm, sings of the sadness and yearning of the Jewish soul, filled with memories. In “Our Sabbath,” he says:

Our Sabbath, channel of festive rest,

candelabra of flames crowded as my days

guard your dark-windowed refuge

like a child in the night, alone and afraid. . . .

and in “The Birth of the Sabbath”:

Sabbath of pause—Shabbat—of truce,

of renewal—chadash—of new

moon—neomenia—for the joy

of one who longs to seek refuge,

far from turmoil, in the mercy

of active idleness, of sacred peace,

and putting behind him dizziness and discord

to love God and think of nothing.

In his “Hymn to Jewish Maidens,” he says:

Against the phantom of war,

with a single, steady faith,

let us give to the earth a Sabbath.

Sabbath is peace. Sabbath is peace.

And finally, he links the moon and the sun in his beautiful Sabbath “Prayer”:

Moon, mother of the Sabbath, transfuse

your loving

calm, your pollen of peace, your wandering

soul into the wife that awaits

the son’s coming like a melodious

paschal consecration of spring fruits.

Sunday, son of the sun, let your light not

strike her,

your alabandine light that knows no rest;

let the roar of the street become gentle music

for the son advancing

with the tremor of water seeking its shore.

Sabbath-Sunday, the child new as the dance

that dies and is reborn upon the stricken

earth,

comes with its hope to seek your hope;

a Jewish mother brings it to you with her

love,

give her your brightness all the days of her

life.

The poet’s Sabbath meditations do not, however, exclude other interests, both Jewish and Argentine: a love of the street, a delight in complete and outward living, an infinite good humor, a tremendous capacity to react against the sadness and uncertainty of existence, interests that he has expressed in verses that overflow with the joy of living. So in his poem, “To Be Danced on Friday Evening”:

Friday, bearing in your arms

the Sabbath like a bride,

—Israel counts by evenings

and anticipates the dawn—

puff of blue cloud that loves the street

like the Hellene and the Jew,

peoples of circles and dreams

with a living, present past;

silent peddlers go by,

stray girls and dogs,

under the trees of night

blind angels rest—

the trees, nature’s gallows,

and candelabra, still cheerful,

spout yellow lights

upon the suicides of Friday.

Friday of stumbling, wandering steps

if your destiny is my destiny

why after loving the Sabbath

do you love Sunday’s laughter?

The poor pass like instants,

around the hearth are pictured

lovers’ luck

and needle’s weariness.

Friday, bustling father,

Saturday, festive wife,

Sunday, street-loving son

and all around, the living life.

The living, living, living life

ununified and unrestricted,

hurray, hurray, hurray for all,

God, Friday, Saturday and Sunday.

and in “Sun Shower in the Ghetto”:

Hallelujah! Hallelujah!

laughs the sun in the rain.

Blond and festive sun

over the Jewish quarter.

Hallelujah that unites

Semite and Christian voices.

The tardy trolleys

sing their bright colors.

The ghetto’s joy

makes a date in the sky.

Evening preens itself

in Jewish streets.

Gay, golden rain

for wordless love . . .

God pours over all

his fine, golden ash.

Girl, give me your hand.

Let us run and get wet.

Hallelujah! Hallelujahl

laughs the sun in the rain.

This poem is a good example of Tiempo’s humor, a humor frequent in his poetry, though often—and inevitably—tinged with irony, because of his themes. Thus, faced with a world that stubbornly refuses either to receive the Jews as compatriots or to give them the promised homeland, Cesar Tiempo writes his ‘“Israelite Cemetery”:

Deaf to the hurly-burly of the street,

drowsy-content, free from delirium,

face upward, with the down-curved noses,

rest

these souls discharged from Jewry and its

cares.

After a crossing by paths without return

their boats have come to mooring here at last;

they have made themselves these beds, this

sprawling city,

in the sure repose of everlasting sleep.

The moans of old women with their noisy

grief

cannot disturb this smug and supine world

where throb the rhythms of the whining

dirge

sung for a set price, with beatings of the

breast.

Here the days dance their slowly-measured

ease,

the flowers’ resurrection confers its grace;

the schnorrer has taken title to the land,

the aristocrat his neighbor in the ground.

And while the nights display their decora-

tions

above this dwarfed city’s heavy calm,

the Semite flock sleeps without vain ambi-

tion,

assured that life will not begin tomorrow.

In the image of the dead Jews resting “face upward, with the down-curved noses” there is a fine example of Tiempo’s characteristic mixture of humor and tenderness. The irony of having to wait for death before becoming landowners and inhabiting the same element as the aristocracy is an irony heightened by the motto that Tiempo used for his poem—Lord Balfour’s “A National Home for the Jewish People.”

His anger against the oppressors of the Jews can become a lash turned against the Jews themselves when they are guilty of worldliness and ignorance. In his magnificent “Harangue on the Death of Hayim Nahman Bialik,” he contrasts the life and death of the great Hebrew poet with the indifference of the Jews of Buenos Aires to the grandeur of their inheritance:

What other interest than that of the present moment can a people have which must drag itself through its shadows and abysses?

—Bialik

On July 5th the Associated Press gave the

news to the world:

Hayim Nahman Bialik had died in Vienna,

Twenty days later, and in the same city,

they put an end to Dollfuss, the “Milli-

metternich.”

Look out for poets

whose fists pound on the desks of hangmen!

The world’s dailies

managed to publish the item on the Society

Page

next to the account of the party

with which the Barabanchik family

celebrated the circumcision of their off-

spring.

I have a violent heart

and a harsh voice.

I walk the streets of the Jewish Quarter

weighed down by my anger and my grief.

Brothers of Buenos Aires:

our proudest poet is dead.

As in the Psalms,

God girded him with strength and made

straight his way.

Minkowski was plaintive,

Bialik an imprecation.

And both will rot under the earth,

facing the blind eyes of tremendous night.

A shirtsleeve sky runs over the roofs.

The pedlars in the Pilsen are at their end-

less game of dominoes.

Girls who want to get married don’t walk

under scaffolding.

You bourgeois who break all the Com-

mandments

and spend your Sabbaths over your black-

bound ledgers,

stroking the spines of the figures

to make them stretch out like cats,

I have seen you in your glittering temples—

ranged like thoroughbreds in sumptuous

stalls—

with your round lifeless little eyes,

with your formal top hats and your pure

silk prayer-shawls,

trying to bribe God

who knows you better than your employees.

Hayim Nahman Bialik is dead.

There’s gefillte fish today in ‘The Inter-

national,’

and a good stock of doctors for your poor

drooping daughters.

Who remembers the massacres in the

Ukraine,

the raving storm of the pogroms,

when hooligans raped your mothers

and you stayed trembling in your cellars,

useless

as a ray of light striking a mirror?

Bialik shouted, he thundered across the

black waters,

and his angry laughter ran through the

villages like a wild wind.

‘The people are a withered grass,

lifeless as dry timber.’

And there were youths who shook them-

selves like wolf cubs

and their sharp teeth tore our shame to

shreds.

Hayim Nahman Bialik is dead.

The old-clothes dealers smile in the door-

ways of their pandemoniums.

The Lacroze trolleys are greener than ever.

Cast thy bread upon the waters, says

Ecclesiastes.

How nice to hear Mischa Elman from a

soft orchestra seat at the Colón.

Gorki said that with Bialik the Jewish race

had given a new Homer to the world.

Would the Bank of Israel accept his sig-

nature?

Voices:

‘Tonight when the store’s closed and I’m

dunking my toast in a glass of tea,

I’m going to ask the wife to read me

The Bird and The Garden, and after

supper we’re going to the Ombú Theater:

if you want to get on the Committee,

you’ve got to keep up with things.’

Hayim Nahman Bialik is dead.

‘Ma, can I wash my hair with kerosene and

put on my sky-blue dress to go to

the Library?’—‘All right, darling, and see

if you can get yourself a young man,

like the rest of the girls: it’s about time.’

Hayim Nahman Bialik is dead.

At the door of the People’s Kitchen our

brothers, the ones who haven’t the

courage to starve to death, are waiting

for their ration.

Hayim Nahman Bialik is dead.

Our legs drag through the deepest marshes

of night and above our heads a pure

light shines.

In Tel-Aviv there was a poet.

And now?

_____________

Cesar Tiempo’s poetry is very Hebraic in spirit. He has the qualities that appear in the work of the great Hebrew poets: irony, humor, sentiment, pity, an interest in man and in the reality of his existence, all expressed with a pure, free lyricism. And at the same time, this Hebraic poetry of Cesar Tiempo proves to be very true to Spanish tradition in its form. There is in his songs an infectious choral gaiety and in his psalms the solemnity and the peacefulness of medieval plainchant. Very Spanish are his humor and tenderness that often become bitterness and sarcasm. He has a thoroughly Spanish stoicism that can accept the hazards of life and view with equanimity the deepest anguish. Very Spanish, too, is his love for the precise, concrete image, and that poetic fantasy that couples dissimilar and improbable elements in bold and striking metaphors, as in, these descriptive verses: “The roofs hoist flags of smoke,” “The cold sharpens its knife on the wind,” “Friday of fog. The dawn has a handkerchief in each hand,” “The night has its back to the sky,” “Sunday nervously loosens its tie, and the shadow of an indifferent Monday advances.” Speaking of a deaf-mute painter:

Your hands learned the purest language,

translating into pictures your wordless grief,

as the clouds tell their pluvial

sorrow with simple water pictures.

At this uncertain hour, in a world filled with hatred and distrust, it is good to listen to the voice of this Jewish poet who, knowing that to understand is to forgive, devotes himself to banishing the errors and deceits that nourish intolerance. Argentina, and America, North and South, need such voices, now more than ever.

And despite the incredible horrors and injustices that have been, and are still being committed against the Jews, Cesar Tiempo gives to his Jewish brothers, and to the whole world, a note of hope in the last poem of his book Sabbath-Sunday, a poem entitled “Weeping and Singing,” which bears this motto from the Psalms: “They that sow in tears shall reap in joy”:

From a land of milk and honey,

from hills and rivers clear,

the people of Israel went forth,

weeping.

Pillars of fire and cloud

went on before their steps

and Israel crossed the desert,

weeping.

The captives lifted up their

cities of mighty walls

and they gave thanks to God,

weeping.

Their lances became harrows,

their swords were turned to plows,

night and day they labored,

weeping.

The sea of fiery water

they crossed over with their horses,

the tempest fell upon them,

weeping.

They were walled about

in the shadow of the ghettos

but they found out the light,

weeping.

The Sabbath was their buckler,

their isle, their candelabrum,

and they called the Sabbath holy,

weeping.

Taunted and spat upon,

bent low above the earth,

they sow without hate or rest,

weeping.

Tomorrow the sun will smile

upon the seed-rich fields

and then, then we shall reap,

singing, brothers, singing.