Information about «Diario Tiempo» media

Newspaper Name: Diario Tiempo Newspaper name in English: The Daily Times Alternative Names: El Tiempo Owner: Grupo Continental Country / Region: Honduras (San Pedro Sula) Language: Spanish Format type: Newspaper Category: General Political alignment: None Frequency: Daily Publication Years (print version): 1970 — 2015 (45 years) Circulation: 50,000 (2015) Official Pages: Website: tiempo.hn [read with translation]

«Diario Tiempo» is a daily newspaper in San Pedro Sula, Honduras, published since 1970. It is part of the Grupo Continental conglomerate. The newspaper is also known in the city of San Pedro Sula under the abbreviated name «El Tiempo» (The Time). It is one of the most widely circulated newspapers in Honduras, as well as a popular online website and digital publication for portable devices. In addition to a daily news feed and an overview of political and economic events, the newspaper offers its readers a variety of informative, entertaining and socio-cultural sections.

On October 27, 2015, the newspaper's print version was suspended indefinitely after the owners of the «Continental Group» were charged with money laundering in the Rosenthal case. At the moment, it exists only in electronic form.

Translate the latest edition of the Hondurasian newspaper «Diario Tiempo»

Latest issue of the «Diario Tiempo» (The Daily Times) may be translated in English language now.

For request latest edition of this media, click «Translate» button in front of the selected translator.

Translation result will be opened in your browser on new window (or tab).

Select one of the translators below.

available 3 translators

⇓

Translate «Diario Tiempo / The Daily Times / tiempo.hn» newspaper into English by Google Translate

Click on this button to begin translation of the media ⇒

Read «Diario Tiempo / The Daily Times / tiempo.hn» newspaper online in English with translation by Yandex Translate

For request translation result click on this button ⇒

«Diario Tiempo / The Daily Times / tiempo.hn» in English by Bing Translator

Click on button this for translate media ⇒

...

English version of «Diario Tiempo / The Daily Times / tiempo.hn», latest issue from SysTran Translation Service

Translator currently not available x

English edition of «Diario Tiempo / The Daily Times / tiempo.hn», fresh translation by PROMT Trans

Translator currently not available x