The American thriller film North by Northwest (1959) is one of Alfred Hitchcock’s most-entertaining movies. It features taut suspense and black humor and has all the hallmarks of a Hitchcock movie, including the theme of mistaken identity. The movie contains a number of memorable sequences, including the crop-duster chase and the climax on Mount Rushmore.

Roger O. Thornhill (played by Cary Grant) is a successful advertising executive who, while having lunch at a hotel, is mistaken for another man and kidnapped in broad daylight. He is taken to an opulent home on the outskirts of New York, New York, where he meets Phillip Vandamm (played by James Mason), a charismatic aristocrat who believes Thornhill is George Kaplan and demands certain information. After repeatedly denying that he is Kaplan, Thornhill is forcibly made to drink alcohol and sent off in his car, presumably to drive to his death in a fatal accident. Instead, the drunk Thornhill is arrested by the local police. In trying to determine what has happened to him, Thornhill is led to Lester Townsend (played by Philip Ober), a diplomat. Just as Thornhill meets him, however, Townsend is murdered, leaving Thornhill as the prime suspect. He flees on a train to Chicago, Illinois, and avoids capture with the help of Eve Kendall (played by Eva Marie Saint), who not only shelters Thornhill in her cabin but also seduces him.

Upon arriving in Chicago, Kendall informs Thornhill that Kaplan will meet him at a remote rural bus stop. Once there, however, Thornhill discovers that he has been lured into a trap and barely avoids being killed by a crop duster. He returns to Chicago and trails Kendall to an auction house, where he discovers that she is Vandamm’s mistress. In a tense confrontation, Thornhill is arrested by police but is then taken to the airport, where he is met by the Professor (played by Leo G. Carroll), a U.S. intelligence official who informs Thornhill that Kendall is actually an agent working for him, and her assignment is to find out how Vandamm’s operation is smuggling secret information out of the United States. The Professor also tells Thornhill that there never was a George Kaplan; he is a fictional character made up to deceive Vandamm and his men. The Professor and Thornhill trail Vandamm and Kendall to Rapid City, South Dakota, where Kendall pretends to shoot Thornhill in order to maintain her cover. However, when Thornhill secretly goes to Vandamm’s house, he overhears a conversation that makes it clear Vandamm and his men know Kendall is a spy. Thornhill and Kendall escape, ending up atop Mount Rushmore. As the couple navigates the perilous climb down, Thornhill tangles with Vandamm’s henchmen. Just as it appears all is lost, the police arrive, and Thornhill and Kendall are saved.