Aerial Star Competition Judges

The Aerial Star Competition features judges from all over the world specializing in their chosen aerial apparatus'. All of our judges boast several years experience in the aerial arts and the majority of them have not only practiced and performed on their chosen apparatus, but have also competed, taught at their home studios, and judged other competitions previously. We hold our judges to the highest standards, and they contribute so much to our abilities to hold competitions so we just want to highlight and thank them for their time and dedication here.

If you are interested in judging for any of our upcoming competitions and feel you have the experience required you can learn more about judges requirements as well as apply at the link below.

Apply to Judge

Dan Saab

Daniel Saab began his aerial artistry at an early age and later moved on to begin his professional journey in various locations around New Jersey and New York while attending Montclair State University and acquriing a Bachelor of Arts in Theater Studies. He then enrolled in the Intensive Professional Program at Circus Warehouse NYC and began training regularly. In this program, he had the opportunity to train with experts in their respective fields. His specializations are Aerial Sling and Aerial Hoop, but has also been formally trained in Rope, Flying Trapeze, Tissu, Single-Point/Static Trapeze, and Contortion. Daniel started performing in nightlife with various cabaret shows at venues such as Oz New Orleans and The Slipper Room NYC. He has also performed in larger-scale shows at venues such as Universal Studios Orlando and Madison Square Garden. Having done private events, corporate gigs, competitions, and virtual performances, he has acquired the versatility to perform in many different manners of production. When not performing, he travels around the country and world teaching workshops and private lessons.

Miah James

Miah James fell in love with aerials at the age of 7 and now it is an art that she cannot live without. Miah has paved the way for many young artists and continues to be a game changer in the aerial world and her community. Miah was the first young artist to perform at Aerialympics, as an exhibition act, then with much persistence she was allowed to compete the following year against adults where she placed Bronze. Now a youth division is offered at all their competitions. Miah is the first and only, thus far, aerial artist to be featured in ShowStopper Magazine for aerial dance and her philanthropy work. Performing and competing all over the US has been fulfilling, as well as making her an award winning Lyra, Chinese Pole, and Pole Art artist. In 2020, she co-produced with Free2Luv a suicide prevention cirque production for underresourced youth in Las Vegas. This was the second annual production of "Tour De Force" that Miah and Free2Luv collaborated on together to create in 2018 supporting youth struggling with self-harm and/or bullying. When her humanitarian and cirque passions collide, amazing change is created. Miah enjoys supporting the aerial/pole community and looks forward to the future of this transforming art!

Blake Borders

Blake Borders has been training aerial arts for many years and decided to devote his life to it at the start of 2020. He moved to Vegas to begin performing professionally as a circus artist. Since then he has had countless amazing opportunities to work on some of the most exciting projects. His aerial expertise has allowed him to work with big name shows such as RuPaul’s Drag Race, Cirque Legacy, and various musical artists. He looks forward to continuing his performance journey both in Vegas and across the globe. While Blake is most known for his skills on aerial straps, he is trained on almost every apparatus. Blake has formal training on aerial straps, rope, pole, lyra, trapeze, hand balancing, teeterboard, bungee straps, spanish web, contortion, and stunts! He has had the opportunity to coach at many different studios and he loves being able to pass down his knowledge to eager students. On top of performing, he has also competed in various different competitions and is excited to see all the fresh and exciting talent coming to compete.

Lauren Cookk

Ever since I could walk I was dancing to whatever music I found along the way. I spent my childhood growing up outside the bustling city of Saint Paul Minnesota and this is where I fell in love with movement and being upside down at Circus Juventas. At the age of 8 I started my circus journey on the unicycle and 12 years later I found myself spending almost 20 hours a week in the air on any aerial discipline I could get my hands around. Anything from aerial rope to bungee trapeze, even a one of a kind act created by my youth circus: double cloud swing. I went head first into my circus training and decided to continue my circus education and applied to Codarts University of the Arts located in the Netherlands. Upon acceptance, I chose to specialize in dance trapeze. Although it was a new apparatus for me I was ready for the challenge and the adventure. In my six years of training on dance trapeze I believe I have developed an innovative approach to my discipline by exploring a combination of floor work, dynamics, lighting, vulnerability and strength. This led me to the graduation group show piece - Nefeilbata, and my final graduation solo – Light within the Darkness. After graduation I returned back to my youth circus where I was involved with coaching youth and adults in aerial and ground acts at Circus Juventas and with my own company, Volodesto Aerials. I was also the summer camp director at Circus Juventas for 2020 and 2021. Can you imagine running a summer camp during a pandemic - me either. In addition to my professional experience, I trained and performed multiple acts across a variety of disciplines at the renowned Circus Juventas. It was during this time that I performed a minimum of three separate acts over a 20 show run annually. With an audience of 800 at each show I performed in front of thousands of spectators each year. I also had solo and group performance opportunities through the Codarts bachelor student program, where we were directed by world renowned directors Francesco Sgrò and Roberto Magro. Since graduation I have had local performance opportunities. My most accomplished thus far is being the principal aerialist for Free Chapel’s Christmas Spectacular which presented in front of an audience of +30,000 and was streamed across the globe. I currently reside in sunny Las Vegas training, coaching and gigging all around town!

Krystal Berger

Krystal Berger began taking aerial classes in 2014 and fell in love immediately. She has taught silks and beginner students since 2019 and has performed on a variety of apparatus' including silks, hammock, lyra, lollipop lyra, and pole. Krystal has competed on silks, pole, and in lyra doubles in the past - but her favorite apparatus remains silks. She loves vertical aerial work, and the shock and awe that can be elicited from a crowd with a safe and well executed drop. When asked what her favorite part of aerial is, she states, "the creativity and story-telling combined with athleticism that aerial performances bring together are what I love!" She loves both competing as well as getting to watch and cheer on fellow competitors and showcase performers and looks forward to seeing all of the amazing aerialists that will come together for this competition on the virtual stage.

Miranda Walker

Miranda is an internationally acclaimed & award-winning aerial artist, and an industry innovator with her creative dynamic movements & flow on the Aerial Hoop. She has a passion for sharing her love of Aerial Arts, traveling around the world to teach her Masterclasses & judge aerial competitions in over 8 different countries so far. In order to connect with a wider range of Aerialists, Miranda has expanded into the online world, offering online private lessons & a whole range of Aerial Hoop tutorials. Obsessed with exploring and building an in-depth understanding of movements, she has become an expert at breaking down skills into simple, easy-to-learn steps & believes in offering a versatile and accessible teaching experience with a wide range of modifications and variations for everybody. As a performance artist she strives to create memorable pieces. Miranda performs her show-stopping aerial routines all around Australia & the world, with mesmerizing flow & dizzying dynamics that push the boundaries of the art-form. Demonstrating her great versatility as an artist, she has performed Aerial Hoop, Silks, Chains, Hammock, Corde-Lisse, Fly Pole, Acrobatics, Hand balancing & Contortion routines. Over time, Miranda has broadened her talents even further & enjoys spending her time behind the scenes as an entertainment rigger, stage manager & events coordinator.

Heather Bentley

Heather Bentley is a multifaceted musician and performance artist who combines music and aerial arts to create original works. Heather has two degrees in music, was the Adjunct Clarinet Professor at the University of Louisiana, Lafayette for two years and had a successful private clarinet studio for seven years. She began her aerial career in 2016, and specializes in aerial fabric, aerial hoop, and aerial hammock. Heather has three aerial fabric teaching certifications and is currently working on a fourth. Heather currently coaches at Heather Bentley Aerial in Lafayette, LA and Refuge Aerial Fitness and Performance in Baton Rouge, LA. She has trained extensively with some of the top coaches around the globe and considers herself a forever student. Heather continually seeks out a variety of coaches in the industry that align with her values of authenticity and allow her to further develop as both an artist and coach.

Katrina Diaz

Katrina Diaz is renowned for her outstanding achievements as the owner and lead instructor at Urban Cirque in Colorado Springs. Her commitment to inclusivity has created a safe and welcoming space for individuals of all backgrounds and body types, fostering a sense of belonging that transcends the aerial arts community. Her studio offers a wide range of disciplines, from introductory to advanced training for seasoned performers. Katrina is known for her unwavering passion and dedication to both her craft and her students. Her coaching style is distinguished by her talent for nurturing individual creativity and expression. She believes that every student possesses a unique story to tell and fiercely encourages each one to pursue their passions and chosen paths. Her success is not just a testament to her incredible talent but also her tireless efforts in nurturing the dreams and aspirations of her students, which has earned her a loyal following in the aerial community. Beyond her studio, Katrina continues to contribute to the aerial arts scene in Southern Colorado by organizing workshops, performances and events that showcase the incredible talent that the region has to offer. When she's not teaching, you can usually find her with her daughter and best friend, Bri, who she is lucky enough to share the passion of all things upside down with.

Pole Star Competition Judges

The Pole Star Competition features judges from all over the world specializing in various different styles of pole dance. All of our judges boast several years experience in the pole community and the majority of them have not only practiced and performed for years in their varius chosen styles, but have also competed, taught at their home studios, and judged other competitions previously. We hold our judges to the highest standards, and they contribute so much to our abilities to hold competitions so we just want to highlight and thank them for their time and dedication here.

If you are interested in judging for any of our upcoming competitions and feel you have the experience required you can learn more about judges requirements as well as apply at the link below.

Apply to Judge