Name Owner Start date End date Type City Country Notes Consumer Technology Association (CES) CES 9 Jan 12 Jan Association Las Vegas, NV United States CES is the most influential consumer tech event in the world — the proving ground for breakthrough technologies and global innovators. NRF National Retail Federation 14 Jan 16 Jan Association New York, NY United States Mark your calendars for NRF, where the entire retail industry comes together to hear from the biggest changemakers, experience the latest innovations, and make the relationships that matter most. Sign up for updates and be the first to know when registration opens. CompTIA UK&I Community CompTIA 18 Jan 18 Jan Association Birmingham United Kingdom Join CompTIA's UK&I Cybersecurity Committee in person in Birmingham on 18 January 2024. We will take you through the untold story of a cyber attack from many different perspectives including a hacker/pen tester, an MSP that was hacked, an insurance company, the press and much more. New Relic O11y Day - Stuttgart New Relic 24 Jan 24 Jan Vendor Stuttgart Germany Our upcoming session in Miami, Florida, will guide you through topics like: how to leverage Observability-as-code with the Pulumi infrastructure-as-code SDK and explore ways to collect custom metrics with New Relic Flex. ITC Cyber Summit 2024 ITC 24 Jan 24 Jan Analyst London United Kingdom Faster Future: Amplify Your Defences in the Age of AI! Unlock the Future, Defend Today! Enigma: Usenix Security Conference Usenix 24 Jan 26 Jan Association Santa Clara, CA United States Enigma centers on a single track of engaging talks covering a wide range of topics in security and privacy. Our goal is to clearly explain emerging threats and defenses in the growing intersection of society and technology, and to foster an intelligent and informed conversation. Channel Excellence Awards ChannelPartner 25 Jan 25 Jan Association Munich Germany There are many award ceremonies, honors and trophy presentations in the IT industry: distributors honor the best manufacturers, the manufacturers honor their favorite distributors, and everyone in turn honors their best partners. Enough honor in the channel, one might think. Tampa Cybersecurity Summit CyberRisk Alliance 26 Jan 26 Jan Association Tampa, FL United States The Fifth Annual Tampa Cybersecurity Summit connects C-Suite & Senior Executives responsible for protecting their companies’ critical infrastructures with innovative solution providers and renowned information security experts. Admission gives you access to all Interactive Panels, Discussions, Catered Breakfast, Lunch & Cocktail Reception. TruMethods Schnizzfest TruMethods 28 Jan 30 Jan Community Phoenix, AZ United States Schnizzfest is a mixture of content, discussions and Member-to-Member networking. Topics will include Business Success Principles, Building your Technology Success Practice, Service Delivery, and Sales. RSPA Inspire RSPA 28 Jan 31 Jan Association Rio Grande, Puerto Rico United States Inspire is the RSPA’s annual leadership conference and the retail IT channel’s premier leadership event. Mornings include breakfast followed by executive-focused educational presentations, group workshops, and panel discussions. BICSI Winter Conference BICSI 28 Jan 1 Feb Association Orlando, FL United States The Connected World's premier ICT event, where you'll uncover the latest challenges and solutions in the future of ICT. Dynatrace Perform Dynatrace 29 Jan 1 Feb Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States Perform 2024, our annual cloud transformation event, is back in Las Vegas at the Aria Resort & Casino! Join us January 29 - Feb 1 for inspiring keynotes, hands-on learning, and the latest observability insights and best-practices to future-proof your company and career. DesignCon Synopsys 30 Jan 1 Feb Vendor Santa Clara, CA United States DesignCon is the premier high-speed communications and system design conference, offering industry-critical engineering education in the heart of electronics innovation — Silicon Valley. CPX 2024: APAC Check Point 30 Jan 1 Feb Vendor Bangkok Thailand CPX is back! This annual global event brings together the cyber security industry to explore the latest solutions and strategies that protect organizations in today’s complex threat landscape. Your organization’s digital transformation demands a comprehensive cyber security platform strategy to protect against the latest sophisticated exploits. We are your partner in this journey to enable you to increase the cyber resiliency of your most valuable assets – people and data – and help fortify your digital transformation. At CPX 2024, you will receive best practices and insights to secure and manage your entire security landscape, from network to cloud to endpoints, and your users and access, no matter where they are located. ISE: Barcelona and Beyond ISE 30 Jan 2 Feb Association Barcelona Spain The world’s leading AV and systems integration exhibition. ISE 2024 showcases the world’s leading technology innovators and solutions providers, and includes four days of inspiring conferences, events and experiences. Joint venture between AVIXA and CEDIA. IT-DEFENSE 2024 cirosec GmbH 31 Jan 2 Feb Vendor Stuttgart Germany IT-Defense is different: It is not a conference with sponsors and promotion lectures but a series of interesting presentations focusing on relevant issues. At the same time, there are inspiring evening events for exchanging ideas with speakers and other participants. The IT-Defense program is always a combination of technical lectures, strategic presentations and entertaining speakers on IT security. Canada's Reseller Choice Awards TechnoPlanet 1 Feb 1 Feb Media Toronto, ON Canada We will present the following awards: If you are a VAR or MSP and want to apply for this one-of-a-kind high-value award, simply fill out the assessment at www.bestmanageditcompanies.com. You must score in the top 50 to “win” this award. Cybersecurity Summit Atlanta CyberRisk Alliance 2 Feb 2 Feb Association Atlanta, GA United States The 10th Edition of the Atlanta Cybersecurity Summit connects C-Suite & Senior Executives responsible for protecting their companies’ critical infrastructures with innovative solution providers and renowned information security experts. Admission gives you access to all Interactive Panels, Discussions, Catered Breakfast, Lunch & Cocktail Reception. Cisco Live! Cisco 5 Feb 9 Feb Vendor Amsterdam The Netherlands Let’s come together to gain knowledge, cultivate a vision, build community, share experiences, and explore the possibilities of IT. ImpartnerCon '24 Impartner 5 Feb 7 Feb Vendor Miami, FL United States Three days, one place, hundreds of partner professionals, hours of live learning, thousands of strategic conversations. It’s time for Multiply: ImpartnerCon '24, the must-attend conference of the year for innovative Impartner users and all future-focused ecosystem leaders. Attend and be inspired, informed, and trained on the innovative partner technologies. Leave with the knowledge and network connections needed to make the future of your ecosystem growth more than possible. GTDC Summit North America GTDC 7 Feb 8 Feb Association Oceanside, CA United States Join us for two days of networking, insightful presentations, panel discussions and one-to-one face-to-face conversations around global distribution. Explore the next wave of technology at the 2024 GTDC Summit North America. Ignite on Tour: Brussels Palo Alto Networks 8 Feb 8 Feb Vendor Brussels Belgium Join us for Palo Alto Networks Ignite on Tour, an inspiring one-day cybersecurity strategy and networking event specifically designed for cybersecurity leaders and influencers. We’re bringing cybersecurity decision makers and influencers together to discover how Palo Alto Networks can help organizations harness AI. CompTIA Belenux Community Meeting CompTIA 8 Feb 8 Feb Vendor Antwerp Belgium We're delighted that our first Benelux Community Meeting in 2024 is taking place in the beautiful city of Antwerp, where some of our community's brightest minds will share their unique insights on the NIS2 Directive, covering everything from the legal aspects to practical applications and insurance implications. SMB Tech Fest Q1 SMB Tech Fest 8 Feb 9 Feb Community Irvine, CA United States SMB TechFest is the quarterly technology conference to attend. It provides Solution Providers, MSPs, VARs, Cloud Partners, Security, Telecom, IT Pros, Application Partners and more with industry expert speakers and content. Ignite on Tour: Riyadh Palo Alto Networks 12 Feb 12 Feb Vendor Riyadh Saudi Arabia Join us for Palo Alto Networks Ignite on Tour, an inspiring one-day cybersecurity strategy and networking event specifically designed for cybersecurity leaders and influencers. We’re bringing cybersecurity decision makers and influencers together to discover how Palo Alto Networks can help organizations harness AI. Gartner Security & Risk Management Summit Gartner 12 Feb 13 Feb Analyst Dubai UAE Join Gartner experts and your peers at Gartner Security & Risk Management Summit and gain valuable insights into key strategic imperatives, such as establishing an agile security program; fostering a human-centric, security-conscious culture; and devolving risk ownership. NerdioCon NerdioCon 12 Feb 16 Feb Vendor Punta Cana Dominican Republic NerdioCon 2024 will take place from Feb 12 to Feb 16 2024! We’ll kick things off with a welcome party, and end with a full conference day and wrap-up celebration. We look forward to seeing you there! Cybersecurity Summit Silicon Valley CyberRisk Alliance 13 Feb 13 Feb Association Santa Clara, CA United States The Seventh Annual Silicon Valley Cybersecurity Summit connects C-Suite & Senior Executives responsible for protecting their companies’ critical infrastructures with innovative solution providers and renowned information security experts. Admission gives you access to all Interactive Panels, Discussions, Catered Breakfast, Lunch & Cocktail Reception. MSP Expo / ITEXPO Technology Marketing Corporation 13 Feb 15 Feb Media Fort Lauderdale, FL United States Where the MSP/Channel Community Meets Every Year to Discuss Opportunities, Security, and Business Growth 7 Figure MSP 7 Figure MSP 13 Feb 15 Feb Community Phoenix, AZ United States Our vision is to provide valuable sales and marketing coaching and strategy, as well as help business owners grow their company and secure their businesses longevity and success. Cloud Transformation Conference 2024 Telecoms Tech 15 Feb 15 Feb Media Virtual Virtual Book your free virtual ticket to delve into game-changing strategies that not only harness the potential of the cloud but also tackle security, compliance, and operational challenges head-on. Don’t miss out on your virtual pass to cloud success! Rocky Mountain Cyberspace Symposium AFCEA 19 Feb 22 Feb Association Colorado Springs, CO United States The Symposium provides a national forum for industry, government and academia to work together to help solve the challenges of cybersecurity, community cyber readiness and national defense. TDWI Transform Las Vegas TDWI 19 Feb 23 Feb Association Las Vegas, NV United States TDWI Conferences provide industry-leading education for business and technology professionals, offering in-depth education, networking, and exposure to the latest technology offerings. SolarWinds EMEA Partner Summit SolarWinds 19 Feb 23 Feb Vendor Lisbon Portugal SolarWinds is on a journey of transformation and innovation to be your best partner in the digital future. The 2024 SolarWinds EMEA Partner Summit is the most important event of the year for SolarWinds Partners. ISACA Conference ISACA 20 Feb 22 Feb Association Virtual Virtual Join IS/IT professionals and thought leaders worldwide for the ISACA 2024 Virtual Conference. This global event is your chance to experience three days of expert-driven knowledge in digital trust, audit, governance, privacy, cybersecurity, emerging technologies and more. CPX 2024: EMEA Check Point 20 Feb 22 Feb Vendor Vienna Austria CPX is back! This annual global event brings together the cyber security industry to explore the latest solutions and strategies that protect organizations in today’s complex threat landscape. Your organization’s digital transformation demands a comprehensive cyber security platform strategy to protect against the latest sophisticated exploits. We are your partner in this journey to enable you to increase the cyber resiliency of your most valuable assets – people and data – and help fortify your digital transformation. At CPX 2024, you will receive best practices and insights to secure and manage your entire security landscape, from network to cloud to endpoints, and your users and access, no matter where they are located. Ignite on Tour: Mexico City Palo Alto Networks 21 Feb 21 Feb Vendor Mexico City Mexico Join us for Palo Alto Networks Ignite on Tour, an inspiring one-day cybersecurity strategy and networking event specifically designed for cybersecurity leaders and influencers. We’re bringing cybersecurity decision makers and influencers together to discover how Palo Alto Networks can help organizations harness AI. ASCII Edge California ASCII 21 Feb 22 Feb Association Costa Mesa, CA United States Making national news, now ex-Google engineer, Blake Lemoine saw first-hand the cutting edge of AI and where it will lead. As AI disrupts industries, it remains an open question how much the daily life of IT professionals will change in the coming years as a result of artificial intelligence. IDC Middle East CIO Summit Riverbed 21 Feb 22 Feb Vendor Dubai UAE The digital economy continues to expand in scale and sophistication at an unprecedented rate, driving the transformation of citizen, customer, and employee experiences and the rise of digitally enabled services such as remote healthcare, distance learning, remote work, and mobile banking. TechnoPlanet World Hacker Games TechnoPlanet 22 Feb 22 Feb Association TBD TBD Sneak peak: We are preparing to launch our first World Hacker Games, where hackers and vendors compete to win the battle. This is going to be epic, and this is only phase one! Keep watching as we release more information. For now, mark your calendar for February 22 to catch the first battle. Continue checking www.e-channelnews.com for a continuous stream of news and www.channelnext.ca for all upcoming events. Nationwide Cybersecurity Summit CyberRisk Alliance 23 Feb 23 Feb Association Virtual Virtual The Nationwide Cybersecurity Summit is a one-of-a-kind conference designed for exclusively invited Executives in need of innovative solutions to protect their company’s critical data & infrastructure. This next-generation event will provide a virtual space for business leaders to learn about the latest cyber threat landscape and evaluate the industry’s most cutting-edge solutions by directly connecting them with emerging and established solution providers, subject matter experts and powerful cyber thought leaders. innovate cybersecurity summit 2024 innovate cybersecurity 25 Feb 27 Feb Association Nashville, TN United States Powered by the collected knowledge of hundreds of experts whose decades of expertise cross a wide variety of industries, Innovate is the premier resource for CISO education & collaboration. CompTIA ANZ Community Meeting CompTIA 26 Feb 26 Feb Vendor Christchurch New Zealand It’s a social networking opportunity for local MSP’s, IT Vendors and Distributors to mingle with industry peers and make new connections ahead of the Digital Workplace Conference. Zero Trust World ThreatLocker 26 Feb 28 Feb Vendor Orlando, FL United States For the 3rd year in a row, ThreatLocker will be bringing some of the brightest cybersecurity professionals and special guests together. Take advantage of the most interactive, hands-on cybersecurity learning event of the year! Mobile World Congress GSM Association 26 Feb 29 Feb Association Barcelona Spain Dedicated primarily to the mobile communications industry. Attended primarily by device manufacturers, network equipment providers, representatives of wireless carriers, and the press, among others. Mobile phone manufacturers often use the conference to unveil upcoming devices. ChannelPro Live: Chicago ChannelPro 28 Feb 29 Feb Media Chicago, IL United States ChannelPro SMB Forums are live events offering relevant IT solutions, strategies for growth, and networking opportunities for the small to midsize business community. Cybersecurity Summit Seattle CyberRisk Alliance 1 Mar 1 Mar Association Bellevue, WA United States The Eighth Annual Seattle/Bellevue Cybersecurity Summit connects C-Suite & Senior Executives responsible for protecting their companies’ critical infrastructures with innovative solution providers and renowned information security experts. Admission gives you access to all Interactive Panels, Discussions, Catered Breakfast, Lunch & Cocktail Reception. CRN Xchange The Channel Company 3 Mar 5 Mar Media Orlando, FL United States CRN XChange is an annual event for IT channel decision-makers and technology suppliers. Features a conference program, exhibit hall, and networking opportunities. Opportunity for IT channel professionals to learn about the latest trends, network, and build relationships with technology suppliers. Pink24 Pink Elephant 3 Mar 6 Mar Analyst Las Vegas, NV United States Recognized as THE world’s premier IT Service Management annual event, now in its 27th hugely successful year! Pink24’s cutting-edge program includes all things IT service management, Lean IT, Agile Scrum, DevOps, business relationship management, organizational change management, and much more... FinTech Nexus USA FinTech 3 Mar 6 Mar Media Las Vegas, NV United States Fintech Meetup is the future of fintech events and has been described as “the best fintech show of the year”. They're revolutionizing how the fintech industry connects, collaborates and does business. Fintech Meetup’s groundbreaking event format combines fintech’s largest ever meetings program, an unprecedented network of co-located events as well as fresh approaches to content and speakers KB4-CON KnowBe4 4 Mar 6 Mar Vendor Orlando, FL United States KB4-CON is KnowBe4’s premier annual conference, bringing together KnowBe4 customers, channel partners, security advocates, keynote speakers, and industry professionals. Amplify Partner Conference 2024 HP, Inc. 5 Mar 7 Mar Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States APC 2024 will focus on how we can collectively drive growth through innovation and foster deeper collaboration with our most trusted partners. CPX 2024: Americas Check Point 5 Mar 7 Mar Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States CPX is back! This annual global event brings together the cyber security industry to explore the latest solutions and strategies that protect organizations in today’s complex threat landscape. Your organization’s digital transformation demands a comprehensive cyber security platform strategy to protect against the latest sophisticated exploits. We are your partner in this journey to enable you to increase the cyber resiliency of your most valuable assets – people and data – and help fortify your digital transformation. At CPX 2024, you will receive best practices and insights to secure and manage your entire security landscape, from network to cloud to endpoints, and your users and access, no matter where they are located. secIT by Heise Heise 6 Mar 7 Mar Analyst Hanover Germany Visit Heise Medien's secIT - one of the most important trade fairs for IT security officers, data center managers, network administrators and decision-makers in security issues. Cloud Expo Europe Tech Show London 6 Mar 7 Mar Vendor London United Kingdom Cloud Expo Europe is the UK's top cloud technology event where your future cloud strategies are formed. CRN Xchange UK The Channel Company 6 Mar 7 Mar Media Essex United Kingdom CRN XChange is an annual event for IT channel decision-makers and technology suppliers. Features a conference program, exhibit hall, and networking opportunities. Opportunity for IT channel professionals to learn about the latest trends, network, and build relationships with technology suppliers. Right of Boom Right of Boom 6 Mar 8 Mar Community Las Vegas, NV United States Right of Boom events is purpose-built to educate & enable MSP/MSSPs to prepare for, endure and survive the inevitable “Boom” in either their or their client’s business. Our goal is to build successful, Cyber Resilient businesses. Skyward iCon Progress Software 6 Mar 8 Mar Vendor St. Pete Beach, FL United States iCon is the premier professional development event for Skyward users. You'll get insight on new and upcoming Skyward features and learn how to achieve more with your solution—all while connecting and collaborating with Skyward executives, employees, and users from around the world. Ignite on Tour: London Palo Alto Networks 7 Mar 7 Mar Vendor London United Kingdom Join us for Palo Alto Networks Ignite on Tour, an inspiring one-day cybersecurity strategy and networking event specifically designed for cybersecurity leaders and influencers. We’re bringing cybersecurity decision makers and influencers together to discover how Palo Alto Networks can help organizations harness AI. Cybersecurity Summit San Diego CyberRisk Alliance 7 Mar 7 Mar Association San Diego, CA United States The Fourth Annual San Diego Cybersecurity Summit connects C-Suite & Senior Executives responsible for protecting their companies’ critical infrastructures with innovative solution providers and renowned information security experts. Admission gives you access to all Interactive Panels, Discussions, Catered Breakfast, Lunch & Cocktail Reception. Channel Futures MSP Summit Channel Futures 11 Mar 12 Mar Media Las Vegas, NV United States Join 8,500+ agents, MSPs, VARs, consultants, integrators and suppliers at the world’s largest, independent channel event! CompTIA Communities & Councils Forum CompTIA 11 Mar 13 Mar Association Chicago, IL United States CompTIA counts on our member-led Communities and Advisory Councils to serve as influencers and ambassadors to the technology industry. Don’t miss this opportunity to contribute your ideas and create the partnerships that help shape the future. Modex 2024 MHI 11 Mar 14 Mar Vendor Atlanta, GA United States MODEX will feature 5 keynotes, 150 educational sessions and the manufacturing and supply chain solutions of over 1,100 of the leading providers. Over 45,000 manufacturing, supply chain and transportation professionals will attend seeking solutions for their operations from traditional equipment to sustainability to automation, robotics, and emerging tech. Join them by making plans to attend today and see, in-person the full spectrum of what’s now and what’s next at MODEX 2024. Channel Partners Conference Informa 11 Mar 14 Mar Media Las Vegas, NV United States Over four days, Channel Partners Conference & Expo, co-located with the MSP Summit, will be THE event of 2024 where partners can elevate your skills, team, organization, and connections so you can address high expectations from customers who want real expertise and outcomes. HIMSS HIMSS 11 Mar 15 Mar Association Orlando, FL United States HIMSS unites thought leaders, disruptors and changemakers representing every sector across the global health information and technology spectrum. Join peers and experts to develop, strengthen and learn from the relationship of health and technology. Ignite on Tour: Paris Palo Alto Networks 12 Mar 12 Mar Vendor Paris France Join us for Palo Alto Networks Ignite on Tour, an inspiring one-day cybersecurity strategy and networking event specifically designed for cybersecurity leaders and influencers. We’re bringing cybersecurity decision makers and influencers together to discover how Palo Alto Networks can help organizations harness AI. Cybersecurity Summit New York CyberRisk Alliance 12 Mar 12 Mar Association New York, NY United States The 13th Edition of the New York Cybersecurity Summit connects C-Suite & Senior Executives responsible for protecting their companies’ critical infrastructures with innovative solution providers and renowned information security experts. Admission gives you access to all Interactive Panels, Discussions, Catered Breakfast, Lunch & Cocktail Reception. Ohio Information Security Conference Technology First 13 Mar 13 Mar Association Dayton, OH United States Join hundreds of IT Professionals at the 21st annual Ohio Information Security Conference! We bring Cybersecurity experts from all over the country together under one roof to share knowledge, stay ahead of threat actors, and answer your questions about protecting your most valuable asset: your data. Phoenix Technology Summit 2024 Greater Phoenix Chamber Foundation 13 Mar 13 Mar Media Phoenix, AZ United States Hear from Key Regional C-Suite Technology Executives, Industry & Subject Matter Experts, and Law Enforcement as we address the following questions, share insights and expertise and discuss best practices on how to optimize & secure your business to accelerate profitability and growth. SecureWorld 2024 SecureWorld 13 Mar 14 Mar Media Boston, MA United States For more than 22 years, SecureWorld conferences have been connecting, informing, and developing leaders in cybersecurity through in-person regional events and interactive online platforms. IT Partners 2024 IT Partners 13 Mar 14 Mar Vendor Paris France In total immersion at Disneyland® Paris, the IT Partners event brings together the Channel IT, Telecoms & Audiovisual for 48 hours of meetings and intensive exchanges. Take your badge for IT Partners 2024 now to meet nearly 300 exhibitors and discover around a hundred new products and innovations over two days. AI World Solutions Summit 2024 Telecoms Tech 13 Mar 15 Mar Media Virtual Virtual AI World Solutions Summit is a free to attend virtual event exploring the latest trends, insights and strategies around Customer Experience, Decision Intelligence, Generative AI, Machine Learning, Gesture Control, Big Data, Deep Learning, Ethical AI, AIOps, and Augmented Workforces, Intelligent Automation. CompTIA Dach Community Meeting CompTIA 14 Mar 14 Mar Vendor Munich Germany Our agenda is filled with exciting lectures on current topics, such as artificial intelligence, cybersecurity, diversity and inclusion. New this year is a focus on the important topic of mental health. Rethink! IT Security Fruhjahr 2024 Rethink! 17 Mar 19 Mar Association Berlin Germany The Rethink! IT Security Summit is now offering an exclusive platform for the twelfth time to interactively discuss current developments, projects and challenges, as well as innovative technologies and trends in the areas of IT and cybersecurity over two and a half days. And top-class solution providers present use and business cases and provide helpful practical examples. DRJ Spring 2024 DR Journal 17 Mar 20 Mar Media Orlando, FL United States As the oldest business continuity resource in the U.S., DRJ has the in-depth education and technology to ensure you’re equipped for today’s disruptions and tomorrow’s emerging threats. Midsize Enterprise Summit for IT Security The Channel Company 18 Mar 19 Mar Media Indianapolis, IN United States A Conference Dedicated to Meeting the IT Security Needs of Midmarket Organizations. MES IT Security allows technology vendors to target midmarket IT leaders . Modern Workplace Conference Paris 2024 Modern Workplace 18 Mar 19 Mar Media Paris France The 6th edition of this international event organized in Paris by French speaking community around Microsoft 365 and Power Platform. CloudFest 2024 CloudFest 18 Mar 21 Mar Community Europa-Park Germany The world’s largest cloud industry event is ready to once again take over a spectacular European amusement park to facilitate new partnerships, deep knowledge sharing, and the best parties the industry has ever seen. Ignite on Tour: Munich Palo Alto Networks 19 Mar 19 Mar Vendor Munich Germany Join us for Palo Alto Networks Ignite on Tour, an inspiring one-day cybersecurity strategy and networking event specifically designed for cybersecurity leaders and influencers. We’re bringing cybersecurity decision makers and influencers together to discover how Palo Alto Networks can help organizations harness AI. Cybersecurity Summit Rosemont CyberRisk Alliance 20 Mar 20 Mar Association Rosemont, IL United States The Inaugural Rosemont/Chicago O’Hare Cybersecurity Summit connects C-Suite & Senior Executives responsible for protecting their companies’ critical infrastructures with innovative solution providers and renowned information security experts. Admission gives you access to all Interactive Panels, Discussions, Catered Breakfast, Lunch & Cocktail Reception. Channel Live Mark Allen Group 20 Mar 21 Mar Media Birmingham United Kingdom Channel Live connects IT resellers, MSPs, service providers and Channel partners face-to-face with vendors, distributors and expert speakers from across the sector - all together, all for free. ASIS Europe ASIS International 20 Mar 22 Mar Association Vienna Austria ASIS Europe – From Risk to Resilience is Europe’s leading gathering of established and aspiring security leaders. The event is focused on enterprise-wide security and the role security plays in supporting business objectives. ASCII Edge Houston ASCII 21 Mar 22 Mar Association Houston, TX United States Help MSPs grow their business by investigating new recurring revenue opportunities, exploring new partnerships and learning about the latest industry trends. Cybersecurity Summit Miami CyberRisk Alliance 22 Mar 22 Mar Association Miami, FL United States The Fourth Annual Miami Cybersecurity Summit connects C-Suite & Senior Executives responsible for protecting their companies’ critical infrastructures with innovative solution providers and renowned information security experts. Admission gives you access to all Interactive Panels, Discussions, Catered Breakfast, Lunch & Cocktail Reception. N-able Empower N-able 25 Mar 28 Mar Vendor Frisco, TX United States The massive increase in remote work and expanding SaaS business models have turned the cloud into an opportunity for many MSPs. Empower will give N-able partners the chance to attend educational sessions to learn how to introduce, elevate, secure, and manage their cloud journey. IWCE Expo Informa 25 Mar 28 Mar Association Orlando, FL United States IWCE features a four-day conference program and an 80,000 square foot exhibit hall filled with nearly 400 exhibitors. Over 6,500 industry professionals from around the world attend from government, public safety, utilities, transportation, enterprise, professional services, and the dealer community. Enterprise Connect Conference Informa 25 Mar 28 Mar Media Orlando, FL United States Your enterprise can’t afford to stand still when it comes to communications and customer experience (CX) technology. But every investment has to pay off. To make the right decisions, you need to be well informed, and at Enterprise Connect, you’ll learn from independent experts—and your peers. Microsoft Fabric Community Conference Microsoft 26 Mar 28 Mar Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States Join us at the first annual Microsoft Fabric Community Conference and see firsthand how Microsoft Fabric and the rest of the data and AI products at Microsoft can help your organization prepare for the era of AI. You’ll hear from leading Microsoft and community experts from around the world and get hands on experiences with the latest features from Microsoft Fabric, Power BI, Databases, Azure AI, Microsoft Purview, and more. InCyber Forum Europe 2024 InCyber 26 Mar 28 Mar Media Lille France Revolutionizing Cybersecurity in the Age of AI - join us for a comprehensive exploration of cybersecurity’s transformation in the AI era. From March 26 to 28 in Lille, witness the convergence of the entire public and private ecosystem to address critical cybersecurity challenges. Adobe Summit 2024 Adobe 26 Mar 28 Mar Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States Join us in Las Vegas to expand your skillset, spark inspiration, and build connections that empower you to make the digital economy personal. For those unable to attend the world-class event in Vegas, join us virtually from anywhere for free. Scot-Secure 2024 Digit Events 27 Mar 27 Mar Media Edinburgh United Kingdom Scotland's 10th Annual Cyber Security for Business Summit with live keynotes, workshops and exhibition. Scot-Secure is Scotland’s largest annual cyber security conference. The event brings together senior InfoSec personnel, IT leaders, academics, security researchers and law enforcement, providing a unique forum for knowledge exchange, discussion and high-level networking. The programme is focused on improving awareness and best practice through shared learning: highlighting emerging threats, new research and changing adversarial tactics, and examining practical ways to improve resilience, detection and response. Mastermind LIVE Q1 Kernan Consulting 28 Mar 29 Mar Community Austin, TX United States This business conference is two days of powerful information, instruction, and action to show you how to THRIVE in this economy. These interactive workshops will get you working ON your business and not IN it! Fortinet Accelerate Fortinet 1 Apr 5 Apr Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States Join us this spring for the only conference that promises Fortinet partners and customers an exclusive, in-depth experience like no other. Gain critical competencies to intensify your security skills and expertise. It's time to Experience a Secure Future. Come Join Us in Las Vegas, NV for Accelerate 2024! Robin Robins Big Seminar Robin Robins 2 Apr 5 Apr Community Nashville, TN United States The IT Sales And Marketing Boot Camp Is The LEADING Industry Conference For Growth-Minded CEOs And Leaders Of MSPs, MSSPs, VARs And IT Services Companies With Honest Ambition To Grow, Profit And Scale Atlantic Security Conference ATLSECCON 4 Apr 5 Apr Media Halifax Canada ATLSECCON is a non-profit, volunteer-led information-security conference held in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. Established in 2011, the conference is widely known as a knowledge repository for Atlantic Canada. Our mission is to provide quality information-security education and social networking accessible to all. It fills an industry gap to present a forum for attendees to harness the value of their shared experiences, for sponsors to showcase their industry solutions, and for speakers to provide diversified insights.​ Zscaler Public Sector Summit Zscaler 4 Apr 5 Apr Vendor Washington, DC United States Join leading experts from industry and public sector organizations as we separate zero trust fact from fiction. You'll discover lessons learned and best practices in achieving the promise of a zero trust platform. Walk away with practical insights to strengthen your organization’s security posture. Cybertech Global Cybertech 8 Apr 10 Apr Media Tel Aviv Israel From Tel Aviv and Rome, to Tokyo, Singapore, Panama, and more, Cybertech is the cyber ecosystem's foremost networking platform, conducting industry-related events all around the globe. Our conferences and exhibitions are the place to make business happen. Cybertech serves as the global hub for the latest technological innovations, challenges, and solutions in cyber. Intel Vision Intel 8 Apr 9 Apr Vendor Phoenix, AZ United States Intel® Vision 2024 is an invitation only event where you can gain business insights while making meaningful connections, providing solutions to your greatest challenges, and opening new growth opportunities. Ignite on Tour: Madrid Palo Alto Networks 9 Apr 9 Apr Vendor Madrid Spain Join us for Palo Alto Networks Ignite on Tour, an inspiring one-day cybersecurity strategy and networking event specifically designed for cybersecurity leaders and influencers. We’re bringing cybersecurity decision makers and influencers together to discover how Palo Alto Networks can help organizations harness AI. North America Cloud & Collaboration Summit NTATP 9 Apr 11 Apr Media Fort Worth, TX United States NACS is the only community-led event to cover technologies from multiple cloud vendors, including Microsoft, Salesforce, Amazon, and Google. In the spring of 2024, Irving, Texas, will become the go-to destination where business leaders, IT pros, developers, end users, and other professionals come together to learn how cloud technologies from Microsoft, Salesforce, Amazon, Google, and more can power teamwork, engagement, communications, and organizational effectiveness. Google Cloud Next Google Cloud 9 Apr 11 Apr Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States Join us for Google Cloud Next ‘24 on April 9-11 for product announcements, sneak peeks into future roadmaps, on-site demos with partners and experts, hands-on training and certification opportunities and much more. We really hope you can make it in person in San Francisco. ISC West Conference & Exposition ISC 9 Apr 12 Apr Association Las Vegas, NV United States International Security Conference & Exposition – also known as ISC West – is the leading comprehensive & converged security trade event in the U.S. At ISC West, you will have the chance to network and connect with thousands of security & public safety professionals. Ignite on Tour: Milan Palo Alto Networks 11 Apr 11 Apr Vendor Milan Italy Join us for Palo Alto Networks Ignite on Tour, an inspiring one-day cybersecurity strategy and networking event specifically designed for cybersecurity leaders and influencers. We’re bringing cybersecurity decision makers and influencers together to discover how Palo Alto Networks can help organizations harness AI. ChannelPro SMB Forum: Orlando ChannelPro 11 Apr 12 Apr Media Orlando, FL United States ChannelPro SMB Forums are live events offering relevant IT solutions, strategies for growth, and networking opportunities for the small to midsize business community. Women in Cybersecurity 2024 Women in Cybersecurity 11 Apr 13 Apr Community Nashville, TN United States Women in CyberSecurity (WiCyS) is a non-profit organization dedicated to the recruitment, retention and advancement of women in the cybersecurity field. Appian World 2024 Appian 15 Apr 17 Apr Vendor Washington, DC United States Appian World is the ultimate destination for process automation and digital transformation leaders. The brightest minds from the world’s most innovative organizations share their strategies for driving end-to-end automation and achieving process excellence. Bio-IT World Conference & Expo Cambridge Innovation Institute 15 Apr 17 Apr Association Boston, MA United States The Bio-IT World Conference & Expo is the world's premier event showcasing the technologies and analytic approaches that solve problems, accelerate science, and drive the future of precision medicine. Data Center World 2024 Data Center World 15 Apr 18 Apr Media Washington, DC United States Data Center World delivers emerging concepts, sound advice and best practices to address today's urgent challenges and help data center leaders stay at the forefront of the industry. Ignite on Tour: Warsaw Palo Alto Networks 16 Apr 16 Apr Vendor Warsaw Poland Join us for Palo Alto Networks Ignite on Tour, an inspiring one-day cybersecurity strategy and networking event specifically designed for cybersecurity leaders and influencers. We’re bringing cybersecurity decision makers and influencers together to discover how Palo Alto Networks can help organizations harness AI. Broadcom Mainframe Technical Exchange Broadcom 16 Apr 18 Apr Vendor Prague Czech Republic At the European Mainframe Technical Exchange you can discuss your challenges, share your ideas and learn about new capabilities and processes that will enable you to succeed. Make in-person connections with peers and Mainframe Experts that will expand your network beyond the conference. PI Live USA PI Live 16 Apr 18 Apr Media Miami, FL United States Calling all Partner Marketers — PI Live is a conference that focuses on performance and partner marketing. Join advertisers, publishers, agencies, and influencers from the retail, travel, finance and other verticals. Black Hat Asia 2024 Black Hat 16 Apr 19 Apr Media Singapore Singapore Black Hat provides attendees with the latest in research, development, and trends in Information Security. Here the brightest professionals and researchers in the industry come together for a total of four days—two or four days of deeply technical hands-on Trainings, followed by two days of the latest research and vulnerability disclosures in the Briefings. Black Hat Asia will be a Live, In-Person Event in Singapore, April 16-19, followed one week later by a Virtual Experience including recordings of all Briefings and Sponsored Sessions, available April 25. See the Conference Highlights below for more details. SAS Innovate SAS 16 Apr 19 Apr Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States At SAS Innovate, let's get together and explore how analytics and AI can propel your business in exciting new directions as far as you want to go. ASLAN 2024 Aslan 17 Apr 18 Apr Vendor Madrid Spain The @Aslan Association, which brings together 186 manufacturers and suppliers specialized in digital innovation and cybersecurity, is organizing the 31st edition of the ASLAN2024 Congress & EXPO on 17 and 18 April at the Madrid Conference Center under the title: AI. A GREAT ADVANCE IN DIGITALIZATION. EVERYTHING CHANGES. The emergence of AI is producing great changes in the digital innovation industry. The ASLAN2024 Congress is a unique opportunity to learn how cybersecurity, the digital workplace and data management is evolving thanks to artificial intelligence and how to face new challenges for networks, multi-cloud environments, data centers and other infrastructures. UK Cyber Week Expo & Conference ROAR B2B Limited 17 Apr 18 Apr Media London United Kingdom We're embarking on a transformative journey to unite the cybersecurity and business communities like never before. At UK Cyber Week - Expo & Conference 2024, our mission is clear: to foster collaboration by bringing world-class experts together, allowing them to share their invaluable knowledge, tools, and skills. Our ultimate aim is to empower individuals and organizations with the latest insights and cutting-edge strategies. Together, we'll fortify our teams, companies, supply chains, and infrastructure against the ever-growing threat of cyber attacks. SITS & MSP Show Diversified Communications UK 17 Apr 18 Apr Media London United Kingdom SITS – The Service Desk & IT Support Show is Europe’s leading exhibition and conference for ITSM professionals. The exhibition hosts over 200 products and services from the leading suppliers of ITSM software. Plus, you'll get access to the only FREE ITSM education programme in Europe. Co-located with SITS, is the newly launched MSP Show, dedicated to managed service providers who want to grow their business. Discover the newest technology and pick up valuable advice at the exhibition and free conference. MSP Community Minds MSP Initiative 17 Apr 18 Apr Community Nashville, TN United States These educational sessions are designed to help MSPs grow their business through live educational sessions/workshops. We will bring in Leadership, Finance, Operations, Human Resources, Sales, and Marketing experts to provide hands-on sessions in each discipline of business operations. ASCII Edge Newark ASCII 17 Apr 18 Apr Association Newark, NJ United States Help MSPs grow their business by investigating new recurring revenue opportunities, exploring new partnerships and learning about the latest industry trends. Techspo Toronto IADMP 18 Apr 19 Apr Media Toronto, ON Canada TECHSPO Toronto is a two-day technology expo returning April 18 – 19, 2024 to the luxurious Marriott Downtown at CF Toronto Eaton Centre Hotel in Toronto, Ontario. TECHSPO Toronto brings together some of the best developers, brands, marketers, technology providers, designers, innovators and evangelists looking to set the pace in our advanced world of technology. Cybersecurity Defense Ecosystem Summit TechnoPlanet 22 Apr 22 Apr Media Dallas, TX United States IOTSSA is back to organizing one-day events at the highly popular TOPGOLF venues. This event combines cybersecurity with golf and socializing. Join us in Edison, New Jersey to learn the latest in cybersecurity! Coupa Inspire Coupa 22 Apr 24 Apr Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States Our global BSM community event unifying supply chain, procurement, IT, finance, and treasury to make every dollar spent more effective and sustainable. Extreme Connect Extreme Networks 22 Apr 25 Apr Vendor Fort Worth, TX United States Happening April 22-25 in downtown Fort Worth, Texas, Extreme Connect 2024 will bring together a unique mix of customers, partners, industry experts, influencers, and analysts along with Extreme's leadership team to connect, gain knowledge, and explore new ideas. Our annual three-day user conference is the place to get exclusive access to Extreme information, experts, and experiences that will transform your network and the way you work. GISEC Global GISEC 23 Apr 25 Apr Media Dubai UAE GISEC Global provides vendors and companies from around the world with access to lucrative opportunity to capitalize on what's set to become one of the world's booming markets. With its growing spending on securing digital infrastructure, the Middle East's cybersecurity market is expected to be valued at a staggering $31 billion by 2030, new data from Frost & Sullivan has shown. Cyber Security EXPO Satos Media 25 Apr 25 Apr Media Bristol United Kingdom The Cyber Security EXPO is the only dedicated recruitment event designed for clients and recruitment agencies who operate within the cyber security industry. The EXPOs are a great way to engage and network with multiple employers who are recruiting for cyber roles both contract & permanent. Midsize Enterprise Summit Spring The Channel Company 28 Apr 30 Apr Media Orlando, FL United States Midsize IT enterprises are unique. Accelerating growth and elevating objectives require the right technologies, connections, and market intelligence. Our Midsize Enterprise Services (MES) are designed to support senior midmarket IT leaders and top technology suppliers with exclusive events. TDWI Transform Chicago TDWI 28 Apr 3 May Association Las Vegas, NV United States TDWI Conferences provide industry-leading education for business and technology professionals, offering in-depth education, networking, and exposure to the latest technology offerings. ASAP Global Alliance Summit Association of Strategic Alliance Professionals 29 Apr 1 May Association Cape Coral, FL United States For every executive who must partner to succeed, the ASAP Global Alliance Summit is your only source for the depth of insight, learning, research, practical experience, and proven practices that enable profit, innovation, and value for the partnering enterprise. Tableau Conference Tableau 29 Apr 1 May Vendor San Diego, CA United States Celebrate the power of data and the people who power it at Tableau Conference 2024—the industry-leading analytics conference. With 200+ sessions, hands-on trainings, and DataFam, there’s something for everyone to transform their career or business with data. Kaseya Connect IT Global Kaseya Connect IT 29 Apr 2 May Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States “Connect IT Global is jam-packed with everything IT professionals need to optimize their businesses—from award-winning experts to administrator certifications that provide technicians with the latest information on the Kaseya solutions they use daily National Cyber Security Show Nineteen 30 Apr 2 May Media Birmingham United Kingdom Find the solutions you need, witness live product demonstrations, and learn how to overcome your cyber security challenges all in one place, over 3 packed-out days! Microsoft 365 Conference Microsoft 30 Apr 2 May Vendor Orlando, FL United States The 2024 Microsoft 365 Conference, the world’s largest gathering of Microsoft engineers and community, will present the most AI focused content anywhere, anytime. #M365Conf24 will focus on the transition to an AI-powered workplace as well as the integration of remote and in-person work with AI-driven business productivity. #M365Conf24 will showcase advancements in Microsoft Copilot, Entra, Azure Open AI, and Viva tools. Come discover proven practices and insights into the modern cloud, featuring Azure, Microsoft Teams, and the Power Platform. Be prepared to be enlightened, educated, and inspired! Atlassian Team 24 Atlassian 30 Apr 2 May Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States Join industry experts and collaboration visionaries sharing their ideas for how to break silos, boost productivity, and make work more visible across teams — all through better teamwork and powered by Atlassian products. BrainStorm Sandusky BrainStorm 5 May 7 May Media Sandusky, OH United States For the past 20+ years, BrainStorm has been an educational technology conference like no other! The goal of the BrainStorm Conference is for K20 techs to network with their counterparts from throughout the region and to connect with technology vendors who tailor their products for the K20 community. We focus strictly on the "tech" side of educational technology where the attendees are IT Directors, technology coordinators, network administrators, hardware technicians, and other positions within IT departments for schools ranging from pre-K through higher ed. CentralSquare ENGAGE CentralSquare 5 May 8 May Vendor Dallas, TX United States CentralSquare ENGAGE is your chance to reunite with your CentralSquare user community and gain actionable insights to help you build your roadmap for success. Connect, learn, and grow as we seek to build smarter and safer communities together. The Ultimate IT Growth Conference The Ultimate IT Growth 6 May 8 May Community Dallas, TX United States The Ultimate IT Growth Conference Is Designed To Give You And Your Salesperson A Clear Sales Plan With A New-Found Ability To Close Naturally ... Technology & Services World TSIA 6 May 8 May Analyst Orlando, FL United States Technology Services World is a conference and exhibition dedicated to services business and covers key areas and strategies for the technology services industry including Field Services, Education Services, Professional Services, Managed Services, Support Services and Services Revenue Generation. Red Hat Summit 2024 Red Hat 6 May 9 May Vendor Denver, CO United States Red Hat® Summit is expanding its offerings to include the world of automation technology by hosting AnsibleFest this year. Attendees will gain exposure to even more of the Red Hat technology ecosystem, partners, customers, and experts. RSAC 2024 RSA 6 May 9 May Association San Francisco, CA United States RSA Conference 2024 will take place May 6 – 9, 2024, in San Francisco! Join us for some of the most inspirational sessions and Keynotes, innovative technologies, opportunities to connect with peers and experts, and so much more. The Automate Conference Automate.org 6 May 9 May Association Chicago, IL United States Take your career to the next level at the Automate Conference. This exclusive, classroom-style experience puts you side by side with professionals who know how to implement, optimize and expand automation. ItaliaSec Cyber Summit QG Media 7 May 8 May Media Milan Italy Returning for its 8th year, ItaliaSec agenda is designed by and for information security experts to facilitate the discussion of pressing cyber security challenges, creating cross-industry synergies among public and private organizations in a collaborative effort to safeguard their assets. DevOps Day Berlin 2024 Devopsdays 7 May 8 May Media Berlin Germany Devopsdays is a worldwide series of technical conferences covering topics of software development, IT infrastructure operations, and the intersection between them. ServiceNow Knowledge ServiceNow 7 May 9 May Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States Can’t-miss keynotes or must-see demos? YES! Shake hands with experts or hands-on training? YES! Network with new friends or connect with peers? YES! At Knowledge you don’t have to choose. Data Summit Connect 24 Information Today 8 May 9 May Media Boston, MA United States You'll hear about innovative approaches that the world's leading companies are taking to solve today's key challenges and emerging technologies revolutionizing how data is stored, protected, integrated, enhanced and acted upon. SMB TechFest Q2 SMB Tech Fest 9 May 10 May Community Irvine, CA United States This event consists of hours of learning from expert speakers, vendors and peers. A combination of business, operations, sales & technology topics to provide you the highest value. Each event is packed with a unique combination of today's in-demand speakers and the latest technology topics. Avaya Engage Conference Avaya Engage 13 May 15 May Vendor Denver, CO United States Avaya ENGAGE is a must-attend event for our customers, partners, and many more. As the global leader in customer experience solutions, we assemble the top minds in the industry. This is where innovation and inspiration go hand-in-hand and where new connections create new opportunities. 7 Figure MSP 7 Figure MSP 13 May 15 May Community Phoenix, AZ United States Our vision is to provide valuable sales and marketing coaching and strategy, as well as help business owners grow their company and secure their businesses longevity and success. Inspire Alteryx Alteryx 13 May 16 May Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States Inspire 2024 is Alteryx’s flagship user conference where leading data experts, key decision makers and innovators in the analytics space come together to learn, share and explore. PSA TEC 2024 PSA 13 May 16 May Association Dallas, TX United States TEC, presented by PSA, is the premier education and networking event for all professional systems integrators. This premier training venue is open to PSA member companies. It is designed to meet the educational needs of employees within an integrator's organization. GlueCon 2024 IDG 14 May 15 May Media Broomfield, CO United States GlueCon is a developer-oriented conference focused on providing the latest in-depth technical information, presented in a format that fosters community . GlueCon’s topics change from year to year, but include things like APIs, DevOps, Serverless, Edge Computing, Containers, & Microservices. European Collaboration Summit 2024 ecs.events 14 May 16 May Media Wiesbaden Germany With 2,500+ attendees, the European Collaboration Summit is the largest Microsoft 365 and Power Platform conference in the world. It hosts high ranking Microsoft executives, program managers and architects as speakers, as well as numerous Microsoft Regional Directors and Microsoft MVPs. With 75+ sponsors and exhibitors year after year, it features the largest industry related expo in the world. Gartner Applied Innovation & Business Solutions Summit Gartner 14 May 16 May Analyst Las Vegas, NV United States This track explores how successful application leaders manage applications as products, maintain application roadmaps, leverage business technologists to ... ChannelPro SMB Forum: Baltimore ChannelPro 15 May 16 May Media Baltimore, MD United States This event will send you home with actionable strategies for making more money and spending less, straight from some of the channel's leading MSPs and reseller Ingram Micro Cloud Summit Ingram 15 May 16 May Distribution Las Vegas, NV United States With unmatched global reach, easy access to automated go-to-market and integration tools, deep technical expertise, and a curated selection of scalable SaaS and IaaS solutions, Ingram Micro Cloud helps vendors, resellers and managed service providers by offering More as a Service. Informatica World Informatica 20 May 23 May Media Las Vegas, NV United States Attend the cloud data management and AI conference of the year to connect, network and learn best practices that will set up your business for success. The event will feature innovative and strategic thinkers in cloud data management from Informatica – as well as from our customers and partners – to help you discover how we bring data and AI to life. Registration opens in February 2024. IBM Think 2024 IBM 20 May 23 May Vendor Boston, MA United States Engage with peers and experts, exploring how current and future tech is used to inspire new ways to reach your goals. Epicor Insights Epicor 20 May 23 May Vendor Nashville, TN United States The real value with Epicor is in the partnership, something I didn’t fully understand until I experienced it. Now, I can’t imagine having this degree of collaboration with any other company.” Dell Technologies World 2024 Dell Technologies World 20 May 23 May Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States The future of technology belongs to thought leaders, trailblazers and trendsetters like you. Join the Dell Technologies World community of forward thinkers and innovate how we live, work and play. IEEE Infocom 2024 IEEE 20 May 23 May Association Vancouver, BC Canada IEEE INFOCOM is a top-ranked conference on networking in the research community. It is a major conference venue for researchers to present and exchange ... Manchester Tech Week Clarion Events 20 May 24 May Media Manchester United Kingdom This will be the North’s biggest digital transformation event focused on how to improve connectivity and implement cutting edge enterprise technologies. We’ll be featuring a collective of some of the region’s most loved institutions, community groups, and associations as we assemble the northern tech community for something truly special. Manchester Central is set to host the biggest tech exhibition that the region has ever seen! Women of the Channel Leadership Summit The Channel Company 21 May 22 May Media Palm Springs, CA United States The Women of the Channel Leadership Summit West is the meeting place for women from across the IT channel who are looking to advance organizational diversity, make unmatched connections, and empower and cultivate women leaders. Nutanix .NEXT 2024 Nutanix 21 May 23 May Vendor Barcelona Spain .NEXT is finally live again, and we can’t wait to meet you in person. Come discover how easy it is to manage all your clouds as one, public and private alike. We’ll show you how to run your apps from any cloud at any scale, with the flexibility you want and the security you need. Lightweb Stockholm Tech Show Lightweb 22 May 23 May Media Stockholm Sweden The need for such a comprehensive technology event has never been greater, and this is it. An opportunity to exchange knowledge about innovations and how best to apply them. An occasion to explore next generation strategies for AI & Big Data, Cyber Security & Cloud, Cloud, DevOps and Data Centre as well as Startup-Scaleup. And a forum for discovering and understanding the new technology that will drive businesses and society forward. Cloud Expo Europe CloserStill 22 May 23 May Media Frankfurt Germany Cloud Expo Europe Frankfurt is Germany's leading event for cloud technology where your future cloud strategies are formed. Don't miss the chance to meet thousands of fellow leaders and best-in-class solution providers on 22-23 May 2024 at Messe Frankfurt. This is the place to build partnerships, optimize your IT infrastructure, and reach your business goals. ASCII Edge Denver ASCII 22 May 23 May Association Denver, CO United States Help MSPs grow their business by investigating new recurring revenue opportunities, exploring new partnerships and learning about the latest industry trends. CRN Fight Night The Channel Company 23 May 23 May Media London United Kingdom Back for 2024, 20 fearless channel contenders will once again immerse themselves into the brutal world of boxing to raise money for their chosen charities. Raising over £220,000 for charity since the first fight in 2008, CRN is thrilled to be raising money once again for a host of worthy causes. Identiverse 2024 identiverse 28 May 31 May Community Las Vegas, NV United States Experience unparalleled education, collaboration, and insight into the future of Identity. Join us in Las Vegas at the end of May 2024 for a unique event experience and participate alongside experts and peers in information-rich sessions on the latest technologies, best practices, and industry trends. Cybersec Europe 2024 Jaarbeurs 29 May 30 May Media Brussels Belgium Cyber attacks are an ever growing threat in today’s tech environment. Cybersec Europe 2024 is the platform for experienced cyber security experts as well as next-gen start-ups to share knowledge with peers for jointly coping with the cybersecurity challenges. Businesses and institutions of all sectors learn how to enhance cyber resilience and protect their core. Cisco Live! Cisco 2 Jun 6 Jun Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States Join us in Las Vegas or online as we continue the tradition of education, inspiration, and fun at Cisco Live. ChannelNEXT Central TechnoPlanet 3 Jun 4 Jun Media Niagra Falls, ON Canada Now in its 22st year, ChannelNEXT continues to be an outstanding business-building experience for channel partners and vendors. IT Nation Secure 2024 ConnectWise 3 Jun 5 Jun Community Orlando, FL United States The must-attend cybersecurity conference for TSPs interested in securing their business and clients and building cybersecurity services. VeeamON 2024 VeeamON 3 Jun 5 Jun Vendor Fort Lauderdale, FL United States Your business depends on data; it depends on you. Come learn the best practices and strategies to keep your business running through data resiliency with Veeam. Learn from product experts, peers, and thought leaders how best to protect your data, and ensure ongoing business continuity. Qlik Connect Qlik 3 Jun 5 Jun Vendor Orlando, FL United States QlikWorld is a global annual conference dedicated to the latest advancements of data integration and analytics, featuring keynote presentations, interactive sessions with thought leaders and subject matter experts, and product demonstrations. SAP Sapphire SAP 3 Jun 5 Jun Vendor Orlando, FL United States Explore our latest technology innovations at our signature event – virtually or in-person. Gartner Security & Risk Management Summit Gartner 3 Jun 5 Jun Analyst National Harbor, MD United States As digital business transformation pervades the enterprise and “digital” becomes essential to get every job done, security and risk leaders must become the change agent driving secure digital transformation. No longer focused solely on defense. Snowflake Summit 2024 Snowflake 3 Jun 6 Jun Vendor San Francisco, CA United States How you approach data will define what’s possible for your organization. Data engineers, data scientists, application developers, and a host of other data professionals who depend on the Snowflake Data Cloud continue to thrive thanks to a decade of technology breakthroughs. InfoSecurity Europe Reed Exhibitions 4 Jun 6 Jun Media London United Kingdom Infosecurity Europe is the meeting place for the industry’s finest minds, most important names and biggest ideas. Delivering expertise and knowledge from the world’s most celebrated cybersecurity experts, it’s a huge opportunity to connect with suppliers to find true solutions. NRF Protect National Retail Federation 4 Jun 6 Jun Association Long Beach, CA United States Retailers, get the tools and strategies to fight retail crime at NRF PROTECT, the industry’s premier loss prevention, asset protection, digital fraud and cyber risk event. AI & Big Data Expo TechEx Media 5 Jun 6 Jun Media Santa Clara, CA United States The AI & Big Data Expo is a two-day conference, taking place on 5-6 June 2024 in Santa Clara, CA. This technology event is for the ambitious enterprise technology professional, seeking to explore the latest innovations, implementations and strategies to drive businesses forward. ChannelPro SMB Forum: Columbus ChannelPro 6 Jun 7 Jun Media Columbus, OH United States ChannelPro SMB Forums are live events offering relevant IT solutions, strategies for growth, and networking opportunities for the small to midsize business community. Pax8 Beyond Pax8 9 Jun 11 Jun Distribution Denver, CO United States An immersive learning experience that elevates and amplifies the partner community and sets the stage for ongoing innovation. Hear from a lineup of unique speakers, meet for focused breakout sessions, attend captivating keynotes, participate in panel discussions and gather insights. PegaWorld iNspire 2024 Pegasystems 9 Jun 11 Jun Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States Meet industry leaders, hear success stories, and get your hands on the latest Pega tech. Disrupt old ways of working and inspire something new. AWS re:inforce AWS 10 Jun 12 Jun Vendor Philadelphia, PA United States At AWS re:Inforce, AWS leaders, builders, and experts cover the latest advancements in AWS security, compliance, identity, and privacy solutions. Check out some of our highlights from 2023, and subscribe for updates and the latest news on re:Inforce 2024. Databricks Data + AI Summit 2024 Databricks 10 Jun 13 Jun Vendor San Francisco, CA United States Sign up to be notified when Data + AI Summit 2024 registration opens. Please complete all fields. London Tech Week Informa 10 Jun 14 Jun Analyst London United Kingdom For 2024, London Tech Week returns with double the space, double the opportunity and double the impact with a full takeover of our new home at Olympia London. Across 3 days and 2 floors, we'll be convening global communities, empowering cross-industry collaboration and driving partnerships to ensure powerful economic growth within the global tech ecosystem. European Power Platform Conference EPPC 11 Jun 13 Jun Media Brussels Belgium Alongside 1500+ of your professional peers, at the European Power Platform Conference 2024, you can expect world-class, expert guidance to help you succeed in your projects and career and an unforgettable experience in the beautiful city of Brussels. Kaseya + DattoCon Europe Kaseya + DattoCon 11 Jun 13 Jun Vendor Dublin Ireland Kaseya + DattoCon Europe is your chance to experience the best of both Connect IT and DattoCon in one event. It is a great opportunity to learn about the most powerful IT service solutions to date and gain technical insights from industry experts. SAP Sapphire Barcelona SAP 11 Jun 13 Jun Vendor Barcelona Spain Explore our latest technology innovations at our signature event – virtually or in-person. Splunk .conf Splunk 11 Jun 14 Jun Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States For more than a decade, Splunk users and leaders have come together at .conf® to swap tips, see inspiring speakers and nab the punniest t-shirts in tech. With thousands of security, observability, IT and DevOps professionals from around the world and hundreds of sessions to choose from. InfoComm 2024 infoComm 12 Jun 14 Jun Association Las Vegas, NV United States InfoComm is your once-a-year opportunity to see new products, find the most AV training offered anywhere, and grow your professional network. At InfoComm, we combine what you'd see at smaller trade shows into a giant extravaganza of AV goodness. Collision 2024 Collision 17 Jun 20 Jun Community Toronto, ON Canada With an exhibition floor, roundtable discussion, onstage sessions, and networking and networking, attendees get to learn about the intersection between tech and entrepreneurship. HPE Discover 2024 HPE 17 Jun 21 Jun Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States HPE Discover is a partner and customer centric event… Channel-Sec 2024 IT Europa 26 Jun 26 Jun Media London United Kingdom Channel-Sec 2024 is a high-level conference and networking event that will explore the fast-changing security landscape and the opportunities it provides for UK and European Managed Service Providers (MSPs) and Managed Security Service providers (MSSPs) and VARs and Systems Integrators. This event will be a must attend for any channel player forming or building on a security strategy, and appropriate for all levels of experience. ASCII Edge Tampa/St. Pete ASCII 26 Jun 27 Jun Association Chicago, IL United States Help MSPs grow their business by investigating new recurring revenue opportunities, exploring new partnerships and learning about the latest industry trends. Managed Services Summit Benelux IT Europa 2 Jul 2 Jul Media Amsterdam The Netherlands Now celebrating its 7th year, the Managed Services Summit Benelux (formerly MSS Europe) is now firmly anchored as the leading managed services event for the European IT channel. The event features conference session presentations by specialists in the sector and leading independent industry speakers from the region, as well as a range of sessions exploring technical and operational issues. XChange Security The Channel Company 15 Jul 17 Jul Media Dallas, TX United States Join together with 75+ security-focused IT leaders from solution provider, MSP, MSSP and IT consulting organizations at the new XChange Security conference. At XChange Security, these executives will learn from industry thought leaders and top technology suppliers how to outpace the competition. NRF Nexus National Retail Federation 15 Jul 17 Jul Association Rancho Palos Verdes, CA United States Join leading retail executives at this exclusive event and see the co-host of Pivot and host of On with Kara Swisher discuss the impacts of emerging technologies and innovation on retail in her keynote session. SMB TechFest Q3 SMB Tech Fest 18 Jul 19 Jul Community Irvine, CA United States This event consists of hours of learning from expert speakers, vendors and peers. A combination of business, operations, sales & technology topics to provide you the highest value. Each event is packed with a unique combination of today's in-demand speakers and the latest technology topics. Cyber Security EXPO Satos Media 24 Jul 24 Jul Media Manchester United Kingdom The Cyber Security EXPO is the only dedicated recruitment event designed for clients and recruitment agencies who operate within the cyber security industry. The EXPOs are a great way to engage and network with multiple employers who are recruiting for cyber roles both contract & permanent. ASCII Edge Boston ASCII 24 Jul 25 Jul Association Boston, MA United States Help MSPs grow their business by investigating new recurring revenue opportunities, exploring new partnerships and learning about the latest industry trends. RetailNOW RSPA 28 Jul 29 Jul Association Las Vegas, NV United States Get ready for the retail IT channel’s #1 trade show, education conference, and networking event. ARN Edge IDG 28 Jul 30 Jul Media Gold Coast Australia EDGE is the leading technology conference for business leaders in Australia and New Zealand, built on the foundations of collaboration, education and advancement. CompTIA ChannelCon CompTIA 30 Jul 1 Aug Association Atlanta, GA United States ChannelCon is your chance to get back in the groove—an opportunity to reconnect and reinvigorate your business and your career. ChannelCon serves up a great playlist of information, tools, and networking opportunities. Black Hat USA Cybersecurity Informa 3 Aug 8 Aug Media Las Vegas, NV United States Founded in 1997, Black Hat is an internationally recognized cybersecurity event series providing the most technical and relevant information security research. Grown from a single annual conference to the most respected information security event series internationally. TDWI Transform San Diego TDWI 4 Aug 9 Aug Association Las Vegas, NV United States TDWI Conferences provide industry-leading education for business and technology professionals, offering in-depth education, networking, and exposure to the latest technology offerings. ChannelPro SMB Forum: DEFEND ChannelPro 7 Aug 8 Aug Media New Jersey United States ChannelPro SMB Forums are live events offering relevant IT solutions, strategies for growth, and networking opportunities for the small to midsize business community. Telarus Partner Summit Telarus 8 Aug 8 Aug Distribution Nashville, TN United States Telarus is the largest Technology Solutions Brokerage in the United States, Canada, EMEA, Australia, and New Zealand. We have created the most efficient yet friendly community where our Partners source technology solutions through our robust portfolio of 290 leading service providers. XChange August The Channel Company 11 Aug 13 Aug Media San Antonio, TX United States CRN XChange is an annual event for IT channel decision-makers and technology suppliers. Features a conference program, exhibit hall, and networking opportunities. Opportunity for IT channel professionals to learn about the latest trends, network, and build relationships with technology suppliers. Channel Evolution CRN 13 Aug 15 Aug Media Queensland Australia Australian IT providers must adapt to excel in the face of disruption and competition. Join us to delve into the business models, tactics, offerings, partnerships and leadership needed to navigate IT channel evolution. ASCII Edge Toronto ASCII 21 Aug 22 Aug Association Toronto, ON Canada Help MSPs grow their business by investigating new recurring revenue opportunities, exploring new partnerships and learning about the latest industry trends. IT Nation Connect ConnectWise 21 Aug 23 Aug Vendor Sydney Australia Three days of impactful MSP business-building insights from industry experts and thought-leaders, including ConnectWise product training to streamline your work and help you deliver the highest quality service. BigBIG Taylor Business Group 22 Aug 24 Aug Vendor Hollywood, FL United States Join us in Hollywood, Florida from August 22 to August 24 for BigBIG! VMware Explore VMware 26 Aug 29 Aug Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States VMware's flagship event for all things multi-cloud. VMware Explore aims to facilitate new relationships, inspire learning, and provide hands-on training and access to thought leadership in the multi-cloud space. VMware is a company that thrives on profound reinvention. The 20 - Vision The 20 27 Aug 30 Aug Community Dallas, TX United States At The 20, we are serious about superior IT support for your business. We leverage the combined skills, expertise, and knowledge of hundreds of IT companies to tackle your IT problems quickly, so you can simply focus on growing your business. CanITCon CanITCon 8 Sep 10 Sep Community Kelowna, BC Canada Uniting the MSP community to drive success! Are you an MSP looking to stay ahead of the curve in an ever-evolving industry? Look no further than CanITCon, the must-attend technology conference for MSP's in Canada. DRJ Fall 2024 DR Journal 8 Sep 11 Sep Media Grapevine, TX United States As the oldest business continuity resource in the U.S., DRJ has the in-depth education and technology to ensure you’re equipped for today’s disruptions and tomorrow’s emerging threats. ChannelPro SMB Forum: Charlotte ChannelPro 9 Sep 10 Sep Media Charlotte, NC United States ChannelPro SMB Forums are live events offering relevant IT solutions, strategies for growth, and networking opportunities for the small to midsize business community. Build IT Live IT By Design 9 Sep 11 Sep Community Orlando, FL United States Build It Live is the South East's dedicated event for creating a truly individual home. It's designed for self-builders, home renovators, and anyone wanting to create a bespoke home that is the envy of friends and neighbors. SuiteWorld Netsuite 9 Sep 12 Sep Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States SuiteWorld 2023 was jam-packed with learning, networking, and, of course, fun. From visionary keynotes to all the learning opportunities in sessions and hands-on labs, catch a glimpse of the activities that made this year so memorable. Hear directly from attendees, feel the energy on the expo floor, and see all the action and fun at The Party! Oracle CloudWorld Oracle 9 Sep 12 Sep Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States Get more learning from experts, more networking with peers, and more solutions to explore when CloudWorld returns to Las Vegas on September 9-12, 2024. Sign up now for notifications on early registration and the best rates. Managed Services Summit London IT Europa 11 Sep 11 Sep Media London United Kingdom Celebrating its 14th year, the Managed Services Summit – London continues its tradition of being the premier managed services event for the UK IT channel. As delegates have come to expect the event this year will again feature presentations by leading independent industry speakers, a range of sessions exploring technical, sales and business issues by leading specialists in the sector, and extensive networking time to meet with potential business partners. Midsize Enterprise Summit Fall The Channel Company 15 Sep 17 Sep Media Tampa, FL United States Midsize IT enterprises are unique. Accelerating growth and elevating objectives require the right technologies, connections, and market intelligence. Channel Futures MSP Summit Informa 16 Sep 19 Sep Media Atlanta, GA United States For 25+ years, Channel Partners has been the leader in delivering the best events in the channel. Its three annual shows bring together ICT professionals to build relationships, showcase top solutions & stay up-to-date on the latest trends. Fal.Con 2024 CrowdStrike 16 Sep 19 Sep Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States Fal.Con is where the global community of protectors come together to protect and power businesses. It’s the place to network with industry experts, explore the latest technology, develop skills at hands-on workshops, learn from top threat hunters, and tap into the full power of the CrowdStrike ecosystem. Tech Live 24 KingswoodTech Events 17 Sep 17 Sep Media London United Kingdom TECH LIVE 2024 is a one-day event, set in an convenient central London location where ICT professionals, IT and mobile resellers, MFP/Printer Dealers and other technology Providers can meet new prospective channel partners face-to-face and build new relationships, explore new business opportunities and engage with new converging technology opportunities. Schneider Electric Innovation Summit Schneider Electric 17 Sep 18 Sep Vendor TBD North America Staying competitive, choosing the right technologies, and achieving a wide-ranging set of sustainability goals requires strategy and ingenuity. Hear how software and technologies are making the digital, electric world a reality from Innovation Summit Las Vegas, now on demand. Salesforce Dreamforce Salesforce 17 Sep 19 Sep Vendor San Francisco, CA United States Dreamforce is the highlight of the year for many professionals in the ecosystem. With countless workshops, networking opportunities, and parties galore Microsoft Power Platform Conference Microsoft 18 Sep 20 Sep Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States Be inspired by Microsoft senior thought leaders, the product experts, and engineers behind the Power Platform. You’ll also learn from Microsoft MVPs who are dedicated to bridging the gap between humanity and technology. MPPC is the perfect place to connect with folks from around the world who are eager to share their insights and knowledge on how the Power Platform & Dynamics 365 can transform your business. Rethink! Cloud Security Rethink! 18 Sep 20 Sep Association Berlin Germany The Rethink! IT Security Summit is now offering an exclusive platform for the twelfth time to interactively discuss current developments, projects and challenges, as well as innovative technologies and trends in the areas of IT and cybersecurity over two and a half days. And top-class solution providers present use and business cases and provide helpful practical examples. INBOUND HubSpot 18 Sep 20 Sep Vendor Boston, MA United States Forbes called it “A must-attend event for agency owners and marketing professionals”. From marketing automation and CRM company HubSpot comes a conference focused on business trends and conversations with industry leaders about marketing tactics for attendees to implement. ASCII Edge St. Louis ASCII 25 Sep 26 Sep Association St. Louis, MO United States Help MSPs grow their business by investigating new recurring revenue opportunities, exploring new partnerships and learning about the latest industry trends. Managed Services Summit Nordics IT Europa 1 Oct 1 Oct Media Stockholm Sweden Launching in 2024, we have added a new Summit to our successful portfolio offering networking and presentation conference sessions by leaders from across the Nordic region. Based on a format that has delivered successful events for over a decade, MSS Nordics includes a range of highly engaging sessions exploring technical, sales, and operational best practice along with ample time for networking and engagement with key contact from across the region. Cyber Security & Cloud Expo North Europe TechEx Media 1 Oct 2 Oct Media Amsterdam The Netherlands Join us again at the Cyber Security & Cloud Expo Europe on 1-2 October 2024, and stay ahead in the rapidly evolving landscape of cybersecurity and cloud technology. Taking place at RAI Amsterdam, this is a technology event and conference for the ambitious enterprise technology professional, seeking to explore the latest innovations, implementations, and strategies to drive your businesses forward. Gain valuable insights from industry leaders, network with experts, and discover cutting-edge solutions to safeguard your organization's digital assets. Don't miss this premier event to enhance your knowledge, expand your professional network, and ensure your organization's resilience in the face of emerging cyber threats. What are the additional benefits you won’t want to miss? - VIP Networking Party - Over 250 speakers - Over 250 exhibitors showcasing the latest technology products and solutions - 6 co-located events (AI & Big Data, IoT, Unified Communications, Digital Transformation, Cyber Security & Cloud and Intelligent Automation) - 7,000 attendees – 76% directory level Find out more about the event and book your ticket here: https://www.cybersecuritycloudexpo.com/europe/. TEC - The Experts Conference Quest Software 1 Oct 2 Oct Vendor Dallas, TX United States The Experts Conference (TEC) 2024 is the crown jewel of in-person technical conferences. Taking place October 1-2, 2024 in Dallas, it will be filled to the brim with face-to-face Active Directory and Microsoft 365-focused breakout sessions led by technical and industry experts. DTX & UCX Imago Tech Media 2 Oct 3 Oct Media London United Kingdom DTX brings together creative minds, technical experts and the latest tools needed to drive change and generate value across today’s organizations. The event showcases the technology, solutions and strategies essential to advance digital projects and achieve sustainable success at scale. Whether you’re exploring new IT solutions to execute your organization's digital strategy, working on a plan to battle the next big cyber attack or just curious about the new technologies that are changing the game, we guarantee that you will be more inspired and more informed. DTX is your chance to learn more in 2 days than you could in two months. MSSP Alert Live CyberRisk Alliance 7 Oct 9 Oct Association Washington, DC United States Join us as we discuss the cyber strategies, technology trends, and business insights security service providers seek to manage and grow their business and safeguard their customer's assets. Whether you are just getting started offering managed security services, or an established MSSP, this event will deliver you everything you need for your managed security services roadmap for 2025 and beyond. Canalys Forums EMEA Canalys 8 Oct 10 Oct Analyst Berlin Germany The Canalys Forums are the largest independent pan-region events for channel partners, distributors, and senior vendor management. They bring together the IT channel to network and discuss the industry’s latest news and topics. ChannelPro SMB Forum: Dallas ChannelPro 9 Oct 10 Oct Media Dallas, TX United States ChannelPro SMB Forums are live events offering relevant IT solutions, strategies for growth, and networking opportunities for the small to midsize business community. Pax8 Beyond 2024 EMEA Pax8 13 Oct 15 Oct Vendor Berlin Germany Join us on 13-15 October 2024, at the InterContinental Berlin for the channel’s favourite partner event, and discover what the future holds for the channel and your business. Best of Breed The Channel Company 14 Oct 15 Oct Media Atlanta, GA United States The Best of Breed (BoB) Conference meets the evolving needs of the IT channel’s largest, fastest-growing, and most progressive solution provider organizations and the top technology vendors and distributors. An invitation-only event. SaaStock 2024 SaaStock 14 Oct 16 Oct Community Dublin Ireland Attendees can learn from industry experts and connect with SaaS peers at this 5,000+ person event. SMB TechFest Q4 SMB Tech Fest 17 Oct 18 Oct Community Irvine, CA United States A combination of business, operations, sales & technology topics to provide you the highest value. Each event is packed with a unique combination of today's in-demand speakers and the latest technology topics. Scottish Summit 2024 Scottish Summit 17 Oct 19 Oct Community Aberdeen United Kingdom Scottish Summit started in 2019 as a way to showcase Microsoft Dynamics 365 in Scotland. The first event gathered 370 Dynamics professionals to Glasgow to watch 38 sessions. In 2020 the full Microsoft Cloud Community was invited to showcase all the Microsoft Cloud stack and over 1,100 people attended. Fast Forward to 2021 and world events allow the event to go Global to over 3,400 attendees who took in 365 sessions. TDWI Transform Orlando TDWI 20 Oct 25 Oct Association Orlando, FL United States TDWI Conferences provide industry-leading education for business and technology professionals, offering in-depth education, networking, and exposure to the latest technology offerings. ChannelNEXT West TechnoPlanet 21 Oct 22 Oct Media Whistler, BC Canada Now in its 22st year, ChannelNEXT continues to be an outstanding business-building experience for channel partners and vendors. CompTIA EMEA Conference CompTIA 21 Oct 22 Oct Association London United Kingdom CompTIA counts on our member-led Communities and Advisory Councils to serve as influencers and ambassadors to the technology industry. Don’t miss this opportunity to contribute your ideas and create the partnerships that help shape the future. GOTO Chicago GoTo 21 Oct 23 Oct Vendor Chicago, IL United States Set yourself apart by offering customers a robust SMB package – all from one award-winning vendor. From GoTo Connect’s streamlined communications capabilities to GoTo Resolve’s all-in-one remote support, our solutions are designed to help your customers thrive. Canada IT Security Conference Auro Conferences 23 Oct 23 Oct Media Toronto, ON Canada IT Security conference for the Canadian IT industry. ASCII Edge Tampa ASCII 23 Oct 24 Oct Association Tampa, FL United States Help MSPs grow their business by investigating new recurring revenue opportunities, exploring new partnerships and learning about the latest industry trends. SMBiT Conference 2024 SMBiT Professionals 27 Oct 28 Oct Association Melbourne Australia The Conference is designed to be the premiere networking and education event for IT Businesses and IT Professionals servicing SMBs across Australia and will feature extensive educational content and networking opportunities plus dinners on the Friday and Saturday nights. NextGen Conference & Expo The Channel Company 27 Oct 29 Oct Media Houston, TX United States High-velocity MSPs attend the event to: explore the future of technology, gain actionable intelligence on market trends, add strategic, long-term partners, connect with trusted peers, and grow recurring revenue streams. Cisco Partner Summit 2024 Cisco 28 Oct 30 Oct Vendor Los Angeles, CA United States Partner Summit is Cisco's premier strategic partner experience. Occurring every year, the event allows Cisco partners to hear inspiring keynotes, connect with Cisco leadership, and experience our latest products and solutions. TechCrunch Disrupt 2024 TechCrunch 28 Oct 30 Oct Vendor San Francisco, CA United States Known for the Startup Battlefield competition which has produced 121+ successful exits and over $9.7B in funding for participants post-appearance, TechCrunch attracts founders, investors, and tech builders alike. DattoCon Datto/Kaseya 28 Oct 30 Oct Vendor Miami, FL United States At DattoCon24, you’ll get savvy about security as you witness the unveiling of Datto’s most powerful cybersecurity solutions to date and gain technical insights from industry experts. PACK EXPO 2024 PMMI 3 Nov 6 Nov Association Chicago, IL United States Every two years, PACK EXPO Las Vegas brings together all packaged goods and life sciences industries for the most productive week of the year. This is where suppliers showcase their latest innovations and end users discover game-changing solutions to packaging and processing challenges. Women in Tech Festival 2024 The Channel Company 5 Nov 5 Nov Media London United Kingdom The Women in Tech Festival 2024 is a celebration of the women shaping the technology industry, from bottom to top. And next year’s Festival also brings you Women of the Channel; the meeting place for women from across the IT channel who are looking to advance organizational diversity, make unmatched connections, and empower and cultivate women leaders. Hosted by Computing and CRN, we will bring together the brightest minds and most influential women to connect with each other, share their stories and encourage future leaders. Designed for present and future female IT leaders who want to thrive in their professional and personal lives. As well as learning about the tech trends shaping the world, you’ll have opportunities to connect with mentors and access practical advice on how to progress your career. ONE 2024 Ingram Micro 6 Nov 8 Nov Vendor Washington, DC United States Ingram Micro ONE 2024 is the global innovation summit that brings the world's thought leaders, tech enthusiasts and IT visionaries from across the world together. From our cloud technology to our software and services, we are giving partners an experience that continues to push the boundaries of technological innovation and imagination at one flagship event. IT Nation Connect ConnectWise 6 Nov 8 Nov Community Orlando, FL United States IT Nation Evolve is an annual membership program designed to help you navigate your business journey through peer group interactions. Our members are among the highest in growth and have the largest profitability percentages in the industry. ChannelPro SMB Forum: Los Angeles ChannelPro 12 Nov 13 Nov Media Los Angeles, CA United States ChannelPro SMB Forums are live events offering relevant IT solutions, strategies for growth, and networking opportunities for the small to midsize business community. CVx Expo ChannelVision Magazine 12 Nov 14 Nov Media Scottsdale, AZ United States CVx sessions are broken into two concurrent tracks.: The ChannelVision track; covering trends and technologies most important to channel partners, while Remote Work Solutions magazine will present a track covering partner opportunities within the red hot remote and hybrid workspace. TD SYNNEX CommunitySolv TD SYNNEX 15 Nov 18 Nov Distribution Palm Springs, CA United States Navigating the channel is not a one-person job – it’s a team effort — and bringing together diverse viewpoints enriches our collective outlook. These perspectives enable us to see further across the horizon and decipher its complexity as we sail toward success. Managed Services Summit Manchester IT Europa 19 Nov 19 Nov Media Manchester United Kingdom Now in its fifth year, the Managed Services Summit Manchester builds on the successes of previous years as well as its sister events London and Benelux, which are firmly established as the leading managed services events for the UK and European IT channel. Featuring conference session presentations by major industry speakers, the Summit will also provide opportune networking breaks for delegates to meet with potential business partners. The unique mix of high-level presentations plus the ability to explore and debate the most pressing business issues with sponsors and peers across the industry makes this a must-attend event for any senior decision maker in the IT channel. OpenText World 2024 OpenText 19 Nov 21 Nov Vendor Las Vegas, NV United States The ultimate information management conference is back from November 19 to 21 in Las Vegas – with over 150 sessions and more than 45 sponsors. AWS re:Invent 2024 AWS 2 Dec 6 Dec Vendor TBD TBD You'll learn how to apply AWS technologies to serve your customers and how the AWS Partner Network (APN) can help you build successful business practices and solutions. You'll also have the opportunity to connect with AWS team members and other partners. Canalys Forums APAC Canalys 3 Dec 5 Dec Analyst Bali Indonesia The Canalys Forums are the largest independent pan-region events for channel partners, distributors, and senior vendor management. They bring together the IT channel to network and discuss the industry’s latest news and topics. Gartner Identity & Access Management Summit Gartner 9 Dec 11 Dec Analyst Grapevine, TX United States Accelerate learning and build a shared vision by attending as a group. Receive complimentary ticket(s) when you register as a team.* Canalys Forums North America Canalys TBD TBD Analyst TBD TBD The Canalys Forums are the largest independent pan-region events for channel partners, distributors, and senior vendor management. They bring together the IT channel to network and discuss the industry’s latest news and topics. Channel Partners Europe Informa TBD TBD Media TBD TBD Your primary focus is achieving your business goals, and ours is helping you get there. At Channel Partners Europe London, you'll build valuable relationships and learn from business growth experts to maximize your company's potential in 2024. Crossbeam Supernode 24 Crossbeam TBD TBD Vendor TBD TBD It’s the conference that past attendees have called “By far and away the most impactful conference I have attended in my career.” If you loved it last year or are wanting to cure your major FOMO, join Crossbeam in sunny San Diego for the second annual Supernode. Mastermind LIVE Q2 Kernan Consulting TBD TBD Community TBD TBD This business conference is two days of powerful information, instruction, and action to show you how to THRIVE in this economy. These interactive workshops will get you working ON your business and not IN it! Mastermind LIVE Q3 Kernan Consulting TBD TBD Community TBD TBD This business conference is two days of powerful information, instruction, and action to show you how to THRIVE in this economy. These interactive workshops will get you working ON your business and not IN it! Mastermind LIVE Q4 Kernan Consulting TBD TBD Community TBD TBD This business conference is two days of powerful information, instruction, and action to show you how to THRIVE in this economy. These interactive workshops will get you working ON your business and not IN it! CRN Sales & Marketing Awards The Channel Company TBD TBD Media TBD TBD The CRN Sales & Marketing Awards recognize and reward the achievements of those individuals and teams that are responsible for making the UK IT channel truly great. Microsoft Inspire 2024 Microsoft TBD TBD Vendor TBD TBD Announcing Microsoft Inspire 2024 dates and Microsoft Partner of the Year Awards nominations