1. Learning in the wild: designing for location-based experiences Elizabeth FitzGerald Institute of Educational Technology, The Open University

5. Introduction • Mobile communications are now part of everyday life • Huge potential for utilising location-specific resources and rich multimedia experiences • How we can use these resources for effective contextual learning? • How can we design and evaluate location- based learning?

6. Types of mobile and contextual learning • Six general categories of activity: – Behaviourist: learning results in a change in learners’ observable actions – Constructivist: learners actively construct new ideas/concepts based on previous and current knowledge – Situated: learning occurs within authentic context and culture – Collaborative: learning through social interaction – Informal/lifelong: learning outside of formal settings – Learning and teaching support: help co-ordination of learners and resources Ref: Naismith, L., Lonsdale, P., Vavoula, G. & Sharples, M. (2005) Literature Review in Mobile Technologies and Learning. A report for NESTA Futurelab (available online).

7. Contextual learning (1) • Learning occurs in a series of contexts e.g. time, place, tasks/goals, resources, social activities – within and between groups and individuals • Learning also creates context through continual interactions between people, settings, technologies and other artefacts • Context can be seen as a film or movie: each scene represents a context state, one that follows on the previous one • Learners share artefacts and create mutual understanding through dialogue and physical interaction

8. Contextual learning (2) • Context can also be seen as an emergent property of interaction… • … i.e. how we augment human activity in context, instead of modelling it • The challenge is how to add value to locations or places with appropriate tools and materials • Can then enable people, individually and together, to create and maintain their own rich contexts for learning

9. Case Study 1: Augmenting the visitor experience Ref: Priestnall, Gary, Brown, Elizabeth and Mike Sharples (2009) A student-led comparison of techniques for augmenting the field experience. Proceedings of the mLearn 2009 Conference, Orlando, Florida, 26-30 Oct 2009, pp 195-198.

10. To assess a range of techniques for exploring the use of digital geographic information to augment real scenes in the field Create a student-led exercise to encourage critical evaluation of these techniques to support the field experience (and mobile tourist guides). Aims

11. Eric Robson (Striding Edge Ltd) Supporting learning about the landscape Sir Hugh Walpole Video

15. Screen visibility can be an issue … this is as good as it gets

16. VIDEO from Derwent Water Wainwright OS Photo Audio of Wainwright 3. Mediascape on a mobile phone

17. Phone-based mediascapes

18. 4. Google Earth on a Tablet PC

20. Geovisionary (Virtalis, Univ. Leicester, Univ. Nottingham) 5. Head-Mounted Display (partial VR)

23. Summary of student findings • Computer-generated acetate:  Successful format/simple, ‘electronic acetates’ a vision for the future?  Difficult in windy conditions, predetermined viewpoints a drawback. • Custom PDA application:  Sketching, legend & audio popular (but relevance?)  Stability, incl. GPS connectivity. Screen visibility in bright sunlight. • Mediascape on a mobile phone:  Easy authoring (control over media placement)  Screen size and visibility, graphical media less effective. • Google Earth on a tablet PC:  Large screen and Google Earth’s data exploration environment popular  Screen visibility, battery life, pen-based interaction (GE designed for desktop) • Head-Mounted Display:  Fun, engaging, good for heavily graphical information  Technical complexity, robustness, heavy, not waterproof!

24. Reflections on exercise • Relating digital information to features in the real world – How can digital representations be mapped onto the real world by the user – Information doesn't always relate to neat trigger regions – How do we mimic the in-field expert pointing things out? • In-field evaluation – Asking students to develop their own evaluation schema – Video diaries a promising technique • The role of graphics – Seek alternatives to heavily graphical representations – More emphasis on design of audio for in-field use. • Ease of use – Even tech-savvy students didn’t have time for complex mapping apps – The demand for simplicity was in evidence across all interactions

25. Need to develop design rules for mobile field guides which mimic the field expert. Reduced emphasis on graphics, new challenges in making geographically relevant audio. Simple but effective? – all new geospatial and handheld AR applications will need to strive to move from being novelty apps to becoming killer apps. Google Maps Navigation for Android 2.0 Beginning to exploit real-time handheld Augmented Reality Caistor Roman Town, East Anglia, UK. Data from Will Bowden (Archaeology) Implications and future work

26. Case Study 2: Hidden Histories: To the Castle! Refs: • FitzGerald, Elizabeth; Taylor, Claire and Craven, Michael (2012) To the Castle! A comparison of two audio guides to enable public discovery of historical events. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing (DOI 10.1007/s00779-012-0624-0). • FitzGerald, Elizabeth (2012) Assessing informal learning: a case study using historical audio guides. In: CALRG Annual Conference 2012, 19-20 June 2012, Milton Keynes, UK.

27. Overview of the project • Investigated how geolocated audio can be used to provide opportunities for historical learning in public history • Case study of the 1831 Reform Riot in Nottingham, content created by a local history group • Conducted 2 types of guided walk: – People-led – Technology-led

28. What we were trying to find out • Can mobile technology be used to convey historical empathy and learning from conflicting perspectives? • How were these two audio tours different or similar? • Did they provide an effective means of learning by the general public about local historical events? • How might these kinds of techniques can be used in the future or by other community groups?

30. To the Castle! ‘people-led’ walk

32. To the Castle! ‘technology-led’ walk

34. 7scenes – tracing the walk

35. Key findings around… • Mode of delivery • Number of participants and social interactions • Geographical affordances of places/spaces • User experience • Opportunities for learning • Other factors: – Technical problems – Length of audio – Political views of community group

36. Case Study 3: Situ8 Ref: FitzGerald, E. (2012). Creating user-generated content for location- based learning: an authoring framework. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 28(3), pp. 195–207.

37. Designing location-based experiences • Context is king • Some media formats can be more suitable or compelling than others • Can we break away from ‘authoritative’ content to something a bit more personal?

39. Ad hoc learning in location • Anyone can be a field guide, through creation and delivery of user-generated geolocated content • Enables learning in location through serendipitous discovery of media placement • In-field authoring and editing of content • Enables reflection by user, either at the time or later on

40. A framework for authoring Landscape domain Type of communication Use of language/media related to the landscape Knowledge level of content Contextual aspects Interaction – try to include: 1. form of landscape 2. common knowledge 3. science 4. history 5. contemporary use 6. myth 7. symbol 8. art 9. suggestion 10. hint or warning 11. conversation 12. practical task 13. reminiscence 14. short textual description 15. exhortation (e.g. ‘look carefully’) 16. describe shape, colour, size 17. use emotions or personal response where appropriate 18. use simple English (short, commonly- used words) where possible 19. avoid jargon but do use appropriate language 20. be culturally sensitive 21. be clear and concise 22. orient the visitor appropriately 23. Domain-specific:  beginner  intermediate  advanced  specialist 24. age-related? (children might not have the same knowledge or level of understanding as an adult) 25. Needs prior knowledge? Temporal: 26. is this info related to the time of year or the seasons? 27. is this info related to time of day? 28. visibility of the landscape and its features/landmarks Available resources: 1. other people 2. experts 3. leaflets 4. notices/signs 33. authenticity 34. relevance to everyday life 35. element of fun 36. anything unusual or unexpected 37. opportunity for reflection by the user 38. respect for others and for the environment 39. the story behind the visible (e.g. photosynthesis in a leaf)

41. Analysis of existing content • Analysed 3 systems that contained user-created content: – OOKL – Peoples’ Collection Wales – WildMap Media type: Number of items (out of 217) that contained that media type: Percentage (%) … text 204 94.0 … audio 12 5.5 … video 2 0.9 … 1 photo 166 76.5 … 2 or more photos 33 15.2 … web link (URL) 13 6.0

42. Impact of this work • Content analysis  can guide creation of user- generated content / provide framework for authoring and aid metacognition • Help curation of user-generated content + tagging/filtering; potential for personalisation • Media created should be of higher quality • Use the framework to structure learning aims and outcomes

43. Situ8: the challenge • To develop new models of technology-enhanced learning based on the activity of capturing, filtering and presentation of crowd-sourced locational information • Basically, how to capture and deliver educational media – In location – About location – On-the-fly/dynamically • Also how to situate this information within specific physical and social contexts to enable learning to occur

44. Our app: how it works • Anyone can be an author • Create media for yourself and/or others to access • Can be used in fieldwork, to upload observations and data • Can also be used for leisure activities – a natural evolution from taking photos on holiday • Also give fascinating insights into how other perceive their surroundings • Provide both formal and informal opportunities to learn more about the environment/place/space

45. Overview of Situ8 • App available for Android phones • Can create and view MOs (media objects) • All MOs are public • A MO can be text, image, audio, video • Media is hosted/streamed through third-party services • Need Internet access for it to work, also GPS • Only basic user accounts (username, no password)

48. Current state of play • Currently in private ‘alpha’ testing mode with tame users • Can be used as testbed for new projects, to do with capture of location-based media • Development of Situ8 web portal currently underway, completion date July 2013: funded by OpenScience Laboratory to develop citizen science platform

49. Future development • Features planned for future releases also include: – Being able to view nearby MOs on a map – Having full user accounts, with passwords, user profiles etc. – Users to have ability to edit and delete MOs – Adding tags and categories – Filtering and searching MOs, according to a user’s interests, location or other contexts such as author or date – Local caching of MOs to enable asynchronous upload/download, for when users are not connected to the internet

50. Summary • Whistle-stop tour of location-based mobile learning • Educational affordances and context • Selection of case studies – Augmenting the visitor experience – To The Castle – Situ8

51. A few lessons learned • ‘In the wild’ not necessarily to do with physical environment • Can be tensions between – Researcher and communities in which they work – Innovative ‘catwalk’ technology vs ready-to-wear technology – Changing or maintaining practices • Tech problems not gone away… but now competing with other challenges around user- generated data/content, privacy, ownership etc

52. Other questions • Do we need new ‘in the wild’ theories? • How do we make sense of augmented or blended spaces? – Do existing theories of situated learning help explain what is so compelling about learning in location? • How can we manage this deluge of data being made available to us? (“cognitive curation” vs cognitive dissonance?)

54. Thanks for listening elizabeth.fitzgerald@open.ac.uk http://iet.open.ac.uk/e.j.fitzgerald http://elara99.wordpress.com http://www.tinyurl.com/edwild Acknowledgements: Gary Priestnall, Mike Sharples, Claire Taylor, Mike Craven, Rob Jones, People’s Histreh, James Goulding and students from the School of Geography at the University of Nottingham