Details

Accessibility

"The ground floor of the museum is fully accessible to those in wheelchairs.Access to the first floor is limited to only part of the museum, but information on exhibits is provided on the ground floor. https://amershammuseum.org/visit/access-statement/

The on-site toilet facilities are wheelchair accessible, and include a baby-changing area for parents. The museum has low doorways and beams throughout."

Brief description

"Amersham Museum is a local history museum located in the medieval market town of Amersham, north-west of London. The museum is housed in part of a 15th century hall house and a 19th century building with a new extension which includes seven public rooms and a herb garden. The museum displays a social history collection, which includes photographs, documents, objects and oral histories.

The museum has a regular programme of events, for families and for adult visitors. There are also regular talks and walks. The museum has two websites,

www.amershammuseum.org and www.amershamhistory.info "

Address

Amersham Museum

49 High Street

Amersham

HP7 0DP

Email

info@amershammuseum.org

Phone

01494 723700

Website

https://amershammuseum.org/ and www.amershamhistory.info

Directions

"Amersham Museum is located at 49 High Street, Old Amersham, HP7 0DP

Free parking is available in the High Street. The nearest car park is just off the Broadway, about 300m from the Museum; this car park includes some designated disabled spaces."

Opening Times

Always check with the venue directly for up-to-date information including opening times and admission charges as they may be subject to change

Transport

"There are several local bus services which go through Old Amersham.

If you are coming by train from London, Chiltern Rail trains from Marylebone or the Metropolitan line from Baker Street go to Amersham-on-the-Hill. From the station, there are buses to Old Amersham.

There is a very pleasant walk to the Museum from Amersham Station through woods and fields, with fine views. It takes about 15 minutes. Turn left out of the station and in 20m turn left under the railway bridge. Immediately cross the road to turn right along a footpath between houses and the railway embankment. In 50m, after the houses, turn half left up a hill, then follow a clear path through woods, staying parallel to the road. Eventually, the path descends and opens out into fields and slopes steeply down to the Church. Cross the churchyard and emerge onto the road. Turn right, walk past the Market Hall. The Museum is 150m on the right."

Amenities

Toilet

Baby-changing area for parents.