School Overview

Stockdale High School's student population of 2,298 students has stayed relatively flat over five school years.

The teacher population of 89 teachers has grown by 11% over five school years.

Grades Offered

Grades 9-12

Total Students

2,298 students

Gender %

Total Classroom Teachers

89 teachers

Students by Grade

School Rankings

Stockdale High School ranks within the top 30% of all 9,602 schools in California (based off of combined math and reading proficiency testing data).

The diversity score of Stockdale High School is 0.72, which is more than the diversity score at state average of 0.63. The school's diversity has stayed relatively flat over five school years.

Source: National Center for Education Statistics (NCES), CA Dept. of Education

Frequently Asked Questions

What is Stockdale High School's ranking?

Stockdale High School is ranked #2587 out of 9,602 schools, which ranks it among the top 30% of public schools in California.

What schools are Stockdale High School often compared to?

Stockdale High Schoolis often viewed alongside schools like Independence High School by visitors of our site.

What percent of students have achieved state testing proficiency in math and reading?

36% of students have achieved math proficiency (compared to the 33% CA state average), while 63% of students have achieved reading proficiency (compared to the 47% CA state average).

What is the graduation rate of Stockdale High School?

The graduation rate of Stockdale High School is 96%, which is higher than the California state average of 87%.

How many students attend Stockdale High School?

2,298 students attend Stockdale High School.

What is the racial composition of the student body?

44% of Stockdale High School students are Hispanic, 24% of students are White, 17% of students are Asian, 9% of students are Two or more races, and 6% of students are Black.

What is the student:teacher ratio of Stockdale High School?

Stockdale High School has a student ration of 26:1, which is higher than the California state average of 21:1.

What grades does Stockdale High School offer ?

Stockdale High School offers enrollment in grades 9-12

What school district is Stockdale High School part of?

Stockdale High School is part of Kern High School District.

In what neighborhood is Stockdale High School located?

Stockdale High School is located in the Seven Oaks neighborhood of Bakersfield, CA. There are 1 other public schools located in Seven Oaks.

School Reviews

1

The freshman is out of control.

- Posted by Parent - Yuan chhj

5

I am a parent of a student going to your school. and I not only rate Stockdale 10 thumbs down. This School has tolerance for violence. I reported this and nothing was or has been done.

- Posted by Parent - ochoa

Review Stockdale High School. Reviews should be a few sentences in length. Please include any comments on:

Quality of academic programs, teachers, and facilities

Availability of music, art, sports and other extracurricular activities