About this Item

RÖNTGEN, WILHELM CONRAD VON. (1845-1923). German Nobel Prize winning physicist; discovered X-rays. Rare Autograph Manuscript Statement Signed, ''Dr. W. Röntgen'', in German. One page, black ink on laid paper. Oblong octavo, Strasbourg [France], October 1874. Neatly and professionally silked on the verso, else very fine condition. After earning his Ph.D. at the University of Zurich in 1869, then some years as assistant to physicist August Kundt, Roentgen qualified as Lecturer at the Strasbourg University in 1874. This announcement of the lecture series in physics and chemistry is for the Nobel Prize physicist s first teaching position: ''I propose to lecture during the winter semester: 1) Publicly: Introduction into practical physics. 2 hours weekly 2) Privately: Selected chapters on Physical Chemistry, particularly on Gasometric Methods. 2 hours weekly I would ask those gentlemen who wish to attend the first lecture to discuss the schedule with me at 5 p.m. on Monday 26 October, and for the second lecture, at 6 p.m. on Monday 26 October, in the Physics lecture room. Dr. Wm. Röntgen.'' Fully autograph manuscripts from this early in the career of any Nobel Prize winning personality are exceeding-rare, let alone one with this spot on topic of Physics!. Seller Inventory # 210230

Contact seller

Report this item

GERARD A.J. STODOLSKI, INC. IS ONE OF THE WORLD'S LEADING PURVEYORS OF FINE HISTORIC AUTOGRAPHS, ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPTS, NOTABLE PHOTOGRAPHS, SIGNIFICANT FIRST EDITION BOOKS AND SIGNED DOCUMENTS FROM ALL AGES IN HISTORY. Since 1978, we have helped develop superb private libraries and major institutional holdings. We excel in locating the unique single item or in developing specialty collections of Presidents, Literature, History, Royalty, Women, Philosophy, Americana, Science, Medicine, Law, Music and Art. Whether you are a beginning or seasoned collector, we can help you build the collection you want. We invite you to contact us about your interests and discuss which services we can provide for you. More About Us Our experience spans over six decades in the historic autograph, rare book and manuscript field. During those years we have been engaged in the full-time business of buying, selling and appraising original letters, manuscripts, documents, signed photographs, historical ephemera, posters and books. We have been members of the ABAA and ILAB for over 35 years. Among our many clients are: The White House, the Library of Congress, major libraries, colleges and Ivy League universities. Many of the finest private libraries and collections on the planet contain items that have passed through our hands. The total dollar amount of this material is incalculable. We have been profiled with a segment on the ABC Evening News, and have been quoted and/or interviewed by: The New York Times, NY Daily News, The Washington Post, and other major newspapers, both here and abroad. We have also authenticated and appraised major collections of material including: Abraham Lincoln?s ?House divided? speech for a Morgan Library patron; to Louisa May Alcott?s family archive, and the Leon Trotsky archives, both at Harvard University; to a major collection of French Impressionist artist letters; to a world class collection of Charles Dickens, now residing at the Dickens House Museum in London; to co-appraising the archives of The New York Stock Exchange, among hundreds of others. Our experience is second to none. We exhibit at many of the major book fairs and symposiums held nationally and internationally. Additionally, we participate in both auction and non-auction sales of material, representing client interests in New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Hong Kong, Philadelphia, London, Paris, Shanghai, Berlin, Rome, Geneva and elsewhere. Unconditional Guarantee The authenticity of all material is guaranteed, without time limit. Any item found to be otherwise may be returned for an immediate, full refund of the purchase price. Refunds and our liability are limited to the original purchase price. Terms of Sale All items are subject to prior sale. Title of the material remains with the seller until invoice is paid in full. Shipping and insurance are extra. Extended payment options and ?Lay-a-ways?, are possible. Institutions may be billed according to their needs. Return Policy Our return policy allows items to be returned for any reason within seven (7) days of receipt, in the same condition that the item was sent out. Exceptions to this policy may be considered, if arranged in advance, and the terms must be in writing. Privacy Policy The privacy of our clients is of the utmost importance to us. All transactions and communications are kept strictly private, and we will not share or sell your information with anyone. Full information on our Technology Privacy Policy may be found on our website.

Visit Seller's Storefront

Association Member Members of these associations are committed to maintaining the highest standards. They vouch for the authenticity of all items offered for sale. They provide expert and detailed descriptions, disclose all significant defects and/or restorations, provide clear and accurate pricing, and operate with fairness and honesty during the purchase experience.

Seller's business information

Gerard A.J. Stodolski, Inc.

Five Chickadee Court, Bedford, NH, 03110-4800, U.S.A.

Terms of Sale:

Terms of Sale

Authenticity Guaranteed: As members of the ABAA, and ILAB, as well as most other major trade organizations, we stand behind the authenticity of all items we sell with a complete money-back guarantee. Any item found not to be as described, many be returned per ABE policy, provided it is returned in the same condition as when sent, for a full refund, less postage costs. All items remain the property of Gerard A.J. Stodolski Inc, until invoice is satisfied in full.

Return Policy

We gua...

More Information

Shipping Terms:

Orders usually ship within 2-3 business days, after receipt of payment, though often sooner. We often require and use signature required delivery services. Shipping costs are based on packages weighing 1 LB, or 1/2 KG. If your order is heavy or oversized, or is destined for delivery outside the United States, we may contact you to let you know extra shipping costs are required. Insurance is extra.