Christopher Smith, a Last Word on Sports writing contributor and NBA enthusiast, has been a Brooklyn Nets fan since 2012 when the team moved across the bridge and opened the Barclay’s Center. He recounts the history of the Nets, tells the story of the pivotal 2018-2019 team, and ties it together with a modern outlook of the team.

The Brooklyn Nets: History, Greatness, and Undying Fandom

A History

When the Nets moved from New Jersey to Brooklyn, they were considered the underdog basketball team of New York. Some would even equate them to the Knicks’ “little brother.” This was unsurprising considering the New Jersey era had not been successful since 2003. Despite this, the prospect of having another professional New York City basketball team lured many new fans. The Nets’ rebranding was an attractive addition to the NBA. The classic black & white colors, jersey and court designs, and logos are simple, yet smooth.

The Nets started the Brooklyn era by building around Brook Lopez and added players like Joe Johnson and Deron Williams. They were a mediocre playoff team, but they upgraded by acquiring Paul Pierce, Kevin Garnett, and Jason Terry in a blockbuster trade in 2013. They traded young players and several first-round picks in the deal, gambling much of their future. In the end, the team only stayed together for one season with only a second-round playoff advancement to show for it. The Nets had a tough road ahead of them afterward. The turning of the organization was led by Sean Marks who took over as the Nets general manager in 2016. He proceeded to hire Kenny Atkinson, an excellent developmental coach who was vital in the Nets’ improvement and success. These changes, paired with strategic drafting and player signings helped the Nets move into an exciting time.

A New Era

In June 2017, news dropped that D’Angelo Russell was traded to the Brooklyn Nets for Brook Lopez along with other considerations. The Nets franchise was filled with excitement for the Nets’ new possible franchise player. Russell was the 2nd overall 2015 NBA draft pick and his potential was sky-high. Due to some controversy with the Lakers, his stock as a player and leader went down allowing the Nets to pounce and bring in their next great player. After an injury-plagued season in 2017 and a rough start in 2018, Russell was the leader the Nets wanted. He made his first All-Star appearance and helped the Nets make the playoffs for the first time since 2015. This is where the great story of the 2018-2019 Nets begins.

A Story of Greatness

The group that wore the black and white during the 2018-19 season quickly became one of the most likable Nets squads of all time. Adversity and chemistry allowed them to blossom into one of the NBA’s most improved and exciting teams. Bleacher Report projected the Nets’ 2018-19 record to be 29-53. The injury to Caris LeVert in November 2018 followed by the Nets slump would have made many believe the prediction. From November 21st, 2018 to December 7th, the Nets lost eight straight games. However, it seems the setback sparked a turning of fate. Under the leadership of D’Angelo Russell and company, they proceeded to go on a seven-game winning streak and more. They finished the season with a record of 42-40, making the playoffs for the first time since the 2014-15 season.

Growth Breeds Fandom

The Nets’ growth and exciting play were incredible to watch. There was nothing like hearing Ian Eagle exclaiming, “That’s a man’s jam!” after a Jarrett Allen dunk, or watching Theo Pinson lead the bench in their signature celebrations. The Nets’ 28-point comeback against the Sacramento Kings where D’Angelo Russell scored a previous career-high of 44 points is unforgettable. It was awesome to see the team rally around Rondae-Hollis-Jefferson after he made the game-winning shot. That game was a symbol of the “Brooklyn Grit” of the 2018-19 Nets. That same grit is what Brooklyn strives for today. It prompts the question, what would have happened if the Nets stuck with their core?

What Could’ve Been

While the 2018-19 Brooklyn Nets did not have the star power they later achieved, their chemistry appeared off the charts. The improvements they made over the course of the season were substantial enough to run it back. The players they had have mostly maintained or taken new heights. Most notably, Jarrett Allen became an all-star. Spencer Dinwiddie is still one of the best guards in the NBA. Joe Harris pre-injury was one of the best three-point shooters in the NBA. D’Angelo Russell and Caris LeVert are thriving with their new teams. The Nets were one piece away from making a deeper run. Revisiting the 2019 NBA offseason shows how this piece could have been filled.

Re-tooling the 18-19 Core

The Nets had some decisions to make following their successful season. Namely, D’Angelo Russell’s ascent begged the question if the Nets should have offered him a max contract. What is more, the 2019 free agency class was loaded with talent. Many wished the Nets would re-sign D’Angelo Russell and bring in another top-tier player to strengthen their weaknesses. It was clear the Nets had great offensive upside and their defense was surprisingly ranked above average. What they were missing was consistency at the power-forward spot. They heavily relied on Hollis Jefferson, Jared Dudley, and Rodions Kurucs. These players played their roles well, but one opinion is that signing Julius Randle in addition to retaining key role players would have solved the Nets’ missing piece of the puzzle.

The Answer Part 1: Julius Randle

Similar to D’Angelo Russell, Julius Randle had the makings of a breakout season. He saw his points-per-game increase from 16.1 to 24.1. Some would argue his improvements only came from an increase in field goal attempts and a larger role within the Pelican’s offense. However, similar arguments were made about D’Angelo Russell’s improvement, and he was able to be an impactful leader for the Nets. In addition, Randle’s chemistry with Russell from being his Laker teammate would improve the team dynamic, something that was instrumental to the Nets’ success. In addition to signing Julius Randle, the Nets needed to keep key role players. Their role players were not only important for chemistry but for leadership.

The Answer Part 2: Keeping the Role Players

In the midst of the Nets’ losing streak, it was reported that Jared Dudley was responsible for rallying the team together. He helped hold a players-only meeting where the Nets worked through some of the problems they faced on the court. This is one of the events that sparked the turning of the Nets’ season. For this reason, the Nets needed to bring back players like Dudley, Hollis Jefferson, and DeMarre Carroll. Bringing back the same veteran presence, role players, and talent with the addition of Julius Randle would have allowed the Nets to improve upon their already impressive 2018-19 season. Things obviously did not happen this way.

Another New Era

During the summer of 2019, the Nets signed Kevin Durant, Kyrie Irving, and Deandre Jordan. This signified major changes to the franchise. The Nets fanbase was ecstatic to hear that two of the NBA’s top talents were coming to Brooklyn, but what would this mean for the culture of the team? Would the new-look Brooklyn Nets be able to replicate the same energy they did during the journey of the 2018-19 season?

The Results of the “Superteam”

The first year of the new-look Nets did go as well as many hoped. They finished the 2019-2020 season at 35-37, losing in the play-in tournament of the NBA “bubble” Playoffs. The second year saw Kevin Durant return from his Achilles injury for the first time since June 2019. His presence provided much-needed success to the Nets organization. In addition, the Nets pulled off a blockbuster trade to land James Harden, who completed the “big three” superteam.

The Nets would beat the Boston Celtics in the first round of the 2021 playoffs and faced the mighty Milwaukee Bucks in the semifinals. In game 7, Durant made a thrilling shot to send the game to overtime. Had his foot been behind the three-point line, the Nets’ championship run might have come to fruition. They would ultimately lose, marking the farthest the Nets have gone in the playoffs since 2013. The following season would see James Harden get traded to the Philadelphia 76ers primarily in exchange for Ben Simmons. The next season was a roller coaster of controversy and hot and cold streaks. In the end, Irving and Durant were traded away from the Nets marking the end of the superteam era.

A Reflection and Outlook

Many of the pieces that helped build the foundation of the Nets culture were gone in the aftermath of the superteam, but the project was not a complete failure. Nets fans will always be grateful for the play of the superstars of the last three years. Kevin Durant’s play with the Brooklyn Nets was incredible and inspiring. They will always remember the excitement and dominance he brought to Brooklyn. The same can be said for Kyrie Irving. Watching a team of all-stars is fun, but it does not compare to witnessing a team with less talent overcome the odds to make it to the top. That is why the 2018-19 Brooklyn Nets team holds such a special place in the hearts of many Nets fans. They were instrumental to the passionate fandom of the team.