Jason Terry is excited about his new team, the Brooklyn Nets, and on opening night, he'll have the tattoo to prove it.

Terry intends to have "BK All Day" inked somewhere on his body. The location and design won't be unveiled until Oct. 30 when the Nets open their highly anticipated season at the Cleveland Cavaliers.

Terry has a habit of making a statement with tattoos.

As a member of the Dallas Mavericks, Terry got a tattoo of the Larry O'Brien Trophy on his right biceps before the 2010-11 season, and then helped the team win the title. He got a tattoo of the Celtics' leprechaun logo spinning the O'Brien trophy on his left biceps before last season, but the team was eliminated in the first round of the playoffs by the Knicks.

Terry has no regrets about the Celtics tattoo and no reservations about the impending Nets ink.

"I'm a very superstitious guy, but every community I come involved with, I just take it on," Terry said. "That's what the tattoo symbolizes. It means something to me. Being a Boston Celtic, that means something. I've been blessed and fortunate to play for a lot of great franchises, and this is just another one."

Terry, who was acquired in the blockbuster draft-day trade that landed Kevin Garnett and Paul Pierce from the Celtics, has embraced his new surroundings. Terry took part in a "Dads take your child to school day" community event in Fort Greene on Tuesday morning, and he received a big ovation when he promised the Nets will deliver a championship to Brooklyn.

"You can just feel the enthusiasm and the energy that the people have," Terry said. "Without the fans and without the city's support, we're pretty much out there by ourselves. Instantly, from Day 1, I knew the community really embraced what the Brooklyn Nets stand for."

Terry, in turn, has fully embraced the burgeoning rivalry with the cross-town Knicks. In an interview with Dime Magazine last week, Terry mocked the championship guarantee made by Knicks guard J.R. Smith.

Terry learned his trash-talking ways from recent Hall of Fame inductee Gary Payton and has no intention of backing down.

"I learned from the best as far as trash-talking and trying to get under the opponents' skin," Terry said. "But it's all in fun. None of this translates into fighting or anything like that. It's more like a competitive edge. I'm one of the guys - myself, KG - that if you allow us to get underneath you, we'll be there all night."