The Brooklyn Nets shocked the NBA last month when the team swung a trade with the Boston Celtics to acquire Kevin Garnett, Paul Pierce and Jason Terry. The trio arrives in New York with championship rings, 25 combined All-Star game appearances, MVP and Sixth Man of the Year awards, as well as countless other accolades. The group was introduced Thursday at a press conference at the Barclays Center. Nets' owner Mikhail Prokhorov made a surprise appearance after jetting in from Moscow and he made it clear what his expectations are. "I will [only] be proud when we win the championship," Prokhorov said. "For me there is only one place: First place."

Prokhorov has his sights set on the championship trophy, but he still has to get by the New York Knicks on and off the court. The Nets closed the gap in both areas with their NYC rivals last season. The Knicks, owned by Madison Square Garden Co., finished first in the Atlantic Division and the Nets were only five games behind. The Nets were 14 games back during the 2011-12 lockout season.

The move to Brooklyn dramatically improved the team's financial fortunes. Attendance jumped 53% last season at ticket prices 50% higher than the Nets' last year in New Jersey. The Nets moved from last in the league in attendance to 16th. TV ratings increased an NBA-best 210% last season for Brooklyn game on the YES Network.

Despite the huge improvement on financial metrics, the Nets still lag the Knicks in terms of their fan base. Ratings for Knicks' games on MSG--up 71% as the team captured its first division crown in 19 years--were more than triple those of the Nets. Despite the hoopla surrounding the opening of the Barclays Center, the Nets still had empty seats during games and played to a 95% 97% capacity for the year. Most elite teams in big markets, like the Knicks, sell-out every game. The Knicks are riding a three year sell-out streak at prices twice as high as Brooklyn. The Knicks led the NBA's ranking of merchandise sales last season and forward Carmelo Anthony had the top jersey. The Nets ranked fourth with their new black and white color scheme (the rankings are skewed towards NYC teams since they are based on sales at the NBA Store on Fifth Ave and NBAStore.com).

The Nets already have topped the Knicks in one area for next season. Las Vegas has the Nets odds to win the 2014 NBA Championship at 12/1 after the Boston trade and addition of free agent Andrei Kirilenko, versus 22/1 for the Knicks.

Prokhorov is taking unprecedented steps with his payroll this year to reach his championship goal. The team's payroll will likely clock in around $103 million, including Travis Outlaw who was amnestied (the Nets must pay Outlaw's $4 million salary, but he does not count for luxury tax purposes). The payroll is not a record, but the league's new, more punitive luxury tax will result in a tax bill of close to $80 million. The $180 million team breaks the record set by the Knicks in 2005-06 when they had a $126 million payroll and $37.2 million in luxury taxes (the final payroll cost was reduced when the Knicks received $16 million in insurance money for Allan Houston who retired due to injury).

Prokhorov's spending is reminiscent of Paul Allen's run 10 years ago with the Portland Trail Blazers. Allen racked up $81 million in luxury tax bills over two seasons between 2002 and 2004. His 2002-2003 team had a payroll and tax cost of $157 million as he chased a championship (the Blazers lost in the first round of the playoffs). The Trail Blazers did not have the revenues to meet the huge payrolls. Allen racked up massive losses and the team's arena entered bankruptcy in 2004. The team lost $85 million during the 2002-03 season by Forbes' count in our annual look at the business of basketball.

The Nets are potentially headed for similar losses for the 2013-14 season. On top of the $180 payroll/tax cost, the Nets will spend in the ballpark of $65 million to run the team and operate the Barclays Center, and that does not include the interest on the debt to build the arena. Only the Knicks and Los Angeles Lakers had revenues of more than $200 million last season. The Nets say they have sold $3 million in season tickets since the announcement of the Boston trade, but even with an extended playoff run, they are unlikely to hit $200 million in revenue. Prokhorov's losses will likely top $50 million this year. Prokhorov, like Allen before him, can certainly afford it. They are the two richest owners in the NBA worth $15 billion (Allen) and $13 billion (Prokhorov).

The Nets-Knicks rivalry promises to be one of the NBA's bigger storylines next season and the addition of Garnett, who feuded with Anthony last season, adds fuel to the fire. Prokhorov clearly has the Knicks on his mind and couldn't help taking a dig at the Knicks' owner at yesterday's press conference. "I want to congratulate James Dolan," Prokhorov said with a smile. "He is watching us for the time being."

-