Jason Terry Biography

Jason Terry began his NBA career in 1999 as a first-round pick out of the University of Arizona. During his time as a Wildcat, he helped lead his team to the 1997 NCAA National Championship and averaged 21.9 points as a senior, earning him Consensus First Team All-American and Pac-10 Player of the Year honors in 1999. After joining the Hawks the following season he quickly became a star, earning NBA All-Rookie Second Team honors in his first season and averaging over 18 points during his first five seasons in the league before joining the Dallas Mavericks in 2004. Throughout his career, h he spent time as a premier starting guard and also served as a valuable bench player. In 2009 he earned the prestigious NBA Sixth Man of the Year award and went on to help the Mavericks to an NBA Championship in 2011. He went on to play with the Brooklyn Nets, Sacramento Kings, Houston Rockets and Milwaukee Bucks. Terry is now in coaching and is currently an assistant for the Utah Jazz.

Book Jason Terry for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Jason Terry for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Jason Terry. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Jason Terry, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Jason Terry's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Jason Terry, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Jason Terry for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Jason Terry for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Jason Terry for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Jason Terry’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Jason Terry for your Virtual Meeting