A day after landing Paul Pierce, Kevin Garnett and Jason Terry from the Celtics, the Nets announced Jason Kidd’s new coaching staff.

Lawrence Frank, Roy Rogers and Eric Hughes all have agreed to become assistants under Kidd, while Doug Overton was retained from last year’s coaching staff.

“I am very pleased to add Lawrence, Roy, Eric and Doug to my staff,” Kidd said in a statement. “They collectively bring a wealth of NBA experience to our bench, both from a coach and player perspective. This combination will not only prove beneficial to me, but will be an invaluable asset to our players as well.”

The biggest addition is Frank, who Kidd publicly campaigned to add to the staff from the moment he was introduced as the team’s head coach two weeks ago. Frank coached Kidd for several seasons in New Jersey, and is the Nets franchise leader in victories as a head coach. He coached the Nets from 2004-09, before spending a season with Pierce and Garnett in Boston as an assistant under Doc Rivers before spending the past two seasons coaching the Detroit Pistons.

Frank is a well-respected defensive tactician, and in addition to being Kidd’s lead assistant will almost assuredly be in charge of the team’s defense, which should get a significant boost from the additions of both Pierce and Garnett.

Rogers has spent the last five years working alongside Frank as an assistant. From 2008-10 he worked under Frank with the Nets, then moved on to Boston to work with Garnett, Pierce and Frank in 2010-11 before going on to work with Frank for the Pistons the last two years. The first-round pick of the Grizzlies back in 1996 is a highly-respected big man coach, helping develop Brook Lopez during his first two seasons in the NBA as well as working with Greg Monroe and Andre Drummond the past two years in Detroit.

Hughes joins the Nets after spending the past six seasons with the Toronto Raptors, including the last four as an assistant coach split evenly under Jay Triano and Dwane Casey. Hughes was an assistant coach at Cal from 1991-93, the second year being Kidd’s freshman year at the school.

Overton will enter his sixth season with the Nets and fourth as an assistant coach, after spending the last three working under Avery Johnson and then P.J. Carlesimo last season.

tbontemps@nypost.com