Reading a menu at a restaurant may be a non-issue for many of us, but for those who are blind or visually impaired, this is just one of the many hurdles they have to face in a world that has not been made accessible for them.

In India, a restaurant in Indore is taking a positive step towards inclusivity and accessibility by introducing a Braille menu.

Absence of braille menus makes ordering inaccessible to blind

Printed menus with small text and the general absence of Braille alternatives make menus inaccessible to the visually impaired.

Gurkripa, a restaurant in Indore, has started presenting menu cards in Braille script so that visually impaired customers can order food on their own.

This initiative was launched by the Confederation of Indian Industry's Young Indians group, which came up with the idea after meeting some restaurant operators.

The owner of Gurkripa restaurant, Simran Bhatia Sharma, said, "The Young Indians Group had contacted us and asked us to make menu cards in Braille script."

"We have called visually impaired children from Mahesh Drishtihin Kalyan Sangh to treat them at the restaurant here. We had provided Braille script menu cards for them at the restaurant. These Braille script cards will be kept here, in this restaurant from today, for blind people," said Young Indian Group Chairperson Bhavna Ganediwal, speaking to ANI.

"We have specially ordered this Braille script card from Chandigarh. We will be sending 10 such cards to other restaurants. All these restaurants have agreed to have Braille script menu cards," she added.

No longer dependent

One of the visually impaired students, Raksha Jogi, said, "Today we ordered our food here by reading the menu card in Braille script. We felt that we were not dependent on anyone else. Earlier, when I went to the restaurant, my family members used to read out the menu card to me so that I could order. Today, I ordered my own food myself. Restaurants in every city and village should have menu cards like this in Braille script."

Anatibala Porwal, a class 12 student, also expressed pride in placing an order by herself. She said, "I had never felt so proud of myself before. I had never imagined this. Today, I read the menu card myself and ordered food. All the visually impaired people in the world should get this kind of facility."