India’s Visually Impaired Pioneer

There is no doubt that Padma Shri Jawahar Lal Kaul belongs to that special category of totally unassuming people who can only be judged by the estimation of his abilities and achievements which makes him stand taller than his peers.

To begin with, there are many ‘firsts’ which Kaul has achieved in his eighty years. Topping the list is the Louis Braille Medal from the World Blind Union. In 2012 he was the first recipient of the award from a developing country. Kaul considers this “my biggest recognition as it came from my own kind of people”. Beyond this, his extensive, seemingly never-ending, list of awards continues for recognitions received within India and globally from international organisations.

Srinagar-born Kaul who lost his sight at the age of five due to small pox, moved to Amritsar with his family where after schooling joined DAV College. Upon completing his B.A. (Hons) Sanskrit at Punjab University in 1967, he was not only a Gold Medalist but also the ‘first’ student in India to appear for his graduation exams using a typewriter.

Another ‘first’ was in 1997 when Kaul founded what has become India’s largest Braille printing press. Under the auspices of the All India Confederation of the Blind (AICB) established in 1980, Kaul as its Founder-General Secretary ensures that Braille Bhawan in Rohini, New Delhi supplies textbooks and other reading material to schools and college in 10 States across India.

Education followed by productive employment for the blind being primary to Kaul, he along with the family of late Capt. Chandanlal opened the Capt. Chandanlal Special School for Blind in Gurugram in 1994.

“Of the current generation of students, while technology has provided numerous advantages, it is noted that children today are not as hard working and sincere as previous generations. Main cause is the audio system which has made them reliant on new, easier methodology. They don’t read Braille books or even bother to learn to spell”, rues Kaul.

AICB conducts a number of programs specifically designed for the visually impaired. Kaul pioneered systematic training in Stenography and advanced Computer applications as contemporary and viable employment opportunities for the blind. This has enabled over 600 sightless persons being employed as Stenographers in Government and Private sectors and Banks.

At Braille Bhawan all printing machines are imported and 18% GST is being charged on these under ‘motorised vehicle’ category. Kaul strongly feels these should come under special category for the disabled. “Spare parts are imported, as due to limited demand it has not been feasible for even a small factory being set-up to make these parts. We are keen to train our boys locally for repairing the machinery which will also give them opportunities to work on machines all over India, but do not find this happening. Indigenously produced 130-140 GSM Braille paper is expensive and price has gone up further. Eventually, we will move towards paperless Braille,” he says.

Looking at the future, Kaul says, “Competition is there but the foundation has to be strong. Basic training for the new generation is being missed out by the teachers. We have to stress on that. I tell my students, work harder, get good jobs. Don’t use your Reserved Quota as a clutch to get jobs. Let it be on merit while competing with mainstream people.”

Kaul is married to Usha, also visually impaired. Since 1968 they continue to live modestly in their rented home in Delhi’s Model Town. Their son Vinit Kaul is 51. When not busy with work, the couple enjoy reading and listening to TV news. Kaul affirms he still uses public transport to commute from home to work and back. The office car is used only when on official duty.

His conclusion, as expected from someone of his modest temperament, is “I don’t work for awards but they do help create awareness of our work. The Padma Shri was a great honour – especially when visitors come to my organisations, they feel my company with this title has been worth their meeting me,” laughs the recipient over the telephonic interview.

Contact:

Mr. Jawahar Lal Kaul

General Secretary AICB

Mobile: +91-9810684208

Landline: +91-11-27054082 / +911127050915

Email – [email protected]

Website – www.aicb.org.in All India Confederation of the Blind

Braille Bhawan, Near Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Hospital

Sector-5, Rohini, Delhi -110085.