Christian Petersen/Getty Images

With the 2012 NBA trade deadline rapidly approaching, the Miami Heat are looking to add a quality big man to bolster their already-impressive collection of talent.

The Heat are once again sitting atop the Eastern Conference with the Chicago Bulls, as well as being one of the strongest teams in the NBA this season. With a 29-9 record and winners of 13 of their last 16 games, they are priming themselves for a run similar to last season's run to the NBA Finals.

However, if they are going to make a run at an NBA title, they are going to need another big man to help shoulder the load placed on the lithe shoulders of Chris Bosh.

The latest rumors circulating around the NBA have centered on bringing in enigmatic big man Rasheed Wallace. Last week, the team brought in the former NBA champion for a workout to see if he could still contribute to an NBA team.

While we all know that the team has a solid core of LeBron James, Dwyane Wade, and Chris Bosh, questions remain about their depth. Mario Chalmers and Norris Cole have provided solid production in the backcourt, but the frontcourt of the team remains very thin.

Behind Bosh's 18.5 points and 8.1 rebounds each night out, power forward Udonis Haslem and center Joel Anthony combine for less than 10 points and 11 rebounds of offensive production per night.

Haslem's play has been steadily declining over the past few seasons, and his offensive game is nowhere near where it used to be. Pair that with the fact that Anthony is not an option on the offensive end of the floor, and it is easy to see why the Heat so badly need an effective backup big man.

Ronald Martinez/Getty Images

Bringing in the currently retired Rasheed Wallace could be a very smart move, if he is indeed still able to be at least a shade of his former self. He was a key cog in the Detroit Pistons 2004 NBA Championship team, and he knows what it takes to win.

The four-time NBA All-Star doesn't need to play a huge role for the team if the Miami Heat sign him. He just needs to provide 10-15 minutes off of the bench, while scoring five to ten points and helping the team on the rebounding end of the floor.

However, what would help the team most is the presence he would provide in the locker room. He is a respected player throughout NBA locker rooms, and he will bring another dimension of identity to a team seeking a title.

If the Miami Heat can sign Rasheed Wallace in the coming days, they would be adding a significant piece to their championship puzzle.

They don't need another superstar to content for a championship, but they certainly could use someone with the swagger of a champion, and that is exactly what he would bring to the table.