Miami Heat has been under Pat Riley’s stewardship ever since 1995. The Godfather joined the team as a president and during his second stint as the head coach, Miami won its first-ever NBA championship. Boasting the likes of Shaquille O’Neal, Dwyane Wade, Udonis Haslem, and an aging Gary Payton, the team was filled with serial winners. Former NBA champion and Detroit Pistons icon recently spoke of this team as he reminisced on a crazy Conference Finals.

The Heat lost to the Detroit Pistons in the 2005 Eastern Conference Finals. It was this loss that catapulted Riley to make changes that resulted in them winning the title next season. While a great team on paper, the championship season started on a somber note as Miami went 11-10 at the start of the season. This resulted in the sacking of coach Van Gundy. Riley took charge of the team and the rest, as they say, is history.

Former NBA champion heaps praise on Dwyane Wade’s Miami Heat

ADVERTISEMENT

Article continues below this ad

Before their eventual triumph in 2006, the Miami Heat were in the ECF in 2005 as the top seed in the East. Facing off against defending champions, Detroit Pistons, the two locked horns in what was one of the closest ECF finals to date.

With both teams trading a win for a loss after each game, the stage was set for a mouthwatering Game 7. Even though the Heat lost in 2005, Pistons star Rasheed Wallace realized they weren’t going away anytime soon.

Watch This Story: Endorsing $170,000,000 Rich Dwayne Wade’s Liquor Venture, Wife Gabrielle Shares Snippets Of Musical Weekend

After getting praised by another power forward, Chris Bosh, the Flash was lauded by Wallace as well. In a recent appearance on the Underdog NBA channel on YouTube, Wallace expressed his views on that Miami team. Giving props to his opponent, Wallace stated, “That was a great Miami team too.”

Reiterating his point about Miami, he added. “A young D-Wade, a young you god aka Udonis Haslem man that was a good team right there.” Continuing to heap praise on his opponents, Wallace stated, “Again not necessarily a young, but a young-er dominant force Big Diesel. Like man, that was a hell of a series there between us.” Sheed was right as this was only the beginning for Miami.

Dwyane Wade and Miami’s eventual triumph

ADVERTISEMENT

Article continues below this ad

While the Miami Heat succumbed to an 88-82 defeat in Game 7, they bounced back a year later as they ran rampant in the East. They managed to finish second in the conference after a slow start to the season. Pat Riley’s men demolished their opponents before having a rematch of the 2005 ECF with Detroit.

Overcoming the Pistons with a 4-2 series victory, the team faced the Dallas Mavericks who were led by Wade’s soon-to-be HoF classmate Dirk Nowitzki.

Read More: After ESPN Shut Door on Stephen Curry’s Ex-Mentor, Disappointed Stephen A. Smith Pleads With Warriors Stars for a Fix

ADVERTISEMENT

Article continues below this ad

While younger than the German, Dwyane Wade announced himself to the world as he won the Finals MVP for his strong showing. Winning the series after going down 0-2, the win saw Miami capture their first championship as Wade became a household name in the process.

We can expect more such stories to come out with Wade’s HoF induction imminent. What are your thoughts on Wallace’s take? Let us know in the comments.