Overview

April is a good time to visit Leipzig. The weather is usually moderately chilly with a gentle breeze, with temperatures ranging from 39—59°F (4—15°C). There are plenty of events to check out and activities to try in Leipzig during this time. Some of our top recommendations: explore the Leipzig Auerbachs Keller, take a bike tour along the Leipzig New Lakeland, take a walking tour of Leipzig's historic Old Town, and more!

Leipzig has plenty to offer for visitors of all ages and interests. In this article, we tell you the top things to see and do for your April trip to Leipzig. Get inspired by the events, activities, attractions, and experiences unique to April. We’ll let you know where to explore events based on your interests, whether that’s food, culture, art, music, sport or others.

We’ll let you know everything you need to prepare for the weather in Leipzig in April. Learn about what to wear and pack for your trip, the average temperatures throughout April, temperature changes from morning to evening and much more.

Visiting Leipzig? See our Leipzig Trip Planner.

Weather in Leipzig in April

Temperatures on an average day in Leipzig in April

The average temperature in Leipzig in April for a typical day ranges from a high of 59°F (15°C) to a low of 39°F (4°C). Some would describe it as moderately chilly with a gentle breeze.

For comparison, the hottest month in Leipzig, August, has days with highs of 78°F (25°C) and lows of 57°F (14°C). The coldest month, January has days with highs of 37°F (3°C) and lows of 26°F (-3°C). This graph shows how an average day looks like in Leipzig in April based on historical data.

Visiting Leipzig? See our Leipzig Trip Planner.

General weather summary

Moderately chilly with a gentle breeze

Feels like

16%

Chance of rain

0.042 in

Amount

13.6 mph

Wind speed

69%

Humidity

13.8 hrs

Daylight length

6:17 AM

Sunrise

8:04 PM

Sunset

46%

Cloud cover

Sweater

What to wear

What to wear in April

With an average high of 59°F (15°C) and a low of 39°F (4°C), it generally feels moderately chilly with a gentle breeze. With that in mind, most people would dress in something moderately warm like a sweater