Scientists said it was possible that Tuesday or Wednesday of this week could again surpass Monday’s record, as temperature peaks generally happen in clusters.

The last record hot day was in July 2023, when the daily peak was broken across four consecutive days from July 3 through 6. Before that, it was set in August 2016.

What makes this year’s record unusual is that unlike in 2023 and 2016, the world in April moved out of the El Nino climate pattern, which generally amplifies global temperatures owing to warmer-than-usual waters in the Eastern Pacific.

Karsten Haustein, a climate scientist at Leipzig University in Germany, said it was remarkable that the record had been breached again now with the world well into the “neutral” phase of the El Nino-Southern Oscillation.

This points to the greater-than-ever influence of climate change, driven by the burning of fossil fuels, in boosting global temperatures.

“This past Monday might have set a new global record for warmest absolute global average temperature ever – by that I mean going back tens of thousands of years,” Haustein said.

Asia boils

China has issued a series of heat alerts this week, with dozens of weather stations in parts of central and northwestern China recording temperatures in excess of 40 degrees.

The central Chinese city of Wuhan, which hosted an international climate change meeting this week, issued a heat red alert early on Wednesday after temperatures hit 42.2 degrees a day earlier.

Taiwan was also bracing for the impact of Typhoon Gaemi on Wednesday, with factories and financial markets shut down amid forecasts of torrential rain. Wind speeds at its centre were approaching their second highest ever recorded for the Western Pacific Ocean on Wednesday afternoon. China’s state weather bureau also issued a typhoon red alert.

Scientists say climate change is making typhoons – tropical cyclones which gain energy by feeding on ocean heat – more intense, capable of reaching greater wind speeds and dumping more rain.

Japan too has experienced record-breaking heat throughout July. Heatstroke alerts were issued in 39 of the country’s 47 prefectures on Monday, with temperatures exceeding 37 degrees.

Burning down

More than 40 million Americans on Tuesday were facing dangerous temperatures, largely in the US West, where wind gusts and dry conditions stoked dozens of wildfires.

Excessive heat will continue to blanket an area stretching from the US Southwest north through Nevada and into Idaho and Montana over the next two days before milder temperatures arrive on Friday, the US National Weather Service said.

The province of Alberta in western Canada is also grappling with dozens of wildfires that have caused evacuations of thousands of people, including from Jasper National Park on Monday night.

Even the Arctic is enduring a heatwave.

Fairbanks, Alaska was set to hit 31 degrees on Wednesday, approaching past records, while temperatures in parts of the Canadian, Russian and Norwegian Arctic were reaching temperatures more than 9 degrees above the 1979 to 2000 baseline average for this time of year.

Russia’s state forest agency has been battling dozens of blazes in Siberia in recent days as the unusually hot summer fuels fires.

Cooling off?

In Europe, Spain endured blistering temperatures in its second heatwave of the summer, which arrived on Tuesday, just four days after the first one ended. The heat was expected to peak on Wednesday, with at least one wildfire burning out of control in the northeast of the country.

Weather service AEMET put about half of Spain’s territory on orange alert for heat and part of the eastern region of Extremadura on red alert, forecasting maximum temperatures of 44 degrees.

Meanwhile, Greece’s longest-ever heatwave ended officially on Wednesday after 16 days, beating the record set just last year.

“It is noteworthy that the record was broken so quickly, in just the following year,” said Kostas Lagouvardos, research director of the National Observatory of Athens.

While temperatures during the latest heatwave – Greece’s second this summer – were not extreme, nighttime temperatures did not fall below 30 degrees in certain regions, compounding the impact of heat stress on humans, Lagouvardos said.

Although temperatures eased on Wednesday, higher-than-normal temperatures are forecast for the coming days.