April 6, 2016

I really really wanted to like this book, but I just couldn't. A jester who can't tell a joke for his life and a speaking buffalope sound somewhat promising, but it isn't. I would have loved to give this book more than 1 star, but this lone star is for the writing style and the attempt at making different characters.

This book is a typical hero story and I knew all of the time what was going to happen next, there are no unpredictable twists and turns and Philip Caveney somehow didn't even try tomake it more thrilling by not telling the reader everything and letting him figure out some of the stuff that was happening. He just wrote it all down.

The problem I had with this book was not the way it was written (this was in fact the only thing I liked) but the characters. Sebastian was not as witty as I would have imagined him and for the first part of the book he was okay and in the second part he just became the almighty hero who saves the princess and isn't afraid of anything. Unrealistic if you ask me. The same goes for Max, the buffalope, at the beginning I found his nagging funny, but it went on and on and on without stopping. I don't have anything against small people, but I didn't like Cornelius from the moment he stepped in. I hoped so much that he would go away or die later in the book, but that didn't happen and I had to put up with his combative attitude until the very end. Same goes to the Princess. Even worse than the Princess and Cornelius was the king. I mean I don't have anything against bad kings but when they start kicking old women around I don't think it funny.

Philip Caveney changed his figures characters from one drastic to the other so much that it was just unrealistic.

I wouldn't recommend this book to anyone who would like to read something new and not the same old story with just different names in it. The way the book ended and the author tried to install a new thread for the next story was a clumsy attempt and didn't sit well with me. I'm definitely not reading the second installment of this series.

June 9, 2009

real rating: 2.5 stars.

I really wanted to like this book. And I did at certain points. For instance, the cover design and parts of the interior design were awesome! I didn't like the margins--they were huge. Also, Cornelius was a great character. I loved how fierce he was and what an amazing warrior he was, better than anyone else even though he was a little person.

The thing that bothered me was that it seemed like the book couldn't figure out if it was YA or middle readers. I'm sure it was YA, even though there were pictures in it and sometimes the dialogue was simple. The ages of the main characters were 17 (YA) and the diction was too advanced for middle readers. And don't get me wrong, I liked the pictures, they were a cute addition. But it added to the confusion of who this book was for.

The dialogue also seemed forced at times. I couldn't shake the feeling that it sounded fake. But you know, dialogue can be really hard.

Everything seemed kind of convenient and clichéd. There was an evil king who wanted to continue ruling. He had an ugly old crone of a witch who egged him on and did his evil bidding. He used the lowlife scrum of Brigandia to carry out his plots.

We never learned how he came to be aligned with the Brigands. Why did he have them at his disposal? It's assumed they're mercenaries but never explained. I think this is why I liked Cornelius so much. He wasn't a usual character in the story of an Evil King with an Ugly Crone Witch.

The story was entertaining for the most part though. To me, though, it didn't live up to its potential.

July 21, 2009

i really enjoyed this. We listened to it in the car to UT. Cause of recommendations i even had to buy it!!!

The audio was excellent. The voice was amazing.

My favorite chapter names was "That Stupid Gurl" (and i don't usually use the word 'stupid'.

Cornelius and Max were wonderful characters. we can't wait to see what happens yet.

January 25, 2018

My main criticism: The real star here is Cornelius and I rather wish he got top billing.

This is an easy, enjoyable fantasy novel. Nothing to strain your brain, just good fun reading, ideal for tweens and teens and adults who want a fun, easy read. When I finished it, I passed it on to my 12 year old and he's enjoying it as well. I will probably seek out the sequels.

May 31, 2017

Max the intelligent talking buffalope and Cornelius the tiny wunderknight are classic, but I can't quite get the measure of Sebastian -- things just seem to happen to him. I stayed up late reading the book, though, so it's obviously good!

February 13, 2018

Great quick read, brilliant for younger readers to read who like an adventure read with warriors and talking animals!! and princesses in distress.

June 14, 2022

This book is such a hit-&-miss hidden gem. I'm not even really sure why I have it, I can't remember buying it (& two other books in the series) & neither do my parents who must have bought this book for me years ago in secondary school. But still, I came back to it, hidden at the back of the centermost shelf of my bookshelf, & decided to read it.

The beginning left some things to be desired, that's for certain. It felt like any odd high fantasy story for kids/teens, like it was following a specific formula that it didn't particularly want to break. But, by the end of the first part, I found myself quite charmed by the story, the characters, & the book as a whole.

The best way to describe this book is very hit-&-miss. The prose is very hit-&-miss, leaving some things to be desired with its scarce descriptions. Kerin hardly got a description beyond being beautiful & green-eyed, while many other minor characters, especially the named ones, seemed to have far more description given to them. The jokes, too, were hit-&-miss, but I found myself chuckling & smiling at this book often enough (at least, part 2 onwards) that it was a hit for me, but sarcasm & slapstick always gets me, so there's that. The characters & story, too, were very hit-&-miss, in that they are all very simple, the story has no real twists or mysteries, but it has good parts like the bittersweet ending, or Sebastian's relationships with Cornelius & Max, his two companions (their friendship was certainly a highlight of the book.) It is simple, almost childish, & the sort of fantasy that reminds me of the mindless pulp-fic romance novels with the same story beats, written to be read for the fun of it with no intellectual merit. I am not complaining about either, mindless fiction is important too (I am a fan of the Suicide Squad movies, I have no say on whether mindless media is god or not, it's just meant to be fun after all), but the comparison can certainly be made.

Another thing that is hit-&-miss, are the fight scenes. Make no mistake, they are rather well written, & I can tell from experience that fight scenes are a hard thing to nail. The problem with them is the general... vibe, of them. The entire book is written in a comedic, childish manner, with no swearing, with the characters acting cartoonish, etc. But, the fight scenes feel like they were plucked right out of a book for adults & then were simplified for kids to understand. The fight scenes can get so brutal! I certainly wouldn't give this book to my 10 year old cousin.

One thing that isn't so hit-&-miss is the, frankly, racist caricature that are the Brigands. This world's version of bandits are savage, uneducated men who live in Brigandia, a city in the desert with many Middle Eastern inspirations. Oh, & did I mention that they are slavers? Yeah, nota good look, & a clear sign that this book was written following a certain high fantasy formula set years ago by authors like Tolkien.

Over all, Sebastian Darke showed up suddenly on my bookshelf one day, & wouldn't leave my mind for years. Now that I have finally read it, I do not regret waiting years to read it, but I can say with certainty that it is a perfect book if you need a light chuckle & a mindless, actiony book to read that doesn't require a lot of brainpower to understand. Definitely a good 3.5 stars.

April 30, 2024

Apart from having a hero who is half elf, half human, a couple of talking animals, and a dwarfling sword-master there is not a great deal of world building going on in this YA fantasy novel. The story's setting is mock medieval European. A land of rival city states either ruled by monarchs or by rogues - it may be difficult to tell them apart. There is the unruly land of Brigandia, a thieves' world similar in status to the old Alsatia in early London, which plays a brief but important part in the tale of Sebastian Darke, Prince of Fools and unemployed court jester, and Princess Kerin of Keladon.

Sebastian's problem as a court jester is that he is not funny. He has learned all of his late father's joke books and scripts by heart. The words are there, the talent is somewhere else. The author brings that across very well by limiting Sebastian to really old jokes and some drunken sarcasm. Mr. Caveney misses the opportunity to put in a remark attributed to a variety of people - I prefer that of the Queen of Tonga, Queen Salote, during Queen Elizabeth II's coronation procession - when Sebastian and Kerin are travelling in a wagon pulled by Max, the talking and flatulent buffalope. If only it had happened. Max breaks wind very noisily. Sebastian, highly embarrassed, turns to the princess and says, "I'm really sorry about that." Princess Kerin replies, "That's quite all right. I thought it was the buffalope." Never mind, the plot jogs along very nicely without it.

The whole story of an evil uncle usurping the royal throne and the commoner boy coming to the rescue of the beautiful princess could have been from a Violet Needham novel, if it were not for the humour and the rugged fight scenes. Sebastian proves himself to be no mean hand with a sword himself. The story is not outstanding but it is lively. It has an interesting love story, plenty of action - including a princess who can smite her enemies as lustily as any gnarled warrior - and some good jokes. All splendid ingredients to make a sequel sound appealing.

May 3, 2022

Sebastian Darke, son of a human father and an elvish mother, travels to the kingdom of Keladon in hopes to get a job as court jester. His late father, the Prince of Fools, was a great jester. But Sebastian is probably the worst joke-teller around. Accompanied by Max, a talking but usually complaining family buffalope, they meet a tiny but powerful warrior called Cornelius who is also headed to Keladon to try to take his place in the royal Crimson Cloak. The pair, along with the buffalope, travel together and soon become involved in an attack where they inadvertently save Princess Kerin, niece to King Septimus. Escorting her home to her kingdom, where the king appears happy to have his niece returned safely, is the misfortune for Sebastian, Cornelius, and the buffalope. This is an extremely humorous and entertaining fantasy that will appeal to readers ages 10 and up, but also to younger readers as a read-aloud. For Harry Potter fans and those who enjoy adventure stories with lots of fight scenes and action and a little bit of love thrown in, this is a delight. This is also a great book on CD to listen to. Highly recommended.

April 3, 2024

Ironico come, dopo Betrayed di Kiera Cass, io abbia deciso di leggere questo libro che ha un finale completamente opposto ma andiamo con ordine. Si tratta di uno dei libri preferiti della mia adolescenza e per fortuna non mi è caduto come invece ha fatto Bianca come il latte, rossa come il sangue. È una storia semplice: c'è un povero ragazzo in cerca di fortuna, un animale parlante, una spalla per il protagonista, una principessa da salvare e un tiranno da detronizzare. A volte però anche le storie semplici servono. Non ho cambiato opinione nemmeno sul mio personaggio preferito, che è rimasto la principessa Kerin. Da ragazza viziata e antipatica, matura anche grazie a tutte le disavventure che deve subire. È proprio su questo che voglio soffermarmi. Alla fine del libro lei diventa regina, proprio come Hollis in Betrayed, ma mentre quest'ultima mette i suoi bisogni davanti al regno volendo a tutti i costi sposare Etan, Kerin invece mette il regno davanti. È innamorata di Sebastian, soffrirà e piangerà per questo, ma deciderà lo stesso di sposare il principe di un regno vicino per interrompere una guerra.

Rilettura riuscita alla perfezione.

This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers.

July 19, 2024

If it wasn't kind of a classic repetitive plot I would have given it 5 stars, but as basic as it is , direct to the point and with no extra plot twist, I adored it , I like this kind of old direct stories , like The Princess Bride" when it is all about the adventure, boy saves girl kind of situation, but the girl is not a complete damsel in distress, some parts truly made me laugh out loud, and I think am going to jump to the second book immediately, that is how much I enjoyed it.

As much as I loved this old school cover, I did NOT like the art inside, I am glad I didn't flip through the book before I purchased it, this kind of art would have made me think again before reading it, I think the other edition internal art wise is better.

December 30, 2020

The key to enjoying this book is to not take it too seriously.

Yes, the plot is predictable, but as the saying goes, "it's about the journey, not the destination."Sebastian, Cornelius, and Max form a group of unexpected adventurers, and there is plenty of humor as they work to protect the princess from the evil King. The whole story was very Princessbride-esque to me, although with significantly less romance. The dialogue might not seem entirely natural, but this is fine for a book that is considered a comedy!

Despite the illustrations throughout, I would recommend this book to early YA readers and above. It's a light, quick read (and a lucky find hidden amongst my other books; I'm not sure exactly how I got this book but am glad to have read it).

---

https://thegiantpencil.blogspot.com/2...

July 18, 2017

I loved this book until I realized that there was a sequel (which I'll have to read, of course)- a fairy tale of sorts where friendship conquers all, the boy doesn't quite get the girl (but it makes sense), good conquers evil, and a Buffalope god named Colin, and fart jokes. There have to be fart jokes. One of the best audiobooks I've read in a while, and a fun read. Glad the author chose not to wrap up everything (although the adventure did end), and I suppose I won't belittle the opportunity to make a buck on the sequel. (It better be good...)

August 16, 2017

This is an awesome book for middle school/ high school boys looking to get into adventure & fantasy! Possibly great for reluctant readers. I listened to the audio and really enjoyed the different characters. The entire plot is set up very similarly to a Dungeons & Dragons campaign with adventuring/battle scenes/humor/complicated teen feelings. It was really great and will definitely be suggesting this to my students

January 20, 2024

This book is billed as YA title. Since I am no.longer young and my wife would question my claim to being an adult, it seems this book wasn't aimed at me. It delighted me all the same. In tone, it reminded me of the film THE PRINCESS BRIDE. A funny, fast-moving fantasy. Classic battle between good and evil. Guess who wins. When we're finished with it I plan on loaning it to my 12 year-old neighbor Cady-Mae. Shes definitely young. And possibly more adult than me.

July 18, 2018

This was a fun book that reminded me a little of Prince Caspian and A Horse and his Boy. The writing style is engaging and there are lots of humorous moments and a little romance thrown in. I'm looking forward to reading the sequel. Recommend for ages 10+, the main character is 17 but I'd call it a tween book.

January 10, 2020

The story is so good and full of comedy especially Max, I can't stop laughing. Although I'm kinda disappointed at the ending. I hope Sebastian will meet Princess Kerin again, now I'm so eager to read the book 2 of it but I can't find that in our local book store. However, I'm so lucky to bought it with the author's signature. I'm so happy and proud.

August 25, 2019

I was hoping for a light read while on vacation. This delivered. Entertaining adventure story with a few chuckles along the way. Moral in the story of overcoming negative expectations from others about you, and, more importantly, about yourself. Solid brain candy category selection for me.

May 17, 2021

It was enjoyable. I probably would have liked this back in middle or elementary school, but it's too juvenile for me now. I did think that the jokes that were supposed to be bad were actually pretty funny, so that's something. I wouldn't recommend it, but I didn't hate reading it.

December 21, 2018

A good solid 3.75. A little predictable plot-wise, but the characters are great and the pacing is good.

March 1, 2021

Pues... me, esta bien, tampoco es así la gran cosa, pero es agradable y de lectura rápida

February 9, 2022

Inte lika bra som jag kom ihåg tyvärr

January 24, 2024

Delightful romp reminiscent of The Princess Bride.

May 9, 2024

Cute, happy-go-lucky book. Eclectic cast of characters, a very happy mix of happily ever after and not *too* blithe.

June 2, 2021

Los protagonistas no son los típicos y es una aventura ambientada en el mundo medieval fantástico. El protagonista no me ha gustado mucho pero los personajes secundarios tienen personalidades variadas y cargan con el peso de la trama

June 7, 2020

Probably the first series I read as a kid (while still only able to read in Greek), the twists,the outlandish adventure and the medieval background fascinated me.