We’ve learned the sad news today that actor Hugh Keays-Byrne, known for his starring roles in both Mad Max and Mad Max: Fury Road, has passed away this week at the age of 73.

Hugh Keays-Byrne, who was born in Kashmir, India in 1947 but moved to Australia in his twenties, played the villain Toecutter in George Miller’s original Mad Max (1979) and later returned to the wasteland to play the villain Immortan Joe in Mad Max: Fury Road (2015).

Keays-Byrne also made a name for himself as an actor outside the Mad Max universe, starring in films such as Stone (1974), The Dragon Flies (1975), Mad Dog Morgan (1976), The Trespassers (1976), The Death Train (1978), The Chain Reaction (1980), Lorca and the Outlaws (1984), The Blood of Heroes (1989), as well as “Moby Dick” (1998) and “Farscape” (2000).

Fury Road ended up being Hugh Keays-Byrne’s final appearance on screen, and his performance earned him a “Best Actor in a Supporting Role” nomination at the Australian Film Critics Association Awards and a “Best Villain” nomination at the MTV Awards. Decades prior, his performance in Mad Max earned him an Australian Film Institute nom for supporting role.

Longtime friend Brian Trenchard-Smith writes, “I am sad to report that our friend Hugh Keays-Byrne passed away in hospital yesterday. He was a fine actor and a good friend to Margaret and myself for 46 years. Hugh had a generous heart, offering a helping hand to people in need, or a place to stay to a homeless teenager. He cared about social justice and preserving the environment long before these issues became fashionable. His life was governed by his sense of the oneness of humanity. We will miss his example and his friendship.”

We’ve learned the sad news this week that actor Whitney Rydbeck, who played a brief but memorable role in Friday the 13th Part VI: Jason Lives, has passed away at the age of 79.

Jason Lives director Tom McLoughlin said in a statement to Bloody Disgusting, “I’m heartbroken to share this past Monday night we lost the wonderfully talented physical comedian/actor Whitney Rydbeck. He played Roy the nerdy businessman/paintball player. His comic performance is still making audiences and fans laugh almost 40 years later.”

“I have worked with Whitney for over 53 years,” McLoughlin’s statement continues. “We’ve collaborated on so many projects together. Some as comic partners on stage and film, others on projects I wrote and directed. I specifically wrote the Roy part in Jason Lives for him knowing his unique talent. We also became close friends over these past decades.

“He’s truly the kindest, heartfelt, and lovable person I have known. Seeing him struggling with cancer this past year and a half has been beyond heartbreaking. A year ago he appeared on stage (with almost all the Jason Lives cast) at a sold out screening for the American Cinematique. Despite his condition, he made the fans laugh with his stories and antics.”

Outside of the horror genre, Whitney Rydbeck appeared in over 50 movies and television shows from 1970 through 2007, including “The Brady Bunch,” “Lassie,” “Monster Squad” (1976), Rocky II, “M*A*S*H,” Battle Beyond the Stars, “Star Trek: The Next Generation,” “Murder, She Wrote,” “3rd Rock from the Sun,” “7th Heaven,” “Party of Five,” and “Scrubs.”

Tom McLoughlin tells us this week, “I’m going to miss Whitney in so many ways. He truly knew how to make people happy. That was his gift. Our loss is Heavens’s Gain.”