Synopsis

The 51-year-old Nayar, who was previously married to actress Liz Hurley, is set to tie the knot with Kim Johnson.

An heir with a reported net worth of around $200 million, Arun Nayar’s resume reveals that he is the force behind a technology company called Direction Software.

#Budget' 2024 with ET

Union Budget 2024 Live Updates

The official website of his firms says: ‘He holds a B.Sc. degree in Physics from Oxford University and a Masters degree in Physics from Imperial College, London. He speaks fluent English, German and Italian’. As its chairman, Nayar is believed to have spearheaded the growth of the company that provides software solutions bringing ‘simplicity to growing complexity’.

An approach, no doubt, that has helped Nayar navigate the complicated paths of love in his personal life too.

Born to a German mother, Gunnar and Indian father, Vinod, Arun also has a younger brother Nikhil. Known in the swish set as a charming personality, Nayar came into the spotlight during his highprofile relationship with British actress, Elizabeth Hurley, and now, apparently, her lookalike.

Valentina Pedroni

Lot much is known about the Italian model-cumsocialite except about her relationship with Nayar. The duo married in 1997 in Mumbai and then in Milan.

Nayar was rumoured to have started dating Hurley while he was with Pedroni. In his divorce petition, Nayar said that Pedroni subjected him to cruelty and mental torture. It was also reported that she got £6,20,000 as a divorce settlement from Nayar.

Elizabeth Hurley

British actor and model, 51-year-old Liz Hurley dated actor Hugh Grant for 13 years, before calling it quits. A couple of years after the highprofile breakup, Hurley gave birth to a son, with businessman and film producer Steve Bing.

Arun Nayar with Liz Hurley in happier times

It was sometime in the year 2002 that she started dating Nayar, before tying the knot with him in 2007. The marriage lasted for three years, when reports of Hurley’s closeness to Australian cricketer Shane Warne started doing the rounds. After getting divorced in 2011, the actress got engaged to Warne, but the duo split shortly after, in 2013.

Elizabeth Hurley watching cricket match with son Damian ​at Chinnaswamy stadium

Kim Johnson

Nayar and Johnson got engaged a year ago, and Johnson has been constantly referred to as a ‘Hurley look alike’ (ouch !) ever since the couple made their relationship public.

Twenty years his junior, Johnson is a model and has been dating Nayar since 2011. The couple is all set to tie the knot in less than a month’s time. Here’s hoping Nayar gets third time lucky.

Also read: Elizabeth Hurley sells Cotswolds farm for 9 million pounds

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

It took 42 years of grit and finesse to turn a 2-minute promise into an INR9,000 crore brand whose taste unites India

What this Sebi proposal for discerning investors means for MFs and PMS

Economic Survey’s plan to drop food from inflation targeting is a bad idea

Dollar bear cycle may fuel emerging markets rally till 2029: Rohit Srivastava of Indiacharts

Lessons for Indian cybersecurity from Google’s biggest acquisition ever

RBI sets stage for the first shift in monetary policy stance since April 2022

1

2

3