Elizabeth Hurley reunited with her ex-husband Arun Nayar to celebrate New Year's Eve together on Sunday night.

The actress, 58, and the multi-millionaire textile heir, 59, were married from 2007 to 2011, but have remained good friends after their divorce.

In a fun snap posted by Elizabeth's son Damian, 21, the pair were branded 'mama and daddy' as they cosied up at a party.

Arun is not Damian's biological father, but Elizabeth has previously said she always considered him to be his dad after the former couple got married when Damian was five.

The Bedazzled star looked glamorous as she put on a leggy display in a tiny sequin dress and towering silver heels.

The businessman was dapper in a black tailored suit as he posed cheek-to-cheek with his ex-wife.

Elizabeth and Arun were last pictured together in August 2022 when they attended Damian's graduation from drama school.

Damian captioned the post: 'Mama and Daddyo at graduation with mee!'

Elizabeth said of Arun during an interview with the Daily Mail's YOU magazine in 2018: 'Arun is Damian's daddy and a very good one too, they see each other a lot.'

The pair have a close relationship and during some summers they have holidayed together alongside Damian, whose biological father is the late Steve Bing.

On June 22 2020, the movie producer died by suicide at the age of 55.

Damian was born after an 18-month relationship between millionaire businessman Bing and Elizabeth in the early 2000s.

The pair split amid a bitter paternity row and a subsequent DNA test confirmed Bing was Damian's father.

While it had been claimed that Bing had never met his son, Elizabeth confirmed after his death that father and son had grown close in recent times and had spoken on Damian's 18th birthday.

She told YOU magazine in 2020: 'It had been great to connect again. We hadn’t been friends for a very long time, but about a year and a half ago he came back into our lives.

'It’s very sad… just terrible. Horrific that it happened but there is some comfort to know we had made up and there was no bad feeling.'

Three years ago, details of Damian's late father's will emerged, among them the claim that Bing had disinherited his two children, Damian and Kira Kerkorian, due to it being drawn up before their births.

Steve, who received a $600million inheritance from his grandfather when he turned 18, had his will drawn up in 2001 - before he knew Kira had been born and while Elizabeth was pregnant.