Arun Nayar Wiki, Age, Wife, Net worth, Biography, Family, Height, Fact

Profile, Parents & Early Life

Elizabeth Hurley’s Husband was born in December 1964 in Burmantofts (United Kingdom, UK). Presently, Arun Nayar’s age is 53 years old, as of 2018. He is the son of Vinod Nayar (father) and Gunnar Nayar (mother). Arun has a younger brother whose name is Nikhil Nayak. He belongs to Indian-German Descent.

Before his younger brother’s birth, he lived with his parents in Leads council estate. He shifted to India after Nikhil was born. Arun lived with his family members in Mumbai City. However, his parents decided to file divorce.

He and sibling lived with his mom Gunnar. She set up a successful range of textile business in Mumbai 1970s. However, she worried about Arun’s naughty behavior. Mr. Nayak went to England and studied in Millfield Boarding School. After that, he studied in Imperial College and received a degree in Physics.

Dating History, Girlfriend & Children

Valentina Pedroni (Arun Nayak Ex-Wife).

Arun Nayar married thrice. The name of his first wife is Valentina Pedroni. They married in 1997. She is an Italian born Model. Valentina met Arun at St Moritz for the first time. After their wedding, both of them lived in Mumbai. By the end of 2002, they decided to file divorce. He got busy with his Director Software Solution Company.

Arun Nayak with wife Elizabeth Hurley & Son Damian.

Then, he dated English model and actress Elizabeth Hurley. They made their first public appearance in Christian Dior fashion show, Paris. Ms. Hurley associates with Estee Lauder. He married to the Elizabeth in 2007 with an Angelica wedding in England Castle. Later on, Arun went to Jodhpur for Hindu wedding.

Sangeet Function.

He has spent around $2.5 million USD on his marriage. Furthermore, he lived with his wife and son Damian in Cotswood, London. Damian is her son from her past relationship. The model linked with Australian cricketer Shane Warne in 2010.

Wedding Photo.

During that time, they have parted their ways. Meanwhile, Mr. Nayak had an affair with Liz Hurley. The 53-year-old met French woman Kim Johnson and married on July 30, 2016. He is in a dating relationship with her for four years.

Wiki/Bio

Real Full Birth Name

Arun Nayak.

Nick name

Arun.

Profession

CEO of Direction Software Solutions.

Age (As of 2018)

53 years old.

Date of Birth (DOB), Birthday

December 1964.

Birthplace/Hometown

Burmantofts (United Kingdom, UK).

Nationality

Indian-British.

Gender

Male.

Sun Sign (Zodiac Sign)

Capricorn.

Ethnicity

Multiracial Descent.

Religion

Hinduism.

Current Residence

Mumbai (Maharashtra, India) & London (UK).

Famous for

Founder of Director Software Solutions.

Physical Statistics

Height (Tall)

Feet & Inches: 5` 7".

Centimeters: 170 cm.

Meters: 1.7 m.

Weight

Kilograms: 55 Kg.

Pounds: 121 lbs.

Biceps

12 Inches.

Body Measurements (Chest-waist-hips)

40-34-35.

Shoe Size (US)

6.

Tattoo details?

None.

Eye Color

Black.

Hair Color

Black.

Family

Parents

Father: Vinod Nayak.

Mother: Gunnar Nayak.

Siblings

Brother: Nikhil Nayak (Younger Bro).

Sister: None.

Famous Relatives

Not Known.

Personal Life Relationship

Marital Status

Married.

Dating History?

She is in a relationship along with her French born Kim Johnson.

Girlfriend (Partner)

1. Valentina Pedroni (Italian Model).

2. Elizabeth Hurley (English Actress & Model).

3. Kim Johnson (French).

Wife/Spouse Name

1. Valentina Pedroni (m. 1997; div. 2002).

2. Elizabeth Hurley (m. 2007; div. 2011).

3. Kim Johnson (m. 2016).

Son

None.

Daughter

None.

Education

Highest Qualification

Post Graduation in Physics.

School

Millfield Boarding School.

Alma Mater.

Imperial College.

Hobbies & Favorite Things

Favorite Celebrities

Actor: Aamir Khan.

Musician: Badshah

Actress: Asin.

Dream Holiday Destination

London.

Favorite Color

Black.

Love to do

Reading Books, and Traveling.

Food Habits

Italian Food.

Wealth

Net worth (approx.)

$200 Million US dollars (As of 2018).

Earnings

Will Update.

Contact Details

Office Address

Not Known

Home Details

Will Update.

Mobile or Phone Number

N.A.

Email Address

Will Update.

Official Website

Not Known.

Some Lesser Known Facts about Arun Nayar

Arun worked in Mumbai and joined the textile business.In fact, he owns lavish houses in France, Germany, and England.Nayar started a software company Direction Software Solutions.

Read Also: Wikipedia Profile of Mehdi Hasan & his Hidden Trivia

Money Factor: Arun Nayak’s Net worth is $200 Million US Dollars (as per his annual income in 2018).He believes to grow his organization in the field of software development.

Categories Famous PersonalitiesTags Arun Nayar, Elizabeth Hurley, Kim JohnsonPost navigationHartley Sawyer Height, Weight, Age, Wife, Girlfriend, Biography & MoreRohit Saroha Wiki, Age (Prachi Tehlan’s Husband) Biography, Family & More