Name Arun Nayar Wedding & Marriage / Wife / Spouse / Partner Married. Check the full bio for relationship details.

Wiki Information / Profile Background

Introduction :

Arun Nayar is a businessman, intellect, and enchanting international tycoon. Often portrayed as an international man of mystery, Arun has accrued a lot of media coverage over the years.

Early Life and Childhood :

Nayar was born on a Leeds council estate to a German-born mother, Gunnar, and an Indian father, Vinod.

His father was studying at the local university when Arun was born in December 1964.

The family moved to India shortly after his brother Nikhil Nayar was born.

When his parents separated, Arun and Nikhil lived with their mother in Mumbai while she founded a successful textiles firm.

The boys were sent to an exclusive school and Arun, being mischievous, eventually was sent to England to attend Millfield boarding school.

It was during this time that Arun excelled in sports and physics, eventually leading to his attendance and graduation with a physics degree at Oxford.

Education, Career, Salary and Net Worth :

Nayar gained a Masters in Physics at Imperial College in London, and then returned to India to work in his mother’s textile business.

Relationships & Love Life :

Arun frequented the social scene in Saint Tropez, France, Germany, and London.

While in his youth, Arun also dated Italian model, Valentina Pedroni in 1997. She maintained her heavy travel schedule as a model and he spent time using his vast contacts in business.

Valentina & Arun spent much time abroad and in the Mumbai glitterati, but eventually parted due to his increasing time invested in his new computer business, Direction Software Solutions.

The pair parted in 2002, and Arun met actress British actress, Elizabeth Hurley through London-based financier Alessandro Tome.

Arun and Liz :

Arun married Elizabeth (aka Liz Hurley) in March 2007, and their wedding was billed as the celebrity international event of the year.

They married at Sudely Castle, near Winchcombe, Gloucestershire & had a second traditional Hindu wedding at Umaid Bhawan Palace in Jodhpur, India.

They shared their time with her son, Damian, between a London residence and a country home in Cotswolds.

There were separation rumors in 2010, and the couple finally divorced in 2011, but still vacation together.

Kim Johnson Arun Nayar :

He married a third time to Kim Johnson in July 2016, in the French Riviera and hosted a small cocktail party for family and friends.

The third time, his bride is 20-years his junior!

Fun Facts, Height and Trivia :

Arun’s net worth is estimated to be in millions of dollars, with income from both the family textile industry and his computer firm.

He is said to be fluent in English, German, Italian, and Hindi.

Age / How old / Birthday / Date of Birth / DOB Born in December 1964. As of 2024, he is around 60 years old.