Kevin Peter Hall (May 9, 1955 – April 10, 1991) was an American actor best known for his roles as the title characters in the first two films in the Predator franchise and the title character of Harry in the film and television series, Harry and the Hendersons. He also appeared in the television series Misfits of Science and 227, along with the film Without Warning.

Early life

Hall was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. His parents were of above-average stature; his father, Charles Hall, was 6 ft 6 in (1.98 m) and his mother, Sylvia Hall, was 6 ft 2 in (1.88 m). At 7 ft 2 in (2.18 m) tall, he was the tallest of seven brothers, all over 6 ft 5 in (1.96 m).

During his high school years at Penn Hills High School, he was a star basketball player. He subsequently attended George Washington University in Washington, D.C., where he played for its basketball team and majored in Theatrical Arts.

After graduation, Hall moved to Venezuela to play professional basketball.

Career

Due to Hall's height, he was often cast in monster roles. He made his acting debut in the 1979 horror film Prophecy. He appeared as the alien in the 1980 horror film Without Warning and as Gorvil in the 1982 television movie Mazes and Monsters. In 1985, he co-starred in the short-lived series Misfits of Science. He guest-starred on the sitcom Night Court as a huge but gentle mental patient who humorously towered over bailiff Bull Shannon, played by Richard Moll, who is 6 ft 8 in (2.03 m), and a fellow mental patient, played by James Cromwell, who is 6 ft 7 in (2.01 m). The next year, Hall portrayed yet another monster in the horror film Monster in the Closet, followed by the role of Harry, the Bigfoot, in Harry and the Hendersons.

In 1986, Hall was cast as the main antagonist in Predator, opposite Arnold Schwarzenegger. During its developmental stages, the Predator was going to be played by Jean-Claude Van Damme, who played the Predator for the first few scenes, but was not billed in the end credits. The producers decided to recast the role with Hall so that the Predator could more convincingly dominate the film's human characters with its greater size. Hall would go on to reprise the role in the 1990 sequel, this time opposite Danny Glover and Gary Busey.

Following his role in Predator, Hall appeared in the feature film Big Top Pee-wee (1988) and had a guest spot on Star Trek: The Next Generation; Hall had been one of the actors considered for the role of Geordi La Forge on the latter, before the role went to LeVar Burton. From 1989 to 1990, he had a recurring role on the NBC sitcom 227. In 1990, Hall reprised his role as Harry in the television series Harry and the Hendersons, based on the 1987 film of the same name. He died during the series' first season.

Personal life and death

Hall met actress Alaina Reed while taping a guest role on the television show 227. The couple would marry both on the show and in real life.

While working on the TV series Harry and the Hendersons, Hall announced that he had contracted HIV from a blood transfusion. He died from AIDS-related pneumonia on April 10, 1991, a month short of his 36th birthday.

Honors