Citation preview

THE FILMS OF BONG JOON HO

Global Film Directors Edited by Homer B. Pettey, Professor of Film and Comparative Literature at University of Arizona, and R. Barton Palmer, Calhoun Lemon Professor Emeritus of English at Clemson University Volumes in the Global Film Directors series explore cinematic innovations by prominent and emerging directors in major European, American, Asian, and African film movements. Each volume addresses the history of a director’s oeuvre and its influence upon defining new cinematic genres, narratives, and techniques. Contributing scholars take a context-­oriented approach to evaluating how these directors produced an identifiable style, paying due attention to those forces within the industry and national cultures, that led to global recognition of these directors. These volumes address how directors functioned within national and global marketplaces, contributed to and expanded film movements, and transformed world cinema. By focusing on representative films that defined the directors’ signatures, these volumes provide new critical focus upon international directors, who are just emerging to prominence or whose work has been largely ignored in standard historical accounts. The series opens the field of new auteurism studies beyond film biographies by exploring directorial style as influencing global cinema aesthetics, theory, and economics. Recent titles in the Global Film Directors series: Nam Lee, The Films of Bong Joon Ho Jim Leach, The Films of Denys Arcand

Bong Joon Ho with Oscar (Credit: Mark Ralston/AFP, Getty Images).

THE FILMS OF BONG JOON HO N a m Lee

Rutger s Uni v er sit y P r ess

New Brunswick, Camden, and Newark, New Jersey, and London

Library of Congress Cataloging-­in-­Publication Data Names: Lee, Nam, author. Title: The films of Bong Joon Ho / Nam Lee. Description: New Brunswick, New Jersey : Rutgers University Press, [2020] | Series: Global film directors | Includes bibliographical references, filmography, and index. Identifiers: LCCN 2020004583 | ISBN 9781978818910 (cloth) | ISBN 9781978818903 (paperback) | ISBN 9781978818927 (epub) | ISBN 9781978818934 (mobi) | ISBN 9781978818941 (pdf) Subjects: LCSH: Pong, Chun-­ho, 1969—­Criticism and interpretation. | Motion picture producers and directors—­Korea (South) | Motion pictures—­Korea (South)—­History. Classification: LCC PN1998.3.P6625 L44 2020 | DDC 791.4302/33092 [B]—­dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020004583 A British Cataloging-­in-­Publication record for this book is available from the British Library. Copyright © 2020 by Nam Lee All rights reserved No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without written permission from the publisher. Please contact Rutgers University Press, 106 Somerset Street, New Brunswick, NJ 08901. The only exception to this prohibition is “fair use” as defined by U.S. copyright law. ♾ The paper used in this publication meets the requirements of the American National Standard for Information Sciences—­Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48–­1992. www.rutgersuniversitypress.org Manufactured in the United States of America

For Kun Soo, Yong Oh, and Yong Jae Chung

CONTENTS

List of Illustrations xi Preface xiii

Introduction 1

1

A New Cultural Generation

14

2

Cinematic “Perversions”: Tonal Shifts, Visual Gags, and Techniques of Defamiliarization

39

3

Social Pujoris and the “Narratives of Failure”: Transnational Genre and Local Politics in Memories of Murder and The Host 63

4

Monsters Within: Moral Ambiguity and Anomie in Barking Dogs Never Bite and Mother 90

5

Beyond the Local: Global Politics and Neoliberal Capitalism in Snowpiercer and Okja 115

Conclusion: Parasite—­A New Beginning?

139

Filmography 153 Notes 173 Bibliography 191 Index 201

ix

ILLUSTR ATIONS

Figure 1.

Bong Joon Ho (Cine 21). 28

Figure 2.

Mother. The mother checks on her son, who is urinating on the wall.

45

Memories of Murder. The arrival of Detective Seo from Seoul.

57

Memories of Murder. Detective Park looking at the first victim.

73

The Host. Gang-­du and his daughter, Hyun-­seo, running away from the monster.

80

Barking Dogs Never Bite. Yoon-­ju trying to kill the barking dog.

98

Figure 3. Figure 4. Figure 5. Figure 6. Figure 7.

Mother. The mother visiting the wrongfully accused orphan in jail.

113

Snowpiercer. Tail-­enders look bewildered in the Wilford Industries’ colorful classroom.

129

Okja. An idyllic moment between Mija and Okja before Okja is taken away.

137

Figure 10. Parasite storyboard by Bong Joon Ho. Ki-­Woo enters the Park mansion (Bong Joon Ho).

148

Figure 8. Figure 9.

xi

PREFACE

While this book was in production in February 2020, Bong Joon Ho stunned the world by sweeping the Academy Awards with his film Parasite, winning Oscars for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Original Screenplay, and Best International Feature. It was truly a historic moment in film history. Not only was it the first time a South Korean film had been nominated for an Oscar—­let alone had won any—­but it was also the first time a foreign-­language film won Best Picture. Parasite has overcome the “subtitle barrier” to win the hearts of American moviegoers as well as Academy Awards voters. Furthermore, Parasite became the first film since Marty (1955, dir. Delbert Mann, U.S.) to receive both the Best Picture Oscar and the Palme d’Or at the Cannes Film Festival. While the Academy Awards honor “quality films” made within the Hollywood industry, the Cannes Film Festival tends to favor director-­driven works. And because of the different nature of the two awards, Parasite’s Best Picture win was even more surprising and utterly unexpected. Palme d’Or winners have not been favored or even considered possible candidates for Best Picture unless they are English-­language Hollywood films. Parasite has shattered that convention. This rare achievement of winning both the Palme d’Or and several Oscars seems to be a fitting recognition of Bong Joon Ho’s unique filmmaking, which seamlessly combines Hollywood genres and auteur cinema. Bong’s Palme d’Or and Oscar awards posed some “pleasant” challenges to the writing of The Films of Bong Joon Ho. Indeed, one of the difficulties I faced during the production of this book stems from the fact that I was writing about a living director who not only keeps making films but also keeps making history! The book was first conceived in 2013, when Snowpiercer was released in Korea, and the first draft of the manuscript was completed in 2017. However, then Okja premiered at the Cannes Film Festival against the backdrop of a Netflix scandal, and I had to revise the manuscript to add an analysis of the film. Then while the manuscript was going through a review process, Parasite became the first Korean film to win the Palme d’Or in May 2019, and so the book had to include an analysis of it too, because it would be missed if not. So I rewrote the conclusion to add a much-­needed analysis of that film. However, this was not the end, as you can see: I am currently sitting at my desk rewriting this preface to bring the book up to date on the significance of Bong’s achievements. It gives me some sense of security and relief to know that Bong Joon Ho will not be releasing any new films before the book’s publication, although I most eagerly await his next film. xiii

xiv Preface

The first time I sat down with director Bong Joon Ho to talk about his films was in November 2011, when I organized the second Busan West Film Festival at Chapman University’s Dodge College of Film and Media Arts, where I teach film studies. (I had met him twice before in Los Angeles, but both were brief meetings at postscreening receptions for his films.) The Busan West Film Festival was hosted biannually by Dodge College in partnership with South Korea’s Busan International Film Festival (BIFF) with the aim of introducing the latest Asian films. In 2011, Bong was invited as the main guest filmmaker and the recipient of the Busan West Icon Award. He stayed on campus for three days and offered a master class, audience Q&As, and lunch meetings with students to talk about his films and filmmaking. The festival’s opening film was the 3D version of The Host, which had just been converted from 2D and premiered at the BIFF a month prior. The festival also included a miniretrospective of Bong’s films, including his debut feature, Barking Dogs Never Bite (2000); Memories of Murder (2003); his Korean Film Academy thesis film, Incoherence (1994); and the mockumentary short film Influenza (2004). His latest film, Mother (2009), had already screened at the inaugural Busan West two years earlier. So basically, Chapman students and the audience had the opportunity to see all of his feature films to date. At the time, Bong was attracting international attention as an emerging Korean director. The Host and Mother had been released in the United States and elsewhere to critical acclaim, but his fame and popularity had not reached the level he now enjoys. Barking Dogs Never Bite was released in Korea in 2000, after I had left to study film in the United States, which meant I had to watch his movies on Korean DVDs or at the film festivals held in Los Angeles. When I started teaching film studies at Dodge College in 2008 and began offering new courses on Korean and Asian cinema, I included Bong’s films in my syllabi. Of all the Korean and Asian films I screened and discussed in class, Bong’s were always the students’ favorites and the ones that prompted the liveliest discussions. Students were fascinated by his unique ways of bending genre conventions and his films’ tonal shifts and unexpected plot twists, and they were baffled by his endings, which offered no resolution. His films also proved to be the most popular subjects for final paper assignments. The students’ reactions to Bong’s films were the main motivations behind my inviting him to the Busan West Festival; however, another reason—­a personal one—­was that I myself was particularly attracted to his films. I was intrigued and impressed by the ways in which he dealt with the 1980s in Memories of Murder and The Host. The decade was one of the most crucial periods in contemporary Korean history, one in which the democratic movement continued and intensified, culminating in the June Struggle of 1987, which finally brought an end to the military regime. Korean films made during the 1980s and how the period is

Preface xv

represented in contemporary Korean cinema were my main research topics at the time. How are the 1980s remembered and portrayed in New Korean Cinema? Bong’s Memories of Murder and The Host were excellent examples with which to explore this question. Memories of Murder is based on a real-­life serial rape and murder case in the 1980s that remained unsolved at the time of production. The film was unique because instead of focusing on the killer, it examined the crime within the wider context of its time. I was impressed by the ways in which the film pointed to the oppressive military regime as the main reason behind the detectives’ inability to catch the killer. During the postscreening Q&A of Memories of Murder, I asked Bong about his different approach to crime thrillers and learned that he had thoroughly researched the case for six months before writing the script. He spent thousands of hours reading newspaper articles in archives and interviewing people involved in the case, including the detectives. He became obsessed with the case to the point that he imagined meeting the killer and even composed a list of questions to ask him. He explained that the idea of making the film a story about the 1980s military regime occurred to him during his newspaper research. The newspaper articles on the case were surrounded on the page by other articles on a range of different subjects, so this allowed him to identify the wider political and social atmosphere of the time. I could see he was very perceptive and amazingly thorough. His next film, The Host, comments on the legacy of the 1980s student movement through the former student activist character of Park Nam-­il, and it features many iconic images of the 1980s democratic movement, including some that allude to the May 1980 Kwangju Massacre (discussed in the introduction), which remains the most traumatic event in contemporary Korean history. The Host fascinated me because I thought it was arguably the first film to allegorize the tragic Kwangju Massacre in a popular genre—­the monster movie—­instead of in a serious drama. Thus it was the most interesting film to explore the question of the representation of the 1980s in New Korean Cinema. Chapter 3 of this book is the product of my inquiry on the representation of the 1980s in Bong’s films. Given that it was the first chapter I completed and it paired two films under the theme of the 1980s, it was logical to organize other chapters and films by theme: Barking Dogs Never Bite and Mother under the theme of moral ambiguity and Snowpiercer and Okja under the theme of global politics and neoliberal capitalism. In addition to the thematic categories adopted in this book, other combinations are possible. Mother can be analyzed as a sequel to Memories of Murder, as they are both crime thrillers set in a rural town twenty years apart; the portrayal of the police in Mother and in Memories of Murder is quite different

xvi Preface

because Mother is set in the postdemocratic era. Furthermore, in October 2019, the serial rapist and murderer of the 1980s was finally identified, thirty-­three years after his last murder. It caused a sensation in Korea, and Bong and Memories of Murder attracted renewed interest in the mass media. The killer’s mother adamantly denied the possibility that her son had committed such terrible crimes, given his gentle and quiet nature. Her reaction inevitably reminds us of the mother in Mother. It is uncanny that as the real killer was caught, the fictional mother of Mother was summoned back. Thus it is not a stretch to say that Mother is a sequel to Memories of Murder. Then The Host and Okja can be paired in terms of the giant CGI imaginary creatures they feature, while Snowpiercer and Parasite can be compared and contrasted in terms of class polarization and catastrophic imagination, since both films end in a catastrophe as a result of a class conflict. Although Bong has not been a prolific filmmaker, releasing a new film every three or four years, Parasite was released only two years after Okja, which is a welcome change for both the director and audiences alike. Despite the completion of this manuscript having to be postponed in order to keep up with Bong’s filmmaking, it is better—­even fortunate—­that Parasite is included, because as I write in the conclusion, it is a film that both summarizes his previous films and one that lets us see the new direction Bong seems to be taking. Perhaps we could say that the seven feature films discussed in this book compose the first half of Bong’s filmmaking career. I am curious to see his next film. The process of writing this book included watching Bong Joon Ho grow from a promising local film director to a global auteur. It was also a process of witnessing the effects of globalization—­which Bong’s films so precisely capture—­as the films themselves came to be shared by audiences worldwide. Bong’s films are a testament to how the most local issues can also be the most global in our era of neoliberal capitalism. I would like to thank him for his unique oeuvre that inspired me to write this book. I also thank him for offering his generous time to sit down with me for interviews whenever I visited Korea. Many people and institutions have inspired and helped me at various stages of this project, and I would like to express my sincere gratitude for their support and encouragement. My heartfelt gratitude goes to David Desser for his valuable advice during the entire process of writing this book. His willingness to give his time so generously to read my work in progress has been instrumental in completing this book. I would like to give special thanks to my dear friend Linda Robinson, the first reader of many versions of my draft and whose proofreading and editing greatly improved my manuscript. I am particularly grateful to film critic and longtime friend Lim Jae-­cheol for his insightful comments and suggestions in the final stage of this project and for thought-­provoking conversations on the art of cinema.

Preface xvii

I have been privileged to receive thorough support and encouragement from David E. James, who has been a mentor to me during my academic career over the years. His insightful comments and encouragement helped me refine my ideas. Namhee Lee, whose book on the 1980s minjung (people’s) movement in Korea was inspirational in my analysis of Memories of Murder and The Host, also read parts of my manuscript and enthusiastically supported my project. I thank Kathy Kleypas for her constructive suggestions in the early stages of the project. I also appreciate the rigorous readings of the anonymous manuscript reviewers that helped strengthen my approaches in analyzing Bong’s films. I also acknowledge the mentorship and inspiration from professors when I studied at University of Southern California: Dana Polan, the late Anne Friedberg, Peggy Kamuf, and Marsha Kinder. I am fortunate to have joined a welcoming community of colleagues at Dodge College of Film and Media Arts at Chapman University. I am particularly grateful to former dean Bob Bassett for his support for my research and teaching of Korean and Asian cinema. He spearheaded the launch of the Busan West Film Festival, which brought Bong to our campus in 2011. I also extend my gratitude to associate deans Michael Kowalski and Pavel Jech for their support for film studies faculty research. It allowed me opportunities to present early versions of this work at conferences, where I had thought-­provoking discussions that enriched this book. I thank my colleagues at Dodge College’s film studies program. I am grateful to Bill Dill for offering me generous time out of his busy schedule to discuss cinematography in Bong’s films. His keen analytical eye helped me refine my own reading of the films in terms of their visual construction. I was also blessed to have Korean cinematographer Kim Hyung Koo visit my “Korean Cinema Today” class in fall 2015 to discuss his work on Memories of Murder and The Host with my students. A special thanks to the Korean Cultural Center, Los Angeles, for sponsoring Kim’s guest visit. I also thank my Korean cinema students whose creative curiosity and fresh perspectives inspired me to write this book. A number of people offered information and intellectual encouragement through conversations and correspondences. In particular, conversations or seminars with Inyoung Nam, Hyangjin Lee, and Hyun-­seon Park, all scholars of Korean cinema, were inspirational in expanding the theoretical framework in analyzing Bong’s films. The seminars I had with Inyoung and Hyun-­seon on Jacques Rancière and Alain Badiou were crucial in constructing my reading of Snowpiercer. I also thank Inyoung for inviting me to the Forum Busan 2019 to present my chapter on Parasite. I am also grateful for the many discussions I had with Jeon Chan-­il, film critic and former Korean film programmer of Busan International Film Festival, on Bong’s films. He also helped me organize Busan West Film Festivals.

xviii Preface

Chapman colleagues Stephanie Takaragawa and Jan Osborn have been extremely supportive of my work throughout the process. I deeply appreciate their willingness to discuss my research and writing, to listen to my queries, and to lend a hand whenever I need them. I extend my thanks to my fellow members of the Irvine Cultural Forum, a Korean book club in Orange County, who watched Bong Joon Ho films to discuss my work in progress in two of their monthly meetings. I benefitted from their comments and observations from a non–­film studies point of view in my effort to make this book accessible to a wider readership. I would like to acknowledge two Korean institutions—­the Academy of Korean Studies (AKS) and the Korea Foundation (KF)—­that provided me with generous funding to conduct field research in Korea. The AKS Junior Fellowship Program allowed me to begin archival research and conduct interviews with Bong in Korea in the summer of 2013. While the AKS fellowship was instrumental in shaping my project in its early stages, KF’s Fellowship for Field Research in fall 2019 supported a fruitful sabbatical semester of research and writing to bring the manuscript to completion. I am also grateful to Chapman University for granting me a sabbatical semester during this final stage to add a new chapter on Parasite and to finish the edits of my manuscript. My sincere thanks go to editor Nicole Solano, Global Film Directors series editors Homer B. Pettey and Richard Barton Palmer, and the staff at the Rutgers University Press for their guidance and help in bringing this book to fruition. Last but not least, I thank my extended family in Korea for their many years of support and love. First, to my dear parents, Sang Ho and Jung Hee Lee, for their unconditional love and support throughout my life. They helped me raise my two kids during my most difficult times as a working mom in Korea. I would not be where I am today if not for their unwavering belief in me. My siblings, Young, Young Jin, and Hyun, and my sister-­in-­law, Mikyung, always make my stay in Korea comforting and full. I thank them for their heartwarming support across the Pacific Ocean, particularly my little sister, Hyun, who looked after me when I injured my knee during the sabbatical period in Korea. Without her care, I would not have had the peace and stability to work on completing the manuscript. My deepest gratitude and love goes to my husband, Kun Soo Chung, whose remarkable patience, love, and devotion have sustained me throughout the years in Korea and California. His belief in me never falters. Finally, I send my love and thanks to my two sons, Yong Oh and Yong Jae, and my daughters-­in-­ law, Connie and Monica, for numerous fun times of board games, movies, and travels. I thank you for being who you are.

Preface xix

A Note about Romanization The romanization of Korean names and terms in this book follows the McCune-­ Reischauer system. Exceptions to this rule are the names of the people quoted from other sources, such as the Korean Movie Database (KMDb), or where there is already a widely accepted romanization. In compliance with the Korean practice, Korean names are presented with the last name preceding the given name, except for names printed otherwise in English-­language publications. Previously, Bong Joon Ho’s romanized name has been Bong Joon-­ho with a hyphen in order to indicate that Joon Ho is his first name; however, Bong Joon Ho without a hyphen is Bong’s preferred romanization. All translations from Korean-­ language references are mine unless otherwise noted.

THE FILMS OF BONG JOON HO

INTRODUCTION

When Bong Joon Ho announced a monster movie, The Host, as his new project in 2004, many if not all Korean film industry insiders were skeptical, despite Bong’s great success—­both critical and commercial—­with his feature film Memories of Murder the year before. Nobody could predict the record-­ breaking blockbuster phenomenon the film was to become in 2006. Upon its release on July 27, the film broke the opening-­day record, set a new domestic record by selling more than ten million tickets in twenty-­one days,1 and became the highest-­grossing film of all time with more than thirteen million tickets sold. It maintained this record for the next eight years. The Host was successful not only domestically but also internationally: it screened at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival to critical acclaim and earned Bong international recognition.2 The reason this project was initially met with strong skepticism was, in large part, because monster movies have never before been popular with Korean audiences. Unlike Japanese cinema, which has established a unique kaiju (strange beast) genre, South Korean cinema does not have a strong monster genre tradition. The 1960s saw a few notable kaiju-­influenced films, but for the most part, they were considered children’s movies and were not taken seriously; moreover, their special effects were poor.3 Thus Bong’s plan to make a monster movie that required significant use of sophisticated visual effects was considered reckless, and some tried to dissuade him from attempting the project. Of course, skepticism about his film projects was nothing new to Bong Joon Ho. In fact, industry insiders had scornfully predicted that his first three feature films would be disasters. The story told in his debut film, Barking Dogs Never Bite (2000), of dogs that go missing in a small apartment complex, was deemed too trivial for a feature film, and Memories of Murder (2003) was scorned as commercial suicide because it was a crime thriller in which detectives fail to capture the killer. At the time, the Korean domestic film market was dominated by romantic comedies with happy endings, so Bong was advised to change the film’s ending 1

2

The Fil ms of Bong Joon Ho

so the mystery was solved satisfactorily. However, Bong kept the original conclusion because it was based on an actual unsolved serial murder case, and he wanted to remain true to the real story. Some investors even pulled out after seeing the edited film. Bong was an unknown young director at the time, but he could make these films as he had originally conceived because of the unusual support he received from his producer.4 The fact that, from the outset of his career, Bong has maintained the original conception of his films against all odds is crucial to understanding his approach to filmmaking. Although he makes mainstream commercial films, he does not abide by the accepted rules or conventions of established genres. He has always been a self-­conscious auteur who refuses to compromise his own vision and integrity as a filmmaker. Instead, he tweaks, turns, and inverts conventions and even turns them upside down. Still, he completely snubs the skepticism that clouded his new projects every time and pulls off great box-­office successes and movies that receive critical acclaim. In his films, the guilty get away with murder, literally and/or figuratively. His genre films—­whether a crime thriller, monster movie, or science fiction—­do not give audiences the reassurance offered by their Hollywood counterparts. Rather, his films usually end without a clear sense of resolution, leaving the audience puzzled, if not bewildered. The absence of the Hollywood “happy ending” constitutes one of the most prominent elements of genre subversion in Bong’s films: the dog killer gets away in Barking Dogs Never Bite; the detectives fail to capture the serial killer in Memories of Murder; the family cannot save their daughter from the monster in The Host; the real murderers are set free in Mother (2009); the world comes to a bleak end in Snowpiercer (2013); the girl saves her giant pig, but the horror of the slaughterhouse continues in Okja (2017); and all four members of the poor family succeed in getting jobs with the wealthy family, but their successful scheme only leads to a total catastrophe in Parasite (2019). Even so, Bong’s films are immensely popular among Korean audiences, and with the success of Snowpiercer, Okja, and Parasite, which received the Palme d’Or at the 2019 Cannes Film Festival as well as four major awards at the Oscars in 2020, he has become the most sought-­after director on a global stage as well. Bong’s unique achievement as a filmmaker lies in his successful foray into what I would describe as “political blockbuster” filmmaking. The “political” in his films is not overt or didactic but effortlessly blends into his films’ entertainment. Instead, the films are political in their aesthetics of subverting the conventions of blockbuster films and in the sense that they draw our attention to the world we live in and encourage us to ponder the social and political issues we identify with in his films. In certain ways, his films provide a cultural forum where important and pressing social issues are mobilized and discussed by the audience. For example, Okja prompted online discussion about the modern meat

Introduction 3

industry and, as the Foodbeast blog reported in July 2017, inspired some people to go vegan.5 Similarly, as will be discussed in detail in chapter 5, Snowpiercer opened up public discussions on the issue of global warming. Parasite, which became Bong’s second film after The Host (2006) to surpass ten million ticket sales in Korea, saw a proliferation of interpretations of the various themes in the film, mostly the issue of class polarization in our own era. Whether set in South Korea (hereafter Korea) or in an imaginary space, the stories in Bong’s films are grounded in the realities of the world and address issues that affect everyday lives. And these stories are always told from the perspective of ordinary people. Indeed, Bong’s films pay particular attention to the socially weak. The protagonists of his films are unlikely heroes—­a dim-­witted father in The Host; a poor, middle-­aged single mother and her mentally disabled son in Mother; a young girl from remote rural Korea in Okja—­who are thrown into situations in which they have to battle a powerful system (whether political or corporate) in order to save their loved ones. And it is the plight of the socially weak that seems to resonate with audiences both locally and globally.

Leitmotif of Misrecognition With seven feature films between his debut in 2000 and 2020, Bong has established himself as a rare film director who garners both critical acclaim and commercial success while maintaining full control over his work. He has successfully balanced entertainment and social commentary, as the issues embedded in the stories do not overshadow the cinematic enjoyment they provide. Bong achieves this by cleverly using the leitmotif of “misrecognition” or “misconception”—­an inability to recognize an object or a person, mistaking it for another or holding inaccurate expectations about it—­as the main trigger of the narrative. This leitmotif is most evident in his thrillers, a genre that lends itself to this theme when based on a mystery-­plot structure in which the protagonist is chasing an unknown criminal. In Bong’s thrillers, protagonists often fail to recognize the criminal or perceive the wrong person to be the criminal and fail to capture the culprit. In Barking Dogs Never Bite, the protagonist, desperate to stop a neighbor’s dog from barking, kidnaps and hides it in the basement of his apartment building, only to learn that he has stolen the wrong dog. Before he can release it, however, the building’s janitor kills and cooks the dog; thus, this initial misrecognition triggers the film’s horror subplot. The plot of Memories of Murder is a series of one misrecognition after another, and the primary question the narrative raises—­what is the identity of the serial killer who is preying on the young women of this rural village?—­is never answered. A young girl is captured by the river monster in The Host only because her father, running away from the

4

The Fil ms of Bong Joon Ho

monster, grabs the hand of another girl, leaving his daughter behind to be snatched away by the monster’s tail. Moreover, the characters in The Host never learn what has created this monster, although its origins are revealed to the audience in the film’s prologue. Mother is the story of a woman trying to prove her son’s innocence when he is charged with murder, and this murder charge is the misconception that sets the story in motion. The mother mistakes two other men as the real killers before learning she is the one who has been laboring under a misconception all along; rather than the innocent victim she believes him to be, her son is, in fact, the murderer. At the same time, detectives misread blood found on another boy’s shirt as proof of his guilt and charge him with the murder in the film’s final misrecognition. The very premise on which the story of Snowpiercer is built is a misconception. In this film, the remnants of the world’s humanity circle the earth in a perpetually running train, believing the ice age blighting the planet has made it uninhabitable. At the film’s end, however, this belief is revealed to be false; following a revolt within the train during which an explosion derails it and frees its inhabitants, the survivors of the crash venture out, possibly to start human civilization anew. An earlier misconception is revealed when the leader of the revolt confronts the train’s owner and operator, only to learn that the train is run not by mechanics alone but is dependent on child labor. In Okja, the protagonist Mija’s mission of saving her superpig Okja begins when the pig is taken away by the Mirando Corporation, which genetically engineers superpigs for food consumption. Mija was unaware of the fact that Okja was an engineered pig and that she is to be taken away to the United States by the Mirando Corporation to be publicly revealed as the winner of their superpig competition. Thus when Dr. Johnny Wilcox, a zoologist, a well-­known TV show host, and the brand ambassador of the Mirando Corporation, arrives at her house with a filming crew, she misrecognizes him as just filming one of his TV episodes. That is why she leaves the house to the filming crew without any suspicion to visit her parents’ grave with her grandfather. Also, one of the climactic scenes in the film rests on an intentional mistranslation. After the Animal Liberation Front (ALF) has helped Mija reunite with Okja, the ALF leader, Jay, wants to ask Mija if she will agree to their next mission, which is to take Okja to New York to penetrate the Mirando Corporation and take them down from the inside. If she does not agree, they will not pursue their mission. The Korean American member K acts as an interpreter between them. Mija replies that she does not agree and she just wants to take Okja back to the mountain. At this critical moment, however, K decides to give a deliberate mistranslation and tells the ALF members that she agrees. This triggers the narrative forward to New York and subsequently to the slaughterhouse. Thus Okja’s narrative is built upon three

Introduction 5

misunderstandings or misrecognitions: first, Mija thought Okja was a pet she could keep; second, she misrecognized Dr. Johnny Wilcox only as the famous TV personality; and lastly, she did not even know that her answer was mistranslated, which was why they go to New York. Parasite takes this motive of “misrecognition” to a new level. While the misrecognitions in the previous films were not intentional ones, the protagonists in this film actively use them. The four members of the Kim family succeed in getting hired by the rich family all by pretending to be somebody else, presenting false identities and résumés. They also pretend to be strangers to one another. The whole film is triggered by their pretensions. (The film even has a scene in which the son, Ki-­Woo, asks Da-­Hae, whom he is tutoring, to compose an En­glish paragraph using the word pretend at least two times.) Alfred Hitchcock is the greatest master of the “wrong man” motif, and the plots of his films are often structured on misrecognition. Bong effectively appropriates Hitchcock’s motif of misrecognition to express the absurdities of Korean realities and global issues. In Barking Dogs Never Bite, Memories of Murder, and Mother, characters are wrongfully accused or convicted of crimes; however, unlike various Hitchcockian protagonists wrongfully identified, pursued, and—­in the case of The Wrong Man (1956)—­charged with a crime, Bong’s characters are often not cleared or set free, or at least not until after having experienced violence or torture. Further, Bong’s narrative structures are more complex than Hitchcock’s. For instance, Mother has dual narrative strands consisting of two murders committed by two separate individuals; moreover, both murderers go free while the audience knows—­although the police in the film do not—­that a wrongfully convicted man remains in prison. The complexity of this dual structure and the layering of mismatched knowledge are more effective than a straightforward mystery in conveying the peculiar realities of Korean society. Bong uses the leitmotif of misrecognition because, it seems, it provides the most effective tool to reveal the multiple layers of social absurdities of contemporary Korean society. Korean citizens (including the characters in his films) expect that the system that governs the nation will protect and save them from disasters or crises, but their expectations are always betrayed. Indeed, the five Bong films set in Korea capture his idea of “Koreanness.” Before expanding his filmmaking to a global level with Snowpiercer and Okja, his aim was to appeal exclusively to Korean audiences. He has stated that The Host, which enjoyed international success, “was acclaimed at Cannes, but they do not understand this film 100 percent. The film is full of humor and comedy only Koreans can understand.”6 But he added that he was “happy to see that Korean sentiment and sensibilities also worked in the West.”7 Specifically, Bong localizes “conventional” (i.e., Hollywood) genres within Korean stories, realities, and sensibilities. And it is this localization that makes the subversion of genre

6

The Fil ms of Bong Joon Ho

conventions inevitable, as chapter 3 will demonstrate. Unlike Americans, whose collective trust and belief in their governmental system and authority are usually reflected in mainstream Hollywood films, Koreans generally are suspicious of their government or authorities. And these two opposing tendencies or sensibilities clash within Bong’s films to create his unique adaptation of Hollywood genres.

Koreanness as Social Absurdity The notion of Koreanness can be interpreted in different ways. So how, precisely, does Bong define the Koreanness that informs his filmmaking? For Bong, Koreanness does not lie in the traditional Korean culture of the premodern era. In this, he differs from veteran director Im Kwon-­Taek, whose films are often associated with the uniquely Korean notion of “han.” This is a concept that has no English equivalent, but it refers to unresolved grief, grudges, or regrets, a sentiment that has accumulated in the hearts of Koreans throughout the country’s tumultuous history. In contrast, in Bong’s films, Koreanness lies, in his own words, in the absurdities or irrationalities (pujoris)8 in everyday life. In his films, the social pujoris are the result of the widespread political corruption, social injustices, and anomie of contemporary Korean society, and these pujoris are the key to understanding Bong’s films. For instance, these pujoris are the reasons his films lack clear resolutions. They also account for his films having narratives that result in failure. This element, which I call the narrative of failure, can be explained by Korea’s discourse of “failed history.” Specifically, after liberation from thirty-­six years of Japanese colonial rule in 1945, Korea experienced postwar U.S. occupation, national division, civil war (i.e., the Korean War), and then almost three decades of successive military dictatorships that came to an end only in the late 1980s after an intense struggle for democracy. However, pride in achieving democracy turned into increasing confusion and cynicism after a financial crisis in 1997 and an International Monetary Fund (IMF) bailout that mandated the adoption of neoliberal measures, which, in turn, intensified the economic inequalities and social injustices. One cause of the persistent social injustices and political corruption in Korean society can be traced to Korea’s failure to identify and prosecute collaborators and perpetrators of Japanese imperialism and military dictatorships, particularly those involved in the Kwangju Massacre in May 1980, during which Korean paratroopers turned their weapons on civilian protesters demanding democracy. Even after democratization in 1987, no substantial change has been achieved in Korea’s system of corruption and pujoris. Thus today a sense of despair, anger, and cynicism is widespread in Korea. Man-­made disasters occur

Introduction 7

frequently, and the government and other authorities often fail to protect ordinary citizens; these are the historically accumulated sentiments that Bong’s films capture and that strike a chord with Korean audiences. Bong’s observations on the workings of Korean society are so keen and accurate that they are almost prophetic. In The Host, a monster emerges from the Han River and attacks people along the shore. However, government authorities in the film are bent on chasing a family victimized by the monster rather than on containing or killing it. Furthermore, the authorities continue to pursue the family as carriers of a monster-­borne virus even after learning that the virus does not exist. Six years after its release, the film was summoned back to public discourse in the aftermath of the worst ferry disaster in history. On the morning of April 16, 2014, the ferry Sewol capsized and sank off Korea’s south coast, killing 304 people. The victims were mostly high school students on their way to Cheju Island for a school excursion. The nation watched the Sewol sink in real time on live TV broadcasts as government rescue efforts failed to arrive in time to save the passengers. Most viewers identified with the horror the students’ parents must have felt as they watched helplessly, unable to save their children. President Park Geun-­hye was conspicuously absent while the boat was sinking; it was revealed later that poor oversight by regulatory bodies had contributed to the disaster, and the government was accused of a cover-­up. The victims’ families and other members of the public engaged in protests, but the government refused to investigate and has never explained why rescue services were late in responding to the disaster. Further, instead of investigating what went wrong, the government began to accuse the protesting families of politicizing the event, going so far as to label them “North Korean sympathizers” bent on disrupting the nation. The striking similarity between the Sewol ferry disaster and the monster attack in The Host became an immediate topic of discussion on social media, as reflected in these sample Twitter posts: “Is Bong Joon Ho’s film The Host a prelude to the Sewol disaster? The nation’s incompetence; the families’, especially the father’s, desperate struggle; and the victimized young child. It seems that the fathers’ desperate struggle will continue in this monsterized society” (@ell65, August 22, 2014); “Watching Bong Joon Ho’s The Host again and this is completely identical. Director Bong has incredible insight” (@hanjovi21, July 15, 2014). The comic writer Lee Jae-­suk wrote, “On second viewing, [The Host] is a film about Korea and the Sewol disaster . . . Bong Joon Ho’s The Host is not an SF fantasy film” (@kkomsu10000, July 5, 2014). This evocation of The Host in the wake of the Sewol ferry disaster is a testament to the extent to which Bong’s films provide a keen insight into contemporary Korean society. His films are in a way a study of the social ills and their effects on the lives of ordinary Korean people.

8

The Fil ms of Bong Joon Ho

Therefore, his films can be best understood through an examination of the Korean realities that serve as their subtexts. Specifically, the chronotope9 of his films is the transitional period in Korean history between the military dictatorship of the 1980s and the democracy and neoliberal capitalism of the twenty-­ first century. His films probe the dire consequences of the rapid economic growth Korean society experienced in the forty years after the Korean War (1950–­1953)—­known as an “economic miracle”—­during which Korea transformed itself from one of the world’s poorest nations to one of the world’s largest economies. Politically, Korea transitioned within twenty-­six years from a military dictatorship in 1961 to a democratic society in 1987. In economic terms, the transition from military dictatorship to a democratic society was a journey from state-­planned economic growth to neoliberal capitalism. While Memories of Murder looks back at the dark era of the 1980s military dictatorship, Barking Dogs Never Bite, The Host, and Mother dig beneath Korea’s postwar economic miracle and explore the ways in which its consequences drove individuals, especially the socially weak, into disastrous situations. Bong interrogates the superficiality of the parliamentary democracy and reveals how the preexisting system of social ills and corruption has been maintained and has even intensified in postdemocratic Korean society.10 Bong stands out among contemporary Korean film directors for his politically and socially conscious approach to filmmaking; perhaps alone among his cohorts, he maintains a critical gaze toward Korean society while also making popular films. His works explore the problems of Korea’s social system, reveal political and moral corruption and social injustice, and (in)directly address unresolved issues in Korean history. Uniquely, however, his work remains squarely in the realm of commercial entertainment, achieving wide appeal through his appropriation of Hollywood genres. Thus his films differ from those of other well-­known and critically acclaimed Korean directors, such as Lee Chang-dong, Hong Sang-­soo, and Kim Ki-­duk, whose film styles are more radical and whose works circulate mostly in the art cinema / film festival circuit. At the same time, Bong is different from Park Chan-­wook, who also works within a genre tradition. While Park’s films manifest auteur consciousness through their highly stylized aesthetic, Bong’s films are more realistic, both visually and thematically. They are also more mass oriented than Park’s, with playful subversions of genre conventions and blockbuster spectacles, whereas Park’s films tend to be more serious and philosophical, with twisted stories that unfold around the theme of revenge. Bong’s films are more sociological than philosophical. However, this does not mean Bong is not conscious of being an auteur. Rather, he strongly defends his integrity as an auteur to such a degree that he is willing to risk commercial success to maintain full control over his work, as his struggle with Harvey Weinstein over the U.S. release of

Introduction 9

Snowpiercer demonstrates.11 Rather than conforming to the distributor’s request to cut twenty minutes of his film to guarantee a wider release, Bong opted for the limited release of the uncut version. This decision reinforces the idea that Bong often goes against suggestions for wider audiences; instead, he pushes forward his original vision for his films. Two weeks into a limited theatrical release, Snowpiercer went on a streaming service concurrently and became one of the most watched of his films there, which in turn led the distribution company to increase the number of screens in the theaters. Bong’s tremendous global success offers an interesting case study of making films that are at once nationally specific and universally appealing. It is fair to say that this transnational appeal of his films is related to economic globalization and the spread of neoliberal capitalism worldwide. Since the late 1990s, Korea has been at the forefront of neoliberal capitalism, and Bong’s films capture the various social ills intensified by the neoliberal policies of deregulation of government measures to control markets, privatization of public assets, cutback of social welfare, and de-­unionization, all of which engender corporate greed and widen the gap between the rich and the poor. As these neoliberal measures spread with the global market economy, the consequences are shared globally as well. Thus although Bong’s films portray specifically Korean realities, the underlying social problems and issues are universal. As he ventured into English-­ language global filmmaking with Snowpiercer and Okja, his scope of social inquiries also expanded to include global issues. These two films are global versions of his Korean-­language films in terms of their interrogation of social systems and their biting critique of neoliberal capitalism. Snowpiercer is an allegory of the ever-­widening gap between the rich and poor while raising the global issue of climate change; Okja deals more directly with corporate greed, the issues of genetically modified food, and the cruelty of animal factory farms. By combining Hollywood genres and local politics, Bong opens up what Homi Bhabha terms a “third space”12 of enunciation in which the cultural differences between postcolonial society and the West are translated and articulated. Bhabha posits that recognition of this third space opens the way to “conceptualizing an international culture, based not on the exoticism or multiculturalism of the diversity of cultures, but on the inscription and articulation of culture’s hybridity.” Bong Joon Ho’s films can be considered the product of this hybrid filmmaking, standing as he does between Hollywood filmmaking on one hand and Koreanness on the other. The contemporary Koreanness in his films is rooted in the various historical, social, political, and cultural abnormalities Korea is faced with as a postcolonial society. By bringing together elements from each, he creates something new and uniquely his own. However, it is not the goal of this book to trace the uniqueness of Bong’s films solely to his cinematic genius or to link them to the romantic notion of an auteur

10

The Fil ms of Bong Joon Ho

whose intentions provide the keys to understanding the meaning of his films. Rather, the book takes French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu’s idea that a work of art is not a product of some sort of inspiration from God but a social phenomenon shaped by concrete social and historical processes. Bourdieu’s concept of a “field of cultural production”—­the idea that understanding a work of art involves looking not only at the art itself but also the conditions of its production and reception—­provides a tool to overcome the opposing approaches to studying a work of art: the internalist approach that focuses on the work’s formal qualities and structural determinism that claims that art is a mere reflection of social structures.13 His claim that “scientific analysis of the social conditions of the production and reception of a work of art, far from reducing it or destroying it, in fact intensifies the literary experience”14 supports the aim of this book to provide concrete historical, social, and cultural context—­the field of production—­to enhance the pleasure of discovering the rich subtext in Bong’s films. While recognizing his creative agency, the book acknowledges that all forms of culture, including films, are shaped by social practices and that the creators are also cultural products. Bong Joon Ho himself can be described as a “cinematic sociologist” whose films are embedded in concrete social realities of both Korean society and neoliberal capitalism at large. His films are about individual lives—­in particular, the marginalized of Korean society. However, they are always positioned within the larger social, political, and economic context. In this sense, his films realize what American sociologist C. Wright Mills termed as “sociological imagination,” a creative way of understanding the private troubles by looking at them within larger social realities and public issues.15 All of Bong’s films are about the plight of ordinary, disadvantaged people, and in the process of portraying the difficulties they face, his films reveal and suggest to the audience the root cause of their predicaments. This will be analyzed in detail in the subsequent chapters; however, for example, Memories of Murder places the serial murderer and the incompetent police within the larger context of the 1980s military dictatorship; in The Host, the root causes of the tragedy of the Park family are the postcolonial conditions of Korea: its subservient relationship to the United States and the corrupt authorities. The moral corruption of the protagonists in Barking Dogs Never Bite and Mother is not depicted as caused by the individuals’ monstrous nature but rather by the harsh social and economic conditions forced upon the weak. In Snowpiercer and Okja, Bong’s cinematic sociology becomes more overtly political to indict the global phenomenon of neoliberal capitalism, which allows corporate greed to disregard dire issues of global warming and animal cruelty. Parasite brings a renewed attention to the issue of class, the polarization of the rich and the poor under a neoliberal capitalist society in which upward mobility is no longer attainable for those who have fallen through the cracks.

Introduction 11

Thus the chapters of this book are structured thematically in terms of the Korean context of the specific social ills and corruption the aforementioned leitmotifs of misrecognition and misconception aim to reveal. Chapter 1, “A New Cultural Generation,” provides a brief biography of Bong Joon Ho, summarizing the diverse and hybrid cultural influences on his work. It analyzes his short films and the films he worked on as a screenwriter before becoming a director. With this background, the chapter then positions Bong Joon Ho and his films within the context of New Korean Cinema. Characterized by the emergence of cinephile filmmakers and audiences, New Korean Cinema burst onto international movie screens in the late 1990s. Among the most popular and influential of these films, which demonstrate Korea’s powerful pop-­ culture presence, were Shiri (1999), JSA (2000), My Sassy Girl (2001), and Oldboy (2003). Of all these films, however, the most popular by far was The Host (2006). A record-­breaking blockbuster in Korea, the film also achieved acclaim internationally with serious movie fans and cult audiences alike. Chapter 2, “Cinematic ‘Perversions’: Tonal Shifts, Visual Gags, and Techniques of Defamiliarization,” focuses on Bong’s formal techniques and visual expression. It closely examines how Bong’s focus on Koreanness is communicated visually and formally. Specifically, I discuss Bong’s major filmic techniques of genre bending and tonal blending; his realist aesthetics, analogous to the tradition of the “real-­view landscape” in Korean painting; and his defamiliarization of everyday spaces. I borrow the Russian formalist and literary critic Viktor Shklovsky’s notion of defamiliarization—­making familiar objects appear unusual or new to the viewer/reader—­to explain Bong’s use of space in his films. Bong tends to use spaces that are often overlooked, such as the basement of an ordinary apartment in Barking Dogs Never Bite and the sewage of the Han River in The Host. His films turn these everyday places into spaces of horror. Chapter 3, “Social Pujoris and the ‘Narratives of Failure’: Transnational Genre and Local Politics in Memories of Murder and The Host,” focuses on and analyzes the ways in which Bong utilizes specifically Korean politics in the narratives of the crime movie (Memories of Murder) and the monster movie (The Host) to subvert and reinvent genre conventions. Bong has shaped these films with specifically Korean narrative forms I identify as narratives of failure. These narratives of failure reflect the self-­perception of a “failed history” that characterizes the collective experience of Korean society since the mid–­twentieth century, beginning with its liberation from three decades of Japanese colonial rule in 1945 and concluding with the neoliberal capitalism of the twenty-­first century. Both films position the 1980s as the crucial transitional period in Korea’s postwar history that created Korean society as it exists today. Chapter 4, “Monsters Within: Moral Ambiguity and Anomie in Barking Dogs Never Bite and Mother,” explores these films’ representation of the social effects

12

The Fil ms of Bong Joon Ho

of Korea’s experience of compressed economic growth. The rapid economic growth the nation experienced following the Korean War transformed Korea, in a matter of decades, into an urban, industrialized nation, bringing about great social confusion and disruption of moral values. Both films portray the emotional struggle ordinary Koreans faced with moral dilemmas arising from Korea’s adoption of neoliberal policies in the late 1990s. In these films, the socially weak are portrayed not as mere victims of the system but as driven to succumb to moral corruption by their desperate situations. In these films, the line between good and evil is blurred, and the films illustrate the manner in which moral confusion and anomie have intensified in the lives of the individual as a result of the major political, industrial, and financial shifts Korea has experienced in the late twentieth and early twenty-­first centuries. Chapter 5, “Beyond the Local: Global Politics and Neoliberal Capitalism in Snowpiercer and Okja,” situates these two films within the context of global filmmaking and illustrates their radical politics by examining, first, how the train in Snowpiercer and the Mirando Corporation in Okja symbolize a microcosm of the current neoliberal capitalist system and, second, how the films’ transnational appeal can be located in the global expansion of this neoliberalism. The films create a new “political space” Nancy Fraser argues for in order to raise issues of global injustice and inequality as well as environmental issues. The radical politics of the tail section’s revolt in Snowpiercer is analyzed in terms of Jacque Rancière’s redefinition of politics and his notion of the “distribution of the sensible,” and Okja is analyzed in terms of the relationship between film and activism, focusing on the fact that Okja initiated among its audience a movement to go vegan. Chapter 5 is followed by the conclusion, “Parasite—­a New Beginning?,” and a detailed filmography of all Bong Joon Ho’s films. The analysis of his latest film, Parasite, offers a wonderfully fitting conclusion to the book as it is at once Bong’s return to Korean realities and a departure to a new level of his idiosyncratic approaches to genre filmmaking. The film summons his previous films in various ways but at the same time departs from them in its focus on sociological aspects of emotion, which has been considered as something individual and personal. The film shows how the feelings of humiliation are built up in the poor and the deprived in contemporary Korean society and how they can trigger a total catastrophe in which nobody is a winner. Filmography includes short- and feature-length films Bong directed as well as those he did not direct but produced, wrote, or acted in. Detailed synopses of each film will allow those readers not familiar with them to obtain the necessary information to help follow the analyses in this book. By grounding the films of Bong Joon Ho securely within the sociopolitical transformation of Korean society since democratization in 1987 and the

Introduction 13

global expansion of neoliberal capitalism in the twenty-­first century, this book aims to illustrate the ways in which his films are reflections of a growing sense of injustice and failure among Koreans in the age of neoliberal globalization, a sentiment global audiences may identify with as well. Films cannot be isolated from the cultural system that generated them. Placing Bong’s films in the dual context of the transition from military dictatorship to democracy in Korean history and the simultaneous changes in the Korean film industry will clarify to the non-­Korean readers the rich subtext crucial to a full understanding of the films of Bong Joon Ho.

1 • A NEW CULTUR AL GENER ATION

In 2015, a documentary short made by three high school students caught the attention of the Korean film community, garnering awards at a number of youth and short film festivals. Titled Searching for Bong Joon Ho,1 the film follows these students as they try to meet the filmmaker Bong Joon Ho, whom they idolize. Their almost impossible quest begins when their parents dismiss their dream of becoming filmmakers, given the harsh realities of the Korean film industry. In response, they decide to search for Bong by any means necessary to seek his advice. As the voice-­over narration explains, the student filmmakers “go wild at director Bong’s films. Wouldn’t he be able to give [us] helpful advice, given that he made it big despite the difficult conditions [of the film industry]?” The students use social media, email, and phone calls to reach out to people who have worked with Bong, but most of them refuse to help. Finally, the students are exhilarated when Hong Kyung-­pyo, the director of photography who worked with Bong on Mother and Snowpiercer, helps set up a meeting with him. This short documentary is noteworthy in two respects. First, it attests to Bong Joon Ho’s success and popularity among aspiring filmmakers in Korea. Second, it demonstrates how Bong’s approach to filmmaking influences these young filmmakers. Consciously or not, the documentary resembles Bong’s films in its playfulness, its conception of the powerless pursuing a seemingly impossible task, and most of all, in its final unexpected twist with a bittersweet ending. They finally succeed in meeting with Bong, but instead of giving the students the support and encouragement they expected, Bong discourages them from pursuing a career in filmmaking. The students’ interview with Bong is oddly funny. When they ask him for any fond memories he had when making his films, he had to stop and think for a moment. Finally, he tepidly offers, “Visiting Korean rural areas was enjoyable.” 14

A New Cultural Generation 15

Then they ask about the hardships he has encountered as a filmmaker, and he replies, “Everything. You can say everything is hard.” If, however, they choose to ignore his advice and continue to pursue a filmmaking career, he urges them not to cater to anyone but themselves, to make films that make them happy. At the film’s end, undeterred, the students are still intent on becoming filmmakers. It turns out that the most encouraging advice came not from Bong Joon Ho but from Hong Kyung-­pyo, who was the one to urge them not to give up trying to find Bong from the beginning. As this student film testifies, Bong Joon Ho has become one of the most significant directors to come out of New Korean Cinema that emerged in the late 1990s. Among the Korean directors who gained national and international recognition, Bong is arguably the only one whose filmmaking is unequivocally commercial and whose name is considered a guarantor of box office success. Bong is both a role model for aspiring filmmakers and a brand that is known and marketed around the world,2 despite his relatively brief filmography. He has made seven feature films—­Barking Dogs Never Bite (2000), Memories of Murder (2003), The Host (2006), Mother (2009), Snowpiercer (2013), Okja (2017), Parasite (2019)—­and six short films: White Man (1993), Memories of My Frame (1994), Incoherence (1994), Influenza (2004), Sink & Rise (2004), and Shaking Tokyo (2008). With the exception of his debut feature, Barking Dogs Never Bite, all his feature films dominated the box office and garnered numerous awards. The Host and Mother made the Korean Film Archive’s 2014 list of the “100 Greatest Korean Films,” and Memories of Murder ranked seventh in the all-­time best ten, the only film released in the 2000s to be included in the list.3 The critical and commercial success of The Host, Mother, Snowpiercer, Okja, and Parasite in the United States and elsewhere established Bong’s international reputation as one of the most innovative genre filmmakers working today. As Christina Klein argues, Bong’s approach to genre filmmaking is not mere “Copywood” but local interpretations and reinventions of dominant cultural forms.4 His films exemplify what Arjun Appadurai refers to as a “multiplicity of localized events” that brings different cultures into contact.5 And this process of cultural hybridization, Homi Bhabha argues, creates something different and new that opens up “a new area of negotiation of meaning and representation.”6 This negotiation includes subversion, transgression, and reformulation. Bong’s films are products of diverse cultural influences, and they subvert and reformulate Hollywood genres. By combining elements of different cultures and various film traditions in his work, Bong has opened up new possibilities of creative filmmaking in a postcolonial context. Specifically, Bong’s films demonstrate a new cultural practice of appropriating global genres and film styles to inscribe the local—­Koreanness—­into them. Bong’s filmic world reflects a keen interest in the Korean way of life, local

16

The Fil ms of Bong Joon Ho

politics, and social systems while unfolding stories about the everyday lives of ordinary Korean citizens, particularly the socially disenfranchised. Bong utilizes local subjects and politics to open up new forms of genre filmmaking that confront and challenge the global force of Hollywood cinema. In so doing, Bong has pioneered a “third space” for world cinema. And in this third space, Bong Joon Ho never relies too much on either Korean or Hollywood styles and themes but always finds a happy middle ground between the two. Of course, as previously stated in the introduction, filmmakers and films do not exist independently of the social conditions and cultural system in which they exist but are in constant interaction or struggle with them within what Pierre Bourdieu terms “the field of cultural production.” Conversely, through films, we can read the society and the system that produced both the auteur and his or her films. What, then, are the internal and external forces that shape Bong Joon Ho’s filmic world? What are the material conditions that enable Bong to create blockbuster films? What are the cultural influences that inform his creativity and cultural hybridity? How are we to position his cinema in relation to the politics, cultures, and cinemas of Korea and of the world? This chapter aims to answer these questions by examining the individual and institutional conditions involved in Bong’s filmmaking: his formative years as a filmmaker, the significance of the “386 generation” both in Korea’s political landscape and its cultural production, the Korean film industry’s struggle against Hollywood domination and the subsequent rise of New Korean Cinema, Korea’s democratization and achievement of the freedom of expression, and Korea’s financial crisis and the implementation of various neoliberal economic policies. Thus while recognizing the creative agency that renders Bong’s approach to filmmaking distinct to him, this chapter examines the various conditions—­historical, political, social, and cultural—­that shaped the structure or social formation within which he has made his films. This chapter pays particular attention to the diverse and intercultural influences reflected in Bong’s films: Hollywood films, European and Asian films, Japanese manga, and the strong tradition of critical or social realism in Korean cinema. Bong represents a new generation of filmmakers who grew up watching Hollywood movies and Japanese cartoons on TV, participated in film clubs in the 1980s and 1990s, and attended film schools. Thus this chapter positions Bong Joon Ho and his films in the context of the rise of New Korean Cinema led by this new generation in the 2000s. It explores the ways in which changes in the Korean film industry gave this group of filmmakers the opportunity to make films that, in turn, brought about the further transformation of the industry and its mode of production while simultaneously putting Korean cinema on a world map.

A New Cultural Generation 17

Bong Joon Ho and Film Authorship A study on a director inevitably raises the question of authorship in film. The traditional notion of the auteur—­the claim that the director is, or should be, the author of his or her films, advanced by young critics of the film journal Cahiers du cinéma in 1950s France—­has been much contested, especially with respect to the Hollywood studio system, where a director’s creative control was limited. Indeed, unlike literary work, cinema is an inherently collaborative enterprise, which makes it difficult to attribute the role of the “author” to one person. However, despite the continuing debate on its validity, auteur or director studies persist. Recent auteur studies have increasingly focused on filmmakers on the margin of mainstream filmmaking, such as women, diasporic, avant-­garde, and other non-­Hollywood directors. In addition, the scope of the “auteur” has broadened to include producers, screenwriters, stars, and even the Hollywood production system itself.7 Academic and critical attention has also shifted to reception studies or audience studies that reject the idea that the author is the sole originator of the text’s meaning. Increasingly the “author” is considered only one of many voices that create the meaning of texts.8 Film authorship then can be thought of in terms of the auteur’s agency. Janet Staiger locates this agency in the choices directors make and brings attention to the ways in which subjects in minority positions, such as women, peoples of the LGBTQ community, and people of color, have practiced methods of self-­ expression that would be described as “‘transcending,’ ‘defamiliarizing,’ ‘subverting’ or ‘resisting.’”9 Seung-hoon Jeong and Jeremi Szaniawki see the need to reassess the film auteur in the age of globalization as the “global auteur,” whose authorship is expressed through film directors capturing the zeitgeist. Thus the auteur is an agent who “subjects itself to sociohistorical ideologies, cultural voices, technological conditions through which meaning is motivated, rationalized, mediated or reconstructed between an auteur and an audience.”10 We can say that Bong Joon Ho is a prime example of such an agent. In addition, Bong can be appropriately examined as an auteur because of the extent to which he maintains control over his work. His nickname, in fact, is Bong-tail, combining Bong Joon Ho and the word detail, reflecting his close attention to all aspects of his films. He has written or cowritten all his films and is known for demanding the right to the final cut. In Hollywood, however, directors are not usually given such a right. This is why, unlike Park Chan-­wook and Kim Jee-­woon, who came to Hollywood to make their first English-­language films, Bong turned down offers from Hollywood studios and instead made his first global film, Snowpiercer, with funding from the Korean company CJ E&M. However, Snowpiercer was not free from Hollywood intervention.

18

The Fil ms of Bong Joon Ho

The release of Snowpiercer in the United States and other English-­language territories was delayed almost a year after its Korean release in July 2013 due to the conflict between Bong and Harvey Weinstein, the American distributor of the film. Weinstein, the owner of the Weinstein Company, requested twenty minutes be cut out because “midwesterners are too stupid to understand the movie as it is.”11 In addition, Weinstein considered adding opening and closing voice-­ overs for further explanation of the story. Bong was “reportedly furious about the Weinstein English-­version cuts.”12 Non-­English-­speaking countries including France, Taiwan, and Japan had released Bong’s original version. Interestingly, this conflict between Bong and Weinstein sparked an online debate and even a “Free Snowpiercer” petition campaign led by a film activist. The petition points out Americans’ long anticipation of the film and the film’s potential to raise urgent issues to the American society: “social classes and the dangers of elitism.”13 Eventually, an agreement was reached to retain Bong’s original version, but it meant forsaking a wide release. The film’s distributor was switched to Radius-­T WC, a boutique label from the Weinstein Company that releases films on multiplatform video-­on-­demand (VOD) services and in theaters. The film was finally released in the English-­language territories on June 27, 2014, in eight theaters. However, with overwhelmingly positive reviews and word of mouth, the film finally achieved a wide release in more than 150 theaters nationwide. Also, the film was released on VOD two weeks into the theatrical release, making it the first film to be available on streaming service while still playing in theaters. Thus Snowpiercer left its mark on the history of online distribution in the United States. Three years later in 2017, another of Bong Joon Ho’s films became the center of controversy, this time on the issue of online streaming services. Okja, his first non-­Korean film in terms of financing, was met with fierce resistance from local exhibitors in France and Korea. Okja was produced as a Netflix original movie. Netflix offered Bong $50 million and total creative freedom, which was important to him. The only restriction was the choice of format. While he wanted to shoot the film in 35 mm, Netflix required that all their original movies be shot and archived in 4K.14 Thus Okja became his first film to be shot on digital. It was also his first film to be invited to the Competition section at Cannes International Film Festival. (Both The Host and Mother were screened out of competition.) However, Okja’s entry prompted protests from French distributors and exhibitors who were furious that Cannes had selected a film that was not set for theatrical release in France. During the premiere screening, the audience booed when the Netflix logo appeared on the screen, although the critical reception of the film was overwhelmingly positive. This incident led the Cannes Festival to issue a new rule that all future competition titles have to be released in French theaters. So unintentionally, Bong Joon Ho’s film was at the center of a

A New Cultural Generation 19

controversy surrounding the new distribution format of online streaming. It was in a way the price he had to pay in exchange for total creative freedom. The controversy and uproar did not stop in France. Okja was also met with resistance from the Korean theater chains as well. CGV, Lotte Cinema, and Megabox—­the top three theater chains in Korea, composing 93 percent of the nation’s movie theaters—­boycotted Okja over the simultaneous release on Netflix, citing that it violates the three-­week window between theatrical release and streaming availability.15 Through his choices, Bong was able to keep his cinematic vision intact; however, in the process, his work demonstrated the tensions created by innovations in film distribution, laying bare the unresolved obstacles to the coexistence of online streaming and theatrical release. He inadvertently stood at the forefront of the new changes in digital distribution. While Netflix provides non-­Hollywood filmmakers like Bong the ability to make a studio-­ quality movie with a creative control not offered by studios, it also limits the film’s consumption to primarily laptop screens and home televisions, which is a problem for blockbuster movies like Okja. Bong’s growth as an auteur was supported by the change in the industrial climate of the Korean film industry during his formative years. From the mid-­1990s to early 2000s, the traditional Korean film industry—­known as the Chungmuro, after the name of the street in Seoul where film production companies were concentrated—­began to hand over the reins to large conglomerates.16 Giant corporations such as Samsung and Daewoo set up their own movie business subsidiaries and began investing and producing films. This change would eventually allow individual directors like Bong to plan and produce films by dealing directly with conglomerates for funding. Furthermore, the French film culture and its notion of the auteur exerted strong influence at the time, creating an environment in which directors are usually given full control over their work. (Hence the impetus for Bong’s choice to have Snowpiercer produced by a Korean rather than Hollywood studio.) Indeed, in the 1990s, the Korean film industry used auteurism as a strategy to raise its international status. For instance, the Busan International Film Festival, which was launched in 1996 and has contributed to bringing international attention to Korean cinema, is deliberately and consciously director centric. Indeed, the rise of New Korean Cinema is attributable to this strategy of making the director the center of creativity in film.

Bong Joon Ho and New Korean Cinema The start of Bong Joon Ho’s film career coincides with the emergence of New Korean Cinema, which burst onto international movie screens in the new millennium. Yet of all these films, the most popular one in the 2000s was, by far,

20

The Fil ms of Bong Joon Ho

The Host (2006). The film broke records in Korea and also struck it big internationally with serious movie fans and cult audiences alike. While the film works marvelously as both a horror film and a black comedy, a sociopolitical agenda is clearly visible beneath the waves of the monster’s watery home. Just what that agenda is—­how the film responds to Korean-­U.S. relations, the image of the Korean military, and family and generational conflicts—­may seem a bit murky to non-Korean audiences; nevertheless, it was an international breakthrough film for the young Bong Joon Ho. It is symbolic that Bong’s first feature film, Barking Dogs Never Bite, was released in 2000, the year that celebrated the new millennium. It was as if to announce that Bong is going to become one of the leading lights of New Korean Cinema. Indeed, Bong’s trajectory corresponds to the success story of the Korean cinema itself. The changes the Korean film industry was going through since the mid-­1990s were revolutionary in all aspects. The production system, government policies, and the mode of distribution and exhibition underwent a drastic shift; new film media, especially film magazines, attracted new readers and film audiences; and international film festivals boomed. The artistic and technological quality of the films were greatly improved as well. This period is often referred to as the “renaissance of Korean cinema,” following a dark period from the 1970s to the 1980s in which Korean cinema suffered heavy political censorship under military dictatorship. The renaissance of Korean cinema was spearheaded by a new generation of filmmakers, including producers, directors, cinematographers, production designers, and so on. They constituted the first generation of film school graduates, technically sophisticated with new cinephile sensibilities. Described by Chris Berry as a “full service cinema,” the Korean film industry achieved success in a “full range of modes of production and consumption.”17 Art films began making a mark in international film circuits, while the commercial films, so-­called Korean-­style blockbusters, were having huge success in the domestic market. The share of home-­produced films in the domestic market was a mere 15.9 percent in 1993, but it rose to more than 50–­60 percent in the twenty-­ first century.18 Korea remains one of the few nations whose home-produced films dominate over Hollywood films in the domestic market. The rise of this New Korean Cinema was made possible by Korea’s achievement of democracy in the early 1990s, which in turn freed filmmakers from the political censorship that plagued the industry during the 1970s and 1980s. Film censorship was deemed unconstitutional by a Constitutional Court of Korea ruling in 1996. This freedom of expression opened the door for the creative power of a new generation of filmmakers to explode on to the world scene, and Bong is one of them, arguably the most successful filmmaker to emerge from this newly found freedom. The term New Korean Cinema refers to the creative and commercial resurgence Korean cinema experienced during the late 1990s and early 2000s.19 It

A New Cultural Generation 21

ushered in the “renaissance of Korean cinema” on both the domestic and the international level. In Korean context, the terms Korean New Wave and New Korean Cinema are used to indicate two separate periods and two distinct film styles, although the latter inherits the former’s legacy of critical realism or social realism. Korean New Wave cinema’s period roughly falls between 1988, when Park Kwang-­su’s debut feature, Chilsu and Mansu (Chilsu wa Mansu), was released, and 1995, when Park released his fifth feature film, A Single Spark (Aleumda-­un cheongnyeon Jeon Taeil). Korean New Wave films were much more politically oriented, whereas New Korean Cinema was focused more on commercial viability and transnational appeal. While Korean New Wave films dealt with social issues, New Korean Cinema was prompted by the idea of borrowing Hollywood’s concept of blockbuster and localizing it in order to win back the audience from the massive onslaught of Hollywood blockbusters. The filmmakers of Korean New Wave, such as Park Kwang-­su, Jang Sun-­woo, and others who were born in the 1950s, suffered under harsh political censorship; however, the filmmakers of New Korean Cinema were free from such restrictions. Also, while the Korean New Wave filmmakers were inspired by the prodemocratic political movement and the underground independent film movement of the 1980s, New Korean Cinema filmmakers were the first cinephile generation of filmmakers in Korea who were inspired by Hollywood genre movies and art cinema of Europe and Asia. For Korean New Wave filmmakers, cinema was an art for social critique and a tool for social change; for New Korean Cinema filmmakers, it was more of an entertainment and self-­expression. Bong Joon Ho’s films are significant in that they merge the two different approaches to filmmaking: the commercial entertainment aspect of cinema and the social commentary on injustices and social ills. With the onset of the financial crisis in 1997, the Korean film industry was faced with numerous challenges that threatened its foundation. First of all, conglomerates began to exit from the film industry, shutting down their film-­related wings, which caused the film industry to face its own financial crisis. To make matters worse, in the following year, the 1998 bilateral trade agreement (BIT) between Korea and the United States posed a serious threat to the screen quota system. The United States demanded the elimination of the system in exchange for more imports of Korean products such as cars and electronics into the U.S. market. Typically, a screen quota system is a legislative measure for governments to protect their domestic film industry. It requires every screen to set aside a certain number of days to domestic films so that foreign films—­mostly Hollywood—­do not dominate the theaters. At the time, every screen was required to show Korean films up to 146 days a year. This threat to eliminate the screen quota was palpable to the Korean film community. It was truly a life-­and-­death problem. A massive resistance ensued.

22

The Fil ms of Bong Joon Ho

Major filmmakers even shaved their heads in protest to the government’s disregard for the cultural value of cinema. In December 1998, the Screen Quota Emergency Committee was formed, encompassing “various groups in and out of the Korean film industry: mainstream filmmakers, producers, KIFA [Korean Independent Film Association], Screen Quota Watchers, and numerous civil movement organizations.”20 This committee led the massive protests against the elimination of the screen quota system in 1998 and 1999. This strong resistance succeeded in pressuring the Korean government to take the screen quota negotiation off the table, although eventually it was reduced to seventy-­three days per year in 2006. The sense of urgency surrounding the screen quota struggle stimulated the Korean film community to devise ways to survive and possibly win back the audience from Hollywood domination. Filmmakers and critics were actively discussing what would be the best way to bring about the resurgence of Korean cinema. Should they follow the auteur-­centered European model and make their mark in the international film festivals? Should they adopt more Hollywood-­like commercial films? How could they compete with the big-budget Hollywood blockbusters? They cannot compete in terms of budget, so it should be something that only the Korean film community can produce. The resulting idea was what is referred to as the “Korean-style blockbuster,” the idea that they should adopt the Hollywood style of narrative structure that audiences are familiar with but make stories that are uniquely Korean. A new generation of producers was at the forefront of creating and establishing the Korean-­style blockbuster. The first films of this style were Shiri (1999) and JSA (Joint Security Area, 2000). Shiri broke the local box-­office record set by Titanic the year before, selling 2.43 million tickets. A year later, JSA set another record, with 5.89 million ticket sales. Considering the basic concept of the Korean-­style blockbuster as telling specifically Korean stories with Hollywood language, it is no coincidence that both Shiri and JSA dealt with tragedies caused by the national division between South and North Korea since 1948. However, the two films differed in their approaches to adapting the Hollywood blockbuster style and their depiction of North Koreans. Directed by Kang Je-­kyu, Shiri was a political thriller about a North Korean terrorist organization infiltrating South Korea during a jointly sponsored soccer match between South and North Korea teams in Seoul. At the center of this terrorist threat lies the tragic love story between a South Korean intelligence agent and a North Korean sniper disguised as a civilian. The style of the film is fairly conventional, following the model of Hollywood action thrillers like The Rock (1996), for example, with North Koreans as the antagonist. Alternatively, JSA, which was directed by Park Chan-­wook, was the first film to depict North Koreans in a sympathetic light. Since the national division, the

A New Cultural Generation 23

South Korean government held a harsh anticommunist stance; therefore, media depictions of North Koreans were always evil. However, JSA, which tells a story of a forbidden friendship between Korean soldiers within the demilitarized zone, depicted both sides as the victims of the ideological divide. The film was made possible by the thaw between South and North Korea, with South Korean president Kim Dae-­jung and North Korean president Kim Jong-­il having the first summit meeting in Pyongyang, North Korea, in June 2000. Thus the film was a product of the time, which is in line with the concept of the Korean-­style blockbuster. The Korean film industry’s openness to and successful localization of the blockbuster to address local issues seems to be related to Korea’s postcolonial situation, which is different from those of Latin America and Africa. Korea was colonized by Japan, not the West; therefore, it was Japanese culture that had been banned in Korea until the late 1980s. After the liberation from Japan in 1945, American culture rapidly replaced Japanese culture in Korea. The Americanization of the Korean culture soon took place, while all things Japanese were considered suspicious. Korean people had more access to American culture and values than to Japanese or even Chinese cultures, since China was a communist nation vilified by Korean governments. There had been no cultural exchange between Korea and China until 1992, when Korea established diplomatic relations with China. Thus Korea was less resistant to Western culture—­in particular, American culture and Hollywood movies. They were not something to overcome but to emulate and adopt in order to draw audiences to local products. Whether Korean-­style blockbusters remain a mere “colonial mimicry”21 or are creating a “third space” is open for debate; however, it is safe to say that Bong Joon Ho’s films represent the cultural hybridization that creates a third space in which new forms of cultural production and meaning are created and the identity of Koreanness is negotiated. They adopt the Hollywood language in order to resist mere mimicry and to localize issues for the Korean audience. While Korean blockbusters led the resurgence of the local film industry’s share of the domestic market to an unprecedented level (53.5 percent in 2003), the auteur-­centered art films were making their waves in international film festivals. As was briefly mentioned previously, making auteur cinema was discussed among the new generation of filmmakers as another strategy to revive the failing Korean film industry. The central idea was that since it is almost impossible to compete with Hollywood in the commercial realm, Korean cinema should concentrate on producing auteur films to elevate their artistic quality and international reputation in the film festival circuit.22 The cultural influences that shaped Korean cinema were indeed a mixture of elements. The new generation of cinephile filmmakers grew up mostly watching Hollywood movies on TV; however, the French New Wave and its

24

The Fil ms of Bong Joon Ho

notion of the auteur were equally influential, if not more so, especially among the young film critics who were as much involved in the resurgence of Korean cinema as the young filmmakers were. During the 1970s and especially in the 1980s under the military regime, film culture in Korea was almost nonexistent. Theatrical releases of foreign films were limited, and most of the Korean films were either adaptations of literary classics or soft porn films, often referred to as “hostess films.” Therefore, many young people interested in film went to screenings held in the French Cultural Center and the German Goethe Institute in the city of Seoul. French New Wave films shown at the French Cultural Center left a lasting impact on this new generation, making the French term nouvelle vague the talk of the town. Accordingly, in contrast to the Hollywood mode of production, the Korean film industry tends to give established directors full control over their work, although recently, more and more directors are hired by the production company. Thus the notion of the Korean-­style blockbuster and the emphasis on the director as the auteur are crucial in positioning Bong Joon Ho and his films within New Korean Cinema. He has a strong sense of himself as the auteur of his films, writing the screenplay and having the right of final cut for his films. While other filmmakers of New Korean Cinema—­such as Hong Sang-­soo, Kim Ki-­duk, Park Chan-­wook, Lee Chang-­dong, and so on—­make more auteur-­ oriented art films that appeal to more sophisticated film viewers and circulate in the international film festival circuit, Bong Joon Ho, together with Kim Jee-­ woon, make blockbuster genre films with a strong sense of authorship. Bong’s third feature film, The Host, is a great example of the Korean-­style blockbuster film in terms of both its production value and its huge box-­office success. It sold over thirteen million tickets, smashing the all-­time box-­office record.

The 386 Generation and New Cultural Sensibilities Born on September 14, 1969, Bong Joon Ho belongs to the tail end of the 386 generation. This term was coined in the late 1990s to refer to the generation who was at the time in their thirties (3), had entered college in the 1980s (8), and was born in the 1960s (6). This generation left a distinct mark in contemporary Korean history with their crucial role in the 1980s democratization movement, which brought an end to the twenty-­seven years of military dictatorship. And they are the first generation since the Korean War who has studied Marxism and Leninism through underground groups in college, aspiring to liberate workers and peasants from exploitation, even though all Marxist writings were banned during the military dictatorship. Because of their unique historical experience of this political resistance, risking imprisonment and torture under the draconian military regime, the

A New Cultural Generation 25

members of the 386 generation tend to share a strong sense of social justice and freedom as well as a keen interest in class issues. The 1980s antidictatorship struggle was the catalyst for the emergence of this new political and social generation, which was comparable to the May 1968 generation in France. As a “social generation”—­to use Karl Mannheim’s term—­they were significantly influenced by a particular historical event in which they were actively involved during their youth, and in turn, they exerted influence on the political and cultural events that shape the future generations.23 Cinema was no exception, as it was mostly 386 generation filmmakers such as Park Chan-­wook, Kim Jee-­woon, Im Sang-­ soo, and Bong Joon Ho who led the renaissance of Korean cinema in the late 1990s onward. Bong entered Yonsei University in 1988, a year after the parliamentary democracy was achieved through the intense 1987 June Democratic Uprising. This meant that the student activism and political protests became less central to college life, although Bong participated in student demonstrations against the newly elected Roh Tae-­woo administration, which, although elected by direct vote, still represented a continued military regime. Bong also had participated in the June 1987 uprising as a high school student. He was a socially conscious student, and in the summer of 1990, he was arrested for using a Molotov cocktail during a protest organized by the Korean Teachers and Education Workers Union.24 While less intense student protests continued during his college years, the 1988 Seoul Summer Olympics brought with it some revised cultural policies by the government. The overseas travel ban was lifted in 1989 (previously, only those who obtained government approval could travel outside Korea), and the publication ban on the works by writers and poets who voluntarily or involuntarily chose to stay in North Korea after the Korean War was lifted in 1988. And between 1998 and 2004, the Korean government gradually lifted the ban on the importation of Japanese popular culture. Following the liberation from Japanese colonialism in August 1945, the Korean government restricted and regulated the import of Japanese pop culture in order to revive and protect the Korean language and culture, which had been nearly destroyed by Japan’s harsh assimilation policy during the 1930s and 1940s. The ban on Japanese pop culture was also in consideration of the people’s harsh feelings toward Japan. Japanese cinema and songs were banned from TV network broadcast until 1998, when the government took the first measure to open up the market. In 1998, the ban was lifted for manga and for films that won awards from prestigious international film festivals; in 1999, stage performances of Japanese songs were allowed, and the scope of films that could be released expanded; in 2000, Japanese video games, TV broadcasts of sports, documentaries, and news broadcasts were allowed, as was the importation of anime for

26

The Fil ms of Bong Joon Ho

theatrical showings; and finally in 2004, all restrictions were lifted on films and sales of CDs and cassette tapes of songs. The ban on Japanese popular culture is now a thing of the past in Korea. Thus unlike the 386 generation, those born in the 1970s and 1980s were exposed to a more diverse and hybrid cultural experience. While the 386 generation is more influenced by the political movement of the 1980s, those born in the 1970s had a more culturally rich experience in the postdemocratic Korea. Indeed, the 1990s saw an explosion of popular culture both in terms of production and consumption. The 386 generation’s energy and enthusiasm for political activism had now transferred to an enthusiasm for popular culture—­in particular, for cinema. It opened a new era of “film mania.” The weekly Cine 21 became a must-­read film magazine for film buffs, and the monthly Kino attracted more sophisticated film audiences with in-­depth analyses and introductions of films and film history. International film festivals were launched starting with the Busan International Film Festival in 1996, followed by Bucheon International Fantastic Film Festival and Seoul International Women’s Film Festival in 1997 and Jeonju International Film Festival in 2000. These festivals introduced films from around the world to Korean audiences and at the same time exposed previously little-­known Korean films and filmmakers to the international festival circuit. Bong Joon Ho’s films have elements taken from what the 386 generation represented, such as their particular attention to the socially weak, and his critical stance toward authorities and the United States is evident in his films—­in particular, Memories of Murder and The Host. His strong sense of social justice and political commitment can also be attributed to the characteristics of the 386 generation. However, at the same time, it is equally important to point out the ways in which Bong Joon Ho differs from them, especially in terms of cultural influences. Bong’s cultural experience was closer to that of those born in the 1970s, who benefited from the cultural freedom resulting from the political changes of the late 1980s. Bong stands between the “political” generation and more “cultural generation,” thus being in a position to meld the political with the cultural in his films. One distinct factor that separates this later generation from the 386 generation is a love for Japanese subculture, especially manga and anime. In fact, those born in the 1970s form the first otaku generation in Korea.25 It is well known through numerous interviews Bong gave that he is an avid fan of Japanese manga, and we can observe its influence in his films.26 In particular, Barking Dogs Never Bite manifests comic-­book-­inspired fantasy scenes and characters with exaggerated actions.

A New Cultural Generation 27

Formative Years From early on, Bong dreamed of becoming a film director. In his 2014 essay “Never Even Imagined of Doing Different Work,” he writes that it was the only job he ever wanted.27 From a young age, Bong watched almost all the films that were shown on TV. He says in an interview, “I saw Henri-­Georges Clouzot’s The Wages of Fear (1953) on TV when I was in elementary school. I was fascinated by its crazily intense tension. So I decided to become a filmmaker then.”28 Bong’s experience of becoming a film buff is significant in that it reflects the similar trajectory of many young people in his generation who were “film maniacs” and led the nationwide cinema fervor of the 1990s into the new mi