View waymark gallery

Asa Gray - Watertown, MA

Posted by: hykesj

N 42° 22.276 W 071° 08.631

19T E 323483 N 4693225

Grave of Asa Gray, the ‘Father of American Botany,’ in the prestigious Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge.

Waymark Code: WM19CKD

Location: Massachusetts, United States

Published By: Alfouine

Views: 1

Asa Gray was born in upstate New York in the early part of the nineteenth century. An early interest in plants led him to pursue botany as a hobby, one that became his life’s work. Formally trained and educated in medical science, Gray nevertheless continued to pursue botany (which wasn’t really a profession at that time) by taking leaves of absence to travel around the eastern United States collecting and classifying plant samples. His ‘hobby’ eventually grew to the point where his personal collection of plants and books on the subject numbered in the thousands.

In 1842, Asa Gray accepted a position at Harvard University as professor of natural history. By the end of the American Civil War, Gray had donated his entire botanical collection to Harvard, effectively creating Harvard’s Department of Botany. To this day the herbarium at Harvard University is named in his honor.

Over the course of his life, Gray identified hundreds of new plant species and has had many named for him. He was also a prolific writer, publishing many articles, manuals and textbooks. His most famous work, titled ‘Manual of the Botany of the Northern United States, from New England to Wisconsin and South to Ohio and Pennsylvania Inclusive’ but more commonly known as 'Gray’s Manual,' is still in print today. The highest award granted by the American Society of Plant Taxonomists is known as the Asa Gray Award.

(Source: britannica.com)

Description:

See Long Description above.Date of birth: 11/18/1810Date of death: 01/30/1888Area of notoriety: Science/TechnologyMarker Type: Horizontal MarkerSetting: OutdoorVisiting Hours/Restrictions: 8:00 am to 5:00 pmFee required?: NoWeb site: [Web Link]

Visit Instructions:

To post a visit log for waymarks in this category, you must have personally visited the waymark location. When logging your visit, please provide a note describing your visit experience, along with any additional information about the waymark or the surrounding area that you think others may find interesting.

We especially encourage you to include any pictures that you took during your visit to the waymark. However, only respectful photographs are allowed. Logs which include photographs representing any form of disrespectful behavior (including those showing personal items placed on or near the grave location) will be subject to deletion.

Search for...

Geocaching.com Google Map

Google Maps

MapQuest

Bing Maps

Nearest Waymarks

Nearest Grave of a Famous Person

Nearest Geocaches

Create a scavenger hunt using this waymark as the center point

Recent Visits/Logs:

There are no logs for this waymark yet.