Birinci Göz Hospital is a modern ophthalmological centre in Turkey specialising in corneal transplantation and laser vision correction.

The hospital has been operating since 2004. It is part of the well-known Turkish medical chain “Birinci Health Group.” The ophthalmological hospital is located in the centre of Istanbul, close to historical and cultural attractions, the airport, and the train station.

Main Areas of Work of Birinci Göz

Birinci Göz Eye Hospital in Turkey provides patients with qualified services for the diagnosis and treatment of various pathologies of the organs of vision:

cataracts;

glaucoma;

diabetic retinopathy;

keratoconus;

corneal dystrophy;

retinal detachment;

myopia;

farsightedness;

astigmatism.

Medical center doctors provide a wide range of medical care such as surgical and conservative treatment and physiotherapy. Vision check-ups and eyelid aesthetics are also conducted in Birinci Göz.

Modern Technologies of Treatment in the Eye Hospital

Birinci Göz uses modern painless eye treatment technologies that allow patients to quickly recover and return to their normal lifestyle.

The main methods of Birinci Göz

Laser vision correction. Popular technologies include:

LASIK – for most patients with myopia, hyperopia, and astigmatism;

PRK (photorefractive keratectomy) is recommended for patients with thin or uneven corneas.

Keratoplasty (cornea transplantation). Depending on the degree of damage to the cornea, ophthalmologists perform:

penetrating keratoplasty is a complete replacement of the cornea with donor issue in case of severe corneal lesions such as bullous keratopathy, deep ulcers, dystrophy, perforation;

lamellar keratoplasty is a replacement of a certain part of the cornea with superficial or deep corneal defects such as keratoconus, Fuchs' dystrophy, epithelial intrastromal cysts;

limbal keratoplasty is a replacement of the limbus (transitional zone between the cornea and sclera), it is indicated for burns and corneal injuries.

Cataract phacoemulsification with implantation of an artificial lens. This is a minimally invasive procedure, during which the doctor safely removes the cataract using ultrasound.

Lamellar keratoplasty is the most preferred method in the treatment of keratoconus. Doctors record a lower risk of donor tissue rejection, better optical stabilization, and preservation of endothelial cells. According to the Birinci Göz Hospital data, the treatment success rate is 99%, indicating high medical care.

Benefits of Birinci Göz Hospital

Birinci Göz Hospital has modern laser equipment that meets international standards.

Experienced ophthalmologists regularly undergo training in the leading eye centres in Europe and are experts in their field.

The patient has access to consultations with a doctor before and after treatment.

Comfortable conditions for the stay of patients who need surgery.

Birinci Göz provides an individual approach to each patient, considering their characteristics, wishes, and possibilities.

Compliance with sanitary and hygienic standards.

Affordable prices for procedures.

Technical Equipment of Birinci Göz Hospital

At Birinci Göz, we closely follow innovations and developments in the field of ophthalmology and quickly implement the best technologies. The Birinci Göz Ophthalmological Center is equipped with advanced systems with which doctors perform:

optical coherence tomography;

ultrasonic biomicroscopy;

ultrasound of the eye;

computer perimetry;

computer topography of the cornea;

autorefractometry.

For the surgical treatment of the organs of vision, Dr. Birinci Göz uses:

Excimer laser from Schwind Amaris. This is an ultra-precise 5D system that allows doctors to carry out the treatment as safely as possible.

Femtosecond laser IntraLase FS60. It is a powerful device with a wide spectrum of actions developed specifically for keratoplasty. It allows complete preoperative preparation using computer programs so that doctors can achieve ideal optical performance.

Phacoemulsifier Alcon Infiniti (USA). This is the most advanced cataract surgery system, allowing the doctor to perform all manipulations through a minimum incision of up to 2 mm. The system also considers the individual characteristics of the patient's eye.

Operating microscope Zeiss OPMI Lumera. It allows the doctor to examine in detail the transparent structures of the eye and instantly make the necessary decisions.

Intraocular lenses from the world's leading manufacturers: Alcon AcrySof, Zeiss AT LISA, Rayner Sulcoflex. A new generation of lenses called smart lenses is used in Birinci Göz. This ensures that the patient no longer needs glasses and contact lenses.

Birinci Göz Eye Hospital in Istanbul is the best choice for restoring vision at an affordable cost, with the opportunity to relax in a hospitable Turkish resort. Medical consultants of Experts Medical will advise on all treatment issues quickly and without overpayments as well as arrange a trip to Birinci Göz in Istanbul.

Long-term diabetes is one of the risk factors that play a vital role in the development of diabetic retinopathy. To diagnose the disease in Birinci Goz, apply the following:

FFA (fundus angiography);

optical coherence tomography;

OCT angiography.

Unlike conventional ocular angiography, OCT angiography does not involve intravenous administration of drugs. 3D visualization is available in the hospital, which provides 100% diagnosis.

Birinci Goz ophthalmologists treat diabetic retinopathy with an argon laser. This technology slows down the progression of vascular damage in the eye, allows you to stop the development of the disease at an early stage and prevent vision loss. Doctor Birinci Goz uses parallel intraocular injections to treat many stages of retinal damage caused by diabetes. In severe cases, cleansing of the intraocular membranes is carried out microsurgically (vitrectomy).