"I was interested in creating fictional worlds and wanted to show that through the human body," says Çağla Çağlar, who first picked up a camera at the age of 15, inspired by her grandfather who was a professional photographer.

While she was getting to grips with her camera and its functions, Çağla focused predominantly on landscapes and still life before moving onto portraits of people, which she immediately fell in love with. When she turned 18, Çağla enrolled at the Istanbul Topkapi University (then known as the Plato Vocational School) to study photography and videography. "Learning the theory of photography and film was very useful to me," she recalls. "I learnt the history of art, which expanded my horizons, and I learnt the technical aspects of my trade in applied lessons."

Çağla's first job in the industry was as an Assistant Director on a television sitcom, Sen Harikasın, which aired on a national channel in Turkey. She continued to work in TV and on commercial sets for 10 years alongside working as a photographer, shooting simple but emotive portraits and posters for theatre productions. Once established in the industry, Çağla began writing, producing and directing her own short films – the first being Minval, which aired in 2016.

As for the work that she's most proud of, Çağla says it's the music video she created for artist Minstrel's song, Back to Where You've Never Been. "I love taking photos in a series because it gives me a chance to show my cinematic perspective," she says. "This is the piece that satisfies me most in terms of composition and cinematic quality."

What inspires your work?

"I take inspiration from everything that affects my emotional state – music, movies, where I live, weather conditions. I compose emotional states and events through the human body, and prefer simple but effective visuals."

How do you tailor your approach to tell stories in a way that reflects your style?

"I choose my lens according to the subject I will shoot. I generally prefer wide or medium lenses because telephoto lenses narrow my field too much. I prefer soft tones, so I avoid creating scenes with too much contrast, and when shooting externally, I adapt my settings to create a consistent aesthetic."

How does your approach differ between each piece of work you make?

"I usually write and direct short films myself, which makes me freer. I can express my own feelings in my own language. When I'm shooting commercial projects, such as music videos, all decisions are made by a group of people. The artist will share with me what they feel about the music they make, and I make something that I hope aligns with their thoughts. I love my work, but I feel the most free when I'm working on personal projects."

What is the most rewarding part of your job?

"It makes me happy to know that my work is valued. It encourages me to have my photographs exhibited, and to have my films watched and appreciated. Knowing that people appreciate my work is an important motivator for me, as I think it must be for any artist."