August 18, 2012

At the heart of this volume of Leonard Woolf's autobiography are his discussions of his wife, Virginia Woolf. The author recounts his falling in love with Virginia, their marriage, and, most significantly, accounts of their life together during Virginia's recurring bouts with mental illness. Mr. Woolf's deep and profound understanding of his wife's condition and his recollections of its impact on their life is both an important contribution to an understanding of Virginia's life and work, and an achingly moving portrait of Leonard's love for her. We must again remember that Mr. Woolf is writing in 1963 about events in the years 1911 through 1918. His ability to relate not simply a sequence of events, but to capture the emotional qualities of those events at such far remove is extremely impressive. I also find Mr. Woolf's writing to be wonderful. This example is one of my favorite sentences in the book, where he is describing the effect on him of Virginia launching into a flight of conversation: "It always made me think of the breaking and gushing out of the springs in autumn after the first rains." In addition to giving the reader an appreciation of the life of Leonard Woolf, this book provides an invaluable contribution to our understanding of Virginia Woolf.

November 7, 2021

thank you Leo some useful bits for my diss here also loved the ending when you and Virginia celebrated the end of the war by going to the dentist then ate choccy bars on the way home that’s very cool

This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers.

May 20, 2014

So far the strongest of these autobiography volumes. We get the marriage to Virginia, the destruction of the Great War, Leonard's politics (and his rise in said circles), TS Eliot's poetry published by the Woolfs, and the birth of the Hogarth Press. Woolf is critical of himself and others; his eye does not mitigate his opinions then or 'now'. His mind also allows us to continue to take big asides with him, which can be fun and curious (especially when he brings us 20 years away from where his story is currently). George Bernard Shaw's row with Leonard and TS Eliot's acceptance to tea with Virginia with the use of a rhyming poem are particularly fun tidbits delivered here. Virginia's first bouts of mania are troubling.

To think I've wanted to read these for ten years and only got a hold of them five years ago, and they have sat on my bookshelf unread until now.

September 13, 2020

The title refers to beginning life again in England, after 7 years in Ceylon [Sri Lanka], not as one might think, to life after Virginia. Virginia truly appears in this volume for the first time and it is very evident how much Leonard loved her. This volume, even more than the previous two, is a loosely knit, unchronological-in-many-ways set of reminiscences about these years—which were dominated by the Great War. Rather like my grandfather [Ellis] might write, only better written. I felt as if I could see Leonard at the end of his life, losing (gradual) his ability to deliver a coherent narrative. Yet it is compelling and interesting.

March 3, 2023

These autobiographies are so interested as Leonard Woolf tracks the period after he leaves the civil war and returns to England . He marries and deals with his wife’s bouts of madness against a back drop of the 1st World war . Somehow along the way they both learn how to print and set up the Hogarth Press. Fascinating.

March 29, 2021

I’m in love with Leonard Woolf. Controversial, yet true. He mesmerises me through his writing. His descriptions, his philosophy, his honesty. Everything that appeals to me in a book. Highly recommended.

Read

November 1, 2021

not specifically a good book but he lists exactly how much he and Virginia made on several books, so that was fun

March 20, 2009

Probably my favorite volume in the series. This book is basically more fascinating reports of the early entity that was Virginia and Leonard's marriage ... her fragile mental health that led to a complete breakdown in 1913, and the after affects that reverberated for her (and for Leonard) for more than another year or so. Also detailed: accounts of their daily working life (their writing); their reading; their buying of houses (Asham & Monk's House, the country houses, briefly Clifford's Inn, and Hogarth House); LW's throwing in with the Fabian Society and Labour party and his becoming politically aware in general. Then, of course, comes the horror of World War 1 - the debacle that one could see coming at you, but were helpless to prevent.

January 2, 2015

I wondered if Woolf was staring to get a little scattered in his old again here as he kept saying that he wanted to tell his story chronologically and then jumping all over the place and repeating himself. Reading this and Penelope Fitzgerald at the same time really emphasizes how small the English upper classes are and how they all know each other. Loved hearing about Virginia from his point of view even if much of what he relates is sad and disturbing. It's hard to think she could have been quite so successful without his devotion to her which is consistently touching.

February 18, 2016

See full review here: http://ilayreading.com/2016/02/17/beg...

I think that I will stick to reading regular biographies of the couple from now on. I’m still very much interested in their life–and I do have a book marked from Vanessa Bell’s perspective–but Leonard Woolf, my man, you should’ve let your wife do the writing.

July 13, 2010

I found this in a used book store and bought it, and even though it's the third volume of five I found it easy to read without the others. Very interesting.