3. Karma 1 Special Sections Editor & Vice President Ilavarasan Editor Pundit Madhu Manikandan Reporter & Art Director Priest Kumar Contributing Writers Legal Advisors Nirmala Sujatha Reddy Deepika Raina Sheetal Pooja Sushma pattel SHAMA PARARAJASINGHAM A.P. Jayachandran, Esq The nation’s largest full color monthly spiritual and metaphysical magazine. Submission & Disclaimers: Weacceptarticles,photography,and art work that is in keeping with our mission. We do not endorse any particular opinion, program, or advertisement. We reserve the right to edit or reject any material we receive. We will do our best to honor the integrity of our readership. It is merely our sincere hope that we help our readers to achieve success in their lives. Post Masters: Send address changes to Shiva Vishnu Temple of Texas P.O. Box 2602, Baytown, TX - 77522 Note: Karma does not accept any responsibility for products or services advertised. The publisher has the right to deny any advertising at its sole discretion. Contact Information Publisher : texastemple@aol.com Editor : texastemple@aol.com Advertising & Marketing : avtemple@aol.com Subscription & Postage : parutower@gmail.com Telephone : 1-888-808-1418 web : www.karmamagazine.org Hindu “Simple” Mantras 2 Simple Idea about Hindu Vedic Astrology 4 The Transformational Divine Light 10 Confusions and immediate guaranteed solutions 16 Bed time Stories for Kids 20 Chettinadu Samayal ( Cooking)z 24 Letter to our Swamiji 28 Sex 55 Religion 60 Content......... Karma Empowering Self & Community

4. Karma 2 - His Holiness Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar Mantras are considered to be divine rhymes composed by the ancient Vedic Rishis/saints in the divine language of Sanskrit. Mantras are energy-based sounds. They are primarily used as spiritual conduits, words or vibrations that instill one-pointed concentration in the devotee. Other purposes have included religious ceremonies to accumulate wealth, avoid danger, or eliminate enemies etc. Mantra is a combination of magical/mystical words and sound waves. Mantra is recited to relax mind & to fulfill the desired work. Mantra is an invocation or a mystical formula, which aids the person to release the self and attain bliss and ultimate fulfillment. The sounds involved in a Mantra are themselves significant for they generate in the individual an unusual mystic power. Mantra produces a set of vibration in the surrounding atmosphere & its force depends on the attitude of the person as well as the intensity of concentration. Mantras are performed through faith, the results of which cannot be analyzed measured, weighed, seen but are felt. The force of Mantra can be only felt. It should be performed with due faith and all rituals, then it is fruitful. You must have complete faith in Mantra you are reciting and must know its meaning. Do the things as per prescribed methods. You will experience sensation and vibrations during or at the end of Japa, this is a sufficient proof to believe. Mantra requires faith, Japa, hard work ad per laid dictums to realize the desired objects and vibrations. Each Mantra has a different use, The vibrations of sound create desired reactions within the body too. For Children: Santan Gopal Mantra ॐ श्रीं ह्रीं क्लीं ग्लौं देवकीसुत गोविन्द वासुदेव जगत्पते देहि मे तनयं कृष्ण त्वामहं शरणं गतः । Om Shreeng Hreeng Kleeng Glaung Devakisut Govind Vasudev Jagatpate Dehi Me Tanayam Krishn Tvaamaham Sharanam Gatah । Santan Prapti Mantra ॐ नमो भगवते जगत्प्रसूतये नमः । Om Namo Bhagavate Jagatprasutaye Namah । Shri Krishna Mantra for Santan Prapti ॐ क्लीं गोपालवेषधराय वासुदेवाय हुं फट स्वाहा । Om Kleeng Gopalveshadhaaraay Vaasudevaay Hum Phat Swahaa । कात्यायनि महामाये महायोगिन्यधीश्वरि । नन्द गोपसुतं देविपतिं मे कुरु ते नमः ॥ Katyayani Mahamaye Mahayoginyadheeshwari । Nandgopsutam Devipatim Me Kuru te Namah ॥ Parvati Mantra for delayed Marriages हे गौरि शंकरार्धांगि यथा त्वं शंकरप्रिया । तथा मां कुरु कल्याणि कान्तकातां सुदुर्लभाम ॥ Hey Gauri Shankarardhangi Yatha Tvam Shankarpriyaa ।

5. Tatha Mam Kuru Kalyaani Kaantkatam Sudurlabhaam ।। Surya Mantra for delayed Marriages ॐ देवेन्द्राणि नमस्तुभ्यं देवेन्द्रप्रिय भामिनि । विवाहं भाग्यमारोग्यं शीघ्रलाभं च देहि मे ॥ Om Devendrani Namastubhyam Devendrapriya Bhamini । Vivaaham Bhagyamaarogyam Sheeghralabham Cha Dehi Me । Shiv Mantra (Panchakshari) For the acquisition of salvation and destruction of fear of death this Shiv Mantra is best. This Shiva mantra is considered effective for the eradication of disease, sorrow, fear etc. Recitation of this Mantra gives success and Siddhis. ॐ नमः शिवाय । Om Namah Shivaay । Rudra Mantra This is known as Rudra mantra. Rudra Mantra is recited to get blessing of Lord Shiva. It is considered effective for the fulfillment of one’s wishes. ॐ नमो भगवते रूद्राय । Om Namo Bhagwate Rudraay । Shiv Gayatri Mantra ॐ तत्पुरुषाय विद्महे महादेवाय धीमहि तन्नो रुद्रः प्रचोदयात । Om Tatpurushaay Vidmahe Vidmahe Mahadevaay Deemahi Tanno Rudrah Prachodayat । Shiv Dhyaan Mantra करचरणकृतं वाक् कायजं कर्मजं वा श्रवणनयनजं वा मानसंवापराधं । विहितं विहितं वा सर्व मेतत् क्षमस्व जय जय करुणाब्धे श्री महादेव शम्भो ॥ Karcharankritam Vaa Kaayjam Karmjam Vaa Shravannayanjam Vaa Maansam Vaa Paradham | Vihitam Vihitam Vaa Sarv Metat Kshamasva Jay Jay Karunaabdhe Shree Mahadev Shambho || Mata Bagalamukhi Mantra for Sarva Karya Siddhi ॐ ह्रीं ऎं क्लीं श्री बगलानने मम रिपून नाशय नाशय ममैश्वर्याणि देहि देहि शीघ्रं मनोवान्छितं साधय साधय ह्रीं स्वाहा । Om Hreeng Aing Kleeng Shri Bagalanane Mam Ripoon Naashay Naashay Mamaishwaryaani Dehi Dehi SHeeghram Manovanchhitam Saadhay Saadhay Hreeng Swaahaa। Mahamrityunjay Mantra This is known as Mahamrityunjay Mantra. Mahamrityunjay Mantra is most powerful mantra and most effective for increasing longevity(long life), for eradicating diseases and death fear. The house where Mahamrityunjay Mantra is recited problems like diseases, sudden death and death fear cannot touch the members of that house. ॐ ह्रौं जूं सः भूर्भुवः स्वः त्र्यम्बकम् यजामहे सुगन्धिम् पुष्टिवर्धनम् । उर्वारूकमिव बन्धनान् मृत्योर्मुक्षीय मा मृतात् भूर्भुवः स्वरों जूं सः ह्रौं ॐ ।। Om Hruang Jung Sah Bhurbhuvah Swah Trayambakam Yajamahe Sugandhim Pustiwardham | Urwarukmivbandhanaan Mrityormuksheey mamritat Bhurbhuvah Swaraung Jung Sah Mirutannjay Mantra This is known as Mrityunjay Mantra. Mrityunjay Mantra should be recited for the eradication of disease and death fear. Mrityunjay Mantra is highly recommended for increasing longevity. ॐ त्र्यम्बकम् यजामहे सुगन्धिम् पुष्टिवर्धनम्, उर्वारूकमिव बन्धनान् मृत्योर्मुक्षीय मा मृतात् । Om Trayambakam Yajamahe Sugandhim pustivardham, Urwarukmivbandhanaan Mrityormuksheey mamritaat | Ekakshar Mrityunjay Mantra ह्रौं | -Hruang | : Trayakshar Mrityunjay Mantra :-ॐ जूं सः | - Om Jung Sah

6. Karma 4 - His Holiness Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar Vedic Astrology is an ancient Indian science which explains planetary motions and positions with respect to time and their effect on humans and other entities on earth. Astrology is the science of the effects of the planets movements on our lives and all things. Astrology is based on astronomy in that astrologers need to know the correct positions of the planets at any given time, as well as the correct positions of the zodiacal fixed star signs in relation to any place on earth at any given time. Once the correct positions of the signs and planets are known, the Atharva Vedic Punditsthen constructs charts representing these positions, and using the astrological science, studies the charts and can make quite a wide range of conclusions about the moment the chart was cast for. Astrology sees mankind as being not only influenced by hereditary factors and the environment, but also by the state of our solar system at the moment of birth. The planets are regarded as basic life-forces, the tools we live by as well as the basis of our very substance. These planetary forces take on different forms, depending on their zodiacal position and on the way they relate to one another. The aspects formed between the planets describe these relationships, the positions of the planets in relation to the place of birth tell us of their expression in the spheres of life depicted by the astrological houses. By interpreting the roles of these players (the planets) and their qualities (the elements, signs and houses) and creating a synthesis, astrology is able to present a complete and comprehensive picture of the person and his potential, based on the natal horoscope. Astrology is without doubt the original science, the oldest of the sysytems of knowledge devised by human beings.It is the science of fate/destiny used for understanding events happening on earth. Astrology is not only the foremost of the outer sciences which deal with the nature of the physical universe, it is one of the most important of the inner or spiritual sciences which deal with the mind and soul. Branches of Vedic Astrology Vedic astrology (Jyotisha) has three main branches: · Siddhanta (Astronomy) · Samhita (Mundane astrology) · Hora (Predictive astrology) The Science of Astrology is concerned with the observations of the positions of certain bodies and certain points in the heavens in relation to the earth and with the correspondences between these relative positions and the events which occur on the Earth. That such correspondences do exist is unquestionable. Modern scientific experiments and observation could easily verify this and confirm the findings of the ancient scientists. It does not necessarily follow that the planets and the stars themselves affect or cause such events. It is sufficient to note that certain positions or groupings of the stars or planets in relation to the earth actually do correspond to certain types of events which occur on the earth. To make the necessary observations and to translate these observations into terms of correspondence with events occurring on the Earth, both physical and psychological, Hindu Astrologers evolved a rational procedure which is based on five main factors: 1.The Zodiac fixed background to which all heavenly bodies are referred. This background is divided into twelve equal parts. (See Figure I). 2. The Asterisms-Subdivisions of the Fixed Background or Zodiac into smaller sections marked by the Fixed Stars. (See Figure 2.) 3. The Solar System-The Sun, the Moon and the planets which, like the Earth, comprise our own Solar system. The motions of these bodies from point to point within the Fixed Background and in relation to the Earth. 4. The Houses-Imaginary space divisions, radiating out vertically from any particular point on the Earth’s surface, and marking out divisions of space, traversed by this point during each twenty-four hours, as the Earth revolves on its own axis. 5. Time-Any given moment at which an event occurs. THE ZODIAC In order to determine these positions and groupings accurately, Astrologers use a fixed background or plane of reference called the Zodiac.The Zodiacal Circle is in the same plane as the Ecliptic which is the approximate path of the Earth and Planets in their motion around the Sun. The Zodiac, therefore, is merely the Ecliptic extended limitlessly into space. These twelve equal sections or divisions of the Zodiac are called the Signs of the Zodiac and are named and numbered as follows: (l ) Aries (2) Taurus (3) Gemini (4) Cancer (5) Leo (6) Virgo (7) Libra (8) Scorpio (9) Sagittarius (10) Capricorn (11) Aquarius (12) Pisces Vedic Terminology : 1. Mesha 2. Vrishabha 3. Mithuna 4. Karka 5. Sinha 6. Kanya 7. Tula 8. Vrischika 9. Dhanu 10. Makara 11. Kumbha 12. Mina THE ASTERISMS or NAKSHTRA It was observed by the ancient Astronomers that many changes occurred within the 30 degree zones mapped out by the Zodiac. It was therefore, found necessary to subdivide each of the twelve sections or Signs of the Zodiac. Using the belt of Fixed Stars which encircle the Earth at the Equator as markers, they divided the Zodiacal Background into 27 sections, the boundary of each being marked by a particular Fixed Star, located close to the Zodiacal belt. These sections are known as the Asterisms or Nakshatras. They begin at the same point in the Constellation Aries which marks the beginning of the Zodiac,. and since each extends over an

7. arc of 13 deg-20’, there are therefore twenty-seven of them in the complete circle of 360 degrees. PLANETS The Zodiac and the Asterisms form the fixed background to which all the variables or moving points used in Astrology are referred. A sort of backdrop, in front of which the drama of our solar system is played. Importance of Vedic Astrology Astrology is the language of the stars ... it is in fact the Universal language. Astrology is basically a science of time. Every moment in time has a certain quality attached to it. By being born at a particular moment in time under the heavens we imbibe this quality. The personal horoscope is just a simplified map of the heavens at the moment we are born. It is in turn a guide map for our journey through time on the planet known as earth. Astrology does not pronounce any judgement. Just like nature, it has no good or bad. It just reveals what was, what is, and what can be. Astrology is not about depending on fate as a lot of people purport it to be. In fact, it puts more emphasis on karma than fate. Today’s ‘karma’ is tomorrow’s ‘fate’. Astrology is the science of ‘light’ and lights the path known as life. It is finally up to us to traverse the path once it has been lighted. Astrology is amazingly accurate ... it can work accurately even on a daily or hourly basis if required. Astrology is not only the foremost of the outer sciences which deal with the nature of the physical universe, it is one of the most important of the inner or spiritual sciences which deal with the mind and soul. Nakshatra OR Constellations It was observed by the ancient Astronomers that many changes occurred within the 30 degree zones mapped out by the Zodiac. It was therefore, found necessary to subdivide each of the twelve sections or Signs of the Zodiac. Using the belt of Fixed Stars which encircle the Earth at the Equator as markers, they divided the Zodiacal Background into 27 sections, the boundary of each being marked by a particular Fixed Star, located close to the Zodiacal belt. These sections are known as the Asterisms or Nakshatras. They begin at the same point in the ConstellationAries which marks the beginning of the Zodiac,. and since each extends over an arc of 13deg-20’, there are therefore twenty-seven of them in the complete circle of 360 degrees. NAKSHATRA | YONI | GAN | NADI NAKSHTRA YONI GAN NADI Asvini Ashva Dev Adya Bharani Gaja Manushya Madhya Krittika Mesh Rakshash Antya Rohini Sarp Manushya Antya Mrigsira Sarp Dev Madhya Ardra Shwan Manushya Adya Punarvasu Marjar Dev Adya Pushya Mesha Dev Madhya Rakshash Marjar Rakshash Antya Magha Mooshak Rakshash Antya P. Phalguni Mooshak Manushya Madhya U. Phalguni Gao Manushya Adya Hasta Mahishi Dev Adya Chitra Vyaghra Rakshash Madhya Swati Mahishi Dev Adya Vishakha Vyaghra Rakshash Antya Anuradha Mrig Dev Madhya Jyestha Mrig Rakshash Antya Moola Shwan Rakshash Adya Purvasdha Kapi Manushya Madhya Uttaradhdha Nukula Manushya Antya Shravana Kapi Dev Antya Dhanishtha Sinh Rakshash Madhya Shatbhisha Ashva Rakshash Adya P. Bhadrapad Ashva Manushya Adya U. bhadrapad Gao Manushya Adya Revati Gaja Dev Antya The Zodiac, therefore, divides heavens into twelve equal sections of thirty degrees each. The Asterisms, however, are sections or divisions of the heavens of 13deg-20’ each. But it was found that changes in conditions and characteristics occurred even within these smaller boundaries and so each Asterism is further subdivided into arcs of 3deg-20’ or into quarter sections. As we have seen, the birth chart reflects what circumstances in this life we can expect to experience. According to the Vedic Astrology, these effects are a result of past actions, actions in previous lifetimes. Our time and place of birth is not random, it precisely specifies a birth chart for us, delivering the results of our past actions through the quality of Natural Law at the time of birth. The act of birth imprints these laws in our physiology and the environment we are born in. The planetary positions are merely convenient indicators of those laws, accurate instruments to measure, calculate and interpret these laws. The interpretation of the birth chart is merely a reflection of our stage of evolution at the time of our birth; it does not limit us in any way to grow and improve upon it. Even though the analysis includes a lifetime of dashas and transits, one should realize that all of that remains relative to the evolutionary state at the time of birth. Past actions are the result of past choices. When people become aware of choices that they no longer wish to keep, they can change their life by starting to choose differently. New choices will start creating new responses, which will gradually change our circumstances. Reactions and responses from past actions take time to manifest, and remove those karmas. Remedial measures are things we can do to help correct or neutralize the undesired results of past actions. There are different types of remedial measures. Jap-Pujan: Yantra :Gemstones etc., Call Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar @ Toll Free: 1-888-808-1418 for more help

8. Karma 6 Significance The twelve houses of zodiac represent all the aspects of existence at the terrestrial as well as individual level. The houses from the lagna to seventh represent the right half of the body of the native(and the left half of the body of his spouse). Those from the seventh to the lagna represent his left half and the right half of his spouse. First House Body, fame, strength, character, courage, knowledge or lack of it, residence, place of birth, dignity, honor, ancestry, livelihood, the present wisdom, wealth, comforts and discomforts, self-respect, peace of mind, happiness and un-happiness, detachment, virtues and vices, health of parents. In medical astrology : Body in general, limbs, complexion, marks or moles on the body, sound and unsound health, skin texture, longevity, sleep, head, brain, texture of hair, stamina. Second House Wealth, speech, physical enjoyments, trading in ornaments, pearls and diamonds, buying or selling in general, accumulation of wealth, earning through self-effort, acquisitions from father, truthfulness and falsehood, inclinations, food, taste, clothes, eloquence, humility, steadiness of mind, learning education, letters, anger, deceitfulness, family members, friends, enemies, servants, close followers, self-control, death. In medical astrology : Face, teeth, tongue, oral cavity, nose, nails, speech, eyes(right eye). Third House Courage and valor, physical fitness, hobbies, talent, education, goodqualities,siblings,longevityofparents,tolerance,capability, quality and nature of food, selfishness, sports, fights, refuge, trading, dreams. Sorrows, stability of mind, neighborhood, near relations, friends, army, inheritance, ornaments, cleverness, short journeys. In medical astrology : Ears(right ear), neck, throat, shoulders, bones, upper limbs, mental instability, physical growth, and longevity. Fourth House Near and dear ones, caste and ancestry, mother, relatives on mother’s side, lands and houses, agriculture, farming, gardens, orchards, installations, buildings, parliament favors from the ruler, medicine, education, knowledge of land and geography, hidden treasures, comforts and discomforts, courage, faith, victory and defeat, perfumes, clothes, milk, digging, agricultural produce, vehicles, possession of cattle, horses and elephants. In medical astrology : Chest, lungs, heart, breast, potent, medicine. Fifth House Progeny, father, mental ability, learning, knowledge, scholarship, character, conception, prosperity, acquisitions through wife, fascination (for women), sharp, wisdom, discrimination and analytical skill, capability, devotion to gods, means of earning, official seal, good or bad memory, speculation, humiliation, authorship, shruti(Vedas), Smitri, knowledge of mantras, karmas of past lives. In medical astrology : Heart, upper abdomen, liver, gall bladder, mind, mental illness, problems related to pregnancy. Sixth House Enemies,oppositions,mentalagitation,injuries,accident,disease, wounds sustained in war, loans, debts, losses, disappointments, obstacles, poisons, slanders, humiliation, cruelty, indulgence in prohibited acts, theft, quarrels, imprisonment, maternal uncles, maternal aunt, step-mother, pets, cattle, flavors of food, servants, subordinates, nuisances in general. In medical astrology : Intestines, umbilical region, phlegmatic illness, tuberculosis, eye disease, poisoning, accidents, operations. Seventh House Spouse, sex partner, marriage, adultery, lust or passion, nature or character of spouse, sexual union, secret love affairs, journey, deviation from ones path, partnership in business, overt enemies, quarrels, theft, loss of memory, recovery of lost wealth, progress, attainment of status, grandfather, brothers son death. In medical astrology : Lower urinary tract, anal canal, semen, seminal vesicle, urethra, prostrate, sexual act. Eighth House Marital Status of the woman, longevity, death, obstacle, disgrace, defeat, discontinuity, suddenness, unexpectedness, misery, loss of memory, sin, killing a living being, capital punishment, nature of death, place of death, wickedness, father’s indebtedness, deviation from unexpected norms, frightful place, difficult route, crevices, finding faults, humiliation, wife’s wealth, sudden unexpected gain, hidden talents, spiritual pursuits and attainments, inheritance, son of the elder sister. In medical astrology : External genitalia, incurable or chronic disease, loss of limb, longevity, cause of death, severe mental anguish.

9. Ninth House Virtuous deeds, pilgrimages, worship, religious inclination, devotional and religious learning, karmas of the present birth, splendour, association with virtuous, auspiciousness, the preceptor or guru, father, austerity, penance, charity, kindness, wisdom, knowledge, devotion towards the preceptor, spiritual initiation, mental quietude, fame and fortune, progeny, temples, Vedic rituals, long journeys, travel by sea. In medical astrology : Hips, thighs, nourishment. Tenth House Profession, function, source of livelihood, governmental service, honour from the king, business, status, wealth, political power, fame, progress, nature of work, professional inclination, the treating physician, hidden treasure, prescribed course, teaching capability, self-control, dominance, sacrificing nature, proficiency, fathers wealth and well-being, foreign travel, financial status, place of residence, performance of sacred and religious deeds. In medical astrology : knee joint, knee cap. Eleventh house Gains of all the nature, income, acquisition, fulfillment of desires, nature of earning, arrival, rewards, recognition, favours from ruler, special status, proficiency, learning, ancestral property, fondness for the precious stones, lost wealth, pursuit of pious and religious deeds, profits and returns, elder brother, paternal uncle, longevity of the mother, material enjoyments. In medical astrology : Legs, left ear, left upper limb, recovery from disease. Twelfth House Expenditure, loss of wealth, spending money for prescribed or prohibited pursuits, pleasures of the bed, bedroom, mental anguish, loss of sleep, physical disease, wickedness, penury, loss or disease of a limb, loss of authority, imprisonment, confinement in an enemies house, loss of spouse, exit from world, emancipation, renunciation, distant travel, foreign land, emigration, loss in travel, paternal property, spiritual learning, secret learning, fear from overt and covert enemies. In medical astrology : Sleep disorders, mental imbalance, hospitalization, feet, left eye, death. For more help to understand your life, the problems goes around or expected problems and to resolve it Call immediatelyl the “ authority of Vedic Astrology” in USA Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar , who is considered to be a living God to millions of followers. Toll Free: 1-888-8-8-1418. email: avtemple@aol. com Atharva Vedic Lal KitabSwamiji sri Selvam Siddhar is the “ only” authority in thre western countries with relates to Atharva Vedic Lal Kitab. Reach swamiji immediately in his cell phone number 408- 829 7780 immediately to discuss your personal problems in a confidential and confident way. He will guaranteed way will settle your problems, “ if” there is a good reason for it Lal Kitab introduced a new style of horoscope analysis with quick and affordable remedies. In Lal Kitab, nine planets have been accorded prominence as in the Vedic astrology. In addition, the predictions are based on the planetary position according to the twelve houses. However, there are differences in Vedic astrology and Lal Kitab. In case of Vedic Astrology, the houses are fixed but the zodiac signs are not fixed whereas in Lal Kitab both houses and zodiac signs are fixed. Lal Kitab Remedies OR Lal Kitab Upaay Most important aspect of Lal Kitab is the identification of malefic planets and easy, inexpensive and extremely effective remedial measures for propitiation of their ill effects. It is said that the solutions & remedies given by Lal Kitab are infallible. Lal Kitab remedies are affordable, easy and provide quick results. The effect of remedies is unbelievable. It is said that these remedies are especially suitable for quick results in Kaliyuga as the traditional methods. Mantra,Yagya, Japa, Havana etc. have become very difficult in this period. The remedies are as easy in throwing something in running water or establishing something in home. However, beware that Lal Kitab remedies can also backfire, if not properly studied and performed. That is why one should be very cautious as and when you take shelter of Lal Kitab consultancy. It is advisable to stop performing remedies immediately if you observer any negative side effects. Instructions For Performing Lal Kitab Remedies Any remedy of Lal Kitab can be started at any time. However it must be observed continuously for 43 days after starting once. If you are not able to continue it for 43 days due to some hindrance or forgetting about it for a day or two you should discontinue it for a few days and then restart the process afresh and uninterrupted for 43 days. Unless the prescribed remedy is observed continuously for 43 days, its full reward remains uncertain. The remedies affect a certain measure or reward if some rice washed with milk is kept nearby before beginning the observance of the prescribed remedy. The remedies of Lal Kitab must be observed during the day [in the presence of sun]. No effect can be seen for the remedies observed either before dawn or after sunset. Besides there remains the possibility of loss.

10. Karma 8 ॐ भूर्भुवस्वः । : तत् सवितुर्वरेण्यं ।: भर्गो देवस्य धीमहि । धियो यो नः प्रचोदयात् ॥ The Gayatri Mantra is the most revered mantra in Hinduism. It consists of the prefix :oṃ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ ॐ भूर्भुवस्वः, a formula taken from the Yajurveda, and the verse 3.62.10 of the Rigveda (which is an example of the Gayatri meter). Since all the other three Vedas contain much material rearranged from the Rig Veda, the Gayatri mantra is found in all the four Vedas. The deva invoked in this mantra is Savitar, and hence the mantra is also called Sāvitrī. Ever wondered what is the significance or importance of Mantra. or the sacred ancient vedic hymns?? Were they like ‘keys’ that would unlock the sacred pathway leading to a world beyond the unseen? Let’s try to get some answers using scientific and ancient wisdom - There are all kinds of frequencies and vibrations all around us. There are frequencies we see (such as light waves), hear (sound waves), or feel, and others that are beyond our ability to sense, such as gamma rays, infrared, or radio and television frequencies. In fact, the ancient Vedic texts of India explain, in summary, that this whole universe is the production or manifestation from particular vibrations that cause a change from the spiritual energy into the material energy. And all these frequencies effect us in many ways. For example, we may hear music that can be soothing and peaceful, or that is abrasive and irritating. Or there may be frequencies that we have to deal with on a more regular basis, like the noise we hear when working in a factory, or the sounds of downtown traffic. Walk through a factory. The noise and vibrational level of the frequencies that you hear and feel are not attractive. In fact, they may be damaging to your hearing and necessitate the need for wearing ear plugs. Being around that kind of noise, which are lower vibrations of themselves, can make you restless or agitated in due time, tend to pull your consciousness down in a way that makes you think in very basic terms. They can make your mind become absorbed in the lower modes of thinking, like simply desiring to satisfy your senses, wanting to go to the bar after work to drown your thoughts, or thinking of whatever will give you the easiest thrill. In other words, exposure to low vibrations tends to produce low consciousness simply by your exposure to them. Let’s explain this a little more. The science of vibrations and frequencies and how they effect people is something that has been around for thousands of years. We can still find evidence of this in the ancient Vedic texts of India. These explain not only the results of using the frequencies of words and mantras, but also supply instructions in some cases. The sages of ancient India used it to produce various results in the rituals they performed, and from the mantras they would recite. If themantraswererecitedinparticularways,certainamazingresults would take place, including changing the weather, producing certain types of living beings, or even palaces. Others used it to produce weapons, like the brahmashtra weapon, which was equal to the modern nuclear bombs. Specific mantras could be attached to arrows, with the sound causing powerful explosions when the arrow reached its target. Others used the science of vibrations to bring their consciousness to higher levels of perception, or to enter spiritual reality. We can see the results of exposure to certain frequencies in other ways as well. Even now there has been research that has provided discoveries on the use of frequencies. They have worked with plants, exposing them to various kinds of music. Plants would thrive when exposed to classical music, while they would languish or wither when around heavy rock music. However, considering the nature of the mostly unenlightened society in which we live, some of these discoveries have not been for the benefit of the world and are quite scary to think of the results that may happen. There has been proved to be a psycho-physiological sensitivity in animals and humans to magnetic and electrical fields in extremely low frequencies (ELF) corresponding to brain waves. These ELF, which can penetrate anything, have made it possible for the military to have a world-wide communication system with its submarines, which can be situated in any part of the world. Man is a bio-cosmic transducer, a transmitter and receiver as well, and that somehow our brain waves can lock on and modulate with the earth’s electromagnetic field, the Universal Magnetic Field (UMF), as Tesla called it. Research has shown that altering these electromagnetic fields can influence the brain waves of cats and monkeys. Humans are also affected. Simple Ancient Mantra The ancient Mantras that heal

11. Anything above eleven hertz produces a general range of agitation and discontent. High voltage power lines throw off 50 to 60 hertz, and there’s been concern about what they can do to people who live near them. Some feel that such lines, or even the use of such items as electric blankets, can cause cancer because of the unnatural magnetic field to which the body is exposed. Researchers have concluded that humans are electrical people. For example, our hearts can start or stop due to appropriate electrical impulses. The use of pacemakers is an example of helping maintain a steady heartbeat. Thus, electro magnetic radiation could be the most harmful pollutant in our society. There is strong evidence that cancer and other diseases can be triggered by electromagnetic waves. There are machines that use frequencies for beneficial use. There is a medical device called a Multiple Wave Oscillator, first developed by a French researcher and improved by solid state electronics. It used a miniature Tesla system consisting of two copper coils. When activated, a magnetic field is generated between the two coils and the frequencies can be adjusted for the electricity that flowed from one coil to the other. The result is multiple waves of inherently good frequencies to help heal various parts of the body. Sore knees or torn muscles can be placed inside the magnetic fields for a few minutes at a time, helping it to heal much faster than with conventional methods. Researchers have found that frequencies under seven hertz create a general feeling of relaxation and well being, known as the alpha state. The most beneficial frequency on earth is said to be the 6.8 hertz frequency. Interestingly, the Pyramid at Giza has a constant frequency of 6.8 hertz running through it. Although researchers have studied it, they don’t know where it comes from or why in such an ancient structure. The Nadha Brahmam “Ohm” or “ॐ” or in Modern terminology Schumman resonance has a close significance Aum corresponds to the strongest of the schuman resonance among all other bio magnetic fields. We can relate the seven different chakras in body to these sounds and also with Schumann Resonances of earth, ie, 7.83, 14, 20, 26, 33, 39 and 45 Hertz of earth. We all know 7.83 hz being the strongest of all. ॐ - 7.83Hz : Gam - 14hz :Hleem - 20Hz ; Hreem - 26Hz: Kleem - 33Hz: Krowm - 39Hz: Sreem - 45Hz This points to the idea that the ancients knew the importance of frequencies and how to use them in order to provide an atmosphere for attaining a peaceful state of mind for entering higher states of consciousness and perception of spiritual reality. The use of yoga has utilized this principle for as long as it had been known--many hundreds of years. Concentrating on the steady breathing, as in hatha-yoga, is a means of leveling and harmonizing the electrical impulses of the body and the beating of the heart. Invoking the alpha state by a natural means allows one to also reach a vibrational state in which the consciousness can enter higher levels of being and perception. The body is not only conducting the more balanced frequencies, but it begins to generate them as well. It is as if the body and mind are creating its own atmosphere in which it can further its more spiritual development, with or without the proper atmosphere around it. Building structures, like the pyramids and pyramid-like temples, which are common in such places as India and Central America, may provide the assistance for doing that, along with the physical exercises of yoga and the use of prayers, mantras, or rituals. By implementing such things on a regular basis in one’s life, it would increase one’s peaceful existence, bring about a higher state of consciousness, and insights into a level of reality beyond ordinary sense perception. In other words, it would naturally take one closer to the Truth of our existence. It would, as Tesla was hoping, bring the peace that would come from a natural consequence of universal enlightenment A key point in this regard is the ancient use of mantras, as already mentioned earlier. Not only could certain results be attained by the proper use of vibrations in sounds, but even today the use of particular mantras are known for calming the mind, lowering blood pressure, relieving one from unnecessary anxieties by changing one’s focus in life, and so on. It is also understood that certain mantras and prayers, such as the chanting of the spiritual names of God, bring to one the transcendental vibration of the spiritual world from where it comes. This means it is like a conductor, bringing the spiritual energy and frequencies that come from the transcendental strata. Thus, by absorbing one’s consciousness in the sound vibration of these names of God, it will do several things, such as alter and improve the electrical impulses that are generated by the body, and help defend oneself from the negative impulses that one may encounter. In this way, it helps create a peaceful attitude within the individual and a healthier disposition. It also prepares one’s consciousness for perceiving higher levels of reality, opens one up to the spiritual world, gradually reveals one’s true spiritual identity, which would also allow one to see the unity between all people. It also harmonizes one’s existence with nature, and even begins to rekindle one’s real relationship with the Supreme Soul, God. Once the higher vibration of the spiritual realm is invoked on a regular basis in this way, and is opened for its use among the people in general, the chances for world change become enormous. Naturally, this may not happen immediately. One needs to be able to concentrate on those spiritual sounds appropriately. This means to rid oneself of the clutter in one’s mind. Only by purely focusing on the sound of the holy names can one truly feel its power, and open its potential. This is why there is a need for living a simple and honest life, and developing sincerity and devotion. It makes such a difference in being able to focus on the chanting of these spiritual prayers and mantras with feeling. Then one gives up that clutter which gets in the way of truly hearing the sounds and allows them to have a deep affect on one’s life. That is when the deep changes and insights can begin to take place. When the general masses of people begin to participate in this process, that is when the collective vibrations around the world can begin to bring social changes that will help lead all people to a higher and more peaceful state of being. The general frequencies that we generate and receive will then naturally be of a harmonious and spiritual nature.

12. Karma 10 THE TRANSFORMATIONAL DIVINE LIGHT -His Holiness Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar Experience is what causes change in a person. Someone has very aptly stated: “No one can persuade another to change. Each of us guards a gate of change that can only be opened from the inside. We cannot open the gate of another, either by argument or emotional appeal.”Opinions, facts, arguments, or emotional appeal do not produce changes in a person’s behaviour or thoughts because the gate of change “can only be opened from the inside.” Experience is the sole key to unlock the gate of change. For instance, do health warnings on cigarette cartons and bottles of alcohol really deter buyers from purchasing such detrimental items? No! The only way users stop from taking in such intoxicants is when their lungs, heart, liver, or any vital organ suffers. Hence, experiencing the injurious effects produces the necessary change. St. John proclaims: “God is light; in Him there is no darkness at all.” 1 John 1:5. Seeing the divine light of God from within is the ultimate experience needed to transform a person into a self-recognised spiritual being. The direct experience of God is further spoken of in the book of Corinthians: “For God, who said, ‘Let light shine out of the darkness,’ made His light shine in our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ.” Corinthians 4:6. Through the grace of the Christ-like Perfect Master, the doors to the inner world are opened and one begins to gaze at the visions present inside. We are familiar with only one reality - the external. But, we know so very little about what lies within, what God is waiting to show us. Saint Kabir has said, “In this body lie lush gardens, in this body lies the Supreme, in this body lies the shimmering diamond necklace, and in this body lies my Perfect Master.” As a person with external vision can change his appearance to make it more appealing or can enhance his understanding of certain trades, professions, subjects through the use of his organs of sight (which feed information to the brain), likewise, an individual with internal vision, the divine eye, can change himself for the better. He can see himself in the effulgent light of God. Without such a vision, he would be handicapped and rendered unable to uplift himself from the doldrums and superficiality of material existence. Upon the opening of the divine eye, the first transformation that takes place is that one practically sees that he is spirit, not body. Swami Vivekananda illustrates this idea. He says, “Here I stand and if I shut my eyes, and try to conceive my existence, ‘I,’ ‘I,’ ‘I,’ what is the idea before me? The idea of a body. Am I, then, nothing but a combination of material substances? The Vedas declare ‘No.’I am a spirit living in a body. The body will die, but I shall not die.” Spiritual aspirants, when blessed with the grace of a Spiritual Master, have spontaneous visions of the immortal spirit through the Divine Eye, reinforcing the perennial fact that we are, in reality, the part and parcel of theAlmighty, who resides within us as the luminous soul. Lord Krishna says in the Gita, “Ishwara sarvabhootanaam hrdesh arjun tishthti.” – “O Arjuna! I am the Supreme, ever-shining in the chambers of all hearts!” During the course of meditation on the internal light, spiritual growth also takes place. Through diligent practice, a person begins to transform by sharpening his power of discrimination, rising above selfishness, pride, and falsity. He develops the ability to shake off envy, greed, attachment, etc. because he views life with a broader vision - seeing beyond the pettiness, egotism, and over-extensive passions of this world. Having the visions of light blessed by the Perfect Master is the first life-altering experience, as it eventually leads one to coming transformations. One should note that victories in moral behaviour without seeing the divine light of God are good, but small in comparison to the undivided bliss that one experiences when in communion with the light of the inner-world. That bliss creates a saint out of a sinner, as one realizes his own purity and strength and inspires others to fashion their life in righteousness as well. Most importantly, our transformation rests solely on our own shoulders. We bear the onus of self-growth. The divine light and the merciful hands of the Perfect Master give us the stamina and hope for refinement, but will should come from us, as we are responsible for no one but our own selves. Swami Vivekananda puts it brilliantly: “How will you behave if a little baby is put on your hands? Your whole life will be changed for a moment; whatever you may be, you must become selfless for a time being. You will give up all your criminal ideas as soon as responsibility is thrown upon you - your whole character will change. So if the whole responsibility is thrown upon our own shoulders, we shall be at our highest and best; when we have nobody to grope towards, no devil to lay or blame upon, no personal deity to carry our burdens; when we are alone responsible, then we shall rise to our highest and best. I am responsible for my fate, I am the bringer of good unto myself, I am the bringer of evil.” Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar has documented and helped countless number of cases of hard-core criminals who have attested to their changed behavior through Spiritual Knowledge imparted to them behind bars. Thousands of acquitted and released prisoners have laid a new foundation for themselves, and many have taken on the responsibility of keeping themselves on the track of righteousness and actively helping others to give up the life of crime. We too can produce important changes in our lives through the grace of the Perfect Master. Changing our perception from body to soul, from aggression to compassion, from ego-centricity to humility will enliven, enlarge, and enrich us as human beings. The experience of the divine light awaits us.

13. –The Foundation of Vedic Culture Gayatri mantra and Yagna constitute the foundation of the Vedic Culture. While Gayatri mantra imparts wisdom and pure intelligence, Yagna inspires corresponding creativity and actions. In talking of the Vedic age the images of the great rishis performing agnihotra-yagnas instantly flashes before our sight. In those days, apart from the rishis, the rich and the poor, the kings and citizens also had an equally deep faith and respect for Yagna and they used to sincerely participate in and lend wholehearted support for different kinds of Yagnas. The rishis used to spend at least one-third of their lives in conducting Yagnas. It was a common belief and an observed fact in the Vedic Indian society that Yagna was essential for the refinement of human life from a shudra (i.e. a person living a life driven by animal instincts) to a Brahmin (i.e. a wise, knowledgeable, charitable person), and ultimately to a divine, great personality. Yagnas played an essential role in the all-round progress, prosperity and happiness in the Vedic age. This was indeed natural, as the philosophy and science of Yagna and the different modes of performing agni-yagna were discovered and developed by the rishis based on their deep understanding and in-depth research of the human psyche, the intricacies of the social fabric and the mysteries of Nature. The brilliance and purity of agni (fire) appears to be a universal symbol for worship. The rituals of different religions affirm this fact. The first mantra of Rigaveda – the most ancient scripture of knowledge on Earth, quotes “agnimiÃe purohitam”, signifying agni as a sacred symbol of God. This is what is referred to in different religious and spiritual scriptures as Brahmateja, Divine Flame, Sacred Glow, Divine Light, Latent Light, etc. The Vedic hymn “agne supathá ráye” prays to this omnipotent, supreme power to enlighten and inspire us towards the righteous path. The same is meant in the phrase “dhiyo yonah prachodayát” of the great Gayatri Mantra. Meaning of Yagna: In its gross form, Yagna is a spiritual experiment of sacrificing and sublimating the havana sámagri (herbal preparations) in the fire accompanied by the chanting of Vedic mantras. This is only the outer physical process or ritual of Yagna, which has scientific importance and beneficial effects. This agni-yagna when performed on a small scale is also known as havan, homam or agnihotra. The meaning of yagna is not confined to this sacrificial ritual. It has a much wider and deeper meaning. The word yagna is derived from the Sanskrit verb yaj, which has a three-fold meaning:worshipofdeities(devapujana),unity(saògatikaraña) and charity (dána). The philosophy of yagna teaches a way of living in the society in harmony and a lifestyle which promotes and protects higher human values in the society, which is indeed the basis of an ideal human culture. Scientific Aspects of Yagna: The four Vedas signify the philosophy of the eternity and complementarity of Gayatri and Yagna in the divine creations. Further, the Atharvaveda also deals with the sound therapy aspects of the mantras. They can be used for the treatment of the ailing human system at the physical, psychological and spiritual levels. The Samaveda focuses on the musical chanting patterns of the mantras and the subtle form of yagna by defining the latter as the process of mental oblation on the surface of internal emotions through the cosmic radiations of the omnipresent subtle energy of sound.TheYajurveda contains the knowledge of the principles and the methods of performing yagnas as a part of the spiritual and scientific experiments for global welfare. The effects of yagna include treatment of various diseases and the removal of atmospheric pollution (discussed in detail in the coming issues). Another prominent effect is parjanya. Parjanya implies sublime showers of vital energy and spiritual strength from the upper cosmic planes (higher space). As the natural fertilizers add to the fertility of soil, the unique confluence of the power of mantra, thermal force and sublimated herbal energy in yagna increases the vital energy (práña)1 in the atmosphere while purifying the air. This práña is inherent in the air. The sádhaka, having prepared himself through práñáyáma, is able to inhale this parjanya along with oxygen through inner determination (samkalpa). The flow of fresh air in the morning has been found to be rich in práña. The larger the scale of yajgns and the longer their duration, the greater would be these effects. The parjanya generated by yagna augments the level of práña in the air. This effect is condensed around the yagnashálá (the area where is yagna performed) but is also prevalent in the wider space and continues to expand with the flow of air

14. Karma 12 with the process of yagna. If we pour some oil drops in a pot containing water, the oil separates itself from water and spreads on the surface of water. In a similar way, the energy of yagna expands all around in the open space. Its práña, its essence, its energy, is also present in the water contained in the clouds. This is showered in the form of rain and thus gets absorbed in the soil, crops and vegetation. The soil irrigated by it is found to be more fertile and the grains, fruits and vegetables grown there are tastier and have higher nutritive value. The milk of the cows which graze the grass grown on such lands is also of excellent quality. Drinking the milk and eating the fruits and vegetables energized by yagna increases our stamina, resistance against infections and diseases, and mental astuteness. In fact the cosmic flow of práña is omnipresent in the subliminal realms of Nature. It enables all activities, movements and evolution of living beings. All creatures possess práña and therefore they are called práñi. Práña is the source of our vital strength. If it were present in substantial amount in the body, an apparently lean and skinny person would be very strong and healthy (e.g. Mahatma Gandhi). Its elevated levels are expressed in mental radiance, intellectual sharpness and talents. Its reduction on the contrary would render a physically robust person weak, lethargic and dull. Reduction of this subtle energy in plants and trees would diminish the shining beauty of flowers, and nutrient quality of fruits, vegetables and grains. Decreased levels of práña in the air, despite the presence of substantial amounts of oxygen, would lessen its vitality. Even deep breathing of this otherwise ‘fresh’ air would not have the desired healthy effects. People living at such places are found to lack vital strength, immunity and mental sharpness. The parjanya extracted by yagna compensates for these deficiencies. Types of Yagnas: A variety of yagnas are described in the scriptures. The seva yagna, meaning service to the society, is a noble example of yagna. The jóána yagna corresponds to the service of people by enlightening their lives with the glow of knowledge and education. The práña yagna implies the selfless service of saving the lives of people from sufferings and agonies and inspiring liveliness and reverence for life in them. Modern times and ignorance towards a great tradition: In the tides of time we lost and forgot the original purpose, relevance and importance of yagna in our life. It won’t be an exaggeration to conclude that this negligence has been a major cause of our fallen and miserable state today. Nevertheless, there is a hope of reviving the yagna in its original form, as we have somehow continued the tradition of yagna as a holy custom and occasionally perform it, in some form at least, as a symbolic ritual. Although lifeless and deformed, a feeble and hazy image of this ancient tradition is still with us. All important ceremonies, including the shoÃaÌ samskáras (sixteen rituals that are performed at various stages of life from birth till death), are conducted with yagna. For instance, the Vedic mode of the wedding ceremony (viváha samskára) takes place in the presence of the sacred flames of yagna. As the melting heat of the fire welds and binds two metal pieces, the pious glow and the spiritual warmth of the yagyágni (the fire of yagna) conjugate the souls of the bride and the groom through the sacred knot of marriage. The cremation rites (dáha or aòtyeÌÚi samskára) is also a yagna. The significance of yagna in the thread ceremony (upanayana samskára) is self- evident, as the sacred thread donned to symbolize the initiation of an enlightened life is called “yajóopavita”. This thread is always worn in the auspicious presence of yajóágni. Yagna is also performed during the programme of katha-kirtan (the recital of an allegoric story along with devotional songs), religious celebrations and the occasions of special festivals. For example, Holi, which is celebrated these days as a colour festival was originally a festival of yagna to celebrate the harvesting of ripe crop every year. A handful of fresh grains is required to be sacrificed in the “holi- yagna” as a mark of expressing gratitude to God’s grace. It also signifies the spirit of purifying the grain in yajóágni before using it in food preparations. Yagna is also performed on religious functions like Satya Narayan Katha, Bhagvat Katha, Ramayan Parayan, etc. Specific yagnas are also invariably linked with the Vedic as well as the tántrika sádhaná-anusthánas. Gayatri sádhaná is regarded incomplete without yagna. The number of áhutis offered in the havans or yagnas organized to mark the end of Gáyatri anuÌÚhána or mahápurascarañas should at least equal the tenth or hundredth fraction of the number of japas completed everyday in these sádhanás. Worshipping various manifestations of God is also required to be carried out with specific kinds of yagna, as described in the holy places of pilgrimage. The prominence of tirthas, the places of pilgrimage, is also associated with yagna since the Vedic Age. The places where grand yagnas were organized and conducted by the rishis became tirthas and are still revered as holy destinations of pilgrimage in India.

15. Karma 13

16. Karma 14 The First Temple for “Yakshini” - who are extremely powerful to settle any of your ongoing and expected problems immediately. * “Guaranteed results” Call the temple immediately @ Toll Free 1-888-808-1418 to get any of the following services instantly for you * Bring lover back * Black magic removal *To attract any Girl/ Boy towards you with heart. *To make your or your partner’s parents agree to Love Marriage * Get your ex back / win wife back / get your wife back * Rebuild trust and happiness in your relationship * Stop your marriage or relationship from breaking apart. * Get you marriage to the lover of your choice. * Prevent your spouse or lover from leaving or divorcing you * Solve money problems. * Prevent your spouse or partner from cheating on you * Resolve business or career problems * Resolve bitter family arguments * Get advice on moving home or work * Rebuild personal relationships under strain * Return lover or spouse / bring lover back * Improve your luck * Remove curse / rid curse * Improve your chances of success in education * Resolve your emotional problems * Improve your general well being or emotional state * Remove black magic / black magic removal * Have more control over your lover or spouse * Find out why you are not progressing in life and the solution . *Guarantee you win the troubling court cases, divorce no matter how( if the truth is on your side) * To come out of all kinds of Depression:- Depression Feeling down now and again is a traditional a part of life.However when emptiness and despair take hold and will not go away, it might be depression. More than simply the temporary “blues,” the lows of melancholy make it tough to operate and luxuriate in life. Depression can make makes you are feeling helpless, hopeless, or empty and numb; but there’s so much you can do to vary how you feel. With assist and support, you’ll be able to overcome despair and get your life back. The key to recovery is to begin small and take things sooner or later at a time. Feeling higher takes time, but you can get there should you make constructive choices for yourself each day and draw on the support of others. Faces of Despair The Highway to Recovery Suicide Prevention Understanding Depression Learning about depression-including its signs, signs, causes, and remedy-is the first step to overcoming the problem. Despair in Men Understanding and coping with male depression, a common condition that interferes with work, relationships, and enjoying life. Depression in Ladies Reduce your risks and deal with depression more successfully by learning in regards to the many unique elements affecting women. Teen Depression: A information for parents and teachers for helping a depressed teenager. Coping with Teen Depression A guide for youngsters with ideas and tools for serving to yourself or a friend. Depression in Older Adults Learn in regards to the unique effects of depression in older people and the various steps that may lead to optimistic changes. Postpartum Despair Study the signs and symptoms of postpartum and the way new mothers can get assist and support. Understanding Bipolar Dysfunction A person with bipolar dysfunction may exhibit signs of major melancholy, however the remedies are very different. * Get A Boyfriend or Girl Friend or problems with your Girl Friend or Boy Friend? Breakup is a extremely bad experience. It makes depression, feeling bad, pain , angry , confused. Now a days it is common and needy . to get your love back, you will have to Vashikaran on your lover and spell the proper mantra. Guru ji proving the love Vashikaran mantras and proper spell will help to get 100% love back. If you can’t spell the proper mantra then guru ji will do it for you Right things at the right time help to get the love back in your arms 1-How To Get Your Ex Back-Is it possible to get back the lost love? :2-How to Get My Love Back |Get Your Love Back by Black Magic ... 3-Want love Back girlfriend back boyfriend back :4- problem in love cheating with in love :5-love related problem Save Your Marriage And Avoid Divorce Today, many marriages are found to be ending in divorce. Marriage is a start of relation, while divorce is an end. After passing of few days or months of married, life, some conflicts and bitterness may get started. Sometimes, the couple began to think about the divorce.However, divorce changes social trends and causes adverse effects for the both the partners. Hence, it is always recommended to save marriage stop divorce.Marriage has a great importance in the life of every human being as it gives personal and social stability and it is also necessary to satisfy your emotional and physical needs. It may be essential to get the prestigious social status as living a single or getting separated

17. is not accepted by the society in some countries.It is not easy for a man or a woman to live alone whole life. After divorce, the individual may have to face physical, psychological and economical problems. The family life of the person is totally collapsed. Divorce also can cause sexual deprivation. Separation or divorce of the parents affects a lot to the children. It may give rise to psychological problems which can affect the tender minds of children as they need both the parents equally. The children may get mentally and physically disturbed and feel insecure due to which their future may get spoiled. Looking towards these effects, you should strive to save marriage stop divorce. Mantras to Attract Women Woman Vashikaran Mantra is used to entice or get back your wife/ex-wife or desired/stri women vashikaran mantra.The Women Vashikaran mantra are Powerful women Love spells to put under your control your desired women(Stri), Female or love.Vashikaran Mantra is used to control someone whom you love or want him to love you. It is also used to get your wife back, get your ,get back ex girlfriend,women vashikaran etc Some people used women islamic vashikaran mantra to get back their stray wife or get back illicit relationship involved wife. Women islamic vashikaran mantra should be used for good purpose.Vashikaran Mantra to attract someone you love, to bring your beloved under your control. Get More Vashikaran Mantra, Islamic vashikaran mantra , women Vashikaran Mantra, Girlfriend/Boyfriend Vashikaran mantra, Husband/ptti Vashikaran mantra with Mantra Procedure how to use these mantra Contact to Swami Ji IMMEDIATELY Call Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar @ Toll Free - 1-888- 808-1418 or in his cell:- 408 829 7780 to get guaranteed success for your problems. All your problems will be highly confidential and will not be shared with any one *The purity in the mind and proper thoughts and devotion to the Guru is very important factors to get a guaranteed success. CALL NOW TOLL FREE 1-888-808-1428 Atharva Vedic Akarashana Ritual & Mantra techniques to help your love Attraction Spell Dramatically improve your “curb” appeal. This spell brings your inner beauty to the surface, allowing others to see your sex appeal, your intriguing personality, your beautiful qualities. Not only will you feel better about yourself, but when stares and compliments come your way, your self-confidence will soar, and you will feel on top of the world. And well you should be because you are a very special person. Contact World Famous Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar for the following help :- Tol Free:-1-888-808 -1418 * Bring lover back * Black magic removal * To attract any Girl/Boy towards you with heart. * Get your ex back / win wife back / get your wife back * Rebuild trust and happiness in your relationship * Stop your marriage or relationship from breaking apart. * Get you marriage to the lover of your choice. * Prevent your spouse or lover from leaving or divorcing you * Solve money problems. * Prevent your spouse or partner from cheating on you * Resolve business or career problems * Resolve bitter family arguments * Get advice on moving home or work * Rebuild personal relationships under strain * Return lover or spouse / bring lover back * Improve your luck * Remove curse / rid curse * Improve your chances of success in education * Resolve your emotional problems * Improve your general well being or emotional state * Remove black magic / black magic removal * Have more control over your lover or spouse * Find out why you are not progressing in life and the solution . * To make your or your partner’s parents agree to Love Marriage * Guarantee you win the troubling court cases, divorce no matter how if the truth is on your side

18. Karma 16 - Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar Are You Confused about any of the following incidents on your life , then “ you should call Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar immediately in his phone number 408 829 7780( USA phone number) or Toll free 1-888- 808-1418 ( USA and Canada) to get immediate , proper and guaranteed guidance Confused About Marriage :- Marriage of the most important decisions of life. Marriage is not just about love… it is about giving sharing, sacrifices, adjustments, in-laws, babies! Marriage is an association of two persons of opposite sex to live together and bring up a family a world of their own. If You Are Unmarried • Why am I experiencing delays in getting married? • Know the best period for getting married. • Know Whether You will get married to the person of your choice?. • When will I get married? • Why am I experiencing delays in getting married? • Will you have a love or an arranged marriage? • Will your engagement break? • Will you remain a bachelor whole of your life? Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar will suggest you remedial measures if you are facing any kind of miss happenings related to marriage. You can fully rely on the report prepared by your expert Astrologer. Confused About Career :- The Career report will give you a clear insight to your horoscopes planetary positions describing the periods of rise, changes, instant gratifications, work pressures, demotions etc. just provide your date, time, & place of birth and leave the rest to us. Some of the question which arises is:- •When will I get Job? : •When will I get a raise ? : •Am I going to be promoted? :•Is there any person who is trying to ruin my career? :•When will the working conditions improve? :•Will I get the job of my choice ? :•When will I change my Job? :•I am suspended from my job. Will I be reinstated? :•I want to get a transfer. Will I get a transfer? Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar will suggest you remedial measures if you are facing any kind of miss happenings related to Career Problem. You can fully rely on the report prepared by your expert Astrologer. Confused About Education :- Education is the fore most important part of one’s life. Everybody wants to get a good education, it is education which is the building block of one’s life’s career, whether a person would be inclined to mechanical, biological, instrumental, mathematics, physics and astronomy etc is highly governed by the planets. The early stages of education are easy as the subjects are compulsory but later on it diversifies into various parts and then one has to choose what or which path of education one should opt which will bring him/her success in life. Some of the question which arises is:- •Which field of education should I opt ? :•Will this field of education help in building my career? :•Will I be able to clear the exam? :•Will I be selected for scholarship? :•How well I fare in this exam? :•Do I have a foreign education in future? :•Why am I not getting good results even after studying so hard? Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar will suggest you remedial measures if you are facing any kind of miss happenings related to Education Problem. You can fully rely on the report prepared by your expert Astrologer. Confused About Business :- Every businessman has a desire to have a successful business. He works his heart out to expand and get immense profits but sometimes things do not shape up as desired . So he tries to wonder what is he doing wrong why are the results not up to the expectations our expert Atharva Vedic Pundits will help you to find out where the problem lies. By choosing the business report which our Atharva Vedic Pundits prepares for the date of birth, time of birth & place of birth provided by you, using the unique Vedic calculations & analyze it to the minute details. Some of the question which arises is:- •Which is the best business suited for me? :•Is partnership good for me? : Can I rely on my partner? :•Will I be successful in my existing business? :Should I start the new venture or carry on the existing one? :•What is the right time to invest in my new venture? etc : Should I take a loan ? :•Will I be able to clear all my loans ? Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar will suggest you remedial measures if you are facing any kind of miss happenings related to Career Problem. You can fully rely on the report prepared by your expert Astrologer. Confused About Child’s Birth Every married couple has a dream to have children and bring up a family. The Progeny Report will provide you with best and favorable time to bring up a family. If you are facing any progeny related problems then do not hesitate and request the progeny report Bharat Raneja will give you our best astrological guidance. We can help you in the following questions like. •What will be the best time to conceive ? :•When will I get Child? :•Is the pregnancy period free of any malefic effect? •Is there any chance of miss carriage ? •How many children ? will i have etc. •Remedies for Gand Mool Nakshatra. ? Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar will suggest and guide you with remedial measures if you are facing any kind of delay or miss happenings related to progeny. You can fully rely on the report prepared by your expert Astrologer. Call Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar @ Toll Free - 1-888-808-1418 or in his cell:- 408 829 7780 to get guaranteed success for your problems. All your problems will be highly confidential and will not be shared with any one *The purity in the mind and proper thoughts and devotion to the Guru is very important factors to get a guaranteed success. CALL NOW TOLL FREE 1-888-808-1428.

19. Karma 17

20. Karma 18 By -Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar Purchase of property and luxurious vehicle are the common dreams of a person and needs good finance form anyone’s pocket. For some people, their purchase may involves the entire savings of an individual. Sometimes, it is also co-related with the status of family. A native has few common questions regarding the purchase of his/her property and vehicles. His Holiness Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar can help you out by answering your questions like :- • Will I able to maintain my vehicle? • Which color will suit for my vehicle? • Will I get a property or vehicle as a gift? • When will I sale my property/vehicle? • Will I get insurance claim for my Vehicle? • When will I purchase a vehicle or property? • Whether I purchase my property through loan? • When am I going to start construction on my plot? • Will I get any rental income from my property? • Will I purchase a commercial or residential property? • Do I have to do Partition or Sale of Property? • Whether I am going to lose my property in litigation? • My vehicle was snatched by somebody. Will I get it back? • What will be status and condition of my vehicle/property? The Property/Vehicle Purchase Report will help you to determine the exact periods when you are going to purchase vehicle or property for you and all such questions mentioned above. Even we will tell you about the status and location of property, color of vehicle, whether you will purchase them through loan or in installments and much more. We help you to get correct answers to all the above questions. Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar will suggest you unique and effective remedies which will help you in decreasing the malefic effect of the planets and also to increase the benefic effect of the planets. The suggested remedies are completely safe and give the desired results. Contact World Famous Swamiji to get his Services to/for :- * Bring lover back : * Black magic removal * To attract any Girl/Boy towards you with heart. * Get your ex back / win wife back / get your wife back * Rebuild trust and happiness in your relationship * Stop your marriage or relationship from breaking apart. * Get you marriage to the lover of your choice. * Prevent your spouse or lover from leaving or divorcing you * Solve money problems. * Prevent your spouse or partner from cheating on you * Resolve business or career problems * Resolve bitter family arguments * Get advice on moving home or work * Rebuild personal relationships under strain * Return lover or spouse / bring lover back * Improve your luck * Remove curse / rid curse * Improve your chances of success in education * Resolve your emotional problems * Improve your general well being or emotional state * Remove black magic / black magic removal * Have more control over your lover or spouse * Find out why you are not progressing in life and the solution . * To make your or your partner’s parents agree to Love Marriage * Guarantee you win the troubling court cases,divorce no matter how MAKE A ONE CALL TO “SWAMIJI SRI SELVAM SIDDHAR “ IN THE TOLL FREE # 1-888-808-1418 AND CHANGE YOUR LIFE WITH IN 24 HOURS WE DON’T SAY WE JUST DO THE WORK CONTACT SWAMIJI IMMEDIATELY IF YOU ARE SUFFERING FROM THE ABOVE PROBLEMS AND WANT TO TO GET A SOLUTION IMMEDIATELY. SO MANY THOUSAMDS GOT HAPPINESS THROUGH SWAMIJI SRI SELVAM SIDDHAR.All your information are highly confidential.

21. Karma 19

22. Karma 20 - His Holiness Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar Stories as a narrative or tale of real or fictitious events. Stories are a nourishment for our hungry souls. Often stories we regard as fiction have elements of truth dressed up to make them more palatable. Stories are magic, taking us everywhere: backwards, forwards or happening right in the present time, transporting us to many places and situations we might never go. THE EGG PLOY Once in a city there were two neighbours Harry and Danny. Harry would always remain tense as the hens of his neighbor daily used to enter his garden and ruin it. One day Harry came to know that Danny was away. So, he placed some eggs in the garden. When Danny returned home and saw Harry picking up the eggs, he asked him, “Harry, you have no hens. Then where did you get these hens from?” Harry innocently replied, “Some hens come in my garden and lay eggs. I am lucky to get free eggs daily.” Since that day, the hens of Danny never entered the garden of Harry. THE MOSQUITO NET One day David asked his wife to go to the market and buy a mosquito net. His wife went to a shop and asked the shopkeeper to show her the best quality net. The shopkeeper showing her a very good net said, “This is the best quality which you won’t be able to find elsewhere. Not even a single mosquito can pass through it.” Mrs. David refused to but the net. When the shopkeeper asked the reason, she said, “If a mosquito can’t pass through it, then how will we pass through it.” Then she returned home and narrated the whole matter to her husband. Hearing the whole matter, David laughed at his wife’s foolishness. THE RIGHT CHOICE Once upon a time, a wise and generous king ruled Burma. One day, his prime minister retired. Now the king had to find his replacement. There were two names for the post- Leuk and Batuk. Leuk was lazy but Batuk was hard working as well as intelligent. The king organized a boat race. But suddenly something seemed to disturb the calm waters of the river. Leuk said that it was some monster and returned to the shore. Batuk dived into the river and took the culprit out. It was just a coconut, which the king himself had placed there. Batuk was chosen as the prime minister. A CAT AND A RAT Once there was a cat called Lucy and a rat named Taffy. Taffy was a smart rat. Every time Lucy tried to catch him, he would run back to his hole. One day, Lucy thought of a plan. She took a dish full of milk and kept it in front of the hole where Taffy lived. When Taffy peeped out of the hole, he saw Lucy hiding there. Suddenly, Lucy saw a long hollow pipe coming out of the hole. Taffy drank all the milk of the dish through the pipe. Poor Lucy sat on looking at the empty dish. STEALING IS BAD One day, Rosy went to a grocery shop to buy bread. When she saw that the shopkeeper was busy with the other customers, she stole some toffees from a jar. When she got back home, her mother asked her that where did she get the toffees? Rosy told her mother the truth. Her mother said, “It’s really very bad to steal. The shopkeeper might not be looking at you but the God is always looking at you all the time. So, one should never steal.”

23. Rosy understood the words of her mother and went back to the shop to return the toffees to the shopkeeper. The shopkeeper felt happy on seeing her honesty and gave her some toffees as a reward. FEAR OF GOD Once there were two brothers who were very naughty. Always they were up to some mischief. One day, their mother asked a priest to talk to her sons and put the fear of god in them so that they would mend their ways. The priest asked her to send her sons to him one by one. Firstly, the younger brother went to the priest and sat by his side. The priest asked him in a commanding voice, “Where is God?” The boy didn’t react. When the priest asked again, the boy ran to his elder brother and said, “Do you know God is missing and everybody thinks that we are responsible for this.” THE MANGO TREE Once there lived a lazy man in a village. His only source of income was a mango tree, which was planted in the backyard of his house. One day, one of his relatives came to his house. At breakfast, lunch and dinner, only mangoes were served to the relative. He got fed up of this and thought of a plan. At night, when the lazy man was sleeping, the relative quietly woke up, cut down the tree and fled away. Next day, when the man saw that the tree was cut down, he cried a lot. After few years, the same relative again came to his house. By now, the man had worked and prospered. His condition had improved. He thanked the relative for making him realize his mistake. NAUGHTINESS IS HARMFUL A man used to move from village to village with his acrobatic team of a goat, a monkey and a snake to entertain people. Once, while crossing a river, he balanced the snake basket on his head, sat the monkey on his shoulder and guided the goat with his hand. The level of the water was low but there flowed a strong current. Midway, the naughty monkey opened the snake basket. The snake within the darkness of the basket sprung up with its head high. The hissing and the fury frightened the monkey and it fell into the water. The current started dragging the monkey away. A split-second effort to save the monkey threw the charmer off balance and the snake basket fell into the stream. To catch hold of the basket, he lost his grip on the goat. Within few seconds, the current carried away all three of his companions. TWO NEIGHBOURS Once there were two ladies who were neighbours. One of them was very fat while the other was very thin. They always kept fighting with each other. All other neighbors were fed up of their quarrels. One day, an elderly person said to both the ladies, “Why do you quarrel so much? Can’t you be like the wheels of a two wheeler where one wheel compliments the other?” At this the thin lady said, “Yes, but how can a vehicle move smoothly when one tyre is of a tractor and other of a cycle.” Everybody present there started laughing, hearing such a witty answer ONLY FOR LOVE Two donkeys who were friends, met at a crossroad. One donkey was healthy and the other malnourished. The healthy donkey asked the weak one, “What happen to you? Why do you seem so weak?” The weak donkey replied, “My master makes me work the whole day and doesn’t give me enough food to eat and also beats me.” “Oh” exclaimed the healthy donkey. “Then why don’t you run away from your master’s house.” He replied, “I think my job has better prospects. My master beats his only daughter, too. And whenever he does so, he says to her, “I’ll marry you off to this donkey.” For this reason I’m not running away.” THE DISGUISED PEACOCK Once a crow felt like becoming a peacock. He got some feathers of peacock from somewhere and pasted them on his tail. Then he went among some peacock. But the peacocks recognized him. They pecked all over his body and threw him out.

24. Karma 22 The crow felt glum and returned to his race. When his family came to know about his deed, they also felt very angry and pecked him hard. Thus, the crow decided never to follow others. THE FLUTE PLAYER Tom was very brave and intelligent. One day, while playing, he went far into the forest. Just then a jackal saw him. He decided to eat the boy and came in his way. When Tom saw that he had no way to save himself, he said to the jackal, “Brother, I am not afraid of death but I want to die peacefully. So, I want to play my flute and dance to its tune. Then you can eat me.” The jackal permitted him. As soon as, Tom started playing his flute, his dog came running. The dog saw the jackal and leapt on it. The jackal ran for his life. Tom returned home with his dog. THE MANAGER Once, Mr. Lion was looking for a manager to look after his business. Many animals applied for the post and were interviewed. Finally, came the turn of monkey. When the monkey was questioned that why he should be appointed as the manager, he replied, “Sir, you are looking for a dynamic manager who can handle a variety of jobs.” At this, the lion asked the monkey to prove his capability. The monkey said, “Sir, in the past year, I have changed 10 jobs. Don’t you think, I am capable of doing various jobs.” Lion laughed at the witty reply and appointed him as the manager. WHO IS POOR Once upon a time, there was a renowned saint. Many people used to visit him to get his blessings. Once a rich and greedy merchant went to him and offered him a bag full of gold coins. The saint refused to accept the offerings and said, “I don’t accept money from people who are very poor.” The merchant said, “But I’m very rich.” “Don’t you wish to earn more money?” asked the saint. “Yes”, said the merchant. “Those who wish for money always run after it. They can do anything to acquire it. No one is as poor as these people” said the saint. The merchant felt ashamed and went back to his home. NEVER TELL A LIE On his deathbed, a father advised his son to always speak truth. The son promised that he would never tell a lie. One day, while going to the city through a forest, he got surrounded by some robbers. One of them asked, “What do you have?” The boy answered, “I have fifty rupees.” They searched him but couldn’t find anything. When they were about to go, the boy called out, “I am not telling a lie. See this fifty rupee note which I had hidden in my shirt.” The leader of the robbers felt pleased at the truthfulness of the boy, gave him hundred rupees as reward and went away. HARD WORK ALWAYS PAYS Once two friends called Harry and Garry came to a city to earn money. They went to a rich merchant for a job. The merchant gave each of them a cane basket and pointing towards a well in his garden said, “Take these baskets and draw water from the well till dusk.” Harry thought it foolish to draw water in a cane basket. So, he slept. On the other hand, Garry kept working. After few hours, when he drew the basket up, he saw some gold coins in the basket. He took them to the merchant who rewarded him and gave him a job too. Harry went away ashamed.

25. Karma 23 Dasoupadesam “The Ten Hindu Commandments” - Param Pujya Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar The living God His Holiness Swamiji Sri Selvam Siddhar’s ten Hindu Commandments are as follows: 1. One of our duties as human beings is to avail ourselves of every opportunity to do good to others. The poor can serve others by their loyal work to the country and the rich by their wealth to help the poor. Those who are influential can use their influence to better the condition of the lowly. That way we can keep alive in our hearts a sense of social service. 2. Man by himself cannot create even a blade of grass. We will be guilty of gross ingratitude if we do not offer first to God what we eat or wear - only the best and choicest should be offered to Him. 3. Life without love is a waste. Everyone should cultivate “Prema” or love towards all human beings, bird and beast. 4. Wealth amassed by a person whose heart is closed to charity is generally dissipated by the inheritors: but the family of philanthropists will always be blessed with happiness. 5. A person who has done a meritorious deed will lose the resulting merit if he listens to the praise of others or himself boasts of his deeds. 6. It will do not good to freeze over what has happened. If we learn to discriminate between good and evil, that will guard us from falling into the evil again. 7. We should utilize to good purpose, the days of our life-time. We should engage ourselves in acts which will contribute to the welfare of others rather than to our selfish desires. 8. We should perform duties that have been prescribed for our daily life and also be filled with devotion to God. 9. One attains one’s goal by performance of one’s duties. 10. Jnana is the only solvent of our troubles and sufferings.

26. Karma 24 Ms Vishal Kalyani Chettinad is famous for its rich cultural heritage, art and architecture, huge mansions etc. But more recently it is becoming well known world over for its mouth watering cu- linary delicacies. Chettinad restaurants are being opened in almost all big cities and towns world over Chettinad food is famous for its spicy aroma. Most of the food items are easily digestible, less in caloric value compared to other south Indian food items since items like cheese butter and cashews rarely find its way in chettinad receipe. Cocunut which is feared by all for its high cholesterol content is also used in very small quantities. Karaikudi and 74 other villages comprise Chettinad, the homeland of the Nattukottai Chettiars. The Chettiars were a prosperous banking community who ventured overseas to do business in South and Southeast Asia in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Vendakkai More kulambu Ingredients: • 15 Lady Fingers • ½ cup Coconut (shredded) • ½ cup Curd :• 5 Green chilies (chopped) • 4 Flakes Ginger (grated) • 1 tsp Cumin Seed Powder • 1 tsp Mustard Seeds :• ½ tsp Turmeric Powder • Salt to taste • Oil for frying Method: • Wash lady’s finger and slit it properly into 2” long pieces. • Heat the oil in a pan over medium flame and fry okra pieces separately. • Add salt to the fried lady’s finger. Keep it aside. • Heat some oil in the same pan and add mustard seeds and curry leaves to it. When the seeds start spluttering, add the fried lady’s finger to it. • Add turmeric powder to the above and stir it well. • Mix cumin seeds, coconut, chilies and ginger to make a mixture in a bowl. • Pour the mixture, some water and salt to the lady’s finger in the pan. Boil it for 15 minutes and then turn off the flame. Allow it to cool. • Add curd to the above-made recipe and mix it well. • Vendakkai More Kulambu is ready to serve. Amla thayir pachchadi Ingredients: 10 nos Amla cut lengthwise and de stined. :4 nos Green Chilies finely chopped :½ ltr Curd :A pinch asafetida A pinch of Turmeric Powder :Oil to season.: Salt to taste; A few Curry Leaves,:¼ tsp Mustard and Urad dhal. Method Heat a little oil in a pan add maustard, urad dhal, asafetida, goose berries, green chillies and curry leaves and sauté for a few minutes until the moisture evaporates.Add turmeric powder, salt and Curd and mix well. Uses: Useful for the diabetics. Useful in constipation and to reduce body heat. Improves digestion. Chettinadu Egg Roast Ingredients: 3 eggs hard boiled :chopped onions 2:chopped tomato 3:garlic cloves 4 small:Ginger 1/2 piece:Green chillis 1 or 2:fennel seed 1/4tsp:Coriander Powder 1tsp:Chilli Powder 1 tsp: Turmaric Powder 1/4 tsp:Pepper Powder 2 tsp:Garam Masala Powder 1/4 tsp:Curry leaves few Coriander Leaves chopped few coconut grated 3/4 cup salt oil Method: Blend coconut very well in enough water to get thick solution. Grind garlic ,ginger, green chilies and fennel seeds together. Heat oil in a pan, sauté onion until transparent. Then saute with the ground paste. After 2 minutes, put tomatos, curry leaves and all the powders except pepper powder. Add salt. Stire Until the mixture is thick and tomatos are cooked. Add coconut blended solution, pepper powder and coriander leaves. De shell eggs , cut in to halves. When it boils put egg pieces, continue cooking for a while. When the mixture become thick, check salt and remove from the fire. Serve Hot with rice. Chettinadu Egg curry-2 Ingredients: Boiled eggs-3 Small Onion- 15 to 20 Tomato- 1 Chili powder- 1/4 tsp Turmeric powder- 1/4 tsp Oil and Slat- as required

27. To paste: Coriander seeds- 2 spoon Red Chili- 2 Garlic- 2 cloves Ginger- 1/2 inch Curry leaves- few Rice- 1/2 tsp Pepper corns- 1/2 tsp Fennel seeds- 1/2 tsp Cumin seeds- 1/4 tsp Grated coconut- 4 spoon Method: 1. Peel Small onion and fry with little Oil. Fry till it turns into light brown in color. Crush the fried onion with a knife. Hard boil the eggs in water. 2. Chop the tomato and keep this aside. Remove the shell of boiled eggs and cut it lengthwise. 3. In medium flame, heat 2 teaspns of Oil in a pan . Add all the ‘To paste’ ingredients except grated Coconut. Fry till the rice becomes pure White in color. 4. Finally add grated Coconut and fry for a min. 5. Grind all fried ingredients with Water and make a fine paste. 6. Heat Oil in a pan. Add the crushed Onion and fry for a min. Then add Tomato and saute till it turns soft. 7. Then add Chili powder, Turmeric powder, ground paste, Salt and a cup of Water. Cook for 7 to 10 min in medium flame. 8. Finally add the boiled eggs and cook for a min. Egg Curry Ingredients: Egg – 2 Onion – 1 :Tomato – 1 Grated coconut – 3 spoons Turmeric powder – a pinch Chicken masala powder – 1 spoon Chili powder – ½ tspn Black pepper – 1 tspn Coriander seeds – 1 tspn Poppy seeds (kasakasa) – ½ tspn Fennel seeds (perunjeeragam) – 1 tspn Mustard seeds and Black gram– ½ tspn Curry leaves – a string Coriander leaves – a string :Oil, salt – As required Method: 1. Cut the Onion and Tomato into small pieces. 2. Grind Coriander seeds, Poppy seeds (kasakasa), Fennel seeds and Black pepper with Grated coconut. Take coconut milk out of this ground mix and keep aside. 3. Heat Oil in a pan, add Mustard seeds and Black gram. Once it splutters add Curry leaves and Onion. Fry till the onion becomes golden brown in color. 4. Then add Tomato and fry till it becomes soft. 5. Then add Chili powder, Chicken masala powder and Turmeric powder. Fry till the raw smell of masala goes. 6. Once the raw smell goes add a cup of Water, Salt and already prepared Coconut milk. Let it boil once. 7. Finally break each Egg and drop into the curry, one at a time. Do not stir or mix after this. Let it boil for a few minutes. 8. Once the Eggs cook on both sides, garnish with Coriander leaves.