Microsoft brought together 2300+ fresh graduates spanning across all roles, positions, organisations, and domains. The event was a melting pot of cultures, nationalities, languages, and perspectives which led to the perfect concoction for the cultivation of ideas.

Analysing our emotional mind

What’s the ONE thing you are going to do to tackle the gremlin?

Stew and Gemma, two very friendly personalities guided us towards understanding the inner critic in our mind that scrutinises our personal identity and impedes confidence. We began by identifying the Gremlin’s negative accusations and thereafter exculpating it with positive facts about ourself. By the end of the session, the Gremlin and its flawed statements were scrunched into a ball of paper and thrown away from ourselves. Until this moment, I had never thought looking at four hundred flying paper balls could make me feel this liberated.

Stew and Gemma tied the above lessons to their showmanship qualities to showcase how being a better reader and demonstrator of body language can improve communication and allow room for ideas to grow. During this exercise, I noticed how people would speak more freely when uninterrupted and subjected to an open-minded listener. Listeners could take the conversation further by pulling on the open-ended threads left behind by the speaker — aka: follow-up questions. Stew and Gemma also displayed a variety of body language and eye contact skills that I do not have the ability to put into words; I suppose some concepts will remain restricted to visual learning.

The general perspective towards change has always been pessimistic. For instance, none of my friends like it when a newer version of Windows comes out …until they do.

Cassandra Worthy is a change enthusiast that advocates for making the harder decisions in life and following our dreams and passions. The picture above is a snippet of her delivering a talk on the emotional rollercoaster ride we face once we set foot into this journey. At every crossroad of life-changing decisions, we will be faced with familiarity on the one side, and uncertainity on the other. She explained that it takes wisdom to recognise when we arrive at this crux; courage to face this challenge head on; and resilience to make a dent in the reality of our lives. She imbibed courage by divulging that the harder path led to hope, excitement, joy and fulfilment.

Decision Making

Jason and Chris led sessions on time management, prioritization, and personal development. The difference between dreaming about our life’s mission and actually putting it down on paper is heavily contrasting to say the least. Both speakers recommended coupling our personal interests and to leverage those skills to map out the next chapter of our life.

By participating in his activities I learnt about my personal work style preferences and how I could optimize my work output in a day without burning out.

Jason took the conversation further by leading sessions on productivity. He explained task resolution through the Eisenhower principle and how to maximise work output by optimising our personal circadian rhythm. He also navigated us through a better understanding of the human mind and helped create a plan to maintain trajectory during difficult emotional states. The strategy followed the Trigger-Response-Result strategy. The session made us pick the most difficult trigger and how we could take small instant actions to help unhook from the trigger. The strategy can be thought of as exercising a muscle in the brain that can be strengthened over time with repetitions and mental rehearsal.

Jason had a pragmatic and rational approach towards emotions and I appreciated the fact that he persuaded us to look at the human brain from a third-person perspective — separating the emotional mind from the rational mind. I believe that, I and many others, could benefit immensely by analysing our emotions and logically arriving at a state of understanding.

Thank You!

Organizing an event for approximately two and a half thousand attendees is no simple feat — yet the Aspire team made it appear effortless. Each individual I encountered at the event was amiable, kind, vibrant, and energetic. It is without doubt, we have all ventured beyond our comfort zones this week, and a significant reason for this feeling is the Aspire team’s efforts to ensure we felt comfortable, welcomed, and at ease.