Mr Bustamante previously denounced the recall

The deputy of embattled California governor Gray Davis is breaking ranks to stand as a candidate in October's recall election.

Lieutenant Governor Cruz Bustamante's announcement comes hot on the heels of film star Arnold Schwarzenegger's decision to run as a Republican candidate.

However another Republican hopeful, congressman Darrell Issa, whose efforts paved the way for the special election announced he was pulling out of the race, saying there were enough qualified candidates in the field.

"It has nothing to do with Schwarzenegger's decision, other than I needed to know that there were several strong candidates," he told journalists at a press conference.

On Friday, California's Supreme Court dismissed all challenges to the recall vote, including one brought by Gray Davis seeking to delay the ballot until March.

'Poisonous policies'

Mr Bustamante is the first prominent Democrat to challenge Mr Davis, who faces an unprecedented recall because of his perceived failure to handle the state's spiralling budget deficit.

State Insurance Commissioner John Garamendi, another Democrat, is also expected to stand.

OTHER POSSIBLE CANDIDATES

Actor Gary Coleman

Comedian Leo Gallagher

Porn magazine publisher Larry Flynt

Porn star Mary Carey

Columnist Arianna Huffington

Billboard model Angelyne

Correspondents say Mr Bustamante's decision may damage Mr Davis' chances of surviving in office, as he had hoped to keep other Democrats off the ballot.

On Wednesday, Mr Davis had won some relief when popular Democrat Senator Dianne Feinstein ruled herself out of the race and said the drive to kick him out of office was a terrible mistake.

On Thursday the leader of the Democrats in US Congress, Nancy Pelosi, condemned the recall as part of an "extreme Republican agenda" to solidify control of state governorships.

And although she did not mention Mr Schwarzenegger by name, she criticised what she said were Republican attempts to "undermine Democratic values, using a familiar public face to promote poisonous policies that favour special interests over the public interest".

Analysts are already predicting a tough time for Mr Davis with the surprise entry of Mr Schwarzenegger, a charismatic movie-star with money to spend on his campaign.

"The danger for Davis is much more dramatic now than it was before," Jack Pitney, professor of government at Claremont McKenna College, told the Los Angeles Times.

"He's not running against a candidate, he's running against a phenomenon."

Unusual candidates

There had been widespread speculation Mr Schwarzenegger, 56, would not run because of concerns expressed by his wife.

Schwarzenegger revealed his plan during a television show taping

"The politicians are fiddling, fumbling and failing," he told The Tonight Show, announcing his candidacy.

"This is why I am going to run for governor."

Voters face two questions on 7 October - whether to recall Mr Davis, and who should replace him, if the recall vote goes through.

The deadline for candidates to lodge their applications is 1700 local time on Saturday (0000GMT Sunday), and dozens of hopefuls are lining up.

They include adult magazine publisher, Larry Flynt, who is campaigning under the slogan "vote for the smut-peddler with a heart".

And 22-year-old porn actress Mary Carey is also running, with a campaign that includes taxing breast implants and swapping guns for X-rated films to reduce violence.