SACRAMENTO, Sept. 3 (UPI) -- Cruz Bustamante could be "the right person in the right place at the right time. Many voters view the lieutenant governor as the logical person to replace the governor. And his career, by pure fate, has coincided with the rising power of Latinos." -- Democratic consultant Darry Sragow.

With California's recall election scheduled for Oct. 7, independent surveys over the past four months have consistently shown Gov. Gray Davis to be in severe jeopardy of being removed from office. If so, those same surveys have also shown that the two leading candidates to replace him are Republican actor Arnold Schwarzenegger and the Democratic Lt. Gov. Cruz Bustamante.

While the entire world knows the rags-to-riches story of Schwarzenegger, the fact is that his main opponent in the race to replace Davis (if he is recalled) matches up very with Arnold in the "Horatio Alger" sweepstakes.

These two men are California's most inspiring candidates in years and could produce a record voter turnout.

In just a decade, Bustamante has made the climb from being an obscure legislative assistant to the brink of becoming the Golden State's first elected Hispanic governor. Like Schwarzenegger, Bustamante came up the hard way and has come amazingly far from his humble roots. "I think he really symbolizes the American Dream," said Democratic Assemblywoman Jenny Oropeza. "I think it's what every parent aspires for their child, what Cruz Bustamante has achieved."

To borrow from Ross Perot's 1992 running mate James Stockdale, who is Cruz Bustamante, where is he from and why is he here?

His story combines any successful politician's two best friends -- luck and great timing -- plus a naturally congenial personality, the benefits of a Latino ethnic base that is booming and lots of good old-fashioned hard work.

(Disclosure: The author indirectly worked for Bustamante in the Legislature and supports him for governor. The author also plans to vote "no" on the recall question.)

Like so many of California's Hispanic community, Bustamante's grandparents and parents came to work in the agricultural industry of California's Great Central Valley. His father worked two, and sometimes three, jobs to support his wife and six children. Bustamante's first job was picking fruit in the fields and his second was sweeping the floor in the barbershop where his father worked. Other odd jobs included cutting meat in a butcher shop, construction work and running a summer youth jobs program.

While working for a fertilizer company in Fresno at the age of 19 in 1972 and part-timing his way through community college, he entered the political world with an internship for veteran Fresno Rep. B.F. Sisk. He soon discovered that politics was his true love.

As he told The New York Times, "I remember about halfway through, thinking, 'You know this government thing; you can really help a lot of people.'"

As he wrote on his official state Web site: "I loved helping to make government work for people. I found out I was a lot better at cutting red tape than I was at cutting meat."

He then served as a legislative staff member in the 1980s and 1990s for California State Assemblymen Richard Lehman and Bruce Bronzan. In 1993, Bronzan unexpectedly retired, and endorsed Bustamante to replace him in a special election.

Bustamante was fortunate enough to go to Sacramento when term limits were opening up vast new assignments for political rookies. Bustamante was also part of the class of "Proposition 187 babies" -- Hispanic legislators elected right around the time of an immigrant-bashing law passed by the voters, but largely overruled by the courts.

He quickly made alliances with other new members, using former House Speaker Sam Rayburn's theory "to get along, you go along." In his legislative career, he focused on reducing classroom sizes, reforming welfare, expanding healthcare for the working class, the tobacco settlement and even a middle class tax cut. In 1996, the Democrats re-took the State Assembly based on a spike in Latino turnout in response to 187. As a moderate Latino Democrat from rural California, Bustamante was the natural choice to become the new speaker of the Assembly.

His ascendancy to the speaker's office completed his transition from an ordinary ethnic pol to a respected power broker who got along well with both business and labor. As former Assemblywoman Sheila Kuehl said, "He's not indecisive, he's inclusive."

After Latino turnout set a record in 1996, Democratic Party leaders supported his nomination for lieutenant governor in 1998. In his two successful statewide campaigns, he's been able to both capitalize on his Latino base and transcend it. While Latinos are more than one-third of the people in California, they have never been more than one-sixth of the voters. By building coalitions, Bustamante won record-breaking majorities from his fellow Hispanics (nearly 90 percent and more raw Hispanic votes -- more than 1.1 million -- than anyone in history), solid support from African-Americans and Asian-Americans -- along with roughly 40 percent of the white vote.

By winning the second spot, he became the first Latino elected to statewide office in California in over a century. (Ironically, his Hispanic predecessor, Lt. Gov. Romualdo Pacheco, served out the remainder of his boss's term, a feat Bustamante will try to duplicate should Davis be recalled.) In his relatively brief career, he's never lost an election, going 10 for 10 in both primaries and general elections.

The lieutenant governor has always shown great pride in his heritage: "I understand the symbolism and the substance of representing, in many people's eyes, the hopes and aspirations of many immigrant folks, many people of color and the Latino community." But he also goes out of his way to campaign on issues of general interest to all voters. As he said on his Web site: He's committed to working for good schools, clean safe neighborhoods, opportunity for all regardless of background. "That's not an ethnic agenda ... that's an American agenda."

Interestingly enough, it was a quarrel over Davis' handling of the disposal of the lawsuit involving Proposition 187 that provoked Bustamante's first dispute with Davis and won him national attention. His relations with Davis chilled, but were repaired in time for their re-election in 2002. Now, the men are working together on the recall: Davis hopes that Bustamante's "replacement" candidacy will bring out a huge minority turnout that also votes "no" on the recall and Bustamante says he's running as a Democratic "insurance policy."

As for policies in a possible Bustamante administration, he's promoting what he calls "tough love for California," a package of tax increases on the wealthy and spending cuts (very similar to what incoming Gov. Ronald Reagan did in 1967) to help the state through its severe budget crisis. To borrow Franklin Roosevelt's old term, Bustamante would likely be "a little left of center." On most issues, he would be practical and work to build a public consensus.

In the 2002 gubernatorial election, Democrats comprised roughly 45 percent of all voters, Republicans 40 percent and independents 15 percent. Bustamante's formula for winning the replacement election is garnering 75 percent of the Democrats, about 5 percent to 10 percent of Republicans and a third of the independents. According to 2000 Census data, Hispanics were about 15 percent of California voters. If Hispanics can reach 16 percent to 18 percent of the voters on Oct. 7, Bustamante should win.

Recent polls show Bustamante to be either slightly ahead or behind Schwarzenegger. He has started to consolidate the Democratic base, but needs to improve with independents. A poll of Hispanics nationally also showed him to tied with actress/singer Jennifer Lopez for being the "most admired" Hispanic-American.

In many ways, both Schwarzenegger and Bustamante represent the "New California" of immigration, upward mobility, rapid demographic change, high-tech industry and the burgeoning entertainment industry. Schwarzenegger utilized the "rugged individualism" path of promoting himself in the private sector -- first as a bodybuilder, then as an actor -- and earned great fame and riches. On the other hand, Bustamante slowly but surely worked his way up the political ladder, eventually winning power and influence. Like former Olympic czar Peter Ueberroth, Bustamante and Schwarzenegger have something else in common. They're all winners: Schwarzenegger in bodybuilding, the movies and business; Bustamante in politics and government.

The Schwarzenegger-Bustamante rivalry is a political version of Schwarzenegger 's hit film "Twins," with Schwarzenegger as (who else) Schwarzenegger and Bustamante in the Danny DeVito role. It's a classic match-up of Hollywood glamour vs. farm worker grit, of Tinseltown vs. Fresno, of the self-made businessman vs. the successful pol, of charisma vs. experience -- and right now the early polls say it is too close to call.

The election of either man would be sensational: the movie star leading a GOP revival or a grandson of Latin-American immigrants taking the helm of the nation's wealthiest and most populous state.

--

(Patrick Reddy is a Democratic political consultant in California.)