Jose Saramago

Jose Saramago (1922-2010) is Portugal's only winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature.

(The Associated Press)

SKYLIGHT

Jose Saramago

Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, $26

320 pages

By JEREMY GARBER/Special to The Oregonian

Many of the authors populating perennial lists of modern literature's must-reads once found their earliest works languishing amidst a publisher's slush pile -- relegated and disregarded with a nary a second thought. So it was with José Saramago, who, in 1953, nearly a half-century prior to receiving the world's highest literary honor, the Nobel Prize, submitted a typewritten manuscript to a publisher that would offer no reply in return... until three and half decades later. The rejection surely stung the fledgling writer, as he did not publish anything excepting poetry and newspaper articles for almost 25 years following.

That once-neglected novel, "Skylight," was rediscovered in 1989 -- found while the publisher was moving offices. The house offered to finally see the book through to publication but Saramago declined, not wishing for it to appear in print during his lifetime. (Portugal's only Nobel laureate for literature died in 2010 at 87). "The book lost and found in time" was released posthumously in 2011, nearly 60 years after its completion.

Set in early 1950s Lisbon, "Skylight" features an ensemble cast of 15 characters, residents of an undistinguished apartment building. The lives of these inhabitants, each of them poor or working class, are portrayed with both stark realism and compassionate detail: Silvestre, a "philosophical cobbler," and his wife Mariana, forced to take in a young lodger, the precocious and itinerant Abel, out of financial necessity; Justina and Caetano, unhappily wedded and overcome by the death of their daughter; Carmen and her salesman husband Emilio, both miserable in their failing marriage; Rosália and Anselmo, whose 19-year-old daughter Maria Cláudia attracts the affections of a much older man; Lidia, a kept woman who once worked the streets; and Cândida and Amélia, widowed sisters sharing a flat with the former's grown daughters, Isaura and Adriana (who must contend with their own repressed sexualities).

As the fates, fortunes, and failings of the building's tenants unfurl, "Skylight" chronicles their many secrets, betrayals, infidelities, jealousies, and suspicions. Employing the apartment as microcosm, Saramago keenly discerns the emotional difficulties of human interaction and familial relations -- the fluidity of life often encumbered by what has been and what's yet to come, "The inquisitorial silence of the past observing us and the ironic silence of the future that awaits us."

With gestating metaphors abounding, "Skylight" presages many of the themes that Saramago would go on to explore in later books. The long, lyrical, punctuation-less sentences that would become his trademark are largely absent, but flashes of his characteristic style are nonetheless present. Even in their incipient stages, Saramago's curiosity and compassion for mankind are well evident. With a skepticism tempered by receptivity to life's profundities, Saramago writes empathetically about vulnerability, hardship, life, gender, and society. Through the guise of Abel, a book-loving clerk perhaps redolent of the young author himself, we espy the burgeoning political, religious, and social concerns that would shape so many of Saramago's novels to come.

Translated from the Portuguese by Margaret Jull Costa, Saramago's longtime English translator, "Skylight" affords a beautiful, candid, and timeless glimpse into the lives and loves of ordinary people. "Lost and found in time," it is a rich and lively novel, but also a window into the imagination of a writer whose prodigious talents wouldn't be appreciated for many years to come.

"Skylight," with its humanity boldly on display, deserves to reside amongst the late author's sincerest efforts. Saramago's gifts were myriad, and even in this, his second novel, it's easy to see why he would go on to become one of the world's most beloved and respected storytellers.