Tiny home in Świętne

5 out of 5 average rating, 22 reviews5 (22)

Great Hut

The cottage is located on a plot, partially fenced with direct access to the lake, surrounded by forests for 4-6 people 2 double bedrooms living room with kitchen(dishwasher, oven, induction hob,dishes) bathroom with shower and toilet covered patio with comfortable furniture large outdoor table,sun loungers,BBQ. The cottage is 100m from the lake. Only the landlord's cottage in the area. Rest, peace, quiet,contact with nature,you like walking,cycling,fish,mushrooms It's at our place Feel free to join us

Home in Smolniki Powidzkie

5 out of 5 average rating, 4 reviews5 (4)

HideSia - Lake House

Hey :) This is Justyna and Piotr. We built a lake house surrounded by a forest, filled with warmth and positive energy. Charming lake, forest, sauna relaxation, fireplace, peace and quiet. It's all exclusive. The home is designed to feel part of the landscape. Be in nature, not next to it. Get rid of restrictions. Take it to a whole new level of creativity powered by nature. Hurry, overwork. Say no. Get away from the hustle and bustle. Slow down with us. It works. We look forward to welcoming you!

Cottage in Kornaty

4.91 out of 5 average rating, 11 reviews4.91 (11)

Cottage Guesthouse Czempion

The Czempion Guesthouse is perfect for those who appreciate relaxing in the countryside, away from the hustle and bustle of the city. It is located 10 km from the cleanest lake in Poland - Lake Powidzkie (study from June 2023). The cottage is fully equipped and has everything to feel comfortable and comfortable. Whether you're a couple, a family with children, pet owners, youth, or the elderly, this cottage will provide the opportunity to relax surrounded by a garden full of colorful flowers.

Dome in Wiosna

5 out of 5 average rating, 8 reviews5 (8)

Spring Glamp

Luxury tent : Spring Glamp, consists of two separate rooms, a living room, a bathroom and a kitchenette. Spring Glamp is located away from the hustle and bustle of the city, surrounded by a forest. It offers free WiFi. On the fenced-in area there is a private pond, volleyball court and parking. Features include air conditioning, wifi, and an Amazon Prime TV. Guests have access to a private bathroom with a shower. The village of Wiosna is located 50 km from the center of Poznan.

Guest suite in Gołuchów

4.94 out of 5 average rating, 33 reviews4.94 (33)

Forest Apartments Historie 1

Relax and unwind in this peaceful, stylish space. Apartments Forest history is situated near Kalisz - in Golug, a gem of Southern Great Poland. We are almost an integral part of a beautiful park, which has the status of the largest arboretum in Poland. Our place is quiet and the peace...In Golu, there is a castle and castle complex:The Castle, the Forest Museum, the Dog Show Animal (toast, Polish horses, dishes), the blouse, the boulder,access to the beach.

Cottage in Ślesin

4.73 out of 5 average rating, 11 reviews4.73 (11)

Cottage Rybakówka Ślesin

We cordially invite you to our year-round lake house in Ślesin. Our home is a former fisherman after a total renovation. A secluded place, but close to restaurants, shops, and tourist attractions that Ślesin offers. From the windows and the spacious terrace you can admire the beautiful lake and we are only a 10-minute walk to OSiRu and the promenade. A great place for families and people who value peace and comfort. The minimum stay with us is 5 nights.

Guest suite in Mikorzyn

5 out of 5 average rating, 6 reviews5 (6)

Balance by the Lake - Mind Oasis

We invite you to escape the busyness of life and leave the chores and to-do lists behind as you relax, recharge and balance by the lake at our holiday home. Our top-floor condo is bright and airy, and has a clean uncluttered aesthetic which makes it the perfect space to escape from the city and the responsibilities of everyday life. The minimalist zen-like design and serene colour palette help to calm and open up your mind without distractions.

Home in Brdów

4.93 out of 5 average rating, 46 reviews4.93 (46)

An entire home perfect for a nice laziness :)

If you like indoor spaces that feel like a local, this listing is for you. My house in Brdów has everything you need to relax and get away from everyday life - a large living room with windows to the south, 2 bedrooms and a garden will allow you to hang out lazy time reading, cooking, etc., and if you like to be alone actively, you can walk to the nearest lake in 3 minutes, and into the woods in the 15th. An entire home and garden just for you!

Villa in Połajewo

4.83 out of 5 average rating, 23 reviews4.83 (23)

Lakefront villa with pool (2.5h from Warsaw)

Take your friends and family on a vacation and have a wonderful time together. Full privacy - cottage and 1.5 hectares exclusive! A "manor house" located on a 1.5 hectare in the area of Polawek (K. Peter's Kujawski, 2.5h), with a 90-meter shoreline. Private deck on the lake. Kayak, paddle boats, and more. In the area – pool, treehouse, trampoline, swings, sandbox, basketball court and football court, barbecue.