Tiny home in Świętne

5 out of 5 average rating, 22 reviews5 (22)

Great Hut

The cottage is located on a plot, partially fenced with direct access to the lake, surrounded by forests for 4-6 people 2 double bedrooms living room with kitchen(dishwasher, oven, induction hob,dishes) bathroom with shower and toilet covered patio with comfortable furniture large outdoor table,sun loungers,BBQ. The cottage is 100m from the lake. Only the landlord's cottage in the area. Rest, peace, quiet,contact with nature,you like walking,cycling,fish,mushrooms It's at our place Feel free to join us

Home in Smolniki Powidzkie

5 out of 5 average rating, 4 reviews5 (4)

HideSia - Lake House

Hey :) This is Justyna and Piotr. We built a lake house surrounded by a forest, filled with warmth and positive energy. Charming lake, forest, sauna relaxation, fireplace, peace and quiet. It's all exclusive. The home is designed to feel part of the landscape. Be in nature, not next to it. Get rid of restrictions. Take it to a whole new level of creativity powered by nature. Hurry, overwork. Say no. Get away from the hustle and bustle. Slow down with us. It works. We look forward to welcoming you!

Cottage in Kornaty

4.91 out of 5 average rating, 11 reviews4.91 (11)

Cottage Guesthouse Czempion

The Czempion Guesthouse is perfect for those who appreciate relaxing in the countryside, away from the hustle and bustle of the city. It is located 10 km from the cleanest lake in Poland - Lake Powidzkie (study from June 2023). The cottage is fully equipped and has everything to feel comfortable and comfortable. Whether you're a couple, a family with children, pet owners, youth, or the elderly, this cottage will provide the opportunity to relax surrounded by a garden full of colorful flowers.

Tiny home in Borecznia Wielka

4.94 out of 5 average rating, 103 reviews4.94 (103)

Verde Land - Wooden cottage in the countryside

The farmhouse is located in the village of Borecznia Wielka, surrounded by fields, meadows and forest. Large space and a beautiful garden. The building, along with the adjacent area, is intended for the exclusive disposal of guests. • Air conditioning •Fully equipped kitchen (gas stove, microwave, refrigerator, dishes, etc.) •Bathroom with shower •Mezzanine with three sleeping areas + bed in bedroom + sofa bed •Wi-fi, TV •Large patio surrounded by greenery •BBQ •Peaceful neighborhood

Cottage in Pyzdry

4.97 out of 5 average rating, 76 reviews4.97 (76)

Folwark Wójtostwo in Pyzdrach

The farm is located on the outskirts of the Nadwarcia Landscape Park (the land of water and mud birds) and the Pyzdrska Forest (the land of "iron houses"). It has existed since the Middle Ages and its name: “Wójtostwo” is historic. Do 1904 roku należało do gen. H. Dąbrowskiego. The guest cottage is located in the annex at the turn of the 18th/19th. Hosts provide full information about the neighborhood. Catering is available. Free parking. We accept pets for a fee of 50 zł per night.

Guest suite in Gołuchów

4.94 out of 5 average rating, 33 reviews4.94 (33)

Forest Apartments Historie 1

Relax and unwind in this peaceful, stylish space. Apartments Forest history is situated near Kalisz - in Golug, a gem of Southern Great Poland. We are almost an integral part of a beautiful park, which has the status of the largest arboretum in Poland. Our place is quiet and the peace...In Golu, there is a castle and castle complex:The Castle, the Forest Museum, the Dog Show Animal (toast, Polish horses, dishes), the blouse, the boulder,access to the beach.

Guest suite in Mikorzyn

5 out of 5 average rating, 6 reviews5 (6)

Balance by the Lake - Mind Oasis

We invite you to escape the busyness of life and leave the chores and to-do lists behind as you relax, recharge and balance by the lake at our holiday home. Our top-floor condo is bright and airy, and has a clean uncluttered aesthetic which makes it the perfect space to escape from the city and the responsibilities of everyday life. The minimalist zen-like design and serene colour palette help to calm and open up your mind without distractions.

Villa in Połajewo

4.83 out of 5 average rating, 23 reviews4.83 (23)

Lakefront villa with pool (2.5h from Warsaw)

Take your family and friends on vacation and have a fantastic time together. Full privacy - cottage and 1.5 hours exclusive! Rezydencja typu „dworek” położona na 1,5 ha obszarze w Połajewku (k. Piotrkowa Kujawskiego, 2,5h od Warszawy), z 90 metrową linią brzegową. A private jetty on the lake. Możliwość korzystania z kajaka i rowerka wodnego. In the area – pool, treehouse, trampoline, swings, sandpit, basketball and soccer field, barbecue.

Villa in Stefanowo

5 out of 5 average rating, 12 reviews5 (12)

GluszaSpot Cottage Odin

The house called Odyn is a magical building with a huge viewing terrace overlooking Lake Głuszyńskie.We recommend Odyn for winter evenings and hot summer days, thanks to air conditioners located on each floor, a fireplace and underfloor heating. The house, finished with Scandinavian taste, is located in the first line of the Głużyńskie lake, famous for its peace and cleanliness.