Podkowa Leśna

Podkowa Leśna [pɔtˈkɔva ˈlɛɕna] (literal meaning - "Horseshoe Grove", in full: Miasto-ogród Podkowa Leśna - "Garden-City Podkowa Leśna") is a town in Grodzisk Mazowiecki County (Masovian Voivodeship) of Poland and located on the Łowicko–Błońska Plai…

Palace of the Kraków Bishops in Kielce

The Palace of the Kraków Bishops in Kielce (Polish: Pałac Biskupów Krakowskich w Kielcach), was built in the 17th century as a summer residence of Bishops of Kraków in Kielce, Poland. The architecture of the palace constitute a unique mélange of Pol…

Opole University of Technology

Opole University of Technology (Polish name: Politechnika Opolska; sometimes called in English Technical University of Opole) is a university located in Opole, Poland.

Olsztyn, Silesian Voivodeship

Olsztyn [ˈɔlʂtɨn] is a village in Częstochowa County, Silesian Voivodeship, in southern Poland. It is the seat of the gmina (administrative district) called Gmina Olsztyn. It lies in historic Lesser Poland, approximately 12 kilometres (7 mi) south-e…

Nyskie Lake

Nyskie Lake (Polish: Jezioro Nyskie or Jezioro Głębinowskie) is a reservoir constructed on Nysa Kłodzka river in Poland in 1971. Its name comes from the nearby town of Nysa. The dam that created the reservoir is 2 kilometer long, and 20 meters high.…

Nowy Żmigród

Nowy Żmigród, until 1946 Żmigród (Yiddish: זשמיגראד / Zhmigrid‎, German: Schmiedeburg), is a village and rural municipality (gmina) in Jasło County, Subcarpathian Voivodeship, Poland, 8 miles (13 km) WNW of Dukla and 10 miles (16 km) south of Jasło.…

Nowy Korczyn

Nowy Korczyn [ˈnɔvɨ ˈkɔrt͡ʂɨn] is a village in Busko County, Świętokrzyskie Voivodeship, in south-central Poland. It is the seat of the gmina (administrative district) called Gmina Nowy Korczyn. It lies in Lesser Poland, approximately 20 kilometres …

Nowogród Bobrzański

Nowogród Bobrzański pronounced ['nɔˈvɔɡrut bɔˈbʐaɲskʲi] (German: Naumburg am Bober) is a town on the Bóbr river in Zielona Góra County, Lubusz Voivodeship, Poland, with 5,068 inhabitants (2004). It is the administrative seat of the Gmina Nowogród Bo…

Nowe Warpno

Nowe Warpno [ˈnɔvɛ ˈvarpnɔ] (German: Neuwarp) is a town in northwestern Poland, in Police County in West Pomeranian Voivodeship. It lies on the shore of the Szczecin Lagoon, very close to the border with Germany.

Nowe Miasto Lubawskie

Nowe Miasto Lubawskie [ˈnɔvɛ ˈmʲastɔ luˈbafskʲɛ] (German: Neumark in Westpreußen ) is a town in Poland, situated at river Drwęca. The population is 11,104 (2004).

Nosy

Nosy [ˈnɔsɨ] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Tarczyn, within Piaseczno County, Masovian Voivodeship, in east-central Poland.

Niklas

Niklas [ˈniklas] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Stare Miasto, within Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

Myszków

Myszków [ˈmɨʂkuf] is a town in Poland, with 33,016 inhabitants (2004). Situated on the Warta river in the Silesian Voivodeship (since 1999), previously in Częstochowa Voivodeship (1975-1998), it is the capital of Myszków County. Myszków historically…

Mszana Dolna

Mszana Dolna [ˈmʂana ˈdɔlna] is a town in Limanowa County, Lesser Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 7,431 inhabitants (2004). Mszana Dolna lies among the hills of western Beskids, 50 kilometres (31 miles) south of Kraków. The town is located in a dee…

Mrzeżyno

Mrzeżyno [mʐɛˈʐɨnɔ] (German: Deep, or Treptower Deep, after 1930 often Regamünde) is a village with a fishing seaport in Gryfice County. This is also a health resort with a lots of pensions, campsites and spa. It is located near the estuary of the R…

MotoArena Toruń

Marian Rose MotoArena Toruń (Polish: MotoArena im. Mariana Rosego) is a multi-use stadium in Toruń, Poland. It is currently used mostly for motorcycle speedway matches and is the home stadium of KST Unibax Toruń in the Speedway Ekstraliga.

Monument to the Fallen Shipyard Workers of 1970

The Monument to the fallen Shipyard Workers 1970 (Polish: Pomnik Poległych Stoczniowców 1970) was unveiled on 16 December 1980 near the entrance to what was then the Lenin Shipyard in Gdańsk, Poland. It commemorates the 42 or more people killed duri…

Milik

Milik [ˈmʲilʲik] (formerly Mikowa) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Muszyna, within Nowy Sącz County, Lesser Poland Voivodeship, in southern Poland, close to the border with Slovakia. It lies approximately 5 kilometres (3 mi) nor…

Mieszkowice

Mieszkowice [mʲɛʂkɔˈvʲit͡sɛ] (German: Bärwalde in der Neumark; Kashubian: Berwôłd) is a town in Gryfino County, West Pomeranian Voivodeship in northwestern Poland, about 15 km (9.3 mi) east of the Oder river and the border with Germany.

Miedwie

Miedwie (Polish: Jezioro Miedwie, German: Madüsee) is a lake in Pomeranian Lakeland, West Pomeranian Voivodship, Poland. It is 35 km² large, 16.2 km long and 3.2 km wide. Its maximum depth is 43.8 m.

Mała Wieś przy Drodze

Mała Wieś przy Drodze [ˈmawa ˈvjɛɕ ˈpʂɨ ˈdrɔd͡zɛ] ("small village by the road") is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Leoncin, within Nowy Dwór Mazowiecki County, Masovian Voivodeship, in east-central Poland.

Leśna

Leśna [ˈlɛɕna] (German: Marklissa) is a town in Lubań County, Lower Silesian Voivodeship, in south-western Poland, close to the Czech border. It is the seat of the administrative district (gmina) called Gmina Leśna.

Lake Gardno

Gardno (German: Garder See) is a lake in the Słowińskie Lakeland in Pomeranian Voivodship, Poland. It is the part of Słowiński National Park. Its area is 24.69 km². It is 6.8 km long and 4.7 km wide.

Lack, Poland

Lack [lat͡sk] is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Hanna, within Włodawa County, Lublin Voivodeship, in eastern Poland, close to the border with Belarus.

Kłobuck

Kłobuck [ˈkwɔbut͡sk] (German: Klobutzko) is a town in Poland, with 13,193 inhabitants (2009). Located in the Silesian Voivodeship, about 15 km northwest of Częstochowa, it is the capital of Kłobuck County. Historically, Kłobuck belongs to Lesser Pol…

Kąty Wrocławskie

Kąty Wrocławskie [ˈkɔntɨ vrɔt͡sˈwafskʲɛ] (German: Kanth) is a town in Wrocław County, Lower Silesian Voivodeship, in south-western Poland. It is the seat of the administrative district (gmina) called Gmina Kąty Wrocławskie. Prior to 1945 it was in G…

Kupa Synagogue

Kupa Synagogue (Polish: Synagoga Kupa) is a 17th-century synagogue in Kraków, Poland. It is located in the former Jewish quarter of Kazimierz developed from a neighborhood earmarked in 1495 by King Jan I Olbracht for the Jewish community, which has …