LIFE WITH HAROLD PINTER

Antonia Fraser in conversation with Benedict Nightingale

When Antonia Fraser met Harold Pinter she was a celebrated biographer and he was Britain's finest playwright. Both were already married - Pinter to the actress Vivien Merchant and Fraser to the politician Hugh Fraser - but their union seemed inevitable from the moment they met: 'I would have found you somehow', Pinter told Fraser. Their relationship flourished until Pinter's death on Christmas Eve 2008 and was a source of delight and inspiration to them both until the very end.

Join Times theatre critic, Benedict Nightingale in conversation with Antonia Fraser as they discuss modern literature's most celebrated and enduring marriage with fascinating glimpses into Pinter and Fraser's creativity and their illustrious circle of friends from the literary, political and theatrical world.

Antonia Fraser

Antonia Fraser is the author of many widely acclaimed historical works which have been international bestsellers. The prizes she has won include the Wolfson Award for History and the Norton Medlicott Medal of the Historical Association. She has been President of English PEN, chairman of the Society of Authors, and chairman of the Crime Writers’ Association.

Antonia Fraser was made DBE in 2011 for services to literature. She was married to Harold Pinter who died in 2008. Her previous books include Mary Queen of Scots, Cromwell: Our Chief of Men, King Charles II, The Gunpowder Plot: Terror and Faith in 1605, The Six Wives of Henry VIII, The Weaker Vessel, Warrior Queens, Love and Louis XIV, and most recently Perilous Question:The Drama of the Great Reform Bill 1832. Must You Go? My Life with Harold Pinter was published in 2010. She lives in London and has six children and eighteen grandchildren.

Benedict Nightingale

Nightingale was the Guardian's northern theatre critic, the New Statesman's theatre critic, the New York Times Sunday theatre critic and, from 1990 to 2010, the Times chief theatre critic during a period widely acknowledged to be as productive and exciting as any in theatrical history.