Bisbee & Associates News

NOVAR AND BISBEE & ASSOCIATES JOIN TO PROVIDE NOVAR’S ENERGY SOLUTIONS TO THE RESTAURANT INDUSTRY

Novar and Bisbee & Associates will work together to bring comprehensive energy services solutions to thousands of customers in the multi-unit restaurant industry

CLEVELAND, OH—July 28, 2009 – Novar, a division of Honeywell that provides strategic energy management solutions for multi-unit customers, and Bisbee & Associates, a professional energy consulting organization that assists energy management companies in growth initiatives, will combine efforts to drive energy savings and reduce greenhouse gas consumption for more than 800,000 restaurant customers in North America.

“The restaurant industry has enormous potential for energy savings and more effective use of its limited resources,” said Dean Lindstrom, President of Novar. “It’s our goal to become the largest energy services provider in the multi-unit restaurant industry, much in the same way we have become a leader in the retail segment. We are thrilled to work with Bisbee & Associates, and are confident their experience and existing relationships will greatly accelerate our success in this sector.”

Starting immediately, Bisbee & Associates will use its extensive experience in both energy services and in the restaurant industry in its role as the business development channel for all Novar services and products to the restaurants market.

“We feel that Novar presents the absolute best-in-class solution for the energy management needs of restaurant clients,” said Alex Bisbee, Principal of Bisbee & Associates. “Novar’s comprehensive package of technology, implementation services, and strategic support is perfectly suited to meet the financial and operational needs of a restaurant customer.”

Bisbee & Associates estimates that a typical quick-serve or casual dining location can reduce its electricity and expenditures by $5,000 - $10,000 through the implementation of the Novar product and services offering.

Novar is committed to becoming the recognized leader for energy management in the restaurant industry. “With our assistance, Novar will bring an offering to the restaurant industry that is incredibly compelling and unlike anything I’ve seen in the marketplace,” said Bisbee.

About Novar

Novar, a division of Honeywell International, is the global leader in multi-unit energy management solutions. Novar delivers energy and operational management consulting, technology and services to support its clients’ sustainability strategies and improve profitability. Its target markets include traditional retail chains, restaurants, theatres and other national and global multi-unit applications. For more information, call 1.800.348.1235, e-mail info-request@novar.com or visit www.novar.com.

About Honeywell

Honeywell International (www.honeywell.com) is a Fortune 100 diversified technology and manufacturing leader, serving customers worldwide with aerospace products and services; control technologies for buildings, homes and industry; automotive products; turbochargers; and specialty materials. Based in Morris Township, N.J., Honeywell’s shares are traded on the New York, London, and Chicago Stock Exchanges. For more news and information on Honeywell, please visit www.honeywellnow.com.