ALLIANCE Partners

Bisbee & Associates specializes in implementing energy management and renewable energy solutions in key market segments, primarily in North America. In selected markets and solution segments, B&A works with Alliance Partners to deliver services. In these cases, B&A works exclusively with the partner in return for sole representation in a market segment.

Our Partners

Novar

Bisbee & Associates is Novar’s sole agent in the restaurant market. We worked to structure our alliance with Novar due to their clear market leadership in multi-site energy management.

Novar, a Honeywell company, is the global leader in multi-site energy management. More than 20 years ago, Novar invented the technology to control and manage HVAC and lighting systems for businesses with multiple locations, and never looked back. As the market leader in multi-site controls and energy management, Novar uniquely provides the industry’s most comprehensive offering of products and services.

www.novar.com

H2O Applied Technologies

H2O and Bisbee & Associates work together in the hospitals and nursing home markets in the Midwest and Western United States. H2O has engaged B&A to develop and implement an outsourced sales and marketing program in this geographic region.

H2O Applied Technologies reduces utility expenses-water, energy, waste and telecommunications-by designing and installing a wide range of measures to optimize utility usage and/or replace inefficient equipment and systems. With over 10 years of experience serving clients in the healthcare, university, scientific research, and federal government sectors, we deliver reliable ways to reduce utility costs and solve related problems. We are a certified Women Business Enterprise (WBE) and proud ENERGY STAR partner.

www.h2oappliedtech.com

The Nevada ERC Board

The Bisbee & Associates partners comprise much of the operational leadership of the Nevada ERC Board as contract consultants. The Nevada ERC Board has a $30 Million+ track record in energy savings performance contracting with State, schools, and municipal agencies. The Nevada ERC Board includes financial, engineering, and project management resources, and continues to serve as a qualified third-party agency for energy performance contracting in the Western US.

www.nevadaerc.com

Greenmax Capital Advisors

Bisbee & Associates provides US-based business development, M&A, and marketing services to Greenmax Capital Advisors. Greenmax Capital Advisors is an international energy and environmental investment advisory and management consulting firm. Greenmax employ experts with broad experience in all aspects of energy project development, with a strong focus on renewable energy and energy efficiency.

www.greenmax.com

Cypress Limited

Bisbee & Associates provides marketing, sales, and leadership support to Cypress Limited in its efforts in the management and execution of its utility programs throughout the US. Cypress, Ltd. is an energy-consulting firm that simplifies the development and execution of complex efficiency and demand programs. Balancing the expectation of energy efficiency and the reality of utility resources, Cypress designs programs that support electric, gas, and water utilities in their efforts to motivate customers to adopt efficient behaviors and technologies. Offering a full line of consulting and administrative services, Cypress programs encourage high participation and efficient resource deployment.

www.cyp-res.com