Novar, a Honeywell company, is the global leader in multi-site energy management. More than 20 years ago, Novar invented the technology to control and manage HVAC and lighting systems for businesses with multiple locations, and never looked back. As the market leader in multi-site controls and energy management, Novar uniquely provides the industry’s most comprehensive offering of products and services. We focus on providing you as little, or as much support as your enterprise requires – from helping you develop your energy management and sustainability strategy, to executing on your behalf by providing a complete national or international turn-key program of equipment, installation / project management, and ongoing operation services. Our track record as a long term, trusted partner in our customers' success speaks for itself. Novar’s technology, processes, expertise and commitment to our customers has resulted in the deployment of our technology in more than 40,000 sites worldwide, with our team actively managing more than 10,000 sites on behalf of our customers. Our product and service offering delivers quick ROI, lowest lifecycle costs, and have literally saved billions of dollars for our customers. That’s why the top retailers have chosen Novar to help them with Energy Management, Operational Efficiency, and Business Improvement.

Read more

Novar, a Honeywell company, is the global leader in multi-site energy management. More than 20 years ago, Novar invented the technology to control and manage HVAC and lighting systems for businesses with multiple locations, and never looked back. As the market leader in multi-site controls and energy management, Novar uniquely provides the industry’s most comprehensive offering of products and services. We focus on providing you as little, or as much support as your enterprise requires – from helping you develop your energy management and sustainability strategy, to executing on your behalf by providing a complete national or international turn-key program of equipment, installation / project management, and ongoing operation services. Our track record as a long term, trusted partner in our customers' success speaks for itself. Novar’s technology, processes, expertise and commitment to our customers has resulted in the deployment of our technology in more than 40,000 sites worldwide, with our team actively managing more than 10,000 sites on behalf of our customers. Our product and service offering delivers quick ROI, lowest lifecycle costs, and have literally saved billions of dollars for our customers. That’s why the top retailers have chosen Novar to help them with Energy Management, Operational Efficiency, and Business Improvement.

Read more

Reach More Decision-Makers with Scale Plans

Let us show you how our accurate B2B company and contact data can help you reach the right decision makers and close more deals.

What can you expect?

See how Lusha can speed up your workflow

Learn how to reach your ideal prospects

Discover the practices of the best performing sales teams

Trusted by 280,000+ revenue teams of all sizes