Derek Fisher accomplished so much during his playing career with the Los Angeles Lakers and as a coach with the New York Knicks.

Now, he's onto his next challenge as a high school coach. Fisher recently accepted the job at Crespi Carmelite High School in Los Angeles. He is leading three of his sons on the team.

"So far, so good," Fisher said. "It's been a blessing. Our kids obviously are growing up really fast. We got one in college and four in high school and the three boys at the same high school playing together. It's not something we had planed in our lives We're just really thankful and excited for the opportunity."

Fisher, who won five championships alongside Kobe Bryant and Shaquille O'Neal with the Lakers, took the opportunity when the previous coach stepped down before the season.

For Fisher, who coached the New York Knicks from 2014-16 and the Los Angeles Sparks of the WNBA for three seasons, it was a chance to remain close to the game while also spending time with his sons.

"It's been enjoyable," Fisher said. "I think we've all done a pretty good job of balancing coach and Dad and sons and not really overly mixing the two. When we're at home, we just try to be a family and love each other and make sure things are flowing at the house the right way. When we're at gym and at school, we kind of try to keep those boundaries in place. That's when I'm coach and not as much Dad."

Fisher said he's enjoyed the aspect of working with the younger generation. It gives him opportunity to deal with players before they become stars.

"I think the biggest difference is you're trying to help young players and young student-athletes build the foundation habit and work ethic and approach to a sport that they are trying to become great at," Fisher said. "As opposed to when you're coaching the pros, most of the pros have already established that they are some of the best basketball players in the world. You're not trying to help them become great, they already great."

Fisher spent most of his playing and coaching career living a four-star lifestyle. Now, he's adjusting to wearing more hats than when in the NBA life.

"At the pro level as a head coach or assistant coach or whatever your role is, you're not necessarily responsible for driving the van to the game on the road or carrying the ball gab into the gym to make sure you have enough balls for warmups before games," Fisher said. "You're not responsible for, at the pro level, for the medical kit because the athletic trainer at the high school also has to be at the soccer game or volleyball game or some other game ... You have to have the emergency medical kit in case a kid gets injured or hurt or cut."

Shandel Richardson is the Publisher of Back In The Day NBA. He can be reached at shandelrich@gmail.com

TWITTER: @ShandelRich

Follow all of our Miami Heat/NBA coverage on Facebook here

Subscribe to our YouTube channel here

For any Heat or NBA questions, please email shandelrich@gmail.com