Westfield Heritage Village is one of the most fascinating wedding destinations in Ontario. Composed of a stunning collection of over 35 historical buildings carefully restored to capture the true charm and spirit of early Canadian culture, the village offers excellent opportunities for unique and rustic outdoor photographs.

Make sure to check out my list of the top wedding venues in H amilton, Ontario after this to get inspired by more locations to have your wedding reception or ceremony!

History

Westfield Heritage Village was established by two Brantford, Ontario high schoolteachers in 1961 who purchased land near Rockton, Ontario, using their own money. Their goal was to save heritage buildings that were in danger of being destroyed and also to create a hands-on educational facility to teach pioneer life. The original name of the facility was the Westfield Pioneer Village until 1981 when the name was changed to Westfield Heritage Village as much of the collection was not actually of the pioneer era. [1]

Available Spaces

The Bandstand

The bandstand is an elegant outdoor gazebo styled structure that makes for a beautiful setting for an outdoor ceremony. Tucked between two large trees with the backdrop of the quaint village, the bandstand creates a stunning stage for you to take your vows.

The Mountsberg Church

This Victorian styled church has a rustic charm and authentic elegance that brings you back to the golden ages of ole.

The Ironwood Hall

The Ironwood Hall is a newly renovated reception hall ready to host your wedding dinner and evening events.

Packages & Prices

The Signature Package - $2400

Includes:

Victorian Mountsberg Church for your wedding ceremony.

Rehearsal date prior to the wedding.

Ironwood Reception Hall featuring a large kitchen, air conditioning, wheelchair accessibility, an outdoor deck, and easy access for deliveries.

Victorian Bandstand in the center of the village green

The spaces can also be booked individually at the following prices:

Ironwood Hall Rental - $1855.00

The Mountsberg Church and Victorian Bandstand - $545.00 + HST per 2 hours

Please note that these prices are subject to change and it’s best to contact the venue directly for the most accurate and up-to-date information. For more information you can visit: https://westfieldheritage.ca/westfield-weddings/