Source:

LANCASTER

and Fairfield County

Published by

George A. Kraemer, Publisher

[PORTRAITS: Gen. W. T. Sherman; Hon. John Sherman; Thomas Ewing; Thomas Ewing, Jr.]

CHAPTER IV.

LANCASTER'S SONS AND DAUGHTERS, PAST AND PRESENT.

---------------

GENERAL WILLIAM TECUMSEH SHERMAN,

This eminent Lancastrian was born Feb. 8, 1820, bis parents being Judge Charles and Marv Hoyt Sherman, than whom no more honorable names adorn the records of Fairfield County.

It is rather remarkable that an entire family should be at once so interesting and distinguished as was that of Judge Sherman. His son John is too well known as statesman and financier to need a historian so soon after his demise. The same may be said of Gen. Sherman, and it is said that all the eleven children possessed remarkable traits of character, which reflected to a marked degree the strong individuality of their illustrious forebears.

Mrs. Sherman, left a widow with a large family, Hon. Thomas Ewing, a neighbor with great regard for the Judge’s memory, offered to adopt William, or “Cump” as he was familiarly known, and until sixteen years of age, when he went to West Point, he lived with Mr. and Mrs. Ewing, afterward marrying their eldest daughter (1850).

Graduating third in his class at West Point, he rose from the rank of Second Lieutenant to Captain, serving at Fort Moultrie and in California.

From 1853 to 1857 he was in the banking business on the Pacific coast, the monotony of a military life having wearied him. Later, having studied law while in the army, he went to Leavenworth, Kansas, where, with Thomas H. Ewing and General McCook, he established himself in that profession.

Perhaps it was his bearing the name of the Indian warrior Tecumseh — perhaps his early training, or perhaps destiny — but we next find him in 1859 President of the Louisiana State Military Academy, where he remained until the Civil War, when, being in sympathy with the North, he resigned and proceeded to Washington, offering his services to the President for the awful struggle, which, from his long residence in the South, he knew to be inevitable.

We see him in command at Bull Run — brave, desperate, his brigade lost more than two-thirds of its number. Later, Brigadier-General of volunteers at Louisville, Ky.; again at Shiloh, where Grant said of Sherman: “ To his individual effort I am indebted for the success of the battle.”

Then Vicksburg, Missionary Ridge, and Lookout Mountain, a panorama of glorious achievements, which shall be told by father to son as long as memories of the Civil War remain.

Perhaps he added more largely to his reputation by his movement on Atlanta and his historic March to the Sea, severing all connections as he went, burning his bridges behind

Page 94 -

him, discarding all but necessities, without surplus provisions and in an enemy’s country; shouting defiance to all orthodox methods of warfare, military critics pronounced him insane and prophesied destruction for the entire army.

It is an old story now of how the mighty host swept all before it, and how like a triumphal march his soldiers occupied Macon, and through cities, villages, forests, fields, "On to the Sea” was their cry, and rested not until that eventful Christmas tide, 1864, he wired President Lincoln: "I beg to present to you as a Christmas gift the city of Savannah with 150 guns and plenty of ammunition and about 25,000 bales. of cotton.”

But for this brilliant campaign, his conquest of the Carolinas, which so soon followed, would alone have made him famous. True, he differed with the War Department as to terms of surrender for Johnston at Raleigh, and Grant relieved Sherman in arranging this matter, but history has vindicated his opinions, and he has had ample justice done to the daring originality of design, the fertility of resource, the brilliant strategy and untiring energy that made Gen. Grant pronounce him "the best field officer the war had produced.”

Sherman was made Lieutenant-General in 1866, Commander-in-Chief in 1869, and retired from the army Nov. 1, 1883.

General Sherman died in New York City, Feb. 14, 1891, and was buried in St. Louis, Mo., beside his wife, who had preceded him in 1888.

He directed that the only inscription above his dust should be his name, rank, dates of birth and death, and the words "True and Honest.”

HON. JOHN SHERMAN.

Where so many distinguished names compete for superlatives, it is, indeed, difficult to say who has been Lancaster’s most distinguished son.

Possibly the popular vote would as nearly be unanimous on the name of John Sherman as on that of any other, and at its mere mention not only Lancaster, but the County of Fairfield and the State of Ohio, together with the entire United States and all the world beside, hasten to lay immortelles on the grave of this truly great man.

John Sherman was born in Lancaster, May 10, 1823, his parents being Judge Charles R. and Mary Hoyt Sherman.

Judge Sherman died in 1829 and two years later John, then but eight years old, was offered a home in the family of his father’s cousin, John Sherman, at Mt. Vernon, Ohio. Here he remained about four years, and in 1835 returned to his mother’s family at Lancaster.

As a boy of twelve, he entered Howe’s Academy, and in after years, when in retrospective mood, used to recount the happy days spent with his schoolmates, Wm. P. Rice, Winthrop Sifford, P. B. Ewing, Fred. Reese, William Duke, Mike Effinger, his brother "Cutup” Sherman, and many other names familiar to the fast passing generation.

In 1837 John Sherman was rodman under Col. S. R. Curtis, and for two years assisted on the Muskingum River improvements.

A political change retiring Col. Curtis’ engineers in 1839, young Sherman then about sixteen, found employment with Dr. M. Z. Kreider, Clerk of the Courts, and the records show him to have been paid $1.50 per day for his services.

Page 95 -

In 1890 he entered his brother Charles' law office at Mansfield, Ohio, and on May 10, 1844 — his twenty-first birthday — he was admitted to the bar of the Supreme Court at Springfield, Ohio.

He at once became a partner of his brother Charles, and their office in Mansfield was a center of legal and political work.

In 1852 he was a delegate to the Whig State Convention, and was warmly complimented on his brief but brilliant speech.

In 1854 he was elected to Congress, taking his seat Dec. 1, 1855, and from that date until almost immediately before his death, he was continuously in public life, as Representative, United States Senator, or as member of the President's Cabinet.

In a word, he was a Statesman, and no man has done more for his country than John Sherman.

He died in Washington City, Oct. 22, 1900, and was buried beside his beloved wife

at Mansfield, Ohio.

“The pilgrim they laid in a large upper chamber

Whose windows opened toward tile sun rising.

The name of the chamber was peace.”

HON. THOMAS EWING.

Thomas Ewing, the elder, was born on Dec. 28, 1789, near West Liberty, in Ohio County, Virginia (now West Virginia). He was of Scotch-Irish descent. His father, George Ewing, served in one of the New Jersey regiments in the Revolutionary War. His mother was Rachel Harris, of New Jersey.

While he was still a child his father settled near Amesville, in Athens County. A high rock, the top of which is difficult of access, is still pointed out where he used to read and study. There is a story current that the son of a recent owner of the farm pointed out the rock to a visitor, and said that he didn’t remember who used to climb upon it, but thought it was Adam and Eve!

His early life was one of privation and of great physical and mental exertion. Before he was eight years of age he had read the entire Bible, and a year later, to borrow a new book, walked twenty miles, along a trail where for thirteen miles there was no house. A few years later he contributed all his hoarded wealth, ten raccoon skins, towards the purchase of the famous “Coon-skin” Library. Much of the time between 1809 and 1812 he worked at the Kanawha salt wells, where, by prodigious exertion, he earned enough money to pay off the purchase mortgage on his father's farm and for his education at Athens University. He was graduated in the year 1815. After a year in the law office of the Hon. Philemon Beecher he was admitted to the bar, and began the practice of law in Lancaster.

During four or five years he was prosecuting attorney of Fairfield County, where he succeeded in stamping out the traffic, theretofore prevalent, in counterfeit bank-notes. Of the bar of that early day Mr. Ewing has written:

Page 96 -

Mr. Ewing served in the Senate of the United States as a Whig from 1831 to 1837, and again in 1850-51. He was appointed Secretary of the Treasury by President Harrison in 1841, and Secretary of the Interior by President Taylor in 1849. His most important public services were rendered, however, mainly by public discussions during the later years of his life.

In January of 1820 Mr. Ewing was married to Maria Wills Hoyle, daughter of Hugh Hoyle, of Lancaster, who, for forty years, was Clerk of the Supreme Court of Ohio for Fairfield County. She was a devout Catholic. Their married life was one of happiness, unbroken until her death, which occured on Feb. 20, 1864, in Lancaster, where her virtues and charities are still lovingly remembered. They had five sons and two daughters. One son, George, died in infancy. Another son, Philemon Beecher, was Judge of the Court of Common Pleas in Fairfield County and prominent in Lancaster as a man of business. Three other sons, Hugh Hoyle, Thomas and Charles, were all lawyers, and each attained, during the Cival War, the rank of Brigadier-General. Of two daughters, one, Ellen Hoyle, was the wife of Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman; and the other, Maria Theresa, was the wife of Col. Clement F. Steele.

Mr. Ewing died in Lancaster on Oct. 26, 1871. A few days before his death he entered the Catholic Church. His moral elevation and superb abilities entitle him to rank among the greatest lawyers of his time.

GEN. THOMAS EWING, JR.

Gen. Thomas Ewing, son of Thomas Ewing and Maria Wills Hoyle, was born at the Ewing homestead, in Lancaster, Ohio, on the seventh day of August, 1829. He was educated at Mr. Lyons' School, in Lancaster, at the Greenfield Academy, and at Brown University, in Rhode Island. When he was nineteen years old he was one of the private secretaries to President Taylor. He was graduated from the Cincinnati Law School, and began the practice of the law in Cincinnati in 1855. On Jan. 18, 1856, he was married with Miss Ellen Ewing Cox, a daughter of the Rev. William Cox, of Piqua, Ohio, whose younger daughter was the wife of Col. John M. Connell, of Lancaster.

Page 97 -

Page 98 -

[PORTRAITS: Hoyt Sherman; Col. Henry B. Reese; Hugh Boyle Ewing; Mrs. Mary Elizabeth Reese]

Page 99 -

MARY ELIZABETH REESE

Page 100 -

Page 101 -

SAMUEL ALEXANDER GRISWOLD.

Page 102 -

[PORTRAITS: S. A. Griswold; Thomas Wetzler; John Trafford Brazee; Otto W. Kraemer]

Page 103 -

THOMAS WETZLER

For nearly thirty years Thomas Wetzler was editor and prietor of the Ohio eagle, one of the few Ohio publications that was established at the early dawn of the last century and has since been in continuous publication.

Page 104 -

OTTO W. KRAEMER.

Some of America's best citizens are foreign born, and while still honoring the Fatherland, are none the less proud of their adopted home; nay, have labored to its upbuilding through long and often troublesome years.

Of such is the subject of our sketch, Otto W. Kraemer, a native of Goethengen, German, where he was born Apr. 5, 1812.

He attended the famous university of that city, and not until 1833, when in his young manhood, did he determine to seek a home across the seas.

Page 105 -

He at once located at Lancaster, going into the drug business with Burry & Beck, and later with KofTman & Co.

Mr. Kraemer was a chemist of great ability. He became such by study and attention to the details of his chosen profession.

He died in September, 1868, leaving an honored name and the assurance to his family that he had benefited his fellow man.

HENRY ORMAN.

A long and honored life closed when Henry Orman, Sr., passed away, July 29, 1900. Born

HON. TALLMAN SLOUGH.

At the time of Judge Slough's death, Aug. 16, 1900, a local journal, in referring to his remarkable life, summed it up in a happy sentence: "An able jurist, affectionate

Page 106 -

husband, and a worthy citizen." He was born in Fairfield County, Violet Township, recording his birth Sept. 12, 1839, and his parents, Frederick and Mary Slough, were also

WILLIAM MEDILL.

NATHANIEL WILSON and the WILSON BURIAL GROUND.

Among the prisoners of Charles the First, at the Battle of Bothwell Bridge, June 22, 1679, were Richard Cameron and Nathanial Wilson, the latter a boy of nineteen, but a Scotc

Page 107 -

[PICTURE of Wilson Burying Ground]

[Page 108] -

DARIUS TALLMADGE.

Page 109 -

[PORTRAITS of Darius Tallmadge; Hocking H. Hunter; Benjamin F. Reinmund; Dr. F. L. Flowers]

Page 110 -

BENJAMIN F. REINMUND.

Page 111 -

MRS. SARAH KLOTTS.

[PORTRAIT: Mrs. Sarah Klotts, Descendant of Ebenezer Zane]

JOHN H. RHODES.

The hand of time sets lightly on the subject of this little biography, few people believing from his appearance that John H. Rhodes was born as long ago as October

Page 112 -

[PORTRAITS: Samuel Rhodes; Hervey Scott; John H. Rhodes; Rev. P. D. Schory]

Page 113 -

3, 1823. And yet the old family Bible so records that event as taking place at Burkettsville, Maryland.

His father, Samuel Rhodes, was born at Petersville, Maryland, Mar. 4, 1792, and died Oct. 9, 1884, so that it can be seen that John H. Rhodes comes of good old stock.

Mr. Rhodes, Sr., lived in Maryland until after his son’s birth and then removed to Virginia, but hearing remarkable stories of the new West, he determined to make a home for his family in Ohio, and in 1832 made the long journey to Lancaster.

Business prospering, the Rhodes families, father and son, were among the most comfortable in Fairfield County.

John H. Rhodes joined the Masons in 1855, and for more then forty-five years has been a consistent member of the Order.

HERVEY SCOTT.

Page 114 -

GEORGE M. MORRIS.

It was in

WILLIAM L. KING.

Page 115 -

[PORTRAITS: W. L. King; Philip Nester; John M. King; Prof. Geo. M. Morris, Superintendent of Amanda, Ohio, Schools]

Page 116 -

JOHN M. KING.

PHILIP NESTER.

Page 117 -

He left two children, Charles, a member of the Gas Board, and Caroline, wife of Mr. Frank Miller, of Lancaster.

LEROY G. SILBAUGH.

GEORGE S. CUNNINGHAM.

FRANK M. ACTON.

Frank M. Acton was born in Amanda, Fairfield County, Ohio, Apr. 8, 1872. In 1876 he with his parents moved to Lancaster. HE attended the public schools in Lancaster and graduated from the High School in 1890. Mr. Acton was employed by the Standard Con-

Page 118 -

JOHN N. WOLFE.

GEORGE W. TRIMBLE.

Page 119 -

[PORTRAITS: R. F. Brown, Trustee of Natural Gas Board; Albert Getz, Trustee of Natural Gas Board; Chas. F. Nester, Trustee of Natural Gas Board; George W. Trimble, Superintendent of Natural Gas Plant]

Page 120 -

R. F. BROWN.

Was born at Sugar Grove, Fairfield County, Oct. 2, 1851. Orphaned while young, he was left to the care of his grandparents, residing in Morgan County, and afterward in Muskingum County, where young Brown acquired a good common school education, later attending the Fairfield Union Academy at Pleasantville, Ohio, and the Ohio Wesleyan University at Delaware. After leaving Delaware he began teaching, and alternated for twelve years his Summers on the farm, his Winters in the school-room.

In 1884 he was appointed Deputy Auditor under Benjamin F. Dum, serving in that capacity for over five years, when he succeeded to the Auditorships, and for six additional years conducted the office. At that time Mr. Ginder was elected Auditor and he promptly named Mr. Brown his Deputy, thus recognizing the faithfulness and integrity of this longtime official.

Mr. Brown has for years been a "City Father," serving on boards and committees of various bodies. He is now Chairman of the Natural Gas Board, and in every trust he has shown his entire fidelity to Lancaster and her best interests.

Mr. Brown has been in the service of Fairfield County for nearly twenty years.

CAPTAIN ALBERT GETZ.

Although foreign born, there is no more loyal citizen of this Great Republic than the subject of this sketch.

His birth place, Baden, Germany, Dec. 18, 1844, he was very young when his parents, Norbert and Hannah Getz, removed to New York State and here, until their death, they remained with their little family. Orphaned at the tender age of nine years, he was fortunate in finding a home in the family of his father’s kinsman, Ferdinand Getz, an old and honored citizen of Lancaster, Ohio. Here young Getz completed his education, and under Wolfinger & Hoffman learned the shoe business, and it is with this industry that for eighteen years his name has been invariably linked in the business world of his adopted city.

While with Myer & Getz, and afterward with the first shoe factory in Lancaster—named for him, by the way — he was prominent in promoting the shoe business and incidentally the manufacturing interests of the city.

He was a member of the original Natural Gas Company of Lancaster, acting as its Vice-President, and later served three additional terms as Trustee of this company.

Mr. Getz was a member of the 114th Ohio regiment from 1862 to 1865 in the Civil War, and is properly proud of his honorable discharge from his country’s service. In 1881 he organized the Mt. Pleasant Guards and for eight years was its honored Captain.

Mrs. Getz, was before her marriage Miss Clara C. Ream, of Lancaster.

JOSEPH W. STEWART.

In 1848, in Jacksontown, over in Licking County, and right in midsummer, Aug. 4, Sheriff Joseph W. Stewart was born.

Page 121 -

[PORTRAITS: Capt. J. M. Sutphen, Clerk of Natural Gas Plant; H. T. Mechling, City Clerk; Louis J. Snyder, Superintendent of Water-Works; Joseph W. Stewart, Ex-Sheriff]

Page 122 -

Like his neighbors, he went to the district school, and even now will tell you which of the teachers whipped him the hardest, and of the many pranks he played, for which he deserved all he got.

Leaving school, lie served for two years behind the counter of a local dry goods store, and then for three years followed Horace Greeley's advice —“ Go West, young man ” — locating in Kansas City and afterward in Denver.

But Ohio called him and “Home, Sweet Home,’’ beckoned, and, in 1872, we find him again in Fairfield County, and the following year he married Miss Alice Farr.

For a time he conducted a grocery business at Newark, but in 1881 removed to Pleasantville,

Ohio, opening a general warehouse.

In 1896 he was elected Sheriff, and in 1898 was again honored with the office.

LOUIS J. SNYDER

HON. GEORGE EWING.

It was said during one period of Rome, that "to have been a Roman was greater than a King," and so in Ohio, in Lancaster, to have relationship with this honorable family by blood or marriage ties was, indeed, good fortune.

Page 123 -

[PORTRAITS: N. Bonner, Water-Works Trustee; C. Lehmen, Water-Works Trustee; George Ewing, Member State Board of Pardons; Robert H. Sharp, Representative]

Page 124 -

Page 125 -

JAMES C. MOCK.

Page 126 -

AD. H. GINDER.

W. J. FRITZ.

GEORGE H. MILLER

A. B. KIEFABER

Page 127 -

HON. JOHN G. REEVES.

Page 128 -

FRANK W. RAITZE

JOHN SIMON

Page 129 -

In the Fall of 1900 Mr. Simon was elected County Commissioner, and the choice was, indeed, a case of office seek the man, and an honor most worthily bestowed.

THEODORE SHALLENBERGER.

A. E. BEETZ.

Page 130 -

CHRIS. KELLER.

E. H. BININGER

Page 131 -

[PORTRAITS: Chris. Keller, President of Board of Trade; Chas H. Towson, Secretary Board of Trade; E. H. Bininger; Benjamin Dum; BOARD OF TRADE]

Page 132 -

CHARLES H. TOWSON

W. C. STRETTON

Page 133 -

[PORTRAITS: W. C. Stretton; John C. Hite; Philip Marks; Gust. A. Kraemer. BOARD OF TRADE]

Page 134 -

COL. JOHN C. HITE

GUSTAVUS A. KRAEMER

Page 135 -

CHARLES McCLELLAN STRICKLER

ABRAM R. EVERSOLE

Page 136 -

[PORTRAITS: BAR ASSOCIATION. A. R. Eversole; George E. Martin; Joseph S. Sites; Thomas H. Dalson; Charles M. Strickler; James M. Ferrell; A. I. Vorys; James W. Miller; Robert L. Gilliam]

Page 137 -

[PORTRAIT: BAR ASSOCIATION. E. C. Rutter, M. A. Daughterty, Brooks E. Shell; Wm. Davidson, L. O. binckley, L. G. Silbaugh, J. M. Shallenberger; John h. Littrell, C. C. Pickering, Wm. Daughterty, Otto Beeles; Van A. Snider, H. C. Drinkle, L. L. Wagner]

Page 138 -

F. W. WRIGHT.

FRED L. MAUGER.

A. J. ARNOLD

Page 139 -

[PORTRAITS: A. J. Arnold, Ex-County Commissioner; Frank W. Wright, Ex-County Recorder; George H. Heed; Fred L. Mauger, County Auditor Elect.]

Page 140 -

Before he had rounded out a half century of useful life his Democratic friends nominated him for County Commissioner, and for nearly seven years he served in that responsible position.

H. CLINTON BELT.

CLAV HARRIS SHAW

ROBERT H. CROOK

DR. J. J. SILBAUGH.

Page 141 -

[PORTRAITS: Fenwick Ewing; Robert H. Crook; H. Clinton Belt, Member County Bar Association; Clay H. Shaw, Ex-//county Clerk ]

Page 142 -

JOSEPH P. HERSHBERGER, M. D.

DR. CHARLES FRANKLIN JUNKERMAN.

Page 143 -

[PORTRAITS: Dr. J. J. Silbaugh; Dr. Jos. P. Hershberger; Dr. G. A. Harman; Dr. Chas. Franklin Junkerman.]

Page 144 -

DR. CHARLES EDWARD REESE

Is the son of Isaac Reese and grandson of Maurice Reese, who came from Pennsylvania in 1799, and settled about one mile west of Lancaster.

He was born on this original farm, obtaining his education in the country schools and Lancaster High School. Later lie went one year to Worthington Academy, finishing at Xenia College, at which institution he afterward held the position of teacher of French for one year.

In 1881 he began the study of medicine, entering the Ohio Medical College of Cincinnati, graduating in 1885. Immediately he began the practice of his profession at Lancaster, and in 1893 was appointed physician to the Boys Industrial School.

DR. GEORGE W. O'GRADY

Was born in Philadelphia, June 26, 1873, and at nine years of age removed with his parents to Lancaster, where he attended the public schools, graduating from the High School in June, 1895.

Long before this date (1890) he began the study of medicine with Dr. J. P. Hershberger, but as soon as he had finished school he went to the Pulte Medical College, Cincinnati, and later, 1896-97, to the Cleveland University of Medicine and Surgery. He completed his medical course at the Homeopathic College of Cleveland, graduating April 4, 1899. On Feb. 1, 1899, he received the appointment as first assistant house surgeon in the Huron Street (Cleveland) Hospital, and at the date of his graduation he was promoted to senior house surgeon, which position he retained until October, 1900, when he located in Lancaster, taking offices in the Effinger Block.

DR. LEE H. DECOURCY O'GRADY

Lee H. DeCourcy O’Grady, D. D. S., was born Dec. 16, 1877, in Petrolia, Butler County, Pennsylvania. He came from the East with his parents in 1884, and received his education in the Lancaster public schools. Graduating from the Dental Department of the Ohio Medical University, Apr. 22, 1900, he opened an office in this city May 1, 1900, at 158½ West Main Street.

DR. J. C. SCOTT

Dr. Scott is a Lancaster boy for whom his native city has never had cause to blush, but, on the contrary, points to his success in his chosen calling — dentistry — as an incentive to the rising generation and an example of what energy and natural ability can do.

To be sure his father, Dr. Hervey Scott, left him the heritage of a good name, one respected far and near; instead of being handicapped thereby, as is sometimes the case, young Scott seemed determined not to tarnish his family honor, but to add more laurels thereto. His record at school in Lancaster and at the Ohio College of Dental Surgery, at Cincinnati, is one to be proud of, and included plenty of hard work, otherwise he could not have taken the high standing in his profession at his old home, for at Lancaster, as

Page 145 -

[PORTRAITS: Dr. J. H. Stuckey, Dr. Chas. E. Reese, Dr. W. C. Graham, Dr. George W. O'Grady, Dr. Lee H. DeCourcy O'Grady]

Page 146 -

elsewhere, “a prophet is not without honor, save in his own country.” But true merit "pot there.” The third generation ”Dr. Scott ” is now in training in the person of Dr. J. C. Scott’s son Walter, who graduated in dentistry from his father’s Alma Mater in May, 1901.

DR. JOHN J. STUCKEY

Was horn at Sugar Grove, Ohio, Sept. 7, 1868. He attended the Lancaster public schools, and completed his education with a normal course.

Being offered a position as Deputy under R. F. Brown, Auditor, young Stuckey served in that office until, Dr. E. L. Slocum needing an assistant, he saw an opening which proved his life work.

He studied dentistry for three years with Dr. Scott, graduating from the Ohio Medical University of Columbus in 1896, after which he established himself in a very successful practice in Lancaster, with offices in the Rising Block.

DR. C. W. OUTCALT.

While drums and bugles were calling good men and true, and when

"Many where the hearts praying for the right,

And wishing for the war to cease,"

The subject of our sketch was born on Sept. 4, 1864, at Lancaster, Ohio.

Too young to know what it all meant, he only learned from the pages of history in the schools of his native town what thrilling events had silvered the hair of his elders. He only knew 1864 as his birth year; to them it was not only that, but the pivotal year of one of the greatest conflicts the world has ever known.

At seventeen years of age young Outcalt began the study of dentistry, and on May 1, 1886, graduated in his chosen profession at the University of Pennsylvania.

Immediately returning to Lancaster, he began a successful practice, his offices being well and favorably known throughout Fairfield and adjoining counties.

DR. W. C. GRAHAM.

A Fairfield County boy by birth, he gained his education at the district schools until such time as he was ready for the Lancaster High School, where he spent a year fitting himself for the Ohio Normal University at Ada.

The training at the University persuaded him that he had a vocation for teaching, and for three years he was a successful instructor.

In 1893 lie went to Philadelphia and began his life work in the Dental College of the University of Pennsylvania. He completed his course in this institution in June, 1889, and was promptly elected Vice-President of the Dental Alumni Association.

He is also a member of both the Ohio and National Dental Associations.

Page 147 -

[PORTRAITS: Dr. J. C. Scott, Dr. J. J. Stuckey, Dr. C. W. Outcalt, Dr. E. C. Repass]

Page 148 -

In 1894 Dr. Graham joined the Knights of Pythias, rising rapidly to the coveted places in the order; at the present time he is P. C. of Mt. Pleasant Lodge, and Jajor of the Third Battalion, First Ohio, U. R. K. P.

Not only an affable, congenial gentleman, but thoroughly posted in his profession, the Doctor is an addition to the social and business community of Lancaster, and highly appreciated by all who know him.

DR. E. C. REPASS.