Table of Contents -Volume III

CHAPTER 12

THOMAS E WING

Ewing Family Lineage: William-James

Thomas EWING was a nice name to have if you lived in Ohio. Honorable Thomas E WING of Lancaster, was a senator from Ohio, Secretary of the Treasury under Harrison, and the United State's first Secretary of the Interior under Taylor. He and his wife, Maria BO YLE, raised, and were later parents-in-law of the great Civil War general, William Tecumseh S HERMAN.

Many of our Thomas' descendants have wanted to claim him as their ancestor. It would be nice, but of course he is not. The two were contemporaries, however. Our Thomas was born on the 30th of July 1788, and Hon. Thomas 14 months later, on the 28th of September 1789. They were born not too awfully far apart - our Thomas on the banks of Swago Creek, in what was then Greenbrier County, Virginia and Hon. Thomas was born 150 miles or so north of there, at West Liberty, in what was then Ohio County, Virginia.

That Thomas' parents were George and Rachel (HARRIS) EW ING, George being of the Greenwich, New Jersey branch of the Ewing family, descending from Finley EWI NG. If there is any relationship between those Ewings and ours, it goes back way to the other side of the Atlantic and long before our James was born.

One thing that some of our Ewings did have in common with Hon. Thomas was that they worked with him at the Kanawha Salt Works across, and up, river from Gallipolis, Ohio. Hon. Thomas went through life called the "Salt Boiler" for his years spent there, 1809, again in 1810 and 1812.

While our Thomas did not achieve the national prominence of the other Thomas Ewing, he was not without importance in his own little community of Huntington Township, Gallia County, Ohio. It is unknown if our Thomas had a formal education, but he had excellent penmanship, and was called on to use it as Clerk of the school board in Huntington Township and he was Justice of the Peace there for several years in the 1820s and 1830s.

Early in the 1900s a cousin, Clyde EDW ARDS bought the old Thomas Ewing farm near Ewington and in demolishing the ancient log house found a little packet of papers, folded and tied with a piece of linen string. The papers were some that Thomas himself had written or that concerned him, and that he deemed worthy of preserving. Clyde gave the packet to his sister, Hannah EDW ARDS to send to A.E. E WING. I now have the papers and string tucked away for safekeeping.

One of the papers is dated 13 Nov 1809 and is signed by Val. WHI TE, Clerk of the 81st Regiment of Bath Co. Virginia militia. It exempted Thomas from militia duty "on account of a lameness in his foot." On the reverse side the exemption was later reconfirmed in Gallia County, "Examined and Approved," dated 26 September 1812, and signed by Sam'l R. HOL COMB, Col., 3 Regiment lst B Division.

Thomas followed his sister Elizabeth into the cabin on Swago Creek by 17 months and 15 days. As the eldest of the 10 sons of William and Mary he probably had a major part in seeing that the farm produced to feed all those mouths.

In the Spring of 1810, the family was immersed in preparations for the move from the mountains and the Greenbrier to Ohio. It suddenly occurred to Thomas, then 21, that he was not going anywhere without a certain lady, also 21, by his side. She was Anstis KELL ISON, daughter of a neighbor, Daniel K ELLISON, and his wife ( her name is unknown).

On 6 April 1810, Thomas appeared before the clerk of Bath County at Warm Springs and took out a marriage bond. Anstis' brother, Edward KE LLISON, went surety on the bond, and Daniel gave consent for his daughter to marry, with Edward witnessing that consent.

Reverend John PIN NELL performed the ceremony that made Thomas and Anstis one on the 10th of April 1810.

In the 1810 Bath County census, Thomas was listed as the head of a household of himself and a female 16 to 26 years of age. Shortly after that census the Ewings, and several other families, headed for Ohio.

About the same time as the Ewing arrival in Ohio, Huntington was formed as a township from Raccoon Township. That happened on 5 June 1810. On the last Saturday of July in 1810 the men of the township gathered at the home of Stephen and Susannah HOLCOMB for election purposes, and Thomas was the 17th of 18 to cast a vote.

Thomas chose land in Section 2, in the northeasternmost corner of the township, 80 acres, the east half of the southeast quarter. He immediately set about building a house. It was, as all in that area were then, of logs. It was roomy and well built and it served as his, and Anstis' home through all their years.

Within a few years Thomas also acquired the quarter section adjoining his 80 acres on the east - 160 acres in Section 1, the southwest quarter with Strong's Run Creek coursing through it on its way to Raccoon Creek. It was the very southwestern most corner of those 160 acres that he gave over as a plot for a family cemetery as early as 1818 when his and Anstis' infant, Rebecca, was born and died. It may have been earlier, for it is believed that one of the three unmarked graves is that of Mary Hughes MC NEILL, grandmother of Thomas.

Of the 17 marked graves in the cemetery, there are 16 Ewings - and one OIL ER, Fred, who was in Co. K of the 27th OVI, not one of "us." The 17 burials span a period of about 100 years. The last to be buried there was Thomas Ewing SPR OUSE in 1913.

Even with the addition of the 160 acres to his farm, Thomas and his family remained on the 80 acres in the comfortable log house that was home. Here Thomas and Anstis raised nine of their 10 children and several grandchildren as well. Three of the grandchildren; Sanford VI ERS, Thomas Jefferson EWING, 21, and Mary MANNER ING, 18, were listed with them in the 1860 census. At that time Thomas was worth $2,800/$250.

Fifty-six years of marriage ended on 21 June 1866 when Anstis died at the age of 78. She was buried in the little plot in the corner of their 160 acres.

At the time of her death, their children had for the most part either died or scattered. Sarah MA NNERING, Rebecca I, and her namesake Rebecca VI ERS, Samuel and Zeruiah GL ASSBURN were all deceased. John JO RDAN had gone to Missouri, Anstis S PROUSE lived in Wilkesville, Ohio and Margaret LE ONARD lived in Fostoria, Ohio. Only Elizabeth P EDEN and Mary - "Polly," were still in Huntington Township. Elizabeth, by then a widow, on a farm next to Thomas, and Mary, who had never married, still at home. After her mother's death, Mary took over the household and cared for Thomas in his declining years.

On 29 February 1938, U.B.G. E WING (21-3-2), son of Dr. Gilbert A. EW ING, who was born in Ewington and lived there, recalled for A. E. EWING what he could of his "Uncle Tommy, the famous marksman."

"Uncle Tom was taller than the others and fairly slender, but cannot recall his features. He often read his Bible, always with uncovered heard, even when out of doors in the shade of an apple tree. Aunt Polly kept house for him, may have remained a spinster to do so, yet he rubbed it in on her in introducing her. 'This is my Polly, an old maid who never got married.

"Uncle Tom did not have but a very small beard, think he was somewhat bald. He used a cane, told us mostly of shooting bears, once only wounded one and had to reload his gun on the run, then turned on it and shot it."

U.B.G. wrote again about Uncle Tommy a year later, on the 13th of April 1939:

"Uncle Tommy sparce built, only slightly stooped, height perhaps 5 ft., 8 or 9 inches, weight about 140 to 145, hair rather thin and tousled, neither long nor shingled, sandy gray beard, short and scattering, thickest on chin, 1/2 to 2 inches long on chin and angle of jaws, high cheek bones, cheeks more gaunt, built rather for climbing, walked with a cane.

"I may have seen him hoeing his garden, but can't say about his using mechanical tools nor singing or whistling but often reading his Bible or a few other books or the weekly paper, the Gallipolis Journal. Was full of bear, deer and other hunting stories. Father was his physician, also his administrator. I don't remember his children, except Mrs. Peden and Aunt Polly who remained single and kept house for him. She smoked a clay pipe on a cane stem. He always introduced her to a stranger by 'This is my Polly, an old maid who never got married'."

In the 1870 census Thomas was listed as 81 and infirmed. As for his worth, while he had $2,000 in chattel worth, his value in real estate had dropped from $2,800 in 1860 to $500. Apparently in his last years, Thomas sold off most of his property. In the atlas of 1874, the year he died, the 80 acres show up as belonging to his nephew, Dr. Gilbert A. EWING, George's son and the 160 acres as belonging to A.R. MARTI NDALE (section #4). A.R. (Alvin) built a large frame house on the land.

Eventually - about 1879, Isaac EWI NG acquired the 80 acres and moved into the log cabin with his bride. About 1899 he also acquired the 160 acres next door from the then-owner, a cousin, Niles Quincy MARTI NDALE, son of A.R. and his wife Julia Ann HOWELL. He moved his family into the frame house and the old log home Thomas had built so many years before, became one of several barns on the farm.

Isaac and his wife are among the latter-day burials in the little family plot in the corner of Section 1, and for a time it was called Isaac's Burial Field. Although the official name is Ewing Cemetery.

After Isaac's death in 1910, Clyde EDWA RDS, also a cousin, acquired the 80 acres and the old log cabin. It was in tearing down the old structure to replace it with a new home that he found the papers, in perfect condition, which Thomas had wrapped in linen string nearly a century before. They had slipped between the punched-on flooring.

In 1917, William Granville CA STO and his family arrived in Ewington from West Virginia. They liked the looks of the 160 acres on Abney Road, and bought them and the large frame house thereon. Thus they became latter-day custodians of the tiny Ewing plot in the corner of the 160 acres. In 1943 a daughter of the Castos, Naomi, married William Playford EW ING (21-2-2-4-3) a grandson of Isaac EW ING, and their son, John Grant C A STO, married in 1937 one of our DODR ILLs, Ruth Pauline (11-8-1-7-4). John and Ruth's grandson, Timothy Grant CAS TO, 25, who also lives on Abney Road, has taken on the care of the little cemetery, and goes down two or three times each summer to mow it, and to replace flags.

Timothy was not aware until I told his mother last year - (26 November 1983) that the gravestones of William and Mary McNeill Ewing, he was taking care of, were those of his great-great-great-great-great-grandparents. Timothy had no idea he was a Ewing. Timothy is a descendant of Indian John also.

The current owner of the 160 acres is William and Cora's son, James A. CA STO.

In the meantime, the 80 acre plot to the west, which Clyde Edwards had bought after Isaac Ewing died in 1910, had become the property of the BOSTERS and eventually William G. Casto bought those too. So, once again the two farms were one!

The end came for Thomas on the 27th or 28th of May 1874. He was 84 years old and had a stroke - paralysis says the record. He and Anstis and their infant daughter Rebecca share a tombstone in Ewing Cemetery.

ISSUE:

12-1 1. John Jordon E WING, b. 22 July 1811, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio.

2. Mary "Polly" EWING, b. 28 Oct 1812, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio, d. 11 June 1888, Vinton, Ohio. Buried: Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio. Single, lived at home.

12-3 3. Elizabeth EWI NG, b. 14 July 1814, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio

12-4 4. Sarah EWI NG, b. 8 Nov 1816, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio.

12-5 5. Rebecca E WING, b. b&d about 1818, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio. Buried: Ewing Cemetery .

12-6 6. Rebecca EWING II, b. 25 Sept 1819, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio.

]2-7 7. Anstis EWI NG, b. 11 Sept 1821, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio. d. (Sept 9 on tombstone)

12-8 8. Samuel EWI NG, b. 28 Aug 1823, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio.

12-9 9. Margaret E WING, b. 12 Dec 1825, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio.

12-10 10. Zeruiah EW ING, b. 16 Feb 1828, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio.

Top of page

12-1 JOHN JORDAN EWING

Ewing Family Lineage: Thomas-William-James

Thomas and Anstis had 10 Children - but eight of them were daughters, and of the two sons, only John was destined to have a large family and sons and grandsons to carry on the Ewing name.

John did not know it at the time of his birth, 22 July 1811, but his progeny were to take up nearly half of the Thomas Ewing chapter in this book, with his nine siblings and their progeny taking up the other half.

John was born about a year after his parents' arrival on the Raccoon Creek in Huntington Township, and all he knew in his growing up years were those 80 acres his father had in Section 2 and the 160 additional acres Thomas acquired in Section 1. John soon became second in command on that large farm. There was no third in command (only sisters) until Samuel came along in 1823 when John was 12. By the time Samuel could help, John had it all under control.

And then Elizabeth Amelia VIE RS came into his life. The Viers family had been around Ewington and Vinton for a long time - about as long as the Ewings. John VIE RS was from Virginia and had a large family in Huntington Township and there would be at least three marriages between the Viers and the Ewings at the years progressed. But it was not until he was about 22 that John Jordan Ewing began to think of Elizabeth Amelia Viers as his future wife. Elizabeth, born in Virginia on the 28th of January 1816, was about 17 at the time. A few months later, on 13 February 1834 they stood before the Reverend Hiram R. HOW E to say their marriage vows.

The newlyweds started married life right where John had always lived, in the household of his parents, in the roomy, comfortable log cabin on the 80 acres. All eleven of John and Elizabeth's children were born there.

The last of them, Samuel, came along in June 1855. Shortly thereafter, John and Elizabeth began to make plans to join the westward migration. Their destination was the same place that two of John's cousins, John Ewing H OWELL and his wife, Electa E WING (Chapter #4 and #13) had gone to earlier, Clark County, Missouri.

By that time John and Elizabeth's eldest daughter, America, had married William T ERRY, they had lost two sons, Andrew and Lafayette by drowning, and son Thomas, then 18, chose to remain with his grandparents. So there were only seven children in the Ewing wagon. America and William were with the party, though, as they too were going to Missouri to make their home.

In the 1860 census the Ewings were in Jefferson Township, Clark County, Missouri, John a farmer, worth -?$400. Listed next to them was the husband of John Howell's deceased daughter Jane, James Madison ARN OLD.

Not long after that census, the Ewings moved on. John's greener pastures were in Putnam County, Missouri - three counties west. Their farm was in Elm Township in the section of Putnam County then called East End, or sometimes Low Ground. The towns of Martinstowns, Graysville and Greentop were in this area, near the Sheridan River, which separated Putnam from Schuyler County. This was to be their home for the rest of their years.

Soon after arriving in Putnam County, John founded a little church which he called Holiness Church, which he was minister. His youngest son, Timothy, remembered this incident and passed it down through the family:

Timothy was 10 or 11. One Sunday morning he was walking home from church after the service with his father, and John asked the lad, "Well, Timmy, how did I sound this morning?"

Timothy was at that age of speaking without thinking and he blurted out, "Well, Father, if I had been just over a hill and couldn't have seen you, I would have thought it was a jackass braying." Timothy remembered saying that - and the hazelnut switching he got across the legs when he got home!

John and Elizabeth gave more than their share to their country during its dark hours of 1861-1865. They sent five sons off to war - and only two returned.

In their declining years, John and Elizabeth must have wondered, "Where did all the family go?" John was killed in an accident about 1879, Thomas had been killed in battle, Andrew and Lafayette had drowned as youngsters, Margaret had died about 1870, Hugh and George died during the war and Samuel had been killed in a fight. Only America, William and Timothy were still living - and America was in Arkansas. It fell to William and Timothy, still nearby, to give them attention in their old age. John died 6 August 1888 and Elizabeth 10 years later, on 24 May 1899. They are buried at Greentop Cemetery, Putnam County, Missouri.

ISSUE:

12-1-1 1. America Jane E WING, b. 25 Mar 1835, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio.

12-1-2 2. John A. EWI NG, b. 29 Oct 1836, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio.

3. Thomas Jefferson E WING, b. 26 July 1838, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio. Remained behind in Ohio, lived with his Ewing grandparents. Union soldier from Ohio, enlisted 12 Aug 1861, records say he was killed at Battle of Cedar Creek, Virginia, 19 Oct 1864, Buried: Winchester, Virginia. Family records say: "Died of smallpox in Danville Prison, Virginia" Private, Company B, 36th OVI.

4. Andrew Jackson EWI NG, b. 23 Mar 1840, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio. Drowned between 1840 to 1850, was not in 1850 census.

12-1-5 5. William Allen EWI NG, b. 11 Feb 1842, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio.

6. Margaret Virginia Ann EWING, b. 23 Nov 1843, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio, d. about 1870. Married: about 1863, Harvey A. F ARRIS, b. Oct 1838 - Kentucky. After Margaret's death, Harvey married again and then a third time to Margaret's sister, America.

Issue:

1. Myrtle Belle FARR IS, b. about 1864. Married: MOTT, lived in Chicago, then in California where she died..

2. FARRIS, d. young

3. FARRIS, d. young

7. Lafayette EWING, b 17 July 1846, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio, drowned pre-1850 - not in census.

8. Hugh P.H. EWING, b. 11 Feb 1847, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio, died: about 1865, Civil War in Missouri. Buried: Mt. Harmony Soldier's Plot, Adair County, Missouri.

9. George Virgil E WING, b. 22 Apr 1849, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio, d. about 1865, St. Louis, Missouri. Prisoner, Civil War. Family record: believes starved to death "they sent food but he never got it".

12-1-10 10. Timothy Jordan EWING, b. 14 Oct 1851, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio.

12-1-11 11. Samuel Luther E WING, b. 10 June 1855, Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio.

(11/94 - Mary WOOD of Palmdale, CA edited parts of America Jane Ewing and Frances Elizabeth Terry. Mary has researched the Terrys and was able to provide data that Nancy was unable to locate. BP)

Top of page

12-1-1 AMERICA JANE E WING

Ewing Family Lineage: John-Thomas-William-James

I took a shine to this cousin at the start, because of her name, I guess. I had almost nothing on her, only scant information contained in two letters to A.E. EWING from a granddaughter, Ova PO WELL, and neither did any of the descendants of her two brothers, William and Timothy. Nothing!

But I was not going to let America go without trying my best. She had sparked my curiosity even more than any of the other elusive cousins, and I gave her the big push. It has taken more years, work, letter writing, "search" telephone calls, pouring over microfilm and microfiche, wading through books, etc. More was done than you can imagine, but I think I have finally got the story of America Jane Ewing pretty much together, I mean considering what there was to go on at the beginning.

It would have been great to have known America. She went through life as "Meck," she was a tiny person, she smoked a clay pipe, she had four husbands, and she lived to be at least 78 years old. (11/94 - Mary W OODS mother, Mildred Carl JACKS ON said that someone who was courting one of America Janes daughters was to have said, "A man could be more interested in the mother than the daughters." Mildred also says of her great-grandmother, she had sandy colored hair, was small and slender. BP)

America was born 25 March 1835 at Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio, the first grandchild to come into the cabin of Thomas and Anstis. Twenty years later (lacking two weeks) on 11 March 1855, America and William Bennett T ERRY were married in that cabin.

William was born in Ohio in 1833. He was the brother of Mary TE RRY who married Addison Blair E WING (15-4). Apparently the Terrys lost their parents early. In the 1850 census there was just William, Mary and a brother, Abner, living in Wilkesville, Ohio. There were several taxpayers by the name of TER RY in Gallia and Jackson Counties in the 1820s. The ones in Wilkesville Township were Abner, David, Gresham, Paul and Paul Jr. One of those might have been William's father.

(11/94 - per Mary WOOD of Palmdale: Paul and Bethia TERRY had a son David TERRY who married Mariah ROBERTS. David and Mariah TERRY were the parents of William Bennet TERRY. William had a sister Mary Bethina who married Leland ROBERTS her first cousin. The Mary TERRY who married Addison Blair EWING mentioned in the preceeding paragraph may have been a cousin. BP)

Before the wedding William went out to Missouri to prepare their home. Apparently his chosen land was in Schuyler County, where his Terry kin also went. It is unsure if they were in Schuyler County, Missouri during the time of the 1860 census, but they were there in 1862 for that is where, and when, William enlisted for service during the War Between the States.

William Bennett Terry is the only soldier in this entire book who signed up under the Confederate flag!

William enlisted on the 20th of July 1862, as a private in Company B, Clark's Missouri Infantry, Confederate States of America. He did not serve very long - less than four months - but that time spent as a "Johnny Rev" sets him very much apart from the other Civil War soldiers in this book, all of whom served under the American flag. William and America named their son, born in 1861, Jefferson Davis. (11/94 - per Mary WOOD: William and America had another son, John Jordan TERRY. BP)

Also, because Confederate soldiers and their widows were not allowed pensions, there is no pension file as a means of further information about William and his family. William was discharged on the 9th of November 1862 on a Surgeon's Certificate of Disability. It was apparently TB.

And that tuberculosis was bad enough to make William and his family leave Missouri and seek a better climate. At sometime between 1866 and 1870, William, America and their three children left Schuyler County, Missouri in favor of War Eagle Township, Madison County, Arkansas, (their post office was Huntsville, Arkansas) in the northwest corner of Arkansas, almost on top of Oklahoma. They were there in the 1870 census.

But William did not have very long there. He was only 39 years old when he died of TB in 1872.

America was then 37. She had four children, 16, 13, 6 and 1 and was miles away from her family.

She carried on and not long after, about 1874, she married Robert D AVIS, about whom absolutely nothing is know, except that he sired America's fifth, Hiram Cantrell DAVI S, born in 1876.

As near as can be figured out, Robert died about 1877, and the following year America married George L. C AUSEY, who had been previously married and had children who were with George and America in the 1880 census. In 1880, they were listed in War Eagle Township, Madison County, Arkansas.

Strangely, when Ova POWELL sent A.E. EWING the brief material on America's life, she never mentioned this forth marriage, only the other three and yet George may have been the father of an elusive son of America's, Joseph. She was said to have had a son Joseph, and in the 1900 census she turns up with having had six children, five then living. Only five of those six are accounted for in various censuses. The premise is, then, that this Joseph was born after the 1880 census and had left the home by the time of the 1900 census. If he were born after 1880 he would have to have been a Causey.

George and America did not have long together. George died somewhere between 1880 and 1883.

(11/94 - per Mary WOOD: America did have three husbands, William Bennett TERRY, Robert DAV IS, and Harvey F ARRIS. Geroge CAUSEY married America Jane, but family folk lore indicates that he failed to mention that he was already married. She was widowed by each husbands' death. Mr. Causey brought two sons to the marriage, and the children told America that their mother was living. It is not known whether there was a divorce from Mr. Causey, an annulment or what. There was not a legal marriage if he already had a wife. BP)

Soon thereafter, America went back to Missouri to visit her parents. She took at least one of her sons, Hiram, with her. John and Elizabeth Ewing lived in Elm Township, Putnam County, Missouri. Across the river, in Schuyler County lived her brother-in-law, Harvey A. F ARRIS. Harvey had been married to America's younger sister, Margaret, and had married and been widowed again after Margaret's death, about 1870.

America, 49, and Harvey, 46, were married in Missouri in 1884. Harvey was born in October 1838 in Kentucky, and may have been the son of Dudley FARR IS, born in 1812 in Kentucky and who was found in the 1870 Schuyler County census.

America and Harvey went to Arkansas, but 8 year old Hiram remained in Missouri with his uncle, William EWING, who took care of him from then on.

By the time of the 1900 census, Harvey and America had moved to Prairie Township of Madison County, Arkansas. Harvey was a boot and shoemaker. There were just the two of them. It was the same in the 1910 census. America's address in 1913 was Springdale, Washington County, Arkansas, and Springdale is where America's daughter, Frances Terry POW ELL, and her family lived. America spent her last years with the Powells. It was from Springdale in 1913 that America sent a contribution to the Mary McNeill Ewing Memorial Fund - $1.00 for herself, 50 cents for her daughter Frances and 50 cents for granddaughter Madge C ARRELL.

Harvey died in Springdale around 1913. He is buried in Springdale, Washington County, Arkansas.

(11/94 - Mary WOOD's records show that America Jane lived with the Powell's after 1910 until her death in 1917 which occurred in Tahlequah, Oklahoma. She is buried in the Powell Plot in Tahlequah, Oklahoma. BP)

In 1923 Frances died in Tahlequah, Oklahoma and she is buried in the Powell plot.

ISSUE:

12-1-1-1 1. Mary Josephine T ERRY, b. 27 Mar 1856, Missouri.

12-1-1-2 2. Frances Elizabeth T ERRY, b. Nov 1859, Missouri.

3. Jefferson Davis TER RY, b. 1861, Missouri. Apparently died young, was in 1870 census, but not in 1880 census.

4. Rosalthy Belle T ERRY, b. 1872, Arkansas. Married: James D. MAYS.

Issue:

1. Myrtle Anstis MAYS, b. about 1892, d. about 1981, Forks, Washington of cancer. Married: TUT TLE, d. 30 Dec 1974. No issue.

12-1-1-5 5. Hiram Cantrell DA VIS, b. 1876, Arkansas.

6. * Joseph , (maybe...CAUSEY). James Monroe EW ING says America had a son by that name. Not in any census. No one else has mentioned him, but America is down in census as having 6 and 5.

*(11/94 - per Mary WOOD: "According to anything that I have knowledge of...America did not have a son named Joseph...John Jourdan T ERRY lived only a few months and was the son of William Bennett TERRY. BP)

(11/94 - excerpts from a letter written by Anstis Mayes TU TTLE to Mildred Carl JA CKSON. Anstis was the daughter of Rosalthy Belle TER RY and Mildred was the grandaughter of Francis Elizabeth TERRY - older sister of Rosalthy Belle TERRY. Mildred is the mother of Mary W OOD.

"Grandma (America Jane) had an awful time during the Civil War. She was a young woman, still in her twenties, with three tiny children to care for. Both sides were raiding. One time the Northern Cavalry stole her beautiful mare and her brothers (all Northern soldiers) were afraid to steal her back again, so she, herself, went to the Colonel and asked for her horse. He asked if she was a Union sympathizer. She replied, 'I was always reared to honor the United States of America.' The Colonel ordered the mare returned to her." BP)

Top of page

12-1-1-1 MARY JOS EPHINE TER RY

EWING FAMILY LIENAGE: America-John-Thomas-William-James

The story coming up is more that of Mary's husband than of Mary herself. But because James Franklin L EDBETTER, better known on the Oklahoma frontier as "Uncle Bud," was such an illustrious figure and his life so exciting, it just seems right to add his colorful story to the Ewing annals.

James was referred to in an article about him as "Bullet-Proof Bud." He received not one single scratch in all his years of fighting outlaws. The story of his life was published in the 1974 edition of "PERSONS AND PLACES OF INDIAN TERRITORY" by C.W. WE ST. It is going to be difficult to condense the 17 page account of his exploits as a law enforcement officer in the then lawless west, to a few paragraphs for this book. "If you had lived in Indian Territory at the turn of the century, or Oklahoma 50 years ago, you certainly would have known of James Franklin Ledbetter, better known as "Uncle bud." He was so well known and feared so deeply that in many cases all he had to do was to send word to an outlaw that he would come after him if he did not give himself up. Such a threat often caused the law-breaker to come in of his own volition. He was loved and respected so much that in all my research I have not found a derogatory remark concerning him or any scandal associated with his name. He was honored by outstanding law enforcement representatives and the electorate repeatedly. Last but not least, he was a great big, soft-hearted grandfather to his descendants in spite of the many cares of his occupation."

Mary and James were married the 28th of June 1874, in Madison County, Arkansas. James was born 15 December 1852 and was a native of Madison County, War Eagle Township, Arkansas. Mary, born 27 March 1856 in Missouri, had moved with her family to War Eagle Township in the Boston Mountains when she was about 10 or 12. James was the son of another James Franklin LEDBETTER and his wife, Sabrina R EEVES, called "Tennessee" for the state of her and her husband's nativity.

James' parents died when he was 18 years old in 1870, and he left War Eagle in favor of Oklahoma Indian Territory, where he got a job as a guard for the Wells Fargo Express Company at Webber's Falls, Oklahoma.

But in 1872 he returned to War Eagle and began farming. Two years later he and Mary were married and thus began the marriage of a devoted couple that lasted until her death 56 years later.

In the ensuing three years the couple had two children, George Washington and America Jane - "Dolly." About 1877 they moved next door to Coal Hill, Johnson County, Arkansas - on the Arkansas River.

Placid enough so far, right? but then one day James drove into Coal Hill, a little mining community to get supplies. He was wearing a natty white linen suit. "After taking care of his needs," we are told, "he strolled into one of the many saloons where a group of town bullies, who had imbibed liberally, had gathered. They thought they had a 'dude' in their midst and began making snide remarks and fingering Bud's suit. His steel blue eyes, that were to become so famous, took on an unusual glint. He strode out of the saloon without a word, and went to a hardware store down the street, where he bought an axe handle. Upon returning to the saloon, he entered, locked the door, and began to 'educate' the jeering crowd. Within a short time a number of the group was lying on the floor unconscious, with others cowering behind the counter and under tables.

"When the commotion was heard by a passerby, an attempt was made to gain entrance. When this failed, the mayor was summoned, who, with the help of other citizens, forced the door open. Bud was leaning against the bar, axe handle in his hand, glaring at the mayor and his associates with those eyes - which were to be referred to later as 'eagle eyes', as if to inquire, 'what are you going to do about it?' There was a moment of frustration on the part of the mayor. After gathering his composure, he ordered the room cleared of the 'bums' muttering that they would have 'to get to the bottom of the affair.' When the city fathers did 'get to the bottom of the affair,' the result was that they offered Bud the job of town marshal."

James accepted and proceeded to clean up the town. So effective were his activities that the county sheriff offered him a job as one of his deputies. James filled this position for 14 years, during which time he gained himself a reputation for being able to deal with a criminal peacefully, and how to ferret him out of his den or track him down.

Eventually things got too quiet in Johnson County, Arkansas for "Uncle Bud" and he headed for Muskogee in Indian Territory. In 1894 he signed up with Wells Fargo to act as a guard on trains carrying payroll between Oswego, Kansas and Checotah, Oklahoma.

One of the biggest events of that year - and in fact of Uncle Bud's entire eventful career, was what went down in local history as the Blackstone Switch holdup. A gang led by the notorious Texas Jack shunted a train to a siding at Blackstone Switch, a few miles north of Muskogee. What the gang did not know was that Uncle Bud and two other men were riding guard on the $60,000 in gold bullion and silver Texas Jack was after.

The outlaws surrounded the stalled train. In the ensuing battle passengers were robbed of money, jewels, and watches and the baggage coach was blown up, but Uncle Bud got his man, wounding Texas Jack severely enough for the latter to call a halt and retreat with his men in the night.

Eventually all the members of the gang were tracked down and sent to the penitentiary. Texas Jack was given a five-year sentence and paroled after a year. He became an evangelist, preaching the consequences of sin and crime all over the southwest.

The U.S. Marshal in the territory was S. Morton RUTH ERFORD. In 1895 he approached James and asked him to be a deputy marshal. James accepted and was sworn in on the 5th of June 1895. His activities in the years ahead included helping to prevent a lynching; single-handedly taking Jim MC ALFORD who had terrorized citizens of Porum; stemming an outbreak of feuding at Indian stomp dances; bringing in the TURNER GANG and single-handedly capturing Al JEN NINGS - the last of the train robbers and big time outlaws. Al had been a U.S. Marshal himself, but turned outlaw - only to reform after his arrest and preach the "crime does not pay" gospel. Years later, after Uncle Bud's death, Al and former Deputy Marshal Ted CO OPER made a special trip to Muskogee to pay homage to Uncle Bud by placing a wreath on his grave.

James served as town marshal of Vinita between 1897 and 1903 - the quietest years of his life, and then went to Okmulgee, the capital of the Creek Nation, in the same capacity. On the 1st of January 1904, he became a deputy marshal under Leo E. BEN NETT, with headquarters at Muskogee. This was at a time when race riots haunted Muskogee, but Uncle Bud was equal to the task of quelling them. In 1909, with Oklahoma on the verge of statehood, Uncle Bud was appointed chief of police of Muskogee. As usual he took charge with precision and vigor causing gamblers to leave town, the red light district to close down, and liquor joints to either close or be raided.

So successful was his tenure as chief of police that he was elected sheriff of Muskogee County.

But then Okmulgee called. Things had gotten so bad there that the citizens prevailed on Uncle Bud to come back to clean up the town. He responded and was a plainclothesman on the police force there from 1917 to 1922. Needless to say, things got straightened out.

In 1922 he was asked to run again for sheriff of Muskogee County. He was reluctant. After all, he was 70 years old and the years were bearing down on him. But he relented and easily won the election in a field of nine other men, with a majority of 3,000, showing what respect the public had for him.

Bootleggers and moonshiners were his chief quarry this time. His opening challenge to his men was to "bring in a still every day." And, as usual, he succeeded in cleaning up.

The West article winds it up: "James took a well-earned retirement in 1928 at the age of 76. After a very full, often hectic life. He had built a home at 415 W. Southside Blvd., Muskogee, Oklahoma and he settled down to enjoy life. He had bought a farm which was being cultivated by his son, George, and he enjoyed going out to the farm and puttering around, especially petting and grooming the horses. He boasted of having the best team in Muskogee County."

In those later years, James loved to visit with old friends, and spent a great deal of time ambling the streets of Muskogee or in the court house, police station or federal building, passing the time of day. He was regular in his attendance at meetings of the Peace Officers Association and the like. He loved to go back to his old haunts such as Vinita, Haskell and Okmulgee, and made a trip or two back to Arkansas. "Old friends are precious to me," he said. "They don't make them like they used to. Sometimes I meet as many as 2,000 of my old friends in one day."

His retirement was marred by the death of his faithful companion, of 56 years, Mary Josephine. Mary died 12 May 1930 in Muskogee, Oklahoma at the age of 74 years. Through all those years as James' standby, she always had that fear that all law enforcement offices' wives have, that he might not come back, but she never showed it to the rest of the family and assisted them in having a normal daily life. It is said that James was just not the same after Mary's death.

It was the custom for many years to have a birthday party for Uncle Bud, at which time they presented him with a hat.

The last battle, the only one he ever lost came on the 8th of July in 1937. His last public appearance was on his 84th birthday. He became ill with a heart ailment shortly afterward and went to the hospital. He fought valiantly in and out of the hospital for six months, but in vain. The public in general, and peace officers in particular, from all over the states of Oklahoma and Arkansas came to pay homage to their hero. All Muskogee stores closed and all public offices suspended operations in order to attend the funeral. Many of his old buddies were present.

West concludes his story: "It is hard to understand how a man could be so feared, yet so loved and honored; shot at so many times and never hit; so forthright, yet so deliberate; so ruthless when necessary, yet so kind and understanding. Relatives of those it had been necessary for him to arrest or kill were among his closest friends, as were many whom he had arrested. His fame and admiration for what he was - continue to follow him."

His granddaughter, Nettie Estelle LEDBE TTER, now Mrs. Earl D. CO RLISS of Muskogee, remembers her grandfather not as one of the most fearless, noted lawmen of his day, but "just as a big gentle granddaddy who would play with us, do a jig for us, and have lots of fun with us." She says they did not know that he faced death most every day and that he was one of the most feared men in Indian Territory. His daily duties were never discussed. He came home like anyone else, that had a routine way of life, with no hint whatsoever of his line of work, not that it was kept secret, merely that nothing was made of it.

Another thing Nettie Estelle remembers about her grandfather is that he often brought samples of sand and asked them to smell it, thinking it might be oil sand. He never struck oil, but like many others, he always had hopes.

ISSUE:

12-1-1-1-1 1. George Washington L EDBETTER, b. 28 Aug 1875, Huntsville, Madison County, Arkansas.

2. America Jane LEDBET TER, b. 30 Oct 1877, Huntsville, Madison County, Arkansas, d. 14 Sept 1961, age 83 years. Married: 12 Apr 1903, Fred Morton YO UNG, called "Dolly".

Top of page

12-1-1-1-1 GEORGE WASHINGTON LEDBETTER

Ewing Family Lineage: Mary-America-Thomas-William-James

Although he may have admired his father's daring and renown, George did not follow in his father's footsteps. Being mechanically inclined, he became an auto mechanic. But he ended his years caring for his father's farm near Muskogee.

George was born 28 August 1875 at Huntsville, Madison County, Arkansas. He was not very old when his dad's work took the family to Oklahoma and that is where George grew up.

It is uncertain how 18 years old George and 15 year old Ann Elizabeth PROC TOR, a native of Prairie Grove, Washington County, Arkansas came to be married in East Liverpool, Columbiana County, Ohio on 8 November 1893. Another of the many unanswered questions that have come to light during the research of this work.

Ann was the daughter of John and Harriet (GREEN) P ROCTOR and was born 18 March 1878.

Soon after the marriage the couple were back in Arkansas. George's trade took him all over. Between 1895 and 1917 there are records that he and Ann lived in Coal Hill, Arkansas; Craig County, Oklahoma; Muskogee, Oklahoma; El Paso, Texas and Muskogee again, where they remained, because George had been called on to run his father's farm.

George died on the farm in Muskogee, Oklahoma on the 2nd of July 1943 at the age 68 years. Exactly 20 years and 21 days later on 23 July 1963 Ann died at the age of 85.

ISSUE:

1. George Lancelot LEDBE TTER, b. 16 Sept 1895, Coal Hill, Johnson County, Arkansas, d. 26 Dec 1909, El Paso, 14 years old.

2. Dolly Mae LE DBETTER, b. 16 Aug 1903, Vinita, Craig County, Oklahoma. Married: 29 Sept 1922, Harold M. F REUDENTHALER, d. 31 Dec 1977.

3. Mary Josephine LEDBE TTER, b. 22 Aug 1905, Muskogee, Oklahoma. Married: 1st. 6 Mar 1923, Harold S IMPSON, married 2nd 1939, Malcolm R OSS, married 3rd Oscar Lee YO UNG.

4. Nettie Estelle LEDBET TER, b. 15 May 1906, Muskogee, Oklahoma. Married: 11 June 1924, Earl D. C ORLISS. 1983: Lived in Muskogee, Okla.

Issue:

1. Earl Robert CORL ISS, degree in engineering, is vice-president of the gas company in Dallas, Texas has three children and 2 grandchildren, one grandchild was born in 1982.

5. James William LEDBE TTER, b. 16 June 1908, El Paso, Texas d. 18 July 1943, Married: Judie M ILLER.

12-1-1-1-1-6 6. John Franklin LE DBETTER, b. 14 Feb 1911, El Paso, Texas.

7. Mary LEDBET TER, b&d 1913, El Paso, Texas.

8. Marc Leroy LE DBETTER - TWIN, b. 14 Apr 1917, Muskogee, Oklahoma.

9. Annie Marthelle L EDBETTER - TWIN, b. 14 Apr 1917, Muskogee, Oklahoma. Married: 12 Apr 1943, Percy E. F AUST.

Top of page

12-1-1-1-1-6 JOHN FRANKLIN LED BETTER

Ewing Family Lineage: George-Mary-America-Thomas-William-James

John and his family had some interesting World War II experiences that bear telling about. Though he was older than most soldiers of the infamous war - he was born 14 February 1911. John was not an ordinary recruit, as he was in the service pre-Pearl Harbor.

John was born in El Paso, but did most of his growing up in Muskogee, Oklahoma. He was married on his 23rd birthday in 1934 to Lida Harris W ALLACE. That marriage ended in divorce. On 23 October 1939, he and Zona HAF EN were married in Yuma, Arizona. Zona was born 3 January 1914 in Provo, Utah, the daughter of John H AFEN, a native of Switzerland, and Ellen L OWRY.

John, a scientific engineer, and Zona were in Long Beach, California in October of 1940 when their daughter Zona Joyce was born. Not long after, they were sent to Coco Solo, Panama Canal Zone, Their daughter Ann Marie tells it from there:

"My own birth in the Canal Zone is interesting because of the special hardships that the outbreak of World War II brought on. My father's home base was Coco Solo, Panama, although he was assigned in Recife, Brazil, for some time. I never saw my father until I was 2 years old because of the war. When Pearl Harbor was attacked in December of 1941, most women and children were evacuated from the Naval base, but not my mother, because she was expecting. There were practice air alerts on a regular basis. Everyone had to go into dark cellars with crabs, water and giant tropical spiders. I have a few photos to prove their size. As luck would have it, I was born in a blackout and delivered by flashlight in the Naval hospital. When I was 6 weeks old we were shipped to New Orleans, Louisiana on a boat that had to zigzag all day long and pull into port every night all up the Central American coast to avoid possible enemy subs. It must have been exciting times but I don't remember anything about it."

At war's end, John and Zona were in Oakland, California where their third and last child, a son, was born and presumably that is where they stayed, for John died in Oakland at the age of 51 on the 9th of March 1962. Zona was 48 years old at the time and on the 27th of August 1962 she married Everett B OLTON. When Ann Marie wrote in 1983, Zona and Everett were living in Redlands, California, but they also spent a lot of time at their second home in Sallisaw, Oklahoma.

Top of page

12-1-1-2 FRANCES ELIZABETH T ERRY

Ewing Family Lineage: America-John-Thomas-William-James

Frances was born in November 1857 in Schuyler County, Missouri and was 11 when the family moved to Madison County, Arkansas in 1870. Her father, William TERRY died in Madison County when she was about 13 years old. In 1875 she went back to Missouri to stay with her grandparents, John and Elizabeth EWING. Frances had been there two years when a young man she had known in Arkansas, Jeremiah Turner PO WELL went there to visit her. The visit culminated in their marriage right there, in 1877, and they returned to Arkansas to make their home.

Jeremiah Turner POWELL, J.T. or Jerry as he was known, was born in July 1857 in Arkansas. His parents were James and Lucinda (REEVES) P OWELL, natives of Cannon County, Tennessee. Lucinda's mother was Elizabeth R EEVES called "Tennessee," who was born in Tennessee in 1795. She was living with her grandson, Jeremiah, and Frances in the 1880 census.

That was in War Eagle Township, Madison County, Arkansas. A sketch in an 1889 Madison County history on Jeremiah's brother, Dr. George N. POWE LL, mentions Jeremiah and puts him on Drake's Creek and "late a Republican candidate for county assessor of Madison County." Jeremiah was Sheriff for two terms in Madison County.

By 1900 Jeremiah and Frances had moved next door, to Washington County, and were living in Springdale, Springdale Township. Jeremiah was a merchant, a grocer, and they owned their home free. They moved to Tahlequah, Oklahoma, Indian Territory in 1903. Jeremiah was a Sheriff there also.

Frances' mother, America, spent her last years with the Powells. She lived with them after 1910 until her death in 1917. It was from Springdale, in 1913, that America sent a contribution to the Mary McNeill Ewing Memorial Fund for four generations of "Ewings" - herself, her daughter, Frances, her granddaughter, Florence Powell CA RREL and her great-granddaughter, Madge CA RREL - $2.50 in all.

Frances died in Tahlequah, Oklahoma in 1923.

Jeremiah was 83 and still going strong when his daughter Ova, wrote to A.E. EWING in 1939. Jeremiah died 22 February 1943 in Tahlequah, Oklahoma and he is buried in the Powell Plot in the Tahlequah Cemetery.

ISSUE:

1. Lucinda Jane POWE LL (Lucy), b. Mar 1878 d. 15 Apr 1948, Arkansas. Married: after 1900, Van W. CA RL of Prairie Grove, Arkansas. 1900 census: 22, at home attending school.

Issue:

1. Mildred CA RL, b. about 1905. Married: Owen JACK SON. 1982: Lived in Denver, Colorado.

Issue:

1. Mary Jane J ACKSON

2. Annette B. POW ELL, b. July 1879, Arkansas, d. pre-1900, suicide in early womanhood. Buried: Drake's Creek, Madison County, AR.

3. Maude POWE LL, b. Dec 1881, Arkansas, never married, buried Powell Plot, Tahlequah, Oklahoma.

12-1-1-2-4 4. Florence P OWELL, b. Sept 1884, Arkansas.

5. William PO WELL, b. Dec 1888, Arkansas, d. 1905, in an accident, age 17. Buried: Powell Plot, Tahlequah, Oklahoma.

12-1-1-2-6 6. Ova Myrtle P OWELL, b. Aug 1891, Arkansas. Ova was the youngest child.

7. Olive POWE LL, Died in infancy. Buried: Drake's Creek, Madison County, AR.

8. Iva POWE LL, Died in infancy. Buried: Drake's Creek, Madison County, AR.

Top of page

12-1-1-2-4 FLORENCE POWELL

Ewing Family Lineage: Frances-America-John-Thomas-William-James

Florence was born on Drake's Creek in War Eagle Township, Madison County, Arkansas in September 1884. In the 1900 census she was still at home and attending school, but she was married shortly after that census was taken to Thomas Dean CAR REL. In 1913, a contribution of 50 cents was sent to the Mary Mc Neill Memorial Fund in her name by America, also her only daughter, Madge. Their address is on the list as Springdale, Arkansas, but no Carrels were found in the 1910 Arkansas Index.

Florence died in 1967 at the age of 83 years. But no particulars about her or her husband were found.

ISSUE:

12-1-1-2-4-1 1. Madge C ARREL, b. 1901.

2. John W. CARRELL, b. about 1903. 1982: Lived in Springdale, Arkansas, has an adopted son, Lewis CA RREL who lives in Phoenix, Arizona.

3. Powell CAR REL, b. about 1905, d. 1968, suicide. Married: 1st. Clydene CHILDS.

Issue by Clydene

1. Marilyn CARR EL

2. Jerry CARR EL

Powell married 2nd Connie

Issue by Connie

3. Mark CAR REL

4. Todd CAR REL

5. CARREL

6. CARREL

7. CARREL

Top of page

12-1-1-2-4-1 MADGE CARR EL

Ewing Family Lineage: Florence-Frances-America-John-Thomas-William-James

It was a happy day when contact was finally made with Madge. She had been just a name on a list - the Mary McNeil Memorial Fund for so long.

I called her in 1982 and then wrote and she replied, enclosing a dainty little tatted snowflake she had made for me and the following information on her family.

Madge was 81 years old in 1982. Madge was first married to Carl RI CE, by whom she had four children. She and Carl who was a Mason, used to go to a lot of dances. "It is still in my blood," says Madge. "I love to dance."

Madge married her second husband, C ARMAN and had one child. Her third husband's name is not known. Her fourth husband was an OLS ON.

In 1982, Madge was living at 4605 So. P. Street, Fort Smith, Arkansas.

ISSUE:

1. Lizbeth Ann R ICE, Married: B ARRON.

2. Mary Frances R ICE, Married: GEORGE

3. Jo Dell R ICE, Married: 1st. M OODY; married 2nd P OWELL

4. Timothy RI CE, was Lt. Cmdr, retired from Navy, lived Pensacola, Florida.

5. John Gregory CARM AN

Top of page

12-1-1-2-6 OVA MYRTLE POW ELL

Ewing Family Lineage: Frances-America-John-Thomas-William-James

Ova did not have a family, but she deserves some space of her own, just by virtue of the fact that if it had not been for her and her interest in her ancestors so she could get into DAR, there would have been no clues at all to America Jane.

Ova was the youngest of the family of Frances and Jeremiah POW ELL. She was born in August of 1891 in Arkansas, but she spent the greater part of her life in Oklahoma. Her 1939 letters to A.E. EWING are written on the letterheads of H.M. VANCE, Attorney at Law, Tahlequah, Oklahoma.

Ova had written to A.E. in 1923 (which correspondence can not be located) for information on Ewings and McNeills so she could get into the DAR. A.E. responded, but with her mother dying that year, and the family moving to Tahlequah, and all, she did not do anything more about it until 1939. At that time she wrote A.E. again, and through his help she was able to make the DAR grade.

According to her niece, Madge, Ova was a "joiner." She belonged to not only DAR, but United Daughters of the Confederacy. She was also active in the Order of the Eastern Star and served in all offices, including Worthy Matron. She belonged to the Christian Church and was on its board.

Ova was married late in life - about 1939, to Joseph ANTO INE. The couple was childless. Ova died in 1971.

Top of page

12-1-1-5 HIRAM CANTRELL DAV IS

Ewing Family Lineage: America-John-Thomas-William-James

Hiram was found and then lost to this researcher. He was only a name for so long and nothing could be found out about him until Ann Marie came along. Ann Marie was able to shed some light on him, and then he was found in the 1910 census - but that is all. Attempts to raise his progeny for this work have failed.

Hiram was born in Madison County, Arkansas in 1876. In the 1880 census he was living with his mother and stepfather Causey in Madison County's War Eagle Township - age 4 years.

After Causey died, America went to visit her parents in Putnam County, Missouri and took Hiram with her. She married her former brother-in-law, Harvey FARRIS there, and they returned to Arkansas. Hiram, about 8, remained in Missouri to be brought up by America's brother, William Allen E WING, in Adair County, Missouri. Hiram was married about 1896, age about 20 years, to Cassie Donna BAKER, who was born in Missouri in 1876. They lived near Queen City, Schuyler County, Missouri. There was no sign of them in the 1900 census, but they were there at Queen City in the 1910 census.

Cassie died about 1911 and Hiram married again, his second wife being Mar FA RMER.

James Monroe EWING of Unionville, Putnam County, Missouri, wrote that in about 1965 he had run into Hiram in Kirksville where he was night manager of a hotel. Hiram Cantrell DAVIS would have been 89 years old in 1965, it is possible James meant the son, Harvey Hiram DAV IS.

ISSUE by Cassie:

1. Argyle Dahlia D AVIS (son), b. 1897, Missouri.

2. Cassie Donna DA VIS, b. 1901, a concert singer.

3. William DAV IS, b. 1903.

ISSUE by Mae:

4. Harvey Hiram D AVIS, b. about 1912.

Top of page

12-1-2 JOHN A. E WING

Ewing Family Lineage: John-Thomas-William-James

There were John Addisons later in this Ewing family, possibly John A's middlename was also Addison.

John was born 29 October 1836 in Huntington Township back in Gallia County, Ohio and was about 20 years old when the family moved to Missouri, Clark County first and finally Putnam County.

John was one of the John and Elizabeth's five sons who entered the fray on the Union side. He enlisted 12 September 1862 as a private for three years in Company C, 27th Missouri Infantry. His address then was Queen City, Schuyler County, Missouri.

John only had four months and three weeks in the infantry, and 60 days less than that in actual service. In December his "old narcosis of the left tibia, contracted before enlistment," began acting up, the bone becoming much enlarged. On 6 February 1863, having been disabled over 60 days, John was given a medical discharge at Benton Barracks Convalescent Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri. John returned home.

John was married about 1870 to Evaline GARD NER who was born in 1842 in Ohio. John and Evaline lived in Ninevah Township, Adair County, Missouri and had two children, William born 1872 and Georgia Annie born in 1878.

John was killed in a tragic accident. It took place about the time of Georgia's birth, 1878, or perhaps 1879 - but it was before 1880. John and his young son, William, were out hunting. John was up on a tall stump when he lost his footing and fell. The hammers on his gun caught the stump and both barrels took him in the chest. His clothes caught fire and this in turn set the woods on fire. William escaped unharmed.

"John was burned pretty bad," James Monroe Ewing wrote me, "so they cut off his boots and buried him there on the spot where he lay."

Years later James Monroe's father, Timothy Jordan E WING, John's brother, went to the spot where this all happened, along with a man by the name of Houston. This was probably Andrew Jackson HOUS TON who married a niece of both Timothy and John, Lena Etta May E WING (12-1-5-1)

Andrew Jackson Houston also lived in Ninevah Township. He would have been about 13 year old at the time of the accident. He had told Timothy he knew the exact spot where John had died. They went out there and Houston set his foot down in a spot and said, "If you dig under my foot, you will find John A. Ewing's boots." "My dad did dig down, " James Monroe wrote, " and there was his leather boots." How it was that Houston knew where to look was because for years he had kept a little pole fence around the spot.

"My dad tore off two small pieces and somewhere in my stuff I have those two pieces of leather."

In 1880 the widow Evaline Ewing and her two children were living in Ninevah.

On 23 August 1885 Evaline and Simon A. HAY NES were married in Elm Township, Putnam County, Missouri.

Evaline could not receive a pension under her first husband's wartime service but her minor daughter could and in 1891, the daughter, Georgia Annie, chose a guardian to administer her estate.

On 13 July 1891, a curator for the estate of John's daughter, Georgia Annie - 13, was to receive the pension appointed by Probate Judge SHELD ON of Putnam County. He was David B RASFIELD, 31, of Queen City, Schuyler County, Missouri.

That is the last that is known of this family. All of them - Simon, Evaline, Georgia Annie, William and his wife - disappeared from the Missouri scene. There is no record of any of them in the 1900 Missouri census index, and none of their Ewing family remaining in that part of Missouri has any knowledge of them.

What we have recorded comes from official records and digging by some "kin" who care.

ISSUE:

1. William Allen E WING, b. 1872, Missouri. Married: 30 Oct 1892, Martinstown, Putnam Co. MO by I.L. CR OW, J.P., Ellen A DMIRE, b. 1877, daughter of Jessie ADM IRE. His stepfather and her father had to sign so they could get married; he was with his father when John was killed.

2. Georgia Annie EWI NG, b. 5 Feb 1878, Missouri.

Top of page

12-1-5 WILLIAM ALLEN EW ING

Ewing Family Lineage: John-Thomas-William-James

William lived a long, fruitful life and produced a lot of Ewings for posterity, but strangely the descendants that were contacted were unable to give any information about him personally.

William was born 11 February 1842 at Ewington, Gallia County, Ohio. He was 13 or 14 when the family made the move to Missouri.

William, like four of his brothers, was in the Civil War, but no service record was located. Apparently he was not sick or wounded while in the service, or else was affluent enough not to have need of a pension, because there are no records for him at the Pension Bureau in Washington.

Next door south of Elm Township in Putnam County, Missouri, is Ninevah Township in Adair County and next to Ninevah is Polk Township. In Polk Township lived Francis R EY NOLDS and his family, from Norfolk, Virginia. A daughter in the family was Sarah Elizabeth, born in 1844. This was the young lady who became Mrs. William Allen Ewing.

Sarah Elizabeth REYNOLDS and William were married in Adair County, Missouri on 13 October 1867 by David WELLS, J.P.

The newlyweds went into housekeeping on a farm next to the Reynolds farm in Polk Township. They were listed side by side in the 1870 census.

Sometime before 21 July 1874, Sarah's parents and brother went away, either on an extended visit or in a move to a new place. A letter Sarah wrote to them on that date has been preserved, in good condition though holey in places where folds are. At that time Sarah and William had three children - Lena, almost 6, James, 4, and John, 2 - and were expecting a fourth.

The letter reads as copied:

July the 21st A.D. 1874

Dear mother,

I seat myself to answer your welcome letter which came to hand yesterday. I was glad to hear from you. We are all well and doing well. Times are tolerably good here. Will is not here to write though I shall write for him. The neighbors are all well as far as I know. Aschey is married. He married a girl by the name of Fanny Codel. He is still living at father's. Now I must tell you that Timothy Ewing has a fine girl. Her name is Nancy Elizabeth for its two grandmothers (Elizabeth [Viers] Ewing and Nancy Martin).

Will is up at Timothy Ewing's at work. He expects to work there all summer if he can get work to do.

James Harvey Ewing sends his love to his grandma and says for you to come back home. He wants to see you very bad. Etty May Ewing sends her love to her grandma and she wants you to come back here and little John is always saying something about you. After you were gone two or three weeks, I got that pipe out of the trunk and John said it was George's pipe. Now I must tell you that we have very good prospects for corn if the season is good it will take a long time to gather his corn this year he took in some new (?)

Now I must tell you that Ann (?) has had a hard time. She had a tumor in her side and had to have it taken out. Wilson and Bickel (?) were the doctors that made the operation and how awful it was. Will saw it taken out. They took her to Doctor Wilson's house and made the operation there, then kept her there four or five days till she got so she could come from there. Was joy with us all when she came home. That circumstance occurred last winter. She is pretty near well now. Few people have heard of this before and if (?) See could tell you all the particulars of it. Tell George if he doesn't (?) he had better now.

I must tell you that Miss Scott sends her love to you and said tell you she was digging black root and had to work as hard as she ever did. Now I must close. (?) my bad writing for the children tease me so bad I can't hardly write (?) son fail note. I shall be glad to hear from you all soon.

From Sarah Elizabeth Ewing to her mother and father and brother. Good bye for this time.

The fourth child, Nettie, arrived 10 April 1975. The infant made it into the world all right, but the mother died in giving her life. Sarah was only 31 years old at the time. She is buried at Greentop Cemetery, Adair County, Missouri.

William had help in taking care of the children from his parents and possibly Sarah's parents too. It was three years before he found a woman who could take her place. She was Nicinda PAR TIN, born 19 July 1855 in Missouri. She was the daughter of Martin and Nancy (MULLINAX) P ARTIN and a first cousin of Florence MULLI NAX who married William's brothers Samuel and Timothy.

William and Nicinda were married in 1878. She became stepmother to four young Ewings and mother to four more. To the eight Ewings they added Hiram D AVIS, William's nephew who went to live with them.

They continued on at the Polk Township farm through at least the next 22 years. In the 1900 census, Nicinda's father, Martin PARTIN, was living with them.

The year of Nicinda's death could not be located, but she is buried at the Greentop Cemetery, Adair County, Missouri. Strangely, William, who died in 1922 at the age of 70 years is buried at what is now Pleasant Home Cemetery in Worthington, Putnam County, Missouri - formerly Brasfield Cemetery.

Incidentally, William was one of the biggest - if not the biggest - producers of Ewings in the entire family. There are more Ewings by that name in the pages coming up than in any other section, even the sections on John Smith Ewing and Enoch. Sad that there is so little known about them.

ISSUE by Nettie:

12-1-5-1 1. Lena Etta May E WING, b. 8 Aug 1868, Youngstown, Missouri.

2. James Harvey EW ING, b. 7 Nov 1869, Youngstown, Missouri, d. 17 May 1945, Kirksville, Missouri. Buried: Greentop Cemetery, Adair Co. Missouri. Married: Alice MAY of Putnam County, Missouri born near Connelville, Adair County, Missouri separated soon after birth of only son, she was last heard from somewhere in California.

1900 census: single, partner in sawmill with George TER RY, 35, Ninevah Township, Missouri.

Issue:

1. Virgil EWING, last heard from somewhere in California.

12-1-5-3 3. John Addison EW ING, b. 2 Feb 1872, Youngstown, Adair, Missouri.

4. Nettie F. EWI NG, b. 10 Apr 1875, d. July 1922. Buried: Greentop Cemetery, Adair County, MO. Married: 1. about 1895, George W. GILL ESPIE, b. 1872, Missouri, with his mother Aley or Ciley GILLE SPIE, a widow, two houses away from the Ewings in Polk Township, 1880 census.

Married: 2nd. Samuel RO LLS. Nettie was a seamstress as well as housewife.

Issue:

1. Walter GILLES PIE

2. Goldie GILLES PIE

3. TWIN ROLLS, died at birth

4. TWIN ROLLS, died at birth

5. Mortimer R OLLS, d. May 1974/75

Issue:

1. Connie R OLLS, last known in CA

ISSUE by Nicinda:

12-1-5-5 5. Ennona EW ING, b. 1878, Adair County, Missouri.

12-1-5-6 6. David Anderson EWING, b. Feb 1880, Adair County, Missouri.

7. William Allen E WING, JR., b. Sept 1886, Adair County, Missouri. Cloe called him "Little Billy".

12-1-5-8 8. Virginia Iva EW ING, b. March 1892, Adair County, Missouri.

Top of page

12-1-5-1 LENA ETTA MAY EWING

Ewing Family Lineage: William-John-Thomas-William-James

Lena was born 8 August 1868 in Adair County, Missouri and was married at the age of 16 on 26 November 1886 to Andrew Jackson HO USTON. Andrew, son of Andrew J. and Ann Eliza J ACKSON of Adair County, was born 15 May 1866 in Missouri.

Andrew and Lena had their farm home in Adair's Ninevah Township. Lena died 9 March 1941 at the age of 72 and Andrew died on 30 March 1953, age 86 years old. Both are buried at Greentop Cemetery, Adair County, Missouri.

ISSUE:

1. William Jackson HOU STON, b. Jan 1887, Adair County, Missouri, d. 21 Dec 1976, Adair County, Missouri. Married: 2 Nov 1909, Adair County, Pearl R EID. Pearl died 12 Dec 1910 in childbirth. William was a farmer.

Issue:

1. Owen Newman HOUS TON, b. 21 Nov 1910, Adair County, Missouri. Per Cloe HOUS TON, 1979: "Has a heart condition, can't operate, has been in and out of hospitals and intensive care for the past five years; has a nice family, all married; two girls, eldest a schoolteacher, one son employed at North Missouri State University, all attend church and live here in Kirksville; my mother and I took over and raised him when his mother died. I love him very much.".

2. Annie Myrtle Frances H OUSTON, b. 9 Nov 1888, Adair County, Missouri, d. 4 June 1912, age 23 years, Single. Buried: Greentop Cemetery, Adair Co. Missouri.

12-1-5-1-3 3. Cloe Opal HOUS TON, b. 12 Feb 1894, Adair County, Missouri.

4. Noah Floyd HOUS TON, b. 28 Nov 1899, Adair County, Missouri. Married: 25 Dec 1920, Kirksville, Missouri, Gladys MOREH OUSE, b. 24 June 1903 daughter of Lewis M OREHOUSE.

1979: Noah retired from highway department. Resided: Lancaster, Schuyler Co. Missouri.

Issue: (all married)

1. James Douglas HOUS TON, b. 22 May 1926

2. Donald Eugene HOUS TON, b. 13 June 1928

3. Gladys Lucille HOU STON, b. 22 July 1930

4. Mary Lou HOUS TON, b. 8 Apr 1932

Top of page

12-1-5-1-3 CLOE OPAL HOU STON

Ewing Family Lineage: Lena-William-John-Thomas-William-James

Cloe and her husband moved around a lot, but in her later years, after her husband's death, she returned to the place of her nativity, the Kirksville, Missouri area and when she did, resumed her maiden name. Thank heavens for that. Had she not, she would never have been found and there would be precious little on the Houston family.

Cloe was born 12 February 1894 in a log cabin 5 miles west of Greentop, Adair County, Missouri. Cloe was married the 30th of January 1922 in Gardnerville, Nevada to Herman D. E RBST. Herman was born 9 September 1876 in Hamburg, Germany. Herman's mother was Maria ER BST. He was a rancher and had been a Mason for 50 years prior to his death. Cloe worked in offices and nursing. They lived in Nevada, Susanville, California and Flagstaff, Arizona.

In 1979, Cloe lived at 1114 N. Elson Street, Kirksville, Missouri. She was then past 85 and "can't work like I used to and my memory is bad, I have pretty good health considering all things."

ISSUE:

1. Kuebha Jacqueline ER BST, b. 13 Nov 1922, - on a ranch in Douglas County, Nevada. Married: 8 Jan 1939, Avery E. SE WELL, served in Air Force overseas; nine children, 18 grandchildren.

2. Etta Marie E RBST, b. 3 Jan 1924, - on a ranch in Douglas County, Nevada, d. 11 Aug 1930, Gardnerville, Nevada, 6 years, 7 months, 8 days. Buried: Greentop Cemetery, Adair County, Missouri.

(12/94, Thanks to the submissions at the Family History Library, descendants of this family, Don and Alison EWING of Post Falls, Idaho contacted me and were able to add to and correct information on the John Addison EWING line. BP)

Top of page

12-1-5-3 JOHN ADDISON EWING

Ewing Family Lineage: William-John-Thomas-William-James

John certainly did his part! He brought 13 little Ewings into the world, eight of them boys. Supposedly this family stuck pretty close to the Kirksville area, but according to long distance information there was only four Ewings listed in Kirksville, Missouri on February 1984. One is Hillis EWING, who does not seem to be one of ours, and the other three are unlisted numbers. In other words, Ewing members of this family were unable to be contacted.

John Addison was born 1 February 1872 in Adair County, Missouri and was married on the 1st of February 1893 to Sophia Ann SA VAGE, daughter of James and Hilda SAV AGE. (Don and Alison's records show that Sophia was the daughter of Cale B./Caleb SAVAGE and Hester Emily HAYNES, BP) Sophia was born 24 November 1874. In the 1900 census the Ewings were living in Polk Township, Adair County, Missouri - John a farmer.

An interesting sidelight: their eldest son was in World War I and their youngest, born 21 years later served in World War II.

Sophia died 9 November 1918 and John on 17 October 1943 at the age of 71 years.

ISSUE:

1. Timothy Jordan E WING, b. 24 Jan 1894, Adair County, Missouri, d. 4 July 1968. Steel worker, a farmer, coal miner and railway worker. Was in World War I.

12-1-5-3-2 2. Noah Edman EW ING, b. 1 Oct 1895, Adair County, Missouri.

12-1-5-3-3 3. William McClellan E WING, b. 18 July 1897, Adair County, Missouri.

4. Ida Mae EWING, b. Mar 1899, Adair County, Missouri, d. 1914, age 15 years.

5. Virginia Bell E WING, b. 13 Oct 1900, Adair County, Missouri, d. 1907, age 7 years.

6. Naomi E WING, b. 11 Aug 1902, Adair County, Missouri, d. 14 Feb 1977. Married: Elmer C. S COTT. She was a factory worker.

Issue:

1. Crystal Lorene SCOTT Married: James Lee MC KIM.

Issue:

1. James MC KIM

2. Kenneth MC KIM

3. Wanda Kay MC KIM

4. Judy MC KIM

2. Lois SC OTT, married more than once, has a son, Donnie .

12-1-5-3-7 7. James Harvey EWING, b. 15 Mar 1904, Adair County, Missouri.

12-1-5-3-8 8. Henry Stevens E WING, b. 21 Aug 1905, Adair County, Missouri, d. 16 Apr 1973. Married: Anna Magnolia O FFIELD. Farmer, construction worker and maintenance employee, Missouri State Highway Commission.

9. Andrew Marcellus E WING, b. 29 Jan 1907, Adair County, Missouri, d. 3 May 1975. Married: Lovie LIV INGSTON. Farm laborer and bee keeper.

Issue:

1. John EWIN G

2. Cora Lee EWING

3. Helen EWI NG

4. Gordon EWIN G

5. William EWI NG

12-1-5-3-10 10. Hester Emily EWI NG, b. 17 July 1908, Adair County, Missouri.

11. Gladys Lucille E WING, b. 29 Dec 1910, Adair County, Missouri.

12. Charles Andrew E WING. b. 24 June 1913, Adair County, Missouri.

12-1-5-3-13 13. John Anderson EW ING, 7 June 1915, Adair County, Missouri.

Top of page

12-1-5-3-2 NOAH EDMAN E WING

Ewing Family Lineage: John-William-Thomas-William-James

Noah was born 1 October 1895 near Kirksville, Adair County, Missouri and was married about 1920 to Mary B ARNHART. He was a farm laborer and coal miner in the Kirskville area. He died 13 May 1965.

ISSUE:

12-1-5-3-2-1 1. Waneta EWI NG, b. 8 Mar 1921, Kirksville, Adair County, Missouri.

2. Raymond EWI NG, b. 1927, Kirksville, Adair County, Missouri, d. 1967.

3. Leona May EWI NG, b. 24 Jan 1931, Kirksville, Adair County, Missouri, d. 21 Oct 1980. Married: 1st MC DONALD; married 2nd 13 Feb 1968, Robert C. WALKER.

4. Mary Louise EWIN G

5. John EWI NG

6. William E WING

7. Daughter EWING, (stillborn)

Top of page

12-1-5-3-2-1 WANETA EWI NG

Ewing Family Lineage: Noah-John-William-John-Thomas-William-James

Waneta was born 8 March 1921 near Kirksville, Adair County, Missouri and was married, at the age of 15, on the

11th of July 1936 to John Dee NEW COMER. John was born the 5th of January 1915.

12-1-5-3-3 WILLIAM MC CLELLAN E WING

Ewing Family Lineage: John-William-John-Thomas-William-James

William was born 18 July 1897 near Kirksville, Adair County, Missouri and died at the age of 67 years on 11 May 1965. His wife was Elizabeth S PARKS. William was a construction worker, coal miner and a very good fiddle maker.

ISSUE:

1. Virgil Samuel E WING

2. William EWI NG

3. Naomi EWI NG

4. John David E WING

5. Faye EWI NG

6. Anna Mae E WING (stillborn)

7. Son EWING, died in infancy

Top of page

12-1-5-3-7 JAMES HARVEY E WING

Ewing Family Lineage: John-William-John-Thomas-William-James

James was born 15 March 1904 near Kirksville, Adair County, Missouri and in his adult years was a construction worker and farm laborer. His wife was Bertha Juanita WEAV ER. James died 26 July 1973.

ISSUE:

1. Juanita EW ING, MARRIED: Leland SEAR CH.

2. Mary Ellen E WING, MARRIED: Earl C ASTEEL.

3. Ann E WING, MARRIED: Leonard FO RD

Top of page

12-1-5-3-8 HENRY STEVENS EWING

Ewing Family Lineage: John-William-John-Thomas-William-James

(12/94, Information on Henry's lineage was sent by his son, Donald EWING and Don's wife, Alison Shaw WATSON EWING of 205 Riverside Harbor Dr. W., Post Falls, Idaho 83854 BP)

Henry was born in Kirksville or Greentop, Adair County, Missouri on the 21st of August in 1905. He and Anna Magnolia OFFIELD were married in Livingston County Missouri the 7th of May 1932. They moved to a farm north of Chillicothe in the 1950s.

Henry died the 16th of April 1973 and was buried 20 April 1973 in the Hutchinson Cemetery in Chillicothe, Livingston County, Missouri. Anna was born on the 8th of September 1913 in Mooresville Township, Livingston County, Missouri, the daughter of James Grover OFFIELD and Julia Helen AUSTIN. Anna was a resident in a nursing home in Chilicothe when she died the 30th of March 1982. Anna is buried with Henry in the Hutchinson Cemetery in Chillicothe, Missouri.

Top of page

12-1-5-3-10 HESTER EMILY E WING

Ewing Family Lineage: John-William-John-Thomas-William-James

Hester, born 17 July 1908 near Kirksville, Adair County, Missouri, married Dee J. VAN LANINGHAM. Hester and Dee were living on a farm, west of the Kirksvilles area in 1979, when she sent all the information about her family to Cloe HO USTON - for this portion of the book.

Hester and Dee were married 31 October 1926. Hester was always called Emma.

12-1-5-3-13 JOHN ANDERSON EWING

Ewing Family Lineage: John-William-John-Thomas-William-James

Being Number 13 wasn't unlucky for John Anderson. He had a most interesting and rewarding life.

John, whose birth date was 7 June 1915 was born and raised on the farm at Kirksville, Adair County, Missouri - but here's a boy you couldn't keep down on the farm. As of 1982 he had been in 44 of our 50 United States, and during World War II he made it to Australia and New Guinea. He was first a farm laborer, then was in construction work, then went into gospel ministry, and finally he was a postal worker, from which he retired.

In 1982, John was in the entertainment business. He was a professional country and country-gospel music composer and recording artist. If you ever come across any work by Andy St. John - that's our boy! John sent me one of his recordings. On one side is "Come on In, Lord" - gospel music that is also toe tapping. On the flip side is his "Gadabout" a very clever piece about a CBer calling for his mate with the CB moniker of Gadabout, only Gadabout is with the angels. Inasmuch as this was written in 1977, shortly after the death of his second wife, Esther Leone C AZEL, I surmise that she was his Gadabout. The songs are on Seven-Eleven records and both were recorded in 1977.

John has been married three times. John's third wife is Jane DULA NEY. John and Jane were married on the 11th of December of 1978 and in 1982 they made their home in Tuscola, Illinois. Their address: P.O. Box 367, zip code - 61953. John was first married to Irene LAWSON on 23 June 1933. They were the parents of Dorothy Lee E WING. They were divorced and on 20 May 1945 John and Esther were married. Esther died on the 19th of November 1976.

John sent most of the information on his family's line.

Top of page

12-1-5-6 DAVID ANDERSON EW ING

Ewing Family Lineage: William-John-Thomas-William-James

Like his brother, John, David gave 13 Ewings to posterity, and like his brother, eight of those were sons - though only three of them had progeny.

David was born in February 1880 in Adair County, Missouri. He was musically inclined and was great on the fiddle. He was a butcher by trade, a calling he passed down to five of his sons. And he liked his pipe and a bit of whiskey now and then.

He was married in Adair County on 2 July 1902 to Cora Mabel W ILLIAMS. Cora, born in 1886, was the daughter of William and Charity (BIGGER) WI LLIAMS of Mt. Pulaski, Illinois.

The Ewings lived in Adair County at first, in or near Kirksville, and it was there, their first nine children were born. But in December of 1918 they moved to Hannibal, Missouri. - Hannibal, Marion County, on the Mississippi River, where a fellow by the name of Tom Sawyer and his pal, Huckleberry Finn, achieved great fame thanks to the pen of Mark Twain.

David owned the Ewing Butcher Shop on N. Main Street in Hannibal for many years. After Cora's death in 1931, and his retirement about 1945, he made the Hannibal home of his daughter, Dixie GLA SCOCK, his headquarters, and from there radiated out to visit other offspring during the year. He also enjoyed a trip out to the state of Washington to visit his sister, Virginia TIET SORT.

David died in 1954 at the age of 74 years. Both he and Cora are buried at Mt. Olive Cemetery, Hannibal, Marion County, Missouri.

ISSUE:

12-1-5-6-1 1. Nova May EWING, b. 1 May 1903, Adair County, Missouri.

12-1-5-6-2 2. Larama Angelo EW ING, b. 29 Mar 1904, Adair County, Missouri.

12-1-5-6-3 3. Dixie Gladys EWI NG, b. 2 Jan 1905, Adair County, Missouri.

4. Leota Mildred EW ING, b. 6 July 1906, Adair County, Missouri. Married: Harold FISH ER. Moved to Los Angeles about 1938 with her brother, Elton and his family. Leota worked in a shoe factory before and after the war. 1979: Husband died, Leota retired - in poor health. No issue.

5. Elton David E WING, b. 19 May 1909, Adair County, Missouri. Married: about 1930, Alta W ILLIAMS. Moved to Los Angeles with Leota and family about 1938 . Served in Army, World War II. Was a butcher after the war until retirement. 1979: was running a small trading post in California mountains, does handy man jobs. No issue.

6. John William EWI NG, b. 8 Jan 1911, Adair County, Missouri, d. Aug 1952, Hannibal, Missouri. Buried: Mt. Olive Cemetery. Married: 1934, Hannibal, Nina JO NES. John served in Navy and was a butcher spending time at Corpus Christi, Texas. Returned to Hannibal about 1949, and started a tavern business, which his brother, Larama took over after his death in 1952. No issue.

7. Jeannette Faye EWI NG, b. 8 Oct 1912, Adair County, Missouri. Married: R.J. NEIDENS. Worked as a secretary in Corpus Christi while staying with her brother, John. This is where she met and married her husband: She worked as a secretary for the Missouri Corps of Engineers until her retirement. No issue.

8. Ferrel Samuel EWING, b. 5 Oct 1914, Adair County, Missouri. Married: Cleta . Butcher all his life in Hannibal, until retirement; liked to entertain the youngsters with card and coin tricks and they say "Uncle Sam is magic:" Likes a game of cards, anytime, especially pinochle. No issue.

12-1-5-6-9 9. Glenn Woodrow EWING, b. 8 Nov 1916, Adair County, Missouri.

10. Jack Thompson EWING, b. 5 Nov 1918, Hannibal, Marion County, Missouri, d. Jan 1919, Hannibal, of pneumonia ("they took the mustard plaster off his chest too soon, " claimed his sister, Nova.)

11. Emil Anderson E WING, b. 29 Sept 1920, Hannibal, Marion County, Missouri, d. 3 Dec 1977, Hannibal, Missouri. Buried: Mt. Olive Cemetery in Ewing Lot #51. Served in Army during World War; Single.

12. Shelby Miles EW ING, b. 22 Aug 1922, Hannibal, Marion County, Missouri. Married: Jacqueline , an Italian girl in Trieste, Italy. Retired from U.S. Army after 20 years

1979: still worked on the Army Base

12-1-5-6-13 13. Mary Lou EWI NG, b. 23 Sept 1924, Hannibal, Marion County, Missouri.

Top of page

12-1-5-6-1 NOVA MAY EWING

Ewing Family Lineage: David-William-John-Thomas-William-James

Nova was born 1 May 1903 in Adair County, Missouri. She went to Hannibal with her family in 1918 and there met Harold Vernon GEO RGE. They were married 19 December 1919. Harold, son of Henry and Josephine (WHITNEY) G EORGE, was born in Richfield, Illinois, 30 November 1899. He died on his 75th birthday the 30th of November in 1974. Both he and Nova are buried at Mt. Olive Cemetery, Hannibal, Marion county, Missouri in Ewing Lot #51.

Nova had two miscarriages so she waited many years to start a family. In the meantime her mother died and her sister-in-law Winona as well, and there were four children who needed a mother's hand, so Nova helped out. Then after 21 years of marriage, she gave birth to Jennie Lou on 18 January 1941. Nova died very suddenly in 1957. She had complained of poor health but would not go to a doctor. She had cancer.

Top of page

12-1-5-6-2 LARAMA ANGELO E WING

Ewing Family Lineage: David-William-John-Thomas-William-James

Larama was born 29 March 1904, in Adair County, Missouri. He was married in Hannibal, Marion County, Missouri in 1924, to Winona Fern ADA MS. Larama and Winona had two sons, Raymond and William. The youngest was only 2 when Winona died in 1928. She is buried at Mt. Olive Cemetery. The boys were raised by their Aunt Nova, and reported in later years that they found her "a pretty good mother."

Larama was a butcher with his father for many years. His niece, Jennie VO GEL, remembers him at Rosser's Locker in Hannibal. In 1952 his brother, John, who owned a tavern in Hannibal, died and Larama took it over. In later life he married again. I have her name only as Flo.

Larama died of lung cancer in 1962 and is buried at Mt. Olive Cemetery in Hannibal, Marion County, Missouri.

ISSUE:

12-1-5-6-2-1 1. Raymond Peyton EWI NG, b. 31 July 1925, Hannibal, Marion County, Missouri.

12-1-5-6-2-2 2. William David EWI NG, b. 1926, Hannibal, Marion County, Missouri.

Top of page

12-1-5-6-2-1 RAYMOND PEYTON EWING

Ewing Family Lineage: Larama-David-William-John-Thomas-William-James

Raymond seems to have had that extra something that took him beyond the norm, and today he is an illustrious citizen of Kenilworth, Illinois, an exclusive suburb of Chicago, and an important executive for a busy international firm (Allstate Insurance Company), headquartered at Northbrook, outside Chicago. Raymond was listed in the 1978-1979 "Who's Who in the Midwest."

Raymond was born 31 July 1925 in Hannibal, Missouri. When his mother died in 1928, he and his younger brother, William, went to live with their Aunt Nova, and her husband, Harold Vernon GEOR GE, in Hannibal.

Raymond was 18 years old when he entered the U.S. Army which he served during World War II from 1943 to 1946. He was in the European Theater of Operations.

After his discharge he entered Hannibal-La Grange College, where he was on the football team. He received his Associate of Arts Degree there in 1948, and went on to William

Jewell College for his Bachelors in 1949. He completed his education with a Master's Degree in the Humanities from the University of Chicago in 1951. In the meantime he and Audrey Jane SCH ULZE were married, the date being 7 May 1949. Audrey's grandfather, William SCHU LZE, came to this country from the Kingdom of Hanover after the Civil War and settled in the St. Louis area, where Audrey was born.

Raymond started his professional life as a marketing management trainee at Montgomery Ward in Chicago, Illinois in 1951-52. He then became a senior editor with the Commerce Clearing House, Chicago, 1952 to 1960. In 1960 he entered the firm of Allstate Insurance and Allstate Enterprises as corporate communications director. In 1967 he was assistant public affairs director and by 1978-79 Raymond had risen to public relations director.

He and Audrey made their home in Winnetka at first, but by 1979 they were living in Kenilworth, at 316 Richmond Road.

Raymond took an active role in the affairs of his community, serving the library, United Crusade, Community Chest and Onward Neighborhood House. He was a member of the Public Relations Society of America, the Publicity Club of Chicago, the Chicago Press Club, and the Chicago Poets and Writers Foundation and has won many awards within those organizations. He has also been a book columnist, a book news commentator on radio and a lecturer.

Top of page

12-1-5-6-2-2 WILLIAM DAVID EWING

Ewing Family Lineage: Larama-David-William-John-Thomas-William-James

William, born in 1926 in Hannibal, Marion County, Missouri and was only 2 years old when his mother died and like his brother, Raymond, was raised by Aunt Nova. William attended Hannibal-LaGrange College where he was on the football team, a good player as was his brother.

William was married first, in 1946, to Beatrice W HITMORE, by whom he had four children. That marriage ended in divorce and he later married Sally Ann GRENIN GER, by whom he had four more children.

In 1979 William lived in Hannibal and had worked 30 years for the Missouri Highway Department.

Top of page

12-1-5-6-3 DIXIE GLADYS E WING

Ewing Family Lineage: David-William-John-Thomas-William-James

Dixie was born in Adair County, Missouri on 2 January 1905 and was almost 13 years old when the family moved to Hannibal, Missouri. Dixie attended Hannibal High School and was on the girls basketball team. In 1974 she received special honors for having played on the team 50 years before.

She was married right out of high school, in 1925, to Henry G LASCOCK. Dixie was a cashier at Rosser's Locker for many years until her retirement. In those retirement years she loved to crochet and make quilts.

In a 1970 Hannibal telephone book Dixie Glascock was listed at 2336 Market Street, and surmised from that, Henry had died prior to 1970. Dixie died just 12 days after her 72nd birthday on 14 January 1978. Dixie is buried at Mt. Olive Cemetery, Hannibal, Marion County, Missouri.

ISSUE:

1. Mary Mabel G LASCOCK, b. 1926. Married: 1st 1944, Donald R OSS, divorced. Married 2nd William HERR ING.

2. Charles Henry G LASCOCK, b. 1927. 20 years in Army, retire Lt. Col. Charles and eldest son in hardware business in or near Orlando Florida.

3. William Donald GLASCOCK, b. 1929. Married: El

4. Betty Ann GLASC OCK, b. 1930. Married: Jack G LENN.

5. Rosella May G LASCOCK, b. 1932. Married: Miller W AUGH

6. Oscar Jerome Ewing G LASCOCK, b. 1937. Married: Lynn

Top of page

12-1-5-6-9 GLENN WOODROW EWI NG

Ewing Family Lineage: David-William-John-Thomas-William-James

Glenn, born 8 November 1916 in Adair County, Missouri, was only 2 years old when the Ewings moved to Hannibal, Missouri. He was married there in 1934 to Della H AWKINS.

When World War II came along, Glenn entered the Sea Bees, (Construction Battalion of the Navy) and spent most of the war years on Pacific Islands doing what Sea Bees do best, building.

After the war he worked with his father as a butcher. He was a strong man, and liked to impress youngsters of that fact by tearing telephone books and decks of cards in two.

Top of page

12-1-5-6-13 MARY LOU EWI NG

Ewing Family Lineage: David-William-John-Thomas-William-James

Mary Lou and her husband, Robert Franklin HOW ELL, have been mentioned before. I think this is the only case in this book where I am writing about two cousins of mine from two different branches of my family in the same section.

Mary Lou, born 23 September 1924 in Hannibal, Marion County, Missouri is of course a Ewing cousin. She and I are great-great-great-granddaughters of William and Mary McNeill EWING. Robert, whom she married in 1943, is a cousin on my Matthews side - and a descendant of another James Ewing, the one of Monroe County, West Virginia.

Robert is the son of Charles HOW ELL of Canton, Missouri. Charles' father was Joseph HO WELL, whose mother was Susan Jane EW ING, daughter of John and Isabelle (MATTHEWS) E WING. John Ewing was a grandson of the James EWI NG of Monroe County. Isabelle MATTH EWS was a daughter of William M ATTHEWS, also of Monroe County, and sister to my Great-Great-Grandmother, Mary Ann MATTHEWS HAN KS.

Robert and I then are fourth cousins. But it helps if you look at it in genealogical ladder form, starting from our first common ancestor, William MATTHEWS.

WILLIAM MATTHEWS OF MONROE COUNTY, WEST VIRGINIA

Isabelle MA TTHEWS -------Sisters------- Mary Ann MA TTHEWS

Mar: John EW ING, grandson Mar: Dr. Caleb H ANKS

of James EWI NG of Monroe County.

Susan Jane E WING -------- 1st Cousins-------- Nancy Ann HANKS

Mar: John Mell H OWELL Mar: Henry McK. E WING

Joseph HO WELL -------- 2ND Cousins -------- Alvin Enoch EWI NG

Charles HOW ELL ------ 3rd Cousins------- Burke McKendree EW ING

Robert Franklin HOW ELL -- 4th Cousins ------ Nancy Hanks EW ING

Mary Lou and I are also fourth cousins.

Jennie Lou VOG EL says Robert is known in the Hannibal, Missouri and Quincy, Illinois area as a number one golf course greenskeeper, a skill he has passed on to several of his sons.

About Mary Lou she says: "Whenever I would visit her house as a child she was always rocking babies; now I visit her and she is rocking grandchildren. She is the only family I have in Quincy from my mother's side of the family, so I feel very close to her and her children."

Top of page

12-1-5-8 VIRGINIA IVA E WING

Ewing Family Lineage: William-John-Thomas-William-James

Virginia was born in March 1892 in Adair County, Missouri and was married in Adair County about 1912 to Jack TI ETSORT, a butcher. In 1936, the two of them left Missouri in favor of Yakima, Washington. They drove out, pulling a trailer loaded with their possessions, including a trunk with some family history in it. They spent one night at an auto camp in Wyoming. During the night someone stole that precious trunk, and many family mementoes were lost, much to Virginia's sadness.

Virginia wrote in 1968. Her husband had died the 26th of June 1956 and she was not in the best of health. She had just come home from the hospital after a very serious operation, her third operation in a year.

"I live alone," she wrote. "I only had one child, a boy. He died in 1942. He had two boys. I raised the oldest one."

Virginia was 76 at that time. In 1979, Cloe HOU STON wrote that Virginia was in a nursing home and that is where she died in March of 1983.

ISSUE:

1. Kenneth TI ETSORT, b. about 1915

Top of page

12-1-10 TIMOTHY JORDAN EWI NG

Ewing Family Lineage: John-Thomas-William-James

Timothy was the 10th grandchild to come into the log home of Thomas and Anstis EWING in Huntington Township's Section 2, Gallia County, Ohio. He was born 14 October 1851 and was about 5 years old when the move to Missouri was made. He was listed with his parents, John and Elizabeth in the 1860 census for Jefferson Township, Clark County, Missouri and in the 1870 census for Elm Township, Putnam County, Missouri. At that time he was 18 years old and a farm hand.

He was married on 14 September 1873 by Daniel S PARKS, J.P. to Martha A. MAR TIN, daughter of the first settlers of Putnam County. They were Brightwell and Nancy (LESSLEY) M ARTIN, and the town of Martinsville in Elm Township is very likely named for them.

Martha was born in Elm Township in 1853, 1855 or 1858.

(Martha was listed as 7 in the 1860 census, 25 in the 1880 census and Timothy's granddaughter has her birthyear as being 1858)

The newlyweds made their home in Elm Township near their parents. They had six children, two of whom died young. David, the youngest, was 6 when Martha died on 29 January 1890. David died four months later. Martha is buried at Pleasant Home Cemetery - formerly Brasfield Cemetery in Putnam County, Missouri.

Timothy and the three children, Iva, 11 and the twins, Myrtle and Jordan, 8, carried on, but before long it became apparent that there was going to be another wedding in Timothy's life. Florence Lela MUL LINAX had married Timothy's younger brother, Samuel Luther, and they had two children, James and Stella, and they were expecting their third, Mae Belle, when Samuel was killed in a fight at a dance in 1882.

John and Florence made it "his, hers and ours." They were married 9 August 1891 by W.M. H ILL, J.P.

Florence was born 8 February 1861 at Kirksville, the daughter of Evan and Mary (DICKSON) MULL INAX.

Granddaughter, Betty Hoyt B ENSON has written a very interesting sketch about her grandparents, and it follows almost verbatim.

"So Timothy and Florence set up housekeeping with six children. The story is told of how Timothy's children would come in from school or play and introduce their friends to their 'mother' and then turn around call her 'Aunt Florence'. That was a source of much amusement with the children on both sides of the family.

"The family continued to grow with the addition of five more children, Ruth, Thomas, Zeruiah, Browford and Joseph.

"Sometime before 1900 the Ewings moved from the east end of Putnam County, to a farm in Wilson Township, about 1/2 miles southwest of Putnam's county seat, Unionville. Here Timothy raised cattle, grew corn and hay and raised sorghum cane from which he made molasses. He considered himself an expert on watermelons and always had a big patch of them.

"His daughter, Ruth, remembered the time he grew a watermelon that weighed 50 pounds. It was on display in the window of Quigley's Saloon in Unionville. Quigley's Saloon was on the southeast corner of the square, a good place for everyone to see the melon and exclaim over it.

"Timothy started a brickyard on this farm as he had available to him the clay and the water from Blackbird Creek. His grandson, James EWING who lives in Unionville, says part of the kiln and some of the bricks are still visible today. The brickyard was in operation for 10 or 12 years.

"Ruth remembered the brickyard very well though she could not remember how many men her father employed. She said it was quite a few, as it took many hands to get the bricks molded, dried, burned, stacked and ready for sale. Many of the buildings and streets in Unionville contain bricks made on his farm. Ruth added that it was her job to take all orders for bricks over the telephone and relay the messages to her father, and she took great pride in this responsibility, and in having her father depend on her.

"Ruth also related the story of how in the summer of 1904, they were very busy in the brickyard and her father had been working long, hard hours, often late into the night. With all the smoke her father had inhaled during the summer, he developed a lung infection and was ill enough to be in bed. This was in September at the time the last baby in the family was about to make his entrance into the world. Ruth had to call Dr. GU YSINGER to come and then it was she who had the honor of bringing Timothy Jordan's child downstairs for his inspection. The new baby was Joseph Archie.

"Ruth remembered the farm very well. She said the house was situated nicely on a small hill up north from Blackbird Creek. There was a good bridge across the creek and the road was always in good shape. She said this was her father's thing, to always have good roads. It was across this bridge and on this kind of road that many of the church groups found their way to the Ewing farm and to the lovely pasture with green grass and big shade trees for their picnics. Many happy outings were held in their pasture.

"Timothy and his family were members of the First Baptist Church in Unionville. Timothy did not attend church as regularly as the rest of his family did but, according to Ruth, 'Papa knew the Bible from A to Z. When his son, Jordan, had typhoid fever after his mother died, Papa took care of him, and for 40 days and 40 nights he waited on him. Through all of this he read the Bible through twice. He always studied the Bible.

"Timothy's daughter, Zeruiah, has told that many an evening as a child she would sit on her papa's lap and he would read the Bible to her. And she in turn was well versed in the Bible and read it almost daily for the rest of her life. Zeruiah was the only one of his children to whom he gave a nickname. He always called her Pud, short for Pudding. Zeruiah also related that on several occasions when Timothy thought it was necessary to work in the fields on Sunday, her mother, Florence, was very opposed and would get out the sewing machine and sew all day and then Timothy would know how upset she was.

"Timothy moved his family into town about 1910 or 1911. They lived in the southwest section of town known as Dundee. Brick was not in as much demand now and while Timothy was a hard worker and knew how to make money, he was not good at managing it. A close friend of his, Bob B RASFIELD, a local merchant, always acted as his business manager. However, after his death things did not go well with Timothy as he was too trusting of people and they did not pay up their debts to him.

"After he moved to town he worked about at different things. He had a good team of horses and did a lot of hauling of sand and coal. His son, Joseph tells how he would go and wait in line at the coal mine for maybe a whole day to get a load of coal and would only make $2.00. Two dollars a day for wages for a man and a team of horses.

"In politics he was a Democrat and a strong one at that. At one time he was a deputy sheriff and was also the town marshall. He was asked several times to run for sheriff but said he didn't want that job.

"He was a handsome man, being 6 feet tall, with dark hair and blue eyes, and he weighed around 180-190 lbs. He had a fair complexion and as an older man he had a mustache. Of his children it was Browford Emerson who most resembled his father in physical appearance. He had a good physical form and when dressed up made a good impression.

"Everyone liked him because he had such a good disposition. However, when he got angry, he was very angry, and sometimes it didn't take too much to spark that anger. He had a good sense of humor and liked to hear or tell a good joke. He had friends in all circles of life, from the richest to the poorest and everyone knew that when Timothy Jordan said something was this way or that, then that was the way it was. He was a man of his word and expected everyone else to be also.

"Several years after they moved to Unionville, Timothy Jordan had a heart attack. After he recovered from this his daughter, Myrtle, and her husband, Hugh G UFFY, urged them to come to Mitchell County, Iowa. And so Timothy, his wife Florence and their two sons, Browford and Joseph moved up to northeast Iowa.

"Here they rented a farm and went into the truck gardening business, raising mainly onions. Joseph remembered what hard work this was, spending whole days bent over weeding those onions. It wasn't long after this that Timothy started suffering from hardening of the arteries. He was confined to a wheelchair and Joseph recalled how much he enjoyed sitting out in the yard under a tree in the summertime. To help him while away the hours he took up whittling. But as far as known