The Ewing House on the Hill, Part I

Thomas Ewing purchased Lot 146 in Square 13 in April 1824 and began to build a house. As the story of the house unfolds through the following 190 years, readers will be able to count on just two hands the owners of this house that is still well maintained and occupied.

Readers should recognize the name Thomas Ewing. He was born in 1789 in Virginia, graduated from Ohio University in 1815 and then came to Lancaster to study law. He was admitted to the Ohio Bar in 1816, married in 1819 and served as a U.S. senator from 1831-1837. He also served as Secretary of the U.S. Treasury, and the first Secretary of the Interior.

He died in 1871 at 82. Several books have been published about his life and career, including “Civil War Dynasty: The Ewing Family of Ohio” by Kenneth J. Heineman in 2013. What follows is not a biography of the man, but rather a “biography” of the subsequent owners of his house.

A house is built

When Ewing married Maria Boyle in 1819, they lived near what is now the southwest corner of Columbus and Mulberry streets in a house given to them by Maria’s father (Goslin, Crossroads and Fence Corners II, p. 14). Son Philemon Ewing was born in 1820, and a second son George in 1822. George only lived about a year. Maria was convinced their home in the “lower” part of town was unhealthy.

“She was certain that one thing which had caused the baby’s illness and death was the fact that their home was damp, and she persuaded Thomas to build a new house in a dryer spot.” (Three Generations by Burton, p. 32).

Thomas purchased property on the northwest corner of Main and High streets in 1824 (Lot 146 in April for $475 and east half of Lot 145 in November for $100). Their new house would be near the home of Charles Sherman. Construction began but they were still in their first house when daughter Eleanor (Ellen) was born in October 1824.

“The new house had been slow in building, both because Thomas wanted it large enough and of the best materials, and because some times he had to wait until he had amassed more funds. A fourth child was born to the Ewings before the house was entirely ready for occupancy.” (Burton, p. 33). Son Hugh (born Oct. 31, 1826) was a few weeks old when the family was finally able to move into the house on the hill. Burton described the house as “a roomy place of white brick, and its wide hospitable front door delighted Maria every time she entered it.”

When Charles Sherman died in 1829 leaving his widow with 11 children, Thomas Ewing walked down Main hill and offered to take one child to raise in his home. He returned home with 9-year-old son Cump, William Tecumseh Sherman. Though never officially adopted, Cump was raised as one of the Ewing children. Three more children were born to the Ewings: Thomas Jr. in 1829, Charles in 1835, and Maria Theresa in 1837. By 1840 the house was larger: “Wings had been added, and there was a high brick wall protecting the yard from the street (Burton, p. 62).

As years passed…

On Nov. 24, 1863, the wedding of Maria Theresa Ewing (the youngest daughter) took place in Lancaster in the house on the hill. The bride’s mother was very ill, so the ceremony was held in her room. Maria married Lt. Col. Clemens F. Steele. They had met when he came to Lancaster as a recruiter in 1862.

Nine years her senior, Steele had been one of the first to respond to the call for troops in April 1861. After being severely wounded at Fort Wagner, South Caroliuna in July 1863, Steele returned to Lancaster and the couple married.

Mrs. Thomas Ewing Sr. died in her home Feb. 2, 1864 with her family around her. Thomas became ill while appearing before the Supreme Court in October 1869 at 80 years of age.

In June the following year he “sold” the house on the hill to his son Thomas Ewing Jr. for “natural love and affection.” The deed stated that an office building connected to the house was included in the sale but Ewing was “reserving to myself during my natural life the east room on the ground floor in said house, and the alcove adjacent there to with present ingress and egress; reserving also stable room for two horses and room for my carriage in the carriage house.”

“On Thursday last, the 26th of October 1871…Thomas Ewing, Sr., departed this life, in the 82nd year of his age — the state of his health for several months had prepared all for the solemn event…The remains, encased in a superb burial casket, lay in Mr. Ewing’s sitting-room, in the family residence, and were viewed by friends and visitors for the last time, up to the hour of burial. Everything in the room appeared as he left them; his table, with books, papers, and writing materials, his watch and spectacles, all lay as deposited by his hands when the final summons came.” (Gazette Nov. 2, 1871). His casket was carried to St. Mary Church by the pall bearers, among whom were Ohio Gov. Rutherford B. Hayes, former U.S. Attorney General Henry Stanbery, and Sen. John Sherman.

Steele Family years

Thomas Ewing Jr., who was living in New York, sold the house on the hill and property to his brother-in-law C. F. Steele in July 1882 for $12,000. Six children were born to Maria and C.F. Steele before they bought the house on the hill, but two died as infants. Clemens F. Steele died Nov. 2, 1893 in the Hotel Martin at 65.

He had been living in Columbus, as did two of his sons, but had recently returned to Lancaster to be near old friends. His wife was in Cape May, New Jersey, at the time with two of their children.

The Ewing property on the hill originally ran from Main Street north to the alley. In January 1896 Maria Ewing Steele sold a 60-foot strip off the back/north end of the lots that ran 125 feet west along the alley.

The deed included information about the out buildings: “Maria Steele will have removed the ice house and barn and all buildings now on said premises hereby conveyed and fill up the excavations left exposed on or before April 1, 1896…she will have removed from her own premises adjoining, the laundry portion of her present homestead.” Charles and Mary Woodin purchased the property for $2,400 and were to build an “elegant residence” facing High Street (Daily Eagle Jan. 15, 1896). The house they built stands today at 121 N. High St.

Family ownership ends

When Henry Wynkoop published Picturesque Lancaster in 1897, it included a Tobias photo of the house on the hill (p. 44). “Residence of Mrs. Maria T. Ewing Steele. This property is known throughout the country as the ‘old Ewing homestead’…It stands on a natural embankment, ten feet above the grade of Main Street, corner of High. It is two-story with attic, and colonial in style and built of brick, some of which came from Chillicothe and Zanesville. There is no attempt at ornamental architecture. It is a plain, substantial, and most comfortable house, with twenty large rooms, conveniently arranged with a careful detailed attention to comfort. Under this roof many distinguished statesmen have been most royally entertained…” This may have served as a real estate ad.

Maria Steele sold the property to Edwin Embich on March 31, 1898 for $8,000. With this sale we learned the property had been leased for an unknown period of time. The deed stated that Mr. Embich would not get possession until Sept. 1, because that was when the leases expired for Mr. Howard Sutton, who was occupying the west side of the house, and for Mrs. Gill Shaeffer, who was conducting a boarding house on the east side of the house.

With this sale almost 75 years of Ewing family ownership came to an end. Maria E. Steele lived in Columbus for a time and then died May 10, 1910, while in Ottawa, Canada.

Two stories of third Ewing generation

Unique heirloom

When Maria Ewing Steele’s daughter Florence was about to marry, an interesting article appeared in the Daily Eagle, August 12, 1899. Mrs. Steele was going to present to her daughter on her wedding day, the same gift she had received on her wedding day from her mother, Mrs. Thomas Ewing Sr.

The gift was “a small red bound volume that contains within its timeworn covers a collection of autographs that is seldom seen outside of a museum. There appear the signatures of Calhoun, Clay, John Quincy Adams, Daniel Webster, William Henry Harrison and others illustrious in the early years of the century and whose memory is revered today.”

Florence Steele married Edward M. Beck of Akron on Aug. 23, 1899, at her mother’s home in Columbus. The bride was escorted down the aisle by her brother Thomas Ewing Steele. After a six-week trip through the East, the couple was to reside in Akron.

Tom Steele, Fugitive

Thomas E. Steele had graduated from Notre Dame in 1884, was admitted to the Ohio Bar in 1886 and then practiced law in Columbus. He married Marie White, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. E. B. White, on Dec. 28, 1892, in Lancaster. E.B. White, druggist, purchased in 1887 the house on East Main that became 129 E. Main and the Elks Lodge. The couple were married here by the Rev. Father Thomas E. Sherman, son of Gen. W. T. Sherman and cousin of the groom.

In 1902 Tom Steele was indicted for blackmail by U. S. Mail. While out on bond, he fled to Canada. His offense was not an extraditable one, so he lived there under an assumed name for 10 years. In 1913 he returned to the U.S. and “threw himself on the mercy of the Federal Court of Cincinnati” (Daily Eagle, March 3, 1913).

“He was given thirteen months in the federal prison at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, but a few hours after he was sentenced he was pardoned by President Taft…his cousins Thomas Ewing and John Ewing were largely instrumental in making possible his return to this country.”

Readers may contact Harvey at joycelancastereg@gmail.com.

The Ewing – Ryckman House, 163 E. Main St., will be the venue for a fundraising event on June 17 to benefit the Fairfield Heritage Association and historical preservation. Those interested in attending may call the FHA office 740-654-9923 for information about tickets. Tickets are required.