Wheelers

Ian Stewart. Aspect, $24.95 (512pp) ISBN 978-0-446-52560-2

Though Stewart, a mathematician, and Cohen, a reproductive biologist, have each written popular science books (they coauthored The Collapse of Chaos), this is the first SF novel either has attempted, with generally positive results. In the 23rd century, after a period of antitechnological sentiment on Earth, a small sect of Tibetan Buddhists gains a singular foothold in space, colonizing the moon and building a high-tech habitat and ore-processing facility called Cuckoo's Nest in the midst of the asteroid belt. Interplanetary travel and commerce thrive for those willing to take the risk, like discredited archeologist Prudence Odingo. No one believes her claim of recovering 100,000-year-old wheeled artifacts from the ice of Jupiter's moon Callisto--until one of the ""wheelers"" comes to ""life."" While the official research team is stymied by traditional scientific approaches, Odingo and her multitalented companions open communications with the intelligent, blimplike aliens they discover in great cities floating in Jupiter's dense atmosphere. Human contact leads to possibly catastrophic consequences for Earth. Although their characters and world-building lack believability, the authors wield scientific speculation with cheerful abandon, providing some real old-fashioned sense of wonder. Fans of hard SF authors Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle will get a kick out of Stewart and Cohen's SF debut. (Nov.)

close

Details

Reviewed on: 10/30/2000

Genre: Fiction

Mass Market Paperbound - 512 pages - 978-0-446-61008-7

Amazon

Apple Books

Barnes & Noble

Bookshop

Share

Tweet

Copy Link

Print

More By and About this Authorchevron_right

Ian Stewart

This new entry in the Art of Mentoring series takes the form of letters from a fictitious mathematician to his niece. The letters span a period of 20 years, from the time the niece is thinking Continue reading »

Ian Stewart

Anyone who thinks math is dull will be delightfully surprised by this history of the concept of symmetry. Stewart, a professor of mathematics at the University of Warwick Continue reading »

Ian Stewart

Defining mathematics as a system of thought for recognizing and exploiting patterns, Scientific American math columnist Stewart takes readers on an exciting, lucid voyage of discovery as he Continue reading »

Ian Stewart

Without disputing the importance of biological research, Stewart (Does God Play Dice?), author of the ""Mathematical Recreations"" column in Scientific American, claims that a deeper understanding of Continue reading »

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR

THE BEST NEW BOOKS

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR THE BEST NEW BOOKS