WHEELERS

by

IAN STEWART AND JACK COHEN

Revised and updated

Produced by ReAnimus Press

Other books by Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen:

The Living Labyrinth

ROCK STAR - the sequel to THE LIVING LABYRINTH (coming soon)

© 2016 by Joat Enterprises and Jack Cohen. All rights reserved.

http://ReAnimus.com/store?author=ianstewartandjackcohen

Cover Art by Clay Hagebusch

Smashwords Edition License Notes

This ebook is licensed for your personal enjoyment only. This ebook may not be re-sold or given away to other people. If you would like to share this book with another person, please purchase an additional copy for each person. If you're reading this book and did not purchase it, or it was not purchased for your use only, then please purchase your own copy. Thank you for respecting the hard work of this author.

Table of Contents

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

1

Giza, 2194

...and in the fifth month of the fifth year of the reign of the child-king Anshethrat, in the city of Ul-q’mur... a spear of fire pierced the northern sky, harbinger of the wrath of Ythriz the Sky Goddess. And fire and flame rose from the ocean, which became as molten brass. And the spear of flame sped like a hurled javelin towards the heart of the Sun. It became as a fiery chariot, drawn by four winged horses, with manes of burnished copper, pursued by a trail of shining dust. One horse had the face of a hawk, and one the face of a wolf, and one the face of a snake... the face of the fourth was devoid of form... Ythriz the Sky Goddess had the face of a lion and the claws of a leopard, and her tail was the tail of a lion...

And Y-ra’i the gods-that-dwell-beneath-the-Sun awoke, and saw Ythriz riding the shaft of flame. And Y-ra’i began to stir, and seethe. And they frightened the horses of Ythriz. And dust and stones fell upon the Earth, and the ground shook with the thunder of their hooves, and the mountains cracked and the Earth shook... and the child-king Anshethrat called his Priests to him, and he demanded of them what could be done to appease Ythriz the Sky Goddess. And the priests ordered the sacrifice of five thousand bulls, and five thousand rams, that their blood be shed for the appeasement of Ythriz.

And so it was.

And still the chariot drew nearer, for the gods were displeased.

And Lofchepsit the Moon-goddess awoke, and shivered with fear... And the Sun trembled and shook, and Y-ra’i flung a spear of flame at the heart of Ythriz.

And the horse with the face of a hawk stumbled, and fell, and was crushed to dust. And the horse with the face of a wolf stumbled, and fell, and was crushed to dust. And the horse with the face of a snake stumbled, and fell, and was crushed to dust. And the horse with no manner of face stumbled, and fell, and it was as if it had never been...

And the fiery chariot of Ythriz plunged into Lofchepsit the Moon-goddess, striking at her very heart, and the chariot vanished in flame... And Lofchepsit fell in a terrible swoon, as if dead.

And the whole sky shone as a sheet of beaten gold, and the Sun’s heart blackened and seethed. And the Priests of the child-king Anshethrat were much afraid, and they cried out for forgiveness from their king, for all were fearful of the wrath of Ythriz and the slaying of Lofchepsit. And the king in his great wisdom denounced the Priesthood, and sent them out of the city into the sands of the desert, there to build a monument to Y-ra’i.

But now the gods-that-dwell-beneath-the-Sun arose, and their wrath was as the wrath of a raging torrent, and they spread great wings of burning flame. And their breath became a breath of fire, and they spat at Anshethrat. And the Moon was aflame, and the sky was aflame, and the Earth was aflame, and every tree in the city of Ul-q’mur turned to blackened ashes, and every house in the the city became as a pillar of flame...

But the Priests of the child-king Anshethrat hid themselves, and the flames passed them by. And they proclaimed the miracle to be a sign from Ythriz the Sky Goddess, who had protected them from the fiery wrath of Y-ra’i. And the High priest Shephatsut-Mir ordered that the monument to Y-ra’i be torn down and built anew in the image of Ythriz, multiplied twelvefold, to seal forever the devotion of her people to the Sky Goddess.

And it was so.

~~~

Charlie Dunsmoore brushed sand from his rolled-up shirtsleeves, opened another tube of beer, and sighed. He focused a small pocket-lens on the chipped clay tablet, comparing the incised hieroglyphs with Prudence Odingo’s transcriptions as they floated holographically before his eyes, and nodded. Then his rubber-gloved finger slid through the air to where she had translated the text into English, and he shook his head slowly from side to side with a fleeting, wry smile.

Prudence was keen, he had to admit. And she was intelligent. She had the kind of luck that could make an archaeologist’s career... Sexy, too, as he had discovered to his surprise the night after her astonishing find. Not that he considered it ethical for academics to have sexual relationships with their students, he knew that just stored up potential trouble and his Head of Department wouldn’t be at all happy if she found out. But it had all happened so fast, and so spontaneously, that he’d never even thought about that until far too late.

Anyway, there were other criteria than ethics. That said, he wasn’t sure what their relationship was any more, or even if they still had one, because they had both been so tired after working flat out on the tablets for three solid days, snatching a few hours’ sleep whenever they could no longer keep themselves awake, that there had been no opportunity for a repeat engagement, and no point in hinting at the possibility of one.

He could hear deep breathing and the occasional snore from Prudence’s partitioned-off corner of the big tent that the two of them shared. Administratively straightforward, and cheaper than two big tents, but — he now saw — asking for trouble.

If only the funding agency had taken the ethical position into account...

His thoughts returned to Prudence. Keen, bright, lucky, sexy... If only she could stop being in such a rush. Her translation was wonderful, it told a fascinating story from an unknown pre-Egyptian mythology... Y-ra’i the gods-that-dwell-beneath-the-Sun... Brilliant.

The only problem was, she’d woven the tale from whole cloth. Where a more cautious scholar would have flagged a word as dubious, or a sentence as conjectural, Pru simply jumped right in with what looked like a claim of a definitive text.

She had excellent intuition, he’d seen it in action on conventional Egyptian hieroglyphics. That was why he’d agreed to take her on as a graduate student, and why he’d put her in charge of the most significant part of the dig.

Dig. He laughed under his breath; the term was a reflex, and not at all appropriate. ‘Disassembly of the Sphinx’, that was closer.

He put the notebook down on the small, rickety table, stripped off the gloves, and stepped over to the open flap of the tent. He loved the feel of the desert air, cool and dry on his skin. Fine sand dust gave the air a faint but unforgettable smell, bringing back vivid memories of previous expeditions... Silhouetted against the starry sky he could see the flat triangles of pyramids and the slight swell of desert dunes. To his right, less than half a mile away, was the Great Pyramid, the most famous of all the ancent monuments at Giza. He had seen it so often that he had lost count; he had climbed its crumbling stones, sat at its tip and stared for hours across the desert, trying to visualise what life must have been like when the stones were newly quarried... and still it possessed the power to move him. There was something elemental about the ancient rockpile, even now, nearly five thousand years after it had been built. The Great Pyramid was a symbol of power, the awesome power of Khufu, founder of the Old Kingdom. It was awesome now; just think how effective a reminder it must have been at the peak of the 4th dynasty. And it was just one monument out of many, evidence for a vanished civilisation that he would give anything to bring back to life. The three much smaller Queen’s pyramids were scattered almost as an afterthought along its near right flank. Ahead, diminished by the distance, was the pyramid of Khafre, in reality only marginally smaller and just as impressive. To his left, Menkaure’s Pyramid, its base a mere hundred yards square, dwarfed by its gigantic companions. And looming above him, still glowing like embers in the dying sunset, was the haunting, battered face of the Great Sphinx. Restored by the 18th dynasty in AD 1500, its nose chiselled off no one knew when or why, pock-marked by wind-blown sand and, more recently, acid rain, it bore a face so similar to that of Khafre that there could be little doubt that it had been fashioned in his image.

The pitted eyes stared blindly at the desert, serene and enigmatic. Carved in the stylised image of a lion, the monument was most probably a symbol of the Sun: human head on a lion’s body, a guarantor of cosmic order with a headscarf for a mane.

Or so the scholars believed. Charles had his doubts.

Whatever its original purpose, the Sphinx was in trouble. Its base was hidden by an ugly skeleton of steel scaffolding, wooden planks, ladders, and walls of yellow netting. Three large cranes were lined up along its left flank, spindly by comparison. Although he couldn’t see anything from where he stood, the Sphinx’s hindquarters and most of its body had gone, sliced into rough cubes of rock fifteen feet across, lifted by the massive cranes on to enormous low-loaders with huge soft tyres, driven slowly away across the open desert to the higher ground of Jabal Abü Shāmon, some thirty miles to the east.

Not for the first time, Dunsmoore shook his head in disbelief. It was a tragedy. The collapse of the Aswan Dam, some sixty years earlier, was to blame. An ecological and archaeological disaster from the moment of its conception two and a half centuries before, it had slowly crumbled under its own weight, victim of shoddy workmanship and worse planning. Its inevitable destruction was hastened by climate change, which dumped huge amounts of rainwater into the catchment area around Lake Victoria, the source of the Nile. The damn had burst under the strain and the silt that had previously been deposited on the bed of the vast artificial lake had flowed downstream like treacle: now it was clogging up the Nile delta to the north of Cairo, in Al-qalyubiyah governorate. Charles had seen the devastation for himself while flying his tiny Deronda into Cairo airport. He was a keen pilot, and wherever he went in Europe or Africa he took the lovingly restored propellor-engined four-seater along. From the air, it was evident that much of Cairo was slowly disappearing under the floodwaters; there had been heroic efforts to divert the river and dredge new channels, but Egypt was not a rich country. The Giza complex was slowly succumbing to rising levels of groundwater, and the best that an international rescue effort could offer, as for the fabled Temple of Abu Simbel two and a half centuries earlier, was a belated and rather panicky project to cut the Sphinx up into transportable chunks and re-erect it on higher ground.

The pyramids would have to fend for themselves.

Dunsmoore found it all quite incredible, but the disassembly of the Sphinx created an unprecedented opportunity to try to resolve some of its mysteries, and the prospect had lured him to Giza like a glowworm to a female’s seductive lantern.

How old was the Sphinx? That was the big question. According to Egyptologists, the monument had been built in Kahfre’s reign, at the same time as his pyramid. Why else would it have borne his face? Charles knew that Khafre, son of Khufu, had flourished around 2500 BC. But geologists who had studied the natural bedrock that formed the Sphinx’s paws and body had found evidence of substantial weathering by rain. It could have been caused by wind, assisted by unstable minerals in the stone, but on balance rain seemed more plausible. There hadn’t been much rain in Egypt around the time of Khafre, but there had been plenty three thousand years earlier. The head could have been added later, or remodelled: it was too small in proportion to the body, suggesting that it had once been larger. Perhaps the original had been a lion in all particulars, and Khafre had stolen its face. So geology placed the Sphinx somewhere prior to 5500 BC, a date that would force a complete rethink of Egyptian and pre-Egyptian chronology, while impeccable Egyptology placed it three thousand years later.

Thanks to Prudence’s discovery, it was beginning to look as though those geologists that favoured rain might be right. Before the giant diamond-toothed saws were permitted to slice into any new bit of Sphinx, Prudence had to use gravimetric equipment to test for concealed chambers. She had found several, but all were natural cavities in the bedrock — until three days ago, when she had discovered a priceless treasure. The workforce had opened up a cavity, very carefully as always, and within it she had found a cache of several hundred clay tablets, inscribed with symbols that looked like hieroglyphs but seemed to be some earlier form of script out of which hieroglyphs had evolved, and some rather odd clay figurines of crouching naked women with lionlike features. A first stab at isotope distribution dating had placed them somewhere between 6600 BC and 3800 BC, with 5500 BC as the maximum-likelihood estimate.

They could date from a period before the base of the Sphinx had been carved from bedrock. Both Charlie and Prudence doubted this; the figurines had a Sphinx-like quality that was distinctly unnerving. So now they were translating the tablets in the hope that the text would settle the matter once and for all. They were having to do it on the spot because the Egyptian authorities, with justification, refused to allow the tablets to be removed from the site. Charles and Prudence were permitted to look at them in small batches, and because Dunsmoore had made the scientific case sufficiently eloquently, they’d been given access to the actual tablets. Holograms were all very well for archiving, but a hologram wasn’t accurate enough for serious archaeological study.

Charlie yawned, walked back to the table, and sat down again. He told his wristnode to check the weather forecast, wondered whether it would be any more accurate than usual, and pulled the thin rubber gloves back over his fingers to protect the precious tablet. He put his ’node back into wordprocessing mode, told it to open a new file, and began editing Prudence’s efforts into something publishable.

‘...and in the fifth month of the fifth year’ — that was OK, though it needed a footnote to the effect that the rudimentary hieroglyph for ‘month’ bore no resemblance to that of the Late Predynastic period — which, however, was only to be expected since the clay tablet had been dated to a period some fifteen hundred years earlier — and its meaning was amply confirmed by other texts found in the same location and with similar dates. ‘Of the reign of the child-king Anshethrat’ — oh dear. The glyphs that Prudence had read as ‘reign’ might equally well refer to ‘stewardship’, and ‘child-king’ was almost certainly ‘viceroy’: ‘king in place of a child’, not ‘king who is a child’. As for ‘Anshethrat’, the clay was so flaky at that spot that there could have been a dozen readings. His eyes flicked onwards and he mumbled to his wristnode sotto voce, as was his habit when dictating. He rather liked ‘harbinger of the wrath of Ythriz the Sky Goddess’ — it was a defensible reading, though a reference to the theories of Gutzmann and Monteleone was definitely in order. But there was no way he could justify ‘fiery chariot’ and as for the alleged winged horses...

He mumbled on, and a tortured, laborious text, full of brackets indicating lacunae, footnotes to alternative readings, and laboured arguments regarding the tablet’s unorthodox grammatical structure, began to assemble itself in mid-air in faintly glowing letters.

He was just starting to get it into acceptable shape when Prudence came in, dusty and dishevelled. God, I feel like I haven’t slept for a week. She saw the text a moment before Dunsmoore told his wristnode to kill it. What are you doing, Charlie? That looked like the text you gave me to translate!

Dunsmoore looked sheepish. Um, yes, it was. I was — er — licking it into shape. For publication.

"Oh, god. Are you messing up my work again?"

Dunsmoore considered this unfair. Now look here, Pru, don’t forget that I’m the supervisor and you’re the student. The look that she gave him was far from happy. "Damn it, you know I’m not the type to pull rank. But I do know what the journals will let us publish, OK?"

She shrugged. Charlie was clever, Charlie was kind of cute — short blond hair, blue eyes, tall, strong without being musclebound — but Charlie was also an unimaginative stick-in-the-mud. He called it scholarship, she called it chickenshit.

However, he was right, which made it all the worse.

"Oh, come on, Charlie! Give me a break, hey? I slaved over that translation most of the night! Sure, I filled in a few gaps, but it feels right. Better to tell a clear story, even if a few pedantic details turn out to be wrong later, than end up with unreadable trash that commits us to nothing."

They’d had this argument before, though at that time he hadn’t been sleeping with her. Assuming he still was, which was not exactly clear. "Mmm, yeah, in a world where everyone who reads your work can intuit the intended context instead of deliberately looking for possible ways to misunderstand your intentions and label you an idiot, that’s right. Unfortunately most academics don’t live in such a world — they’d all love to run the whole show but they don’t have the guts to take responsibility for their own decisions, so it’s much more comforting to sit on the sidelines and carp. And Egyptologists are the worst of the lot, believe me. Which is why, in my professional role as your research supervisor, I’m telling you that we write the paper my way, even if the result lacks your journalistic flair."

Pru’s face softened a bit... a hint of a smile? OK, Charlie, you can call the shots on the paper. But you leave the Press Release to me.

If he’d been less tired he might have seen the trap yawning and managed not to jump into it feet first. Press Release?

"Charlie dear, we have just made the biggest Egyptological discovery since Snuckpot the Great stuck a small rock on top of a larger one and thought that a big version would keep the rain off his corpse after he was dead! We have got to go to the media before the story leaks."

Typical Prudence, belying her name as always... What story, Pru?

"Proof that the Sphinx is aeons older than everyone thought! Evidence of a flourishing civilisation, far more advanced than any archaeologist ever imagined, two millennia before Dynasty Zero! Makes Hierakonpolis look like a slum! Ancient writings by the trucklo—"

He spoke slowly and distinctly. It wasn’t intended to sound patronising, but that’s how it came out. "Prudence, we don’t know any of that. The dating is only preliminary, it could be wrong. All we have is a stack of clay tablets, which for all we know record nothing more interesting than how many people turned up at the annual spitting contest. And the tablets could have been shut up in a cavity in the bedrock, and the Sphinx built around them later."

Dunsmoore’s affectations of pedantry raised Prudence’s mental temperature close to boiling point. "Come on, Charlie! You don’t believe a word of that! You know damned well that I prepared those dating specimens properly! I spent hours making absolutely sure! And what about those figurines? They’re a lot earlier than dynastic! And they look amazingly sphinx-like, you know that. What else can it all mean?"

He didn’t know how to respond. He felt confused, bewildered... and more than a little scared. Prudence was right, really; this discovery could make both of their reputations, secure them Fellowships of the International Archaeological Society at an unprecedentedly young age... But if they went to the news media prematurely, their best career prospects would be drilling into asteroids for a neo-Zen mining combine. Dunsmoore was not a natural risk-taker: Prudence knew no other way.

"We can’t trust intuition here, Prudence. There will be no Press Release— He was intending to add the word yet", but he never got the chance.

"You brainless chicken-livered idiot!" He half expected her to go for his throat, the way her fingers were shaping themselves into claws...

"Don’t be childish. This is my project and my grant—"

"And my discovery which you are trying to take credit for—"

"And you will do what I tell you. Don’t forget what it says in your contract."

Prudence froze; then glared at him. In a voice vibrant with the effort of control, she told him exactly what he could do with her contract.

It is difficult to storm out of a tent, but she managed it with something to spare.

Finally waking up to what he’d done, Charlie swore, briefly and scatologically; then slumped into a chair and stared morosely at the sandy floor. Smart. Really smart. He thought about rushing out after her. It wouldn’t do any good, he knew what Prudence was like when she’d blown her fuses. Best to wait, give her a chance to cool off.

He spent half an hour feeling miserable, and twice he nearly set off in pursuit, but reason prevailed. Finally, to try to break the foul mood, he carefully lifted a tablet from the box, at random, and peeled back the layers of bubblewrap. He didn’t feel like accessing his ’node, so this would have to be an informal, preliminary scan.

In the artificial light he ran his pocket lens along the wavering rows of symbols, trying to translate them on the fly.

He was about six sentences into the text before he consciously realised what he was looking at.

He felt the hairs rise on the nape of his neck — legacy of ten million years of ape ancestry, a primal signal straight from the limbic brain. With exaggerated care he set the tablet back amid its plastic wrappers before his shaking hands dropped it. Bloody hell, he muttered. Bloody hell, bloody hell, bloody hell. Inventiveness failed him.

He rushed from the tent shouting for Prudence, to tell her what they had found. The noise woke up his collaborators from the Cairo Museum and the entire workforce of forty-eight local men and women. But Prudence was long gone. He tried pinging her wristnode but it was locked off. By the time he traced the taxi that had taken her to the airport, her plane was crossing the Italian Alps.

2

Nyamwezi Condominium, 2210

Moses had disappeared. There was nothing unusual about that, but so had a week’s supply of goat’s cheese. Charity Odingo knew what that meant. Cursing under her breath, she set off at a run for the cheetah pens. Dried yellow mud puffed about her bare feet as she scurried through the makeshift farmyard, bright skirts flying. Hens scattered, squawking in protest. A pig raised its snout in surprise, grunted, and went back to sleep.

She ducked under the dead thorns of a stunted acacia and swung herself past the corner of the giraffe-house by grabbing the downpipe from the roof. Twenty yards away, a small brown figure stared at her, frozen by surprise. In its hand was the missing cheese.

Moses!

Silence.

Moses Odingo, you stay out of that cage, you hear? She slowed down and swept the child into her arms. The cheese flew from his hands into the dirt.

Nice pussycat, said Moses, grinning.

Yes. But keep your hands out of the nice pussycat’s cage. And stop stealing cheese from the refrigerator!

But the pussycat likes sheese, said Moses, as if that settled the issue.

"No, cheese. With a ‘ch’."

Sheese.

Not quite, but better. Chuh-chuh-chuh cheese.

Chuh-chuh-chuh sheese.

Have it your own way. Just don’t steal it.

Sheese makes the pussycat go buzz, said Moses, as if to justify the theft. Charity set him back on his feet, and knelt beside him. The cheetahs loved cheese, they purred their heads off whenever they got it. As a special treat, Moses was allowed to feed a small amount to the baby, once a week. Charity didn’t think it was good to indulge either of them more often than that.

"Mo, you mustn’t put your hand in the cheetahs’ cage. I know they seem friendly — they are friendly — but you can never be sure with wild animals. They could bite, or scratch." And M’bawa could take your arm off at the shoulder in an instant.

Can I feed the pussycat some sheese now you’re here? asked Moses hopefully. Please? he added after a moment’s thought. That often tilted the balance in his favour.

Not today. The boy’s mouth turned down in a half-sulk. Charity looked at the dirt-covered slab as it lay on the ground: already the ants had discovered it. Well, maybe later, OK?

OK, said Moses, but he still looked downcast.

Look, tell you what: I’m going to need some help with Zemba. You can help me carry her over to the house if you want.

A huge grin split his face. Can I carry Zemby, Ma?

Yes. Now you just wait outside while I go and get her. Charity sat him on a tree-stump, unlocked the door to the service accessway, and ducked inside. The air was hot and heavy, sharp with the pungency of dried blood and stale urine.

She loved it.

Her wristnode’s hardware link was a bit temperamental, but eventually she persuaded it to activate a movable partition and separate mother from cub. Predictably, M’bawa didn’t like this much, and when Charity opened up a small trapdoor and pulled the cub out, the big cat made her dislike known half a mile away.

Calm down, you great furry lump, she’ll be right back. The adult cheetah just snarled at her, as Charity would have done had their positions been reversed. The baby wriggled in her hands and mewed piteously. Only a moment, Zemba, she said, juggling it uncomfortably with one arm while shutting the door behind her with the other. With the cub clutching at her shoulder for balance, Charity carried the baby cheetah out into the sunlight.

Moses was jumping up and down with excitement. Can I carry Zemby? Please? She likes it when I carry her.

Yes, you can carry Zemby. With care, Charity lifted the cub from her shoulder and and dropped her into Moses’ arms. Lacking proper claws, Zemba clung to him as if her life depended on it. It looked a very topheavy arrangement as the four-year-old staggered along under the weight of the fast-growing cub, like some kind of giant mobile spotted mushroom. Only six weeks earlier, Zemba had been a fuzzy ball that an adult could carry in one hand; now she was the size of a decent dog. But Moses didn’t seem bothered; he cooed at the cat and stroked the long smoky fur that ran down her back.

Charity picked up the cheese, now liberally coated with sand and ants. She could salvage a lot of it, and Moses could feed the rest to Zemba. As they walked towards the house, she shook the ants off and brushed away most of the dirt.

Tucked between two ancient acacias, it was a simple house, corrugated recycled plastic nailed to a timber framework, roofed with slate-coloured solar cell arrays. A faded sign nailed to the door said ‘Gooma Zoodiversity Facility’. The furniture was sparse, and all of it was old; some bought in the local market, some trucked in from Dar es Salaam. From the front window she could just see Lake Eyasi; from the back, the teeming plains of the Serengeti and the distant crater of Ngorongoro. Not far away was the Olduvai Gorge, one of the best known sources of fossil hominids. Charity felt as if she was at the centre of the universe.

Naturally, she thought. The horizon is equally far in every direction. Charity considered herself a realist. But it was a dramatic location. A hundred and fifty miles north-west was Lake Victoria, and a hundred and twenty-five miles to the north, a short hop across what used to be the border into Kenya, was Nairobi. The Swahili name for the land was still Jamhuri ya Muungano wa Tanzania, but its English version, the United Republic of Tanzania, was no longer in use. By 2210, what used to be Tanzania and Kenya had become the Nyamwezi Condominium.

OK, Mo, put Zemby down on the table. With difficulty the boy separated himself from the fur-covered jumble of what appeared to be rubber springs, and sat the cub down. She looked nervous, but relaxed when Moses scratched her head. He had an instinctive rapport with animals, always had had, even before he could crawl or talk. Sometimes Charity found his empathy with the animal kingdom uncanny. Mosquitoes never bit him, bees never stung him, and normally shy birds would sit and sing to him if no one else was nearby.

A pity that he was so hopeless when it came to people. He could become moody and withdrawn for no apparent reason. He was a strange child, and she loved him desperately. His father had died before he was born; she never talked about it, tried never to think about it. Moses and her sister were all the family she had.

Charity cut off the outside of the cheese and handed it over to her son. "Give her this to keep her happy. No, that’s too big, Mo: one little piece at a time, OK? That’s better." Zemba began to purr. Moses grinned, and fed the cat another bit of sandy goat cheese.

Charity opened her instrument case and pulled out a small bulbous unit with a stocky handle. Moses recognised it as a razor. Ma was going to shave off a tiny piece of Zemby’s fur, so that she could be tattooed. It wouldn’t hurt.

You’ve seen this before, Moses. Can you remember why I’m doing it?

Moses nodded, looking very serious now. So’s we can find out where she goes when we set her free.

I may just be a foolish proud mother, Charity thought, but Moses is very quick to remember the things that interest him. That’s right! she said, in the over-enthusiastic manner that parents of small children use for positive reinforcement. "That’s very clever of you, Moses!" The buzz from the razor merged with the purr from the cheetah cub. Expertly Charity bared a rectangular patch of skin an inch or so across.

At that moment her wristnode indicated an urgent incoming call. She put the razor down. Hello?

There was a split second’s hesitation. Then, voice-only: Chatty? That you? It’s your big sister. Hope I’m not interrupting anything, but I’ve only got a few minutes to make this call.

Pru! Big sister, indeed. It was a family joke, though one that had long ago worn thin. Prudence Odingo outranked her twin by all of two minutes.

Charity rummaged in a cupboard. I’m in the middle of getting a new cheetah cub registered, Pru.

"Carry on, I can talk while you work. Reason I called is, I’ll be landing shortly at Kisangani and I thought I’d drop by and see you. How’s young Moses? I can’t wait to see him at last. How old is he now?"

Four. He’s fine, feeding cheese to Zemba. Oh, you won’t know, that’s the new baby cheetah, she’s absolutely adorable, and a total pest as you’d expect. Like Moses. Mo, it’s your auntie Pru. Moses perked up. He had never seen Prudence, but some of his friends had aunties, and when they visited, they always brought presents. "Kisangani? You can get a shuttle to Nairobi and Moses and I’ll pick you up from the airport. Pru, I can’t believe this, it’s been absolutely ages. Where are you right now?"

Can’t you tell?

"How could I— oh, wait a moment. I noticed you were a bit slow responding, but I thought you were just tired, or maybe one of the relay nodes was slow. Charity clipped the handle on to the tattoo-unit, placed it on the shaven patch on Zemba’s side to check it would fit. It’s communication lag, isn’t it?"

"Zero point four seconds and falling even as we speak. Tiglath-Pileser is one hundred and twenty kilomiles from orbital insertion, and my crew are preparing an OWL for touchdown at Kisangani spaceport in the early hours of tomorrow morning."

Prudence was a businesswoman; she owned an old but very well-equipped deep-space cruiser: Charity had always wondered how her impulsive sister had acquired anything so expensive. A night landing? Unusual. Belatedly Charity remembered her sister’s line of business. Did you have a successful trip? she said carefully.

Mmm, so-so.

How to say this? It’s an open channel. Any — er — problems? Need any help when you land? Specialist independent advice?

Prudence laughed. "No need to call the lawyers, sis, the police aren’t hot on my tail this time. I’m a legitimate entrepreneuse, if that’s the word. Speaking of which, this call is costing a small fortune. Pick me up at Nairobi National, not Intercontinental, at — the carrier wave hummed on its own for a few seconds while Prudence diverted to the travelpage — twelve-forty local time tomorrow. Love to Moses, see ya. Bye."

Bye, Pru. Charity looked down at her wrist. Phone off. The subminiature computer/communicator’s neural net searched for a few picoseconds, recognised the command, looked it up in its master table, and put its eXtraNet link on standby.

Is Auntie Pru coming to stay with us, Ma?

For a little while, Mo. Tomorrow. Charity thought she was looking forward to it. Well, she knew she was, that is, she knew she was mostly looking forward to seeing Pru. Her only reservation was that Pru was synonymous with trouble — take the last time she’d turned up. But to be fair, the police had been over-zealous, it hadn’t actually been Pru’s fault. And the lawyers did straighten it all out, and Tiglath-Pileser hadn’t been forfeited after all. But it had cost Pru most of the profi—

Is she going to bring a present?

Moses jerked her attention back to reality. Uh, yes, I’m sure Auntie Pru will bring you something nice. Nuts. It’ll be something totally unsuitable, if I know my sister.

Zemba wriggled, but Charity got a good grip on her neck while Moses popped the final lump of cheese into the animal’s mouth. Making sure she was holding the tattoo-unit in the right position for the wristnode’s infrared beam, she spoke more commands. New database entry. Name: ‘Zemba’. Sex: female. ERO code: gzf-slash-chee-slash-f-slash whatever the next free number is. Parentage: merge from M’bawa’s file, you know which. Statistics and health record: merge from zemba-slash-stats. Moses, do you know what I was doing, don’t you?

The boy nodded solemnly, he’d observed the procedure before. The most recent time had been the piglets, but before that there had been a goat, a zebra, some young giraffes... oh, yes, and the snakes. Hundreds of snakes, that had been real fun. Of course, you don’t shave snakes. Uploading Zemby’s stats, ma.

Charity nodded in encouragement. And why are we doing that?

The child pursed his lips in thought. ‘Cos then Zemby goes into the register. Charity smiled her encouragement, but he could see she wanted more. And then she gets set alight protection.

Satellite.

"Uh — sat alight."

It’ll do. Good boy! Charity pressed the bulb of the tattoo-unit to the cub’s shaven flank and squeezed the handle. In an instant the device made a tiny slit in a fold of skin, impressed a transponder circuit into the animal’s flesh using indelible metallic ink, implanted fine wires to pick up tiny but adequate electrical power from the cub’s own electrolytes, and glued the slit together again. Zemba, her tiny horizons more than occupied by Moses and goat cheese, didn’t even notice.

Tested and working, said the wristnode. From now on, the satellite network of the Ecotopian Register of Organisms would monitor Zemba’s health and track her every move via its interface with an extensive but still incomplete network of dedicated ground-based nodes. On this occasion, mother and baby would be released back into the wild immediately. Through the Xnet, and the survsats that the Ecotopian authorities had finally started launching, the Diversity Police would do their best to guard them against illegal poachers, hunters, souvenir manufacturers, and purveyors of folk remedies.

Not that there were many of those any more. But the few that still operated were tough, mean, and very well organised.

~~~

In the old university town of Coventry, on a medium-sized island just off the edge of continental Europe, it was getting ready to rain. You could tell, because slatted covers made from recycled plastic were unrolling to protect the unstable material of the ancient brickwork. Nursing a glass of brandy, Bailey Barnum lounged on a couch watching reruns of his first vidivid series, Rose Red Cities. He hadn’t been born a Barnum, it was a professional pseudonym: ‘Ironbottom’ hadn’t been vidivisual enough. Jonas Kempe and Cashew Tintoretto, the other two members of his production team, conversed quietly in a corner.

Call for you, Mr. Barnum, said a slinky female voice. His wristnode had woken up.

If it’s a fan, promise the usual package and disconnect. I’m busy.

The caller is Ruth Bowser, your agent.

Bailey rolled lazily upright. "Accept. Oh, Ruthie, hi. Wonderful to hear— He fell silent. Hmmm. Yeah, sure, I get the picture. OK, so you come up with a new idea, you’re the— do I what? Did I really sign that? Why didn’t you protect— oh, you mean it’s in my agreement with you. OK, OK, you don’t need to rub it in. I’ll get the team on to it straight away. Call you back." He cancelled the connection.

Jonas and Cashew had stopped talking, and were staring at him.

"OK, no need to look like a flatworm’s swallowed your socks. The Lumleys on Ends of the Earth are down a little. Nothing to worry about." Without warning he hurled the glass against the nearest wall. It bounced and dropped to the floor, intact. But there was a dent in the wall and the wallpaper was splashed. Shit! Tears welled into his eyes.

Cashew sat down beside him and took his hand. They’re down more than a little, then.

Falling like a barometer in a frigging hurricane. Not even in the top hundred. My god, six years I’ve been in this business and never been out of the top fifty. He didn’t have to point out that there was more to it than just a few figures. Production costs for Ends of the Earth had been astronomical, and their cash-flow was very sensitive to the Lumley ratings. Nobody’s interested in this planet’s unexplored regions any more.

Jonas chose his words with care. "That’s because — well, frankly, it’s because there aren’t any, Bailey. Even when we did the northern ice-cap, we had to inject suspense by sending you under it in a one-man sub. Face it, there are no unexplored frontiers left. Unless you go off-planet."

Yeah, sure, said Barnum. "Damn right. Do you realise that less than two centuries ago there were still whole tribes undiscovered in the jungle? Now you can’t get ten yards into the underbrush without getting a ticket from the Diversity Police. Amazonia, Papuguinea, Chukotskii Hrebet: same everywhere. Not a thing moves without some snoopy computer logging its entire family history. How the dump can you be a trailblazing explorer when the navsats have your position pinned down to the nearest inch?"

Cashew picked up the fallen glass and placed it on the table. Bailey did exaggerate, they were only accurate to six inches. What we need is something that doesn’t use navsats.

Barnum laughed, what an idea. Cash, how else would we find out where we were?

She reddened. Sorry, it was a dumb idea. Just thinking aloud.

No it wasn’t, said Jonas. He activated his wristnode. Cashew craned her neck to see.

History? she said in incredulity. "Jonas, we’ll never get even a toehold in history. The Xnet’s got nothing but—"

Shh. I’m after a new angle. History is just the entry point. Cashew shut up. Jonas’s flair for the vidivisual was legendary throughout the industry.

He muttered some commands to his wristnode, then looked up. Simple idea, but lots of potential. We re-create historical voyages. Using the same kind of gear, the same technology. Crossing the Antarctic in a dog-sled, like that Scott Amundsen guy in nineteen-whatev—

Cashew was quick to point out the flaw. ERO wouldn’t give us a dog-licence, not for VV. ‘Gratuitous involvement of animals.’ And ecovisas for the Antarctic are as rare as panda’s thumbs.

You’re right, said Jonas. "A managed ecosystem is all very well, but there are times when this one is too managed. But I didn’t mean the dog thing literally. He reactivated his wristnode. Plenty of alternatives. Yeah, this one looks tasty."

Bailey glanced towards at Cashew, who shrugged. Jonas liked a little drama, it was in his blood. "OK, genius, let’s have it. But remember, it’d better work or we’re all out of a job."

You cross the Atlantic, said Jonas.

Bailey gritted his teeth in exasperation. Jonas, a three year old child could cross the Atlantic blindfold on a rubber duck.

"Using the navsats, yes. But you’re going to do it using only pre-tec navigational aids. Let me give you the run-down on a primitive Italian geezer called — he glanced at his wrist — Galileo."

~~~

If ever a child had been ineptly named, it had to be Prudence, thought Charity, as she waited impatiently near the arrivals gate. And if ever anyone needed evidence that the phrase ‘identical twins’ was a misnomer, the Odingo girls were living proof. As children, first in the foothills around Gulu and later in the bustle of Kampala, they had been almost indistinguishable, physically. But mentally they were not so much opposites as orthogonal; their thoughts ran at right angles to each other. It had made them a powerful team on the rare occasions when they had joined forces. Orthogonal vectors span the largest dimensional subspaces.

As they’d grown older, they’d changed. Charity was now distinctly on the plump side, heavy round the hips like most middle-aged African women. The unforgiving equatorial sun had tanned her face like old parchment, but her hair was still dark, not even a few grey curls, which was unusual. People lived longer now than two centuries ago; a hundred years was common, a hundred and twenty not unheard-of. They were fertile longer, active much longer, and usually kept their faculties right up till the day they died. But the medical advances hadn’t affected the timing of grey hair, and there were just as many bald men under forty as there had ever been. Charity was just thinking how strange it was that medicine could cure Alzheimer’s but not hair loss, when she saw her sister, accompanied by a robocart bearing a pile of exceedingly scruffy suitcases.

Prudence was tall, slender, lightly clad for hot weather, long legs and a riot of multicoloured hair held together with a huge wooden pin and an orange sweatband. She emanated drive and energy. Charity considered her sister to be something of a fidget. Right now, though, Charity was the energetic one, jumping up and down and yelling. Prudence spoke a few words to the cart and it elbowed its way through the crowds towards her over-excited sister.

"Pru, you haven’t changed a bit! How do you keep so slim?" And how do you keep looking so young? But Charity knew the answer to that: years cooped up in the low light of a cramped spacecraft, years of low gravity. There was a downside too, of course. Low gravity could also cause physical deterioration, if you didn’t exercise. Bone damage, muscular atrophy. And it took a very special kind of person to survive years of trying to stay sane in the company of the same few companions. She’d always wondered how the spacers handled it, but whenever she’d asked Pru about it, her sister had changed the subject. She did know that some people didn’t handle it at all; insanity, obesity, and addiction were just three of the failure routes, and every so often some