Acclaimed Indian director Satyajit Ray’s 1969 film The Adventures of Goopy and Bagha (Goopy Gyne Bagha Byne) is a fantasy adventure musical comedy based on characters published in the children’s magazine Sandesh by Ray’s grandfather Upendrakishore Ray Chowdhury. The film follows the adventures of Goopy Gyne and Bagha Byne, who are both exiled from their respective villages for their poor musicianship. However, their songs attract the attention of the King of Ghosts, who grants them three boons. With their new abilities, they travel to the Kingdom of Shundi and find themselves in the middle of a looming war between two kings. The Adventures of Goopy and Bagha is the first in a series of genre films that found great success upon release, setting a new record at the time for longest continuous theatrical run of a Bengali-language film in Bengal.

This event will not feature a post-screening discussion. Patrons are encouraged to return to the Pollock Theater on Wednesday, October 12 for a screening of Ray’s The Kingdom of Diamonds, with a post-screening discussion of both films. Reservations and details are available here.

Please note the following COVID protocols for Pollock Theater events: audience members must bring masks and wear them for the entire duration of the event. An acceptable mask fully covers both nose and mouth with ear loops or similar fastenings to hold it securely in place. This policy is subject to change in accordance with guidance from local health officials. For further details, visit this page.

The movie theater has always been a space of wonder and anxiety. Since the inception of the cinema, audiences have enjoyed the collective experience of viewing a film on the big screen, but fears of contagion and disease have undercut that pleasure since the cinema’s earliest years. In our current moment, closures of international festivals and competition with streaming platforms have significantly altered the film industry. The Carsey-Wolf Center’s “Big Screen” series at the Pollock Theater will explore this tension as we welcome cinemagoers back to the theater. The series will spotlight films made to be seen on the big screen, including works that are almost never seen in North America (Satyajit Ray), as well as classical Hollywood films (featuring Bette Davis) and early slapstick comedy (Buster Keaton and more). This series will recall those early cinemagoers who first marveled at early moving pictures or new technologies like Cinerama and CinemaScope, and invite conversations with scholars and filmmakers about their varied, personal, and unexpected experiences with the big screen.