The Wise Guy

It was because of Taylor Swift that I first heard about The Wise Guy. Let’s rewind.

Taylor Swift was spotted with Travis Kelce, Brittany and Patrick Mahomes, and crew at Miracle a few times last November and December. Miracle is a chain of Christmas-themed pop-up bars, and this specific one was in Crossroads. Through my many clicks exploring social media, consuming a tremendous amount of Tayvis content, I landed on a story that included a one-sentence reveal of the future of the Crossroads building once the tinsel and Santa Mugs were removed.

As foretold, The Wise Guy took over the former Riger Hotel at 19th and Main in the Crossroads neighborhood of Kansas City. It is owned by the team behind Rockhill Grille but brings a new, distinctly separate identity.

A friend snagged reservations for opening night, and our trio was sat at a candlelit table near the back. None of us were in the mood to drink alcohol, so we asked about mocktail options. There were none on the menu yet, but the server offered two options, and then later an owner assured us that they could make nearly any cocktail alcohol-free.

While sipping on our pineapple mocktails (essentially just juice and club soda, but enjoyable nonetheless), we spent a very long time trying to narrow down which apps to try. Garlic Knots ($12) and Bruschetta ($14) made the cut, though we intended to order one with a little more protein.

We all agreed that the Garlic Knots are a must from now on. They’re baked perfectly golden, with a stretchy, glutenous pull. The top is lightly brushed with house-made spicy honey.

I’m a huge fan of hot honey, as it’s frequently called, and love that they do a custom blend. To make their version lean a little Italian, rosemary and thyme are added and the heat level is slightly lower than the popular Mike’s Hot Honey brand. A bottle of the spicy honey is provided in the table caddies with red pepper flakes and parmesan. A classic hint that pizza is on the menu.

The Bruschetta took a few bites to adjust to since it wasn’t the fresh style we were expecting. There was a light kick from ‘Nduja, a spreadable salami made with Calabrian chilis, and the pistachio basil pesto continued to set it apart from predictable bruschetta. The bread was thicker but softer than usual, and by the time I finished my first slice, I relished the uniqueness.

As for entrees, we opted for sandwiches and a pasta dish. …And made plans to return for everything we didn’t try: aka, martinis and pizza!

With pizza ($16-25) as the main feature, the concise Italian-inspired menu also includes three salads ($12-16), four standalone pasta dishes ($19-25), four sandwiches with a side ($14-18), and three specialty entrees ($23-34).

My Pesto Chicken Panini ($15) came with house-made potato chips and a Calabrian chili aioli that stole the show. I would not consider myself a “condiment person,” but I’ll always try it as it’s served. But this? It ticks all the perfect condiment boxes: sweet, spicy, tangy, cool… I will be ordering the chips and dipping sauce every time. The fries are nice–a thinner, light-gold style–and are a fabulous vehicle for the sauce if you prefer that form of potato over chips.

Back to the sammie. The Pesto Chicken Panini included grilled chicken breast, fresh mozzarella, arugula, preserved tomato, pistachio-basil pesto, and Balsamela on focaccia. Our table agreed that all of the sandwiches should be served on the focaccia over the Rustic Italian Baguette.

The bread to chicken to extras ratio on the panini was fab. It held together well, offering even-flavored bites. Plus, the second half was excellent as lunch the next day. It’s not uncommon for me to have leftovers, but rarely for a lack of truly filling up. No–when I have leftovers it is usually because I was talking too much and eating too slowly.

We didn’t plan on ordering dessert, but lemon is one of my many weaknesses. (Or, simple pleasures.) A Limoncello Pistachio cake was something I did not want to refuse, so I opted for that while my friend tried the Tiramisu Canolis. Both were nice, with excellent textures.

The aforementioned table caddies of red pepper and parm, combined with the red leather seating, brick walls, and candlelit tables create a relaxed pizza-joint feel, but not dingy or divey. A custom playlist takes the atmosphere to the next level. Frank Sinatra and Little Richard kept us dancing in our seats, transporting us to a decades-older pizza joint in NYC.

The Wise Guy is at 1924 Main St, Kansas City, MO 64108.

Kate Smith Soirée

In quaint downtown Overland Park, Kate Smith Soirée sits as the quintessential “little treat” spot.

In large part, it is simply the business hours that keep it so versatile. It doesn’t limit itself to a morning coffee stop, formal afternoon-only tea parties, or even an evening dessert spot. The Tuesday through Sunday hours, generally from 8:30 a.m. – 7 p.m., allow guests to visit Kate Smith Soirée for a tremendous variety of reasons.

I, myself, have used the spot for a meeting, a quick stop to pick up goodies for my grandma, an afternoon tea on an errand run, and most recently, an informal tea party to celebrate my niece’s fifth birthday.

On the festive occasion, I selected a shareable pot ($10) of raspberry tea from Savoy Tea Co. knowing it would be served in a perfectly pink and pretty teapot. Coordinating tea cups and saucers filled our table, and we opted for pastries as our first round of treats. Yes, first–it was a birthday celebration after all!

On our second round of treats, we opted for smaller sweets: macarons and a lemon bar bite. I’ve ordered both a few times before, but it was made all the better by watching my niece marvel at the display as she scanned for the perfect cookie(s).

Selecting macarons from the case is like peering through a jewelry store window at rubies and amethyst and sapphires, but in a sense, better. You can pick out a few and instantly be handed them! The custom colors and creative names inform the imagination. The small size of macarons force you to slow down and savor the cookie, taking note of flavors, scents, and memoires it may resurrect.

The pink teapot, jewel-toned macarons, and frilly but modern atmosphere made for a lovely morning. We’re lucky to have multiple tea spots in the metro, but this is the most approachable for a wide variety of patrons.