1. How Do I Listen to WKSU?

WKSU broadcasts at 89.7 FM. The signal can also be heard on WKRW at 89.3 in Wooster, on WKRJ at 91.5 in New Philadelphia, on WKSV at 89.1 in Thompson, on 90.7 WNRK in Norwalk, in the Ashland area on 95.7 FM from translator W239AZ, and in the Mansfield area on 94.7 from translator W234CX.

Or, click on the "play" button at the top of this page, or (just about) any page on our website. To see other stream choices such as WKSU Classical, click the down arrow "expander" near the right side of the page to see more choices.

2. What Time is My Favorite Show Broadcast?

A complete list of shows currently aired on WKSU can be found on the Program Schedule page.

3. What Are WKSU’s Business Hours?

WKSU’s business hours are Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.

4. What is Public Radio?

WKSU is a non-profit radio station that relies on support from listeners and the Northeast Ohio community. The station is affiliated with National Public Radio (NPR), Public Radio International (PRI), and the Associated Press (AP).

5. How Do I Support WKSU?

It’s easy to support WKSU! Donations of any amount are welcomed and accepted. Find additional information on the Donation page.

6. How Do I Get in Touch with the Station?

Ideastream Public Media

1375 Euclid Avenue

Cleveland, Ohio 44115-1835

Phone: 216-916-6100

Toll Free: 877-399-3307

Audience Services: 216-916-6301

7. What Is Your Comment Policy?

WKSU welcomes your thoughts on stories appearing on WKSU’s digital platforms. WKSU hopes comments on its digital platforms will inspire civil discourse about the reporting appearing on www.wksu.org and the social media platforms on which it engages. WKSU welcomes critical comments. However, personal attacks, profanity or hate speech are among those that will not be accepted.

All comments are reviewed by WKSU staff who will determine whether to accept or decline a comment. Approved comments will appear as they are submitted, without editing.

WKSU staff closely monitors its social media accounts and reserves the right to remove any comment and block individual accounts it deems inappropriate.

The decisions of the WKSU news staff on these matters are final.

8. How Do I Find Out More About a News Story That I Heard On WKSU?

Visit the WKSU News page for the latest in national and regional news. Stories from the WKSU Newsroom may also be found by using the search link in the navigation at the top of every page. Other stories produced by NPR may be found on the NPR web site at npr.org.

9. How Do I Find Out About a Piece of Music I Heard on WKSU?

Previously broadcast classical selections may be found listed in the playlist section of the Classical playlist page of this website.

For information on music heard during broadcasts of NPR’s All Things Considered or Morning Edition, visit the show page at npr.org and click the link for the date you heard the music. Each song is listed, along with a list of national stories aired. For other shows, please visit the WKSU Programs page.

10. How Do I Find Out More About an Event I Heard Promoted on WKSU?

Information on events presented by WKSU, can be found on our Events page.

11. How Do I Find Out More About The Akron Roundtable?