(Editor's Note: This story has been updated to correct information provided to the reporter for this story.)

With no discussion, Kent State University's trustees Wednesday authorized negotiations to merge its WKSU public radio station operations with Cleveland-based Ideastream.

A public service operating agreement to formalize the merger is expected within two weeks.

Ideastream Public Media's board also has approved finalizing the merger, according to a joint news release from the university, WKSU and Ideastream.

Between January and April 2022, WKSU will become the sole National Public Radio news and information station in the area while Ideastream's 90.3 FM will feature classical music and 104.9 FM will serve as a repeater for WKSU's news coverage, the release said. The merged stations will serve 3.6 million people in 22 counties throughout Northeast Ohio.

WKSU Merger: Are public radio stations WKSU and WCPN planning to merge?

WKSU’s staff will be offered positions for at least 12 months under Ideastream, according to Kent State University President Todd Diacon, who made brief comments about the proposal before Wednesday's vote.

“We have to maintain our ‘Flashes take care of Flashes’ commitment,” he said. “We have to take care of everyone in our community.”

Ideastream later released a statement on the job offers.

"All WKSU staff were offered at-will employment at Ideastream Public Media – with no limit on their term," said Ideastream communications manager Calle Andrus." We would like to emphasize that WKSU staff will be treated like all Ideastream Public Media employees."

Elizabeth Bartz, a former member of the WKSU Community Advisory Council, said she’s worried about the futures of WKSU employees.

“I have no reservations in saying that now we’ll go forward with this one-sided deal with Ideastream, and our warnings will surely be replaced with ‘I-told-you-sos,’” she said. “These people have put a lot of their lives in with this station.”

Bartz also attempted to speak on the merger during the trustees’ meeting but was not permitted to comment.

“Obviously, there was more discussion behind closed doors than in front of closed doors,” she said. “Why is this so hidden? They’re the media.”

Officials held a brief press conference after the vote but left before reporters finished asking questions.

Kevin Martin, president and chief executive officer of Ideastream, said the planning “has been a textbook case of how a process should unfold.”

“We really wanted to leave all the doors open for consideration,” he said. “When you do that, you have to be very sensitive not to communicate information that may go in a completely different direction [in a final agreement].”

Diacon said the parties maintained privacy to prevent WKSU employees hearing about proposals that may never come to fruition but may have affected them directly.

“We’ve been in constant conversation amongst ourselves,” he said. “A lot of these stepping stones, these building blocks, are complicated and involve real human beings; they involve our employees.”

Diacon said one of the university’s goals is to maintain a pipeline of interns and new employees for WKSU via the university’s broadcast journalism program.

Wendy Turner, general manager of WKSU, said the building on Summit Street that houses WKSU will likely be used in the future, but it’s not clear how.

“There’s still that commitment we’ve made,” she said, referring to maintaining a strong partnership with the university's journalism program. “We’ve already started having conversations with the college of communications about how we can best utilize all the spaces on campus.”

Bartz said another of her concerns is for the future of Akron journalism under the merger.

“It would seem in short order that staff is going to have to go up to Cleveland to work,” she said. “The might affect a lot of people who have accepted jobs at WKSU.”

Turner said local news has been suffering in recent years, but one of the goals of the merger is to reverse that trend.

“Our North Star for this entire effort is to reverse that trajectory, to invest in local reporters throughout the region,” she said.

Martin said expansion of local journalism is part of his vision for the merger, as well.

“We are excited to be bringing together a group of talented, experienced professionals whose mission every day is to provide accurate, creative and locales reporting to the communities in which they live and and serve,” he said. “Simply put, our goal is to provide more programming, expand journalism for the entire region and build on our established business models to become even more sustainable.”

Martin also said continuing separately doesn’t make much sense any more.

“If we continue with the status quo, we are paying for duplicative programming, he said. “Ninety percent of it is on at exactly the same time.”

Paying once for NPR’s nationally syndicated shows will be one of the areas where the stations will collectively save money.

Diacon said the merger also will enable Kent State to cease subsidizing WKSU by $455,000 annually, as well.

Instead, he said that money would be applied against a debt of about $4 million the station has accrued over the past several years.

Proponents also cited a study conducted by the Public Media Company recommending the merger to improve the finances of both organizations. An 11-page executive summary of the report requested last week by the Akron Beacon Journal was released late Monday. A new request for the entire report will be filed.

The summary, which notes a 96% duplication of service, recommends a merger due to "revenue gains from expanded classical reach, increased focus on news, and the ability to share knowledge and expertise between the two public media organizations to help grow audience across platforms and to translate the audience growth into new revenue."

Do you have a business or healthcare story you'd like to share? Reporter Bob Gaetjens can be reached at 330-541-9440, bgaetjens@recordpub.com and @bobgaetjens_rc.