1. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Mutant Mayhem

Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Mutant Mayhem is a 2023 American computer-animated superhero film directed by Jeff Rowe, who co-wrote the screenplay with Seth Rogen, Evan Goldberg, Dan Hernandez, and Benji Samit. It is the seventh theatrical Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles film and a reboot of the series. The film stars the voices of Micah Abbey, Shamon Brown Jr., Nicolas Cantu, and Brady Noon as the titular team alongside a supporting ensemble voice cast that includes Hannibal Buress, Rose Byrne, John Cena, Jackie Chan, Ice Cube, Natasia Demetriou, Ayo Edebiri, Giancarlo Esposito, Post Malone, Rogen, Paul Rudd, and Maya Rudolph. In the film, after years of being sheltered from the human world, the Turtles set out to be accepted as normal teenagers through acts of heroism. The brothers go on a hunt for a mysterious crime syndicate, but trouble arises when an army of mutants is unleashed upon them.

2. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles

Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles[a] is a 1990 American superhero film directed by Steve Barron and written by Todd W. Langen and Bobby Herbeck, from a story by Herbeck. It is the first film adaptation of the comic book characters created by Kevin Eastman and Peter Laird. It stars Judith Hoag and Elias Koteas with the voices of Brian Tochi, Robbie Rist, Corey Feldman, and Josh Pais. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles follows the Turtles on a quest to save their master, Splinter, with their new allies, April O'Neil and Casey Jones, from the Shredder and his Foot Clan.

3. TMNT

TMNT is a 2007 computer-animated superhero film written and directed by Kevin Munroe (in his feature directorial debut). It is the fourth theatrical Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles film and a standalone sequel to Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles III (1993).[6] The first animated film in the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles franchise, it features an ensemble voice cast including Chris Evans, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Mako, Kevin Smith, Patrick Stewart, and Ziyi Zhang with narration by Laurence Fishburne. In the film, after having grown apart following the final defeat of their arch-enemy, the Shredder, the four Turtles — Leonardo, Raphael, Donatello, and Michelangelo (voiced respectively by James Arnold Taylor, Nolan North, Mitchell Whitfield, and Mikey Kelley) — are set to reunite and overcome their faults to save the world from evil ancient creatures.

4. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows

Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows is a 2016 American superhero film directed by Dave Green and written by Josh Appelbaum and André Nemec. It is the sixth theatrical Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles film, the sequel to Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (2014), and the last Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles film to be set in its continuity. The film stars Megan Fox, Will Arnett, Laura Linney, Stephen Amell, Noel Fisher, Jeremy Howard, Pete Ploszek, Alan Ritchson, Tyler Perry, Gary Anthony Williams, Brian Tee, and Sheamus. The film follows the Ninja Turtles who, after defeating the Shredder, must face an even bigger foe: the dreaded Krang.

5. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (2014 Film)

Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles is a 2014 American superhero film directed by Jonathan Liebesman and written by Josh Appelbaum, André Nemec, and Evan Daugherty. It is the fifth theatrical Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles film, serving as a reboot of the series and the first in a duology of films. The film stars Megan Fox, Will Arnett, William Fichtner, Danny Woodburn, Abby Elliott, Noel Fisher, Jeremy Howard, Pete Ploszek, and Alan Ritchson, with the voices of Johnny Knoxville and Tony Shalhoub. In the film, four mutated reptilian warriors rise from the sewers to join forces with fearless reporter April O'Neil to save New York City from the Shredder and his evil minions.

6. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles II: The Secret of the Ooze

Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles II: The Secret of the Ooze is a 1991 American superhero film directed by Michael Pressman and written by Todd W. Langen. It is the second theatrical Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles film, the sequel to Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (1990), and the second installment in the original Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles film trilogy. The film stars Paige Turco and David Warner, with the voices of Brian Tochi, Robbie Rist, Adam Carl, and Laurie Faso. Resuming from the events of Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, the villain, the Shredder, returns to take back command of the Foot Clan and work towards getting revenge on the Turtles. When he learns the secret behind the turtles' mutation, he becomes more dangerous than ever. The film sheds some light on the origins of Splinter and the Turtles as well as introduces two new villains, Tokka and Rahzar.

7. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles III

Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles III[a] is a 1993 American superhero film written and directed by Stuart Gillard. It is the third theatrical Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles film, the sequel to Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles II: The Secret of the Ooze (1991), and the third and final installment in the original Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles film trilogy. It stars Elias Koteas, Paige Turco, Vivian Wu, Sab Shimono, and Stuart Wilson with the voices of Brian Tochi, Robbie Rist, Corey Feldman, and Tim Kelleher. The plot revolves around the "Sacred Sands of Time", a mystical scepter which transports the Turtles and April back in time to feudal Japan, where they become embroiled in a conflict between a daimyō and a group of rebellious villagers.