View waymark gallery

Paul Dresser Birthplace - Terre Haute, IN

Posted by: GwynEvie

N 39° 27.398 W 087° 25.020

16S E 464124 N 4367534

The restored and relocated house in which famed German-American songwriter Paul Dresser was born.

Waymark Code: WMC2F7

Location: Indiana, United States

Published By: Pfalzjim

Views: 11

Johann Paul Dreiser (he would later change his name to Dresser) was born in this house on April 22, 1859. His father was a German immigrant from the Eiffel region; his mother a German-American Mennonite from Ohio. His famous younger brother, the novelist Theodore Dreiser, was born after the family had moved from this home.

Paul Dresser did not see eye to eye with his strict, religous father and he became something of a juvenile delinquent. He eventually left Terre Haute to seek his fortunes elsewhere, but returned to his home town at points throughout his life. Dresser soon discovered his talent for songwriting and settled in New York to pursue his career. In 1896 he wrote his most famous song "On the Banks of the Wabash, Far Away," which became the second-best selling song of the 19th century (to Stephen Foster's "Suwanee River").

Musical tastes began to change in the early 20th century, and Dresser soon squandered his fortune. He died, penniless, in 1906 and was buried in Chicago.

The Dreiser/Dresser home was slated for demolition in the 1960s, but the Vigo County Historical Society was able to raise the funds to move it to its current location in Fairbanks Park--on the banks of the Wabash! The house is open for visitors on Sundays, 1-4 PM, during the summer months. There is no entrance fee.

Web address or URL for Waymark: [Web Link]

Visit Instructions:

Log a visit to Waymarks in this category by posting a photo of yourself, your GPSr, or a team member at the site. Please include a comment or two about your visit.

Search for...

Geocaching.com Google Map

Google Maps

MapQuest

Bing Maps

Nearest Waymarks

Nearest German-American Heritage Sites

Nearest Geocaches

Create a scavenger hunt using this waymark as the center point