Mohit Malhotra is an Indian television actor who mainly works in Hindi Television Serials and Bollywood Films. He got huge fame and popularity from the role of Mohit Malhotra in the Television serial MTV Splitsvilla 2. Mohit Malhotra has been impressing everyone with his acting skills and has been a part of the shows including Sasural Genda Phool, Bade Achhe Lagte Hain, Beintehaa, and Naagin 5 Since many years.

Mohit Malhotra was born in 4 April 1986 (Age: 35 Years, as in 2021) in Delhi, India. He completed his University of Delhi, New Delhi. Mohit Malhotra is 5 feet and 11 inches tall, and his body weight is around 80 Kg. He has a nice hairstyle and got Black hair and Black Eyes. Mohit Malhotra always keeps himself fit and he is very health Conscious.

Mohit Malhotra Biography, Lifestyle, Wiki, Height, Weight, Birthday, Age, Movies, TV Serials, Instagram, Salary, Net Worth, Income, Girlfriend, Family, Father, Mother, Wife, Affairs, Marriage Life, Phone Number, Photos, House, Cars, Awards & Facts

Biography/Wiki

Full Name

Mohit Malhotra

Profession

Actor

Personal Life

Date of Birth / Birthplace

Mohit Malhotra was born on 4 April 1986, in Delhi, India.

Age

He is currently 35 years old (as in 2021).

Sun Sign

Aries

Nationality

Indian

Religion

Hinduism

Hometown

Harmu Housing Colony, Ranchi, Jharkhand, India

Education

School –

Not Known

College –

University of Delhi, New Delhi

University of California, Berkeley, California

Educational Qualification –

Bachelor of Business Management (B.B.M.)

A Specialized Course in International Business

Physical Statistics And More

Height (approx.)

In feet – 5 feet 11 inches

In centimeters – 180cm

In meters – 1.80 m

Weight (approx.)

In Kilograms – 80 kg

In Pounds – 176 lbs

Body Measurements (approx.)

Chest: 40 Inches

Waist: 30 Inches

Biceps: 16 Inches

Eye Color

Dark Brown

Hair Color

Black

Family & Relationship

Parents & Siblings

Father – Ashok Malhotra

Mother – Anju Malhotra

Siblings – Himanshu Ashok Malhotra (Actor; Elder)

Girlfriend & Spouse

Mohit Malhotradated –

Joanna Magee (Actress)

Aishwarya Desai (Actress)

Marital Status

Unmarried

Career

Famous For

Mohit Malhotra is Famous for the role of Mohit in Hindi TV serial MTV Splitsvilla 2.

Debut

• Bollywood Film – Hacked (2020)

• TV Serial Debut – MTV Splitsvilla Season 2 (2009)

Controversy

Not Known

Mohit Malhotra Salary

Mohit Malhotra Charges Rs 50k Per Episode. Mohit Malhotra’s salary is 10 lakhs per month and his main source of income is Acting, Modeling, and Brand Endorsements.

Mohit Malhotra Net Worth

Mohit Malhotra has an estimated total Net Worth of Rs 7 Crores ($1 million) in 2021.

Mohit Malhotra Cars And Bikes Collection

Not Known

Mohit Malhotra Phone Number, Instagram & Social Media Profiles

Some Lesser Known Facts About Mohit Malhotra

• Mohit Malhotra is an Indian television actor who mainly works in Hindi Television Serials and Bollywood Films.