edit

Getting There

By Plane

Groningen has international and domestic flights leaving from Groningen Airport Eelde. The airport of Groningen offers 11 weekly flights to and from Copenhagen, daily flights to and from Brussels and Munich, daily flights (from April 2018 triple daily) to and from London-Southend (Flybe), two flights per week to and from Gdansk (Wizz Air), and various other scheduled flights to selected cities and holiday destinations in Greece, Portugal, Spain, Canary Islands and Turkey. The Brussels, Munich and Copenhagen flights are operated by Nordica, in cooperation with Star Alliance members such as Scandinavian Airline, Lufthansa and Singapore Airlines. Therefore, a lot of destinations are reachable from Groningen with a transfer at Copenhagen Airport, Munich Airport, Brussels Airport or Warsaw-Chopin Airport.

By Train

Although Groningen is the northern most city in the country, train connections are fast and frequent with travelling times about 2 hours from both Utrecht and Amsterdam. Check the National Railways website for details.

By Car

From Groningen the national highway A28 runs south to Utrecht. Also the A7 is an important highway running from Bremen in Germany all the way to Amsterdam through the northern provinces of the Netherlands, crossing the famous Afsluitdijk, built to prevent floodings from the sea. If is a short route from the province of Friesland to North Holland, passing by Groningen.

By Bus

Groningen is one of the places in the Netherlands that served by Eurolines. Public Express operates a bus from the Groningen trainstation to Bremen Airport.

Flixbus operates a couple of domestic intercity bus lines from Groningen. Line 821 runs to Hengelo and Enschede and line 822 runs to Apeldoorn, Arnhem, Nijmegen and Eindhoven. These bus lines leave at P+R Haren (near Postillion Hotel) and opposite the central train station, at the other side of the road. Booking in advance is cheaper. The buses are in most cases cheaper and faster than making the same journey by train.

edit

Getting Around

Like most cities in the Netherlands, Groningen's historic city center is surrounded by a canal, the diepenring. Most of the sights are within this area, and the Central Station is 50 m outside it, and the museum built in it.

Within the diepenring, traffic is very restricted; Groningen's centre is designed to be as traffic-free as possible, and it is very difficult to drive and park within this area. Even resident parking permits are strictly rationed. However, the central area is compact and can be easily crossed on foot or with a bicycle.

Further out, Groningen has a loosely connected ring road, consisting of several N-roads forming a rather square ring shape around the centre. The city sprawls somewhat and crosses this ring in places, but most of the population live within this area.

By Car

Groningen is not the best city to drive around in with your car. Parkingspaces are limited and prices are pretty high. There is however the option to park your car at a so-called transferium. These are places where you can park your car, and continue to the innercity by public transport. There is one at Kardinge (N46), but also a little bit further away from the city in Haren (south along the A28), Hoogkerk (along the A7) and at Zernike there are transferiums.

By Public Transport

Q-Link is a group of 5 bus services which are air conditioned, have a WiFi connection, and run from city destinations to places just outside the region. One exception for line 15 which is a student express line to Zernike.

Line 1 runs from the Central Station to the Zernike/Zuidhorn, via Grote Markt, Noorderplantsoen and Paddepoel.

Line 3 runs from Lewenborg to Leek via Kardinge, Grote Markt, Central Station and P+R Hoogkerk.

Line 4 runs from Beijum to Roden via Kardinge, Grote Markt, Central Station and P+R Hoogkerk.

Line 5 runs from station Europapark to Annen via UMCG Hospital, Grote Markt, Central Station, P+R Haren and Zuidlaren. Sometimes this bus terminates at P+R Haren, so make sure Zuidlaren and Annen are mentioned if you travel this way.

Line 6 runs from P+R Haren to Ten Boer/Delfzijl via Central Station, Zuiderdiep, UMCG Hospital and Ruischerbrug.

Line 15 is a student express service from Central Station to college campus Zernike. It is located just north of Paddepoel and line 15 runs via Rembrandt van Rijnstraat and Paddepoel. These buses are very crowded in the morning to Zernike, and in the afternoon back to the Central Station. This route does not run in weekends.

If you stay in the centre of Groningen, it is easy enough to find your way on foot. As it is not a huge city, this is not a place where you will have blisters on your feet from walking.

By Bike

Cycling is the best way to travel around. Getting from any place in Groningen to the centre will take at most 20 minutes. This makes the bike a fast, cheap and easy way to travel in Groningen. Don't get scared by the overwhelming number of bicycles. The city houses tens of thousands of students, whose primary means of transportation is the bike. Bicycle theft is pretty high. Most bikes have one lock, but it is best to use a good second lock (preferably a strong chain lock for least €30).

edit

Keep Connected

Internet

Internet cafés are not as widespread as you would expect, but you can easily find one in the popular cities. Most hostels, hotels and camp sites have several computers, so you can keep connected with folk at home. Here is a list of internet cafés that could come in handy for travellers. Otherwise, most libraries have lots of computers and prices are around the €2-3 per hour range, although sometimes it can be even more expensive.

Wireless internet access using wifi is becoming more popular and is usually available at most hotels and increasingly at train stations. Also in trains (at least in most first class wagons, but also more and more in second class) and some buses you can use wifi. Finally, places like McDonald's and Starbucks have free wifi, and smaller individual business like cafés and restaurants are on the rise too offering these services. More often than not, these service tend to be free of charge, though there might be a limited time you can use the internet.

Phone

See also: International Telephone Calls

The country code for the Netherlands is 31. The outbound international prefix is 00. The general emergency number is 112, like many other countries.

0800 numbers are toll-free and for 09xx numbers are charged at premium rates. Mobile phones have numbers in the 06 range, and calls to cell phones are also priced at higher rates.

From internet cafés, it is also usually possible to make long distance international calls. Like in other countries, telephone booths have almost disappeared, though some are still found around public transport stations, where you can use a few coins to make calls. It is only recommended for local calls.

The cellular phone network in the Netherlands is GSM 900/1800. The main providers of cell phone networks are KPN (Dutch only), T-mobile and Vodafone, who cover the whole country. Other operators, like Hollandsnieuwe, Simyo or Tele2, use one of these 3 networks basically.

It is best to buy a SIM card when in the Netherlands for use in your cellphone, as this usually works out cheaper than using the one from home. If you are planning to study or work in the country and stay for several months, buying a cellphone is the best option. A simple one, sometimes with €10 worth on it, can be bought from around €25. The simplest smartphones are around €75.

Post

The rate for sending a postcard or letter up to 20 grams within the Netherlands is €0.64 (2014). Since 2010 there are stamps available for domestic post which no longer include the value in €. Instead, there are stamps available with either a '1' or a '2' as a substitute for value. The '1' can be used for letters and postcards up to 20 grams, while 20-50 grams require you to use the '2'-valued stamps (or two '1'-valued stamps of course).

Sending items to other EU countries and the rest of the world (there is one price since 2014) will cost €1.05. Stamps are sold at post offices, supermarkets and smaller shops/kiosks; often the place where you buy your postcards can also supply you with stamps.

Sending parcels abroad is more costly. A standard-sized parcel between up to 2 kilograms will cost you €9 for destinations within the EU and €18 (both without Track & Trace) to the rest of the world. Prices with Track & Trace start at €13 and €24.30 respectively. Parcel service is available from major post offices only; standard-size boxes are on sale there as well. For sending parcels, it might be just as competitive and fast to use a company like TNT, UPS or DHL.

If you need to receive mail while moving around, you can have it sent poste restante (to be called for) to a post office of your choice, where it will be kept for a month. If you come to claim it, bring a valid ID, and make sure to have told the sender that the name on the envelope must be an exact match with that in your passport. For addresses of post offices, as well as more information, consult the TNT website.