How long will it take me to travel from Groningen to Meppel by train?

Traveling from Groningen to Meppel by train will usually take 0 hr 48 min. This journey covers a distance of 63.38 km . When planning your trip, bear in mind that 0 hr 48 min is an average, and route times may vary from day to day. Weather conditions, issues with transport, unexpected diversions, and local events could all cause delays to your journey. Please keep the possibility of these exceptional events in mind when making travel plans. The distance between Groningen and Meppel is around 63.38 km. Depending on the exact route and provider you travel with, your journey time can vary. On average, this journey will take approximately 0 hr 48 min. However, the fastest routes between Groningen and Meppel take 0 hr 46 min. If a fast journey is a priority for you when traveling, look out for express services that may get you there faster. Some flexibility may be necessary when booking. Often, these services only leave at particular times of day - or even on certain days of the week. You may also find a faster journey by taking an indirect route and connecting in another station along the way.

What time are the first and last departures from Groningen to Meppel?

In general, the first departure of the day will leave Groningen at 5:06 AM, and the last departure will leave at 11:33 PM. However, it is important to remember that this is general information, and these journey times are not necessarily available every day. Timetables for each provider on the route from Groningen to Meppel can change from day to day or month to month. In particular, many providers offer different schedules on weekdays and weekends. Public holidays, local events, and seasonal timetables can also cause schedules to change. The first departure of the night from Groningen to Meppel leaves at 5:06 AM, while the last journey sets out at 11:33 PM. These are according to the standard schedules for the route between Groningen and Meppel. However, different providers' timetables can vary from day to day or month to month, so these particular departures may not be available every day. Some providers may change their schedules on public holidays and weekends, or during the summer months. Check your travel dates when making your booking.

When traveling from Groningen to Meppel by train, which stations can I use?

In Groningen, departure stations include Groningen Europapark,Groningen Stationsweg. When you arrive in Meppel, you may be able to disembark at stations such as Meppel Train Station. Remember though that the exact stations served on each route can vary. Different providers may depart from and arrive at different stations. Furthermore, if you travel on an express service, the number of stations may be limited, and the exact stations served on a particular route may vary at different times of day or day of the week. Check in advance to ensure that you are departing from and arriving at a station that is convenient for your journey.

How many times a day do departures from Groningen leave for Meppel?

On average, there are 82 daily departures from Groningen to Meppel. However, there may be more or less on different days. Providers' timetables can change on certain days of the week or public holidays, and many also vary at particular times of year. Some providers change their schedules during the summer season, for example. At very busy times, there may be up to departures each day. The providers that travel along this route include , and each operates according to their own specific schedules. As a traveler, you may prefer a direct journey, or you may not mind making changes and connections. If you have heavy suitcases, a direct journey could be best; otherwise, you might be able to save money and enjoy more flexibility by making a change along the way. Every day, there are an average of 82 departures from Groningen which travel directly to Meppel. There are 0 journeys with one change or more. Unfortunately, no connection was found for your trip from Groningen to Meppel. Selecting a new departure or arrival city, without dramatically changing your itinerary could help you find connections.