How to get there

Adress of the festival location

Rabo theatre De Meenthe

Stationsplein 1

8331 GM Steenwijk

Nederland

Route by car (from Zwolle)

Take A28 in the direction of Groningen.

Take A32 in the direction of Meppel at junction Lankhorst. Continue the motorway.

Take exit 6 Steenwijk

At the end of the exit – turn left (Eesveenseweg)

Take the first right after the railways (Tramlaan)

Take the first turn left

Take the first exit left

You’ve reached the parking lot of De Meenthe

Parking

Surrounding De Meenthe there’s a big parking lot. At workdays there’s a so called ‘Blue zone’ between 09.00 and 16.00. It means you can only park for 3 hrs, with a blue card that shows your time of arrival. Pay attention to this, otherwise you might get a fine. After 16.00 parking is free. At the other side of the railway, there’s a big Park+Ride on a 2 minute walk from the theater.

Public transportation

De Meenthe is set right next to the railway- and busstation. There’re direct connections by train from Amsterdam, Utrecht, Zwolle and other Dutch places. Make sure to check your travel plans on the website of the NS, the Dutch railway company, and see whether there alterations in your travel scheme.

Public transport in the Netherlands

In the Netherlands travelling by public transport requires an OV chip card; comparable to the Oyster card used in London. Please note: maintenance work is being done between Leeuwarden and Meppel during CaDansa. The sprinters will not be running according to their normal schedule, you can plan your journey from 10 days in advance via the NS website.

Reusable OV chip card

You can buy an anonymous OV chip card for €7.50 at the station and charge it with the amount of money you’ll need for your journey. A single journey Schiphol-Steenwijk will cost you €23.90 (without discount). To be able to check in at the Dutch railway company, your card needs to hold a minimum of €20.-

One-time OV chip card

If you don’t plan on travelling any more than just to and from CaDansa, you may be better off buying a one-time ticket at first Dutch railway station you arrive at (a paper ticket with a chip that can be used once) or (even easier) to just buy an e-ticket online in advance. The good part about an e-ticket is that you won’t have the hassle of checking in and out. Do keep your ID nearby, they might check it! Buy your e-ticket at the e-ticket machine

More information about train travel in the Netherlands at:

the national railway’s website or at: public transport website (includes buses)

Airports

From Schiphol airport

From Schiphol Airport you can take either the direct train to Steenwijk, or change trains at Zwolle. The direct is in the direction of Leeuwarden train leaves every hour at .34. The train in the direction of Groningen leaves every hour at .04; you then need to change trains at Zwolle to Steenwijk (direction Leeuwarden). Schiphol-Steenwijk is about 1 hr 39 minutes and costs €23.90.

From Airport Eindhoven

From Airport Eindhoven you can take the bus to Eindhoven station. From Eindhoven you need to take the train to Utrecht, that’s direction Schiphol Airport. In Utrecht change trains to Steenwijk (direction Leeuwarden). Eindhoven-Steenwijk is about 2 hrs 26 minutes by train and costs €26,50 (single journey, no discount).