Brooks at 100

For nearly 100 years, Brooks School has welcomed to campus talented students from all over the world. Operating under a mission that aspires to provide “the most meaningful educational experience our students will have in their lives,” dedicated teachers help shape a community that is warm, challenging, happy, and motivated.

The school’s core values … displayed on the walls of the academic building for all to see … encompass empathy, engagement, integrity, passion, confidence, and creativity. These values are at the foundation of a Brooks education, and form the bedrock on which our small community is built.

The physical campus is spectacular. Its 270 acres along the shores of Lake Cochichewick provide a glorious setting for rowing and sailing, practices and games on the many athletic fields, a picturesque cross country trail, and a campus core that is laid out in such a way that members of the community are constantly in contact with one another on Main Street.

Centennial Campaign

Building off the success of the Campaign for Brooks, which closed in 2008 after raising $60 million, the school’s next fundraising initiative seeks to complete the campus core projects set out in the school’s master plan while also making a significant investment to endowment.

The Brooks campus is home to about 250 boarding students and 105 day students. Giving them state-of-the-art spaces where they can live and learn only serves to enhance their education. The school’s endowment is the financial expression of the same reality: It affects each student while simultaneously improving every dimension of Brooks. The endowment gives the school a better chance to hire the teachers that can deliver on our mission, and also provides the financial aid to help us enroll the kinds of students who we think will thrive in this setting.

Over the last 20 years, the school’s facilities have undergone substantial improvements: the new Science Center, Chace House, a renovated Chapel, the Center for the Arts, expanded dining hall and Keating Room, and most recently a new admission building. The primary focus of the Centennial Campaign will be on ensuring that the Brooks endowment is able to meet the needs of the school … both now and 100 years from now.