Support the Brooks Fund today!

At Brooks School, we seek to provide the most meaningful educational experience our students will have in their lives.

Every year members of the Brooks community — alumni, parents, grandparents, faculty and friends —are asked to consider making a charitable contribution to the Brooks Fund. These collective donations provide vital resources to support our school from faculty salaries to financial aid to every aspect of maintaining our 270-acre campus.

Last year, our community raised nearly $2.5 million for our school and helped cover more than 10 percent of the school's operating budget. Every Brooks Fund donor made an impact on the day-to-day experience of our teachers and students.

This year, we have set our Brooks Fund goal at $2.5 million. If you have questions about making your gift to Brooks, please contact Director of the Brooks Fund and Family Engagement Mary Merrill.

I support the Brooks

Fund because . . .

"We both come from humble beginnings and found our way as a result of a good education. Because of that, we feel we should give our children the best education we can afford. If given a choice between offering our children an inheritance or a great education, education wins! We believe a great education will better serve them over time."

Monique & Norbert Johnson P'24, P'26

B

"I support Brooks because the school gave me so much, from the tools to succeed in college and beyond, to meaningful relationships and a desire to serve the communities I find myself in. Because of the privileges Brooks provided me, I feel a sense of duty to pay it forward so that future generations of students can find the same kind of fulfillment from their education that I had."

Alumni Trustee Sathvik Sudireddy '15

B

"As an alum and parent of three kids currently at Brooks, I donate to support the amazing academic programs that Brooks offers, as well as the critical opportunities it provides to students from all backgrounds. I have been fortunate to benefit from the support of Brooks in my career and am deeply invested in the lives of Brooks students — past, present and future."

Lori Caiazzo '91, P'25, P'26, P'27