Bill and Donna Eskridge Tri-Art Program Endowment

The educational outreach program of the Brooks Center for the Performing Arts.

Boni Belle Brooks Endowment

Programming or any other related purpose deemed to be a priority by the director of the Brooks Center.

Brooks Center Endowment for The Performing Arts

Programming or any other related purpose deemed to be a priority by the director of the Brooks Center.

Delores St. Clair Wright Endowment

Will provide support for the annual Christmas Show performed at the Clemson University Brooks Center for the Performing Arts.

Lillian and Robert Utsey Chamber Series Endowment

To support the Lillian and Robert Utsey Chamber Series and pay artist fees and other related expenses.

Applied Music Lesson Grant-in-Aid

All students majoring in Performing Arts are eligible for a $100 Grant-in-Aid per semester if they choose to take Applied Music Lessons.

Bauer Family Endowed Grant-in-Aid:

Provides grants-in-aids to students who are enrolled or enrolling into the Department of Performing Arts.

Brian J. O’Rourke (’83) Unrestricted Endowment for Performing Arts:

Will provide unrestricted funds for the Department of Performing Arts within the College of Architecture, Arts and Humanities.

Friends of Chip Egan Performing Arts Scholarship Endowment:

Will provide scholarships for students enrolled or enrolling in the Department of Performing Arts.

Friends of the Brooks Center Grant-in-Aid

Grant-in-Aid awarded to students based on achievement, participation and academic performance.

Hank (’73) and Kay (’73) Owen Spring Sounds Endowment

Provides grants-in-aid to students who participate in any of the performing arts at Clemson University.

Mike and Mary Gill Endowment

Will provide unrestricted funds for the Department of Performing Arts.

Outstanding Student in Performing Arts

Each year, three Outstanding Students in Performing Arts are chosen, one in each area of concentration (Music, Theatre, and Audio) for recognition at the Annual AH Honors and Awards Day. These prestigious awards are accompanied by a check and plaque, and their names are engraved on the plaque displayed in the Performing Arts office.

Stevenson Performing Arts Program

To provide support for the Performing Arts Program, Department of Performing Arts, College of Arts and Humanities.

Chesley and Vera Vincent Scholarship for the Performing Arts

This scholarship is awarded to outstanding students in voice and instrumental music, including piano.

Department of Performing Arts "POPS" Concert Grant-in-Aid

Grant-in-Aid awarded by the program director and/or faculty committee.

Jacqueline Morrow Reynolds Endowment for Music

To support the Department of Performing Arts through named concert series, music faculty enhancement, scholarships for music students and other related activities.

Mu Beta Psi Award

The Mu Beta Psi Awards are presented annually at the AAH Honors and Awards Day to one member each of the Chorus, Band, and Orchestra for recognition of music excellence.

Vincent Scholarship

Scholarships for students majoring in Performing Arts with a concentration in Music, based upon academic excellence. Recipients are expected to be an example of positive attitude, exemplary talent, integrity, and character.

Alan Cade Annual Award

This award is presented in the spring semester to a sophomore or junior musician or drum major participating in both the Tiger Band and the Concert Band. The one-time recipient will be the student who has contributed the most musically.

Anne Tribble Pearce Alumni Scholarship

Scholarships for students participating in band. Must be South Carolina residents, and selection is based on leadership, character, integrity, scholarship, and extracurricular activities. Renewable dependent on continued participation in band and satisfactory academic progress, good citizenship, and proper decorum as Clemson ladies and gentlemen.

Bruce F. Cook Band Grant-in-Aid

Grant-in-aid for students who participate in the CU Band program. Based on musical achievement and academic performance.

CU Pep Band Grants-in-Aid

Grants-in-Aid for Clemson University students who participate in band related activities, including but not limited to the Basketball Pep Band. Auditions are required. Membership in other band classes is not required.

CUTBA (Clemson University Tiger Band Association) Grant-in-Aid

Grant-in-Aid awarded to provide scholarship and/or award recognition to students participating in both the Tiger Band and Symphonic Band, who demonstrate unusual leadership capabilities and dedication. An audition is required, and the award may be renewed each semester.

Jungaleers Memorial Endowment

Grants-in-Aid to outstanding Jazz Ensemble student. It is presented annually at the AAH Honors and Awards Day.

Mu Beta Psi Award

The Mu Beta Psi Awards are presented annually at the AAH Honors and Awards Day to one member each of the choir, band and orchestra for recognition of music excellence.

Scott Hendrickson Endowed Memorial Grant-in-Aid

Grant-in-Aid for outstanding Jazz Ensemble student.

VonLeigh O. and Anne P. Snelgrove Endowment

Grant-in-Aid to an outstanding trumpet player in both Tiger Band (fall) and Symphonic Band (spring); based on talent, leadership, ability, and dedication to CU Band program.

Carolyn Willis Creel Endowed Grant-in-Aid for the Clemson University Marching Band Majorettes

Grant-in-Aid to majorettes in the Clemson University Marching Band.

CU Tiger Band Flag Corp Annual Grant-in-Aid

Grant-in-Aid to members of the Tiger Band Flag Corp.

Jansen Family Endowed Tiger Band Grants-in-Aid:

Will provide grants-in-aid to students participating in the Clemson University Tiger Band.

Jean Willis Turner Memorial Award

An annual award for the Tiger Band Drum Major.

Johnny Helms CUTBA Grant-in-Aid

To provide Grants-in-Aid to trumpet players in the Clemson University Tiger Band. First preference will be given to graduates from Pelion High School, Pelion, South Carolina.

Shannon Amick Hancock ’92 Memorial Endowed Grant-in-Aid:Provides grants-in-aid in her memory to students who participate in the Clemson University Tiger Band and who play the flute.

Pietro Fioretti Endowment for Tiger Band:

Provides grants-in-aid to students who participate in Clemson University Tiger Band.

Rauch Saxophone Grant-in-Aid

Grant-in-Aid to members of the Tiger Band who play saxophone; renewable for four years.

Larry Sloan '74 & Christopher L. Sloan '97 Annual Grants-in-Aid

Grant-in-Aid to the Clemson University Tiger Band Commander.

Arthur and Myra Fear Theatre Arts Award

This cash award is presented annually at the AAH Honors & Awards Day to the graduating senior who has contributed the most service to the cause of theatre arts, as chosen by the Clemson Players.

Brunswick Yarns Award for Theatre Excellence

Awarded to a rising sophomore or junior with an accumulation of success in both curricular and extracurricular theatre work. It is presented annually at the AAH Honors & Awards Day.

Clemson University Centennial Theatre Scholarship Endowment

Scholarships given to students active in theatre at Clemson.

Richard K. Sanders Scholarship Endowment

Scholarships given to students active in theatre at Clemson.

Vincent Scholarship

Scholarships given to students majoring in Performing Arts with a concentration in Theatre, based upon academic excellence. Recipients are expected to be an example of positive attitude, exemplary talent, integrity, and character.