EDMUND LOWE

Handwritten note authorizing his wife Lilyan Tashman and her sister to enter his safe deposit box

Autograph Letter signed: "Edmund S. Lowe", 1 page, 5¼x6½. Hollywood, California, March 19, 1929. On stationery of Lilyan Tashman, In full: This note is to authorize my wife (Lilyan Tashman Lowe) or my sister-in-law (Miss Kitty Tashman) the privilege of entering my safe deposit box." American actor EdmundLowe (1890-1971) worked as a teacher before joining a stock company in Los Angeles, California. He debuted on the silver screen in 1915's The Wild Olive, the first of over 120 film appearances, and made his Broadway debut in 1917's The Brat, the first of his 12 plays on the Great White Way. He became a popular leading man in elegant roles, but made a name for himself as the hellraising Sergeant Quirt in the 1927 film version of What Price Glory? This movie led to several sequels with Lowe and Victor McLaglen as Quirt's rival Flagg, with their signature taglines "Sez you? Sez me!" Lowe made his break into television in 1949; he's probably best known in this medium for his role as David Chase in Front Page Detective (1951). Lowe, who was gay, had a marriage of convenience with lesbian actress Lilyan Tashman from 1925 until her early death in 1934. Right edge frayed. Mailing fold through center. Pencil note (unknown hand) at lower edge. Nail size holes near top and bottom center. Otherwise, fine condition.

This website image may contain our company watermark. The actual item does not contain this watermark

See more listings from these signers

Following offer submission users will be contacted at their account email address within 48 hours. Our response will be to accept your offer, decline your offer or send you a final counteroffer. All offers can be viewed from within the "Offer Review" area of your HistoryForSale account. Please review the Make Offer Terms prior to making an offer.

If you have not received an offer acceptance or counter-offer email within 24-hours please check your spam/junk email folder.