Prague – the movie capital

The Czech capital attracts not only tourists, but also film crews. Literally hundreds of movies and TV series have been shot there. From the series Carnival Row or the second series of Foundation from Apple TV+ to movies made by top Hollywood film studios such as The Illusionist, The Bourne Identity and Mission: Impossible. Back then, Tom Cruise was filming all over Prague! The locations that featured in that action movie include Charles Bridge, the National Museum, Kampa Island, Old Town Square, the Powder Gate and the Municipal House.

Prague has also featured as the backdrop in the movies Batman Forever, Hannibal Rising and The Chronicles of Narnia: Prince Caspian. This fantasy film is set in London, amongst other places, but you actually see the Rudolfinum and the nearby Faculty of Arts building of Charles University.

Have you seen Anthropoid - a movie set in the Second World War? As the actual site of Heydrich’s assassination no longer exists due to the construction of the trunk road through the centre of the city, the main scene was shot at the Vychovatelna intersection in Libeň. However, the crew used the real location for the final battle between the Gestapo and the seven Czechoslovak parachutists, or at least shots of the exterior - the Saints Cyril and Methodius Cathedral near Charles Square.

Prague also featured in the Bond movie Casino Royale, and in Spiderman: Far From Home, which perfectly blends realistic panorama of the city with green screen footage, and also Netflix’s most expensive movie to date – the action thriller Gray Man. Have you seen it yet? One of the main action scenes in the tram was shot on Republic Square in front of the Palladium department store, just a few metres from the Municipal House. The spectacular chase then continued in front of the Rudolfinum.

The fantasy castle of Pernštejn

Want to know how the Bohemian nobility lived during the High Middle Ages? Visit Moravia to take a look at the castle of Pernštejn! This castle has preserved its Late Gothic look and its façade has remained almost untouched by new architectural styles. The majestic edifice on the hill featured in the gory film Wanted starring James McAvoy, and was also transformed into a Transylvanian castle in Van Helsing, the action fantasy movie with Hugh Jackman.

The Adršpach-Teplice Rocks are home to the Gothic gate from The Chronicles of Narnia

These Czech rocks form the biggest rock town in Europe. It’s a magical location shrouded in mystery - that’s why filmmakers love it so much. The first part of the movie saga The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe was set in several places around this remarkable spot. Perhaps you recognise the Gothic gate? The Pevensie children pass through it in the film. You can find it wedged into the rocks from the Teplice nad Metují side, and it opens onto the bizarre formations that make up this rock town.

The royal Křivoklát Castle has played host to Angelina Jolie

The royal castle of Křivoklát is one of the oldest castles still standing in the Czech Republic. This popular movie location is situated not far from Prague. Hollywood stars that have starred in films shot at Křivoklát include Angelina Jolie and James McAvoy in Wanted, and Matt Damon and Heath Ledger in the fairy-tale The Brothers Grimm. From Prague it’s a great place for a day trip, by car or by train.

Karlovy Vary in the Bond thriller Casino Royale

Karlovy Vary in West Bohemia is the most famous Czech spa town, even listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and the biggest Czech film festival – the Karlovy Vary International Film Festival is held there at the beginning of July every year. One of the James Bond movies was shot there, Casino Royale. You can see Daniel Craig in the Mill Colonnade, in the Emperor Spa, and in the Grandhotel Pupp. Jackie Chan has raced through the streets of Karlovy Vary in the movie Shanghai Knights, and Queen Latifah takes a dream vacation in Karlovy Vary in Last Holiday.

America quarries

The former America quarries near Karlštejn look like something from another world, and have been popular with filmmakers for decades. They were used as the locations for Babylon A.D. with Vin Diesel and Medieval with Michael Caine.

Angélique and the Oscar-winning Amadeus at the chateau in Kroměříž

Kroměříž Chateau is said to be one of the grandest buildings in the Czech Republic. No wonder it’s listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. And which movies has Kroměříž featured as a backdrop in? Well, there’s Miloš Forman's Oscar-winning Amadeus for one. That was filmed in the chateau's chambers and in the stunning Assembly Hall, which was lit by 22 chandeliers with 440 real candles. The chateau was also the location for the charming Angélique and the TV series The Young Indiana Jones and The Three Musketeers.

The fairy-tale castle of Bouzov enchanted the creator of the Fantaghirò movies

Although the Moravian Bouzov Castle has a mediaeval look to it, it was converted in the romantic style 130 years ago. The creator of the famous Italian Fantaghirò films was so captivated by it that he shot his movies there. The castle also “starred” in several scenes from the series The Young Indiana Jones.