Trevor Thompson’s career with the Ohio State men’s basketball team is officially over.

The 7-foot center has signed with an agent and will not return to Ohio State for his senior season, The Dispatch has learned.

After transferring to Ohio State from Virginia Tech and sitting out a season, Thompson played two seasons for the Buckeyes and averaged 8.5 points and 7.0 rebounds in 67 games, including 48 starts.

As a redshirt junior last season, Thompson was one of the most improved players in the Big Ten. He was named honorable mention all-league after averaging 10.6 points and 9.2 rebounds per game.

Thompson had tested the NBA waters after the 2015-16 season, when he averaged 6.5 points and 5.1 rebounds, but did not sign with an agent and opted to return for another season with the Buckeyes. He was beaten out for the starting center spot by freshman Micah Potter but took over when Potter went down with an ankle injury and finished with a team-high 11 double-doubles.

"He’s happy," Trevor's father, Ryan Thompson, told The Dispatch. "He’s excited. I think it’s now more getting his mind prepared and getting him ready for the next level. We will forever love Ohio State. For Trevor, it’s the next chapter in his life. I know he wishes it had been different."

Thompson’s departure means the Buckeyes will have two big men on next year’s roster: Potter and incoming freshman Kaleb Wesson, Ohio’s reigning Mr. Basketball. Backup center David Bell transferred to Jacksonville earlier this month.

A native of Indianapolis, Thompson currently is in California working out in preparation for the draft. According to DraftExpress.com, Thompson is the third-oldest of the 145 underclassmen to declare for the draft. Underclassmen who declare for the draft but don’t hire an agent have until 10 days after the NBA combine to return to school without losing their eligibility.

Thompson is not listed in mock drafts assembled by any major publication. He could pursue a career overseas, although Ryan Thompson said earlier this month that his son was looking at either the NBA or a return to Ohio State for his senior season.

Ohio State has three scholarships available to give for next year and is known to be recruiting a handful of guards, some at the graduate transfer level, but no big men. According to a source within the program, the Buckeyes are not actively looking to add another post player unless it would be the right fit.

ajardy@dispatch.com

@AdamJardy