1911 postmarked postcard view of East Main Street at Centerville, Indiana. This view is looking east through the Main Cross Street intersection. It had been snowing and passengers were ready to board a trolley car. The trolley belonged to the THI & E (Terre Haute, Indianapolis & Eastern) Traction Co.

Few business signs are readable and Centerville didn’t have a standard street address system until sometime after 1913. The 1913 Sanborn™ fire insurance map set for Centerville shows a furniture store in the brick building at the left edge of this view. Next door, that map set shows a hardware business at street level and a lodge room upstairs. The map set includes a note saying the building was "boarded up." The 1896 Sanborn™ map set shows the IORM on the second floor of that building. A sign in one of the display windows appears to have been advertising a LORAIN _____ RANGE. Except for a grocery two doors east of the hardware store, the other structures in that block were houses.

On the northeast corner at First Street, the building had a bell tower. The 1913 map set shows that the council room and fire department occupied the first floor of that building while an opera house occupied the second floor. The fire department consisted of 25 volunteers, one Silsby steam engine, and one hook and ladder cart. The bell tower was 24 feet high.

On the south side of the street, a LIVERY and FEED SALES sign advertised a large livery business located on the west side of the alley between Main Cross and First Streets. A jewelers' trade sign (pocket watch) was hanging above the sidewalk in that vicinity, but neither Sanborn™ map set shows a jeweler in that area. The 1913 map set shows the traction station location just two doors west of the livery business, near where the passengers were boarding the trolley. Just above the gentleman standing on the nearby corner was a LUNCH ____ sign. The 1913 Sanborn™ map set shows a restaurant/pool room at that location. One of the signs posted on the nearest utility pole advertised HONEST SCRAP chewing tobacco. The sign above that one also advertised a tobacco product.

From the collection of Thomas Keesling.

The full postcard image can be seen here.

www.flickr.com/photos/hoosier_recollections/6875421589/in...

Copyright 2008-2013 by Hoosier Recollections. All rights reserved. This image is part of a creative package that includes the associated text, geodata and/or other information. Neither this package in its entirety nor any of the individual components may be downloaded, transmitted or reproduced without the prior written permission of Hoosier Recollections.