The Historic National Road, which is the primary route west at the turn of the 19th century, is the Main Street of historical Centerville, Indiana.

Word is that property along the road was so valuable when the town was being settled in the early 1800’s, builders didn’t want to waste an inch of frontage on lanes or alleys. Instead, they put in arched passages to allow people and wagons access to the back of their buildings.

Archways, that is.

In a town filled with classic American architecture, Centerville’s five surviving archways are its most distinctive feature.

With that said, it’s no accident that the town’s annual summer festival is called Archway Days.

This year’s Archway Days festival will be August 24 and 25, and all kinds of activities are planned.

Beginning at 5 p.m. Friday, there will be more than 70 food and craft vendors, bounce houses and other inflatable items, and a car show – all centered around Maplewood Park, just a block north of Main Street.

“We’ve pretty much taken over the entire park,” said Phil Bedel of the Archway Days organizing committee.

Also on Friday, Centerville Christian Church (which adjoins the park) will provide music and Fam-Jam, an interactive show for all ages. At 9 p.m., there will be an outdoor showing of the movie “Max.” Bring your own chairs or blankets.

Park activities start up again at 9 a.m. Saturday and continue all day. Some of the special events taking place include: a pedal tractor pull at 10 a.m., comedy/magic performances at noon and 2:45, a kid’ zone, demonstrations and child safety kits from the Centerville Police Department, musical acts and more.

There will be a parade honoring heroes at 4 p.m. on Saturday. The night will close with music, dancing, and a “huge” fireworks show according to Bedel.

As if that weren’t enough, other Centerville organizations have put together even more activities for Saturday. Boy Scout Troop 16 will have a pancake breakfast, the library will have a used book sale, and Centerville’s Main Street will have a beer garden across the street from the park from 5 to 9 p.m.

Happening from 1 to 6 p.m. Saturday, the Mansion House Museum on Main Street will be hopping, with guided tours of the Mansion House itself, built in 1840 as a hotel, and Civil War-themed presentations at the old log Wayne County courthouse also on the museum grounds. Both buildings are air-conditioned if you need to beat the heat. Apple crisps, ice creams and drinks will be served all afternoon.

If the festival weekend isn’t convenient for you, Centerville is still well worth a visit.

The museum is open from 1-5 p.m. every Saturday, and manager Carolyn LaFever is always ready to show folks around and answer questions about the town’s rich history.

History is everywhere in Centerville. A stroll around town reveals lots of handsome, historic homes and commercial buildings, several of which now house antique stores. You can spend hours browsing along and just off Main Street – but, if you’re antiquing, don’t forget to go a few blocks north to the Centerville Antique Mall (formerly Webb’s) filled with stalls selling items sure to please a variety of tastes.

Also located on Main St. is Wheeler’s Antiques. Specializing in paintings, advertisements, and other unique goods, you can ogle through both of their buildings. Wheeler’s has been in business for 48 years. They first opened their doors in 1970. They’re located at 107 W. Main St. in Centerville.

Want something newer? Stop by the Warm Glow Candle Outlet, five miles north on Centerville Road, next to Interstate 70.

This huge store has over 60 fragrances of hand-dipped candles made in Centerville, plus home décor, floral arrangements, jewelry, bath and body products, gourmet food, and Indiana wines and beer. Warm Glow will have its annual Fall Festival September 22nd and 23rd.

While you’re browsing Warm Glow, check out Stone Hearth Café. Tucked inside of Warm Glow, this little café packs a punch with its menu. Stop in for lunch or grab early dinner!

Part of the Warm Glow complex is Artisans and Java, a coffee shop featuring handcrafted items from around the region, ranging from paintings to furniture and baskets to books.

Local crafts also are available at The Village Forager on East Main Street, a specialty gift shop with herbs and herbal teas.

While you’re browsing Warm Glow, check out Stone Hearth Café. Tucked inside of Warm Glow, this little café packs a punch with its menu. Stop in for lunch or grab early dinner!

While in Centerville, check out Scott Shafer Pottery. Located just off of Main St. (610 N Morton Ave.), you’ll be entranced by his high-quality functional and decorative stoneware pottery. If you’re lucky, you’ll get to see him in action!

While downtown, you much work up an appetite so be sure check out Centerville’s newest addition of Ugly Mugs Taproom and Grill! This establishment is family-friendly. So gather in the dining area and have a terrific time. After all the browsing and shopping, you deserve it!

If all this shopping and activity creates a need to get away from town and head into nature, travel a few miles east on U.S. 40 to the Cope Environmental Center at 1730 Airport Road.

Tour the center’s eco-friendly building (now going through rigorous qualifications in hopes of being certified as a Living Building) at no charge during business hours from 9 to 5 Monday through Friday or 10 to 2 on Saturday, or take a hike on one of the many trails through woods and wetlands. Trails are open from dawn to dusk 365 days a year.

Still want more? Go to VisitRichmond.org for lots to see and do in Wayne County, Indiana.

By Louise Ronald