Product Overview

Condition: Brand New

ISBN: 9781857983401

Author(s): John Sladek,

Publisher: Orion Publishing Co

Pages: 624

Format: Paperback

Sold out

Original price £9.99

Original price £9.99 - Original price £9.99

Original price £9.99

Current price £5.99

£5.99 - £5.99

Current price £5.99

| /

Amazon Review John Sladek was one of SF's premier satirists, and The Complete Roderick is his masterpiece--a dark comedy of artificial intelligence, previously split into Roderick (1980) and Roderick at Random (1983). Roderick is an experimental robot, a well-meaning innocent who grows up and learns what it is to be human in the comic inferno of modern America. Being human isn't much fun: bullied at school, diagnosed as mentally unstable for saying he's a robot, forever in trouble for applying logic to religion... Being a robot is tough: a sinister government agency is determined to destroy all AI "Entities". Luckily their agents are hilariously inept--one assassin lying in wait for Roderick gets mugged for his laser-aimed sniper rifle. Like Voltaire's Candide, Roderick moves wide-eyed through a world of insane commercialism: (Danton's Doggie Dinette, the posh canine restaurant), fly-by-night religions (the Church of Christ Symmetrical), non-art (identical purple squares, meaningless when painted by Roderick, are praised as cutting-edge art), junk science (research into psychic pigeons is faked but generates a bestseller anyway) and--everywhere--people whose fads and tics and rigid prejudices make them more programmed, less truly human, than Roderick himself. This book is painfully funny, sprinkled with wild ideas and nifty one-liners: a surreal musical called Hello Dali; marketing a dull book on fishing as You Can Master Bait; the lady founder of Machine Lib, dubbed the Joan of Arc-welding; buying your jeans at Denim Iniquity... Beneath the dazzle, there's some seriously comic discussion of artificial intelligence and why it fascinates us. Applause to Gollancz SF Masterworks for producing the first one-volume edition of this major SF satire. --David Langford Product Description Roderick is a robot and this is his autobiography. Sladek conveys, with great sensitivity and insight the innocence of an artificial intelligence and asks profound questions about mankind's right to manipulate others. It also portrays how a numerological mind might structure a narrative. Inventive, funny yet melancholy this is one of SF's greatest creative geniuses writing at his thought-provoking best. Book Description Rivals the work of Asimov as SF's keynote statement on Robotics About the Author John Sladek (1937 - 2000) John Sladek was born in Iowa in 1937 but moved to the UK in 1966, where he became involved with the British New Wave movement, centred on Michael Moorcock's groundbreaking New Worlds magazine. Sladek began writing SF with 'The Happy Breed', which appeared in Harlan Ellison's seminal anthology Dangerous Visions in 1967, and is now recognized as one of SF's most brilliant satirists. His novels and short story collections include The Muller Fokker Effect, Roderick and Tik Tok, for which he won a BSFA Award. He returned to the United States in 1986, and died there in March 2000.