(July 26, 1856 – November 2nd, 1950)

Biography

George Bernard Shaw was born on July 26 1856 in Dublin Ireland the son of a civil servant. Although he was best known for drama, he was also proficient in the areas of journalism, music and literary criticism. He began his literary career as a novelist. Shaw’s works concerned themselves mostly with prevailing social problems, specifically with what he saw as the exploitation of the working middle class. Shaw attended various schools throughout his youth but always harboured an animosity towards schools and teachers. He is quoted as saying that “Schools and schoolmasters, as we have them today, are not popular as places of education and teachers, but rather prisons and turnkeys in which children are kept to prevent them disturbing and chaperoning their parents”.

In his personal life, Shaw was an avid Socialist and a member of the Fabian society. In 1898 he married fellow Fabian member and Irish heiress Charlotte Payne-Townsend. He was the first person to be awarded the Nobel prize for Literature as well as an Oscar (for his work on Pygmalion, which was an adaptation of his play of the same name). He wrote 60 plays, most of which deal with social themes such as marriage, religion, class government and health care. Two of his greatest influences were Henrik Ibsen and Henry Fielding. Ibsen’s plays and Fielding’s expulsion from playwriting inspired him to write his own plays on the social injustices of the world around him, including the late nineteenth century censorship of plays, continued from Prime Minister Walpole’s rein in the mid 1740s. The Lord Chamberlain’s Examiner of Plays especially irked him:

“A gentleman who robs, insults, and suppresses me as irresistibly as if he were the Tsar of Russia and I the meanest of his subjects… But I must submit [my play] in order to obtain from him an insolent and insufferable document, which I cannot read without boiling of the blood, certifying that in his opinion — his opinion!– my play ‘does not in its general tendency contain anything immoral or otherwise improper for the stage,’ and that the Lord Chamberlain therefore ‘allows’ its performance (confound his impudence!).” (Mainly xv)

George Bernard Shaw died at the age of 94 due to injuries incurred from falling while pruning a tree.

Listen to an Interview with George Bernard Shaw from 1937.

If you would like to know what Shaw thought about something, the NYTimes has an archive of Shaw: his quotes, his opinions, pictures, etc.

Works

Short Stories

The Black Girl in Search of God

The Miraculous Revenge

Novels

Immaturity

Cashel Byron’s Profession

The Unsocial Socialist

The Irrational Knot

Love Among the Artists

Plays (In chronological order)

Plays Unpleasant

Widowers’ Houses

The Philanderer

Mrs. Warren’s Profession

To read the script with the Author’s Apology, click HERE.

Plays Pleasant

Arms and the Man

Candida

The Man of Destiny

You Can Never Tell

Three Plays for Puritans

The Devil’s Disciple

Caesar and Cleopatra

Captain Brassbound’s Conversion

The Admirable Bashville

Man and Superman

John Bull’s Other Island

How He Lied to Her Husband

Major Barbara

The Doctor’s Dilemma

Getting Married

The Glimpse of Reality

The Fascinating Foundling

Press Cuttings

Misalliance

Annajanska, The Bolshevik Empress

The Dark Lady of the Sonnets

Fanny’s First Play

Overruled

Androcles and the Lion

Pygmalion

The Great Catherine

The Inca of Perusalem

O’Flaherty VC

Augustus Does His Bit

Heartbreak House

Back to Methuselah

Saint Joan

In the Beginning

The Gospel of the Brothers Barnabus

The Thing Happens

Tragedy of an Elderly Gentleman

As Far as Thought Can Reach

The Apple Cart

Too True to be Good

On the Rocks

The Six of Calias

The Simpleton of the Unexpected Isles

The Shewing Up of Blanco Posnet

The Millionaires

Geneva

In Good King Charles Golden Days

Bouyant Billions

Shakes Versus Shav

Essays

The Quintessence of Ibenism

The Perfect Wagnerite, Commentary on the Ring

Maxims for Revolutionists

Preface to Major Barabara

How to Write a Popular Play

Treatise on Parents and Children

Common Sense about the War

The Intelligent Woman’s Guide to Socialism and Capitalism

Dictators-Let Us Have More of Them

“Shaw’s Music: The Complete Musical Criticism of Bernard Shaw in Three Volumes”

“Shaw on Shakespeare: An Anthology of Bernard Shaw’s Writings”

To see a selection of Shaw’s Essays courtesy of Brown University, click HERE.

Return to Drama in the Twentieth Century

References

Shaw, Bernard (1914). //Misalliance, the Dark Lady of the Sonnets, and Fanny’s First Play. With a Treatise on Parents and Children//. London: Constable and Co.. pp. 210. http://www.online-literature.com/george_bernard_shaw/1101/.

Shaw, George B. “Mainly About Myself.” Preface. Seven Plays by Bernard Shaw. New York: Dodd, Mead &, 1951. Vii-Xxvi.

Contributors

Mallory Slade, Karen Bilotti