Previous appearances in finals: 18

Best performance: Winners in 1958, 1962, 1970, 1994, 2002. Also runners-up in 1950, 1998

Coach: Dunga, Brazil's World Cup-winning captain in 1994 - having rebounded from a miserable experience four years earlier when he was made the scapegoat for their second-round exit. Appointed shortly after the 2006 World Cup, despite having almost no top-level coaching experience, to install discipline and pride into the team. He has since won the 2007 Copa America and 2009 Confederations Cup, although many purists dislike the team's counter-attacking style under his leadership.

World Cup

FIFA loses three World Cup sponsors

23/01/2015 at 11:19

Key players:

Kaka (Real Madrid). Age: 27. Midfielder: FIFA's World Player of the Year in 2007, Kaka, full name Ricardo Izecson dos Santos Leite, is still regarded as one of the world's top players. Excellent long-range shooting and incisive passing are both strengths but he is at his most exciting when picking up the ball near the halfway line and then surging towards goal. Ever-present in 2006, he also won a World Cup winners medal four years earlier as a teenager although he made only a brief appearance in the campaign.

Luis Fabiano (Sevilla). Age 29. Forward: The 'Fabulous One' scored nine goals in only 11 World Cup qualifiers including braces against Uruguay, Chile, Peru and Argentina, making him Brazil's top scorer in the campaign. His combination of power and accuracy makes him perfect for Dunga's counter-attacking style.

Julio Cesar (Internazionale). Age: 30. Goalkeeper: Has emerged as one of the top world's top goalkeepers. In several of Brazil's apparently easy World Cup wins - notably the 4-0 victories in Venezuela and Uruguay - he made the difference with outstanding saves early in the game.

FIFA world ranking May 2010: 1st

How they qualified: Brazil sailed through the potentially tricky South American World Cup group, booking their place with three matches to spare in the best way possible with a 3-1 win away to arch-rivals Argentina. Their best performances were away from home, including a 3-0 win in Chile and 4-0 wins in Uruguay and Venezuela. Their biggest problems were at home facing massed defences, and they were held to goalless draws by Bolivia, Argentina, Colombia and Venezuela. Their only defeats in the 18 matches were against Paraguay and Bolivia, the latter at extreme altitude after they had already qualified.

Prospects: Dunga has turned Brazil into a ruthlessly efficient outfit, even if they are not particularly attractive to watch. They are capable of soaking up pressure for long periods and then hitting their opponents with counter-attacks of astonishing power and precision. The air of overconfidence which has preceded their 2006 campaign has been swept away, making them a good bet for a sixth world title.

Bookmakers' odds: 11-2

Expert view: "Despite the Brazilians’ lack of confidence in Dunga, recent results make the Seleção Canarinho one of the World Cup favourites – as always. For the first time, the best section of the Brazilian team is the defence. Julio Cesar, considered the best goalkeeper in the world, with Maicon, Lucio, Juan and Michel Bastos ahead of him. In the middle, Dunga’s style is clear when his chooses to put three holding midfielders plus Kaka….and Kaka is not 100% which is clear in his lack of mobility. Robinho and Luis Fabiano are in their best shape and are the most dedicated players in the training sessions here in South Africa. If the midfield was a little bit more offensive and Kaka had a decent substitute, like Ronaldinho, we would be able to say that Brazil would have an even better chance to win its' sixth trophy. Having said that, I believe that Brazil will get to the quarter-finals, at least and with luck, the semi-finals. That is what most Brazilians’ analysts are pointing to," Rafael Alvez, Yahoo! Brazil

Squad: Goalkeepers: Julio Cesar (Internazionale), Doni (Roma), Heurelho Gomes (Tottenham Hotspur); Defenders: Maicon (Internazionale), Daniel Alves (Barcelona), Michel Bastos (Lyon), Gilberto (Cruzeiro), Lucio (Inter), Juan (Roma), Luisao (Benfica), Thiago Silva (Milan); Midfielders: Gilberto Silva (Panathinaikos), Felipe Melo (Fiorentina), Ramires (Benfica), Elano (Galatasaray), Kaka (Real Madrid), Julio Baptista (Roma), Kleberson (Flamengo), Josue (Wolfsburg); Forwards: Robinho (Santos), Luis Fabiano (Sevilla), Nilmar (Villarreal), Grafite (Wolfsburg)

Soccer City Live - Every evening on British Eurosport (Sky 410 / Virgin 521) & on the Eurosport Player.

World Cup

James Rodriguez beats Stephanie Roche to FIFA Puskas Award

13/01/2015 at 08:11

World Cup

Joachim Loew wins FIFA Coach of the Year award

13/01/2015 at 08:12