With a sense of pragmatism allied to their natural flair, whether in a 4-2-3-1 or 4-2-2-2 formation. Neymar and Oscar have both been asked to play the traditional Brazilian number 10 role, although it's Barcelona's new £50m man Neymar who will be in possession of the actual shirt.

They won the competition for a record third time in South Africa in 2009 and are vying for a hat-trick of successive titles. Brazil are the only nation to compete in all seven Fifa Confederation Cups, with 2003 being the only occasion they have failed to progress beyond the group stage.

Reappointed last November, 2002 World Cup-winning coach Felipe Scolari is affectionately known as Big Phil, a nickname given to him during his playing days by a journalist due to his strong, imposing style.

During Brazil's 2002 success he used Sun Tzu's ancient Chinese military book 'The Art of War' as preparation, slipping certain chapters under players' hotel room doors.

Failed during his time at Chelsea, and was sacked after only seven months in charge in February 2009., external

Barcelona-bound superstar Neymar, 21, has been the talk of Brazil for many a year and the Confederations Cup represents his first chance to play at a major global tournament. He reportedly tries to replicate goals he scores on computer games. Scored twice at the 2011 Copa America and three times at last year's Olympics. The one concern is his temperament.

Chelsea's Oscar enjoyed a fine debut season in English football, calling the experience "excellent". He chipped in with 12 goals in 62 appearances for the Blues and was a key member of their attacking triumvirate, usually alongside Juan Mata and Eden Hazard. Became the first player to score a hat-trick in a World Cup final since Sir Geoff Hurst in 2011 - albeit at Under-20 level.

Hulk is a powerful left-footed forward. He arrives at the Confederations Cup after a disappointing first season with Russian club Zenit St Petersburg following his £32m move last summer. He scored seven goals in 18 league appearances but was subjected to racist abuse and fell out with his coach. He has been linked with a move to Chelsea this summer.

Don't make him angry - he hit a shot so hard on his debut for Porto that it put team-mate Mariano Gonzalez out of action for a month when it hit his thigh.