WILSON, N.C. — February 29, 2016 — The Barton College Friends of Hackney Library and the Friends of the Wilson County Public Library will welcome historian, author, and former CEO Garland S. Tucker III for a second book signing and discussion on Wednesday, March 16. The event will be held from 5:30 p.m. – 7 p.m. in the Willis N. Hackney Library on the Barton College campus. The author of “The High Tide of American Conservatism: Davis, Coolidge, and the 1924 Election” (Emerald, 2010), has published a new book this past year titled “Conservative Heroes: Fourteen Leaders Who Shaped America, From Jefferson to Reagan” (Intercollegiate Studies Institute 2015).

The reception and book signing will begin at 5:30 pm, followed by the program at 6 p.m. Copies of Tucker’s books will be available for purchase during the event, and he will be on hand to sign them before and after the program. This event is open to the public at no charge, and the community is invited to attend.

Following the success of “The High Tide of American Conservatism” (2010), which examined the presidential election of 1924 between fellow conservatives Calvin Coolidge and John W. Davis, Tucker’s second book continues to explore the theme of conservatism in America. Conservative Heroes examines 14 champions of conservative thought—some very familiar, such as Jefferson and Reagan, and others whose names are much less likely to trip off the tongue, such as fellow North Carolinians Nathaniel Macon and Josiah Bailey. In the book, Tucker traces the development of conservatism’s basic tenets and shows how these leaders put them into action, with varying degrees of success.

Tucker explains the genesis of the book in a recent interview with Christopher N. Malagisi on the Conservative Book Club web site: “I wrote [Conservative Heroes] primarily for conservatives—especially young conservatives—with the hope that they will sharpen their perception of what conservatism is and enhance their understanding of the historical perspective.” The book has been well received by its intended audience: “Conservative Heroes is a wonderful book for many reasons, not the least of which is its focus on long-forgotten conservatives like Grover Cleveland, Josiah Bailey, and, my favorite, Robert Taft,” says Fred Barnes, executive editor of The Weekly Standard. According to National Review Online, his “ability to recognize a subject missed by academic historians reserves a special place for Tucker in the pantheon of political authors. Conservative Heroes should be required reading in high schools and colleges.” And, Carolina Journal calls the book “a valuable contribution to today’s American political discourse . . . Tucker’s fast-paced narrative . . . tells the important story of the role liberty-minded thinkers and politicians have played at critical points in the nation’s history.”

Tucker has written for National Review, the Washington Times, and other leading publications. He is a frequent media guest who has appeared on major radio programs locally and nationally, as well as on television networks such as MSNBC and C-SPAN.

Although he currently lives and works in Raleigh, Garland S. Tucker III, is a native son of Wilson; his grandfather, Garland S. Tucker, Sr., established the Tucker Furniture chain that is still run by members of the Tucker family. Tucker serves as chairman of Triangle Capital Corporation, a publicly traded specialty finance company in Raleigh, North Carolina that he co-founded in 2002. Although he retired from his position as CEO in February, he continues to serve as a resource to his successor. Tucker graduated magna cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa from Washington and Lee University and received his MBA from Harvard Business School. A former member of the New York Stock Exchange, Tucker serves on the boards of a number of companies, schools, and charitable organizations.

For more information, contact George W. Loveland, director of Hackney Library, at 252-399-6501 or gwloveland@barton.edu.