Garland Anthony Wilson, MD

Family Medicine Physician, Associate Professor and Chair of Family Medicine; Chief of the Division of Family Medicine

Collector of antiquarian books. I am on the board of Knox Heritage and on a committee with the Tennessee Theatre. I live in downtown Knoxville. Member of Church Street United Methodist Church

About Me

Gender: Male

Languages Spoken:

English

View Insurance Accepted

I am a Tennessee native and attended medical school at the University of Tennessee Health Science Center in Memphis. I completed my Family Medicine residency at UT Graduate School of Medicine in Knoxville, after which I practiced in my hometown of Crossville for 9 years. I completed a Fellowship in Faculty Development at the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill School of Medicine in 2015. I have been faculty at UT Graduate School of Medicine since 2011 and Chair of Family Medicine since 2020.

Clinical Focus:

Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus, hospital medicine, exercise stress testing, no-scalpel vasectomy, care of LGBTQ patients

Specialties:

Family Medicine

Education & Credentials

Schools

University of Tennessee Health Science Center College of Medicine

Residencies

University of Tennessee Graduate School of Medicine, Knoxville, TN

Fellowships

Faculty Development; University of North Carolina School of medicine, Chapel Hill, NC

Other Education

Fellow of the American Board of Family Physicians

Board Certifications

Family Medicine

Organizations & Societies

Tennessee Academy of Family Physicians American Academy of Family Physicians Society of Teachers of Family Medicine Association of Departments of Family Medicine

Being a Family Medicine physician is the best job I can imagine, and teaching new doctors is an honor and an awesome responsibility. Primary Care is the foundation of good medicine.

— Garland Anthony Wilson

Where I See Patients

University Family Physicians

1924 Alcoa Hwy U67Knoxville, TN 37920-1511

Phone: (865) 305-9350

Fax: (865) 305-8681

Directions

Visiting our main campus? Use the UTMC Way app to get around.