DAVENPORT, Iowa (KWQC) - The historic Annie Wittenmyer Campus may soon undergo a major transformation.

Plans are underway to transform these century-old buildings into affordable housing, catering to the pressing need for such residences in the community.

“Just like most cities in the US, there’s a huge need for affordable housing,” said Bruce Berger, Davenport’s Director of Community Planning and Economic Development.

The proposal aims to create 52 units for seniors and 47 units for families, all without demolishing any of the existing structures.

“Not every single building would become housing,” said Berger.

“In the case of Family Resources, they would be able to remain on campuses. In the case of Tapestry Farms, for example, their office location would be convertible to two units, forming a duplex.”

Interestingly, some of the housing units might become homes for families associated with Tapestry Farms.

Berger says that the Junior Theater Program, a long-standing initiative, will continue, either on-site or at a new location.

“It’s a great program, it’s growing. And ultimately, though, they probably need a better facility than they had been using.”

However, moving forward with this ambitious plan requires conditional site control, various applications for federal and state tax credits, property tax exemption, and additional funding.

“You need to competitively score and secure the funding and then work through the historic requirements to ensure effective conversion to modern housing while retaining the historic fabric of the campus,” said Berger.

The campus would also need to be rezoned, as the current zoning does not permit housing.

If conditional site control is granted, there would be approximately a year to secure necessary financing. If successful, the city would transfer the property to the developer by September 2025.

With a potential public hearing on the horizon next week, updates on the revitalization plan for the Annie Wittenmyer Campus will be provided.