Written by Greek Boston in Greek Mythology

In Greek mythology, not all of the stories that were being told involved the gods and the goddesses. While it is true that the gods and goddesses resembled humans in a lot of ways, there were many creatures that only had a few humanlike traits. The Cyclops creatures were considered monsters and they were characterized by the fact that they only hd one eye. Polyphemus was perhaps the most well-known of the Cyclops creatures. Here’s more information about who Polyphemus was and the role he played in Greek mythology:

Who the Cyclops Were

The Cyclops were an entire race of giants in Greek mythology that are one of the primordial races of creatures. They had one eye in the middle of their forehead and interestingly enough, the word “cyclops” means “round-eyed” in Ancient Greek, which offers a direct explanation to the creatures’ most distinguishing features. The Cyclops were said to be the brothers of the Titans in the generation that came before the Olympian gods and goddesses. Depending on the source, there were several different Cyclops. Hesiod describes that there were three Cyclops – the brothers Brontes, Steropes and Arges.

Depending on the source, however, there were different Cyclops with different names. One of their roles is that they were said to live on Mount Olympus and they often assisted Hephaestus, the blacksmith, in his tasks. According to Hesiod, the Cyclops played a part in giving Zeus his thunderbolt, Hades his helmet, and Poseidon his trident. These weapons helped the Olympians defeat the Titans.

Who Polyphemus Was

It is interesting to note that Homer talked specifically about another Cyclops that Hesiod didn’t – Polyphemus. In one of the most well-known stories of any of the Cyclops, Polyphemus made an appearance in Homer’s Odyssey. He is actually described as having a different parentage than the rest of the Cyclops because he was said to be the son of the god of the sea, Poseidon. The name “Polyphemus” means “abounding in songs and legends,” which perhaps as an indicator of how famous he actually was in Greek mythology.

One of the first appearances that Polyphemus made in literature was during Homer’s Odyssey, and his portrayal here was less than flattering. In this take, he was a man-eating monster, and over the course of the story, Polyphemus met his death at Odysseus’s hand. However, other writers did mention him later on and in these cases, he was associated with a nymph named Galatea. In these instances, he wasn’t portrayed to be as savage.

Polyphemus Finds Love

As mentioned above, Polyphemus was portrayed as a man-eating creature until later on in Ancient Greek literature, where he was associated with a nymph, Galatea. In the stories of Polyphemus and the nymph, the pair is said to have fallen in love. Although early versions of the love story indicated that Galatea had another love interest besides Polyphemus, later versions of the take indicate that the Cyclops was successful in courting her and the pair ended up together.

Polyphemus was one of the most well known of all the Cyclops creatures.

Sources:

Wikipedia – Cyclops

Wikipedia – Polyphemus

Brittanica – Polyphemus

Categorized in: Greek Mythology

This post was written by Greek Boston