Loading...

The Autopsy and Other Tales

by Michael Shea

MembersReviewsPopularityAverage ratingMentions281852,984 (3.9)7

Michael Shea has demonstrated an unnerving facility for the macabre, the cerebral, and the whimsical, and he possesses the deceptively effortless ability to conjure scenes of horror and dread leavened by sly humor. Over 590 pages long, this collection features all of Shea's best award-winning horror, fantasy, science fiction, and Cthulhu Mythos tales, with two complete novels and several stories that have never been collected. Laird Barron's insightful introduction provides a unique look at this remarkable, visionary storyteller. Combined with the illustrations of John Stewart, as well as several color photographs and devices, this marks the most important collection yet from an undisputed master of the short story.… (more)

▾Tags

▾LibraryThing Recommendations

▾Lists

None

▾Will you like it?

Loading...

Sign up for LibraryThing to find out whether you'll like this book.

▾Conversations (About links)

No current Talk conversations about this book.

» See also 7 mentions

▾Member reviews

▾Other authors

» Add other authors (1 possible)

▾Common Knowledge

You must log in to edit Common Knowledge data.

For more help see the Common Knowledge help page.

Canonical title Original title Alternative titles Original publication date People/Characters Important places Important events Related movies Epigraph Dedication First words Quotations Last words Disambiguation notice Publisher's editors Blurbers Original language Canonical DDC/MDS Canonical LCC

▾References

References to this work on external resources.

Wikipedia in English (1)

Wikipedia:Cthulhu Mythos reference codes and bibliography

▾Book descriptions

Michael Shea has demonstrated an unnerving facility for the macabre, the cerebral, and the whimsical, and he possesses the deceptively effortless ability to conjure scenes of horror and dread leavened by sly humor. Over 590 pages long, this collection features all of Shea's best award-winning horror, fantasy, science fiction, and Cthulhu Mythos tales, with two complete novels and several stories that have never been collected. Laird Barron's insightful introduction provides a unique look at this remarkable, visionary storyteller. Combined with the illustrations of John Stewart, as well as several color photographs and devices, this marks the most important collection yet from an undisputed master of the short story.

▾Library descriptions

No library descriptions found.

▾LibraryThing members' description

Book description

Haiku summary

Current Discussions

None

Quick Links

Rating

Average: (3.9)

0.511.52 12.533.54 24.5 15 1

Is this you?

Become a LibraryThing Author.