INTRODUCTION

1. Peter Schott

There was a later humanist, a teacher at Ghent, named Peter Schott, who flourished ca. 1530-1540. He is mentioned by A. Bömer, Die lateinischen Schülergespräche der Humanisten, Part II, 113, 119, 127 (= Texte und Forschungen zur Geschichte der Erziehung und des Unterrichts …, I [Berlin, 1897]). This may be the same Schott whose words in praise of Seneca’s style are quoted by W. A. Edward, The Suasoriae of Seneca the Elder (Cambridge University Press, 1928), x.

2. in order that all of Schott’s works might be available … volume

To the number of Schott’s extant works is to be added a letter which we discovered in the Strassburg archives during the summer of 1964, a year after the text volume of Schott’s works had been published. Investigating an entry in the Inventaire (IV, 105B): “Pierre Schott. 1486 2 lettres à Frédéric II, évêque d’Augsbourg,” we identified one letter1 as a handwritten copy (lacking the salutation) of Lucubraciunculae, #83, written by Schott 30 March 1486 to Friedrich von Zollern* (cf. Appendix C). The other letter we found to be a hitherto unpublished letter1 of 28 February 1486 from Schott to Zollern. It is not Schott’s original letter but a handwritten copy and lacks the salutation. A reproduction of this letter along with transcription and explanatory notes appears in Appendix B of this volume. Although the letter contains little new information, it does underline Schott’s unflagging efforts to secure a proper benefice for his beloved master Johann Müller* (cf. N. 527).

Here must also be mentioned Schott’s German translations of two letters of state from Milan. These are preserved in the “Wimpheling Codex” (cf. Appendix D) and in 1899 were published along with the original letters by Hugo Holstein in his article “Neue Mitteilungen. Alsatica,” from which the texts appearing in the appendices of this volume have been taken (cf. Appendices E and F).

The first translation is of a letter written in Latin 27 November 1478 by Duchess Bona and her young son Duke Giovanni Galeazzo Maria Sforza to the city of Zürich. The letter decries as unjust the declaration of war by Zürich and its confederates against the Lombards on 19 November 1478, but warns that the Lombards will defend their cause. (In the winter skirmishes of the war which ensued the Lombards were defeated, and peace, mediated by Louis XI, was made at Pentecost 1479).

How the letter came into the hands of Peter Schott one can only conjecture. It is known that his father Peter Schott, Sr., reported to the Strassburg city council on a meeting of the confederates at Zürich in 1478 (Inventaire [Brucker], I, 102); the meeting may well have concerned the war against the Lombards, and at the time or later the Zürich magistrates may have given Schott, Sr., a copy of the Milan letter which he then handed for translation into German to his son (at home for a period in late 1478 before returning to Bologna).

The second translation is of a letter written in Italian 27 June 1481 from Duke Giovanni to the Strassburg magistracy. He requests that a master architect from the Strassburg cathedral be sent to Milan to advise on the strength of the pillars necessary to support the proposed vast dome of the Milan cathedral. At Strassburg the letter was, no doubt, handed to Schott, Sr., as director of the board (fabrica) in charge of cathedral construction and repairs (N. 76), and he had young Peter (just home from Italy) prepare a German translation.

Schmidt (“Notices…P.S.”, 248) accounts for the request from Milan by assuming that Schott, Jr., had stopped in Milan on his way home from Italy in 1481 and had been presented to the duke, that the duke through him learned of Schott, Sr.’s, position in Strassburg. Whether or not Schmidt’s assumptions have any basis in fact, it is quite obvious that Duke Giovanni was prompted to write to Strassburg by the fabrica of the Milan cathedral which shortly before the date of the letter on 14 June had chosen two members to effect the procurement of a Strassburg master builder (cf. Latin text of the fabrica minutes in Holstein, op. cit., 80).

A request to Strassburg at this period for help in matters architectural needs no explanation other than that the spire of the Strassburg cathedral was considered the quintessence of architectural genius. During the construction of the spire, 1277-1439, students from everywhere had come to study under Strassburg master builders. Indeed it was to distinguish these masters and their students from all others elsewhere that the Order of Free Masons was founded at Strassburg in 1452 by the master builder Jodok (Jost) Dozinger von Worms; until 1620 Strassburg remained the center of the order (cf. Grandidier, Über die Entstehung des Frei Maurer Ordens).

Because Strassburg delayed sending the master builder to Milan, Duke Giovanni on 19 April 1482 directed a letter in Latin to Peter Schott, Sr., who was mayor in that year, and requested that the matter be expedited (text of the letter in Inventaires … St. Thomas, 346; also in Holstein, op. cit., 82; cf. Appendix G). If Schott, Jr., rendered this letter into German, his translation is not extant.

The matter was concluded the following year when the Milan cathedral fabrica contracted with the Strassburg master builder Johannes Nexemberger von Graz for the construction of the dome (Holstein, op. cit., 83). Neither of the Milan letters mentioned above asks for a specific builder, yet Strassburg records claim such was the case, although they do not agree upon the name; it is possible that the envoy bringing the letter from Milan delivered the request verbally. Strobel (460) gives the name as Johann Niesenberger who is no doubt identical with Nexemberger; Schmidt (op. cit., 248) gives the name as Conrad von Strassburg; and the explanatory note beside the picture of the Milan cathedral in the Musée de I’Oeuvre de Notre Dame (cf. N. 76) gives the name as “probablement Conrad Vogt.” The Milan episode is mentioned also in Schadäus’ preface (no pagination) and in Dacheux, Fragments, III, 143.

3. the letter to Anna has been twice printed

The letter has actually been printed three times. Weislinger published his copy of the original in 1749; Dacheux (Réf., 425) reproduced Weislinger’s copy and Dreher (XVIII, 9, n. i) reprinted the text from Dacheux (cf. pp. xxif. and N. 51, N. 53).

Since volume I of this edition went to press, we have found Schmidt’s handwritten transcription made in 1855 from the original letter. The small manuscript is pasted onto a blank rear folio in the undamaged copy of the Lucubraciunculae which is now at the Bibliothèque nationale et universitaire de Strasbourg, but which was previously in Schmidt’s library and, according to the notation on the title folio, once belonged to a monastery: “Lieber Bruder Scottus pertinet ad monasterium SS. Mart. Marcellini et Petri.” Schmidt included in his manuscript the comment Anna wrote at the end of the original letter and added two comments of his own in French: 1) that Anna had pasted the letter on the inside cover of her copy of Vincent de Ferrara’s Sermones de Sanctis, a gift from her brother, which was formerly in the library of the monastery of St. John but at the time (1855) was in the Bibliothèque de Strasbourg; 2) that the copy of the letter published by Weislinger is inaccurate. This remark appears also in Schmidt’s H.L., II, 9, n. 20. For a reproduction of Schmidt’s manuscript, cf. Appendix A.

4. Two other works, no longer extant, … written by Peter Schott.

To the lost works by Schott should be added a poem “Andree apostoli laudes carmen breve” which is listed among Schott’s works by Trithemius, Cathologus, f. 55b.

It is possible that Schott wrote two other works: the “doctrina de accentibus grecis” which he sent to Bohuslaus von Hassenstein (#107, p. 117) and a biography of Nicholaus von Flüe* which he promised to complete for Hassenstein (#107, p. 118). See also the works mentioned in N. 5.

5. A commentary in Latin … inserted … into a book of sermons

Both Weislinger (681) and Schmidt (H. L., II, 29, n. 78; cf. also his note appended to the handwritten copy of the letter to Anna and N. 3) identify the lost book of sermons as St. Vincent de Ferrara’s Sermones de Sanctis (sermons on the saints celebrated throughout the year) and describe the items Anna had pasted into it. In addition to her brother’s letter inserted on the inside cover there were four items at the end of the volume:

1) Schott’s Latin commentary written in his own hand and containing explanatory notes on John 13: 17. On the last leaf of the commentary Anna noted “Disz buch hat min bruder doctor Schott geben mir.”

2) A handwritten Latin letter of unknown origin [by Schott?] dated 1490 and giving religious counsel. At the end appeared the words “Iacobus Sturm manu propria” and Anna’s explanation “Jacop Sturm hat disz geschrieben in sein x jor,” meaning that young Jacob had copied the letter when he was 10 years old, i.e., in 1499. As Schmidt notes, Weislinger (553) mistakenly published this as a letter composed by Jacob Sturm*; obviously, Sturm who was born in 1489 could not have written it in 1490.

3) A copy of Geiler’s sermon to the Strassburg synod of 1482.

4) An unidentified exposition on the psalms [by Schott?].

6. A vocabulary of names of instruments and implements

Cf. #25, p. 33.

7. Scholars have … misquoted material from the Lucubraciunculae

Compare Goldast’s printing of folios XXXVIbff. (reproduced in Appendix I) with #65. Compare also such misinterpretation of material in the Lucubraciunculae as is discussed in N. 62, N. 249 and N. 550.

Furthermore, scholars have without evidence made erroneous statements about Schott, his father and Geiler. For example, virtually every detail concerning Schott and his writings in Holstein (“Mitteilungen,” 78) is incorrect. Confusing Schott with his father, Hartmann (42, n. 3) makes the statement that Peter Schott, the humanist, was the grandfather of Jacob Sturm.* Wuttke in his recent Geiler article for NDB (VI, 150f.) has erred in saying (a) that Geiler was persuaded by “his pupil Peter Schott” to accept the Strassburg cathedral chair, newly established and financed by Schott; and (b) that from 1478 to 1486 Geiler preached in the church of St. Laurentius (cf. N. 80). Zacher (22, 27) terms Schott Geiler’s “pupil” and “secretary.” Cf. also the errors discussed in N. 13 and N. 19.

An example of both misinterpretation of material in the Lucubraciunculae and of erroneous statements is found in two pages of Schmidt (H. L., 32 and 33) where of eleven statements made by Schmidt – seven of which concern material in the Lucubraciunculae – four are mere assumptions without any basis in fact and seven are completely erroneous. A brief discussion of Schmidt’s statements follows (page references are to Schmidt’s work):

P. 32, 11. 2ff. Schmidt avers that it was Kerer himself who in #21 told jokes at Wildbad to spice the Schotts’ dinner, whereas it was someone sent by Geiler and Kerer.*

P. 32, 11. 8f. There is no record that the Schotts “from time to time” visited the castle at Wasselonne to see Ottilia Schott* (wife of Zeisolf von Adelsheim, Sr.*). Only once does Schott speak of a visit to Wasselonne, in a letter to Zeisolf von Adelsheim, Jr.* (nephew to Zeisolf, Sr.). Cf. # 185, p. 203.

P. 32, 11. 9f. Gottfried von Adelsheim,* the doctor of law and praepositus of Wimpfen, was not Ottilia Schott’s brother-in-law, but her nephew by marriage.

P. 32, 11. 12-14. Schott does not say in #63 of November 1484 that he has been in Basel and has heard Johann Heynlin.* Certainly he did not, as Schmidt avers, at that time attend the ceremony at which Brant* received his licentiate in law, for Basel matriculation records (Wackernagel, I, 138) give the date of that occasion as 1483.

P. 32, 11. 19-22. So far as can be learned from Schott’s correspondence, Bishop Friedrich von Zollern* did not invite Schott “à plusieurs reprises” to visit him.

P. 32, 11. 24ff. There is no mention in the Lucubraciunculae of a visit (or visits) to Gabriel Biel.* In his letter of August 1489 (#136) Schott accepts Biel’s invitation to ceremonies in Tübingen on condition that Geiler go also and that his parents give him leave. As indicated in N. 1025, it seems that Schott did go to Tübingen rather than, as Schmidt infers, that his parents opposed his going because of his health, “de plus en plus chancelante.” There is no evidence in the Lucubraciunculae that Schott’s health became progressively worse; indeed, at this time it was the health of his father (still serving his term as mayor) which would have kept Schott from going to Tübingen.

Pp. 32f., n. 94. Trithemius, Cathalogus, folio 55, does not give the year of Schott’s death as 1490, but as 1491 (N. 161). It is the excerpt from Trithemius, Liber in the Lucubraciunculae (#5) which gives the year as 1490.

P. 33, 11. 9f. There is no proof that Hassenstein brought “nombreux manuscrits” from his trip to the Near East, although he may very well have.

P. 33, 1. 13. Hassenstein’s oration on Schott, as explained on p. xxiii (also N. 62 and N. 63), is not a funeral oration.

P. 33, n. 95. Here Schmidt states that Schott’s epitaph was still in existence at New St. Peter at the time of writing (ca. 1878/9), whereas other nineteenth-century sources, including Horning who wrote extensively about the history of New St. Peter, say the epitaph disappeared in 1791 (N. 57) and quote one of the copies of the epitaph made before 1791.

P. xii

8. All acclaimed him as the first Alsatian humanist

The designation “first” is always suspect. Schott was not the first Alsatian of the fifteenth century to be deeply interested in the classics or in the Renaissance, nor was he the first Alsatian to study in Italy. Alsatians are inscribed in the Acta bonon., for instance, as early as 1295, when there were at least four students from Alsace and one from Strassburg at Bologna.

9. Leo Dacheux in his excellent biography…

The one drawback to Dacheux’ work is the lack of an index of any kind. Quotations from the Lucubraciunculae appear throughout the Geiler biography, but most of them are in the section on pp. 286-427. The Latin text of Schott’s items is quoted in entirety or in part in the notes, and selected passages are translated in the discussion.

10. Charles Schmidt in a series of articles … Histoire littéraire…

“Notices sur les humanistes strasbourgeois. II Pierre Schott,” RA (1857), VIII, 241-256, 308-321, 337-352. H. L., II, 2-35.

11. the disastrous Strassburg fire of 1870

Cf. p. xxii and N. 56.

12. Vulpinus (Renaud) published in an article…

JbGElsLotr, X (1894), 37-61. Vulpinus has brief introductory remarks and a few footnotes. He does not give the Latin text, nor does he explain why he omitted four of Schott’s letters to Geiler (#34, #48, #135, #137). His German verse translation of the poem “De tribus Iohannibus” (ibid., 57-61) is in the elegiac metre of the original.

13. Wolfgang Stammler… has two sentences on Schott…

Von der Mystik zum Barock, 56: “Da kehrte 1488 der Kanonikus Peter Schott (gest. 1492) aus Italien, wo er sich den juristischen Doktorhut erworben hat, in das Thomas = Stift zurück und brachte neues Latein, neue Schriften, neue Gedanken von dort mit. Das Kapitel von St. Thomas nimmt nunmehr den jungen Humanismus in seine Obhut.” These sentences are repeated in the second edition (1950), p. 65. From the Lucubraciunculae it is apparent that Schott returned from Italy in 1481; that he became canon of New St. Peter in 1482; that he was never a canon of St. Thomas; and that he died in 1490. GGr2, I, 419 and Erhard, III, 280, say that Schott became canon in 1488.

14. Georg Ellinger… refers to Schott…

Geschichte der neulateinischen Literatur Deutschlands. I. Italien und der deutsche Humanismus, 411.

15. single studies on Schott published since 1900…

The pages for the articles mentioned are: Hammer, ZfdP (LXXVII, 1958), 361-371; Cowie, Kunstmann-Festschrift, 141-155, and SP (LVIII, 1961), 483-495.

P. xiii

16. the free imperial city of Strassburg

The higher ground at the confluence of the Ar and the Breusch with the Ill (whence some say derive Elsass, Alsace), near the point where the Ill flows into the Rhine, has since prehistoric times been a strategic site favored for settlement. The encircling network of river arms and swamps, which were later drained by canals, made the area easily defendable; it was a natural crossroads of main east-west and north-south travel routes; and it was situated in an abundant land. To the north and south stretched the broad, fertile Rhine valley; to the west rolled the foothills of the scenic Vosges towering in the distance; and to the east across the Rhine rose the sharp heights of the Black Forest. The waters teemed with fish and the forests abounded in game. Here grew the city we know as Strassburg or Strasbourg.

Through the centuries the city has had many names, the earliest of which Argenta, Argentilla or Argentos (ar=water, cf. Aar; gen=water, cf. Genoa, Geneva) was probably of Celtic origin. To the Romans the city was known as Argentorate or Argentoratum. According to some authorities this name comes from the German dialect of the Vangiones; Ptolemy, however, claims that the city was so called because of the silver mines found by the Romans in the area. Ptolemy’s explanation gave rise to the names Silberina, Silberstadt, Argentoracum and Argentina, the last mentioned being the one favored by the Alsatian humanists and the early printers. The name Strateburgum, from which Strassburg is derived and which means the fort at the crossroads, came into use during the early Middle Ages. In former times the inhabitants of the city, too, had many names; e.g., Argentoracenses, Tribores, Tribaces and Argentinenses.

The first known inhabitants of the city were Celts. Then German tribes, mainly the Tribochi, pushed across the Rhine and mingled with the Celts. At the time of Augustus, when Strassburg was made one of the posts of the defense line (limes) against German tribes east of the Rhine, artisans and merchants from Italy and the East and legionaries from every part of the Roman empire were added to the already heterogeneous population. At the time of Ptolemy (ca. 140) Strassburg was the headquarters of the eighth Roman legion.

During the Völkerwanderung Strassburg lay directly in the path of barbarians invading Gaul and in 357 was the scene of Julianus’ victory over the Alemanni. After the withdrawal of the Roman legions from northern Europe at the end of the fifth century, the city was laid waste and deserted by most of its inhabitants. From the ruins rose the medieval city which became one of the most important trade centers on the main artery of travel between Italy and northern Europe and which in the age of Charlemagne boasted a cathedral unparalleled along the Rhine. By 1444 Strassburg had an estimated population of 17,000 to 18,000 and was exporting Alsatian wines to points as distant as England.

In 1262 Strassburg succeeded in casting off the rule of the bishops and became a free city of the Holy Roman Empire (a status it lost 400 years later on its capitulation 1681 to Louis XIV). In the mid-fourteenth century, after a prolonged struggle to break the power of the nobility in whose families the chief offices of the city had become virtually hereditary, a democratic government was formed under a rather flexible constitution (Schwörbrief) which with minor revisions, mostly linguistic, remained in effect until 1790 (when Strassburg sank to the level of a provincial capital and the first popularly elected mayor took office). The government of the free imperial city of Strassburg was considered exemplary. Erasmus called it “a monarchy without tyranny, an aristocracy without factions and a democracy without strife.”

In the latter part of the fifteenth and early years of the sixteenth centuries, before the turmoils brought on by the Reformation, Strassburg enjoyed its period of greatest efflorescence. This was the Strassburg which Aeneas Silvio Piccolomini termed the “German Venice” and which Bohuslaus von Hassenstein praised as superior to all its neighbors in natural and human resources (#297, p. 315). This was the Strassburg of Peter Schott.

Cf. Borries, 70-74. Dacheux, Réf., Appendix X. Dollinger, 9-13. Glöckler, I, 6f., 37. Hertzog, viii, 40. Rapp, 36. Rathgeber, Strassburg, 5. Spach, Zunftwesen, Iff. Specklin, 9, 85-88 (text of Schwörbrief). Wittmer-Meyer, Introduction, passim. Cf. also N. 69.

17. Strassburg… became a leading center of humanism…

By the mid-1490’s Strassburg had the intellectual atmosphere for which Schott had longed on his return from Italy in 1481. Not only had a younger generation of Strassburgers been schooled in the humaniora, but also scholars from elsewhere had been attracted to the city. Among the better known humanists active in Strassburg during the decade before and the decade after 1500 may be mentioned Thomas Wolf, Sr.,* Johann Müller,* Andreas Hartmann,* Sebastian Brant,* Thomas Wolf, Jr.,* Philip von Endingen,* Beatus Rhenanus,* Johannes Pauli, and Hieronymus Gebweiler. All of these men had received the best training possible at the time and many had studied in Italy. Some were jurists; others were writers; Rhenanus and Gebweiler were schoolmasters; Wolf, Jr. was the first Alsatian archeologist. A number of them were canons of the collegiate churches St. Thomas and New St. Peter, both of which were centers of learning.

Geiler must be included here. Geiler the humanist has always been overshadowed by Geiler the mystic, the reformer, the renowned preacher. Yet he was well versed in the classics; he was greatly concerned with education; he collected a magnificent library; he prodded his younger contemporaries to edit manuscripts and write history. In short, he had all the attributes of a humanist. He was also responsible for Brant’s return, as well as for Rhenanus’ and Gebweiler’s coming to Strassburg.

Wimpheling, too, belongs to the Strassburg humanists although he was never for any lengthy period resident in the city. It was he who founded the Strassburg humanistic society, “Sodalitas Litteraria Argentinensis,” as is attested by the words of a contemporary “ipse Jacobus fundamenta iecit.” Just when the society began is not known; it was in existence when Celtis visited Strassburg at the turn of the century and in full bloom for Erasmus in 1514.

18. first great humanistic gymnasium

In the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, elementary and secondary education was provided by the schools of the cathedral, the three collegiate churches and the monasteries. There were also schools operated by private individuals where fundamentals were taught, such as that of Johann Uttenheim, “Buchbinder und Leermeister.” Among the institutions noted for their excellence were those of St. Thomas, New St. Peter, the Dominicans, the Franciscans and the Hermits of St. William. Some schools offered advanced studies and had outstanding teachers; e.g., Heinrich von Wesmail was professor of theology at the Dominican school in 1481; Conrad Bondorf* lectured on Scotus at the Franciscan school in 1484 (#54, p. 59) and became lector there in 1489. (Cf. N. 123 and N. 480).

When the schools were disrupted by the economic and religious upheavals accompanying the Reformation, new means of training the young became necessary. In 1528 the Strassburg government formed a committee of three members – Stettmeister Jacob Sturm,* Altammeister Nicolaus Kniebs and Jacob Meyer from the Dreizehner – to organize a system of public education. Separate schools for boys and girls were established, and in 1531 the school at St. Thomas was taken over by the city as a secondary school. This school was moved in 1532 to the abandoned Franciscan monastery, the income from which was allotted to the headmaster, and then moved to its permanent home in the buildings of the former Dominican monastery which dated from 1228. In 1538 this first Protestant Gymnasium, named the Johann Sturm Gymnasium for its first rector, was formally opened. The university founded 1566 completed the Strassburg educational system.

The learned Dr. Johann Sturm (1507-1589) was brought to Strassburg by Jacob Sturm to be headmaster or rector of the Gymnasium and held that post until his death. Johann Sturm was not a member of the Strassburg Sturm von Sturmeck family but belonged to an unrelated family of Sturms from Sleida in the Eifel area. Like Dringenberg,* Agricola* and Erasmus, he had been trained by the Brethren of the Common Life (cf. N. 88). He studied at Louvain and Leyden, then at the university of Paris, where he met Jacob Sturm. For his outstanding contribution to education he was knighted by Emperor Charles V.

After having been ravaged by fire in 1860, the Gymnasium buildings were rebuilt as they had been originally. The Temple Neuf, the old monastery church adjoining the Gymnasium, was destroyed in 1870 but subsequently restored. Today, as one walks along the narrow street between the Place Kleber and the Place Broglie, one may see youngsters crowding through the gates of the “Jean Sturm Gymnase Protestant.”

Cf. ADB XXXVII, 21-38. Engel, Schulwesen, 39f.; (this work has a list of schoolmasters). Engel, Les commencements…, passim. Hasse, II, 163ff. Hertzog, viii, 144ff. Kindler von Knobloch, Buch, 365ff. TruttmannBurg, 189ff.

19. As Archer Taylor… remarks…

The statement quoted from Taylor, Problems, 47f., is true. Taylor, however, goes on to say that Schott was Geiler’s nephew and ward. Now the Schott and Geiler families were not related, and Schott, Sr., a wealthy man, outlived his son by 14 years. Evidently Taylor has confused Peter Schott with Peter Wickgram who was Geiler’s nephew as well as successor in the cathedral chair at Strassburg and whose education, along with that of his brother Conrad, Geiler supervised. Taylor also states that the Lucubraciunculae is a collection of letters written by Schott from Italy to Geiler. This is not quite correct; of the 303 items in the Lucubraciunculae 20 are letters to Geiler and of these only 5 were written from Italy, the others were written in Strassburg or at the baths (cf. N. 106).

J. G. Müller’s article on Geiler in Wetzer-Welte, V,191, has the rather ambiguous clause: “Peter Schott, der unter Geilers Obhut erwachsen..” which is correct only in the sense that Schott from his eighteenth year was greatly influenced by Geiler and that Schott, Sr., largely at Geiler’s urging, allowed his son to study theology and enter the Church.

20. The first… edition of the Lucubraciunculae…

Cf. P. Butler, Newberry Library Check List of Books printed during the Fifteenth Century (Chicago, 1924), 5. Catalogue of Books printed in the XVth Century now in the British Museum (London, 1908), I, 96. J. G. T. Graesse, Trésor de livres rares… (Dresden, 1865), VI, Part 1, 315. L. Hain, Repertorium bibliographicum (Stuttgart, 1831), II, 296, no. 14524. M. Maittaire, Annales typographici… (Amsterdam, 1732), IV, Part 2, 666. G. W. Panzer, Annales typographici (Nürnberg, 1793), I, 342. R. Proctor, An Index to the Early Printed Books in the British Museum (London, 1898), no. 409. J. A. S. Riegger, Amoenitates literariae friburgenses (Freiburg i. B., 1779), 187f. C. Schmidt, Histoire Littéraire de l’Alsace… (Paris, 1879), II, Index bibliographique, 34.

21. Margaret Stillwell… lists seven copies… in the United States.

Incunabula in American Libraries (New York, 1940), 453: “Copies: CHSL, HEHL, IoSL, LC, LC (T), NewL, PhF(W)L.” The third edition (1964), edited by F. R. Goff, notes (p. 552) copies also at Bryn Mawr and Yale.

P. xiv

22. Devise of Martin Schott

The devise at the end of the Lucubraciunculae (cf. p. 324, plate 4) differs from the devises in Martin Schott’s* other printings which feature Martin’s coat-of-arms, an unmistakable head of cabbage with curling leaves, and his initials M. S. (cf. the coat-of-arms copied by Schmidt from Luck’s Wappenbuch in the Schmidt material, Appendix A). This head of cabbage appears with the initials I. S. in the devises of Martin’s son Johann,* although Johann used also his grandfather Mentelin’s coat-of-arms.

The devise in the Lucubraciunculae which looks like a flowering tree with roots exposed is identical with the design in the coat-of-arms of Schott, Sr., as it appears in Straub’s 3 reproductions (Appendix L), viz.: in the description of the altar donated to Sts. Margaret and Agnes (cf. N. 84), in the copy of Schott’s epitaph (cf. N. 57) and in the copy of the memorial plaque to Zeisolf von Adelsheim* and his wife Ottilia Schott.* The use of this coat-of-arms in the Lucubraciunculae may have been meant as a tribute to both Schott, Jr., and Schott, Sr.

Some secondary sources agree with Straub in their portrayals or descriptions of the coat-of-arms of Schott, Sr., others give it as a cabbage of varying appearance. It is possible that the latter sources are confusing the coats-of-arms of the several branches of the Schott family, each of which had its own coat-of-arms as has already been noted in the case of Martin Schott. Because the cabbage appears so frequently in these coats-of-arms, the question has been raised as to whether the original Schotts of Alsace or Strassburg were gardeners. Friese’s surmise, however, that the Schotts who were gardeners in Strassburg in the sixteenth century were descendants of Schott, Sr., is incorrect, for the latter had only the one son Peter, Jr., who was unmarried.

Cf. ADB, XXXII, 405. Friese, II, 105. Hertz-Barach, 4 and Tafel II. Hertzog, vi, 203. Kindler von Knobloch, Buch, 331, no. 402. Pastorius, 186. Ristelhuber, 113f. Ritter, Histoire, 69. Schmidt, H. L., II, 2, n. 2 and “Notices… P.S.,” 241, n. 1; 242. Straub, 84, 85, 86.

23. On folios… are lacunae. These represent Greek quotations…

The folios mentioned are to be found on pp. 18, 72, 99, 118, 159, 190, 289, 296. The lacuna on p. 101 represents two words omitted in the quotation from Priscian (cf. N. 729).

24. Martin Schott had no Greek type.

Greek typography developed in Italy during the late fifteenth century and was not introduced north of the Alps until sometime after 1500. Prior to that time, printers in Strassburg and elsewhere in northern Europe coped with Greek quotations by leaving lacunae where they occurred, by rendering them in Latin or Gothic type, or by reproducing them rather unsatisfactorily with wooden blocks into which the Greek words had been cut. This process known as xylography (cf. N. 45) was tried at Mainz as early as 1468 and was first used at Strassburg by Johann Grüninger in his 1497 edition of Wimpheling’s Isidoneus germanicus and in his 1498 edition of Brant’s Varia Carmina. The first edition of Erasmus’ Collectanea at Paris in 1500 has lacunae as does the 1506 edition of Schott’s Epithoma by Hupfuff at Strassburg. In 1511 and 1512 Mathias Schürer at Strassburg was still rendering Greek words in Latin type.

Cf. A. Appelt, Studies in the Contents and Sources of Erasmus’ Adagia (diss. University of Chicago, 1942), 131. Bogeng, 453-462. Linckenheld, 169, 171, 174. R. Proctor, The Printing of Greek in the Fifteenth Century (Oxford, 1900), 138, 139f. D. B. Updike, Printing Types, their History, Forms and Use (Cambridge, 1922), I, 236, n. 1.

25. Martin Schott may have intended to have Greek written in… never entered…

Copies of the incunabulum seen at Paris, Strassburg, Vienna, the British Museum and the Vatican libraries have the original lacunae.

26. the word ‘priora’… line three of Wimpheling’s epitaph (cf. p. 10)

No other copy of the incunabulum seen has this word.

27. as Thomas Vulpinus says…

Cf. Vulpinus, 37.

28. These were collected… by Geiler von Kaysersberg and Jacob Wimpheling.

Because Wimpheling edited the incunabulum, he is generally given sole credit for collecting Schott’s works. To show that Geiler not only shared in the task, but may indeed have instigated the project of publishing the works, we quote his letter of 28 January 1494 to Reuchlin:*

Eximie doctor, si quas apud te Domini Petri Schotti tenes epistolas, eas mihi mitteri digneris. Colligere enim undecunque nitor, et multas iam collegi ac in unum volumen redigere statui imprimendum.

Aiunt enim illi qui earum rerum habent peritiam eas collectu fore dignas atque divulgatione. Ego plane non intelligo, ideo neque iudico, sed peritis aestimatoribus credo, praesertim si tuo quoque iudicio congruerint, quod non parum ponderis afferet.

Vale. Ex Argentina VI ante festum purificationis Beatae Mariae M.CCCC.LXXXXIIII. (From Epistolae illustrium virorum ad Reuchlinum [Tübingen, 1514], fol. e; text also in Geiger, Briefwechsel, 38, and Dacheux, Réf., 424, n. 1).

29. work… finished sometime before 1498… to have been printed in Basel

For Wimpheling’s statement, cf. his Epitome rerum Germanorum, cap. 57; also Schmidt, H. L., II, 34.

That the Lucubraciunculae was ready for publication in 1494 and had been offered to the printer Johann Amerbach in Basel is indicated by a passage in Leontarius’* letter of 19 November 1494 to Amerbach:

Deinde cum sciam ad huc duo apud te imprimenda extare opera vnum praestantissimi doctoris Ioannis Reuchlin, scilicet Capnion vel de verbo mirifico, alterum epistolarum disertissimi quondam doctoris Petri Scotti Argentinensis, te etiam atque etiam rogatum esse cupio, ut si impressa sint, uel alterum illorum mihi per hunc servum meum transmittas, qui tibi pecuniam praeste adnumerabit. (From Hartmann, 42).

Another indication that the Lucubraciunculae was ready for publication in 1494 is to be found in Trithemius’ two works the Liber de scriptoribus ecclesiasticis and the Cathalogus illustrium virorum, The Liber was published 1494, but the manuscript was already finished by 1492, as Trithemius observes in the introduction. The item on Schott in this work (f. CXXVIb) is identical, except for the date of Schott’s death (cf. N. 161, N. 164), with Trithemius’ item on Schott in the Lucubraciunculae (#5). The Cathalogus was published 1495; the item on Schott therein (f. LVb) differs somewhat from that in the Liber (cf. N. 161) and ends with the statement: “cuius [Schotti] vitam mores et ingenium iacobus vimphelingus descripsit.” It appears then that the item for the Lucubraciunculae was excerpted from the Liber soon after the publication of the latter or perhaps even before, because it was customary to circulate one’s manuscripts among friends for comment and criticism (cf. N. 309). Trithemius’ statement quoted above from the Cathalogus may mean that Trithemius had seen Wimpheling’s introduction to the Lucubraciunculae (#1) or possibly the manuscript of the Lucubraciunculae before writing the item in the Cathalogus.

30. Geiler and Wimpheling included writings of others… pertinent…

Cf. the works not by Schott in the Special Index of this volume. The short poems #298-#300 have no connection at all with Schott and were perhaps put in at the end of the collection as fillers.

31. It was not possible to assemble everything… as Wimpheling observes…

For Wimpheling’s observation, cf. #301, p. 322. Bohuslaus von Hassenstein mentions orations composed by Schott in Italy, none of which is extant; cf. also Notes 2, 4 and 5.

P. xv

32. Correspondence… the only remnant is Reuchlin’s invitation in verse…

Cf. #290, p. 311. Geiger, Reuchlin, 78, states that of Reuchlin’s* poetic works – a number of poems and a book of epigrams – only this invitation seems to have survived.

For Schott’s statements about Reuchlin in a letter to Brant,* cf. #10, p. 18.

33. Geiler writes to Reuchlin…

For the full text of the letter, cf. N. 28.

34. The item with the earliest date is a letter to Johann Gesler…

The letter of 26 December 1477 to Gesler* (#235) is also the earliest extant Latin writing by Schott, while the German letter of 28 February 1476 to Anna Schott (pp. 357f.) is the earliest extant writing of any kind by Schott. The letter to Gesler was placed by the editor in the poetry section, because it accompanied copies of poems which Schott and Hassenstein had composed (#236-#239). Two other letters (#240 and #242) are likewise in the poetry section because Schott enclosed them with copies of the poem “De tribus Iohannibus” (#241) sent to Geiler and Gossenbrot.

35. The last dated item is a letter… to Johann Goez

To be exact, the letter to Johann Goez* (#157) is the last dated piece of Schott’s correspondence. The item with the latest date is the document for a sale of onion seed grown in 1490 (#228), which was signed and sealed before the magistrate 5 November 1490. It was written by Schott at the time the contract was made, probably at seeding season, but was not legally processed until late fall when the seed was delivered.

36. For the most part, the items are chronologically arranged…

Items not in chronological order fall mainly into one of these categories:

1) Those which have dates giving only the year; cf. # #8, 11, 47, 125.

2) Those dated by movable feasts; cf. # #67, 98, 99, 101, 112, 131, 132, 135, 145-148.

3) Those with dates before the kalends of January; cf. N. 218.

4) Those forming units; cf. #36 and #37, N. 34, N. 278.

5) Those with typographical errors in dates; cf. N. 251 and N. 893.

6) Those without any date.

37. Wimpheling wrote… heading for each item…

There are no headings for the following items: # #49, 89, 106, 144, 183, 187, 200-207, 235, 264, 292, 293.

P. xvi

38. First letters of words… Initial letters in capitals

For difficulties in determining the meaning of abbreviations, cf. N. 342, N. 181, N. 681. Cf. also N. 1077, N. 1155.

P. xix

39. Interesting forms are… saguin-for sanguin-

According to Forcellini, III, 327, very often n precedings and other consonants is omitted: meses for menses, cosul for consul, quoties for quotiens, laterna for lanterna, ligula for lingula.

40. a Greek accusative ending: Peana

This is just one example of the many Greek accusatives. There are also a number of Greek plurals.

41. the German phrase ‘einer grieben’

Cf. N. 1549.

42. De mensuris syllabarum epithoma… The first edition

Cf. Catalogue of Books… in the British Museum, I, 166. Graesse, Trésor, VI, Part 1, 315. Hain Repertorium…, II, 296, no. 14525. Maittaire, Annales…, IV, Part ii, 728. Panzer, Annales…, I, 384. Proctor, Index…, 765. Stillwell, Incunabula… (21940), 453; (31964), 552. For bibliographical data, cf. N. 20.

43. third edition… was printed by Mathias Hupfuff at Strassburg

This edition, copies of which we have seen at the Bibliothéque nationale et universitaire de Strasbourg and at the British Museum, is a contrafaçon, i.e., the text is identical line for line and page for page with the text of the first edition. Hupfuff, however, has left lacunae for Greek words and instead of Latin type has employed broad Gothic type which makes the letters seem crowded. One may assume that the second and fourth editions of the Epithoma are also contrafaçons since the practise of copying previous editions was common during the early days of printing; cf. the editions of Gerson’s works (N. 136, par. 6).

Hupfuff inserted four poems in his edition. After the title are a distich by Johann Adelphus:

Parva solet magnum torrens superare fluorem

Coetera per breuibus sic preit et istud opus.

and a tetrastich by Gangolf Steinmetz*:

Qui cupis Interpres vatum genialis haberi

Atque supercilio condere digna gravi

Proxima qui phoebo conari versibus optas

Hijsce rudimentis perdidicisse potes.

After the colophon: “impressum per Mathiam Hupfuff Civem Argen. Anno salutis humane MCCCCC.VI,” appear Petrarch’s poem to Mary Magdalene at St. Baume (cf. biographical note on Geiler) and a poem of 100 lines “Ad diuam Mariam magdalenam Errantium specularum Udalrici Zasii historicon” by Ulrich Zasius.

44. copy of the first edition… Free Library of Philadelphia… Widener…

The quotation below is from a letter of 31 July 1962 by Ellen Shaffer, Rare Book Librarian of the Free Library of Philadelphia:

“The book is not in the Widener Branch and has not been for many years. The story back of it is that in 1899 P. A. B. Widener, the wealthiest Philadelphian of his day, gave his residence at Broad and Girard Avenue to the Free Library of Philadelphia (of which he was a Trustee) to be used as a branch library. With the gift he included Walter Arthur Copinger’s personal collection of incunabula, 500 volumes in number, which his agent had just purchased in England. For many years the incunabula remained in the old Widener home which had become a branch of the Free Library. However, in 1949 when the Rare Book Department was opened in the Central Library at Logan Square, the Copinger-Widener collection was at that time brought into this Department and has remained with us ever since. The old Widener home was later sold by Free Library and is now used as an office by an engineering firm. The name has been retained, and the Free Library’s Widener Branch is now located at 2531 W. Lehigh Avenue, but has no rare material as our rarities are now concentrated in this Department. Mr. Goff has promised that the forthcoming Stillwell census will make clear that the incunabula are no longer at the Widener Branch.”

In his 1964 edition of Stillwell, Mr. Goff lists this copy of the Epithoma as being in the Free Library of Philadelphia, Copinger-Widener Collection. He lists also a second copy in the United States at Yale.

P. xx

45. Greek proper names… written in by hand… lacunae for Greek words.

Since writing these comments, we have seen other copies of the first edition of the Epithoma and these copies have the identical Greek entries. The Greek was therefore not entered by hand but was printed by xylography, as Proctor (Printing of Greek…, 138) says, cf. N. 24.

46. Indeed, the arrangement of the sub-headings… is… highly confusing.

For examples of the confusion, cf. p. 347: I ante C, Genitiuus in icis and N. 1815 thereto, also p. 350: O ante R, decor decoris and N. 1820 thereto.

47. When the Epithoma was written is not known…

That the Epithoma was written for Bohuslaus von Hassenstein is certain. In poem #265 Schott remarks that he must needs obey Bohuslaus’ commands and has therefore sent recently to Bohuslaus, who, deeply involved in composing verses, is desirous of knowledge in metrics, a notebook – meagre in scope but useful – on words, position and syllable quantity. This description very nicely fits the Epithoma.

It seems likely that Schott composed the Epithoma soon after his return in the early summer of 1481 to Strassburg, because Hassenstein, left in Italy and suddenly deprived of Schott’s constant companionship and advice to which he had in six years of association grown accustomed, would have felt very keenly the need of a guide like the Epithoma. The date of composition would probably be during the period: summer 1481 and April 1482, before Schott became canon at New St. Peter (N. 116). We may be sure that the Epithoma was composed while Hassenstein was still in Italy (i.e., before the end of 1482); the rumor Schott mentions in his poem (#265) about Hassenstein’s having produced new poems which he (Schott) has not seen could very easily travel from Ferrara to Strassburg but could only with great difficulty travel from Bohemia to Alsace; Hassenstein himself complains (#106; cf. N. 813) that few persons go from Bohemia to Alsace.

48. Schott… asked Agricola about spellings and derivations…

Cf. #65, pp. 71f.; N. 568.

49. his two letters of 1486… Wimpheling had composed a work on prosody…

In #90 and #91 Schott answers the questions asked by Wimpheling in #89.

Wimpheling’s pamphlet of 12 leaves De arte metrificandi libellus was published at Strassburg in 1505 by Mathias Hupfuff and is said to have been printed in 1496 without Wimpheling’s consent. Some authorities claim it was composed by 1484; Knod places the probable date of its composition in the late 1470’s (Cf. Schmidt, H. L., II, 324; Knod, “Bibliographie,” 473).

Reuchlin* wrote a work on prosody which was published along with two similar works by other writers 1501 in Strassburg under the title Vocabularius breuiloquens cum arte.

50. Epithoma… the work of an amateur

As indicated in N. 47, the Epithoma in the form we have it was not meant to be a finished work for publication.

P. xxi

51. German letter to Anna Schott… the only example of his German writings

The letter to Anna is the only extant example of Schott’s original writings in German; for his German translations, cf. N. 2. and Appendices E and F.

52. He… wrote German letters… as is indicated by… a note of 1486…

Cf. #77.

53. The letter to Anna… Weislinger claims to have copied ‘von Wort zu Wort’

Schmidt says Weislinger’s copy is inaccurate, cf. N. 3.

P. xxii

54. One may question the dialect term ‘fierd’…

Schmidt’s copy has “freid,” cf. Appendix A.

55. Whether the original manuscript had commas… is not known…

Schmidt’s copy has commas, colons, semicolons but no virgules, cf. Appendix A.

56. Much source material… and many secondary sources… have perished…

Following are some reasons for the loss of primary and secondary source material. The wonderful cathedral library, a treasury from the eighth century of rare manuscripts and a storehouse of early printed books, was sold after the Reformation by the Protestant canons to many different buyers during the period 1584-1597. Remnants are now in the Bern public library and in the Vatican. The well-stocked libraries of Old St. Peter and New St. Peter vanished without a trace, as did excellent private libraries like Geiler’s which had been willed to his successors in the chair of cathedral preacher.

Conquering armies carried off materials as booty and not all of these materials had the happy fate of the “Wimpheling Codex” which was carefully preserved by the Swedes at Uppsala (cf. Appendix D). A serious fire ravaged the archives in 1686. The city hall “Pfalz” and the city chancery were pillaged in 1789 at the time of the French Revolution. The city library with its priceless collection of manuscripts and incunabula was completely destroyed in the conflagration started by bombs in 1870 during the Franco-Prussian war. In number of losses this was the worst disaster of all.

Cf. Grandidier, Essais, 361-363. Rathgeber, Schätze, 177. Schmidt, Bibliotheken, 14. Schneegans, “Pfingstfest,” 238.

A sad comment appears in the introduction to volume I of Dacheux, Fragments. In 1868 a committee under the auspices of la société pour la conservation des monuments historiques d’Alsace prepared to publish all the manuscript chronicles of Alsace but was unable to raise the necessary funds. Two years later the manuscripts disappeared forever, except for parts of the Chronik von Königshoven which were being printed in Leipzig at the time.

In World War II the Bibliothéque nationale et universitaire de Strasbourg was gutted by flame bombs and considerable losses of material were suffered, but the real treasures were safely hidden away.

From the latter part of the nineteenth century on Alsatian scholars have been diligently publishing older material of all kinds and since 1870 have even restored as much as possible of the old chronicles by painstakingly piecing them together from references and quotations in other works. So great is this commendable zeal for preservation of the past that not only may a work appear as single editions in both French and German or as part of a collection, but an excerpt from the work may appear as a book or an article under a different title. Because Alsace during the period 1871-1945 has come alternately under German and French rule, the names of writers and editors often vary from the German to the French form, e.g., Jean Jacques (Johann Jacob) Meyer, Charles (Karl) Schmidt, Louis (Ludwig) Schneegans, Lucien (Luzian) Pfleger. The result is that the bewildered investigator finds himself constantly confronted with the same material in different guise.

57. Copies of Schott’s epitaph

The original epitaph in the Zorn chapel of New St. Peter (N. 117) disappeared in 1791 during the Reign of Terror when the church was being used by the army as a magazine. Texts of the epitaph published since are taken from copies made before 1791, viz.: the copies of Reichard, Weislinger, Grandidier and Friese (cf. below).

Schmidt (H. L., II, 33, n. 95) has the text of the epitaph but gives no source. Except for omission of periods and the spelling of three words (huius, linguae, Susannaeque), the text agrees with Weislinger’s text which is discussed by Schmidt in n. 94, beginning on page 32. Following the text Schmidt makes the statement: “Cette inscription existe encore dans l’église catholique de S. Pierre-le-jeune”. That is, Schmidt says that, at the time he was writing (ca. 1878/79), the epitaph was still in New St. Peter. Perhaps the negative n’ was omitted before existe. In any case, Schmidt’s statement must be discounted (N. 7), for Horning, the historian of New St. Peter, not only says that the epitaph was lost after the French Revolution but tells of the new epitaph placed in the Zorn chapel at the time of restoration in 1891 (N. 143); this epitaph we have seen.

There is no way of ascertaining whether the four above-mentioned copies of Schott’s original epitaph were transcribed from the original or taken from transcriptions. One could expect Reichard, the genealogist of old Strassburg families, to have made a fairly exact transcription from the original, but unfortunately we have his text only in Straub’s copy which was made from the genealogical manuscripts of Reichard before their destruction in the fire of 1870. Grandidier may have transcribed his text directly from the original. Weislinger and Friese infer that they did so, but they disagree on the location of the original; Weislinger says he visited Schott’s tomb in New St. Peter 21 March 1749 and saw the epitaph set into the wall above the tomb, while Friese describes the epitaph as hanging on a pillar (“an einem Pfeiler aufgehängt”), a description supported by Horning’s statement (Festschrift, 35) that the broad indentation on the pillar at the right of the street entrance to the Zorn chapel marks the place of Schott’s epitaph.

Reichard’s copy (made in the early sixteenth century; copy in Straub, 85; cf. Appendix L):

PETRO. SCHOTTO. . DIVI IVNIORIS

PETRI AEDIS CANONICO PRESBYTERO

INNOCENTISSIMO IVRISCONSVLTO ET

ORATORI POETAEQVE. DOCTO. PETRI SCHOT

TI SENATORIS SVSSANNAEQVE FILIO PIEN

TISSIMO. AMICI MESTI POSVERE.

MOR. ANNO. M.CCCC.LXXXX.

II

(Schott and Cöllen coats-of-arms)

Weislinger’s copy (Armamentarium, 780; published 1749):

PETRO SCHOTTO. ARGEN. HUJUS. DIVI. PETRI. AEDIS.

CANONICO. PRESBYTERO. INNOCENTISSIMO. JURIS.

CONSULTO. ET. ORATORI. POETAEQUE. CLARISSIMO.

AC. GRAECAE. LINGUE. DOCTO. PETRI. SCHOTTI. SENATO-

RIS. SUSANNEQUE. FILIO. PIENTISSIMO. AMICI

MESTI. POSUERE. VIX. ANN. XXXII. M. II. D. III. MORT.

ANNO. CHRI. M.CCCC.LXXXX. II. YD (Die 13.) SEPTEMB.

Note Weislinger’s interpolation in the last line. He read the year as M.CCCC.LXXXXII and the day as the Ides (13) September instead of two days before the Ides (12) September, as is evident from his words: “Hieraus sehen wir, dass der junge Herr Schott gestorben seye, den Herbst Monat Anno 1492, seines Alters 32 Jahr. 2. Monath und 3 Tag. Folglich ist sein Geburths Tag gewesen 10. Julii 1460.”

Grandidier’s copy (Mélanges, 352 and Nouv. oeuvr., II, 490; Grandidier published works during the 1780’s, but the two mentioned remained in manuscript until 1897-1900):

Petro Schotto Argentinensi, hujus divi junioris Petri aedis canonico, presbytero innocentissimo, jurisconsulto et oratori, poetaeque clarissimo ac graecae linguae docto, Petri Schotti Senatoris Susannaeque filio pientissimo, amici mesti posuere. Vixit annos XXXIII, mens. II, die. Ill, mortuus an. Christi M.CCCC.LXXXX. secundo ydus Septembris.

Friese’s copy (II, 105; published 1791):

Petro Schotto Argent, hujus Divi. Petri

Aedis Canonico Presbytero innocentissimo juris

Consulto et Oratori poeteque Clarissimo ac

Graece Lingue Docto. Petri Schotti Senatoris,

Susanneque Filio pientissimo amici mesti

posuere. Vix. Ann. XXXII. M. II. D. III.

Mort. MCCCCXC. II Sept.

Friese omitted Yd. before Sept. in the last line, but corrected his error in a footnote on the same page as the epitaph.

Comparison of the four copies yields the following data:

1) Reichard’s copy lacks words and phrases present in the other three; it does not give the number of years, months and days Schott lived as do the others.

2) Weislinger and Friese give Schott’s age as 32 years, 2 months and 3 days; Grandidier gives it as 33 years, 2 months and 3 days.

3) Weislinger, Grandidier and Friese agree on the number of months and days Schott lived after his last birthday, viz. 2 months and 3 days.

4) Discounting Weislinger’s interpolation and misinterpretation, all versions agree on the year of Schott’s death as 1490 and on the day of his death as 2 days before the Ides of September.

Counting the days at each end in the Roman fashion, we can calculate Schott’s day of death as 12 September and his day of birth as 10 July. Note that Weislinger, by not counting the day at each end, arrived at the same date for Schott’s birth.

The positive evidence obtained from the copies of Schott’s epitaph is that his birthday was 10 July and that he died 12 September 1490.

58. These errors and discrepancies have… become cumulative.

The above statement is best exemplified by the disagreement of secondary sources on Schott’s age, the year of his birth, the year of his death and the cause of his death. Most disagreement stems from the four sources mentioned below, which were either incorrect or were misinterpreted.

1) The copies of Schott’s epitaph, as already noted in N. 57, do not agree on his age.

2) The biographical items on Schott in Trithemius, Liber (f. CXXVIb), Cathalogus (f. LVb) and subsequent editions of the two works give the date of Schott’s death as 1491. This date was corrected to 1490 in Trithemius’ item for the Lucubraciunculae (cf. N. 160).

3) The phrase “annos nondum tres et triginta natus” is used by Wimpheling in the conclusion to the Lucubraciunculae (#301, p. 322) when speaking of Schott’s youth. Wimpheling is stressing the fact that Schott had not yet reached the traditionally accepted age of maturity, i.e., 33, a third of a century, or – according to some authorities – the age of Christ (cf. DW, VI, 2038; Cath. Ency., Ill, 738). In other words, “not yet three and thirty years old” was a stock phrase and was not necessarily meant to be taken literally.

4) Specklin gives the date of Schott’s death as 1491 and his age as “not over 30 years,” and in a melodramatic account which would do credit to a modern detective novel claims Schott died of poison in a drink handed him by the provost’s cook:

Anno 1491 war ein gelehrter thumbherr, als man nit finden möchte, zum Jungen S. Peter, nit über 30 iahr alt, Peter Schott genant. Der hub an auss gottes wort alle laster zu straffen, verwarff den gekaufften ablass, so ohne reu und besserung des lebens kaufft wurde, verwarff auch des pabsts ansehen, der sich über Christum wolle setzen, die ehre gehoere Christum zu, der uns mit seinem leiden und sterben ablass erworben hatte, wer solches mit warem glauben annehme. Als er aber etliche geistliche missbrauch, darneben der geistlichen gottlos leben auch angriffe, wardt er in drey stunden todt, dan ihme mit gifft vergeben wurde, als er einsmals mit dem probst asse, dessen koechin ihm solches in einem trunck soil zugereicht haben. (“Collectanea,” 287)

Dacheux (Réf., 421, n. 3) terms this account “une calomnie posthume” and Schmidt (H. L., II, 33, n. 94) calls it “un récit de fantaisie.” Certainly there is no evidence that Schott opposed the sale of indulgences; on the contrary, he once asked that a sale of indulgences be announced (#207; cf. also N. 2206). Neither is there evidence that he felt the pope considered himself above Christ. Schott did, however, condemn the practice of clerics’ holding multiple benefices (cf. p. xxx and N. 133, par. 3) and gave his opinion (#217) on such clerical practices as the use of funds received from the Church to support concubines.

In assessing the reliability of Specklin’s account, it must be kept in mind that Specklin was a militant Lutheran of the sixteenth century and used the lives and works of pre-Reformation men of integrity like Geiler and Schott to bolster arguments for his own religious persuasion. This was customary among post-Reformation writers, both Lutheran and Catholic (e.g., Flacius Illyricus and Weislinger); the Lutherans saw in Geiler and Schott forerunners of the Reformation, the Catholics saw in them proof that there were enlightened, responsible members of the clergy before the Reformation.

In later secondary sources Schott’s age varies from 31-34, the year of his birth from 1457 to 1460, the year of death from 1482-1499 (extremes like 1499 may, of course, be typographical errors). The majority of writers followed Trithemius’ sketches on Schott in the Liber and Cathalogus; some obtained their data from one or other of the epitaph copies, several even repeating Weislinger’s error; others took Wimpheling’s comment literally; a few accepted Specklin’s story, notably Stöber (Neue Alsatia, 281), Horning (Festschrift, 36, and other works) and Ristelhuber (115) who suggests the cook may be a personification of the plague. Most writers in the past 80 years have quoted Schmidt (H. L., II, 4, and “Notices… P.S.,” 241f.) who gives Schott’s dates as 1458-1490. It is noteworthy that Dacheux (Réf., 286ff.) who did considerable research on Schott, arrives at the correct conclusion that Schott was born 10 July 1460 and died of the plague 12 September 1490.

Curious inconsistencies appear in data given by the same writer; e.g.; Adam (24) has Schott’s dates as 1459-1491/92 and his age as 31; Cave (Appendix, 1693) has the dates as ca. 1459-1491, the age as 31. Schmidt, as noted above, gives the dates as 1458-1490, but in his “Notices… P.S.” (339) he remarks that Reuchlin was 2 years older than Schott, although the accepted dates for Reuchlin are 1454/55-1522, and in H. L. (I, 19) he sets the time of composition of Wimpheling’s poem to the Virgin in 1492, yet lists Schott as one of those who composed verses lauding this poem (cf. #279 and N. 1701 and N. 1702).

59. almost the only reliable source on Peter Schott… the Lucubraciunculae

Data about which later secondary sources disagree, viz.: when Schott obtained his baccalaureate degree at Paris, when he returned from Italy after receiving his doctorate, why he was prevented from going to Paris for further study in 1484, etc., can be established by comparing évidence in the Lucubraciunculae with information from university records and a few other reliable sources (cf. N. 92, N. 95, N. 121).

By such comparison – along with the positive information from the copies of the epitaph – can also be determined Schott’s age, the date of his birth, the date of his death and the cause of his death. (Cf. N. 57 and N. 58 for disagreement on these vital statistics).

1) The date of birth. Trithemius’ item in the Lucubraciunculae (#5) gives the date of Schott’s death as 1490; this date was corrected from 1491 to 1490 when the item was excerpted from the Liber (cf. N. 161) and is the date given by all copies of the epitaph (N. 57). Trithemius’ item (#5) also has the information that Schott died in his thirty-first year, i.e., after his thirtieth birthday. Three copies of the epitaph agree that his birthday was 10 July. Accordingly, the date of his birth was 10 July 1460. There is no evidence for a date of birth earlier than 1460; rather there is evidence to support this date.

In the letter to his father, written shortly before 1 April 1478, which sets forth arguments for remaining longer in Italy, Schott speaks of himself at one point as needing time to mature in years, body and knowledge, and at another point as being too young and too slight for his years to attempt completing the doctorate in both laws (#8, p. 13f.). These arguments sound reasonable coming from a lad who would not mark his eighteenth birthday until the following July. Six months later, on 15 September, he writes in much the same vein to Rot: the extension of time for study granted by his parents is, he says, greatly to his advantage because of his age and the voluminous amount of material to be assimilated for the degree in both laws (#9, p. 17). Again these statements sound reasonable from one who had passed his eighteenth birthday just 2 months previously.

The close friendship between Schott and Hassenstein began in the first days of their association at Bologna, when they were both in their early teens. Usually boys at this stage of adolescence have their best friends in their own age group, and there is no indication that these two boys were different from others. When Schott crossed the Alps into Italy and matriculated at Bologna in early 1474 (N. 95), he was in his fourteenth year; as Dacheux says (Réf., 287, n. 2): “Schott aurait eu treize ans passés en partant pour l’Italie en 1473-74.” Hassenstein’s date of birth is given as 1460/1462, but the most likely year for his birth is 1461, for in a poem written shortly after he returned from his odyssey in August 1491 he tells us that he has passed his thirtieth birthday: “transcendi aetatis bis tria lustra meae” (Potucek, xi). That he was the younger of the two friends is clear from his words “Is [Schott] me Bononiae adolescentulum adolescens unice diligebat et observabat” (ibid., 55). If, like Schott, he arrived at Bologna during the first half of the year 1474 (even though the first entry for him in the Acta Bonon. is 1475), he was in his thirteenth year when he met Schott.

2) Date of death. From evidence in the Lucubraciunculae Schott died shortly after 6 September, the date on which his last dated letters were written (#156, #157). The only item by Schott with a later date is the legal document (#228) which, as already noted (N. 35), was prepared by Schott but not legally processed until 5 November 1490. None of the undated letters, poems, or other items has references warranting a date later than 6 September 1490. The copies of the epitaph agree that he died on 12 September 1490. Cf. also N. 1123.

3) Cause of death. There can be no doubt that Schott died of the plague. His first reference to the 1490 outbreak of plague in Strassburg occurs in the letter of 30 August to Johann Müller; he writes that he has not yet decided to leave Strassburg, for it seems safer to stay at home, and that he is taking remedies daily (#152, p. 166). On 3 September he writes again to Müller that he is not going to the baths although he had hoped to persuade his parents that he should go “praesertim hoc Autumni tempore” (#155, p. 171). In the last letter to Müller 6 September he observes that one reason for his difficulty in getting guarantors for Müller is the absence of friends because of the plague: “alij mei… ob pestem absentes: id agere non potuerunt”; and speaking of himself he says he was bathed in perspiration the previous night, has been bled and feels better that day (#156, pp. 171f.).

That there was a severe epidemic of plague in Strassburg during the latter part of the year 1490 is confirmed by sources other than Schott’s writings. According to Jodocus Gallus’* elegiac (#295) Schott died when savage plague was raging in the city: “dum pestis atrox ferit Vrbem.” In mid-August the city council, which had the right to arrange religious observances, ordered small processions in all churches to ward off the plague (“fur den Sterbott”), and on 20 October the council ordered a great procession with Ammeister and council participating (cf. Pfleger, “Gottesdienste,” 37; Stenzel, “Gerichte,” 234). It might also be mentioned here that farther north in Heidelberg the university closed its doors on 25 June because of the plague and did not reopen until 2 February 1491 (cf. Toepke, xli; 397, n. 1).

Jacob Wencker (1668-1743), archivist of Strassburg, who made extracts from various Strassburg archives (since lost), has in his Archivi (428 and 632) two passages on Schott. The first reads: “Petrus Schottus filius obierat peste infra VIII Nativitat. Marie quae fuit 12 Septembris anno 1490. In cujus locum in canonicum Sti Petri Junioris assumptus est Comes Henricus de Werdenberg”; that is, Schott died of the plague 12 September 1490 and was succeeded as canon of New St. Peter by Graf Heinrich von Werdenberg (cf. N. 130, last paragraph). The second reads: “[Schott] mortuus Argentinae et in Ecclesia S. Petri sepultus, sub Friderico Imper. III et Innocentio Papa VIII anno Domini 1490 Indictione nona aetatis suae 31.” That this passage is almost identical with that at the end of Trithemius’ item (#5) may be coincidence in use of formulae, or it may indicate that Wencker quoted from the item; in either case, the archivist’s stamp is given to the date of Schott’s death as 1490 and his age as the thirty-first year.

Taking into account all the above evidence, the conclusion must be that Schott was born 10 July 1460 and died of the plague in his thirty-first year on 12 September 1490, a conclusion in which Dacheux concurrs.

P. xxiii

60. Details of his boyhood and other data… Hassenstein’s oration

Biographical material for the period before 1477 is found in #9, where Schott reminisces about student years at Paris, in #178, where he speaks briefly about his study at Paris and his early years at Bologna, and in the poem#287, p. 310.

For Trithemius’ item, cf. #5; for Wimpheling’s introduction, cf. #1; for Hassenstein’s oration, cf. #297 and N. 1751.

61. Trithemius gives the date of death… does not mention the day and month

Cf. N. 59.

62. scholars have erred in… funeral oration

E.g., ADB, XIX, 49: “Gedächtnissrede”; Ristelhuber, 114f.: “son éloge funébre”; Schmidt, H. L., II, 33: “un éloge funèbre.”

63. Bohuslaus speaks of Schott as being alive…

#297, p. 321: “hunc quem praesentem intuemini: cuius mentem sensusque et os cernitis…” (cf. N. 101, par. 3).

Ryba (iv) suggests that the oration was merely an exercise written at the time Schott received his doctorate and that it was never delivered; he does not say on what évidence he bases this assumption.

64. Trithemius’ details… accepted as true… knew the facts.

Cf. N. 161.

65. The Schotts… were an old and important patrician family

The fact that the Schotts of Strassburg were patricians, not nobles, was a deciding factor for the career of Peter Schott, Sr., because as a patrician he was eligible for membership in the guilds and hence also eligible to hold the office of mayor (cf. N. 69; Schott family in Biographical Section; Appendix L of this volume).

66. A manuscript on genealogy… Clans…

The reference is to the lost Hertz manuscript, excerpts of which are in Straub (81, note). Another Claus Schott served on the city council in 1500 (Straub, 83); he may be Schott’s cousin “Vetterclaus” mentioned in #20, p. 29.

67. Last record of the family… 1554

From 1179 to 1554 the Schott family is documented regularly in Strassburg records. After Sebastian Schott who appears in an entry of Straub (84): “1554 Sebastian S. Dreier auf dem Pfennigturm” (cf. Appendix L), there are only two Schotts mentioned: an Augustin Schott, “Gärtner” (Kindler von Knobloch, Buch, ii, 331), who in 1587 lived in the Schottengasse unter Wagnern, now called Impasse des Jardiniers, and an Odele Schott, prioress of Sts. Margaret and Agnes, whose tripart painting of the Crucifixion in the convent church had the Schott coat-of-arms and the inscription:

Othila Schottin Priorin

Zu S. Margaretha und S. Agnesen

in Strassburg Anno 1611. (Straub, 87).

She is probably identical with the Odele of another Straub entry (80) who is noted as having entered the same convent as Anna Schott and whose name appeared on a tablet incorporated into a frieze in 1661 at St. Etienne.

68. Bernard Hertzog… lists the Schotts… extinct before his time.

Hertzog (1537 – after 1592) was writing in the latter part of the sixteenth century.

69. Not only was he on the city council…

As mentioned in N. 16, Strassburg had set up a democratic form of government in the mid-fourteenth century. Because the internal organization of the several bodies changed from time to time, descriptions of the government vary. The government at the time of Peter Schott, as described by Dacheux (Réf., Appendix, X), operated, in brief, as follows:

The chief magistrate or mayor, called Ammeister or magister scabinorum, was elected for a term of one year by the 20 guilds from their membership, which admitted artisans, burghers and patricians, but no nobles; hence no noble could hold the office of mayor. As secondary presiding officers with the mayor were four Stettmeister who were elected annually by the nobles for a term of 3 months each.

The highest governing body was the city council or grand council, grosser Rat, presided over by the mayor and composed of 31 members: 20 plebes, Schöffen, elected by the guilds (10 being changed annually) and 10 nobles (including the Stettmeister) elected by the nobles.

The second highest governing body, the so-called permanent magistracy, consisted of three chambers, the members of which served for life: a) the chamber of the XIII or Dreizehner, presided over by the mayor and composed of 4 nobles, 4 former mayors (Altammeister) and 4 plebes. This chamber had charge of foreign affairs and the army. b) The chamber of the XV or Fünfzehner, presided over by a member chosen from the floor and composed of 5 nobles and 10 plebes. This chamber administered internal affairs, the constitution and finances, c) The chamber of the XXI or Einundzwanziger, composed of men distinguished for ability and service who had been twice elected to the city council and were members of the XIII and XV. This chamber served in an advisory capacity.

The body of 300 magistrates, Schöffen or scabini, presided over by the mayor and composed of 15 members from each of the 20 guilds, convened at the call of the city council and was seldom assembled.

The small council, kleiner Rat, presided over by the Altammeister who had just served and composed of 6 nobles and 11 plebes, controlled affairs concerning wills, succession, possession, servitude, etc.

Cf. the description of the Strassburg government in the fifteenth century by Borries (70-74), which differs in details from that of Dacheux. Cf. also Bernegger, passim. Pastorius, passim. Piton, I, 157. Spach, Zunftwesen, 1ff.

70. 1470 to 1490 he served four terms as mayor…

Schott, Sr., was elected mayor 1470, 1476, 1482, 1488. When the official year of the Strassburg government began and terminated we do not know; it seems not to have corresponded to the calendar year. Did it correspond to the indiction year (cf. N. 164)?

71. In 1483… he had the… Schwörbrief… rewritten.

Sources do not agree on the years for the various versions of the Schwörbrief to Schott, Sr.’s, time: Hertzog gives 1382, 1416, 1482; Specklin gives 1332, 1371; the Straub entry on the revision made during Schott, Sr’.s, term as mayor gives the year 1483, but this revision as quoted by Weislinger ends with the words: “und wir Peter Schott der Ammeister… geben auf den heiligen Weihnacht abend Anno 1482.”

Cf. Hertzog, viii, 59-61, 70-72, 82-86. Specklin, 9, 85f. Straub, 81, Weislinger, 334.

72. Strassburg… an influential member of the confederation of Rhine cities

The beginning of the confederation (Basse Ligue, niedere Vereinigung) was the League Decapolis formed 1353 by 10 free imperial cities of Alsace: Mülhausen, Colmar, Münster, Türckheim, Kaysersberg, Schlettstadt, Obernai (Oberehnheim), Rossheim, Hagenau, Weissenburg. In succeeding centuries the number of members varied as original members quit and others of the free imperial cities of Alsace (Strassburg, Landau, Seltz, Hagenbach) joined the union; but the confederation existed until the French Revolution.

The city of Basel and the Swiss cantons were close allies of the confederation. It was to demonstrate how quickly Zürich could bring aid to Strassburg that a party of stout-hearted boatmen left Zürich with a pot of hot porridge before sunrise on 21 June in the critical year of 1476 and at sunset bore the pot of porridge – still warm – triumphantly ashore at Strassburg. The hundredth anniversary of this amazing feat (Zürich is a day’s drive from Strassburg by auto) was commemorated by Fischart in his poem Das glückhaft Schiff von Zürich (1576).

In 1474 the confederation along with its close allies (the Swiss cantons and the city of Basel) formed a 10-year league with other states of the upper Rhine against Charles the Bold* (cf. N. 74). Among the members of this league were Bishop Ruprecht of Strassburg, Bishop Johannes of Basel, Archduke Sigismund of Tyrol* (because of his holdings in upper Alsace), Duke Reinhardt of Lorraine and sundry landed nobles of Alsace; for some years Emperor Friedrich III and Louis XI of France also joined the league. This is the league referred to as foederati and confoederati in the Lucubraciunculae.

Cf. #26, p. 35; #28, p. 36; #34, p. 41; #55, p. 60; #149, p. 163; #170, pp. 190f. (gives names of confederates). Cambridge Medieval History, VIII, 210ff. Hertzog, ii, 121. Schöpflin, Histoire, 14-22. Stenzel, “Politik,” 53. Cf. also N. 74.

73. Schott, Sr.,… had to go on diplomatic missions… son lamented… absence

For these diplomatic missions, cf. biographical note on Schott, Sr. The son mentions the father’s absence#25, p. 33; #26, p. 35; #28, p. 36; #149, p. 163; #169, p. 189; #170, p. 190.

74. Conflicts with Charles the Bold

When Charles the Bold* in 1467 succeeded his father Philip the Good as duke of Burgundy, the most powerful duchy in Europe, he set out to realize his three predecessors’ dream of recreating old Lotharingia, the middle kingdom of 843, by annexing the territories lying between his southern possessions (Burgundy and Franche Comté) and his northern possessions (among which were Luxemburg, Brabant, Flanders and Holland). For ten years he overran his neighbors and terrorized the upper Rhine. Emperor Friedrich was too weak to check him. Even the mighty Louis XI, assiduously consolidating and expanding his kingdom, saw in his relative Duke Charles not only a formidable rival for territory but, through Charles’ alliance with the English, a grave threat to France itself.

Charles’ first opportunity of gaining a foothold on the left bank of the upper Rhine came in May 1469 when Archduke Sigismund of Tyrol,* of the “ever-empty purse,” who needed money for his war with the Swiss, mortgaged his lands of the Sundgau, the Breisgau and Pfirt in upper Alsace to Charles for 80,000 gold guilders. Believing that the mortgage would never be paid because of traditional Austrian penury, Charles sent Peter von Hagenbach as governor (bailiff, Landvogt) into these lands. By exorbitant taxation and outrageous conduct Hagenbach soon antagonized the people to the point of revolt, and when protests to Charles fell on deaf ears, riots broke out.

In July 1473, at the death of Duke Nicholas of Lorraine, Charles began maneuvers to dispossess the rightful heir Reinhardt and to claim the duchy of Lorraine for himself, thus gaining another part of old Lotharingia.

With a view to stopping Duke Charles’ encroachments on the empire by making him a powerful ally, Emperor Friedrich met him 20 September 1473 at Trier. Marriage between Friedrich’s son Maximilian and Charles’ daughter Mary, the most sought after heiress in Europe, was discussed. Charles, eager for a royal title, was to be created King in Burgundy, as well as King of the Romans, and to be guaranteed the succession as Holy Roman emperor. Agreement on details, however, proved impossible, and Friedrich, frightened by Charles’ arrogance and power, fled by night across the Rhine.

In the same year (1473) Charles caused consternation in Alsace by marching south into the mortgaged lands. Archduke Sigismund, dismayed at Charles’ growing might, repented his bargain and redeemed his lands with money which was loaned by Basel and Strassburg and for which Louis XI stood surety.

In the spring of 1474 Hagenbach, who had been imprisoned by the infuriated people of the Breisgau, was tried before an assembly (Malesitz) of delegates from the Rhine league (cf. N. 72) and Breisach; he was condemned to death and beheaded. The people’s joy at their deliverance merged with Easter celebrations and expressed itself in the chant sung even by children:

Christ is risen, the governor has been captured,

Let us rejoice!

Sigismund will console us, Kyrie Eleison!

Hagenbach lived on in folksong and legend as the prototype of the wicked governor and became the model for Gessler in Schiller’s Wilhelm Tell. His execution was commemorated by Wimpheling in a poem of 1474.

Charles the Bold responded to the execution of Hagenbach by opening hostilities. For three years the league fought Charles on battlefields in Alsace and Lorraine until in 1477 at Nancy, on 5 January (a day long celebrated in Alsace) the golden age of Burgundy came to an abrupt end with the slaying of Charles and the decisive victory of the league. Duke Reinhardt became master of his lands, although he had to borrow 44,000 florins from Strassburg to pay for Swiss aid, a debt not paid until 1622; Louis XI received Piccardy and the duchy of Burgundy; Maximilian and Mary of Burgundy were wed; and Alsace, as so often throughout its history, began repairing its war damages. Strassburg which had had 500 foot soldiers and 300 cavalry at Nancy suffered considerable loss in lives and property; yet despite the 156,000 florins spent outright on the war and the money lent to Dukes Reinhardt and Sigismund, there had been no special levy, a fact which gives some indication of the prosperity of the city and the healthy state of the public treasury.

Cf. Calmette, 185, 189, 258f. Dacheux, Fragments, III, part iv, “La chronique strasbourgeoise de Jacques Trausch,” 12-25 (best chronicle account of the Burgundian wars). Dacheux, op. cit., II, 462f. Friese, 90f. Hertzog, ii, 120-126, viii, 140. Anon., “Peter von Hagenbach, das historische Urbild von Landvogt Gessler in Schillers Wilhelm Tell,” Elsässische Monatsschrift für Geschichte und Volkskunde, I (1910), 632. Rapp, 37, 40. Reuss, Meyer, 98ff. Tritheminus, Ann. Hirs., 481-496 passim.

75. Schott, Sr., was one of the two commanders…

Cf. note on Schott, Sr., in Biographical Section.

76. the committee called ‘fabrica’ which managed finances… of the cathedral.

The term fabrica, fabric – literally, building and, in ecclesiastical usage, the church building – came to mean not only the administrative building of the church but also the body which cared for the church buildings.

In the late Middle Ages the fabrica of the Strassburg cathedral was one of the richest in France and Germany. The city council named the collector of revenue of the fabrica and appointed the three directors from the permanent magistracy; that is to say, the laity, not the clergy, controlled the revenues and administration – a situation unusual at that time. Originally control had been in the hands of the bishop, but at the death of Bishop Walter von Geroldseck in 1263 it had passed to the canons of the cathedral chapter, because disputes between bishops and the city had impeded construction of the cathedral. In 1290 the canons had requested the city council to assume the responsibility. (Cf. Grandidier, Essais, 38-44 passim; 409-413).

The Gothic building of the fabrica (Frauenhaus, Maison de Notre Dame), parts of which date from the thirteenth century, was completed 1347. It stands beside the bishop’s palace in the cathedral square and originally housed not only the administrative offices and the treasury of the cathedral, but also the workshops, studios, storerooms and equipment needed by the artisans. In the great beamed hall on the main floor assembled the masons and stone cutters at whose head was the master builder; here, too, from its founding until 1620 met the grand chapter of the Order of Free Masons. In 1580 was added a new wing of the same Gothic style as the old building. (Cf. Schadäus, 106-110).

Today the fabrica building, restored and expanded in 1931 to include adjoining houses of historical interest, is the Musée de l’Oeuvre de Notre Dame, said to be the most beautifully arranged museum in France. The building complex with its two elegant circular staircases, its finely proportioned rooms and historic windows is a museum piece in itself. The exhibits, some of which are unique, have been strategically and artistically displayed to show both them and their surroundings to full advantage.

77. Strassburg cathedral

On the site of the present magnificent cathedral there once stood a grove sacred to the Tribochi god of war. The Romans felled the grove to make place for their temple to Mars (Hercules?). In the fourth century the first bishop of Strassburg erected on the ruins of the Roman temple a cathedral which was destroyed by barbarians 406-407. Its successor, the renowned cathedral begun by Clovis 504 or 507, had stood five centuries when in 1007 it was struck by lightning and gutted by the ensuing fire. Eight years later the ground was cleared for the Romanesque structure which forms the core of the present cathedral. In 1176 the Gothic style of architecture supplanted the Romanesque for the remainder of the construction. The great spire, rising like a tall taper of stone lace and dominating the landscape for miles, was built 1277-1439. The projected second spire was never begun, although detailed plans for it were drafted; these may be seen in the Musée de l’Oeuvre de Notre Dame.

The sacred spring, a deep well used successively by the Tribochi and the Romans for cleansing sacrifices and sanctified for baptism by St. Remigius, was to be seen in the cathedral until 1696 when it was covered; in 1776 it was sealed.

Like so many cathedrals, the Strassburg cathedral is dedicated to the Virgin and is known as Notre Dame, Unser Frauen Münster. Until the Reformation the cathedral and its square were the center of the city, the heart of the diocese and an integral part of everyday life. During the centuries of its construction voluntary workers from all over the diocese eut and carted great stones from the quarry; these helpers were served free meals, and they as well as those who contributed money were given special indulgences. During annual festivals people from the city and the diocese came in procession to the cathedral; in times of rejoicing or calamity people gathered in the cathedral square; here the army assembled before proceeding to battle. The Schwörbrief was read annually in the bishop’s garden. Vendors had booths in the square and outside the cathedral porticos. The mayor held audience in the nave, and people going to and from market used the cathedral aisles as thoroughfares.

The cathedral sculptures reflect the religion, history and character of the people. The Reuterlein auf der Säulen is said to be the statue of a miller, the first person to bring stone from the quarry for the transept. Three horsemen represent Clovis, Dagobert and Rudolf von Habsburg; a horseman representing Louis XIV was added 1824. The Rohraffe, the cock on the great mechanical clock and the animal groups (depicted as marching in a funeral procession and celebrating mass on the pillars by the choir) express the boisterous humor and satiric irony so inherent in medieval piety.

One comment on the effect of the Reformation on the cathedral: Die kleine Münsterchronik has for the period 1475-1496 31 entries concerning cathedral additions, renovations and repairs; for the period 1516-1530 it has 16 entries concerning damages from the Peasant War, abolition of the cross, the mass, etc., but not one entry about repairs or additions.

Cf. Dacheux, Fragments, I, Part i, passim. Haug, passim. Grandidier, Essais, passim. Schadäus, passim. Schneegans, Sagen, 1-11. Specklin, 9. Cf. also N. 78, N. 80, N. 1326 (par. 12), N. 1333-N. 1338.

P. xxiv

78. the great organ renovated

The first organ, the work of an unknown maker, was donated to the cathedral by the knight Ulrich Engelbrecht 1260. The second organ – built by Gunzelin von Frankfurt – burned 1298 in a fire that ravaged cathedral and city. The third organ – installed 1327 – was damaged by fire in 1384 and restored as well as enlarged in 1385, probably by Conrad von Rotenburg. The inner workings of this organ were rebuilt by Krebs von Anspach 1489, renewed 1714-1716 by André Silbermann, furnished with additional keys and pipes by Wegemann 1833-1844, remade in the romantic style 1893 and completely restored by Roethinger 1935. The exterior, however, has remained virtually unchanged since the fourteenth century.

Cf. Dacheux, Fragments, II, 468. Gass, Orgues, 6. Haug, 133. Grandidier, Essais, 64. N. 1333.

79. he brought Geiler to Strassburg… to be cathedral preacher

The date for Geiler’s arrival in Strassburg, as noted in the Errata, should be 1477/78; cf. note on Geiler in Biographical Section.

According to Hertzog (113) and Grandidier (Essais, 69), Schott, Sr., was already at that time a director of the cathedral fabrica (“praefectus fabricae majoris ecclesiae;” cf. Schöpflin, Alsatia, 668), although Schadäus (109) does not list him as such until 1481.

80. Among his many gifts to the Church is the beautiful pulpit…

For other such gifts made by Schott, Sr., cf. N. 84 and note on him in Biographical Section.

Because the regular pulpit in the cathedral nave had been removed during the strife between the orders and the lay clergy (N. 955, par. 3), it is said that Geiler first preached in the cathedral crypt and then – on account of his increasing congregation – preached from a pulpit in the north transept or from a wooden pulpit in the nave. Some accounts, however, claim that from his arrival in 1477/78 to 1486, when the new pulpit was installed, Geiler preached in the chapel of St. Laurentius. Yet this chapel may not have been usable for services during those years, because it was not completed until 1494-1505, though apparently begun years before under Schott, Sr.’s, supervision. When Geiler came, there was evidently only an altar to St. Laurentius in the cathedral; this is mentioned as early as 1077 and served as the parish altar, but its location in the cathedral is disputed. Wuttke has just recently further confused the issue by saying that from 1478 to 1486 Geiler preached in the church of St. Laurentius. Surely, after laboring to restore cathedral preaching of which the Strassburgers had long been deprived (N. 955, paragraphs 3ff.), the administrators of the cathedral would not have allowed Geiler, the first incumbent of their new cathedral chair, to hold preaching services outside the confines of the cathedral for eight years!

Cf. Barth, Handbuch, 1440, 1450. Laguille, 366f. Pfleger, “Münsterkanzel,” 377. Piton, 322. Winckelmann, “Kulturgesch.,” 278. Wuttke, NDB, VI, 150f.

Largely at his own expense Schott, Sr., had the intricately carved stone pulpit made for Geiler by the cathedral master architect Hans Hammer. The screen alone is said to have cost 18 florins. Haug calls the pulpit “un des plus ravissants chef-d’oeuvres du mobilier flamboyant.” It stands against the base of the third pillar on the north side of the nave.

The lusty humor characterizing many a cathedral ornament (cf. N. 77) found expression in two small figures near the ramp of the pulpit: a lewd little monk just touching the skirt hem of the demure little nun kneeling beside him. This “groupe immodeste” was removed in 1764.

Cf. Barth, Handbuch, 1440, 1458. Dacheux, Fragments, I, 15, 65; III, 143. Grandidier, Essais, 63, 270f., 273. Haug, 131f. Pfleger, “Münsterkanzel,” 377. Piton, I, 322. Rathgeber, Gottesmänner, 12. Specklin, 287. Winckelmann, “Kulturgesch.,” 278; “Nachträge,” 308.

81. interest in the renaissance music of the day

Cf. #42, p. 48. Sixtus IV encouraged improvement in church music and established the Sistine choir. During the last quarter of the fifteenth century, music and the style of singing in cathedrals along the Rhine was greatly influenced by the great composer-musician Conrad von Zabern, teacher and preacher at Heidelberg, who was born in 1450 and died during the papacy of Sixtus IV. His book on the teaching of singing was written 1474. He is known to have written also a treatise on the instrument called monochord.

82. authority on herbology… considerable reputation

Cf. #107, p. 117; #134, p. 152; #138, p. 155; #154, p. 169; #177, p. 198.

83. Anna entered the convent of St. Margaret… probably in 1471.

Anna actually entered the Dominican convent of St. Agnes which stood outside the city walls of Strassburg. Attempts to reform the convent in 1465 had met with considerable resistance: the prior of the Dominican monastery had the convent gates barred to reforming sisters, and the wife of Stettmeister Theobald von Müllenheim, who was visiting her daughter, was locked inside. To settle affairs and effect reform of the convent, it was necessary for the general of the Dominican Order Marcialis Auribelli, to come to Strassburg. Cf. N. 689, par. 4.

In 1475 when Charles the Bold* was threatening Alsace (N. 74), the city government set up a committee of 8 men, one of whom was Schott, Sr., to plan additional defenses. To make way for new fortifications, the committee ordered that buildings lying outside the city walls be razed. Among the condemned buildings were those of St. Agnes and of other religious institutions. Permission to level them was obtained from the pope and the work of demolition began 8 November 1475 (Dacheux, Fragments, III, 18).

The nuns of St. Agnes were transferred to the Dominican convent of St. Margaret within the city. Stettmeister Theobald von Müllenheim and Friedrich Bock* opened the city gates to them; Rudolph von Endingen* and Schott, Sr., conducted them to St. Margaret. From that time on the convent was known as Sts. Margaret and Agnes although later documents not only refer to it simply as St. Margaret, but also apply the name St. Margaret to the former convent of St. Agnes. The convent was under the special protection of both Sixtus IV and Innocent VIII and enjoyed visits of such dignitaries as Salvo de Casseta,* general of the Dominican Order, 1482; Cardinal Raymond Peraudi,* 1502 and 1504; Emperor Maximilian, 1507. Records mention Anna Zorn* as prioress to 1511, Margredt Sturm as custodian 1498 and Odele Schott as prioress 1611 (cf. N. 67).

That the early days of the St. Agnes nuns at St. Margaret were perhaps not too pleasant may be inferred from Schott’s words in his letter of 28 February 1476 to Anna (p. 358): “Even if you are now in another convent, may God give you joy and grace and grant that I may find you happy and well in body and spirit.” To Schott’s letter Anna appended the following note (cf. Appendix A): “My dearly beloved brother Peter wrote me this letter from Bologna in the first year that we of St. Agnes came to this convent of St. Margaret.”

The date when Anna entered St. Agnes is not known, but from the statements of Peter and Anna quoted above, it is clear that she was in that convent long enough before its demolition to feel herself a part of it. In Straub (81) is an entry: “1471 Margret Schott nun at Sts. Margaret and Agnes of Strassburg.” Since the only Margred Schott* mentioned in records is Anna’s eldest sister, who was twice married, the given name may be an error for Anna.

Cf. Barthelmé, 147, 190. Bussierre, 21-28. Dacheux, Fragments, II, 463; III, 18, 220; IV, 173. Gass, Blätter, 19-20; Dominikanerinnen, 14. Meyer, Reformacio, 126, 140. Straub, 80, 81, 82, 87.

84. She was apparently prioress… an altar in her name…

The prioress was Anna Zorn* (N. 83, par. 3).

The elaborate wooden altar donated by Schott, Sr., to the convent Sts. Margaret and Agnes 1494 in honor of his daughter, “der Ehrwürdigen Muther Anna [Schott]” cost 200 Rhenish florins. It stood in the upper choir of the convent church and displayed the Schott and Cöllen coats-of-arms. The intricate carving of its panels, which were painted and gilded, depicted scenes from the Nativity.

85. Her Latin work on the Passion of Christ has been lost.

For other works by Anna Schott, cf. the note on her in the Biographical Section.

86. The only son… was to follow in his father’s footsteps…

Only after much persuasion on the part of Geiler, Anna, Peter and very likely Müller, did Schott, Sr., give up the idea of a public career for his son. Peter did not feel that he was physically fitted for such a career (#18, p. 27), nor, after observing his father’s exhausting and thankless work as a public official, did he want any part of it. In a letter of October 1481 he observes to Hassenstein that if nothing else were impelling him to choose a quiet life, the example of his father’s life would be more than enough to do so; and he wishes Hassenstein might just for one day watch the ceaseless stream of importunists who besiege his father (#170, p. 190).

87. their constant concern for his health… restricted his activity…

Schott was not physically robust, as he himself intimates in two statements: 1) “pro etate graciliori” (#8, p. 14) when speaking of the need for more time to complete his doctorate in both laws; and 2) “ad quas nec corpore nec animo satis idoneus essem” (#18, p. 27) when speaking of his distaste for a public career. That he had periods of illness we know from his letters (#42, p. 47; #43, p. 48; #63; #66; #68, p. 76; #78, p. 84; #99, p. 110; #104, p. 114; #112, p. 132; #156, p. 172), but none of his contemporaries was free from bouts of illness and many of them suffered from some kind of chronic complaint; e.g., Schott, Sr., had kidney or bladder stones, Geiler had kidney trouble and Wimpheling had dyspepsia.

Despite rather delicate health, Schott had amazing powers of endurance and sustained energy, as is attested by the concentration with which he devoted himself to study in Paris and Italy (#297, 316ff.), the number of his compositions, the large correspondence, his editing and cooperation with Geiler, his legal work, his assistance to Schott, Sr., the time spent with famuli, etc.

The exaggerated solicitude of his parents, though loving and well meant, amounted in actuality to domineering interference which almost blighted his life. Though out of filial devotion and piety he ne ver openly rebelled, he often complains to his friends of the lestrictions imposed by parental solicitude. Cf. pp. xxvi; xxvii; #8, p. 14; #9, p. 17; #17, p. 26; #18, p. 27; #20, p. 29; #25, p. 33; #28, p. 36; #54, pp. 59, 60; #58, p. 63; #60, p. 65; #73, p. 80; #136, p. 154; #144, p. 159; #156, p. 172; #170, p. 190; #177, p. 197.

The following passage from his letter to Antonius Manlius* perhaps best expresses how patiently he endured the constricting bonds of parental love: “All is well with me here at home so far as worldly blessings are concerned except that I am wracked by this one problem of being managed by my parents with overmuch indulgence and affection – more than I would wish – to such a point that they are adamant against my leaving home, though I have been panting this long time to return to my studies. I am very much torn with longing to go, yet knowing how attached they are to me, I shall definitely not upset them or leave unless they are willing; and so I am compelled to remain in Strassburg…” (#73, p. 80).

88. the school at Schlettstadt… alumni many famous Alsatians

1) Schools of the Brethen of the Common Life

Because the schools established by the Brethren of the Common Life in the Lowlands influenced Alsace directly through Dringenberg* and indirectly through Thomas à Kempis,* Agricola,* Biel,* Erasmus, et al., a few words should be said about them here. The first school was founded at Deventer by Gerhard de Groot (1340-1384) who had studied at Paris with Gerson* and at Cologne. Wishing to share the large number of manuscripts he had collected, he gathered his friends around him. This was the origin of the Brethren of the Common Life (Brüder vom gemeinsamen Leben, fratres et clerici vitae communis, also called canonici regulares, Kugelherren, Kappenbrüder, blaue Brüder, Hieronymianer, Gregorianer, Gerhardini). They took no vows, but lived together under the rules of the early Christians. They copied and illustrated manuscripts which they sold for the support of their foundation and directed a school open to all desirous of profitting from their learning and free to indigent scholars (who were even supplied with books).

Unfortunately all records of the early school have been lost, not as in the case of Strassburg through disasters but through disinterest, and few details are available in the Deventer city archives. The Brethren apparently took over the cathedral Latin school, first mentioned in 1311, but according to tradition founded in 765. From the archives we learn that Cardinal Nicolas de Cusa, an alumnus of the school, gave the city in 1469 a grant of 4800 gold Rhenish florins to support 20 poor scholars in a tehuis or burse. From Rudolph Agricola’s* congratulatory letter to Alexander Hegius († 1498) we learn that Hegius, who was Erasmus’ teacher, became rector of the school in 1483. It was Hegius who introduced Greek into the curriculum. The present Alexander Hegius Gymnasium is a descendant of the Brethren’s school.

Imbued with humanistic ideals from their experience at the Brethren’s school at Deventer, students and alumni went forth to establish foundations of the Brethren. Johann Hämmerlin (Thomas à Kempis), for example, established the foundation on Mount Agnes, near Zwolle, where he was serving as preacher; it was under him that Dringenberg* studied. The foundation at Windesheim was begun by Florentius Radewyns as a result, it is said, of his death-bed promise to de Groot. Foundations were established up the Rhine at Marienthal in the Rheingau, at Butzbach and as far south as Swabia, where Gabriel Biel* was instrumental in founding new houses. The movement spread northward as far as Rostock and eastward as far as Kulm in Silesia and Poland. It died out during the Reformation.

Cf. Cambridge Med. Hist., VIII, 787ff. Dacheux, Réf., 442f. Dorlan, Notices, 94-99; “Nouv. études,” 338f. Heimbucher, II, 552-560. Obermann, 10-21. Röhrich, I, 83. ter Kuile, 5-11. Velden, 142, 209, 260.

2) The school at Schlettstadt

Schlettstadt in the fifteenth century was, like Strassburg, a free city of the empire; it too had a democratic form of government, was an important trade center and a member of the Rhine confederation. In Schlettstadt developed the finest Latin school in the upper Rhine area.

There is no certain date for the founding of the school; a schoolmaster is mentioned in 1420. First a private (Pfarrschule), then a public school, it became famous under Ludwig Dringenberg who arrived as headmaster in 1441 and taught several generations of Alsatian leaders. He is credited with introducing humanistic studies into Alsace and with improving conditions for teachers, whose salaries were raised in 1459. The curriculum included Bible reading, catechism, oral Latin and the reading of Latin authors.

Wimpheling, an alumnus of the school, says that the Doctrinale puerorum of Alexander de Villa Dei (thirteenth century) was used there for 40 years or more. This was the most popular Latin grammar of the day; there were 49 editions in the fifteenth ce