Back to GetFilings.com

SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549

-------------------------

FORM 10-K

(Mark One)

[X] Annual Report pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities

Exchange Act of 1934.

For the fiscal year ended June 30, 1996.

[ ] Transition report pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities

Exchange Act of 1934. For the transition period from to .

Commission File Number 1-10441

SILICON GRAPHICS, INC.

(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)

DELAWARE 94-2789662

(State or Other Jurisdiction of (I.R.S. Employer

Incorporation or Organization) Identification Number)

2011 North Shoreline Boulevard, Mountain View, California 94043-1389

(Address of principal executive offices and zip code)

Registrant's telephone number, including area code: (415) 960-1980

Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:

NAME OF EACH EXCHANGE

TITLE OF EACH CLASS ON WHICH REGISTERED:

------------------- --------------------

Common Stock, $0.001 par value New York Stock Exchange

Preferred Share Purchase Rights New York Stock Exchange

Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports

required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of

1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the

registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such

filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes X No

----- -----

Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item

405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the

best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements

incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to

this Form 10-K. [ ]

The aggregate market value of the registrant's voting stock held by non-

affiliates of the registrant, based upon the closing sale price of the Common

Stock on September 3, 1996 on the New York Stock Exchange as reported in The

Wall Street Journal, was approximately $3,726 million. Shares of voting stock

held by each executive officer and director and by each person who owns 5% or

more of any class of registrant's voting stock have been excluded in that such

persons may be deemed to be affiliates. This determination of affiliate status

is not necessarily a conclusive determination for other purposes.

AS OF SEPTEMBER 3, 1996, THE REGISTRANT HAD OUTSTANDING

173,158,255 SHARES OF COMMON STOCK.

DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE

Parts of the following documents are incorporated by reference to this Form

10-K Report: (1) Proxy Statement for registrant's Annual Meeting of Stockholders

to be held October 30, 1996 (Part III), and (2) registrant's Annual Report to

Stockholders for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1996 (Parts I, II and IV).

PART I

ITEM 1. BUSINESS

GENERAL

Silicon Graphics provides computing solutions that range from cost-

effective high performance desktop workstations to database and compute servers

to Cray Research supercomputers. The Company's systems enhance the productivity

of organizations engaged in technical, scientific, corporate and entertainment

applications across a wide range of industries.

Silicon Graphics' Cray Research subsidiary, acquired in fiscal 1996,

provides supercomputing tools and services to help solve customers' most

challenging problems. Another subsidiary, MIPS Technologies, designs the

industry-leading MIPS-Registered Trademark- RISC microprocessor. The Company

licenses its designs to semiconductor partners, who manufacture MIPS

microprocessors for use in the computer, embedded control and consumer

markets. The Company's Alias|Wavefront subsidiary provides innovative

animation and advanced modeling software for entertainment and industrial

applications.

CORE TECHNOLOGIES

The Company's strategy has been to identify and to invest heavily in the

key technologies that will enable it to set the pace of innovation. With

respect to these core elements, the Company's objective is to have the world's

leading technology and to be the first to deliver that technology in new

products. This approach has given Silicon Graphics a clear strategic focus and

has allowed it to obtain high productivity from its research and development

investment. With respect to the other, non-core elements required to develop

its products, the Company seeks to form strategic relationships with leading

suppliers worldwide.

The Company's core technologies are:

GRAPHICS Leading graphics performance has been a distinguishing

characteristic of Silicon Graphics' products since its inception. The

Company's systems use its proprietary dedicated graphics subsystems, which

not only provide strong graphics capability but also improve overall system

performance by freeing up the central microprocessor for other tasks. These

subsystems, such as the Onyx-TM- InfiniteReality-TM- and Indigo2 Impact-TM-

family of graphics subsystems, perform complex functions that allow the user

to render, display and manipulate realistic 3D objects and images in real

time. In addition, Silicon Graphics has developed the OpenGL-Registered

Trademark-, an application programming interface (API) that evolved from the

Company's IRIS GL-TM- API and has become an industry standard for developing

2D and 3D graphics applications. The OpenGL API is controlled by an

independent architecture review board that governs its direction and is

licensed to more than 30 leading companies, including all of the principal

UNIX-Registered Trademark- workstation manufacturers.

RISC MICROPROCESSORS The acquisition of MIPS Computer Systems in 1992 gave

the Company ownership of what it believes to be the industry's leading reduced

instruction set computing (RISC) technology, and the Company continues to devote

substantial resources to extending this technology. Since 1992, the Company and

its semiconductor partners have developed and introduced several new families of

MIPS RISC microprocessors optimized for use in products ranging from consumer

electronic products to high-performance supercomputers.

SCALABLE COMPUTING The ability to build computer systems that use more

than one processor without major changes in applications software has been an

important factor in the performance of the Company's systems, particularly for

the technical and scientific markets. This multiple CPU design optimizes the

performance of a single application or maximizes system throughput when handling

many applications or users at one time. Silicon Graphics' substantial

investments in symmetric multiprocessing since the late 1980s have enabled it to

become the leading supplier of low and midrange supercomputers. The acquisition

of Cray Research in 1996 has enhanced the Company's capability to deliver large

multiprocessing systems involving hundreds of processors.

DIGITAL MEDIA Digital media integrates 3D graphics, animation and text

with video, audio and video conferencing capabilities. The Company believes

that digital media technology delivers a fundamentally better way to work and

communicate, especially in a networked computing environment enabling

cooperative work in real-time. Examples include "collaborative engineering",

where engineers in different countries share visual information and work

concurrently on 3D models and designs.

COMPUTER SYSTEM PRODUCTS

The Company's computer systems range from desktop workstations to servers

and supercomputers. All of these systems (other than the current Cray Research

product families) are designed around MIPS RISC microprocessors developed by MTI

and the IRIX-TM- operating system, which is the Company's enhanced version of

the System V Release 4 (SVR4) UNIX operating system. The IRIX operating system

includes the Indigo Magic-TM- user environment, a complete family of tools

including desktop utilities, digital media applications and collaborative tools.

Because of their common microprocessor and operating system technology, the

Company's systems generally are binary-compatible, meaning that software

applications run without modification across the entire product line.

DESKTOP SYSTEMS

Silicon Graphics desktop workstations combine key elements of workgroup

collaboration, interactive media and computing at a range of prices and

performance. Systems in this family can be used for tasks as diverse as

manipulating 3D models for computer-aided design (CAD), crunching numbers for

chemistry and geographic information systems applications, or functioning as a

tool for video editing, animation rendering, technical publishing, World Wide

Web and intranet authoring and serving, and software development.

INDY The Indy-TM- family of entry-level desktop workstation features

advanced 3D graphics and imaging, real-time video capability and interactive and

professional quality graphics, audio and imaging capabilities. The Indy has

significant appeal in markets such as mechanical CAD, chemistry, color

publishing, film and video, software development, education and media authoring.

INDIGO(2) The Indigo(2)-TM- family of workstations is designed to

provide the strongest graphics and computational capability available in the

desktop category, for applications such as 3D solids modeling, mechanical

CAD, digital prototyping, 3D visualization, animation, architectural design

and professional audio and video production.

WEBFORCE The WebFORCE-TM- family of computer systems, one of the first

product lines for creating and serving content for the World Wide Web,

integrates hardware and software for professional Web content authoring and

commercial Web serving, and includes Indy and Indigo(2) Impact desktop systems

as well as Challenge-Registered Trademark- servers.

HIGH END SYSTEMS

-2-

ONYX This family of graphics supercomputers uses multiple microprocessors

and sophisticated graphics subsystems to handle the most demanding visual

computing tasks. Graphics subsystems available with the Onyx systems

include the InfiniteReality and Reality Engine(2)-TM- graphics subsystems. The

Onyx family is well-suited for applications such as computational chemistry, oil

and gas research, molecular modeling, global weather modeling, structural

dynamics, fluid dynamics, image processing, visual simulation, medical imaging

and chemistry, interactive entertainment and digital film and video production.

CHALLENGE The Challenge family of network resource servers includes a

range of capabilities, from single processor deskside systems used by small to

mid-size workgroups up to systems employing dozens of processors and capable of

supporting enterprise-wide distributed computing environments. Challenge

servers efficiently store, manage and move large amounts of audio, video and

graphics data as well as traditional databases and textual data for a wide range

of commercial and other applications. Key uses include data mining (to analyze

and organize database information), product data management for manufacturing,

and commercial transaction processing. Challenge servers also are used as media

servers, World Wide Web site servers and file servers.

POWER CHALLENGE The POWER Challenge-TM- family of supercomputing servers

combines low-cost, high-performance CMOS RISC technology, advanced parallel

system architecture and a simple shared-memory programming model. Key

applications in the technical and scientific markets include finite element

analysis (to determine the impact of elements like stress and temperature),

quantum chemistry calculation, seismic analysis and computational fluid

dynamics.

CRAY RESEARCH PRODUCTS

Cray Research, founded in 1973 and acquired by the Company in 1996, is the

world's leading supplier of advanced supercomputers. Cray Research has

continued as a separate division of Silicon Graphics focused on the high end of

the supercomputing market. Cray Research is working closely with the Silicon

Graphics advanced systems division to develop and introduce over the next

several years an integrated family of highly scalable systems that will

eventually cover the full range from affordable deskside servers to the world's

most powerful supercomputers.

The CRAY T90-TM- family of supercomputers deliver maximum performance for

vectorized supercomputing applications. The large memory bandwidth of T90

systems make them ideal for problems involving huge amounts of data, such as

weather and climate modeling and large-scale auto engineering.

The CRAY J90-TM- family uses low-cost CMOS technology to deliver affordable

supercomputing for vectorized applications like molecular modeling, ecosystem

simulation, medical imaging and vehicle dynamics simulation.

The CRAY T3E-TM- highly scalable supercomputing systems employ a massively

parallel architecture ranging from 16 to as many as 2,048 processors for a

broad range of scientific and industrial applications as diverse as petroleum

exploration, aerospace enginering and traffic system simulation.

MIPS RISC MICROPROCESSORS

All of the Company's system products (other than the current Cray Research

families) incorporate the MIPS RISC microprocessor architecture. The Company's

MIPS RISC microprocessor designs incorporate a general purpose architecture and

instruction set designed for high performance over a wide range of applications.

The MIPS RISC microprocessor designs make efficient use of instruction

"pipelining" techniques and proprietary compilers, allowing significant

performance gains to be realized by optimizing the tradeoff between compiler and

microprocessor functions. The versatility of the MIPS

-3-

RISC architecture makes it suitable for computer applications from entry-level

desktop systems up to supercomputers.

MIPS RISC microprocessors are also used in a wide variety of noncomputer

applications, including disk drives, printers and copiers and, increasingly,

consumer electronics products. Silicon Graphics computers represent only a

small percentage of the worldwide consumption of MIPS RISC microprocessors.

The Company does not manufacture or sell MIPS RISC microprocessors and

related devices. It licenses its designs to "semiconductor partners" who

manufacture and sell the parts. The Company's current licensees are:

Integrated Device Technology, Inc.; LSI Logic Corporation; NEC Corporation; NKK

Corporation; Philips Semiconductor; and Toshiba Corporation. Each semiconductor

partner paid an initial license fee at the beginning of the license period and

pays unit royalties based upon sales.

APPLICATIONS SOFTWARE

Because the Company has historically developed only a very limited set of

applications software, its customers must either develop or license from a third

party the software necessary to address their needs. The Company maintains

active programs to encourage independent software development for its systems,

including training, technology support and cooperative marketing. The Company

believes that there currently are over 2,000 registered application software

programs offered for use on its systems.

The Company's Alias|Wavefront division supplies modeling and animation

application software used by creative professionals in the entertainment,

industrial design and visualization and graphic design markets. Its industry-

leading products include Alias PowerAnimator-TM-, Alias Studio-TM-, and

Wavefront Composer-TM-. Alias|Wavefront has also announced the next generation

Maya-TM- product architecture, which will be incorporated in products beginning

in fiscal 1997. Alias|Wavefront is based in Toronto, Canada with sales offices

across North America, Europe and Asia and worldwide distribution.

In fiscal 1996 the Company introduced the Cosmo-TM- family of content

creation, browsing and management tools for the World Wide Web and intranet

markets. The Cosmo products are intended to facilitate the creation of media-

rich three dimensional environments and especially to take advantage of the

power of the industry standard Virtual Reality Modeling Language (VRML)

developed by Silicon Graphics.

MARKETING, SALES AND DISTRIBUTION

The Company sells its products through its own direct sales force and

through several indirect channels. In fiscal 1996 direct sales accounted for

approximately half of the Company's product revenues. The direct sales and

support organization operates throughout the United States and in all

significant international markets. The Company serves smaller international

markets through distributors.

The principal indirect channels through which the Company operates are the

following:

_ VARS, or value added resellers, are software companies that develop

or customize their proprietary software specifically for use with the

special graphics hardware of the Company's workstations. VARs

purchase workstations from the Company or its North American

distributor, incorporate their applications software and resell the

systems to end-users.

_ VADS, or value added dealers, are typically direct sales

organizations that sell primarily into a single vertical market and

incorporate appropriate specialized third-party software with the

Company's hardware for sale to their customers.

-4-

_ OEM ("original equipment manufacturer") customers generally are

computer systems vendors that customize applications software for use

on the Company's workstations and sell turnkey systems under the OEM's

product name. OEMs also provide independent marketing, service and

support programs to their customers. The Company's principal OEMs

include Tandem Computers Incorporated and Siemens Nixdorf AG.

_ SYSTEMS INTEGRATORS include Silicon Graphics systems in much larger

systems customized for use by the federal government and large

commercial clients.

Information with respect to international operations and export sales may

be found on page 60 of the 1996 Annual Report to Stockholders, which is

incorporated herein by reference. See also "Risks That Affect Our Business"

below. Although no customer accounted for 10% or more of the Company's total

revenues for fiscal 1996, 1995 or 1994, a significant reduction or delay in

sales to major customers could adversely affect the Company's operating results.

CUSTOMER SERVICE AND SUPPORT

The Company believes that the quality and reliability of its system

products and the ongoing support of such products are important elements of its

competitive strategy. The Company's customer service organization includes

field service engineers, field product and applications specialists, product

support engineers, training specialists and administrative support personnel.

In addition, the Company provides customer education through regularly scheduled

courses in system software administration, applications programming and hardware

maintenance. The Company provides local customer support from its regional

sales and service offices located in North America, Western Europe and the

Pacific Rim, with spare parts inventory stored at each location. International

distributors provide training and support for products sold by them.

The Company typically provides a standard "return to factory" hardware

warranty against defects in materials and workmanship for periods of up to

one year.

RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

The Company's research and development program is directed principally

toward maintaining and enhancing the Company's competitive position through

incorporating the latest advances in microprocessor, hardware, software and

networking technologies. This effort is focused specifically on developing and

enhancing its computing architectures, MIPS RISC microprocessors, graphics

subsystems, VLSI technology, compiler software, operating system, applications

software and development tools. Simultaneously, the Company seeks to develop

new ways in which to increase product reliability, reduce manufacturing costs

and improve product development lead times.

During fiscal 1996, 1995 and 1994, the Company spent approximately $353

million, $248 million and $191 million, respectively, on research and

development. Those amounts represented 12.1%, 11.1% and 12.4%, respectively, of

revenues.

MANUFACTURING

The Company's manufacturing operations primarily involve assembling high

level subassemblies and systems and testing major purchased subassemblies. All

products are subjected to substantial environmental stress and electronic

testing prior to shipment to customers. The Company primarily manufactures and

ships its products from its main facility in Mountain View, California and the

Cray

-5-

Research facility in Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin. The Company also has a European

manufacturing and support center near Neuchatel, Switzerland.

The Company continually evaluates the allocation of manufacturing

activities among the Company's own operations and those of suppliers and

subcontractors. This allocation may be affected by fluctuations in the volume

of business, geopolitical, economic and technological developments and other

factors.

The Company attempts to utilize standard parts and components available

from multiple vendors rather than to integrate its manufacturing operations

vertically. The Company believes that there are a number of competent vendors

for most of the parts and components used in its system products. In certain

circumstances, despite the availability of multiple sources, the Company may

select a single source or a very limited number of sources in order to maintain

quality or price control or to develop a more strategic relationship with the

supplier.

Reliance on single or limited source vendors involves several risks,

including the possibility of a shortage of certain key components that meet the

Company's product specifications and reduced control over delivery schedules,

manufacturing yields, quality and costs. These issues tend to be especially

acute in the early or "ramp-up" stage as the Company attempts to reach volume

production of new products. In particular, the Company is dependent on a

limited number of semiconductor manufacturers with state of the art fabrication

facilities. During fiscal 1996, for example, the Company was dependent on a

single supplier, NEC, for the great majority of its requirements of MIPS R10000

microprocessors, a dependency that will continue through at least the first half

of fiscal 1997 until a second source begins volume production. Other components

for which the Company currently does not have multiple sources include certain

application-specific integrated circuits ("ASICs"). These are currently

obtained from IBM, LSI Logic, Motorola, VLSI Technology and Toshiba. Components

available from limited sources include floating point coprocessors and certain

memory circuits.

The Company also has single sources for certain peripherals, communications

controllers and power supplies, and the monitors and plastic cabinets used

across the Company's system products. The Company believes that, in most of

these cases, alternative sources of supply could be developed over a period of

time. However, a reduction or interruption in supply or a significant increase

in the price of one or more single or limited source components would, at least

in the short term, adversely affect the Company's operating results.

Many of the Company's suppliers are located outside the United States,

especially in Japan. The prices of parts from these suppliers have been and may

be affected significantly by such factors as protectionist measures and changes

in currency exchange rates between the United States and other countries. In

addition, changes in the availability of certain memory chips (DRAMs, SRAMs and

VRAMs) have caused, and in the future may cause, significant changes in their

prices.

COMPETITION

The computer industry is highly competitive and is characterized by rapid

technological advances in both hardware and software development. These

advances result in frequent new product introductions, short product life cycles

and increased new product capabilities, typically representing significant

price/performance improvements. The principal competitive factors in the

Company's market are product features, price/performance, networking

capabilities, product quality and reliability, ease of use, capabilities of the

system software, availability of applications software, customer support,

product availability, corporate reputation and price. The strong competition

faced throughout the Company's product line can result in significant

discounting from list price.

-6-

The Company's principal competition has historically come from other

workstation and computer system manufacturers and, to a lesser extent, from

graphics subsystem and terminal vendors and graphics integrated circuit

manufacturers. The principal workstation and computer manufacturers that

compete in the Company's markets are Digital Equipment, Hewlett Packard, IBM and

Sun Microsystems. The Company is facing increasing competition at the lowest

end of the workstation market from systems based on personal computer

technologies such as the Windows NT operating system, Intel microprocessors and

graphics acceleration cards.

In the high end of the supercomputer market, the Company faces competition

from IBM as well as from NEC, Hitachi and Fujitsu. In the applications software

market and certain other emerging markets the Company's principal competitor is

Microsoft.

The Company's MIPS RISC microprocessor architecture and technology compete

directly with microprocessor products offered by manufacturers of other

microprocessor designs, in particular those offered by IBM, Digital, HP, Intel,

Motorola and Sun. Although the Company believes its RISC architecture offers

advantages over these other designs, some of these architectures have a larger

installed base and wider availability of application software, which may

adversely affect the adoption of the Company's RISC architecture.

RISKS THAT AFFECT OUR BUSINESS

Silicon Graphics operates in a rapidly changing environment that involves a

number of risks, some of which are beyond the Company's control. The following

discussion highlights some of these risks.

PERIOD TO PERIOD FLUCTUATIONS The Company's operating results may fluctuate for

a number of reasons. Other than in the Cray Research business, the Company has

short delivery cycles and as a result generally does not have a large order

backlog, which makes the forecasting of revenue inherently uncertain. This

uncertainty is compounded because each quarter's revenue results predominantly

from orders booked and shipped during the third month, and disproportionately in

the latter half of that month. Because the Company plans its operating

expenses, many of which are relatively fixed in the short term, on the basis

that its revenue will continue to grow, even a relatively small revenue

shortfall may cause a period's results to be substantially below expectations.

Such a revenue shortfall could arise from any number of factors, including lower

than expected demand, supply constraints, delays in the availability of new

products, transit interruptions, overall economic conditions or natural

disasters. The timing of customer acceptance of large Cray systems may also

have a significant effect on periodic operating results. Margins are heavily

influenced by mix considerations, including geographical mix, the mix of service

and non-recurring engineering revenue, the mix of high-end and desktop products

and application software, as well as the mix of configurations within these

product categories.

The Company's results have followed a seasonal pattern, with stronger sequential

growth in the second and fourth fiscal quarters, reflecting the buying patterns

of the Company's customers. Sales of Cray Research systems generally reflect

sequential growth from quarter-to-quarter through the calendar year.

The Company's stock price, like that of other technology companies, is subject

to significant volatility. If revenue or earnings in any quarter fail to meet

the investment community's expectations, there could be an immediate impact on

the Company's stock price. The stock price may also be affected by broader

market trends unrelated to the Company's performance.

PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT AND INTRODUCTION The Company's continued success depends on

its ability to develop and rapidly bring to volume production highly

differentiated, technologically complex and innovative products. The Company

plans to introduce several new product families in the first half of fiscal

1997, including products that will replace virtually the entire current product

line. A number of risks are inherent in this process.

-7-

The development of new technology and products is increasingly complex and

uncertain, which increases the risk of delays. The introduction of a new

computer system requires close collaboration and continued technological

advancement involving multiple hardware and software design and manufacturing

teams within the Company as well as teams at outside suppliers of key components

such as semiconductor and storage products. The failure of any one of these

elements could cause the Company's new products to fail to meet specifications

or to miss the aggressive timetables that the Company establishes. As the

variety and complexity of the Company's product families increase, the process

of planning production and inventory levels also becomes more difficult.

Short product life cycles place a premium on the Company's ability to manage

the transition from current products to new products. In order to minimize

product transition issues, the Company often announces new products in the

early part of a quarter, while the product is in the final stages of

development, and seeks to manufacture and ship the product in volume in the

same quarter. In the case of the Cray Research product line, new products

are generally announced well in advance of availability, due to the longer

sales cycle for these systems. The Company's results could be adversely

affected by such factors as development delays, quality or yield problems

experienced by suppliers, variations in product costs, and delays in customer

purchases of existing products in anticipation of the introduction of new

products. On September 25, 1996 the Company announced that its revenues for

the first quarter of fiscal 1997 would be only slightly higher than for the

same period in the prior year and that its net income for that period would

be materially below expectations. The results for the quarter are

attributable, at least in part, to customer anticipation of new high-end and

desktop products that the Company plans to introduce in October 1996.

COMPETITION The computer industry is highly competitive, with rapid

technological advances and constantly improving price/performance. As most of

the segments in which the Company operates continue to grow faster than the

industry as a whole, the Company is experiencing an increase in competition, and

it expects this trend to continue. This competition comes not only from the

Company's traditional UNIX workstation rivals and Cray's traditional

supercomputing competitors, but also from new sources including the personal

computer industry. In particular, during fiscal 1996 the Company experienced

increasing competition at the lowest end of its business from workstations based

upon the Intel Pentium microprocessor, Microsoft's Windows NT operating system,

and a variety of 3-D graphics acceleration cards. Many of the Company's

competitors have substantially greater technical, marketing and financial

resources and, in some segments, a larger installed base of customers and a

wider range of available applications software. Competition can result in

significant discounting and lower gross margins.

VOLUME STRATEGY The Company believes that its long-term success is dependent

on achieving substantial increases in unit volumes over the next several

years. The Company has created a new business unit, the Silicon Desktop

Group, with the charter of implementing a comprehensive strategy for

increasing volumes of desktop products, including new product development,

greater emphasis on lower-cost manufacturing and the strengthening of

indirect distribution channels. Risks associated with this strategy include:

- increased direct competition with the personal computer industry,

portions of which have been seeking to move upmarket to compete with

low-end workstations (see "Competition");

- the impact of lower gross margins, to the extent not mitigated by

savings in distribution costs and other operating expenses; and

- the extent to which the Company is able to adapt its manufacturing and

service philosophies to the demands of higher volumes and lower costs.

ACQUISITION OF CRAY RESEARCH The acquisition of Cray Research will require,

among other things, integration of the Cray Research organization, business

infrastructure and product offerings with those of the Company in a way that

enhances the performance of the combined business. The challenges posed by the

acquisition include the management of a business with a different approach to

product design, manufacturing and sales and service, the development of a

consolidated product road map from a number of incompatible products and the

integration of several geographically separated research and development

centers. The success of this process will be significantly influenced by the

Company's ability to retain key management, sales, and research and development

personnel. The integration process will

-8-

also require the dedication of management resources, which may temporarily

distract attention from the day-to-day business of the Company.

There are several other aspects of Cray Research's business that are different

from the Company's current business and may affect the operations of the

combined business:

- Government agencies and research institutions represent a major

customer group for Cray Research products. As a result of the

acquisition, a greater percentage of the Company's revenue will be

derived from sales to such customers, whose purchasing decisions may

be adversely affected by reductions or changes in government spending.

- International sales of Cray Research's products are more likely to be

subject to export licensing constraints than international sales of

the Company's current products.

- Cray Research derives most of its revenue from the sale of a small

number of large systems, which generally have a longer sales cycle.

Revenue for these systems is recognized at customer acceptance rather

than upon shipment. Cray Research's results for any period are

significantly influenced by the number and mix of systems accepted and

whether a system is sold or leased. Changes affecting even a small

number of systems can have significant financial implications.

- At June 30, 1996, the combined Company's backlog was $572 million,

representing orders scheduled to ship during fiscal 1997. This

backlog primarily consists of orders for Cray Research T90 and T3E

systems, which only recently had their first commercial shipments.

IMPACT OF GOVERNMENT CUSTOMERS A significant portion of the Company's revenue

is derived from sales to the U.S. government, either directly by the Company or

through system integrators and other resellers. This proportion will increase

as the result of the Cray Research acquisition. Sales to the government present

risks in addition to those involved in sales to commercial customers, including

potential disruptions due to appropriation and spending patterns and the

government's reservation of the right to cancel contracts for its convenience.

In the second quarter of fiscal 1996, for example, the Company's results were

adversely affected by purchasing slowdowns related to the federal government

budget impasse.

GLOBAL FINANCIAL MARKET RISKS The Company's business and financial results are

affected by fluctuations in world financial markets, including foreign currency

exchange rates and interest rates. The Company's hedging policy attempts to

mitigate some of these risks, based on management's best judgment of the

appropriate tradeoffs among risk, opportunity and expense. The Company

regularly reviews its overall hedging policies, and it continually monitors its

hedging activities to ensure that they are consistent with policy and

appropriate and effective in light of changing market conditions. Management

may as part of this review determine at any time to change its hedging policies.

However, it is important to recognize that the Company's risk management

activities are not comprehensive, and that there can be no assurance that these

programs will offset more than a portion of the adverse financial impact

resulting from unfavorable movements in either foreign exchange or interest

rates.

Because more than half of the Company's revenue is from sales outside the United

States, and many key components are produced outside the United States, the

Company's results can be significantly affected by changes in foreign currency

exchange rates or weak economic conditions in the foreign markets in which the

Company distributes its products. The Company is primarily exposed to changes

in exchange rates on the Swiss franc, British pound, Japanese yen, German mark

and French franc. When the U.S. dollar strengthens against these currencies,

the value (as expressed in U.S. dollars) of non-U.S. dollar-based sales and

costs decrease. The opposite happens when the U.S. dollar weakens. Because

the Company is a net receiver of currencies other than the U.S. dollar, it

benefits from a weaker dollar and is adversely affected by a stronger dollar

relative to major currencies worldwide. Accordingly, a strengthening of the

U.S. dollar tends to affect negatively the Company's revenue and gross margins.

-9-

To mitigate the short-term impact of fluctuating currency exchange rates on the

Company's non-U.S. dollar-based sales and intercompany receivables, the Company

regularly hedges certain of these net exposures. Historically, the Company has

not sought to hedge future revenues. However, as a result of the Cray Research

acquisition, the Company is continuing Cray Research's policy of entering into

foreign exchange forward contracts that hedge firmly committed Cray Research

backlog. Currently, these hedges extend through December 1999. Beginning in

fiscal 1997, the Company also expects to hedge a portion of anticipated

quarterly revenues from international operations. The Company utilizes foreign

currency forward contracts to hedge non-U.S. dollar intercompany receivables.

The Company has generally not hedged capital expenditures, investments in

subsidiaries or inventory purchases. However, because the Company procures

inventory and its international operations incur expenses in local currencies,

the financial effects of fluctuations in the U.S. dollar values of non-U.S.

dollar-based transactions frequently mitigate or tend to offset each other on a

consolidated basis.

The Company's interest income and expense is most sensitive to fluctuations in

the general level of U.S. interest rates. In this regard, changes in U.S.

interest rates affect the interest earned on the Company's cash equivalents and

marketable investments as well as interest paid on its borrowings. To mitigate

the impact of fluctuations in U.S. interest rates, the Company has entered into

an interest rate swap transaction intended to better match the Company's fixed

rate interest expense on its zero coupon convertible subordinated debentures

with the floating-rate interest income on its cash equivalents and marketable

investments.

OTHER RISKS OF INTERNATIONAL OPERATIONS The Company's results could also be

negatively affected by such factors as changes in trade protection measures,

longer accounts receivable collection patterns, or natural disasters. The

Company's sales to foreign customers also are subject to export regulations,

with sales of some of the Company's high-end products requiring clearance and

export licenses from the U.S. Department of Commerce. The Company's export

sales would be adversely affected if such regulations were tightened, or if they

are not modified over time to reflect the increasing performance of the

Company's products.

MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS The Company replaced its United States

information management system in the third quarter of fiscal 1996 with a

comprehensive system used to manage the entire revenue cycle, including order

administration, billing and collection, as well as manufacturing and finance.

The Company expects that the system will provide operational efficiencies and

support future growth. However, as the system has been in operation for a

relatively short period, there remains a risk of functional or performance

difficulties, particularly if the system is extended to the Company's

international operations and to the Cray Research business.

DEVELOPMENT AND ACCEPTANCE OF MIPS RISC ARCHITECTURE Most of the Company's

system products incorporate microprocessors based upon the Company's MIPS

RISC microprocessor architecture. The Company licenses the manufacturing and

distribution rights to these microprocessors to selected semiconductor

manufacturing companies. The Company believes that the continued development

and broad acceptance of the MIPS architecture are critical to its future

success.

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY The Company routinely receives communications from third

parties asserting patent or other rights covering the Company's products and

technologies. Based upon the Company's evaluation, it may take no action or it

may seek to obtain a license. In any given case there is a risk that a license

will not be available on terms that the Company considers reasonable, or that

litigation will ensue. The Company currently has patent infringement lawsuits

pending against it. The Company expects that, as the number of hardware and

software patents issued continues to increase, and as the Company's business

grows, the volume of these intellectual property claims will also increase.

-10-

EMPLOYEES The Company's future success depends in part on its ability to

continue to attract, retain and motivate highly qualified technical, marketing

and management personnel, who are in great demand.

BUSINESS DISRUPTION The Company's corporate headquarters, including most of its

research and development operations and manufacturing facilities, are located in

the Silicon Valley area of Northern California, a region known for seismic

activity. Operating results could be materially affected by a significant

earthquake. The Company is predominantly self-insured for losses and business

interruptions of this kind.

PROPRIETARY RIGHTS AND LICENSES

The Company has been granted or has applications pending for a significant

number of U.S. patents, and will continue to seek patent coverage for its

inventions in both the United States and foreign countries. The Company also

has applied for and holds various trademark registrations in the United States

and in selected foreign countries. The Company will continue to seek protection

for its inventions, trademarks, maskworks and copyrights where appropriate.

As is customary in its industry, the Company licenses from third parties a

wide range of software for its internal use and for the use of its customers.

The Company licenses the UNIX operating system on a non-exclusive basis from

Novell, Inc., and sublicenses it to its customers.

The Company's ability to compete may be affected by its ability to protect

proprietary information and to obtain necessary licenses on commercially

reasonable terms. The extent to which U.S. and international intellectual

property laws protect the Company's products, and the enforceability of end-user

license agreements, have not been fully determined, and the computer industry

has seen a substantial increase in litigation with respect to intellectual

property matters. Such litigation or changes in the interpretation of

intellectual property laws could expand or reduce the extent to which the

Company or its competitors are able to protect their intellectual property or

require changes in the design of products which could have an adverse impact on

the Company. There can be no assurance that the Company will not be made a

party to litigation regarding intellectual property matters in the future. See

"Legal Proceedings."

EMPLOYEES

As of June 30, 1996, the Company had approximately 10,485 full-time

employees. The Company's future success will depend, in part, on its ability to

continue to attract, retain and motivate highly qualified technical, marketing

and management personnel, who are in great demand. The Company has never had a

work stoppage, and no employees are represented by a labor union. The Company

believes that its employee relations are good.

CORPORATE DATA

The Company was originally incorporated as a California corporation in

November 1981, and reincorporated as a Delaware corporation in January 1990.

The Company acquired MIPS Computer Systems, Inc. through a merger in June 1992,

and acquired Alias Research Inc. and Wavefront Technologies, Inc. through

mergers in June 1995. The Company recently acquired Cray Research, Inc.

through a merger effective June 30, 1996.

ITEM 2. PROPERTIES

The Company believes that, while it currently has or is developing

sufficient facilities to conduct its operations during fiscal 1997, it will

continue to acquire both leased and owned facilities throughout the world as its

business requires. The Company's corporate offices and its primary research and

-11-

development and manufacturing operations are located in Mountain View,

California. The Company leases twelve adjacent buildings comprising a total of

approximately 726,500 square feet under leases terminating during 2000 through

2005. The Company owns 7.5 acres near its Mountain View headquarters, on which

a 112,000 square foot headquarters building for its sales organization was

completed in fiscal 1995. The Company also leases sixteen other buildings near

its Mountain View headquarters, comprising approximately 736,000 square feet.

The Company also has leased 22 acres of land near its other facilities in

Mountain View on which a four-building, 500,000 square foot general office

complex is being constructed to be leased to the Company for occupancy in fiscal

1997.

As a result of the acquisition of Cray Research, the Company also owns

manufacturing, research and development and service facilities comprising

approximately 747,000 square feet in Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin and

manufacturing, research and development, sales and administrative facilities

comprising 479,300 square feet in Eagan, Minnesota. The Company has vacated

and intends to sell a general and administrative and sales office comprising

approximately 118,900 square feet in Mendota Heights, Minnesota. The

Company's computing services operation leases approximately 100,100 square

feet in Minneapolis.

The Company's European manufacturing and support center near Neuchatel,

Switzerland is located in a facility owned by the Company, consisting of

approximately 75,000 square feet An additional facility comprised of

approximately 60,000 square feet is under construction and due for occupancy in

January 1997.

The Company also leases sales, service and administrative offices

worldwide.

ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

The Company is defending the lawsuits described below. The Company

believes that it has good defenses to the claims in each of these lawsuits and

is defending each of them vigorously.

The Company is defending a securities class action lawsuit and a derivative

suit filed in U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California in

January and March, 1996. These suits allege that the Company and certain of its

officers and directors made material misrepresentations and omissions during the

period from October to December 1995. On September 25, 1996, the District Court

dismissed the securities class action, while allowing plaintiffs one opportunity

to amend their complaint, and dismissed the derivative action with prejudice.

The Company also is defending securities class action lawsuits involving

MIPS Computers Systems, Inc., which the Company acquired in June 1992, and Alias

Research Inc., which the Company acquired in June 1995. The MIPS case, which

was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California in

1992, alleges that MIPS and certain of its officers and directors made material

misrepresentations and omissions during the period from January to October of

1991. On September 11, 1996, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth

Circuit reversed the summary judgment granted in defendants' favor in June 1994.

The Company intends to seek rehearing of the Court of Appeals' decision. The

Alias case, which was filed in the U.S. District Court for the District of

Connecticut in 1991, alleges that Alias and certain of its officers and

directors made material misrepresentations and omissions during the period from

May 1991 to April 1992. Alias' motion to dismiss the amended complaint is

pending.

The Company also is defending a patent infringement lawsuit filed by Martin

Marietta Corp. in the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Florida in

September 1995. The Company has filed a counterclaim seeking to invalidate the

principal patent at issue in the lawsuit, and Martin Marietta has requested the

U.S. Patent and Trademark Office to re-examine the patent. The District Court

has set a trial date for the lawsuit in February 1998.

-12-

The Company routinely receives communications from third parties

asserting patent or other rights covering the Company's products and

technologies. Based upon the Company's evaluation, it may take no action or

it may seek to obtain a license. There can be no assurance in any given case

that a license will be available on terms the Company considers reasonable,

or that litigation will not ensue. Management is not aware of any pending

disputes, including those described above, that would be likely to have a

material adverse effect on the Company's financial condition, results of

operations or liquidity. However, management's evaluation of the likely

impact of these pending disputes could change in the future.

EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT

The executive officers of the Company and their ages as of September 20,

1996, are as follows:

Executive

Officer

Name Age Position and Principal Occupation Since

---- --- --------------------------------- -----

Edward R. McCracken 52 Chairman, Chief Executive Officer and Director 1984

Robert R. Bishop 53 Chairman, Silicon Graphics World Trade Corporation 1991

and Director, Silicon Graphics, Inc.

Gary L. Lauer 43 Executive Vice President, Worldwide Sales and Marketing, 1988

Silicon Graphics, Inc. and President, Silicon Graphics

World Trade Corporation

Javaid Aziz 44 Senior Vice President, European Field Operations 1995

Forest Baskett 53 Senior Vice President, Research and Development and 1986

Chief Technology Officer

Ross A. Bott 45 Senior Vice President, Enterprise Technologies 1996

John E. Bourgoin 50 President, MIPS Technologies, Inc. and Senior Vice 1996

President, Silicon Graphics, Inc.

Kenneth L. Coleman 53 Senior Vice President, Administration 1987

Robert H. Ewald 48 President, Cray Research, Inc. and Senior Vice President, 1996

Silicon Graphics, Inc.

Stephen Goggiano 43 Senior Vice President, Manufacturing and Customer Service 1989

William M. Kelly 43 Senior Vice President, Silicon Interactive Group, General 1994

Counsel and Secretary

Stanley J. Meresman 49 Senior Vice President, Finance and Chief Financial Officer 1989

David E. Orton 40 Senior Vice President, Scalable Systems Group 1996

Michael Ramsay 46 Senior Vice President, Silicon Desktop Group 1987

Teruyasu Sekimoto 57 Senior Vice President, East Asian Field Operations 1995

Dennis P. McBride 44 Vice President, Controller 1988

Robert W. Saltmarsh 46 Vice President, Treasurer 1996

Executive officers of the Company are elected annually by the Board of

Directors and serve at the Board's discretion. There are no family

relationships among any directors, nominees for director or executive officers

of the Company.

Except as set forth below, all of the officers have been associated with

the Company in their present positions for more than five years.

Mr. McCracken became Chairman of the Company in 1994.

-13-

Mr. Bishop, who has been an officer of the Company since 1991 and President

of Silicon Graphics World Trade Corporation since 1986, was named Chairman of

the Board of Silicon Graphics World Trade Corporation in July of 1995.

Mr. Lauer joined the Company in 1988 as Vice President, North American

Marketing, became Vice President, North American Field Operations in 1989, was

named Senior Vice President, North American Field Operations in 1991 and became

Executive Vice President, Silicon Graphics, Inc. and President of Silicon

Graphics World Trade Corporation in 1995.

Mr. Aziz joined the Company in 1995 as Senior Vice President, Europe.

Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Aziz spent 20 years at IBM Corporation in

technical, marketing and management positions, most recently as chief executive

officer of the United Kingdom operations.

Mr. Bott joined the Company in 1993 as Vice President/General Manager of

the Company's Network Systems Division. In 1996, he was named Senior Vice

President, Enterprise Technologies. Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Bott was

Vice President of Advanced Development and chief technical officer at Pyramid

Technology.

John E. Bourgoin joined the Company in 1996 as President of MIPS

Technologies, Inc. and Senior Vice President of Silicon Graphics, Inc. Prior to

joining the Company, Mr. Bourgoin served as Vice President, Computation Products

Group at Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.

Robert H. Ewald joined the Company in 1996 as a result of the Company's

acquisition of Cray Research, Inc. and now serves as President of Cray Research

and Senior Vice President of Silicon Graphics, Inc. Prior to the acquisition,

Mr. Ewald had been President and Chief Operating Officer of Cray since late

1994. Prior to that, he was Chief Operating Officer of Cray's Supercomputer

Operations and in 1993 served as Executive Vice President and General Manager,

Supercomputer Operations. During 1991 through 1993, Mr. Ewald was Cray's

Executive Vice President, Development.

Mr. Goggiano joined the Company in 1989 as Director of Operations, Advanced

Systems Division. In 1990, Mr. Goggiano was named Vice President/General

Manager, Operations and, in 1993, he was named Senior Vice President. Prior to

joining the Company, Mr. Goggiano was Vice President, Manufacturing for Altos

Computer Systems.

Mr. Kelly joined the Company in 1994 as Vice President, Business

Development, General Counsel and Secretary. In 1996, Mr. Kelly was named

Senior Vice President, Silicon Interactive Group and remains General Counsel

and Secretary of the Company. Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Kelly had

practiced law since 1978 with the firm of Shearman & Sterling, most recently

as co-managing partner of that firm's San Francisco office.

In 1990, Mr. Orton became Vice President/General Manager of the Advanced

Systems Division and in 1996 was named Senior Vice President, Scalable Systems

Group.

Mr. Ramsay was named Vice President/General Manager, Entry Systems Division

in 1988, and became Senior Vice President/General Manager, Entry Systems

Division in 1991. In 1992, Mr. Ramsay was named Senior Vice President, Visual

Systems Group, in 1994, became President of Silicon Studio, Inc. and in 1996 was

named Senior Vice President, Silicon Desktop Group.

Mr. Saltmarsh joined the Company in 1996 as Vice President, Treasurer. In

1994 and 1995, Mr. Saltmarsh served as Chief Financial Officer at Radius, Inc.

and prior to that was Vice President of Finance at Apple Computer, Inc.

-14-

PART II

With the exception of the information specifically incorporated by

reference from the Company's 1996 Annual Report to Stockholders (the "1996

Annual Report") in Parts I, II and IV of this Form 10-K, the 1996 Annual Report

is not to be deemed filed as part of this Report.

ITEM 5. MARKET FOR THE REGISTRANT'S COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER

MATTERS

The information required by this Item is incorporated by reference to the

section entitled "Price Range of Common Stock" on page 35 of the Company's 1996

Annual Report.

ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA

The information required by this Item is incorporated by reference to the

section entitled "Selected Consolidated Financial Data" on page 34 of the

Company's 1996 Annual Report.

ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND

RESULTS OF OPERATIONS

The information required by this Item is incorporated by reference to the

section entitled "Management's Discussion and Analysis" on pages 36 through 43

of the Company's 1996 Annual Report.

ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA

The information required by this Item is incorporated by reference to the

consolidated financial statements and notes thereto and to the section entitled

"Quarterly Data" on pages 35 and 44 through 61 of the Company's 1996 Annual

Report.

ITEM 9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND

FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE

Not applicable.

-15-

PART III

Certain information required by Part III is omitted from this Report in

that the Company has filed its definitive proxy statement pursuant to Regulation

14A (the "1996 Proxy Statement") not later than 120 days after the end of the

fiscal year covered by this Report, and certain information included therein is

incorporated herein by reference.

ITEM 10. DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT

The information concerning the Company's directors required by this Item is

incorporated by reference to pages 3 and 4 of the 1996 Proxy Statement under the

heading "Proposal No. 1 -- Election of Directors - Directors and Nominees for

Director."

The information concerning executive officers and family relationships

required by this Item is incorporated by reference to the section in Part I

hereof entitled "Executive Officers of the Registrant."

The information concerning compliance with Section 16(a) of the Securities

Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, required by this Item is incorporated by

reference to page 9 of the 1996 Proxy Statement under the heading "Executive

Officer Compensation - Compliance with Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act."

ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION

The information required by this Item is incorporated by reference to page

5 under the headings "Proposal No. 1 - Election of Directors - Compensation

Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation" and " - Director Compensation",

pages 7 through 9 under the headings "Executive Officer Compensation - Summary

Compensation Table", " - Option Grants in Fiscal 1996" and " - Option Exercises

in Fiscal Year 1996 and Fiscal Year-End Option Values", pages 10 and 11 under

the heading "Report of the Compensation and Human Resources Committee of the

Board of Directors", and page 12 under the heading "Company Stock Price

Performance Graph" of the 1996 Proxy Statement.

ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT

The information required by this Item is incorporated by reference to pages

1 and 2 of the 1996 Proxy Statement under the headings "Information Concerning

Solicitation and Voting - Record Date and Principal Share Ownership" and

" - Voting and Solicitation" and page 6 of the 1996 Proxy Statement under the

heading "Other Information - Security Ownership of Management."

ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS

The information required by this Item is incorporated by reference to pages

9 and 10 of the 1996 Proxy Statement under the heading "Certain Transactions."

-16-

PART IV

ITEM 14. EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES, AND REPORTS ON FORM 8-K

(a) The following documents are filed as a part of this Report:

1. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS. The following consolidated financial

statements and supplementary information of Silicon Graphics, Inc. and Report of

Independent Auditors are incorporated by reference to pages 35 and 44 through 62

of the Registrant's 1996 Annual Report:

Consolidated Statements of Operations - Years Ended June 30, 1996,

1995 and 1994

Consolidated Balance Sheets - June 30, 1996 and 1995

Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows - Years Ended June 30, 1996,

1995 and 1994

Consolidated Statements of Stockholders' Equity - Years Ended June 30,

1996, 1995 and 1994

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Report of Independent Auditors

Supplementary Information

Quarterly Data (Unaudited)

2. FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES. The following financial statement

schedule of Silicon Graphics, Inc. is filed as part of this Report and should be

read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements of Silicon

Graphics, Inc.

Schedule Description Page

- -------- ----------- ----

II Valuation and Qualifying Accounts S-1

Schedules not listed above have been omitted because they are not

applicable or are not required or the information required to be set forth

therein is included in the consolidated financial statements or notes thereto.

-17-

3. EXHIBITS. The following Exhibits are filed as part of, or

incorporated by reference into, this Report:

2.1(14) Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization,

dated as of February 6, 1995, among Silicon

Graphics, Inc., S Acquisition Corporation and

Wavefront Technologies, Inc.

2.2(14) Agreement and Plan of Acquisition and Arrangement

dated as of February 6, 1995 by and among Silicon

Graphics, Inc., 1103707 Ontario Inc., Silicon

Graphics Manufacturing S.A. and Alias Research

Inc.

2.3(20) Agreement and Plan of Merger dated as of February

25, 1996 by and among Silicon Graphics, Inc.,

C. Acquisition Corporation and Cray Research, Inc.

3.1.1(12) Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the

Company.

3.1.2(18) Certificate of Designation of the Series E

Preferred Stock filed June 13, 1995.

3.2 Bylaws of the Company, as amended.

4.1(5) Silicon Graphics, Inc. $25,000,000 8.98% Senior

Notes Due February 1, 1996, Note Agreement and

Note, dated February 1, 1991.

4.2(7) Amended and Restated Preferred Shares Rights

Agreement, dated as of May 6, 1992 between the

Company and The First National Bank of Boston,

including the Certificate of Designation of

Rights, Preferences and Privileges of Series B

Participating Preferred Stock, the form of Rights

Certificate and the Summary of Rights attached

thereto as Exhibits A, B, and C respectively.

4.3(12) Indenture dated November 1, 1993 between the

Company and The First National Bank of Boston, as

Trustee.

4.4(15) First Amendment to Rights Agreement dated as of

May 2, 1995 between the Company and The First

National Bank of Boston.

9.1(18) Voting and Exchange Trust Agreement between the

Company and Montreal Trust Company of Canada dated

June 15, 1995.

10.1(6)* 1984 Incentive Stock Option Plan, as amended, and

amended form of Incentive Stock Option Agreement.

10.2(8)* 1986 Incentive Stock Option Plan, as amended, and

amended forms of Incentive Stock Option Agreement

and Nonstatutory Stock Option Agreement.

-18-

10.3(1) Software Agreement dated as of January 4, 1986, as

supplemented June 6, 1986, and Sublicensing

Agreement dated as of June 9, 1986 between the

Company and AT&T Information Systems Inc.

10.4(4)* 1987 Stock Option Plan and form of Stock Option

Agreement.

10.5(2) Software License Agreement dated January 24, 1986,

between the Company and AT&T Information Systems

Inc.

10.6(3) Stock Purchase Agreement dated March 2, 1990 among

the Company, NKK Corporation and NKK U.S.A.

Corporation.

10.7(12)* Directors' Stock Option Plan and form of Stock

Option Agreement as amended as of October 31,

1994.

10.8(8) Form of Indemnification Agreement entered into

between the Company and its directors, executive

officers and certain other agents.

10.9(8) Form of Indemnification Agreement entered into

between the Company and its directors, executive

officers and certain other agents. (Revised)

10.10(8)* 1985 Stock Incentive Program.

10.11(8) Exchange Agreement dated August 14, 1992 among the

Company, NKK Corporation and NKK U.S.A.

Corporation.

10.12(13) Credit Agreement dated December 31, 1994 between

the Company and Bank of America, National Trust

and Savings Association.

10.13(9) Purchase and Sale Agreement, as amended, between

Richard T. Peery, John Arrillaga and Silicon

Graphics, Inc. executed on April 30, 1993.

10.14(9) Waiver and Release Agreement between Richard T.

Peery, John Arrillaga and Silicon Graphics Real

Estate, Inc. dated May 7, 1993.

10.15(10)* 1993 Long-Term Incentive Stock Plan and form of

stock option agreement.

10.16(18)* Employee Stock Purchase Plan, as amended as of

June 12, 1995.

10.17(10)* Form of Employment Continuation Agreement entered

into between the Company and its executive

officers, as amended as of October 21, 1993.

10.18(10)* Consulting Agreement dated as of October 25, 1993

between the Company and Mark W. Perry.

-19-

10.19(11)* Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation Plan dated as

of September 9, 1994.

10.20(13)* Employment Agreement dated February 1, 1995

between the Company and Thomas A. Jermoluk.

10.21(15)* Employment Agreement dated as of February 13, 1995

between the Company and Javaid Aziz.

10.22(18)* Letter agreement dated as of July 6, 1995 between

the Company and Robert K. Burgess.

10.23(18)* Convertible Debenture dated as of February 3, 1993

issued to Robert K. Burgess.

10.24(18) Ground Lease between Silicon Graphics Real Estate

Inc. and the City of Mountain View dated March 7,

1995.

10.25(18) Agreement for Lease between the Company and

Virtual Funding, Limited Partnership dated

November 18, 1993.

10.26(18) Amendment No. 1 to Agreement for Lease between the

Company and Virtual Funding, Limited Partnership

dated March 15, 1995.

10.27(18) Lease Agreement between the Company and Virtual

Funding, Limited Partnership dated November 18,

1993.

10.28(18) Amendment No. 1 to Lease Agreement between the

Company and Virtual Funding, Limited Partnership

dated March 15, 1995.

10.29(16)* Alias Research Inc.'s 1988 Employee Share

Ownership Plan Option Agreement.

10.30(16)* Alias Research Inc.'s 1989 Employee Share

Ownership Plan Option Agreement.

10.31(16)* Alias Research Inc.'s 1990 Employee Share

Ownership Plan and standard forms of Option

Agreements.

10.32(16)* Alias Research Inc.'s 1994 Stock Plan and standard

forms of Option Agreements.

10.33(17)* Wavefront Technologies, Inc. 1990 Stock Option

Plan with standard form of Option Agreement.

10.34(19)* Consulting Agreement dated as of December 21, 1995

between the Company and Tom Oswold.

10.35(19)* Addendum to the Non-Qualified Deferred

Compensation Plan (previously filed as Exhibit

10.19 to the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K

for the year ended June 30, 1995).

-20-

10.36(21)* Consulting Agreement dated as of March 5, 1996

between the Company and Wei Yen.

10.37(21) Credit Agreement dated as of April 12, 1996.

10.38(21)* 1996 Supplemental Non-Executive Equity Incentive

Plan and form of stock option agreement.

10.39(22)* Cray Research, Inc. Amended and Restated 1989

Employee Benefit Stock Plan and form of stock

option agreement.

10.40(22)* Cray Research, Inc. 1989 Non-Employee Directors'

Stock Option Plan and form of stock option

agreement.

11.1 Statement of Computation of Per Share Earnings.

13.1 Excerpts from Annual Report for the year ended

June 30, 1996.

21.1 List of Subsidiaries.

23.1 Consent of Independent Auditors (see page 27).

27.1 Financial Data Schedule.

- -------------------------

* This exhibit is a management contract or compensatory plan required to be

filed as an exhibit to this Form 10-K pursuant to Item 14(c).

(1) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Registration

Statement on Form S-1 (No. 33-8892), which became effective October 29,

1986.

(2) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Registration

Statement on Form S-1 (No. 33-12863), which became effective March 31,

1987.

(3) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Current Report on

Form 8-K dated March 16, 1990.

(4) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Post-Effective

Amendment to Registration Statement on Form S-8 (No. 33-16529), which

became effective June 18, 1990.

(5) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Quarterly Report on

Form 10-Q for the period ended December 31, 1990.

(6) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Annual Report on

Form 10-K for the year ended June 30, 1991.

(7) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Quarterly Report on

Form 10-Q for the period ended March 31, 1992.

(8) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Annual Report on

Form 10-K for the year ended June 30, 1992.

-21-

(9) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Annual Report on

Form 10-K for the year ended June 30, 1993.

(10) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Quarterly Report on

Form 10-Q for the period ended September 30, 1993.

(11) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Annual Report on

Form 10-K for the year ended June 30, 1994.

(12) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Quarterly Report on

Form 10-Q for the period ended September 30, 1994.

(13) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Quarterly Report on

Form 10-Q for the period ended December 31, 1994.

(14) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Current Report on

Form 8-K dated February 13, 1995.

(15) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Quarterly Report on

Form 10-Q for the period ended March 31, 1995.

(16) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Registration

Statement on Form S-8 (No. 33-60215), which became effective June 14, 1995.

(17) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Registration

Statement on Form S-8 (No. 33-60213), which became effective June 14, 1995.

(18) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Annual Report on

Form 10-K for the year ended June 30, 1995.

(19) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Quarterly Report on

Form 10-Q for the period ended December 31, 1995.

(20) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Schedule 14D-1,

Tender Offer Statement dated February 29, 1996.

(21) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Quarterly Report on

Form 10-Q for the period ended March 31, 1996.

(22) Incorporated by reference to exhibits to the Company's Registration

Statement on Form S-8 (No. 333-06403), which became effective June 20,

1996.

(b) REPORTS ON FORM 8-K.

No Current Reports on Form 8-K were filed during the quarter ended June 30,

1996.

-22-

TRADEMARKS USED IN THIS FORM 10-K

Silicon Graphics, CHALLENGE, Indigo, Onyx, OpenGL and the Silicon Graphics logo

are registered trademarks, and Cosmo, Indigo(2), Indigo(2) IMPACT, Indigo Magic,

InfiniteReality, IRIS GL, IRIX, Maya, POWER CHALLENGE, RealityEngine(2) and

WebFORCE are trademarks of Silicon Graphics, Inc. Indy is a registered

trademark used under license in the United States, and owned by Silicon

Graphics, Inc. in other countries worldwide. MIPS is a registered trademark and

R10000 are trademarks of MIPS Technologies, Inc. Cray is a registered trademark

and Cray J90, Cray T3E and Cray T90 are trademarks of Cray Research, Inc.

Alias|Wavefront, Alias Studio, Alias PowerAnimator, and Wavefront Composer are

trademarks of Alias|Wavefront, a division of Silicon Graphics Limited.

Pentium is a registed trademark of Intel Corporation. UNIX is a registered

trademark licensed exclusively through X/Open Company Limited. Windows NT is a

trademark of Microsoft Corporation.

-23-

SIGNATURES

Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities

Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this Report to be signed on

its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.

SILICON GRAPHICS, INC.

By: /s/ Edward R. McCracken

------------------------------

Edward R. McCracken

Chairman and Chief Executive

Officer

Dated: September 27, 1996

-24-

Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this

Report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the

Registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.

Signature Title Date

- ---------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------- ------------------

/s/ Edward R. McCracken Chairman, Chief Executive Officer September 27, 1996

- ---------------------------------------- and Director (Principal Executive

Edward R. McCracken Officer)

Chairman, Silicon Graphics World

- ---------------------------------------- Trade Corporation, and Director

Robert R. Bishop

/s/ Stanley J. Meresman Senior Vice President, Finance September 27, 1996

- ---------------------------------------- and Chief Financial Officer

Stanley J. Meresman (Principal Financial Officer)

/s/ Dennis P. McBride Vice President, Controller September 27, 1996

- ---------------------------------------- (Principal Accounting Officer)

Dennis P. McBride

/s/ Allen F. Jacobson Director September 27, 1996

- ----------------------------------------

Allen F. Jacobson

/s/ C. Richard Kramlich Director September 27, 1996

- ----------------------------------------

C. Richard Kramlich

/s/Robert A. Lutz Director September 27, 1996

- ----------------------------------------

Robert A. Lutz

Director

- ----------------------------------------

James A. McDivitt

-25-

Signature Title Date

- ---------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------- ------------------

/s/ Lucille Shapiro Director September 27, 1996

- ----------------------------------------

Lucille Shapiro

/s/ Robert B. Shapiro Director September 27, 1996

- ----------------------------------------

Robert B. Shapiro

/s/ James G. Treybig Director September 27, 1996

- ----------------------------------------

James G. Treybig

-26-

Consent of Ernst & Young LLP, Independent Auditors

We consent to the incorporation by reference in this Annual Report (Form 10-K)

of Silicon Graphics, Inc. of our report dated July 19, 1996, included in the

1996 Annual Report to Stockholders of Silicon Graphics, Inc.

Our audits also included the consolidated financial statement schedule of

Silicon Graphics, Inc. listed in item 14(a)2. This schedule is the

responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an

opinion based on our audits. In our opinion, the financial statement schedule

referred to above, when considered in relation to the basic financial statements

taken as a whole, presents fairly in all material respects the information set

forth therein.

We also consent to the incorporation by reference in the Registration

Statements (Form S-8 File Nos. 33-11703, 33-16529, 33-18717, 33-26003,

33-34919, 33-38536, 33-40879, 33-44305, 33-44333, 33-48890, 33-59098,

33-65190, 033-50999, 033-51275, 33-58017, 33-60213, 33-60215, 333-01211,

333-06403 and 333-08651) pertaining to the Employee Stock Purchase Plan, 1987

Stock Option Plan, 1986 Incentive Stock Option Plan, 1985 Stock Incentive

Program, 1984 Incentive Stock Option Plan, 1982 Stock Option Plan, Directors'

Stock Option Plan and Subsidiary Stock Agreement, 1993 Long-Term Incentive

Stock Plan and the 1996 Supplemental Non-Executive Equity Incentive Plan of

Silicon Graphics, Inc.; the 1990 Stock Option Plan of Wavefront Technologies,

Inc.; and the 1988 Employee Share Ownership Plan, 1989 Employee Share

Ownership Plan, 1990 Employee Share Ownership Plan, and the 1994 Stock Plan

of Alias Research Inc. and the Amended and Restated 1989 Employee Benefit

Stock Plan and 1989 Non-Employee Directors' Stock Option Plan of Cray

Research, Inc. of our report dated July 19, 1996 with respect to the

consolidated financial statements of Silicon Graphics, Inc. incorporated

herein by reference, and our report included in the preceding paragraph with

respect to the financial statement schedule included in this Annual Report

(Form 10-K).

/s/ Ernst & Young LLP

Palo Alto, California

September 27, 1996

-27-

Schedule II

SILICON GRAPHICS, INC.

Valuation and Qualifying Accounts

(in thousands)

Additions

-----------------------------------

Balance at Charged to Balance at

Beginning Costs and Deductions End of

Description of Period Expenses Other Write-offs Period

----------- --------- -------- ------ ---------- ------

Year ended June 30, 1994

Accounts receivable

allowances $10,875 $3,226 $0 $(4,609) $9,492

Year ended June 30, 1995

Accounts receivable

allowances $9,492 $11,534 $0 $(7,561) $13,465

Year ended June 30, 1996

Accounts receivable

allowances $13,465 $4,292 $6,383* $(373) $23,767

* Acquired Cray Research valuation allowance.

S-1