TRUSTEES' COUNCIL NAMES NEW MEMBERS

Five alumni have joined the Trustees' Council of the College, beginning with the 1999-2000 year. The 34-member council advises the University's Board of Trustees on issues involving the College (arts, sciences, and engineering).

The new members are:

David Friedman '99. An equity research analyst in the E-Commerce/Internet group at Prudential Securities in New York City, Friedman was an economics major.

While an undergraduate, he helped plan alumni programs to bring graduates working in the financial community together with students.

Sam Huber '99. A graduate of the Rochester Early Medical Scholars (REMS) program, Huber is a student at the School of Medicine and Dentistry.

A founding member of the a cappella group Midnight Ramblers, he studied abroad in Peru while an undergraduate. Huber also was a member of Students Together in Networking Graduates (STING) during his four years in the College.

Harry Orchard '91. Orchard works in business development for Silicon Graphics, Inc., in Silicon Valley, California. After graduation, he worked as a pension consultant on Wall Street, and earned an M.B.A. from the University of Michigan Business School.

He and his wife, Betsy, have one son, Ethan.

Susan Rea '70. Recently returned to Upstate New York and a new home on Canandaigua Lake, Rea has made her career as a family and marriage counselor, a business and divorce mediator, public relations specialist, and teacher.

She received a B.A. in English from the University and went on to earn an M.A. in English from George Washington University, and an M.S. in Marriage and Family Counseling from the University of California at Santa Clara.

Tyler Zachem '88. Zachem is managing director of DB Capital Partners, the merchant banking group for Deutsche Bank in New York City. He is a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of the University and an alumnus of Harvard Business School.

Zachem was captain of the Yellowjacket basketball team during his junior and senior years. He and his wife, Karen, live in New York City with their young daughter.