The Saudi press agency was established in 1390h / 1971 as the first national news agency. The main goal of its establishment was to serve as a central body to collect and distribute local and international news in the kingdom and abroad. It is an important channel to keep abreast with developments in the kingdom and to serve as a true reflection for transfer of different kinds of information to Saudi citizens from events locations in the kingdom and abroad. Since its establishment, SPA has made great strides to complete its basic components to be a modern and an effective news agency. In a short time, it became the first and main source of news in the kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Its news services have gained a vast trust because of its objective and authentic coverage and highest professional outlook. SPA Bldg. int. Modern wire and wireless communications means in the kingdom have provided SPA with a great potential to spread its news services rapidly in the kingdom and abroad. Therefore, its news services are now available for various kinds of media and governmental circles and bodies. Ever since its establishment, SPA has been trying to build up close ties with Arab, international, and other agencies of developing countries. In addition, SPA has made linkages with information bodies in order to develop the process of exchanging news and the free outflow of news and information. SPA is a founder member of the federation of the Arab news agencies, the gulf news agency, the international Islamic news agency and the pool of news agencies of the nonaligned countries. The Saudi press agency takes part in annual conferences and meetings to review aspects of the joint cooperation between news agencies of different regional groups. It also participates in other media and information conferences. The SPA is under the responsibility of the ministry of culture and information and therefore, its president directly reports to the minister.[1][3] The SAP provides the newspapers with a guideline, the editorial line, which should be followed in their reports.[3] The Agency publishes news in both Arabic and English.[4] The SPA has offices in Bonn, Cairo, London, Tunis and Washington, DC.[1] In late May 2012, the Saudi Council of Ministers made a decision to separate Saudi Television and Radio and Saudi Press Agency (SPA), making both as two independent corporations.[5] Under the May 2012 restructuring, the SPA covers events and issues at national, regional and international levels, especially those related to the Kingdom and contribute to strengthening the journalistic profession in the country. The new arrangement also involves the transformation of the SPA into a Presidency.[5] The president is Abdullah bin Fahd Al Hussein.[6] The minister of culture and information acts as the board chairman of the agency.[6] In November 2013, the SPA signed a news exchange agreement with Anatolia Agency, official news agency of Turkey.