This department has two sections: internal and external editing desks comprise of a number of specialist editors and correspondents who supervise the daily work. All editors at the headquarters and regional offices in Jeddah, Dammam and other cities in the kingdom are well-qualified Saudi citizens.

It has also the English and translation section, which transmits SPA news in English and French, and also translates the received English and French news into Arabic.

There is also the political monitoring section, which listens to foreign radio stations and provides editing sections with news about current happenings. This section is one of the news sources of the editorial division.

SPA has a modern information and research center, which is considered one of the biggest specialized archives in the kingdom. The primary aim of the center is to classify and store information, in addition to providing research works, reports and statistics on various subjects. SPA has also a complete photo archive that covers the daily events in the kingdom. It sends daily photo service by phone to its subscriber's newspapers and news agencies. It also receives foreign photo service from its offices or other news agencies under contracts and cooperation agreements, and retransmits it to its internal subscribers.

SPA Bulletins

SPA transmits a daily 24 hours comprehensive Arabic news bulletin that contains national and international news. It also transmits an English and French news bulletins and distributes a special bulletin and photos. SPA receives news services in different languages from Arab, European, and Islamic news agencies. It also helps in retransmitting a regular news service for both international Islamic news agency and the pool of news agencies of the nonaligned countries. Every morning, SPA issues a printed daily bulletin on important news, which is distributed, to all senior officials in the country.

SPA Offices and Correspondents

In the light of its desire to make its coverage of events direct and comprehensive, SPA has set up a number of offices and has sent correspondents in all parts of the kingdom and abroad.

Locally, SPA has set up main offices in the big Saudi cities and appointed a number of correspondents in governorates and small towns.

Abroad, SPA has set up offices in the capitals of major countries, as a first step. It has also appointed a number of correspondents in a number of other big cities to provide it with news reports on time and in a direct way. It also appointed a number of female correspondents in a number of cities inside the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

SPA's Offices Abroad

1. Beirut office was set up in 1390 h. It has a staff of more than 20 reporters and administrative personnel. This office has shown a great proficiency in covering Lebanese civil war.

2. Cairo office was set up in 1392 h. It has a staff of about 30 employees.

3. Sana'a office was set up in 1393 h. It covers events and news in Yemen.

4. London office was set up in 1397 h. It has a staff of nearly 10 employees.

5. Washington office was set up in 1399 h. But from 1397 h, SPA had a correspondent in Washington. It has now a staff of more than 10 employees and covers events and news in north and South America.

6. Tunis office was set up in 1401 h. It covers the news of Arab-Moroccan region. The office has a staff of more than 10 employees.

7. Tehran office was set up in 1421 h.

In addition, SPA has correspondents in Islamabad, Jordan, New York, Damascus, Morocco, Mauritania, Palestine, Berlin, Brussels, Paris, Moscow, Beijing, Vienna, Madrid, Geneva, Sydney, Algeria and Kuwait. SPA plans to set up a number of new offices and send correspondents to a number of other countries. The activity of the agency isn't confined on what it receives from its offices and correspondents, but it sends press missions to locations of events in any place in the world to cover these events

بالإضافة إلى ذلك هناك مراسلون للوكالة في إسلام أباد والأردن ونيويورك ودمشق والمغرب وموريتانيا وفلسطين وبرلين وبروكسل وباريس وموسكو وبكين وفينا ومدريد وجنيف وسدني والجزائر والكويت . كما تزمع الوكالة إنشاء عدد من المكاتب الجديدة وإرسال عدد من المراسلين إلى عدد من البلاد الأخرى ولا يقتصر نشاط الوكالة على ما يصلها من المكاتب والمراسلين ولكنها ترسل البعثات الصحفية إلى مواقع الأحداث والمناسبات في أي بقعة من العالم لمتابعة الأحداث .

It is concerned with following up and accomplishing all administrative and financial affairs of SPA, its employees and offices in the kingdom of Saudi Arabia and abroad.

It consists of:

1. The personal affairs section is assigned to provide all administrative services for SPA employees.

2. The accounting division is assigned to deal with all SPA financial affairs.

3. The communication section is assigned to save all documents received and sent to SPA. Moreover it keeps records of all employees.

4. The administration section supervises also the movements of SPA vehicles and information unit, in addition to the small units that are required by the agency

Ties of SPA with Other News Agencies

SPA has reached bilateral agreements to facilitate exchange of news with other Arabic and international news agencies. It has built up strong relations to promote cooperation and exchange expertise with regional and world agencies. On many occasions, SPA sends press and technical delegations to visit friendly news agencies and receives similar delegations.

SPA uses direct satellite and microwaves lines in order to exchange news with other agencies, such as Kuwaiti, Qatari, Gulf, Tunisian and Moroccan news agencies. On the international level, SPA has forged cooperation and exchange news agreements with five world news agencies. They are Reuters, the Associated Press (AP), the United Press International (UPI), the Agence France-Presse (AFP), and Deutsche Presse-Agentur (DPA).

The Prominent Achievements of SPA

Steps that had been undertaken by SPA, ever since its beginning, gave it a momentum to support its abilities and intensify, and develop its services to meet the needs of the upcoming phase. SPA has been trying to employ technically and journalistically qualified cadres in order to activate its news services. SPA has set up in 1401h new sections such as English and French bulletins. It has also set up new sections in internal news department. One of them is to cover cultural affairs, innovations in the field of science in the kingdom and abroad and to cover scientific meetings and conferences.