Background

ITV Studios (formerly known as ITV Productions) is the television production arm of Independent Television (ITV), originally formed in 1995 as the Granada Media Group.

ITV Productions

1st Logo (early/mid 1980s-1989)

Highway

Visuals: There are the big letters "ITV". Beneath that is "PRESENTS" in white.

Variants:

On About Britain, the logo appears on a light blue background and the "ITV" logo is in 3D and is facing downwards.

On Highway, the logo is on a dark blue striped background. "PRESENTS" is much thicker than in the above variant.

Technique: 2D computer animation.

Audio: The opening theme of the show.

Availability: This logo is known to have been seen at the beginning of About Britain and Highway.

2nd Logo (January 16, 2006-2010?)

Visuals: On a blurred background with visible skyscrapers and a blue sky, there is a long white rectangle appear and stretch out, with the words "itv Productions", with the words "itv" in white and in a teal rectangle, appearing on it.

Variants:

This logo exists as both 4:3 and 16:9 variants.

A 16:9 squished to 4:3 variant of this logo also exists.

It also sometimes shares the screen with other logos, these variants have the white rectangle open more. Some of these variants could be still.

Technique: Computer animation.

Audio: The ending theme of the programme or none.

Availability: Seen on ITV-produced shows such as Emmerdale, Coronation Street, Dancing on Ice, The South Bank Show, Best Ever Spitting Image, Scratch 'n' Sniff's Den of Doom, Commando: On the Front Line, and the 2009 TV movie Albert's Memorial, among many others airing on their channels, one example being season 3 of Blue Murder.

One of the first uses of this logo was on the short-lived Holly and Stephen's Saturday Showdown show/block.

However, this logo was never used on ITV shows that aired on other channels, those continued to use the 2004 Granada logo throughout this timeframe until 2009.

It is also seen plastering the 1969 Yorkshire Television Colour Production endcap on ITV3 airings of Rising Damp.

It is also seen at the end of the 2006 TV movie Housewife, 49.

It was also seen on You've Been Framed! episodes from the time period, but it is plastered on current airings.

ITV Studios

1st Logo (2009-July 10, 2013)

Visuals: On a black background, a three-dimensional blue and purple curved design (resembling an aurora) waves in, with the ITV logo and the word "STUDIOS" appearing inside the hole of the design.

Variants:

On Countdown, the logo scrolls up in the credits in its own black box, along with a copyright stamp below that reads "© ITV STUDIOS LIMITED [year]".

It also sometimes shares the screen with other logos.

On Come Dine With Me, the logo appears on the left of the screen with the text reading "An ITV Studios Production for Channel Four" and the copyright notice reading "© Channel Four Television Corporation (year)" which both appear below.

Technique: CGI by Mammal Design.

Audio: A synth choir, the end theme of the show, or none.

Availability: Seen on various ITV-produced shows from the time-period until 2013.

These include Emmerdale, Coronation Street, Dancing on Ice, University Challenge from July 2009 until January 2013, Come Dine With Me, the first few seasons of The Chase, episodes of Countdown from this time period, and the short-lived American series Sit Down, Shut Up, among many others.

It is also seen on the Sky Arts produced series Fame in the Frame.

It was also seen on You've Been Framed! episodes from the time period, but just like the previous logo, it is plastered on current airings.

2nd Logo (January 14, 2013-December 31, 2019)

Visuals: On a white background, there is the 2013 ITV logo and the word "S T U D I O S" appear letter-by-letter. Two curved shadows slide in as well.

Variants:

On some shows such as World's Most Scenic Railway Journey: Minute by Minute, among others, the word "ENTERTAINMENT" sometimes appears below and the background shines.

For its international divisions, either "NORDIC" or "FINLAND" (depending on the region) appears below in the same manner as "S T U D I O S".

Sometimes, the logo also shares the screen with other logos (including the 2016 Channel 5 logo).

Technique: Computer animation.

Audio: A three-note synth theme, or the ending theme of the programme.

Audio Variant: An extended version of the theme also exists, which has the notes drawn out a little longer. This is mainly used for the 2013 ITV Studios Global Entertainment logo.

Availability: Depending on the variant:

Normal:

Seen at the end of ITV productions in the UK from the time-period until 2020, notable examples including Coronation Street, Emmerdale, Judge Rinder, and The Chase, among others.

International Variants:

The Nordic variant is seen on the Finnish talk show Elämää Pelissä on Yle TV1, while the later "Finland" variant is seen on Elossa 24h.

3rd Logo (January 1, 2020-)

Visuals: On a grey background, there is the letter "D" in neon colours zooming out. It reveals the 2013 ITV logo in blue, with "STUDIOS" underneath it.

Variants:

On daytime programmes, the background is white.

A long version exists, which has the letters emerging from the floor, while the logo is shown from various angles. The logo then plays as described above.

A 4:3 version of this logo also exists.

On programmes broadcast on ITV such as Coronation Street Memorable Moments and Barbara Knox at 90, among others, "FOR ITV" (with the 2013 ITV logo) appears below the logo.

Like the second logo, this logo can be shared with other logos and its still on either a grey or white background.

Another version exists where the logo is pink and still.

Sometimes, the words "DISTRIBUTED BY" appear above the logo.

Starting in 2022, a new byline reading "CREATORS. PRODUCERS. DISTRIBUTORS" appears below the logo.

On Alone Australia, the words "Produced by" fade in above the logo.

A zoomed-in variant also exists, which is seen on the pilot of Love Island España on the MTV Katsomo website.

On a TVNZ airing of Fifteen-Love, the logo is slightly brighter.

On the Slovakian adaptation of Come Dine with Me titled Bez Servítky, the words "An ITV Studios Format DISTRIBUTED BY" and "GLOBAL ENTERTAINMENT BV" appear above and below the logo, respectively.

Technique: CGI.

Audio: Nine notes that sound like telephone beeps, followed by another note that holds itself for several seconds. Composed by Resonate.

Audio Variants:

The long version has a long, relaxing synth drone before the beeps.

Both high tone and low tone variants also exist.

On the documentary Barbara Knox at 90, the last note of the standard variant of the 2020 fanfare holds for slightly longer.

Sometimes, the ending theme plays over it or none.

Availability: Seen at the end of shows that ITV Studios produced, including This Morning (until 2021), Loose Women, Dancing on Ice (until 2022), University Challenge, Coronation Street and some specials, among others. It is also seen as an de facto home media logo for the UK since it's introduction.

After This Morning ditched the closing credits, the logo also made it away as well, and since then, the show has simply used an in-credit copyright notice instead.

The long version of this logo can be seen on an ITV Studios update video from June 15, 2020.

The pink variant of this logo was only seen on season 6 of Love Island, from season 7 onwards, it uses the Lifted Entertainment logo instead.

It was also seen on a Virgin Media Three airing of S2E3 of The Hotel Inspector following the Twofour Production for Five endcap.

It was also seen at the end of Harry: The Interview following the 2022 ITN Productions endcap.

It was also seen at the end of a March 12, 2023 airing of Cirque Du Soleil: Volta, and a June 14, 2023 airing of Cirque Du Soleil: Luzia on Sky Arts, respectively.

It was also seen at the end of 2023 Philippine broadcasts of The Voice Kids.

It was also seen at the end of Alone Australia on SBS HD.

It is also seen at the end of a TVNZ airing of Significant Other.

It is also seen at the end of Viaplay streaming prints of A Year on Planet Earth and Cold Case Detectives, respectively.

It is also seen at the end of an SVT Play streaming print of Tom Jones, following the Mammoth Screen endcap.

It is also seen at the end of an SBS On Demand streaming print of Yorkshire Ripper: The Secret Murders.

The white background variant of this logo was also seen at the end of a May 24, 2023 airing of a Hell's Kitchen USA episode "A Finale for the Ages: Part 2" on ITV2, the documentary Barbara Knox at 90, and on a SBS On Demand streaming print of 2022: The Year from Space, following the Atlantic Productions logo.

The white background variant of this logo is also seen at the end of both a Filmin streaming print of S4E01 of Brassic, and an SVT Play streaming print of S29E20 of The Graham Norton Show.

It is also seen at the end of Yle Areena streaming prints of Wild China with Ray Mears and Malpractice, respectively.

It is also seen at the end of S2E21 of Extreme Cake Makers on the the TV2 Hungary website.

It was also seen at the end of a TVNZ airing of Fifteen-Love.

The "DISTRIBUTED BY" variant of this logo was also seen at the end of a June 5, 2023 airing of S19E08 of Hell's Kitchen USA on Virgin Media Two.