“The foundation members aspire to build the largest open ecosystem for accelerated computing. The initial contributions to the foundation will bring an existing open standards based platform with open governance. Our ultimate aim is to foster a multi-architecture and multi-vendor programming platform for all accelerators”, said Rod Burns, VP Ecosystem, Codeplay Software and UXL Foundation Steering Committee Chair.

Read More from Rod Burns, VP Ecosystem, Codeplay Software and UXL Foundation Steering Committee Chair

“The future of human centric, sustainable digital transformation needs a holistic approach to technology development and open collaboration with the international community. The Unified Acceleration Foundation’s innovative strategy of building a unified development ecosystem will play a vital role in advancing the creation of cross-platform software and accelerators”, said Hirai Kouichi, Head of Software Development Division under the Advanced Technology Development Unit, Fujitsu.

“The growing diversity of accelerators presents a tremendous opportunity for the industry but can also introduce challenges. Consistent programming models help developers write code that can run efficiently on any accelerator, fostering innovation and choice,” said George Elissaios, Sr. Director, HPC and ML infrastructure at Google Cloud.

“The technology that is improving our day-to-day experiences of driving, entertainment, healthcare and more, is increasingly data-intensive and complex. A new open and collaborative approach to computing is required to provide the necessary acceleration in an efficient and performant manner, whether in the cloud or at the edge,” said Shreyas Derashri, Vice President of Compute Product Management at Imagination Technologies. “As a founding member of the Unified Acceleration Foundation, Imagination Technologies will help unite the technology ecosystem around the oneAPI spec and encourage its widespread adoption for software acceleration.”

“As a new independent entity, the Unified Acceleration Foundation will help build an open source programming model across a wide range of architectures and vendors,” said Vinesh Sukumar, Senior Director of Product Management, Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. “This helps to address a critical need in the industry for flexible and open source alternatives that will enable a broad range of unique needs.”

“Samsung is pleased to be part of the Unified Acceleration Foundation, which will help expand the basis and adoption for memory coupled computing technologies, such as PIM and PNM”, said Seungwon Lee, Master and lead of computing software team at Samsung Advanced Institute of technology(SAIT). “We expect the open collaboration will also bolster programming models and software stacks to effectively accelerate AI/HPC applications in future datacenter and supercomputing systems.”

“Linux and GNU transformed the CPU software stack through open source and standards, encompassing everything from embedded to cloud computing. As a founding member of the Unified Acceleration Foundation, I believe that open source and standards are essential for creating a cross platform software stack for GPU’s and other accelerators that will serve as the foundation for the next generation of computationally and data-intensive applications”, said Robert Cohn, Intel Corporation, oneAPI Specification Editor.