Isabella (23 February 1478 - 4 March 1496), called The Beautiful, was Queen of Genovia in her own right from her brother's abdication in 1493 to her death in 1496 and Archduchess of Austria by marriage to Philip the Handsome. By marriage to Philip, she was also titular Duchess of Burgundy. She held the title Grand Countess of Burgundy in her own right. She was the youngest daughter of Constance IV of Genovia.

Early Life[]

Isabella Anna of Genovia was born in Relante in 1478 to Constance IV of Genovia and John of Portugal. She was the youngest child and third daughter of Constance and John. Her mother came from the ruling dynasty of Genovia, Madaste, and her father from the ruling dynasty of Portugal, Aviz. At the time of her birth, John of Portugal was Prince of Portugal and therefore Isabella was a Princess of Genovia and an Infanta of Portugal. Her siblings were: Mary, Queen of France, Constance, Holy Roman Empress and Richard V of Genovia. Isabella had a fair complexion. She inherited her mother's light-brown eyes and her grandmother's blue eyes. Her eye colour was a mix between brown and blue and her hair auburn brown.

Isabella was educated on basic knowledge for a Genovian Princess. By 10, she could speak 6 languages: Genovianese, Dutch, German, French, Latin and Castilian. Despite Isabella being the sister-in-law of Charlotte I of Sicily, she could speak no Sicilian herself, which was a problem upon Charlotte's first visit to Genovia where Charlotte attempted to communicate with Isabella however could not do so due to their language barrier. She could speak French very well and communicated to Ioanna Louikayevna, Duchess of Estherian Veneria, her half-sister in French. Ioanna then wrote "elle parle couramment le français (she speaks French Fluently.)"

Betrothal and Marriage[]

In 1482, two brides were selected as potential Duchesses of Burgundy: Isabella Anna of Genovia and Catherine of Heralistle. Both selected were of Genovian descent, with Isabella being the daughter of Constance IV of Genovia and Catherine the daughter of Albert III of Heralistle. The decision was to be made by Maximilian I, Archduke of Austria and Cecily of Burgundy. Upon a visit to the princesses by Maximilian and Cecily in 1488, both decided that even though Catherine was elegant, Isabella held more wit and cunningness. In Relante on 4 March 1489, Isabella Anna of Genovia was betrothed to Philip IV of Burgundy. The marriage contract stated that Isabella would marry Philip at thirteen and become Princess of Genovia until she came of age, which was fifteen. Isabella would then become Queen with Philip ruling alongside her. Constance died in 1490, and the 12 year-old Isabella was sworn in as Princess of Genovia on 11 July 1490 by her brother who was now Richard V of Genovia. Philip was encouraged to court Isabella in person during this time period, and he did in disguise in late 1490. When he returned home, he was so joyous with his bride that he couldn't sleep because 'the excitement of marrying someone so beautiful' was with him.

Isabella was sent to Bruges, in Flanders, to marry her betrothed Philip. Even though Isabella and Philip were both 12 at the time, the two found each other to their mutual liking. They also both shared three common languages: Genovianese, Dutch and French. They were both married on 2 February 1491 in Bruges. The marriage made Isabella Duchess of Burgundy and Philip Prince of Genovia.

The Genovian Promise[]

In 1493, Isabella Anna of Genovia turned of age. Immediately upon hearing the news, Philip wrote to his brother-in-law demanding he hand the Crown of Genovia over to Isabella. Richard however was in 'no rush' to hand over the kingship to Isabella and Philip. Richard denying Philip his marriage right enraged both Philip and Isabella. Isabella had also wrote letters to her brother but to no avail. On 12 June, Isabella and Philip decided to go to Genovia themselves. They left Lier on 20 June 1493 and arrived in Relante on 4 August 1493. There they met Richard and his wife Charlotte I of Sicily, Philip's first cousin. Richard and Charlotte corresponded in Sicilian before starting negotiations in Genovianese with the 14-year-old Philip and Isabella on 7 August 1493.