December 10, 2023

2,5/5!

The Boys in Blue is an erotic gay novel about Phil Andros, a prostitute, who ends up sharing a flat with two hot policemen. As Phil begins a new career and forms new relationships, he also gets into all kinds of shenanigans with his new flatmates. You know the drill.

I read The Greek Ways by Phil Andros earlier this year, and I did prefer that. The Boys in Blue lacked a lot of the humor I found so compelling about the other book. I cackled out loud multiple times reading The Greek Ways, but not so much during this one, which was a shame, cause I was really looking forward to that humorous voice of The Greek Ways. But don't get me wrong - there were some funny bits and it's not like this book is gloomy and serious, not at all. This is a ridiculous sex-filled book with characters who have superhuman stamina and absolutely no self-control.

I had a good time reading this story and following Phil Andros's strange life, and while I have never understood any kind of police-worship, I did like the police context, because I found the conversations surrounding being a gay cop in the 1980s – the secrecy, the dangers of being found out, all of this plays a rather big role in the book.

And before I go into one major critique of mine, I want to mention just how much better the title of this book is in Finnish. The Boys in Blue, sure, lets you know what you're gonna be getting - lots of boys in lots of blue uniforms - but the Finnish translation is absolutely hilarious. It's "Hands up, pants down!" and is that not the funniest name ever?

Now, on to my one big gripe. I want to preface that I am fully aware that this is a book about dom/sub-fantasies and dynamics, and that its goal is not to represent a healthy sexual relationship or anything like that - it's point is to be titillating to read and to let its reader explore riskier and even dangerous stuff safely through fiction. I know all that. But that doesn't take away from the fact that I had some issue with some of the more non-con stuff in the book, stuff that were sometimes straight-up sexual assault. I just don't like reading that kind of stuff, so those moments made me a bit uncomfortable.

I would definitely rather recommend The Greek Ways if you wanna try Phil Andros, but if you want some dom/sub smutty cop fiction, then I guess I would recommend you this one!

June 9, 2015

Well, this wasn't actually as good as Kreikkalainen naimajuttu, but great nonetheless. If I'm correct, this came first so in a way Andros isn't as ready as he is in the other book. Again the language works nicely and the translation is top notch. The books isn't as fun, which kind of makes the sex driven story arc somewhat lacking. It's basically too serious and even mundane with the whole police fuck group. I really didn't like how Andros was almost in love with Greg and the jealousy concerning Pete just didn't work. Well, it was credible, but I didn't want to see Andros act like a 14-year-old school girl.

I did like the police setting and surely it was intriguing. The whole abduction part was plain nasty and somehow I wished Andros would've owned the situation. In a way it was hard to believe that Andros had been a manwhore when he acted the way he did. But, I realize that this may have be his early years in a sense, so it's something I do understand, even if I don't like it all that much. The humor I missed, I wanted more of that wittiness that Kreikkalainen naimajuttu was all about. I just didn't get the margarine thing either - why didn't they use lube or something? Considering that Andros is really strict about hygiene and all (like no spitting in the arsehole etc.). Either way, I like Andros a lot and I love how courageous he is. I wish we'd have more translated into Finnish, since we so need more homo stuff like this.