Elton Brand Biography

As New York's Mr. Basketball and one of the top basketball recruits in the high school, Elton Brand accepted a scholarship to attend the storied basketball program at Duke University. After a sophomore season that ended in a National Championship loss but National Player of the Year honors, Brand entered the NBA Draft where he was selected 1st overall in 1999 by the Chicago Bulls. In his first two seasons with the Bulls, Brand averaged a double-double (20.1 ppg and 10.1 rpg) and was traded to the Los Angeles Clippers in 2001. Brand helped turn around the Clippers franchise and led them to the Playoffs in 2006 with a career best 24.7 ppg. Brand also played for the Philadelphia 76ers, the Dallas Mavericks, and the Atlanta Hawks. Brand was a 2x All-Star selection and has played for Team USA on an international level, winning 3 gold medals and bronze in international play. He is currently the general manager of the Philadelphia 76ers.

Book Elton Brand for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Elton Brand for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Elton Brand. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Elton Brand, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Elton Brand's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Elton Brand, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Elton Brand for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Elton Brand for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Elton Brand for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Elton Brand’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Elton Brand for your Virtual Meeting