Haan Map — Satellite Images of Haan

original name: Haan

geographical location: Mettmann, Dusseldorf, Nordrhein-Westfalen, Germany, Europe

geographical coordinates: 51° 12' 0" North, 7° 0' 0" East

detailed map of Haan and near places

Welcome to the Haan google satellite map! This place is situated in Mettmann, Dusseldorf, Nordrhein-Westfalen, Germany, its geographical coordinates are 51° 12' 0" North, 7° 0' 0" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Haan. See Haan photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Haan in Germany. Haan hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Haan or add new placemark for Haan.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Haan hotel reservations

Book hotel in Haan online and save money

Haan hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in Germany »

Haan hotels – sortable list of all Haan hotels »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Haan hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Haan, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Haan, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Haan hotels map

The location of each Haan hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Haan hotel map is available where all hotels in Haan are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Haan hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Haan hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Haan hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Haan hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Haan

CityClass Hotel SAVOY (at Neuer Markt 23 in Haan)

Home Hotel Haan Nichtraucher Hotel (at Schallbruch 15 in Haan)

Hotel zur alten Post ** (in Erkrath, distanced approximately 2.3 km)

Akzent Hotel Schildsheide *** (in Erkrath, distanced approximately 2.5 km)

Kempe Komfort plus Hotel *** (in Solingen, distanced approximately 3.5 km)

Gästehaus Wahnenmühle (in Erkrath, distanced approximately 3.6 km)

Hotel Hölscher *** (in Solingen, distanced approximately 3.7 km)

more Haan hotels »

Haan car rental

Compare Haan car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Haan rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Haan car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Haan — we will do it for you!

Car hire Haan and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Haan the city centre. Compare Haan car rental offers by various suppliers.

Hilden car rental (distanced approximately 6.0 km)

Dusseldorf - South Holthausen car rental (distanced approximately 11 km)

Wuppertal Center car rental (distanced approximately 12 km)

Langenfeld car rental (distanced approximately 12 km)

Dusseldorf - Koelner Landstr car rental (distanced approximately 13 km)

more offers and Haan car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Haan

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Haan »

Overview of flights to and from Germany »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Haan. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Haan and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Haan are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Dusseldorf Station Airport (distanced approximately 16 km) – airport hotels

Dusseldorf Airport (distanced approximately 19 km) – airport hotels

Leverkusen Airport (distanced approximately 20 km) – airport hotels

Essen/mulheim Airport (distanced approximately 21 km) – airport hotels

Essen-Muelheim Airport (distanced approximately 23 km) – airport hotels

Haan 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Haan in Germany

You can also dive right into Haan on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Haan 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Haan, Germany in Google Earth »

Get more out of Haan map

Add placemark to Haan

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Haan map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Haan google map link options

link to us:

small Haan google map image link

medium Haan google map image link

large Haan google map image link