Protect your purchase

We’re here to help you collect art securely. When you browse and buy on Artsper, you benefit from our guaranteed protections.

Buy works from the best galleries

We partner with the best art galleries. All sellers on Artsper have been carefully reviewed and approved by our team. All of our partner galleries respect our code of ethics.

Know what you’re getting

Each work on Artsper is studied and validated by our team before appearing online. Get personalized support Contemporary art specialists are available by phone and email to answer all of your questions about our works of art. Get personalized advice and curated suggestions for your collection.

Resell your artworks

As a private individual, you have the possibility to resell on Artsper your works acquired on Artsper. For more information click here.

Make an offer with Artsper

Negotiate prices

Price negotiation is possible. Like in a gallery, this allows you to open a discussion and purchase your works at your preferred price.

Get our help negotiating

Let our team handle the negotiations and get back to you once the best deal is made.

Order safely

Artsper’s satisfaction guarantee

With Artsper, you have the opportunity to return a work free of charge within 14 days of receipt if it does not suit you, for whatever reason. You will then receive a full refund for your order.

Protect your purchase with Artsper’s payment partners

All credit card payments are processed by Paybox, the trusted leader in payment processing for international businesses. Paybox ensures the highest level of security.

Get specialized support from Artsper in the event of a problem

On the rare occasion that a work of art arrives in a different condition than described, we will work to administer a return, refund, restoration or exchange for you. Our team will always keep you informed on the progress of your request and will go above and beyond to offer you personalized solutions.

To benefit from Artsper’s protections you must:

Place your order using one of Artsper's payment methods.

Report any issues to Artsper within one week of receiving your work.

Provide all requested photographic evidence of the problem (including the original artwork and packaging).

Artsper’s guarantee covers the following problems:

You receive a work that’s missing a described characteristic (such as a signature or a frame)

You receive a work with different characteristics than those described at the time of purchase

You receive a damaged piece of work

Your purchase is declared lost or damaged during transit

You receive a work that is a different in color than what you ordered

Your purchase is delayed

Artsper delivers worldwide!

However, please note that once your order reaches its destination, it may be subject to VAT or other customs fees. These charges are beyond our control and you will be responsible for paying them (this is indicated at the ‘checkout’ first step).

Select the delivery address of your choice. Please make sure that someone is present to receive your order.

If your billing address is different to your delivery address you can specify this at the checkout.

Why do I have to pay customs fees?

You can return the artwork without needing to provide a reason or pay a penalty fee up to 14 days after receiving your order.

In the case that the right of withdrawal is exercised in the aforementioned time frame, the price of the artwork(s) purchased and the shipping costs will be reimbursed by us as soon as the gallery has received the artwork and notified us.

Artsper will manage the return of the work and will bear the cost of returns (which will either be paid by you and refunded by Artsper or directly paid by Artsper).

The artwork must be returned in perfect condition and in its original packaging (or equivalent).

The buyer exercises his right of withdrawal directly from MUMART, by sending an email to the address: [email protected].