Warsaw University of Technology, Faculty of Automotive and Construction Machinery Engineering and Alstom signed a cooperation agreement on educating and developing the competences of future engineers in the railway sector in Poland.

The agreement was concluded on October 7, 2021, at the Warsaw University of Technology.

The project involves exchange of experiences, implementation of joint scientific and research projects and extensive support for students.

“As the biggest manufacturer and exporter in the Polish railway industry, we have the best know-how and experience within the mobility sector. We are eager to share our knowledge with young people who are preparing to enter the labour market,” Artur Fryczkowski, Alstom Sales and Business Development Director in Poland, Ukraine and Baltic States said.

This initiative aims to support the University in terms of students’ education in order to develop relevant skills of future engineers in the railway sector of the country. In addition, it will enable students to benefit from internships and placements at Alstom’s Polish sites, which may lead to a career within Alstom’s structures. Moreover, cooperation also includes the organisation of joint trainings, conferences and scientific meetings, as well as research and development projects.

Alstom has been present in Poland for more than 25 years and is the largest manufacturer in country’s railway industry. The French company employs more than 4,000 people in 12 Polish sites. Alstom builds on significant industrial heritage of company’s production plants: 180 years of Pafawag in Wrocław, 150 years Konstal in Chorzów and 100 years of ZWUS in Katowice.

Recently, the company has delivered its Coradia iLint hydrogen train to perform test track at the rail institute in Żmigród. For the train, the body shells are manufactured at Alstom Konstal site in Katowice, while the platform of the Coradia Lint diesel train family is produced in Chorzów, in the Katowice area.

Share on: