Information about Local Government Elections

Overview

A Council serves the Shire of Derby/West Kimberley consisting of a President and eight Elected Members, which represent the whole Shire as one ward.

Elections are held every two years for half of the Council. The Shire President and Councillors are elected for a term of four years.

Pursuant to the Local Government Act 1995, all local government elections in Western Australia are held every two years on the third Saturday in October.

While voting in a local government election is not compulsory in Western Australia, all electors are strongly encouraged to vote.

The Shire of Derby/West Kimberley’s ordinary elections are administered by the Electoral Commission and are conducted in person (this system allows the Electoral Commission to visit the remote aboriginal communities to invite them to vote).

2023 Council Election Results

The results from the 2023 Council Election can be found here.

The results published by Western Australian Electoral Commission can be found here.

The results from the election of the Shire President can be found here.

Results of Election – Deputy Shire President

Local Government Act 1995, section 4.77

Local Government (Constitution) Regulations 1998, Reg 11F

RESULTS OF ELECTION FOR SHIRE OF DERBY / WEST KIMBERLEY

These are the result of the local government election for Deputy Shire President held on Monday 23 October 2023.

Candidate Deputy Shire President Geoff HAEREWA

Therefore, Councillor Geoff Haerewa is elected Deputy Shire President of the Shire of Derby / West Kimberley until the next Ordinary Election, 18 October 2025.

Shire President Peter McCumstie

Returning Officer

Date: 23 October 2023

2023 Further Information

Use the following link, which will take you direct to the elections section:

Department of Local Government, Sport and Cultural Industries

Use the following link, which will take you direct to the elections section:

WAEC - Western Australian Electoral Commission