Victorious Baggy Shanker hit back at the fellow councillors who ousted him as Derby City Council leader just weeks ago after he became an MP for the first time. Mr Shanker will take over the reins from Dame Margaret Beckett as Derby South MP after winning the General Election count with more than 14,000 votes to his name.

His victory comes just weeks after he was sensationally removed as leader of the city council over a fresh fallout regarding the Sinfin waste incinerator saga and a disputed £93 million invoice from Derbyshire County Council. Mr Shanker was removed from the role following a vote of no confidence motion which ended tied before the city’s Conservative Mayor used his casting vote to oust the Labour councillor from the top role.

Days later it was announced the elected new leader Councillor Nadine Peatfield had made Cllr Shanker her new deputy leader. After being declared a clear winner to become the next Derby South MP in the early hours of Friday morning (July 5), Mr Shanker took aim at those who removed him as a council leader and said he had been given the “true” vote of confidence by the Derby public.

Join us on WhatsApp to get the latest news straight to your phone

Mr Shanker told the Local Democracy Reporting Service (LDRS): “I’m absolutely delighted but am fully aware of the responsibility that lies ahead and the work that needs to be done to crack on with the job we said we would do to give Britain and Derby its future back. It’s a really important moment.

“I will serve everybody in Derby South and will support the Government delivering the first steps we promised in the election campaign – (providing) a stable economic environment, getting the NHS back on its feet and investing in our schools. Talking to residents over the past six weeks, people have been fed up of this Conservative government and the chaos caused.”

Mr Shanker was then asked about how hard the last few weeks had been for him personally following his removal as council leader last month. He added: “I knew two weeks ago I did the right thing. It was vindictive politics trying to damage my General Election campaign and prospects. That has not worked.

"The true vote of confidence is what the people of Derby South have delivered. They have delivered that pretty clearly. I will always do right for our city.”

Mr Shanker said he would review his position as the current deputy leader of Derby City Council and would attend a meeting in the near future and then make decisions.