Im living in Nottingham, its not as bad as they say, but brace yourself

I guess the areas you should avoid are St Anns, the Medows, Sneinton.

Crytek is pretty centrally located so a good place to look at if you fancy central living is The Lace Market / Hockley area.

Outside center, West Bridgeford and Willford Village are real nice areas.

let me know when your in town and we can meet up for some cultural exchange! (beer)

Nice places in Nottingham inlcude Beeston( fairly studenty), Sherwood, West Bridgford. Avoid St.Anns at all costs:0

I am actually moving up there myself shortly, London just became too dear of late.

Rents in nottingham are pretty cheap. I used to rent a 3 bed house with a garden for about 550 pounds per month.

Driving up tomorrow for a look see.

The city centre is a nice place to hang out.It's good for shopping and eating out/drinking. We used to drink in the pit and pendulum and the social:)

There are rough areas , but most cities have rough areas anyway these days.

I am up for a few beers when I move there, if anyone fancies that:)

Massbot, did you get a job at crytek or perhaps monumnetal?

I moved from London to Nottingham and I'm really enjoying it here.

If you can get a place closest to the centre as possible then I reckon most places are ok. I second the lace market, prices seem reasonable but dunno if that's because I've moved from expensive London.

I live smack bang in the town centre (over looking the big fountain woo!)

Ahh cool Johnny, glad to hear there's some other polycounters here. We should get some beers going when you arrive :P

Hey EzMeow, when do you start? I just got a job there too as a 2D Artist We should meet up some time! I start in a couple of weeks. Same goes for you JohnnyRaptor! I need fwends!

We should get some beers going when you arrive :P

Well now I'm gonna shock everyone here.... I don't drink beer xD (Yeah it's a shame) but my girlfriend do, so she'll drink for the both of us

Hey EzMeow, when do you start? I just got a job there too as a 2D Artist We should meet up some time! I start in a couple of weeks.

I should start on the 25th october, I just need the flat now u.u;;;;;

I should start on the 25th october, I just need the flat now u.u;;;;;

I was recommended the "Hicking building" at first, but couldn't get a flat there. It's a bad time to find a nice place since university just started back. You could try: http://www.martinco.com/

They have a Crytek based in Nottingham...? Well, you learn something new everyday, Ialways thought it was Denmark or someplace they drink beer out of shoes?

Your avatar just freaked me out.

" Did that guy just wink at me? I must be going crazy" *looks away for a sec*

" IT HAPPENED AGAIN!"

*Stares intently at screen*

*wink*

" You sneaky little bastard you"

Hi guys, Ive been following these forums for awhile now just never had an account. Just wanted to say im originally from Nottingham but moved to Bradford for University. Nottinghams really nice! Its alot nicer than people say it is, I was pretty sure that crytek was near Long Eaton tho? Just of the M1? Ive lived in Long Eaton all my life since moving upto Bradford and shall be moving back after i graduate this year. Long Eatons SO nice and also close to Derby which is also a nice city. Good luck with it all! Im VERY Jealous as this is the first place i was going to apply for a 3d Environment artist job at! Enjoy yourself.... AVOID ST ANN'S at all costs!