A £40 million project to bring a mixed use commercial development to Nottingham is drawing to a close.

Nottingham One is a fantastic new development from Nottingham One Development Limited and is currently taking shape on the city’s Canal Street. The development includes 237 residential apartments as well as some ground floor commercial units and revitalises an existing building.

Commenting on the new development, Nottingham One Development Limited Director, Colin Wright, said:

“This is a prime location for businesses and residents looking to locate to Nottingham. We have had a significant interest in the scheme and already 16,500 sq ft of office space has been let. The development also provides office facilities from 7,000 sq ft to 15,000 sq ft, 237 residential apartments and restaurant, leisure and retail opportunities and is already home to the UK headquarters for Crytek, the German video gaming company.”

Deputy Leader of Nottingham City Council, Graham Chapman, said:

“This development is a prime example that the market is recovering and Nottingham is a great place to do business.”

Graham added:

“We are delighted to have Grade A office space available to new businesses and look forward to welcoming them to the city.”

Willmott Dixon is the main contractor on the project, whilst CPMG Architects is providing architectural services. Arup is the quantity surveyor on the project and is also responsible for structural work and some of the mechanical and electrical works.

Work began on the project in 2006, but suffered a few delays when the original developer and contractor went into administration. However with a new developer, contractor and architect on board, the scheme is on track and is due to reach completion in December 2013.

CPMG Architects Senior Architect, Ajay Chauhan, said:

“We were extremely delighted to be appointed with Arup to finish the development which included the external shell and interior design elements of the 13 storey tower and where the development was not completed. This is a high profile project for Nottingham which unfortunately had a bit of a difficult history. It is great to be involved with bringing the development to a conclusion.”

Willmott Dixon Operations Director, Nick Heath, said:

“Nottingham One is a pivotal part of the city’s Eastside regeneration master plan. When finished, the mixed-use development will be a major focal point along one of the main arterial routes in and out of the city.”