25th September 2009. Crytek UK and GameCity are proud to announce an extraordinary and totally unique collaboration for GameCity Squared, 2009’s iteration of the World’s best loved videogame festival. Not content with allowing players to sample gameplay through the safety of a monitor, for two full days, the entire Festival arena in the Market Square will be transformed into a live, full-scale recreation of the Crysis universe – and you can play it for real.

Crysis: LIVE! pitches each player inside a real-life tropical jungle, complete with exotic flora and fauna, where they’ll need to use the famous ‘Nanosuit’ to avoid deadly enemy soldiers and reach their top secret objective. Crysis : LIVE! Is the only real-life game available that enables players to BECOME INVISIBLE.

“This is a terrifying departure from previous events for the festival, we’re really excited to be able to collaborate with Crytek UK on making this amazing project happen”, says GameCity Director, Iain Simons.

The game is created, designed and directed by Rob Yescombe – Crytek UK’s Narrative Designer. “A lot of games are extensions of childhood classics”, says Yescombe. “Crysis: LIVE! is like Hide and Seek for the 21st Century – good old fashioned fun but with a Crytek UK twist. I don’t want to spoil too much. You really need to play it”.

Yescombe - who also created last year’s legendary Resident Evil: LIVE! - is delighted to be hosting the game in Nottingham. “The folks here really embrace the sentiments of GameCity – which is taking games out of the bedroom, and getting everyone involved; meeting each other, sharing experiences and exchanging stories. It warms the cockles of my heart. I love it.”

Crytek UK are also delighted to announce their further sponsor support of the festival, further increasing their investment in the Cultural reputation of the city.

Karl Hilton, MD of Crytek UK commented, “Crytek is really happy to be a sponsor for Gamecity squared. Nottingham has been the cradle of many successful software companies over the years and Gamecity recognises and contributes to the formidable reputation of the city as a centre of technical excellence in the games industry. Crytek is proud to be part of Nottingham and is looking forward to contributing towards making Gamecity a great success.”

Crysis : LIVE! Runs at GameCity Squared from 29-30 October. GameCity Squared happens all over Nottingham from 27-31 October, 2009.

Media enquiries to: Alison Beasley, Lincoln Beasley PR. E: alison@lincolnbeasley.co.uk M: +44 (0)7966 449130

About GameCity

GameCity is the UK's best-loved gaming event, attracting international speakers like Alexei Pajitnov, creator of Tetris and Keita Takahashi, the man behind the Katamari Damacy phenomenon, as well as exclusive game premieres, debates in Indian restaurants and amazing music events. A five-day festival which takes gaming out into the streets, shops and cinemas of Nottingham, it's about finding out what a videogame festival could be.

About Nottingham Trent University

Nottingham Trent University is lead partner and supporter of Nottingham's annual GameCity festival. Its Centre for Contemporary Play brings together inter-disciplinary projects and expertise from across the university, encouraging knowledge transfer and partnerships with the gaming industry. http://www.ntu.ac.uk/

About Crytek GmbH

Crytek GmbH ("Crytek") is one of the world’s leading independent development studios for interactive entertainment with its headquarters in Frankfurt am Main (Germany) and additional studios in Kiev (Ukraine), Budapest (Hungary), Sofia (Bulgaria), Seoul (South Korea) and Nottingham (UK). Crytek is dedicated to creating exceptionally high quality video games for the PC and next-generation consoles, powered by their proprietary cutting edge 3D-Game-Technology CryENGINE®.

Since its foundation in 1999, Crytek created the multi-award winning PC titles Far Cry®, Crysis®, awarded best PC Game of E3 2007 and Best Technology at the 2008 Game Developers Choice Awards and Crysis Warhead®, awarded Best Graphics Technology at IGN Best of 2008 Awards.

Crytek and Crysis are registered trademarks or trademarks of Crytek GmbH in the USA, Germany and/or other countries.

All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.