Baudouin I, the King of Belgium for 42 years and one of the more reclusive of Europe's monarchs, died on Saturday while vacationing in Motril, in the province of Granada in southern Spain. He was 62.

A spokesman for the Spanish Government attributed the death to a heart attack. The King had been in ill health for two years, having undergone prostate surgery in 1991 and an open-heart operation last year. Baudouin, who is to be buried on Saturday in Brussels at St. Michel Cathedral, was the fifth King of the Belgians.

Shy, shunning the dramatic, Baudouin (pronounced bode-WAAN) was never a star player on the European political or social stage. He came to power in Brussels at the age of 20 after the abdication of his father, King Leopold III, who was widely criticized for surrendering Belgium to the Nazis when German forces slashed through the country in 1940.. Rarely Seen in Public

King Baudouin and Queen Fabiola were something of an enigma. They were rarely seen in public, gave few speeches and avoided the glitter and pomp surrounding many of Europe's other royals.

Baudouin, an almost-gaunt aristocrat, 6 feet tall, who once wanted to be a Trappist monk, seemed to be ill at ease in his role as King and sought to remove the monarchy as much as possible from the rough and tumble of politics. The ruling dynasty springs from the Saxe-Coburg-Gotha family, the same German stock that produced Queen Victoria's consort, Albert.

For centuries Belgium has been torn by bitter disputes between the French-speaking Walloons and the Flemish, who speak a variant of Dutch. Baudouin tried to assume the role of impartial umpire between the two groups, and eventually played a stabilizing role in the controversies between the old antagonists. Avoided a Decision

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.