Withers Ranch is located deep in the Davis Mountains in far west Texas. Situated in northern Jeff Davis County and eleven miles from the highway on primitive roads, it is accessible only by four-wheel drive vehicles. The ranch offers an escape for those interested in swimming, hiking, birding and enjoying beautiful mountain country. The ranch has been in our family since 1972 and is dedicated to the protection and preservation of nature. Through a conservation easement, it is part of a 100,000 acre bioreserve under the stewardship of the Nature Conservancy that stretches from the slopes of Mt. Livermore to the mouth of Madera Canyon, downstream from the ranch. Come enjoy the magic of Madera Canyon, the music of the stream, western sunsets and storms, and create your own memories there.

“The new wild is where people and nature thrive together.” These eloquent words perfectly express the Chandler family’s philosophy of the ranch. The vision of making their home a place for guests to enjoy natural beauty and, at the same time, taking care of that beauty was always behind the creation of the guest ranch business. Independence Creek runs clear and steady through the West Texas desert, directly in front of Chandler Ranch headquarters and into the limestone cliffs that form the Pecos River. Escape to the clear cool waters that converge on Chandler Ranch and enjoy swimming, fishing, canoeing, kayaking, and exploring.

Nestled under the rimrock just outside Steamboat Springs, Colorado, Middle Creek Ranch invites visitors to an authentic Rocky Mountain experience. A family-owned, working ranch spanning 10,000 acres, Middle Creek beckons you to rest, play, and take in the extraordinary mountain air. Enjoy unbelievable views while horseback riding, fly-fishing or cross-country skiing, or let our expert guides design a custom adventure for you. Guided ATV rides, sporting clays, a shooting and archery range, as well as the kid favorite paintball field are some of the activities you can choose from. When you’re ready to relax, the hot tub on our sun deck is ready. Savor one-of-a-kind meals from a private chef, and say goodnight in cabins that are as rustic as the Colorado countryside.

For thousands of years, people have been drawn to the shade and cool waters of the Devils River. In just a few days at Hudspeth, guests can paddle and swim from pool to pool, stopping for a picnic on the shaded bank. If your stay is timed just right, catch a glimpse of bright orange fall colors from more than just the changing leaves, as thousands of Monarch butterflies stop along their migration route from Canada to central Mexico. Hike to one of several mountain peaks and search for bald and golden eagles above or white-tailed deer, quail, turkey, javelina and aoudad sheep in the canyons below. Mountain bike the 10-mile loop through Cedar Canyon, cool off at one of the shallow river crossings, site in your firearm at the shooting range and end the day with a home-cooked meal at the ranch headquarters.

A secluded 10,000-acre jewel tucked into California’s famed Santa Ynez Valley, Alisal Guest Ranch & Resort melds the spirit of the Old West with the seductive charms of today’s most relaxing resorts. Drive 30 minutes north of Santa Barbara and you’ll find Alisal Guest Ranch and Resort’s 50 miles of riding trails, 100-acre spring-fed lake, two 18-hole championship golf courses, tennis courts, pool, spa, western-themed accommodations, fine dining, and endless ways to unplug and unwind. Just minutes away from the Ranch are more than 75 renowned vineyards and wineries and the charming Danish village of Solvang. Whether it’s a romantic weekend getaway for two, a family reunion, or a corporate retreat, come discover the magic of Alisal Guest Ranch & Resort. This is far more than just a dude ranch. With a temperate climate year-round and ever-changing seasonal activities, any time of year is the perfect time to visit us.

This Costa Rican family-run cattle ranch is located in the mountains between Miravalles Volcano, Tenorio Volcano, and its extensive National Park. Hacienda Montezuma is entirely off-the-grid, and the water is sourced fresh from the mountain springs. The lake provides a tranquil spot for lazy afternoons, picnics and fishing. For those feeling more active, they can arrange fly fishing in the volcanic rivers, bird watching, trekking, rafting, a visit to the local town, and riding expeditions through pastures & the jungle. The 3700 acre Hacienda is dedicated to raising and breeding Brangus and Brahman cattle, with more than 1300 head. Visitors can join the “sabaneros”, or cowboys, while they herd and work the cattle.

The Costilla Lodge is Vermejo’s hidden gem, located 45 minutes from the main lodge at 10,000 feet of elevation. While guests staying at Costilla Lodge have access to all of the fabulous inclusions and activities as those staying at the Main Lodge, the most sought after summer and winter adventures begin just outside the Costilla doorstep… With snowcapped alpine tundra, 19 fishable lakes and over 550,000 stunning acres of picturesque lands, Vermejo is the jewel of northern New Mexico. Its diverse landscape is home to a wide variety of wildlife including elk, bison, black bears and mountain lions. Whether riding horseback through open fields, exploring turn-of-the-century charcoal kilns, or fly fishing for Rio Grande cutthroat trout, Vermejo has something for everyone.

Located in the picturesque Cienega Mountains with elevations ranging from 4,000 to 7,000 feet, Cibolo Creek Ranch, named for the buffalo that once roamed the region, is one of the oldest ranches in Texas. Cienega Fort was constructed between 1855 and 1857 by the ranch's founder, Milton Faver, at the spring-fed source of Cienega Creek. The Cienega forts were the original headquarters to Faver's growing cattle enterprise., chosen for their location at the spring-fed source of Cibolo Creek. Efforts to restore the ranch's historic structures and native habitat began in the late 1980s. Under the auspices of the Texas Historical Commission, everything from the fort structures, landscaping to interior decor were renovated. Every aspect of the environment reflects features of Spanish and Mexican culture. Most of the modern conveniences are tastefully hidden from view so guests can truly feel that they’ve slipped back in time, but without forfeiting modern comforts. Through ongoing habitat restoration efforts, much of the 30,000 acre landscape has been returned to its pre-pioneer condition.

In a 2005 Big Sky Journal article, the author describes the setting of Green Valley Ranch best: “After a short drive off Montana Highway 2, the winding access road opens onto the homestead, where a caretaker’s cabin, guesthouse and main lodge encircle a small pond. In this sheltered meadow, it’s easy to see why the Green family settled here in the early 1900’s. The valley lies in the curve of the Flathead Range with Desert Mountain standing sentinel at 6,000 feet, cradling the collection of buildings protectively. From the hilltop above the lodge a person could look southwest and see right into Glacier National Park.” Green Valley Ranch was originally homesteaded by the George Green family when Glacier Park was newly created. The land was sold in 1947 and operated for fifty years as a dude ranch known as Desert Mountain Lodge. In 1999, the ranch was purchased and restored by the current owners – grandchildren of the original homesteading family. Today, five generations of the Green family ride and ski the logging trails, thin and replant the forest, and are securing the abundance and beauty of the area for future generations. Green Valley Ranch is their family’s treasure and legacy they now share with a select few.

It all began with a move from LA to Austin. Bobby and Gail went from the fast-paced high traffic, “cement” jungle life to a calming, serene, and nature-filled life. They had the extraordinary opportunity to buy 178 acres of raw land. Paired with a dream to create a wonderful place that provides a unique opportunity to nurture in nature, they began to build what you see today. They had the idea that more folks like them wanted to "nurture in nature", to recharge their physical and emotional batteries in a relaxed, beautiful, and caring environment. The Dubois are passionate about the land and the animals, being active, preparing and enjoying good food, and deeply wish to share that experience with others.

Dead Cat Ranch has been a family owned and operated ranch for over 35 years. Like so many landowners, the Spencer/Betts family has recently opened their ranch to guest stays and are excited to share the history of such a special place. Josh and Stacy have created a fun and relaxed environment with plenty of adventure for both families and large groups. Between the miles of ATV trails, horseback riding, swimming, fishing, shooting sports, and sitting around the campfire under the stars, this is an experience that will have you booking your next stay before you leave.

The Ranch at Wild Rose is fulfilling the Cox family's lifelong dream to share the cowboy way of life. Purchased in the spring of 2022, this exclusive mountain treasure is nestled on 180 acres of gorgeous Utah landscapes. But the story of Wild Rose didn’t begin here. Harmony’s great great grandfather was an original settler of this area. His Wild Rose Ranch, just a few miles east, is where the tradition of hospitality began. Johnathan was well known for taking in weary travelers, offering them a bed and a warm meal. Ahead of his time, Jonathan had an incredible eye for livestock breeding and crop production. He took pride in the work of his hands, but always felt his most important work was his family. Dustin and Harmony Cox and their six cowgirl daughters continue his legacy. They live and raise cattle and crops much the same as grandpa Jonathan. They recognize how rare and special a life they live. Their goal as a family is to not only continue the legacy, but to also share it..

Sprawling across 360,000 acres in the heart of the crimson Chihuahuan desert, Armendaris embodies the very essence of southern New Mexico. This vast property is a true invitation to adventure, offering treks through semi-desert landscapes where you may encounter bison, pronghorn, and desert bighorn sheep. The ranch also provides exclusive access to the Jornada lava flow, home to one of the largest populations of Mexican free-tailed bats in the United States. At Armendaris, you are invited to curate your own experience from an array of transformative activities. Explore southern New Mexico’s abundant wildlife, rich history, and breathtaking landscapes. Witness the awe-inspiring evening exodus of over one million Mexican free-tailed bats, embark on open-air UTV rides through rugged mountain ranges, or take to the skies in a hot air balloon above serene semi-desert terrain. Each experience at Armendaris is designed to bring you closer to nature, allowing you to craft a unique adventure and enjoy everything this remarkable ranch has to offer.

Cumberland has been a significant fixture of Virginia’s history since the 17th century. In recent years, this landmark site has had new life breathed into it as a result of its acquisition by Criss Cross Properties, LLC. Criss Cross Properties was founded by John B. Poindexter, an entrepreneur and restorationist whose ancestry is deep-rooted in the New Kent area. “Criss Cross,” which signified Christ’s cross in that era, was the name of his family’s first home in Colonial Virginia in the late 1600s. Although Mr. Poindexter resides in Texas, he considers New Kent his second home because of his rich family heritage in the area. Inspired by his love for history and a strong desire to preserve it, he began a property acquisition and restoration program in 2013. As part of the program, Mr. Poindexter acquired 3,423 acres of rural property clustered around the authentic Criss Cross home. That acreage encompassed part of the original family settlement, including the grounds of Cumberland. Disrepair and land degradation plagued most of the individual properties when they were purchased. Today, thanks to the guidance of local craftsmen and talented advisors, the estate has been revitalized to an impressive semblance of its original condition — with modern conveniences. Likewise, the surrounding lands are once again thriving as farms and managed forests that maintain the character of the colonial era.

As one of the most remote locations in Scotland, the journey to Alladale is an experience in itself. Driving from Edinburgh, you have the opportunity to see much of Scotland's beauty - rolling hills, pristine rivers, centuries old castles, and if you're lucky, weather that changes by the hour and only enhances the majestic landscape. Once you arrive, you are greeted by an enthusiastic team, led by Stuart and Mandy, eager to ensure your time on the Reserve doesn't disappoint. Alladale’s chef Natasha Buttigieg produces consciously prepared local and organic fare. Their state of the art aquaponic gardens and exterior raised beds produce the vegetables, salads, herbs, and berries. Alladale's ethically culled wild venison is available together with local game if so desired. Regional suppliers offer fresh & wild caught seafood and local trout. Bespoke menus are available upon request. The rugged beauty of Alladale Wilderness Reserve allows for guests to experience the Highlands in its wildest form. Being out there sometimes feels like staying at the edge of the world. This makes spending a few days exploring the Reserve an unforgettable experience. Alladale offers a great range of indoor and outdoor activities for you to enjoy onsite. Ryan is your local guide and expertly navigates his way around the terrain, through the rivers and restored peat bogs, to take you hiking to an ancient forest. Along the way, visit and feed the Highland cows, learn about how they are helping conservation efforts, and stop to visit the Scottish wildcat rewilding program. A trip to the Cairn River is a class in Atlantic Salmon spawning, and its importance to the overall ecosystem. They also offer a variety of interesting day trips to local historic gems. Or go dolphin watching before having a nice local lunch. And what about a visit to a lovely whisky distillery? Alladale is a fantastic base from where to explore a unique part of the Highlands and northern Scotland. You might have been drawn to the lore of the Highlands, but Alladale will capture your heart with its passion, and you'll leave planning your return.