Clear Light Productions “Because I Am” 1973 US Private Xian Psych Funk double vinyl

Featuring: a very young talented vocalist named Greg X. Volz and his Jesus Music group the “e” Band, one of the very first hard rock Christian bands - before Petra and before the Resurrection Band…Greg went on later to record and perform with Petra during the 80`s…the “e” Band never recorded a full album, although there are “live” recordings of the band in concert (most are distorted), their only recorded material is featured on this rock musical… Volz`s trademark screams are easily recognizable here on “Journey to Calvary”…other Jesus Music artists include Mike Johnson of the heavy blues psychedelic/fuzz album The Exkursions… also Newine, Everday People, Ron Thomas, George Andrews and Turley Richards…~

Recorded at the world famous Aengus Recording Studio at 50 Oak Hill Road, Fayville, Massachusetts, in the year 1973, Clear Light Productions offered what was intended to be a rock musical. With an API 3288 Console and a 3M M56 16 track audio tape recorder using DBX 216 and 208 Noise Reduction units, this recording made history, (technically, sonically, and creatively)…..~

Wild and epic private Xian rock musical double-album from the Boston multimedia Christian collective Clear Light. Some bombastic hard-prog tunes with psych moves, heavy fuzz and crazy time changes (such as “Journey to Calvary”), some period Jesus funk-rock with horns, even one really out ‘n funky horned out poly-rhythmic instrumental (“Overture”) with drum and bass that starts off straight out of Factory Records circa 1979 and ends up on the cutting room floor of a Fred Williamson flick… think “UFO” by ESG crossed with “Theme from S.W.A.T.” Ridiculous!From Clear Light founder Eric Anderson’s biography: “This Christian start-up company was founded by some friends from Park Street Church to use multi-media to present the Gospel of Jesus Christ to secular man. We used banks of slide projectors and other devices to do this, along with rock music. We got tossed out of Park Street Church for using rock music!”…..~

Because I Am is a studio album released by the defunct American label Clear Light Productions and brought together several musicians from theChristian underground music scene at the height of the Jesus Movement in the mid 70s , such as Greg X. Volz (before joining Petra ), Turley Richards and the legendary musical group E Band .

Because I Am is considered by many to be a cult album and even an epic one , due to the great importance of its musical content until then innovative by the standards of Christian music of the time . Originally, it was released as a double LP recorded at 33 and 45 RPM

Because it is a rare record, it is seen as a collector’s item by discophiles on duty……~

Rare Massachusetts private-pressing with some seriously funky tracks. One if the major efforts from the early days of Clear Light, when it was called Clear Light Productions, was to raise money to produce a large-screen, theater-quality multi-image musical evangelistic presentation. Enough money was raised to develop the electronic control systems - later sold as products to the A/V market, and to develop the soundtrack for the musical. A 33 rpm record and 45 rpm single were recorded and pressed. The theme song, Because I Am, was recorded by Turley Richards. The song was written by Turley Richards and Ronald Thomas, ….~

Credits

Musicians in the song “Because I Am (Instrumental)”

Guitar - Warren Nichols

Guitar and Bass - Charles Lloyd Chittendon

Organ - George Andrews

Drums - Terry Andersen

Musicians in the song “Overture” and “If A Child”

Guitar and vocals: Greg X. Volz

Guitar - Joe Grier

Piano and Organ - David O'Haver

Bass - Tom Byler

Drums - David Eden

Musicians in the song “Babylon”

Lead vocal, organ and arrangements - Charles Almon

Guitar - Peter Akeke

Piano - George Andrews

Trumpet and flugelhorn - Steve Stone

Bass and vocal harmony - Steven Dubois

Drums - John King

Support Vocal - Sandy Myers

Support Vocal - Linda Barry

Trumpet - Steve Lowry

Saxophone and Flute - Vern Gibson

Musicians in the song “Empty Hollow Choruses”

Lead vocal and guitar - Mike Johnson

Guitar - Charles Chittendon

Piano, banjo and organ - Warren Nichols

Vocal harmony - JoD Andrews

Drums and vocal harmony - Terry Andersen

Musicians in the song “The Search”

Vocal lead and drums - Terry Andersen

Vocal harmony - Greg X. Volz

Piano and Organ - Warren Nichols

Guitar - Charles Lloyd Chittendon

Bass - Leon Wilson

Musicians in the song “Journey To Calvary”

Vocal lead and percussion - Greg X. Volz

Guitars and vocal harmony - Joe Grier

Organ and vocal harmony - David O'Haver

Bass and vocal harmony - Tom Byler

Drums, percussion and vocal harmony - David Eden

Musicians in the song “Where Do We Go From Here”

Lead vocal, piano and arrangements - Charles Almon

Vocal harmony - Marlene Nelson

Vocal harmony - Sandy Myers

Guitars - Warren Nichols

Bass and Guitar - Charles Lloyd Chittendon

Drums - Terry Andersen

Trumpet and flugelhorn - Steve Stone

Trombone - Tom Johnson

Saxophone - Vern

Musicians in the song “He Is In Me”

Vocal lead and drums - Terry Andersen

Piano - Warren Nichols

Guitar - Charles Lloyd Chittendon

Vocal harmony - Greg X. Volz

Bass - Leon Wilson

Fiddle - Gene “Vassar” Elders

Musicians in the song “Because I Am”

Lead vocal and guitar - Turley Richards

Guitar - Taylor Amerding

Mandocello - John Nagy

Musicians in the song “Rejoice”

Vocal lead and percussion - Greg X. Volz

Guitars and vocal harmony - Joe Grier

Organ, piano and vocal harmony - David O'Haver

Bass, percussion and vocal harmony - Tom Byler

Drums, percussion and vocal harmony - David Eden

Vinyl tracklist

Side 1

01 Because I Am (Instrumental) 2:04

02 Overture 3:37

03 If A Child 3:52

04 Babylon 8:13

Side 2

01 Empty Hollow Choruses 7:38

02 The Search 7:01

Side 3

01 Journey To Calvary 8:14

02 Where Do We Go From Here 6:00

Side 4

01 The Search - Reprise 1:00

02 He Is In Me 2:33

03 Because I Am 4:03

04 Rejoice 7:47

CD tracklist