Organizations that want results use

Clear Light Electric

Raleigh Electricians, Trusted in our Community

Serving Raleigh & the Triangle

With Over 15 Years Experience

Testimonials

We've built great relationships with homeowners, businesses and contractors in our community. As you search for Raleigh electricians, review what our community members have to say. Here's what some of our loyal customers are saying about Clear Light Electric.

Alex Van Staveren ★★★★★

Dennis did the electrical work on our home renovation a few years ago and did an excellent job and even stayed late to get the job done. We then called him out of the blue with some questions a few days ago about a different area in our house and he took so much time discussing it with us. Really went above and beyond. Would absolutely recommend him.

Melanie Gill ★★★★★

Dennis and The Clear Light Electric team exemplify professionalism and quality! Working with Clear Light Electric on our renovation was the perfect choice! The team is extremely knowledgable and trust worthy. The team provides value driven options while focusing on customer service. The Clear Light Electric team is fantastic to work with and we look forward to collaborating with them on other projects!

Steve Simpson ★★★★★

Clear Light Electric provide my business with excellent electrical service. They are the top Raleigh Electrician in my opinion. Courteous, on-time, and very professional. I'd recommend using Clear Light as your Raleigh Electrician of choice.

Sarah Layton ★★★★★

Had Clear Light come out and replace all my light fixtures and add some wiring. Did an excellent job! They cleaned up like they hadn't been there! Highly recommend!

Jason Niebauer ★★★★★

Always good to know a great quality electrical company you can trust. This is one of them. They will do a great job and complete everything they say they will. Fair prices and reliable.

Clear Light Electric's work featured on "The Hazelnut House"

Credit: I-TEN DESIGNS, Ayten Nadeau; Instagram: @itendesigns

Meet Dennis Zaccagnini, our founder

We're a professional, courteous, and reliable electrical contractor in our hometown of Raleigh, North Carolina. Simply put, we pride ourselves on superior workmanship. With over 15 years of experience serving Wake County and surrounding areas, we've established a reputation built on honesty, reliability, being on-time and being on-budget. Our goal is to be the #1 Raleigh Electrican recognized for these values.

We specialize in every aspect of electrical work from lighting fixtures to complete home wiring. We work with homeowners, superior Home Builders, Remodeling and Renovation Contractors, and many businesses in the area. We are fully licensed, insured, and bonded in the state of North Carolina. It is our goal to strive for excellence by providing quality electrical contracting services and maintenance programs for home owners and businesses in the Triangle.

Dennis Zaccagnini, owner and licensed electrician, has built a team of the finest electricians in the area. Dennis is photographed here with his beautiful wife Stacey and two sons Carson and Samuel.

Get started.

Let's bid your project

Schedule Your ConsultRisk-Free, Pressure-Free