Serving the community for nearly 25 years, Clearlight Glass & Mirror is the premier custom glass and mirror fabricator in North Carolina. Established in 1994, our locally-owned business remains committed to customer care and we believe in handling every order with creativity, integrity, and accountability.

Working with our customers at every stage of product development–from initial concept, to design, fabrication, and installation–is what sets us apart from our competitors. We care what our customers think and enjoy making top-quality products that exceed expectations. Simply stated — you can count on Clearlight to provide sound advice on your design and deliver high-quality products on time.

Quality Craftsmanship

We enjoy an enduring reputation for superior quality craftsmanship, which is guaranteed. With every project, we aim to be the best in North Carolina using innovative processes and highly experienced employees with decades of industry experience. Learn more about our quality craftsmanship.

Eco-Friendly Manufacturing

We believe being responsible is doing what is right. Our success as a business depends on our ability to demonstrate that we are operating appropriately and responsibly. Clearlight strives to be a good citizen in our community and we take seriously our responsibility to protect the environment, our employees, customers, and others who may be impacted by our business. Learn more about our environmental stewardship.

Transparent Pricing

Transparency is all around us at Clearlight, from the glass we work with to our simple practice of sharing information in an open and honest manner. We want to make the buying process as straight-forward as possible and cultivate a trusting relationship with our customers. There are no hidden fees, such as fuel surcharges, when purchasing from us. Learn more about our transparent pricing.

Charitable Projects

We are proud to offer charitable projects to give back to North Carolina’s communities. Learn more about our charitable projects.