Clearlight® Saunas are not only made with superior craftsmanship, but they look great too! Made from the finest Western Red Canadian Cedar or North American Basswood, your Clearlight® Sauna is furniture quality finished and will enhance the look of any room.

Clearlight® Saunas were designed with your enjoyment as the highest consideration. As a leading company with 21+ years of experience in the infrared sauna industry, Clearlight® Saunas only use non-toxic materials in their saunas. They undoubtedly adhere to the highest manufacturing standard, which is why we stand behind them in everything they do.

As a leader and innovator in the infrared sauna industry for 20+ years, Clearlight® Saunas manufactures infrared saunas that are both luxurious and effective. While their cabins are crafted to provide an exceptional quality, the therapeutic experience is truly their main focus.

The Clearlight® R&D department has ended that debate by introducing the only combination Carbon/Ceramic far infrared heater. Clearlight® True Wave™ Far Infrared Heaters combine Carbon and Ceramic to produce healing infrared heat that is unmatched. Clearlight® Sauna heaters are comprised of micro-thin carbon fibers (1/1000th the thickness of a human hair) combined with the patented micro fine ceramic compound for higher infrared output.

As a premier wellness company, your health and safety are the number one focus. Clearlight® True Wave™ far infrared and full spectrum infrared heaters are most effective and safest infrared heaters available. Clearlight® Sauna models are the only infrared sauna that cancels out both EMF and ELF. Electromagnetic Fields (EMF) are energy waves with frequencies below 300 hertz or cycles per second. Extremely low frequency (ELF) are the electric fields with frequencies from 3 to 30 hertz.

All Clearlight® Infrared Sauna models offer the lowest and safest EMF and ELF levels of any infrared sauna on the market, bar-none. The EMF levels in your Clearlight Premier™ and Clearlight Sanctuary™ saunas will be mostly below 1mg when tested directly on the heater itself. Where you are sitting in the sauna, the EMF levels are virtually 0mg. The ELF levels in your Clearlight Infrared Sauna™ are 3 – 5 times below the threshold of concern. Many competitors are over 20 times above the threshold of concern.

Red Light Therapy, which is also known as photobiomodulation and low-level light therapy, utilizes red low-level wavelengths of light to help you achieve a range of health benefits and wellness improvements. Red light is considered “low level” because it works at an energy density that is low when compared to other kinds of laser therapies.

Did you know that Red Light Therapy was used by scientists to help grow plants in space in the early 1990s? The intense light from the red LEDs helped to promote both growth and photosynthesis of plant cells. After this success, red light was heavily studied for its ability to increase the energy inside human cells. Once the mitochondria in your cells has been exposed to red and near infrared wavelengths, the light is transformed into usable energy for your body through the process of cellular respiration.

Halotherapy is used around the world to help individuals with certain respiratory conditions to manage their symptoms.

The mist reaches deep into your lungs and small alveoli to help improve your overall respiratory function, helping you to breathe deeper and easier.