Saturday Night-

Homotopia-

Set sometime in the future-present Homotopia chronicles a group of radical queer’s dedicated to exposing the trouble with gay marriage, dismantling the State, undoing Empire, while looking totally fierce. Woven into the story of Yoshi’s adventures in love, resistance, and sex, is a critique of the crushing violence of homonormativity and its deadly perpetuation of US patriotism, conservative kinship structures and affective accumulation. Homotopia holds cinematic assumptions hostage through its motley assemblage of never-passing crew. Race, gender, ability and desire are reworked through an anti-colonial take of queer struggle creating a visual rhythm of melancholic utopianism that knows there may be no future but still hopes today is not their last. Love revolution, not State delusion, Homotopia.

Trans

Better This World-

A case of solid journalism that happens to be cinematically interesting, “Better This World” traces the curlicues and conspiracies surrounding the trials of two protestors arrested during the 2008 Republican National Convention. Filmmakers Katie Galloway and Kelly Duane de la Vega sympathize with the protestors, but they also consider the facts of the case by listening to the key players. Result is a docu thriller with twists that will catch many by surprise. Sept. 6 airing on PBS’ “POV” makes Stateside theatrical chances slim, but global biz and fest play should be terrific.

Sunday-

Feast Of The Beast- by Mev Luna

A performative video about a monster hell bent on consuming pronoun cakes representing the gender spectrum in an attempt to “undo” gender, but in the process becomes “undone” by the commentary from the curator and the mass amount of cake consumed.

Feast of the Beast has been screened at Artist’s Television Access in San Francisco, and as part of Open Your Golden Gates in Berlin, Hamburg, and Montreal.

Mev Luna is a new strong voice in postqueer movement using their twisted modern day perversion as a new form of sexual identity. They move effortlessly through heavy real topics of gender and sexuality in an accessible, humorous way. Relying heavily on performative transformation, a contemporary approach to textiles in a collaboration with media art.

Housekeeping-

Housekeeping has been screened in Stockholm, Sweden, and San Francisco.

I have more experience as a maid than as an artist. Am I a maid or an artist?

Letter from Grand Hôtel

Roxy Farhat works with video and performance to create political satires utilizing the simple language of popular culture to exasperate complicated issues such as ethnicity, gender and the image of ‘the other’. Humor is an important element of her work, used as a tool to disrupt emotional responses to conventional myths and stereotypes in society. Her work has been shown in Sweden, the United States and South Africa. Farhat was born in Tehran, Iran in 1984 grew up in Sweden, and is currently pursuing her MFA in New Genres from UCLA.

www.roxyfarhat.com

Queer Farmer Project-

The queer farmer film project is a documentary that captures the intersection of queer and farming. From urban gardening projects to rural agriculture–the QFFP gives a voice to the many faces of queer farmers, and the slow foods movement.

This short was screened at the San Francisco 2009 Tranny Film Fest, and in New York. The project was also covered in Curve Magazine’s Lesbian Localvores article in the2010 July/August issue.

For more info please visit: http://queerfarmer.blogspot.com/

Justice On Trial-