Please join us for our three day Anarchist Film festival, with a special 6 hour screening on Monday, featuring a broad spectrum of anarchist film, ranging from deceptively childlike animations to in-your-face soft porn, from candid documentaries to surrealist explorations of human nature.

Alongside the movies on Fri/Sat/Sun we will have vegan food and baked goods and merch stands for groups like Abortion Network Amsterdam, the Spanish CNT and the Zapatistas National Liberation Army!

Don’t miss out!

PROGRAM

FRIDAY 15th November

16:00

A self-critical squatting memoire. + Crowbar - French squat documentary.

17:30

Documentary on the Kurdish liberation movement in Bakur. + Distant - The female Kurdish militia defending Kobane against the Isis terrorists

20:30

The story of a police investigation into consensual homosexual sadomasochism.

+

Raspberry Reich - Exploring the innate radical potential of homosexual expression.

23:00 MUSIC - MC MUSTAJ

A queer electronic musician and rapper based in Amsterdam, bringing sexy beats, hardcore bass, souly vocals and tight rhymes filled with hope, using music to share, to connect, to dance, to release and as a weapon against the structures of oppression, in particular those of gender and racism, this society is based on.

PARTY - until 1:00

SATURDAY 16th November

12:00

Brazilian documentary and fictional animation on globalization.

14:00

The Fig House - Documentary about a Greek squat for migrants and their cat.

17:00

Hamburger Gitter - G20 documentary.

19:30

A documentary on liberation from colonialism and neocolonialism.

21:30

Thriller: Surrealist existentialism in Franco’s Spain.

23:30 MUSIC - OUST

Generic pissed off raw punk destruction from Amsterdam and Nijmegen.

https://oustpunx.bandcamp.com/releases

PARTY - until 1:00

SUNDAY 17th November

12:00

Homotopia - A love story for radical queers fighting homonormativity + A queer punk SciFi inspiring a generation of feminists.

14:30

Earth liberation front documentary on radical environmentalism.

16:30

Animated comedy-action fantasy film on fighting urban development.

19:30

Lifeboat - A migrant sea rescue documentary.

21:30

An anti-misogynistic Iranian Vampire Western.

MONDAY 18th November

17:00

A historical re-enactment of the radical revolution and extreme heartbreak of the working class in 19th century Paris

Tickets

€3 - €5 suggested donation. First come, first served.

All proceeds are going to the Anarchist Defence Fund.

https://freedomnews.org.uk/the-international-anarchist-defence-fund/

Sign up for a Volunteer shift!

We will be needing a few extra hands during the festival- we might need help with the bar, stands, or a quick trip to the supermarket. Each volunteer will get two free movie tickets!

https://www.signupgenius.com/go/20F0D4DAEAB23A5FB6-anarchist

Safer space

We are aiming to create a safer space. We will not tolerate any forms of sexism, homophobia, racism, transfobia or other discrimination. Unfortunately, the venue is not wheelchair accessible.

AGA and FILMHUIS CAVIA

Sign up for our newsletter to get the complete program and updates. Mail us at aga@agamsterdam.org and we'll add you on the list!

Anarchist Group Amsterdam https://www.agamsterdam.org/