TENNIS

Roddick rolls past del Potro,

earns shot at 30th career title

Andy Roddick beat Juan Martin del Potro of Argentina 6-3, 6-4 Saturday at the Regions Morgan Keegan Championships in Memphis, Tenn., to advance to his 50th career tournament final.

Roddick will play Milos Raonic of Canada in the championship, with the American looking for his 30th title overall and his third in the Memphis ATP event.

Also: Caroline Wozniacki, set to regain the No. 1 ranking, beat Jelena Jankovic 7-5, 6-3 at the Dubai Championships to reach her first final of the year.

The top-seeded Dane downed Jankovic for the first time and will play for the title against Svetlana Kuznetsova in Dubai, United Arab Emriates. Kuznetsova defeated Flavia Pennetta, 6-4, 6-4.

Robin Soderling will play Marin Cilic in the final of the Open 13 in Marseille, France. Soderling, 16-1 this year, beat Dmitry Tursunov 7-5, 6-1, and Cilic saved a match point before downing Mikhail Youzhny, 6-2, 1-6, 7-5.

HOCKEY

Wranglers net two late goals

to post victory over Grizzlies

The Wranglers scored two power-play goals in the final three minutes to stun the Utah Grizzlies 3-2 in an ECHL game at West Valley City, Utah.

Josh Lunden scored with 2:49 remaining to tie it for Las Vegas (32-17-3), and Barry Goers banged in the game winner with 38 seconds remaining. Colin Long scored in the first period for the Wranglers, who went 3-for-4 on the power play.

Also: Chicago Blackhawks coach Joel Quenneville was released from the hospital, three days after being treated for gastrointestinal bleeding brought on by a small ulcer.

He is resting comfortably at home, and a full recovery is expected, team physician Dr. Michael Terry said in a statement. It is not clear when the 52-year-old coach will return to the bench for the Stanley Cup champions, whose next game is today against Pittsburgh.

In a trade between struggling teams in the Western Conference, the Colorado Avalanche acquired former No. 1 pick Erik Johnson and Jay McClement from the St. Louis Blues for Chris Stewart and Kevin Shattenkirk.

The Avalanche, who have lost 10 consecutive games, also receive a first-round pick in 2011 or 2012. Colorado surrenders a conditional second-round selection in 2011 or 2012.

Johnson was the top overall pick in 2006. A rugged defenseman, he has five goals and 14 assists in 55 games this season. Johnson also helped the U.S. to a silver medal at the 2010 Vancouver Games.

MISCELLANEOUS

UNLV softball team notches

upset against No. 3 Tennessee

The UNLV softball team upset third-ranked Tennessee 4-3 to salvage a split of two games on the final day of the Desert Classic at Eller Media Stadium.

After losing 1-0 to Southern Illinois-Edwardsville, the Rebels (4-5) scored all four of their runs against the Vols in the second inning. Heather Harrison had an RBI single, and Tayler Van Acker hit a three-run homer.

Tennessee (7-1) rallied with a run in the fourth, sixth and seventh innings, but couldn't overcome the deficit.

Also: Felix Sturm successfully defended his WBA middleweight title by knocking out American challenger Ronald Hearns in Stuttgart, Germany.

The referee stopped the fight in the seventh round when Hearns (26-2, 20 KOs) -- son of Thomas "Hitman" Hearns -- was unable to stay on his feet after taking a couple of heavy blows in the corner from Sturm (35-2-1, 15 KOs).

Gulfstream Park officials said jockey Eibar Coa fell from his horse and suffered a serious neck injury. A news release said Coa, from Venezuela, broke his C-4 vertebrae in the fall Friday at the track in Hallandale Beach, Fla. He was hospitalized and underwent surgery.

Mucho Macho Man moved closer to the starting gate for the Kentucky Derby, with the 3-year-old colt holding off Santiva in the stretch to win the $300,000 Risen Star Stakes by 1½ lengths at the Fair Grounds in New Orleans.

Louisiana Tech basketball player DeAndre Brown, leading the team at 15.8 points per game, was suspended indefinitely for violating athletic department policy and team rules.

Marlies Schild led Austria to a 1-2 finish in the women's slalom at the world championships in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany, living up to expectations by winning her first major title. Kathrin Zettel was second, 0.34 seconds behind.

Competing in his first race since escaping a doping ban, Alberto Contador kept alive his chances for a third straight Tour of the Algarve title by remaining in second place overall after the race's next-to-last stage in Tavira, Portugal.

The Tour de France champion completed the fourth stage out of the top 10 but remains only six seconds behind overall leader Stephen Cummings.