Music and Lyrics by Lisa Lambert and Greg Morrison

Book by Bob Martin and Don McKellar

Directed by Nick Mayo

Winner of five Tony Awards, including Best Book and Best Original Score, The Drowsy Chaperone is a musical comedy gem offering a tribute to the Jazz Age musicals. As the musical opens, the audience is introduced to a theatre fan playing his favorite cast album, the fictitious 1928 hit The Drowsy Chaperone, on his turntable. As he listens to the record, the characters come to life in his apartment and mayhem ensues. Hailed by New York Magazine as "the perfect Broadway musical," The Drowsy Chaperone is a masterful meta-musical, poking fun at all the tropes that characterize the musical theatre genre.

The running time for The Drowsy Chaperone is approximately 90 minutes. There is no intermission.

View the playbill for The Drowsy Chaperone

Reviews and Inside Look

'Drowsy Chaperone' shows musical genre is much more than song and dance - Austin American-Statesman

The Drowsy Chaperone a Delightfully Near Perfect Musical Treat - Broadway World

Director's Corner: A Conversation with Nick Mayo - OFF BOOK: A Theatre and Dance Blog

Meet the Cast: The Drowsy Chaperone - OFF BOOK: A Theatre and Dance Blog

About the Director

A graduate of the Juilliard School (Group 35), Nick Mayo has performed in several Broadway productions over the past decade including The Ritz, South Pacific and How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying. He has taught classes, workshops and served as a guest instructor at Interlochen Arts Academy, The Juilliard School, The Long Center for Performing Arts, North East School of the Arts in San Antonio, The Kennedy Center Summer Educational programming and The Shubert Organization educational outreach.

Mayo is head of acting for the Texas Arts Project and the associate producer of Summer Stock Austin. As a director, he won the 2016 Austin Critics' Table Award for Best Musical for She Loves Me at St. Edward's University.

Original Broadway production of The Drowsy Chaperone provided by Kevin McCollum, Roy Miller, Bob Boyett, Stephanie McClelland, Barbara Freitag and Jill Furman.

The Drowsy Chaperone is presented through special arrangement with Music Theatre International (MTI). All authorized performance materials are also supplied by MTI. www.MTIShows.com