The Drowsy Chaperone is a Tony Award-winning "musical within a comedy" with music and lyrics by Lisa Lambert and Greg Morrison, and a book by Bob Martin and Don McKellar.

History[]

The show was originally created as a bachelor party gift to Bob Martin and his wife Janet Van de Graaff in 1998. Seeing potential in the show, it was then taken and reworked for the Toronto Fringe Festival the following year, and featured Bob Martin as Man In Chair.

Chaperone was such a success, that it was moved to the Theatre Passe Muraille that fall, and then reworked and moved to the Winter Garden theatre in 2001. Following sold-out runs at the Winter Garden, the show was featured as part of the New York's National Alliance for Musical Theatre's Festival in 2004.

In 2005, a pre-Broadway run performed, once again to sold-out audiences, at the Ahmanson Theatre in Los Angeles.

The show then transferred to the Marquis Theatre in New York, beginning previews on April 3, 2006 and opening officially on May 1, 2006.

Sypnosis[]

The Drowsy Chaperone displays a fictional musical of the same name, sprung to life in the living room of Man In Chair as he plays the original cast recording of the show. Characters include the bride and groom, Robert Martin and Janet Van de Graaff, the best man George, Broadway producer Feldzieg, aspiring actress Kitty, Latin lover Aldolpho, two gansgters disguised as pastry chefs, Mrs. Tottendale, Underling, Trix the Aviatrix, and Man In Chair's favorite character, the drowsy chaperone to Janet.

The characters all gather to attend a wedding, but with the discovery that Robert can easily fall in love with another woman, a plot twist emerges and Janet must find the meaning of true love.

Original Broadway Cast[]

Bob Martin as Man in Chair

Troy Britton Johnson as Robert Martin

Sutton Foster as Janet Van de Graaff

Beth Leavel as The Drowsy Chaperone

Eddie Korbich as George

Lenny Wolpe as Feldzieg

Jennifer Smith as Kitty

Danny Burnstein as Aldolpho

Jason Kravitz as Gangster #1

Garth Kravitz as Gangster #2

Georgia Engel as Mrs. Tottendale

Edward Hibbert as Underling

Kecia Lewis-Evans as Trix

Awards & Nominations[]

Wins are indicated in italics.

2006 Outer Critics Circle Awards

Outstanding Broadway Musical

Outstanding New Score

Outstanding Supporting Actress - Beth Leavel

Outstanding Choreography

Outstanding Set Design

Outstanding Costume Design

2006 Drama Desk Awards

Oustanding Musical

Outstanding Actor in a Musical - Bob Martin

Outstanding Actress in a Musical - Sutton Foster

Outstanding Featured Actor in a Musical - Eddie Korbich

Outstanding Featured Actress in a Musical - Beth Leavel

Outstanding Director of a Musical - Casey Nicholaw

Outstanding Choreography - Casey Nicholaw

Outstanding Music - Lisa Lambert and Greg Morrison

Outstanding Lyrics - Lisa Lambert and Greg Morrison

Outstanding Book