Volume lashes are an incredible thing. They make it look like you have a lot more lashes than what you naturally have as we add two extensions or more for each natural lash you have which makes it look a lot fuller.

This can be a light volume which is made with two or three extensions per bouquet (called 2D for two extensions per fan or 3D for three extensions per fan), or it can be a mega volume which is done with 6D or more to give it an incredibly dark look.

For the longest time, we’ve been calling all volume lash extensions ‘’Russian Volume’’ as that was the most common style of volume lashes that we knew of, so it was easier to call them all that way. Whether or not this style actually originated from Russia is hard to confirm but it is a very common style in Eastern European countries and they have definitely mastered it!

Now, with the rise of social media, we have discovered a new style of volume lashes and to differentiate it from what we’re used to, some people are calling it ‘’American Volume’’ as this style is much more common in America!

In the beginning, it was called the KimK/Kim Kardashian style, then the Strip Lash look, then Whipsy or Spikey Volumes, now we’ve finally settled on ‘’American Volume’’. The way American Volume is different from Russian Volume is all in the tips!

American volume is whispy, messy, and has spikes that go out of the main lash line to give it a more fluffy look, while the Russian Volume style is more neat, clean, and proper, all the tips line up perfectly and none surpass the lash line, (which is a called a perfect topline, for those who are wondering.)

This is why in our own company we’ve changed the name of our volume lash extensions from ‘’Russian Volume Lash Extensions’’ to simply ‘’Volume Lash Extensions’’. If you’d like a specific style let us know during our consultation otherwise we’ll play it safe and do a bit of both or stick with the traditional Russian Volume.

Let us know in the comments which is your favorite of the two different styles!