Presentation on theme: "Aselin Debison. Getting Started Aselin Debison started singing long before the Sony Classical recording company discovered her. She has been singing since."— Presentation transcript:

1 Aselin Debison

2 Getting Started Aselin Debison started singing long before the Sony Classical recording company discovered her. She has been singing since early childhood. In her preschool play, Leaping Leprechauns, she sang Irish songs with the rest of her class (with a few solos included). When she was nine, her community started to notice her voice. At a coal miner’s protest, she gave an unforgettable performance of the local anthem “The Island”. Tears streamed down the faces of many as her haunting voice touched their hearts. Interesting enough, this talented young singer has never taken singing lessons. As she put it, “If something’s not broken, don’t fix it!” As she took her first steps to stardom, Aselin created a foundation for a successful career in the future.

3 Music Career For a young artist like Aselin, she has taken a large leap from small town girl to world famous singer. Aselin has had a tremendous beginning for her career. She has signed a 5 album record deal with Sony Classical. Her superior performance at the Canada Day celebration in Ottawa in 2000 pleased the Prime Minster greatly. Jean Chrétien declared her the next Celine Dion. After looking at other Canadian artists, Aselin is perhaps the fastest rising star in Canadian music.

4 Adjusting to Fame Naomi Kristen, a reporter for Discovery Girls Magazine had an inspiring interview with Aselin. One of the many thorough questions was, “Speaking of Canada, have you noticed any big difference between your hometown and a place where you’ve performed, say ‘New York City’?” We thought there was no better way to tell you what Aselin thought then to give you her own words: “Yes! First of all there are really, really tall buildings in New York! There’s nothing even close to that where I live! In American busy cities, you might see someone on the street you know, and you might say hi, but they’ll keep walking. Everyone seems too busy to talk. But my hometown is connected to an island, and it’s a quiet, comfortable place with lots of friendly people. You can be walking down the street, see someone you’ve never met before and strike up a conversation right away!” Aselin’s positive attitude will hopefully take her far in the music industry.

5 The beautiful landscape of Cape Breton inspires Aselin to keep her heritage alive and sing Celtic and traditional Cape Breton style music!

6 Performances If success is measured by how many performances a singer has, the sky is the limit for young Aselin Debison! Below is a list of Aselin’s performances. Canada Day performance,2000, in Ottawa In Boston for the Tree Lighting Ceremony at the Prudential Centre in 2001, Christmas Season At the 2003 East Coast Music Awards A Toronto Raptors game On a harbourfront in her hometown, Glace Bay At Nathan Phillip’s Square, Toronto, on New Years Eve

7 Aselin presently lives with her family in her hometown, Glace Bay, Cape Breton!

8 Dreams Although Aselin is enjoying the music experience, she still has other dreams she is hoping will come true. Aselin has hopes of winning a college basketball scholarship and playing in the WNBA. Along with her basketball dreams, however, Aselin still wants to continue her music career.

9 Time At Home Although Aselin is very busy singing her Celtic music, she also enjoys her time at home with her family and friends. She still lives at home with her parents Donny, a landscaper, and Joan, a hairdresser, along with her younger brother, Blake. There, Aselin continues her normal, basketball–loving childhood. She not only enjoys Celtic music; she also is a fan of country and pop. Her favorite singers and bands include Great Big Sea, Pink, Lil’ Bow Wow, Celine Dion and Destiny's Child. No matter how far her career takes her, family and friends ALWAYS come first.

10 Bibliography Kristen, Naomi. “Sweet Melody.” Discovery Girls Magazine. October/November. 2003: 57-58 “Aselin’s Bio.” <http://www.aselin.com/SweetIsTheMelody/index2.html