THE FREE LANCE-STAR

Twelve-year-old Aselin Debison isn't quite sure she wants to be a singer when she grows up. But she already has a deal with Sony Records and has been asked to do a nationally televised special on PBS.

Aselin, a native of Glace Bay, Nova Scotia, thinks she might really want to play basketball in the WNBA.

A final decision on that is years away, but it seems likely that she will be able to make a lot more money in music, where her crystalline voice and stunning looks promise to eventually make her a superstar.

Sony/Odyssey released her debut album, "Sweet Is the Melody," Oct. 8. Produced by Grammy winners Peter Asher and George Massenburg, it features Aselin doing everything from folk to Celtic to country to pop.

Her first name (pronounced "AZZ-a-lynn") was inspired by Aslan, the lion in C.S. Lewis' "Chronicles of Narnia."

She continues to live in the economically depressed Canadian hamlet of Glace Bay, but she said her life is no longer that of a typical 12-year-old. The phone has been ringing off the hook.

She began singing at age 3 when she performed a Barney the Dinosaur number at a preschool St. Patrick's Day concert.

By age 8, in 1999, she was invited to sing at a miners' protest rally. She moved strong men to tears with her rendition of the Cape Breton anthem, "The Island." Her performance turned her into an overnight sensation in Canada. Prime Minister Jean Chretien hailed her as "the next Celine Dion."

The mines subsequently closed, putting much of her hometown out of work.

As a result, an article in a Canadian magazine said Aselin "carries the dreams of the entire hard luck town on her shoulders."

"I guess you could say that," she said. "When I sang at the miners' rally, everybody was really hoping something would break through and the mines wouldn't shut down after all."

But the miracle didn't happen, and now the town is living vicariously through Aselin's success. That's a lot of pressure for a grade-schooler.

When she signed her record deal with Sony, there was great excitement.

In particular, the other kids in Glace Bay "thought it was really, really neat," Aselin said.

She had a sleepover to celebrate.

"It was a lot of fun," she said. "We played games and watched a movie and stuff like that."

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.