Josh Homme is an all round musician, singer and songwriter, most known for being the mainstay of the American hard rock band Queens of the Stone Age.

Joshua Michael Homme III was born in Joshua Tree California in 1973. He learned the guitar aged nine (his parents refused to buy him a drum kit!). When he was 15 years old, he formed a band with schoolmates named Sons of Kyuss (eventually Kyuss) and the band became a stoner band cult phenomenon, playing isolated desert locations – later known as generator parties, until they split up in 1995.

Josh Homme experimented with various bands but Queens of the Stone Age came into being in 1997. Although Josh Homme had looked for a lead singer, lack of successful applicants led him to take over lead vocals himself.

The band released a self-titled debut album in 1998; however the bands first mainstream success was with the second album “Rated R”. The Queens of the Stone Age have released five albums in total, the most recent “Era Vulgaris” in 2007.

As well as the Queens of the Stone Age, Josh Homme has also been the driving force behind The Desert Sessions, billed as a musical collective series “that cannot be defined.”

Recordings are made live with a changing line-up of musicians many from the Palm music scene – a loose collective of Californian based musicians who play “desert rock” a scene pioneered by Josh Homme’s first band Kryuss. The Desert Sessions started in 1997 and is continuing, having released 10 volumes of Desert Sessions recordings as of this date.

Josh Homme is also part of the rock super group Them Crooked Vultures founded in 2009 along with Dave Grohl and Led Zeppelin’s John Paul Jones. To date they have released one album “Them Crooked Vultures” and have been touring steadily.

Josh Homme has worked with a number of other acts including PJ Harvey, the Foo Fighters and the Prodigy among others.

Outside music Josh Homme has caused controversy and accusations of being homophobic after calling an audience member a faggot in 2008 – and he was charged with assault in 2004 after attacking Dwarves singer Blag Dahlia. He was ordered to go into rehab and had to do community service.

A right wing conservative, Josh Homme lives in Palm Springs and is married to singer Brody Dalle and they have one daughter.