Seagulls are more intelligent than humans.

This is a conclusion that must be made, considering the years of failed attempts to empty Helsinki's Market Square of seagulls.

A few years ago, nets were cast over the market area, which appeared to work. However, the solution was effective only until the seagulls learned to dive underneath them.

Last summer, the city experimented with a hawk kite, an attempt at which the seagulls likely shared a good laugh. A month ago, Tommi Tapana, head of the technical service unit at Helsinki's Wholesale Food Market, gushed about the new acoustic deterrent device that mimics the sounds of the wild birds. The device was successful at driving away the seagulls in a test last summer.

A week ago, there was still no trace of the impact of the device.

"I hadn't even heard that this type of device was being put into use," says a bewildered Veronika Koponen, who was selling muikkuja – a type of fish - at the market recently.

According to her, the seagulls snatch muikkuja straight from the faces of customers on a daily basis, irregardless of any nets or audio devices.

On the other hand, Raakhel Olga Lehtinen, a worker at a nearby booth, claims that the audio devices have helped alleviate the problem. Nonetheless, those working at the booth have put in place their own nets to protect the market stall, in addition to the nets provided by the city.

"Our nets have worked most effectively of all," she says.

Tourist attraction

Both market salespersons related that tourists are particularly prone to feed the seagulls, which only makes the problem worse.

"Tourists are very interested in the birds. They gladly feed them. Then, when a swarm of seagulls arrives, they become very enthusiastic and begin to take photos. For tourists, it is something of a tourist attraction," Lehtinen explains.

Tapana from the Wholesale Food Market of Helsinki explains that the plan is to put the audio deterrent device to play at random points in the near future. According to Tapana, it is possible that it was playing already throughout the weekend, but not a single of the six market salespeople interviewed by Helsinki Sanomat had noticed any effect.

The impact of the audio deterrent device is based upon a wide scale of different sounds. These include both the screams of wild birds as well as various natural warning sounds of varieties of seagull species. Seagulls are herd animals, so if a single bird hears a warning sound, it will react and warn the rest of the birds – assuming the device works.