LeBron James, who’s known for his ability to pull roster strings, voiced his concern about the Cleveland Cavaliers’ lack of a playmaker in January, so the team’s front office went out and signed Deron Williams, his point guard from the 2008 Summer Olympics.

To the passive basketball audience, Williams is currently known as a solid, veteran backup guard. But to Utah Jazz fans, Williams was the premier guard who elevated the team’s status when he was drafted third overall by Utah in the 2005 NBA draft.

It’s been six years since Williams was a member of the Jazz, but when a player of that caliber is ousted, there’s residual effects.

How it went down

When Jerry Sloan decided to retire from coaching the Jazz after spending 23 seasons with the team, things got weird.

Reports surfaced that the legendary coach’s relationship with his All-Star point guard was deteriorating, helping create an even larger gap between the Jazz and their main competitors battling for playoff positioning in 2010. The Jazz ultimately missed the playoffs that year, losing 21 of their final 29 games.

Shortly after Sloan left the sidelines, the Jazz front office started the rebuilding phase, trading Williams to the New Jersey Nets for a package centered around Derrick Favors, who was picked third overall in the 2010 NBA Draft ahead of DeMarcus Cousins, Devin Harris and future first-round picks.

Harris was an All-Star with the Nets in 2008, but was considered a stopgap for the Jazz. He only spent two seasons with the Jazz before he, too, was traded to the Atlanta Hawks for Marvin Williams. Utah thought Favors was the headliner of the deal, giving them an opportunity to continue their longstanding history of having dominant big men.

Wanting him to develop properly, the Jazz brought Favors off the bench for the first three years of his career — he started just 21 of the 164 games played — and gave starting duties to Al Jefferson and Paul Millsap.

Despite the small sample size, Favors agreed to a four-year, $49 million contract extension with the Jazz in 2013. In the following two seasons after signing the deal, Favors averaged 16.2 points and 8.1 rebounds, flashing his potential as one of the franchise’s cornerstones.

Williams, on the flip side, dealt with injuries in New Jersey as the team tried to figure out a way to overcome a historically disappointing season which saw the Nets go 12-70 in 2009-10.

Needing to jumpstart their team and instill hope into the fanbase, the Nets, now in Brooklyn, acquired aging stars Kevin Garnett and Paul Pierce from the Boston Celtics in exchange for three first-round draft picks.

When the deal was complete, the likenesses of the Nets’ four stars (Williams, Garnett, Pierce and Brook Lopez) were plastered all over magazine covers and the team was expected to challenge the Miami Heat’s “Big Three” in the Eastern Conference.

But as Boston’s general manager Danny Ainge was being thrown into the fire for making such a deal, the Nets grappled with their identity, moving past the first round of the playoffs just once.

Williams, who averaged 20.2 points and 9.2 assists during his last All-Star season with the Jazz in 2010-11, appeared incapable of accepting a lesser role with the Nets alongside the other stars.

Brooklyn lost Pierce, who was a free agent in 2015, to the Washington Wizards and Garnett’s production continued to slip as retirement became imminent.

The Nets, once again, found themselves without much of an option but to hit the reset button, reaching a buyout agreement with Williams that summer. Williams went on to sign with the Mavericks before being waived and agreeing to a deal with the Cavaliers this season.

Ainge is now revered for deciding to complete the trade, as it netted the Celtics the first overall pick in 2017 — the pick that Brooklyn was supposed to get, but handed off to Boston to accommodate Williams’ desire to acquire more well-known players.

The remnants of the deal

When the Jazz traded Williams, it kickstarted a youth movement. Gordon Hayward, for instance, had to mature quickly after being drafted by the team in 2010. The team could no longer rely on their veterans, Millsap and Jefferson, who both left as free agents in 2013.

The Jazz found stability with Quin Snyder in 2014 and the head coach focused on developing the team’s youngsters. Hayward improved his ball handling, put on a considerable amount of muscle and got a haircut. His game — and his look — appeared ready to take the next level. And it did.

Hayward blossomed into the team’s best player and led the Jazz to their first playoff appearance in five years. Hayward, who made the All-Star team for the first time in his career this season, was given an opportunity to learn through trial-and-error. When Williams was on the team, Hayward wasn’t able to experiment in ways he was able to when the team let go of its veteran core.

The outcome of the trade seemed to doom the team for a bit, at least in terms of competitiveness, but the Jazz noticed results on the periphery. The team was able to change their culture and create a roster full of potential. Utah’s front office, which was then led by Kevin O’Connor, didn’t hang onto dying stock. The team parted ways with Williams when his value was still high, got a solid return with Favors and altered the makeup of the franchise.

Favors is entering the final season of his contract and has taken a backseat to Rudy Gobert, who fits into the modern NBA more than Favors. Not needing the ball to be effective, Gobert has blossomed into one of the league’s elite young centers.

Favors missed 32 games with injury this past season and his future with the team has become somewhat murky. Still, even if the Jazz decide to move Favors, the team was able to get a building block in return for Williams.

The trade that sent Williams to the Nets, in hindsight, was an investment made by the Jazz into the team's future. Hayward grew and became a star, and the team narrowed their focus to scouting young talent. The likes of Dante Exum, who was drafted to possibly fill the starting point guard position in the future, and Rudy Gobert were discovered after the fact.

The playmaking role, however, has been in a state of flux. The Jazz have filtered through countless guards after the Williams trade, including Harris, Trey Burke, who was picked ninth overall in 2013, and free agent George Hill.

Now, for the deal to undoubtedly be won by the Jazz, the team has to convince Hayward to return and find stability at point guard, whether it comes by re-signing Hill or the internal development of Exum.