MGM+ is moving forward with a series adaptation of Stephen King’s thriller novel The Institute, and Ben Barnes (Shadow and Bone) and Mary-Louise Parker (Weeds) are set to star in the project.

The Institute is being developed by Jack Bender (Lost, Mr. Mercedes), who will produce and direct, and Benjamin Cavell (Justified, The Stand) who will write and produce.

In The Institute, “When 12-year-old genius Luke Ellis is kidnapped, he awakens at The Institute, a facility full of children who all got there the same way he did, and who are all possessed of unusual abilities.

“In a nearby town, haunted former police officer Tim Jamieson (Barnes) has come looking to start a new life, but the peace and quiet won’t last, as his story and Luke’s are destined to collide.”

Barnes’ Tim Jamieson is “a disillusioned ex-cop who takes a job as the night knocker in a small town, withdrawing from the world until Luke’s plight reignites him and gives him something to believe in.”

Parker will play Ms. Sigsby, “the charming but iron-willed director of the Institute and a true believer in its awful mission. She’s certain history will come to see her as a hero.”

King said in a statement: “I’m delighted and excited at the prospect of The Institute, with its high-intensity suspense, being filmed as a series. The combination of Jack Bender and Ben Cavell guarantees that the results will be terrific.”

Michael Wright, head of MGM+ added: “We are thrilled to have the opportunity to work again with Stephen King. And The Institute, based on his critically acclaimed novel, is an exciting addition to the MGM+ original series slate.

“There is no creative team I would trust more to bring the book to life than Jack and Ben, whose creative vision and love of Mr. King’s voice, will bring this thought-provoking and gut-wrenching story to life, in the engaging, cinematic, and thrilling style MGM+ viewers expect.”

Bender said: “I’m thrilled that Stephen King has entrusted me with another of his brilliant novels and continuing the extraordinary creative relationship with Michael Wright and MGM+.

“Working alongside Ben Cavell and a team of exceptional writers, to tell the story of these uniquely gifted children, will ensure a suspenseful and engrossing series.”

Cavell added: “It is my great honor to have another chance to adapt Stephen King, who has been generous and collaborative beyond my wildest imaginings.

“Also, the opportunity to work with Jack Bender, who has directed some of my all-time favorite television, is truly a dream come true. I couldn’t be more grateful to Michael Wright and MGM for putting this team together.”

The series will consist of eight episodes, and production in set to begin Nova Scotia later this year.