Last night something strange happened…

After cuddling with Curie for half an hour on the office chair, I decided to recoil from the rest of the world and embrace laziness entirely while watching Mansfield Park – a British film loosely based on Jane Austen’s novel. As the movie progressed, something started to bug me…something about the actress’s face…

Then it hit me! Frances O’Connor (who plays the female lead) looks EXACTLY like Mary-Louise Parker, the suburban, drug-dealing widow in Weeds! Look here:

Eh, eh?? :D

This uncanny resemblance made me think of all the other actors out there who have mysterious twins unbeknown to them. So of course I had no choice – I conducted a full celebrity-doppelganger chase lasting two nights which resulted in the following comparisons. Please know that I find these entirely creepy and am convinced that the Caucasian race is just as impossible to differentiate as the Asian race (or so people think):

Keira Knightly VS Natalie Portman

Katy Perry VS Zooey Deschanel

Linda Cardellini VS Ellen Page

Ryan Phillippe VS Justin Timberlake

Naomi Campbell VS Tyra Banks

Nelly Furtado VS Courtney Cox

Heath Ledger could pass as Joseph Gordon-Levitt’s older brother imo

Benecio del Toro VS Brad Pitt

Bono VS Robin Williams

Emily Osment VS Carrie Underwood

Bradley Cooper VS Ralph Fiennes (aka VOLDEMORT)

Isabelle Adjani VS Monica Bellucci (imo two of the most beautiful actresses ever to grace this earth…the 80’s and 90’s were good to them)

Chad Smith VS Will Ferrell

Jodie Foster VS Helen Hunt VS Leelee Sobieski (triple kill!)

After this search, I felt a little……empty inside. Where was MY twin? Is there a celebrity in this world who has the misfortune of resembling me? I had to do one last thing. I had to find my very OWN doppelganger. Friends, this was a hard task. You may not realize it, but we Asians do not all look alike. No, not even remotely. Lucy Liu is a beautiful woman but I do not look like her.

So I searched and searched. Googled and googled. I even went on facedouble.com for some guidance but to no avail (they tried tricking me into thinking that I looked like Maggie Q and…..Lucy Liu :( But then it occurred to me….slowly. I figured it out! You see, most Asian actresses have tiny frames with heart-shaped faces and delicate chins. Turns out Gong Li (The Emperor and the Assassin, Memoirs of a Geisha, Farewell My Concubine) actually has a round face just like mine with a more angular jaw structure. She’s of Chinese background but comes closer to looking like me than most Korean actresses. See here:

She is far too beautiful to be compared to that lowly peasant on the left, but that’s as close as it gets. If any of you find my doppelganger, please inform me immediately.