Notices to the Clerk ot the Snitterfield Petty Sessions to make a return of convictions under 'The Criminal Law Amendment Act'. Endorsed...

Part coloured showing acreages, allotments, ridges in fields, names of adjoining owners and some names of allotment holders Scale: not given...

Letter from John Ludford to [Arthur Chichester] Lord Donegall: dispute with [William Barnard] Bishop of Derry over renewal of lease

Coloured. Showing Keeley's Cottage, garden rented by Keeley, and link road to cottage. With inset key plan (6 chains: 1 inch) Scale: 2...

Wright, George A. : A brief memoir of the late J.O. Halliwell-Phillipps, LL.D., F.R.S., F.S.A. (Whiting and Co., London 1899). Octavo,...

Letter from Sir John Pakington,[4th baronet] to 'My Lord': proposed marriage of his daughter [Margaret] to Mr [John] Chichester

Facsimile of scrapbook volume containing press cuttings relating to the history of the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre and its productions....

Notice from David Rice, executor of his late brother [Bernard], that Dr Panter will continue to run the medical practice as arranged

Note about the death, intestate, of Mary Scotton, spinster of Coventry and appointment of father of nephew as guardian of said nephew....

Court leet and court baron of the Dean and Chapter of Worcester, with steward's file

Copy indictment in case at Warwick Quarter Sessions, Rex against Joan Kennell, alias Vanon, of Stoneleigh, widow, for an encroachment on the...

Court leet and court baron of the Dean and Chapter of Worcester, with steward's file

Autographs of Michael Bateman[?]; Henry W. G....an, 9 Nov 1885; Frederic H. Comey[?](composer of 'The old and the young Marie') Mr Molloy...

Court leet and court baron of the Dean and Chapter of Worcester, with steward's file

Facsimile of scrapbook volume containing press cuttings relating to the history of the Royal Shakespeare Company and its productions. These...

Prompt book used for Royal Shakespeare Company production. Also used at Theatre Royal, Newcastle, 1982. Directors: John Barton with Peter...

Prompt book used for Royal Shakespeare Company production. Also used at Theatre Royal, Newcastle upon Tyne, 1984; Barbican Theatre, 1984....

Facsimile of scrapbook volume containing press cuttings relating to the history of theRoyal Shakespeare Company and its productions. These...

Scrapbook volume containing press cuttings relating to the history of the Royal Shakespeare Company and its productions.

Scrapbook volume containing press cuttings relating to the history of the Royal Shakespeare Company and its productions.

Court leet and court baron of the Dean and Chapter of Worcester, with steward's file

Statement of a related case, Edward Lord Leigh versus William Lord Digby concerning a fishery in the River Blythe which runs between Lord...

Scrapbook volume containing press cuttings relating to the history of the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre and its productions.

Letter from James Henry Leigh to Thomas Hill Mortimer, authorising the sale of stock to pay the inclosure expenses

Facsimile of scrapbook volume containing press cuttings relating to the history of the Royal Shakespeare Company and its productions. These...

Facsimile of scrapbook volume containing press cuttings relating to the history of the Royal Shakespeare Company and its productions. These...

Court leet and court baron of the Dean and Chapter of Worcester, with steward's file

Receipt from Daniel Payne to Lady [Constance] Ferrers for one half year's rent for land, due to the Duchy of Lancaster. 17 June 29 Henry...

Cutting from 'The Redditch Indicator', being "Local Notes Queries" no. 381, a reprint of article of 23 September 1857 from the...

Mortgage of one yardland with farm buildings in Combrook from John Wigson, alias Morrell, yeoman, to John Taylor, yeoman, to secure £170.

Draft brief for plaintiff's attorney, claiming defendant refuses to pay damages in respect of delapidations to property, in case of...

Scrapbook volume containing press cuttings relating to the history of the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre and its productions.

Southern part of the Brewery site, between Clopton Road, Birmingham Road and Brewery Street, with abstract of title from 1727.

Printed list of voters in the Long Compton polling district, divided by parish, cut up and pasted onto card, and then annotated with...

Receipt for the tenants of Lord Leigh in Fillongley for their share of the rate levied for the rebuilding of the Shire Hall

Copy and valuation of contents of Stoneleigh Workhouse, with a note: `Every article was furnished and paid for by the late Honourable Mary...

Fines of the Staffordshire estates. Cons. £1000. [in connection with the marriage settlement of Edward, Lord Leigh and Eleanor Watson

Chief rents due at Lady Day and Michaelmas for Tanowrth and at Lady Day for Monkspath; paper book. Notes on covers by Simon Archer.

Prompt book used for Royal Shakespeare Company production. Also used at Gulbenkian Studio, Newcastle, 1981; The Other Place, 1981;...

Scrapbook volume containing press cuttings relating to the history of the Royal Shakespeare Company and its productions.

Notes on the impropriations in the hands of Edward Lord Leigh for the parishes of Fillongley, Shustoke, Bentley, Maxstoke, Leek Wootton and...

Court leet and court baron of the Dean and Chapter of Worcester, with steward's file

Article about miniatures of Shakespeare, by M. H. Spielman. (on back of mutilated article about newly laid out Knott Garden at New Place

Letter from the Education Department to C. J. Penney, enclosing a list of text books which can be obtained at special prices

Letter from Joseph Woodfall Ebsworth, Molash Vicarage, Kent, to A. H. Bullen, on his current literary work,and complaining about his...

Copy Bargain and Sale from Richard Bush of Allesley to William Priest, for £115 and 20 shillings in hand, three parcels of land totalling 7...

Letter from G[eorge] L[eigh] Cooke to [Chandos Leigh], thanking him for a revised salary for officiating in the Stoneleigh Abbey chapel

Scrapbook volume containing press cuttings relating to the history of the Royal Shakespeare Company and its productions.

Receipt from Daniel Payne to Lady [Constance] Ferrers for one half year's rent for land, due to the Duchy of Lancaster. 16 January 28 Henry...

`William Terry's disbursements by order and on account of the Right Honourable Lord Leigh'

Copy resolutions etc. concerning the sale of land to the Governors of the Infirmary

Receipt to William Shakespeare for farm in Preston Bagot, for his share of the rate levied for the rebuilding of the Shire Hall

Elaborate coloured plan, with two illustrations, part of the particulars drawn up for the sale of the Alveston Building Estate, comprising...

Appointment by Richard Smalbroke, Sequestor General of the Bishop of Lichfield, of Thomas Atkins and John Archer, churchwardens of Ansley,...

Scrapbook volume containing press cuttings relating to the history of the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre and its productions.

Letter from John Ludford to [Arthur Chichester] Lord Donegall: has not proceeded with Levett trial as differing opininons made it seem...

Poster offering £100 reward, in addition to £100 already offered by County Fire Office, for information leading to the arrest and...

Children of the sun by Maxim Gorky, in a new English translation by Jeremy Brooks and Kitty Hunter Blair. Prompt book used for Royal...

Advertisement for two Chamber Concerts at the Town Hall to be given by (26 April) Clive Carey and Beatrice Dunn and (7 May) Mr Cale-Matthews...

Receipt to David Edwards for farm in ? Stoneleigh, for his share of the rate levied for the rebuilding of the Shire Hall

Engraving of 'Shakespeare's Brooch' found in 1828 at New Place, with engravings of other luckenbooth brooches for comparison. The brooch is...

25-inch Ordnance Survey sheets covering the borough and parish of Stratford-upon-Avon, mounted on linen as one map and shaded, annotated,...

"Additional evidences and observations" in the case of Ayshcombe v. Hurlstone concerning delapidations at Broughton Farm in Whitchurch,...

Brief for the defendants in the case, Crown versus the Stratford-upon-Avon Corporation, Lent Assizes, 1811 (ff. 54-85)

Headed `The Faculty' Autographs of Jonathan Hutchinson; S.O. Haberston; James Paget (surgeon to the Queen); E.G. Anderson (Mrs Garrett...

Prompt book used for Royal Shakespeare Company production. Also used at The Other Place, 1979; Gulbenkian Studio, Newcastle upon Tyne, 1980....

Letter from Mary Astley, wife of Richard, Atherstone to her sister Elizabeth Ludford, wife of John Newdigate Ludford, Ansley: unable to...

Bundle of personal receipts and vouchers, mainly London and Leamington but one Cambridge

Letter from Joseph Hill to John Ludford: acknowledges receipt of ER148/4/92-93: action delayed by death of Lord Donegall's daughter; Lord...

Transcripts, mostly by E.I Fripp and Richard Savage, but including some by others, of documents relating to the history of...

Cutting concerning remarks made by Rev. George Arbuthnot about Samuel Timmins in connection with the restoration

Receipt from John Butler of Warwycke to Edward Ferrers esq. for one half year's rent for land, due to the Duchy of Lancaster, received...

Conveyance by lease and release from Thomas Bossard [Bossward] of Birmingham, baker, to Joseph Bossard [Bossward] of Bidford, brickmaker,...

Page from 'The London Gazette' containing notice of the dissolution of the partnership of William Canning and Orlando Canning, trading as...

Rough notes for Warwickshire pedigrees: families listed under parishes with which associated. Also includes notes of burials (1722-1739) and...

Bond in the Staple of Westminster from Ralph Gibbes of Honington, knight to Thomas Gibbes of Hodnell, esq., Tristram Gibbes of CLifton,...

Memoranda on the manorial history of Coleshill and Maxstoke from the time of Edward the Confessor to 1622/1623

Recognizance of William Saunders of Worcester, farmer, to appear at next sessions. Sureties Thomas Lucas of Stratford, maltster, and Richard...

Ordnance Survey (1": Sheet LIV, SE) coloured to show the boundaries of the parish and borough of Stratford-upon-Avon, together with the...

Correspondence between Messrs Cotterell and Jones (attorneys) and Messrs Berry and Sweeting (London agents) in the case of Evelyn Shirley...

Mr. Jodrell, Lincolns Inn to Hon. Miss [Mary] Leigh: has set affairs in motion to secure payment of interest from Mr. Dacre.

Prompt book used for Royal Shakespeare Company production. Pages in wrong order. RSC/SM/1/1980/HAM2 is photocopy in correct order. Director:...

Poster for amateur performances of 'Every Man in his Humour' and 'Animal Magnetism' at the Theatre Royal, Birmingham, in aid of endowing a...

The New Inn, Baughton, Hill Croome with abstract of title 1824-1920 [bundle endorsed `To be renamed the Jockey']

Ink plan showing parish boundary and names of adjoining owners also occupiers, description of land, and acreages Scale: 6 chains: 1 inch...

Letter from William Henry, Lord Leigh to his sister, Georgiana, thanking her for a present on his golden wedding

Note on James Saunders' commission in the Warwickshire Local Militia, dated 11 February 1814. On verso: note on a portrait of William...

Conveyance by lease and release of messuage and lands in Bengeworth. Parties: 1) John Stickley 2) George Townsend Roberts 3) Matthew Roper,...

Personal Papers of Hurst family: Notes on farms at Larkstoke, purchased by George Hurst in 1802-1803. The memoranda include notes on the...

Client Meeting minutes: Minutes of meetings with the Royal Shakespeare Company concerning The Other Place

Lease from John Okes of Welford, weaver, to William Battersby [Battersbie] of the same, weaver, of a messuage, orchard, garden and close,...

Two copies. 'Done into Rhyme and Published by E. G. Humphreys at Ye Five Gables', Stratford-upon-Avon

Accounts relating to work on the Watergall estate: i)14 October 1739-8 November 1740: Payments to weekly labourers by John Boyce ii)1...

Schedule of deeds relating to a messuage in Bridge Street, Stratford-upon-Avon (those abstracted in no. 21 with the addition of a...

Bundle of papers relating to a fete held in the grounds of Alveston Leys, Alveston, the home Ludford Docker, on 10 August 1916 to raise...

Printed ephemera relating to the celebrations held in Stratford to commemorate the tercentenary of Shakespeare's birth. Includes: -...

Feoffment dated 27 Oct. 6 Elizabeth (1564) by William Homberstone of Pakenham co. Suffolk, to Sir Thomas Leigh kt. with letters attorning...

Bond from Sir Walter Devereux of Castle Bromwich, baronet, to Barnaby Smyth of Kingsbury, gent., and Katherine his wife, in the penal sum of...

Draft agreement between Samuel Docker and Honourable Edward Leigh for re- building a house in Maxstoke, in Inner Mill Lane, by the Priory...

Fire insurance policy issued by the Caledonian Fire and Life Assurance Company to John Edward Henry Greves of Stratford-upon-Avon,...

Seven cuttings from the 'Evesham Journal' under general head "The Cotswold Papers": 1: "Serborne" 2: "Wyck Rissington" 3: "Copse Hill" 4: "A...

Prompt book used for Royal Shakespeare Company production. Also used at Gulbenkian Studio, Newcastle, 1981; The Other Place, 1981;...

Lease from Poyntz Porter of Coventry, esq., to Susanna Palmer of London, widow, of a messuage and half yardland, with common pasture for two...

Abstract of the title of William Cherry and Robert Shield, trustees of the will of Rev. William Cherry, deceased, to five messuages in...

Files relating to productions at the first The Other Place deposited with files for 2nd TOP. May include costume plots, designs and...

Probate of the will of Mrs. Ann Parker of Welford, widow, dated 3 January 1775, bequeathing to her nephew, Joseph Harris of Welford,...

Inventory of household furniture, china, pictures, books and all other effects the property of R.J. Attye esq., contained in Ingon Grange...

Assignment from Margaret Edkins [Atkins]of Offenham,co. Worcs., widow and executrix of John Edkins [Atkins] late of the same, innholder,...

The merry wives of Windsor. Originally used for the 1928 production and on the 1928/9 and 1931/2 Canadian and American tours. Director: W....

Probate of the will of William Horne of Charlecote, dated 20 December 1742, bequeathing to his cousin, John Osborne of Charlecote, miller,...

Probate of the will of Joseph Harris of Welford, yeoman, dated 16 April 1790, bequeathing to his wife, Hannah Harris, for life, a messuage...

Please note: this record contains archaic, offensive terms relating to people living with mental health issues. ...

Draft power of attorney from the Reverend Robert Stuart de Courcy Laffan of Stratford-upon-Avon, to Harry Percy Baumgartner of Colombo,...

Copy of a Lease from Thomas Hiron of Warwick, esq., to William Gibbs the elder of Alveston, farmer, and William Gibbs the younger of...

Administration of Will, with Will dated 30 April 1625 annexed, of Thomas Lucas of Stratford-upon-Avon, gent., bequeathing to Richard Lucas...

Other papers, mostly 1914-1915, relating to the activities of the Public Service Committee. These include: - letters etc. (including one...

Legal papers, mainly from the case of Ayshcombe v. Hurlstone concerning delapidations at Broughton Farm in Whitchurch, which John Ayshcombe...

`Boke of Scraps relating to Shakespere his House': a collection made by Theodosius Purland, Ph.D., member of the College of Dentists of...

Bond from Thomas Dyer, Alcester, joiner to John Mills, Billesley Hall, esq., in penal sum £1000 to perform covenants of mortgage of even...

Transcripts by E.I. Fripp of, or notes from, original source material concerning events mainly in London and on the Continent, 1466-1547;...

Part of Chancery decree obtained by William Leigh against his copyholders for breaching enclosure agreement made at Manor Court, 5 James...

Illuminated resolution of the Stratford-upon-Avon Borough Council, granting freedom of entry into the town of Number 605 (County of Warwick)...

Assignment from Robert Salmon, heretofore of Stratford-upon-Avon but then of Haselor, maltster, to Robert Barnes of Stratford-upon-Avon,...

Prompt book used for Royal Shakespeare Company production. Also used at Theatre Royal, Newcastle upon Tyne, 1983; Barbican Theatre, 1983....

Poster and order of service for two sermons to be preached by Rev. Richard Seymour, Rector of Kinwarton, and Rev. George William Cockerell,...

Letter from John Ludford to Mr [Andrew] Hackett and Mr [William] Sadler: had understood that Hacketts had agreed to accept money in London,...

Thomas Chapman, Stoneleigh to [Hon. Mrs. Julia Judith Leigh]: Colonel Gregory refuses to give up the trees and has been told that Mr. Leigh...

c 1848 Papers relating to the estate of William Smith, chemist, deceased. 1863-4 Papers relating to redemption of Land Tax on Brewery...

Photocopy of probate of the will of Robert Smith of Stratford-upon-Avon, yeoman, dated 13 September 1791, proved 9 February 1792,...

Will of John Nashe of Bicester, oxon. Body to be buried in churchyard of Bicester; 4d to the 'mother church of Oxford'. Wife Marjorie to...

Chandos Leigh, Addlestrop to ['Sir] re the Leigh peerage case, with special reference to the illegal removal of a memorial stone from the...

Gift from Ralph [Poutrell] rector of the church of Baddeslee Clynton' and Richard Knyht chaplain to Oliver Burdet of lands, tenements,...

Volume containing summary lists of the contents of boxes of deeds deposited by the Trevelyan family relating to their Welcombe, Snitterfield...

Demise from Sir Thomas Leigh of Hamstall Ridware, co. Staffs., and Lady Jane his wife and Charles Leigh and Christopher Leigh of Stoneleigh,...

Letters, papers, share certificates relating to the Royal Shakespearean Theatre of Stratford-upon-Avon and the proposal by J. O. Halliwell...

Lease from John Gregory of Stivichall, gent., to Segrave Gregory of Stivichall, gent., brother of the said John, and William Godfrey of...

Pedigree of the family of Shakespeare by A.W. Cornelius Hutton, published by Evan G. Humphreys 'At the sign of Ye Five Gables',...

Reprint from 'Evesham Journal' of transcript of the will (dated 26 October 1780), of George Milward of Wincot, Clifford Chambers

Northern part of the Brewery site (south of the canal), garden ground on the east side of Brewery Street and land on the west side of...

Prompt book used for Royal Shakespeare Company production. Also used at Gulbenkian Studio, Newcastle, 1982; The Pit, Barbican, 1982....

Two notebooks inscribed: 'Shakespeare's Spelling', with a third, inscribed: 'Warwickshire Spelling, Pronunciation', and two files of notes,...

Further agreement to ER148/8/49: At his own expense William Priest is to collect and ocnvey to the land let to Downes, 3 waggon-loads of...

The records of the institutions carried on by members of the Corporation acting in another capacity (e.g. as Justices of the Peace) or whose...

Court of the bishop of Chester, held at Itchington, for [?Stivichall] Chadshunt, Tachbrook, Gaydon and Itchington: Wednesday after the feast...

Receipted list of servants' wages for a year, due at Lady Day. Each servant signs or makes their mark

Printed petition from John Wales and Alexander Nitholes, on behalf of the residents of Warwick who had suffered by fire and received no...

List of witnesses for the plaintiff in the case of Ayshcombe v. Hurlstone concerning delapidations at Broughton Farm in Whitchurch, which...

Reprint (on one page) of columns contributed to the 'Evesham Journal', being notes taken from "The Diary" about people and places in...

Orders from the Court of Probate to surrender all wills

View of frankpledge with court baron of Robert Ladbrooke

Court leet and view of frankpledge with court baron of Robert Phillips

Deeds relating ot property in Arrow belonging to the Throckmortons

Notice for rummage sale to be held by the Stratford branch of Toc H

ER25/3/7/3

Stratford-upon-Avon Labourers' Friend Society - Report

Second Report of the Stratford-upon-Avon Labourers' Friend Society

Admission of Edward Frederick Carter as customary heir of Richard Carter

Coloured. Showing new road with Mr Corbetts' fence. Purchased of George Milward Scale: 1 chain: 1 inch Surveyor: J Aronway Oates, Worcester...

7 papers relating to fallen timber on Lord Ferrers' waste

Extract from a copy of an exact survey of the manor

ER25/3/5/8

Corn Exchange - Report & Accounts

Report and Accounts presented at Directors' Meeting of the Corn Exchange

Deeds relating to property in Wixford belonging to the Throckmortons

Copy proclamation on the death of Richard Carter

View of frankpledge with court baron of Thomas Archer

View of frankpledge with court baron of Thomas Spencer

Coloured. With key and field names Scale: 4 Gunter's chains: 1 inch Surveyor: J Smith

Deeds relating to the Devon estates of the Throckmorton family of Coughton

List of working drawings for Avonbank Paddocks and dates issued

Prompt book used for Royal Shakespeare Company production. Also used at Gulbenkian Studio, Newcastle upon Tyne, 1985. Director (A Midsummer...

Verses 'Two Flags' in memory of Lady Hertford. [Mary, wife of 9th Marquess]

Notices to the lord of the manor

Special Report of the Managers of the National Schools, about the building fund

Cutting about references to Shakespeare's tomb and the charnel houses in a letter of 1694 in the Bodleian library

List of towns, villages, parishes and hamlets in the Barlichway, Hemlingford, Kington [sic] and Knightlow Hundreds relating to the 1820...

Prompt book used for Royal Shakespeare Company production. Singer by Peter Flannery. Director: Terry Hands.

Letter from William Bray to John Ludford: sees no reason why Abinger fine should not be paid, despite alleged decay of estates, as fine was...

Bond from £450 from Hursltone to Ayshcombe, in the case of Ayshcombe v. Hurlstone concerning delapidations at Broughton Farm in Whitchurch,...

Bill from Thomas Payne, bookseller to Hon. John Chichester, for £1 16s (not receipted until 18 February 1761, fifteen years after death of...

Cutting from 'Birmingham Weekly Post', being "Local Notes Queries" 4379 - a transcript of the inventory [1510] of Thomas Clay, alias...

Cutting from 'Evesham Journal', being review of "The Fool and the Ice" by J.O. Halliwell-Phillipps, which is itself an account of a...

Prompt book used for Royal Shakespeare Company production. Also used at Adelphi Theatre, London, 1983. Director: Terry Hands.

Cutting about Sidney Lee's views on Shakespeare relics and need for an enquiry

Prompt book used for Royal Shakespeare Company production. Also used at Christ Church, Spitalfields, London, 1984; Warsaw and Wroclaw,...

Plan of land in ?USA Scale: not given Surveyor: not given Printer: Miller's lithograph, 102 Broadway

Brief for the defence in case of Cotterell v. Wilson, claiming £30 for breaches of game laws in the parish of Buckland, Gloucestershire:...

Solihull and Tanworth manorial documents, 1551-1684, with deeds and papers relating to the Gibbs family of Honington, 1556-1745, and an...

Mortgage from John Osborne of Charlecote, miller, and William Horne of the same, yeoman, to George Butter of Warwick, gentleman, of two...

Papers in the case of Evelyn Shirley and Thomas Roberts against Thomas Smith, for trespass and damage in Eattington [Ettington] Field,...

Lease between Giles Lawrence of Charlton co.Worcester, gent .and Edmund Lawrence of Withington, co.Gloucester, gent., of the one part; and...

Memorandum of the title to Snitterfield manor

Poster urging opposition to the Bill for the proposed Water Works Company

Deed to le d to uses of a fine, 20 April 19 James (1621) between Sir John Smyth, Dme Ann his wife, Sir William Monson Dame Dorothy his wife,...

Deeds relating to property in Coughton, belonging to the Throckmortons

25 October 1429 24 April 1430 View of frankpledge with court

30 September 1440 18 May 1441 View of frankpledge and court

Prompt book used for Royal Shakespeare Company production. Also used at Theatre Royal, Newcastle, 1982; Barbican Theatre, 1982. Director:...

Letter from Joseph Woodfall Ebsworth, Molash Vicarage, Kent, to A. H. Bullen, with further news on Cavalier Lyrics..., and enclosing more...

Receipt from John Butler of Warwycke to Edward Ferrers esq. for one half year's rent for land, due to the Duchy of Lancaster, received...

Correspondence between John Newdigate Ludford and Bishop of Coventry concerning the building on an Independent Chapel at Hartshill, and a...

Two letters to Mrs. Hodgson and one letter to F.H. Hodgson, from Catesbys Ltd., concerning attempts to discover secret chambers in the roof...

Copy of Court Roll of the Manor of Atherstone of Sir John Repington, Knight. Surrender by Thomas Draiton of the City of London, Girdelor and...

Stubs from certificates of baptism giving child's name, date of birth, date of baptism, parents' names, address, 1935-8.

Cutting about the results of War Weapons Week

Deeds relating to property in Sambourne belonging to the Throckmortons

'Shakespeare: the Plays of his Tragic Period, 1601-1609': lecture by E.I. Fripp

Pen drawing of plan showing field names, acreages, and adjoining owners. This may be a tracing of a scale plan Scale: not given Surveyor:...

Deeds relating to property in Spernall belonging to the Throckmortons

Programme for fete at Alveston Manor in aid of the Primrose League

ER25/3/1/7

Cutting, relating to the American Fountain

Letter from John Hollingshead, Gaiety Theatre, Strand, to John Davidson, asking him to give [William Meyer] Lutz a lift to a performance of...