A fascinating portrait of the Pythagorean tradition, including a substantial account of the Neo-Pythagorean revival, and ending with Johannes Kepler on the threshold of modernism.

Reviews:

“Kahn’s excellent knowledge of the texts is apparent and his familiarity with the scholarly literature is manifest. . . . The volume is attractively written and and produced, and will do a real service in making the Pythagorean tradition . . . accessible to non-specialists.”

—Richard McKirahan, Philosophy in Review

“This book provides an excellent overview of the development of Pythagorean theory after Pythagoras. Kahn’s narrative is lucid and his judgment reliable. . . . This brief survey is admirably comprehensive in its treatment of Pythagorean influences.”

—Daniel W. Graham, Ancient Philosophy

“This book, written by one of the world’s leading authorities on ancient philosophy, combines a lucid overview of the broad sweep of the Pythagorean tradition, appropriate for readers new to the subject, with new scholarly insights, which will make it essential reading for scholars as well. There really is no comparable up-to-date volume available in English. It is a wonderful book.”

—Carl Huffman, DePauw University

“…a comprehensive, extremely sensible and readable account of a decisive strand in Western intellectual history.”

—Walter Burkert

Contents:

Preface. Abbreviations.

I. The Pythagorean Question

II. Pythagoras and the Pythagorean Way of Life

III. Pythagorean Philosophy before Plato

IV. Pythagorean Philosophy in the Time of Archytas and Plato

V. The New Pythagorean Philosophy in the Early Academy

VI. The Survival of Pythagoreanism in the Hellenistic Age

VII. The Pythagorean Tradition in Rome

VIII. The Neopythagorean Philosophers

IX. The Pythagorean Heritage

1. The Pythagorean Tradition of the Occult and the Supernatural

2. Transmigration and Vegetarianism

3. Mathematics, Music, and Astronomy

Bibliography. Index of Ancient and Early Modern Names. Index of Modern Names. Index of Subjects

About the Author: