The popular culture piece we have decided to study is the film Hairspray (2007). The film features Tracy Turnblad, a teenager living in Baltimore in 1962. Tracy dreams of being on the popular television show, The Corny Collins Show, which showcases other teenagers dancing and singing. Despite being told she cannot join the show because of her appearance, Tracy overcomes barriers to reach her goal. She then finds herself in the middle of a racial battle between white people and black people of the area. Tracy stands up for what she believes in and with the help of her friends, turns The Corny Collins Show into an integrated program. One afternoon Tracy is sent to detention for cutting class; however, detention turns out to be more than she expected when she learns a whole new style of dancing from black students that she takes to television. Tracy proves to be the symbol for segregation when it is she who initiates the fight to rebel when Negro Day is cancelled. Although she tries to help to in problem of integration in the film, the audience gets the idea that white people can speak on black people’s behalf. The movie explores many social issues, including race, sexism, and body image. The element of class plays a more discrete part of the movie. It is not an explicitly stated issue, however, classism is definitely visible between characters. Looking into the physical and emotional relationships of Hairspray we only see relationships of a heterosexual context. Being filmed in the midst of the civil rights movement, sexual orientation had yet to be a major topic of discussion for society, and was highly disapproved of. Therefore, only relationships of a male and female are portrayed throughout the film. The film presents teenagers from different classes, genders, and races, and together they form relationships, which question the norm of 1960’s Baltimore. Furthermore, director Adam Shankman breaks down the schema and negligent attitude towards gender identity. Through analyzing the several multidimensional characters, issues within the cisgender community are examined as they are often overlooked in today’s society and many challenges faced within the queer community are addressed. Characters such as Tracey attempt to reveal cisgender scripts within the media. While her mother indirectly attempts to introduce the audience to the challenges queer identifying woman may face. The film also incorporates several other women who overcome adversity regarding race, ethnicity and femininity. Hairspray is a film created to invoke thought and power. Tracy is one person who takes the time to stand up for what she believes in and ultimately she is the voice who changed society.

Work Cited: