Reasons why Hairspray (2007) is an intersectional masterpiece

Tracy and Link’s relationship

So let’s start with this: Tracy’s feelings for link aren’t the driving force of the protagonist’s journey.

Their relationship is mostly sexual (which I love). Rarely if ever do we see a female love interest who is non conventionally attractive (in universe) attract an S.O. solely based on looks as opposed to them falling for their personality. Link thinks she’s smoking hot the moment he sees her fully in her element. Yes, Tracy has totally objectified Link (realistic high school crush) but the movie doesn’t pretend like she likes him for more than his looks. And whenever he doesn’t adhere to her image of him, she is disappointed, but doesn’t scorn him for it. Her arc as a character is independent from her feelings for Link. With the exception of his self serving behaviour that leads to his rejection, nothing that Link does affects her mission to strive for integration. His fear is the push she needed to get past her own doubts and fully commit to fighting for equal rights, even if it costs her everything she wanted at the beginning of the movie. Link is inspired by Tracy, but none of his big moments are ploys to win her over (with only maybe the exception of the Run and Tell That scene, but I’ll leave that up to you to decide). His big move at the end is caused by Tracy inspiring him and showing courage and that helps him push past his own fears, because he knows it’s the right thing to do. At the end they just make out and it’s the best. Yes, who’s to say that the relationship will last, but what they have is rooted in mutual respect and friendship. And they wanna rip each other’s clothes off too!

Female beauty standards

Now the intersectionality comes into play because it deals with female beauty standards, socio economic status, racism/ethnicity, body image, gender roles and ageism. Tracy is judged for her body, but generally exudes confidence and her insecurity is always due to external circumstances. The arc of body positivity is given to her mother. Edna has to learn to love herself, she has clearly internalized all the judgement over the years. Not only does she (start to) learn to love her size, but there is even an entire song about how age and being older aren’t bad things and can be beautiful. All this is done without shaming thin young women! The contrast between Edna and Tracy dealing with their size, emphasises the fact that Tracy is actually comfortable in her skin, which is such a good message.

Dealing with racial inequality

So one criticism people could have with this movie, is the ‘white saviour’ aspect. But, even though there are plenty of reasons why one would think that, I think this movie is more than that, and the ‘white saviour’ makes sense in context. I will demonstrate this by going over Tracy’s character arc.

At the start of the movie, Tracy wants to dance on the Corny Collins show and her other wants are quite superficial (to look cool and for her crush to like her back). She becomes friends with the black students in detention, by treating them as equals (also she just thinks they’re cool peeps) and doesn’t really think about segregation. She is unaware of the rules and reasons for it, which allows her to break the rules. Her general enthusiasm, as well as her disregard for seeing black people as inferior, gets her a lot of attention (and a lot of looks). She achieves her first want when Link notices her dancing, then he invites her to audition. For the audition she wants to dance Seaweed’s dance, but he says she can do his dance by herself (and sort of take credit for it). This is cultural appropriation, even though Tracy likes the black people in the black culture, she wants to be part of it, she doesn’t know about the struggles that come with black culture and is therefore, unwittingly, and with permission from Seaweed, only taking the aspects of black culture that appeal to her. She achieves her other wants when she gets to dance on the Corny Collins show and gets a makeover that starts a trend of girls wanting to look like her (she’s cool now).

The second story arc comes to the frontline when Maybelle announces their day of the programme has been cancelled. Tracy is outraged and refuses that the black people this unfair treatment. In contrast to her dance ‘borrowing’ with Seaweed. She now starts to see the horrible reality of segregation (in movie context, related to dancing on tv). Tracy assures them that they deserve to ask for more and calls for a marched protest. She gives them the push to start fighting (which yes, makes her a ‘white saviour’) and her involvement with the protest makes all the difference (because she’s a white celebrity). As said before, Link’s selfish behaviour is in contrast with Tracy to show her character growth and part of the push she needed to give up her own ‘wants’. The other is her father’s declaration of pride, and how she inspires him. She joins the march as an equal, side by side to Maybelle. Yes, she is still a white celebrity, but her position and intent when joining is to aid, to be part of the movement. Unfortunately, when the police show up to stop the march, she refuses to adhere to the complicit, careful, inoffensive stance of Maybelle, but demands more, aggravating a police officer in the process. This is heartbreaking to me, because Tracy doesn’t know how the police treat black people differently, but Maybelle clearly sees the danger. All the protesters are arrested and Tracy runs.

Now we get the third part and the eventual ‘solution’ to the movie’s conflict. Wilbur tells edna that he paid bail for all the protesters, because he saw the injustice. He was inspired by Tracy and wanted to help, even though he couldn’t really afford it. He put the rights of the black people over his own needs, because it was the right thing to do. From this moment on, even with the ridiculously amazing dance-heist, our protagonist starts ‘sacrificing’ her own wants and needs to give the black people a chance, inspiring others in the process. Link dances with Tracy (foreshadowing that his reasons for rejecting her previously have now changed) and then pulls Inez from the crowd and dances with her. Link, being the most high profile dancer on the show, instigates the first integrated dance on tv. He was inspired by Tracy, and shows tv audiences (of the Corny Collins Show, so in universe) that joining the movement is more powerful than if Tracy had danced with Inez. Then, Link steps aside so Inez can take centre stage and dance. Then Seaweed and Penny dance (clumsily) on camera and Penny shouts “I am now a checker-boy-chick!” and kisses him, giving the audience (probably) their first interracial couple on TV.

Then the inspiration spreads to Corny, who isn’t just the TV show’s host and the face of the programme, but is affiliated with the network (which the audience knows). He pulls Maybelle to the spotlight and gives her a chance to shine, not putting them as equals, but raising Maybelle (and black people) above him. Equality needs to first restore balance to compensate for the inequality that came before. Corny joining the movement solidifies this as a real change (start of change) and not just the kids ‘acting out’. Once Maybelle starts to sing, all the dancers start coupling up with interracial dynamics. Turns out, even before all this, but also during, the audience loved Inez so much, they started voting for her. This is even more powerful than if she was a token winner to make a point. She was just the best and she deserved it. But that the audience gave her what she deserved, marks the shift in attitude, showing the movement has spread beyond the Corny Collins Show. Inez gets crowned the winner, by Corny and Maybelle, co-hosting as equals and the Corny Collins Show is officially integrated. Tracy got what she wanted, then gave it all up so she could do the right thing and she is super proud and happy.