A minor Australian-set* western. Peter Finch is wonderful as a gentleman outlaw, charming and charismatic in a black shirt and riding a white horse. Unfortunately, he’s not the protagonist. That would be Ronald Lewis and David McCallum who, after failing as jewel thieves in the little seen gem The Secret Place, try their hand at being bushranger brothers. Their uninteresting characters are mainly defined by their choice of romantic partner (fallen brunette Maureen Swanson and respectable Jill Ireland), and one being slightly less ok with a life of crime.

The movie does touch on how hiding out in between jobs can feel just as restrictive as prison, though that’s barely explored. There’s a well-staged stagecoach holdup and bank robbery, and some…

Cowboys; shootouts; cattle rustling; saloons; stagecoaches. Such familiar elements, but this is 1865 Australia not Arizona. So if Robbery Under Arms is not a Western, is it a Southern? In any case, it's a British Rank picture, shot on location in Southern Australia and New South Wales with interiors at Pinewood.

It is the setting that distinguishes the film, the searing heat amid the wide dusty vistas of Oz being almost palpable. Alas it is the sole distinguishing feature since the script is standard and the treatment adequate. Peter Finch is in effect a supporting character - Captain Starlight, a rustling rogue with a band of ne'er-do-wells at the time of an Australian gold rush.

The story centres around two…

MannVanuary II

20. Aussie Western

The Marston brothers, Dick and Jim, have been through the sheep-shearing season, and with their pockets stuffed with cash, are off for a bit of rest and relaxation, but instead a couple of interactions are going to take their lives in a different direction.

First of all, their ex-convict father introduces them to a fellow who goes by the name (among others) of Captain Starlight, and the lucrative, but obviously dangerous world, of cattle-rustling. And secondly, they meet a couple of girls. Which one of these causes them the most trouble is hard to say.

The story is somewhat episodic, never really getting into a flow, focussing on the Marstons who, just when you think…

Two brothers join their father in Captain Starlight’s (Peter Finch) bushranger gang in 19th century Australia in this action drama directed by Jack Lee, also starring Ronald Lewis and Maureen Swanson.

Based on the novel of the same name by Rolf Boldrewood, which was published in 1988, the film is set in 1865 Australia, where two brothers are drawn into a life of crime. When they arrive in Melbourne, the two find romance with two sisters.

Peter Finch gives an OK performance in his role as Captain Starlight, acting like he is in charge, while Ronald Lewis and David McCallum are OK in their respective roles as Dick Marston and Jim Marston, the two Marston brothers who commit awful acts.…