Homotopia was founded in 2003 marking its 20th festival last year.

Afro Queer artist and filmmaker, Topher Campbell, has joined the UK’s longest running LGBTQIA+ arts and culture festival, Homotopia, as its new Director and CEO.

The former artistic director and CEO of The Red Room Film and Theatre Company, and the co-founder of the ruckus! Archive, a ground-breaking cultural archive of Black, Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Trans creatives, artists, venues and organisations, Topher comes with a powerful reputation in curating and commissioning work that is urgent and relevant.

As an award-winning artist he has collaborated with the Mercury Music Prize Winners Young Fathers on FETISH, an art film shot on the streets of New York, which premiered at the Barbican Centre in London, and was Official Selection for the 2018 Aesthetica Short Film Festival and 2018 Scottish Queer International Film Festival and 2021 Sheffield DocFEST.

As a performer, Topher has appeared in Campbell X’s Stud Life, Ian Poitier’s debut feature Oh Happy Day and Sir Isaac Julien’s Trussed. For television he directed Eastenders.

He also co-directed Una Marson, Our Last Caribbean Voice (currently available on BBC iPlayer). His latest film, the documentary Moments that Shaped Queer Black Britain, explores the UK’s Black Queer history and culture for B.E.T Paramount and is streaming on Sky. Topher has recently been commissioned to create new works for Tate Modern and Somerset House.

Topher Campbell said:

“I am thrilled to be joining the team at Homotopia. Homotopia is the UK’s premier and longest running Queer Arts Festival and has a crucial role to play in supporting and elevating the work of LGBTQIA+ artists nationally and internationally and I am very excited to have the opportunity to play a part in this mission.

“In a time where LGBTQIA+ people are increasingly facing a more hostile environment, providing spaces that offer community, dialogue, joy, and creativity for us and by us are essential.

“Liverpool, with its rich heritage of music, culture and Black History, is a global city and the perfect environment for championing LGBTQIA+ culture.

“Homotopia is a jewel in the city’s crown and as such I hope to elevate and build on its national and international reputation for showcasing the best Queer music, film, theatre, performance, visual art and fashion with fabulousness and bite.”

Homotopia was founded in 2003 marking its 20th festival last year. A Liverpool based arts and social justice organisation it makes cultural impact through art and activism.

Part of Arts Council England’s National Portfolio, artists to have featured as part of Homotopia include Fox Fisher, Jade Anouka, Travis Alabanza, John Waters, Jinkx Monsoon, Scottee, Le Gâteau Chocolat, David Hoyle, Zanele Muholi, Amy Lame, Panti Bliss, April Ashley, Fenella Fielding, Duggie Fields, Rachel Adams, Patrick Wolf and more.

A spokesperson for Homotopia said:

“We’re thrilled to welcome Topher Campbell to Liverpool, as the new Director and CEO at Homotopia. Topher’s vision will ignite a new era for the organisation, with fresh programming, ambitious development with scope for new partnerships and opportunities for local artists. Topher brings with him extensive accolades and experience as an artistic leader.

“We are excited to work with Topher, and to support the wider team in ensuring Homotopia continues to platform and develop the very best in queer arts and activism for artists and audiences across Liverpool city region and beyond.”