Homotopia runs from October 23 to November 23

There's a starry line-up for this year’s Homotopia festival, with film director Terence Davies, writer Jonathan Harvey, actress Fenella Fielding and activist Peter Tatchell all taking part.

“It was always at the back of my mind after our 10th birthday last year that 2014 had to be at least as polished and as good,” says festival artistic director Gary Everett. “I hope people respond to it.

‌

“We’re exploring faith and the idea of sexuality and faith and how that has been challenging both here in the UK and internationally.”

The month-long event, titled Miracle of Miracles and which runs from this Thursday until November 23, also includes the UK premiere of John, a piece by DV8 physical theatre, ahead of a run at the National Theatre and a UK tour; the first solo UK exhibition outside London for American artist Catherine Opie, and an appearance from performer and artist (and ‘avant guardian’) David Hoyle.

Homotopia is the UK’s leading celebration of LGBT (Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender) art and culture.

‌

Liverpool Echo Icon

Sign up to FREE email alerts from ECHO Daily News

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you’ve consented to and improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and third parties based on our knowledge of you. More info

This year’s festival sees Homotopia continuing its partnership with the Walker Art Gallery, which is currently staging an exhibition by renowned portrait photographer Opie – the first time her work has been shown outside London, and forging new partnerships with Tate Liverpool, through its forthcoming Transmitting Andy Warhol exhibition, and the Liverpool Playhouse.

Gary says: “I’m delighted at how Homotopia continues to grow into the fabric of Liverpool culture with our April Ashley exhibition, which has already attracted more than 600,000 visitors, extended into next year at the Museum of Liverpool and our partnerships this year with Tate Liverpool and the Walker Art Gallery.

“And I’m really pleased to be able to bring Terence Davies to the museum to talk about his life, his films and this city. It’s the only day he has in the entire autumn because he’s making a new film.”

‌

Davies will be in conversation with local writer and journalist Laura Brown at the Museum of Liverpool on November 8. He’s expected to talk about his career, growing up in post-war Liverpool and the conflict between his homosexuality and faith.

Meanwhile on November 7, Fenella Fielding presents My Scouse Voice at the Unity.

The actress, who also appeared at the festival in 2011, has a seven decade career that’s encompassed Carry On films, Ibsen plays, stage musicals and the Morecambe and Wise show.

‌

Human rights campaigner Peter Tatchell will take part in a Diva Debate – You Gotta Have Faith at the Unity on November 12, discussing faith with Christian commentator and musician Vicky Beeching, Rose Neelam, a Muslim and project director of Safra, and lesbian Rabbi Ariel Friedlander.

DV8’s John, at the Playhouse on Thursday and Friday this week, is a new verbatim dance-theatre work based on more than 50 interviews with men about love and sex.

And on November 6, the Unity is the venue for Polari Salon, where author Paul Burston, who runs London’s award-winning LGBT literary salon, hosts an evening with V G Lee and Jonathan Harvey – making his first appearance at Homotopia, Clare Campbell and Gerry Potter. There will also be a free creative writing workshop during the day.

‌

“I’m really proud of where we are and that the festival is in Liverpool,” adds Gary.