Match Pictures | Matches: 1913 – 1914 | 1913 Pics – 1914 Pics

Trivia

Against Celtic this day at inside-left was a 19-year-old Alex Troup, who would go on to have a very successful career with Everton where he as attributed as having been the main feeder of crosses for record goal-scorer Dixie Dean. Wee Troupie's fame was such that a book was written by Scottish football historian, David Potter, about his life.

Young Alex Troup was the star for the home side and he was certainly well liked and protected by the locals in this game. It was reported that Sunny Jim Young was assaulted with an umbrella by the lad's mother after the game for giving her diminutive youngster a rough time.

Following this fine cup result Scots-Irish followers of the Celtic would be made even happier whith the news that Hibernian had knocked Rangers out of the cup at Easter Road.

The Glasgow Herald of this day reported the death of British rancher and mine-owner, William H. Benton in Mexico. The report states that Benton had stormed into the tent of the Mexican rebel leader Pancho Villa brandishing a revolver upon which Villa shot him. Later reports suggested a slightly different version of events.

Review

Teams

FORFAR ATHLETIC:

G Scott, Ferguson, C Scott, Bruce, Chapman, Leighton, Easson, Walker, Langlands, Alex Troup, James "Jummer" Petrie

CELTIC:

Shaw; McGregor, Dodds; Young, Johnstone, Davidson; McAtee, Gallacher, McColl, McMenemy, Browning

Scorers:

McColl (3), McMenemy, Dodds (Pen)

Referee: W. Shande (Falkirk)

Venue: Station Park

Attendance: 6,000

Articles

Match Report (see end of page below)

Pictures

Match Pictures

Articles

The Scotsman, Monday 23rd February, 1914

Forfar Athletic had Celtic at Station Park, Forfar. There was a big crowd present totalling 8000, but a breaking in the weather half an hour before the start tended to keep back a good number. The Forfar players were no match for their more experienced opponents, though they were plucky, and at the same time showed a lot of fine play. Troup and Langlands constantly kept the Celtic defenders moving and as a matter of fact the Celtic goalkeeper had more to do in the first half than the Forfar goalkeeper.

The Celtic got their first goal as a result of a slip by C. Scott, who missed the ball altogether, and allowed McColl to walk through. The same player added a second point five minutes after the first, heading through from a pass by McAtee.

The second half was nearly all in favour of the Celtic, but the Forfar lads played up very pluckily, Troup again shining. This young lad played a fine game and time and again outwitted the Celtic defence.

McColl added a third goal thus performing the hat trick. A penalty kick against Leighton for bringing down Gallagher enabled Dodds to score a fourth goal, and McMenemy put on a fifth after giving a first rate exhibition of fast dribbling. The Celtic got their goals fairly easily and there was no excuse for the frequency with which they tripped the Forfar players.

There was a crowd of about 8000 present, the gate excluding stands, being £240.

The Glasgow Herald, Monday 23rd February, 1914.

The provincial side were outplayed from start to finish.

McColl scored twice in the first half and added a third in the second half, in which portion Dodds (from a penalty-kick) and McMenemy also scored.