This is part two of our multi-part series taking a look around the internet to see what people said about the newest Buffalo Bills before they were drafted. We continue the series with second-round selection NT Torell Troup and third-round selection DE Alex Carrington. Part 1 - C.J. Spiller

Where applicable, I have copied part of the report summaries and provided a link. I've also included quotes from Bills staff members on each player.

Day Two Recap Press Conference (11:49) - BuffaloBills.com

GM Buddy Nix and V.P. of College Scouting assess day two of the draft and the selections of Torell Troup and Alex Carrington.

Torell Troup (Yes, Torell with one "r")Torrell Troup NFL Draft scouting report - Mocking The Draft

"Troup is a natural nose tackle and will fit right into a 3-4 defense. He may always be a rotational nose, but he’d be a good one. He’s very stout at the point of attack and doesn’t get pushed off the line. He’s not especially quick, so he may be solely a 3-4 player."

WalterFootball.com: 2010 NFL Draft: Nose Tackle Rankings

"A member of the All-Conference USA Second Team, Torrell Troup has moved into the No. 3 nose tackle slot behind Dan Williams and Terrence Cody. Troup dominated the opposition during East-West Shrine practices."

Torrell Troup | Central Florida Scouting Report - 2010 NFL Draft Prospect - Draft Countdown

"Impressed at the East / West Shrine Game and really improved his draft stock --- Profiles as a quintessential nose tackle at the next level --- A one-dimension run-stuffer but excels in that capacity --- Will be highly coveted by teams that run a 3-4 scheme."

Torrell Troup Scouting Report - 2010 NFL Draft Prospect - FFToolbox

"Troup is not a high profile defensive tackle, but there is not much separating him from some of the defensive linemen coming in from more prominent football programs. He is strong and pretty good at the point of attack. Troup did have a great outing at the East-West Shrine Game and his stock has gone through the roof. His success in the early workouts has earned him a much deserved invite to the NFL Combine and he will battle it out with some great defensive tackles. If he can compete with the likes of Dan Williams and Jared Odrick, Troup will easily be gone by the end of the second or third round."

Torrell Troup, UCF, NFL Draft - CBSSports.com - NFLDraftScout.com

In perhaps the most thorough of all the reports, CBSSports.com provides their analysis of Torell Troup.

New Era Scouting " Nose Tackle

Troup was the fourth-rated NT prospect, the 113 overall rated player with a 4th round grade.

Bills notebook: Troup makes a name for himself : The Buffalo News

"Troup, who didn't play football until his freshman year in high school, started 39 of 50 games at Central Florida. The 6-foot-2, 320-pounder was a two-time, second-team All-Conference USA selection with 108 career tackles, including 24 for losses and six sacks. He had only two tackles against the University at Buffalo last season, but recovered a fumble at the UB 17-yard line to seal a 23-17 UCF win." He started 42 of 44 games. He had nine sacks last season to earn first-team All-Sun Belt Conference for the second straight time. He had 10.5 sacks and a league-high 19 tackles for losses as a junior when he was the Sun Belt Conference defensive player of the year.

Troup’s mindset right for Bills – Inside The Bills

"You’ve got to love contact to play in the middle," said Troup. "You get hit every play. Sometimes the defensive end doesn’t even get touched; in the middle you’re gonna get touched every play. I love the contact in the middle. Some people want me to play 3 technique, and I actually tell them I love contact, I love the middle, I love the nose."

Buffalo Bills add Torell Troup, Alex Carrington to help defense | Democrat and Chronicle

"Beauty is in the eye of the beholder and we liked Troup the best," vice president of scouting Tom Modrak said. "He's a classic nose. He's played a lot of snaps, he's strong, he can beat the double team or at least hold up so the linebackers have a chance, and he wants to be good."

Conference Call Transcript With Torell Troup - WGR 550 SportsRadio

Bills DE Torell Troup spoke with the Buffalo-area media following his selection.

Press Conference Bullets:

"We like Troup the best of the bunch." - Tom Modrak

"He is a classic nose (tackle). He plays a lot of snaps, he plays a lot of snaps every game, he's strong, he can beat the double team and you know what those guys do, those are the guys who have to defeat double teams, or at least hold up so your linebackers have a chance. That's what he's been doing, he hustles to the ball and he's a great kid. When you get to talk to him and know him he's one of those guys who wants to be good, he plays like he wants to be good and he's got good strength." - Modrak

"We think that Troup can play 30 plays a game and now we're good in the middle and the center is going to pay his dues every snap. There won't be anybody taking a play off. It's like what we said from the start, you can't put too many good players out there." - Buddy Nix

"If you read the background on Torell Troup, and see where he came from, how he got there. We both went down there and got to know him a little bit. You want to bring him home with you whether he can play or not. And then for him to turn out what he is as a player, then that's a double bonus. He's a guy where adversity won't bother him, he's had it." - Nix

Alex Carrington

Alex Carrington NFL Draft scouting report - Mocking The Draft

"Don’t sleep on Carrington just because he went to Arkansas State. He could have gone to several SEC schools but chose ASU so he could be near family. There, he was clearly a star. Starting since his redshirt freshman season, Carrington was a difference maker. Even though teams schemed against him, he still made plays. In the NFL, Carrington may not be the flashiest of players, but he should be a dependable starter for a long time."

WalterFootball.com: 2010 NFL Draft: 3-4 Defensive End Rankings

"Alex Carrington has been having a great week of practice at the Senior Bowl, and will be targeted in Rounds 3 or 4 as a 3-4 defensive end." Carrington was the fourth-rated 3-4 DE behind N. Suh, G. McCoy, and J. Odrick.

Scouting Report - Alex Carrington DE Arkansas State - Draft Board Insider

"He's got that nice mix of size, speed, and strength that teams fall for. As I said, don't expect to be wowed with his wide variety of pass rush moves, or his production against top talent. But in a league that covets it's great athletes, Carrington is one of those guys. He's probably a year away from being a starter in the league, because he's got to work in some technique with those tremendous physical gifts, but I have no doubt he has potential to start in the league."

Alex Carrington | Arkansas State Scouting Report - 2010 NFL Draft Prospect - Draft Countdown

"Enjoyed a coming out party at the Senior Bowl and that impressive performance sent him shooting up draft boards --- Needs some polish, will never be a great pass rusher and his senior tape was a bit disappointing at times but is a remarkable physical specimen with all of the tools --- Profiles as a prototypical five-technique in a "30" front."

Alex Carrington scouting report - NFL Draft Geek

"Alex Carrington is a player that will be highly valued by almost every team because of his size and schematic versatility. Carrington will most likely fit best play the 5 technique in a 3-4, as he is very strong against the run, great in gap control, and has the strength to get penetration up the middle. Although he was able to be productive in college with just a bull rush, he will need to add some more pass rushing moves to be a productive pass rusher at the next level. Carrington has a little maturing to do as a player, but it shouldn't be long before he is an effective starter, and should have a lengthy N.F.L career. Carrington will get picked at some point during the second round, more than likely by a 3-4 team."

Alex Carrington Scouting Report - 2010 NFL Draft Prospect - FFToolbox.com

"Carrington has flown under the radar for most of his career just because of where he was playing, but he is a great fit for a 3-4 scheme and NFL scouts have taken notice since the season ended and Carrington should be gone by the end of the third round."

Alex Carrington, Arkansas State, NFL Draft - CBSSports.com - NFLDraftScout.com

Complete analysis of Arkansas State DE, Alex Carrington.

Carrington an underrated add to Bills D-line - BuffaloBills.com

"I mean everybody is 330 pounds and they’re leaning on you for 60 plays," said Modrak of opposing offensive linemen. "You just can’t do that no matter who you are. We think Alex has a chance to come in here and develop. Play behind two good players, play now and continue to get better."

Conference Call Transcript With Alex Carrington - WGR 550 SportsRadio

Text from the media's call with new Buffalo Bill Alex Carrington.

Press Conference Bullets: