Vajiravudh in English dictionary

Vajiravudh

Sample sentences with "Vajiravudh"

Declension Stem

In 1924, King Vajiravudh (Rama VI) attempted to clarify the succession process by laying down the Palace Law of Succession.

One of Rama V's reforms was to introduce a Western-style law of royal succession, so in 1910 he was peacefully succeeded by his son Vajiravudh, who reigned as Rama VI.

In 1917, after completing his studies abroad and the customary period of monasticism, Prince Prajadhipok and Princess Rambai Barni were married at Bang Pa-In Palace and given the blessings of her new brother-in-law, King Vajiravudh.

King Vajiravudh, his uncle, sent a telegram on 13 October 1925 giving him this name.

King Vajiravudh (Rama VI) commissioned the Italian architect Annibale Rigotti to design the main building in 1923, although construction would remain incomplete as Rigotti returned to Italy after the king's death in 1925.

In 1925, King Vajiravudh died without leaving any male issue (his only daughter, Princess Bejaratana Rajasuda, was born a day earlier and palace law dictated that the throne must pass to the next male full-sibling of the king).

King Vajiravudh (Rama VI) introduced a means to save money to Thailand in 1913.

In 1915 King Vajiravudh (Rama VI) renamed the district by removing the word Mueang off.

In November the same year, he was Russia's emissary at the coronation of Vajiravudh the King of Siam.

Ayutthaya railway station was built during the reign of King Chulalongkorn. Its name was "Krung Kao", in relation to the nearby Ayutthaya Historical Park. In 1921, it was rebuilt as a concrete building with metal bracing and renamed "Ayutthaya" in keeping with King Vajiravudh's national order of 1917.

The landing was made adjacent to the main Thai army camp, Camp Vajiravudh.

The new city was made a province under the control of Monthon Ratchaburi. To prevent city name confusion, King Vajiravudh (Rama VI) changed the district name back to Prachuap Khiri Khan on 16 August 1915.

When she died in 1919 at the age of 57, she was given a grand royal funeral, attended by all members of the Siamese Royal Family, and the ceremony was presided over by her son King Vajiravudh.

At first the Wild Tigers were drawn from the king's personal entourage (it is likely that many joined to gain favour with Vajiravudh), but an enthusiasm among the population arose later.

In 1915, we were honoured to receive another Royal visit from Thailand by King Vajiravudh (Rama VI), the founder of this University.

King Vajiravudh usually dined around nine in the evening.

In 1912, Vajiravudh announced the change in the solar calendar era from the Rattanakosin Era (R.S.) designated by Chulalongkorn to the Buddhist Era with the year beginning 1 April 2455 BE (1912 CE).

His son, Vajiravudh (Rama VI), ascended to the throne in 1910 and continued his father's zeal for reform to bring the monarchy into the 20th century.

In 1906, his father Chulalongkorn travelled to Europe to seek treatment for his lung disease, and Chulalongkorn made Vajiravudh Regent of Siam.

Varananda Dhavaj was heir presumptive to his uncle Vajiravudh until being replaced as heir by his other uncle Prajadhipok in 1924.

She became queen because of her pregnancy, making the King Vajiravudh extremely happy with a much anticipated heir.

King Vajiravudh issued an act, effective 1 April 1913, to formally set up a "Savings Office" which began its operations under the Royal Treasury.

Authors