Based on the outskirts of Stockholm, IF Brommapojkarna is the largest football club in Europe in terms of the number of active teams covering all ages and over 4,000 players of which 1,000 are female. The club is famous for its youth academy, which has produced numerous top-quality Swedish players throughout the years (25% of the current Swedish National Team started at the club). Creating change and influencing a generation through the power of football, the club have a huge emphasis on diversity and are marking 2019 with a re-brand that sees the release of special edition jersey that represents far more than just a uniform.

This is the biggest female football club in Europe, and this project sees them rebrand from IF Brommapojkarna which translates as 'Bromma Boys’ to the new name of 'BrommaGirls’. For years the club had female teams in their set up who have had to play under the boys name, and this move in partnership with Nike is a positive stride in terms of inclusion, diversity and progression of women’s football.

The project is all about empowering women and making sure men and women have the same opportunities to do what they love – playing football. Nike have paired up to use the biggest female club in Europe and manifest their great equality work with the most stylish jersey for the ultimate celebration. A jersey that the girls can wear as badge of honour.

“Young girls look up to the older generation and when they see the attention and crowd that the girls draw it will definitely inspire them” says player, Engla Antonelius.

“I absolutely love the new jersey! It stands for so much more than just a name. It stands for equality, for a new time and for changes. It makes me so proud to see this change as it is about time that us girls get the respect that we deserve. We have fought for this right, it is time to take it.”

Maja Wilander adds; “It really feels great to be in a club who really focuses & works on equality & integration matters. I feel very proud when talking about BP, they are very much ahead in the way they think. I’ve been here for 5 months and I love it. It’s easy to just blend in when you’re a part of a big club as BP, but I always feel like I’m represented and visible.”

A statement club in a statement year for women's football, and another powerful show of strength in terms of influencing, encouraging and welcoming everybody into this mighty fine sport that we love. Go on BrommaGirls.