It Happened One Night

film by Capra [1934]

Learn about this topic in these articles:

Assorted References

discussed in biography

In Frank Capra: The golden period of Frank Capra

Capra’s “golden period” began with It Happened One Night (1934), the first motion picture to win an Academy Award in five major categories: best picture, best actor, best actress, best director, and best adapted screenplay. The making of this enduring romantic comedy about a runaway heiress (Claudette Colbert) and the…

Read More

history of motion pictures

In history of film: Nontechnical effects of sound

… (Lady for a Day, 1933; It Happened One Night, 1934; Mr. Deeds Goes to Town, 1936), Hawks (Twentieth Century, 1934; Bringing Up Baby, 1938), Gregory La Cava (My Man Godfrey, 1936), Mitchell Leisen (Easy Living, 1937), and Leo McCarey (The Awful Truth

Read More

In history of film: The Hollywood studio system

…whose cheerful screwball comedies (It Happened One Night, 1934) and populist fantasies of good will (Mr. Smith Goes to Washington, 1939) sometimes gave way to darker warnings against losing faith and integrity (It’s a Wonderful Life, 1946). Other significant directors with less-consistent thematic or visual styles were William Wyler…

Read More

Oscar for best picture, 1934

significance to Columbia Pictures

In Columbia Pictures Entertainment, Inc.

…1934 Capra made the hit It Happened One Night, starring Clark Gable and Claudette Colbert; it won the Academy Award for best picture of 1934. Capra’s other comedies for Columbia include Mr. Deeds Goes to Town (1936) and Mr. Smith Goes to Washington (1939). During this same period, Howard Hawks…

Read More

Oscars to

Capra for best director

Colbert for best actress

Gable for best actor

Riskin for best adaptation

role of

Colbert

In Claudette Colbert

…and Capra’s classic screwball comedy It Happened One Night, in which she played opposite Clark Gable. Colbert had been initially reluctant to appear in the slight comedy, but her sparkling performance as a runaway heiress became her most famous and won her an Academy Award. All three films were nominated…

Read More

Gable

In Clark Gable: Stardom: It Happened One Night, Mutiny on the Bounty, and San Francisco

…row”—for the Frank Capra comedy It Happened One Night (1934). The punishment turned out to be a coup for Gable, as the film—the story of a spoiled runaway heiress (portrayed by Claudette Colbert) and the newspaper reporter (Gable) who tries to exploit her story—swept the Academy Awards in all five…

Read More