If there was a Bayern fan that stopped following Munich's team two years ago, he would be confused watching them play right now.

In 2020, at the start of the pandemic, Bayern played MHP Riesen Ludwigsburg and had their power forward Danilo Barthel matching up with overseas rookie Nick Weiler-Babb. And Barthel did everything to make his rookie experience really hard.

This power forward of an opposing team became a primary ball-handler of Bayern Munich, which will try to force the playoff series to Game 5 vs. the regular-season winner Barcelona tonight.

High-reward shift

Nick stole six balls, five of them in six minutes of the first quarter. That's impressive, yes, but there were never any doubts about Weiler-Babb's defensive potential.

He has a rare combination of size, length, athleticism, body control, and game reading, making him a perfect perimeter defender.

According to BBallytics, Weiler-Babb makes the biggest defensive impact among all EuroLeague players.

Weiler-Babb's defensive influence is unquestionable number-wise or based on pure eye-test. The role of the offense is a different topic, though.

But more often than usual, this year, a 26-year-old took ball handler responsibilities, setting up his teammates and himself.

He finished the game against ALBA with a typical stat sheet of Nick Weiler-Babb: 6 points on 3 of 7 shooting, seven rebounds (3 ORB), three assists, six steals (okay, that was not that typical), and one block.

Whether Bayern's point guards Corey Walden and Zan Sisko or other players were sidelined through the marathon of injuries and three covid outbreaks, Trinchieri used Weiler-Babb as his playmaker.

"What is the most common sentence of a player? Coach, let me play," Andrea Trinchieri started his story about Weiler-Babb.

"And this can be everything. Let me play without talking to me, without giving me tasks, busting my balls, without practicing hard. Just let me play," he continued.

"When we signed him from Ludwigsburg, he played like a 4-3. And then we shifted him into a backcourt. But still, I smelled it was not the right thing for him. It didn't fit what he could do. So this season, I make another shift and play him as a point guard. And the reward is very big. The credit goes to him," Trinchieri said.

Nick Weiler-Babb averaged 5.5 points (55.2% 2FG; 25% 3FG), 3.9 rebounds (1.1 ORB); 2.7 assists, 1.2 steals this EuroLeague season.

But some things are hard to measure on paper.

As the 8th best scorer on Bayern's roster, he's the first by +/- in a team that made the playoffs for a second consecutive season.

Such a demanding and detailed coach like Andrea Trinchieri puts him as a primary ball-handler in a fight against the regular-season winners Barcelona, which is one of the best defensive teams in the tournament.

He averages 9.3 points (46.7% 2FG; 50% 3FG), 5.7 rebounds (2.7 ORB), 3.3 assists, and 13.7 PIR in the playoffs.

Weiler-Babb played as a playmaker in the NCAA, but it took a few years in Europe to get this important assignment.

Numerous injuries and covid outbreaks also influenced this shift to a vital position in Bayern. But some things made Trinchieri confident about this re-positioning.

"Coming here last year, I wasn't playing much as a point guard. This year it's been a good transition for me. We had Corey and Sisko as our main point guards most of the season. I was just filling in with somebody sitting out, getting hurt, or getting covid," he added.

"I think the coach saw the potential and me taking care of the ball, not turning it over as much, making good decisions, and being more a pass-first guy than the main scorer. I think that let him put me at a point and trust my decision-making to be a leader on the court," Weiler-Babb said.

"Playing for Andrea helped me to grow as a player. Playing a point guard for this team opened many doors and opportunities," he concluded.

Tough love from Trinchieri

In Trinchieri's eyes, Nick was too laid back, not aggressive or determined enough.

"Push! Attack!" These were things Trinchieri had to remind Weiler-Babb frequently.

The first few months weren't easy. Emilio Kovacic, a former Croatian basketball star and the head of Bayern's player development, helped him a lot.

"I had an approach toward Nick last year a little bit different. I was barking because I saw a lot of potential in him. Things that he didn't believe how good he could be," Trinchieri said BasketNews.

"I'm not the best one to handle players that are laid back. My job here is to maximize the roster. And sometimes to make more than that. If the player's impact is 7, at his best, I need to make it to 8, 9, 10. This is the only way to compete at the highest level in Europe," Bayern's coach continued.

"Sometimes, you have to go against the player daily. Because you have to convince him how good he can be. He's soft-spoken, extremely smart. He knows every player in Europe, he knows every play. When I understood this, I changed my approach to him. I stopped barking. It doesn't mean he will have every good game. Sunday, he was bad. But I believe that we've built something with this shift," Trinchieri explained.

"He's very demanding, aggressive, loud, and outspoken. But this year more than last year, I learned how to take what he says. I think the best thing was learning what to listen to and what not to listen to. He is doing it to push me. He asked me how to coach me better. I asked him how to maximize what he said, not taking anything personally. The second-year being together definitely helped," Weiler-Babb told BasketNews.

His European basketball knowledge comes from his brother Chris.

After a short stint with the Boston Celtics and the Maine Red Claws, Chris Babb headed to Germany, Ratiopharm Ulm, in 2015.

"I like watching European basketball more than trying to stay up to 2-3 in the morning. I just loved the style of the game and that competitiveness how every game matters. Everybody is out there fighting for every possession. I loved to watch it," Weiler-Babb said of the European game.

He is aware of another John Patrick's alumni career path, which is very similar to Nick's.

Thomas Walkup played in Ludwigsburg in 2017-18. Now he tries to contain the top EuroLeague scorer Mike James in the playoffs defending the 2nd seed status with Olympiacos Piraeus. And he's doing pretty well.

"I had talks with John Patrick in Ludwigsburg about Thomas and me having kind of the same path we took," Weiler-Babb smiled.

"Ludwigsburg helped us to get where we are," he added. "We had to talk about it last year when he was in Zalgiris. And this year, we had this connection and similarities to talk about. Us both taking that step in Ludwigsburg didn't happen for no reason. We have a similar path. The game is different, but we also play defense very well. He's on a great team, and I think he's a big part of why Olympiacos are playing really well."

More than a springboard to the EuroLeague: Inside Ludwigsburg's success story

Weiler-Babb still needs to work more on his playmaking skills to follow in Walkup's footsteps.

Extension incoming?

Bayern's sports director Daniele Baiesi went to the Portsmouth Invitational tournament in 2019 and fell in love with Weiler-Babb from the beginning.

The Italian specialist saw Nick's potential to become an exciting player for Europe, so he recruited Weiler-Babb with a three-year project.

However, due to different circumstances, he signed with Ludwigsburg for the 2019-20 season.

The entire situation was very tricky, though. Munich was still working on Maodo Lo's extension. However, Lo reached an agreement with ALBA Berlin, so Bayern needed a new point guard.

Way before the summer of 2020, Zalgiris Kaunas was thinking between Steve Vasturia and Nick Weiler-Babb. But that season, Zalgiris made an early move for Vasturia, and Weiler-Babb became closer to Bayern.

However, Khimki Moscow Region were interested in buying out Thomas Walkup in the off-season. Zalgiris could have easily turned back to Weiler-Babb as his potential replacement.

Walkup finally stayed in Lithuania for his third season, and Bayern signed Weiler-Babb for a buyout from Ludwigsburg.

"He changed his approach to the game. He can do everything both defensively and offensively," Nihad Djedovic, the captain of Bayern, talked about Weiler-Babb.

"He can play wherever he wants. He's that type of a player," Deshaun Thomas, Bayern's 4-man, smiled when asked whether he likes Nick as a power forward or a point guard.

"I like him as a point guard, and I like him as a power forward. Whatever the teams need, he can do. He's so athletic. Athletic guys can do most of the things. He's doing well. He's playing well. People see that. It's going well for our team," Thomas said BasketNews.

Trinchieri still wants him to be more consistent offensively.

But Trinchieri will keep the direction where Weiler-Babb will orchestrate his offense in Bayern.

In a pool of sharks, such an organization as Bayern has to think out of the box. Weiler-Babb is an unpolished project they're developing, but the reward is intriguing.

Big EuroLeague teams were already checking Weiler-Babb for the upcoming free agency. They started recognizing his defensive abilities and his offensive potential as well.

"Honestly, I love it being here in Munich. The past two years were great. I love the city, I love the organization, from Daniele Baiesi to Marko Pesic and Andrea Trinchieri," Weiler-Babb expressed his happiness in Bayern's family.

Bayern's future is in Weiler-Babb's hands now.

Support BasketNews so we could make even better content.