Ysgol John Bright, Llandudno | Fees, Address, Admission, Vacancies, Reviews & More

Ysgol John Bright is a High school in Llandudno with a 2.6 rating.

About Ysgol John Bright

Ysgol John Bright ( High school ) is located at Maesdu Rd, Llandudno LL30 1LF, United Kingdom. It is categorised as : State-Funded.

Other categories: High school

Ratings & Ranking

Ysgol John Bright has a rating of 2.6 and is ranked number 9913 in the UK.

Academic Excellence:

Rated 3 out of 5

School Culture & Environment:

Rated 3 out of 5

Extracurricular Activities:

Rated 3 out of 5

Facilities & Resources:

Rated 3 out of 5

Parent & Community Engagement:

Rated 3 out of 5

2.6/5

Rated 2.6 out of 5

Overall Score

Address & Location

Ysgol John Bright is located at Maesdu Rd, Llandudno LL30 1LF, United Kingdom.

Schools Fees

Given that it is categorised as State-Funded, the school fees for Ysgol John Bright range between 0 GBP and 0 GBP . In Euros, the annual fees range for Ysgol John Bright is between 0 EUR and 0 EUR.

Vacancies:

No vacancies found at the moment.

Admissions:

Admissions are currently open at Ysgol John Bright.

Parents & Students Reviews:

Ysgol John Bright has 11 reviews with an overall rating of 2.6. Some reviews have been edited for clarity.

Overall Rating : 2.6 out of 5.0 stars2.6

Never did my children any favours. No encouragement for one(who is now starting her PhD, and totally mess up my other daughter’s course she still managed to get to university despite that.

At my time being at ysgol john bright I have loads of great memories in that school I’m sad I’m leaving the school but I could always go back and visit my teachers again I’ll miss all my friends as well but at the same rate I can always go and see them again I want to thank school for everything and I’ve learnt a lot while I’ve been in that school fair well ysgol john brights

Not good

Great…

Really modern school

Are you a student or parent at Ysgol John Bright? Please share your experience below:

Your review

Your overall rating

Title of your review

Your review

Your name

Your email

This review is based on my own experience and is my genuine opinion. ​