Previously, I published an article about Silent Hill. I talked about how the game’s story line progressed and how Silent Hill was made into two different movies. One of the conclusions I came to was that Silent Hill is absolutely a horror series with deep emotional tendencies. But, what I didn’t mention was the elements that played a huge part in inspiring the creators of Silent Hill to make it into all of what it has come to be today. If horror isn’t what you are into, it might be a good idea to steer clear. This isn’t to say that the Silent Hill games and movies are terrible, but simply, that Silent Hill has been around since the late 1990’s scaring people and showing us what it means to be afraid. So, if horror is your go to for entertainment, then by all means, grab a copy of one of the Silent Hill games or movies and enjoy the experience.

Inspiration is something we all experience. It helps the artist to create what he intends to bring into the world. It is the flickering flame or a raging fire that keeps your creative spirit flowing. It is very obvious, that the team responsible for creating the Silent Hill series was fueled by great ambition and wanted nothing more than to create one of the best horror franchises in the gaming industry. Many people seem to assume that because Silent Hill was created by Japanese creators, that the inspiration came from different elements throughout Japan, however, almost all of Silent Hill’s inspiration was from Western influences.

If you are a Silent Hill fan, then you are very much aware of Jacob’s Ladder, a movie that is thought to have inspired Silent Hill along with other works. The movie is a thriller/drama that came out in 1990 and follows a character who has lost his child and starts suffering from dissociation. He is also a Vietnam war veteran which is apparent throughout the movie as he tries his best to figure out if he is dreaming or actually living through the strange occurrences happening all around him. Silent Hill always sets up the main character in worlds that he or she doesn’t really understand, leaving them to question whether or not they are immersed in reality or a nightmare.

If you don’t already know, Stephen King is a very popular horror fiction author and was also thought to play a part in the inspiration for some of the games. Specific works of Stephen King thought to have inspired Silent Hill are: The Mist, Carrie, and even the areas in which Stephen King’s novels take place are similar to the areas of Silent Hill.

The TV show Twin Peaks is often referenced as being a major influence for Silent Hill but only vaguely. In the show there is a red world that is very similar to the otherworld in the video game series. Also, both Twin Peaks and Silent Hill take place in a small town with the occult as a major influence.

Another famous inspiration for Silent Hill was the art of Francis Bacon. Art is known for blessing us with inspiration and if you decide to take a look at Francis Bacon’s art, you will understand how some of his most famous works of art inspired the amazing horror franchise.

Silent Hill video games had many different forms of inspiration, however, the movies had different aspects that were inspired by other individual events and places that didn’t fit in with the inspiration for the video games.

————————————-

The first Silent Hill movie came out in 2006. The town in the movie sits over a coal mine that is constantly burning underground.

The inspiration for such a town came from Centralia, Pennsylvania. There exists a theory that Centralia had an idea to start burying trash in the ground, then decided to start burning the trash and in doing so, accidentally set fire to an undiscovered coal mine beneath the town. However, trash being set ablaze is a simple theory and no one really knows for sure what started the fire. Eventually, citizens did have to be evacuated and all of them left, excluding a dozen or so people who, to this day, refuse to move from their homes despite the fire, smoke, and gases that continue throughout the town.

Silent Hill is an amazing video game and movie franchise that has been entertaining people for quite some time and if anyone were to ask when Silent Hill will be done for good, it is fairly obvious, the creators of Silent Hill don’t seem to be keen on letting their horror franchise die down anytime soon, leaving it safe to assume, Silent Hill will be around for a very long time.