Glen Campbell sings "On a Good Night". Super and Donald give a tour of the new Super Dave Senior Citizen's Theatre, which has features specifically built for senior citizens and their needs. The movie playing is Super's "Garbane" fuel demonstration. Super find out the building was renovated, and he wonders what the building used to be. Donald tells him it used to be a Senior Citizen's parking lot.

Rodney McCray from the White Sox is inducted into the Super Dave Hall of Fame, and George Brett and Rocket Ismail are also present for the occasion. Michelle Wright sings "All You Really Want To Do". Donald and Super introduce the Children's TV Hall of Fame area of the compound, and perform "Mr. Osborne's neighbourhood" (A spoof of Mr. Rogers' Neighbourhood) with Super as Mr. Osborne, and Donald as Mr. Conductor, learning about trains. Mr. Osborne visits "Train Land" and also learns not to put his hand on the miniature train tracks, while Mr. Conductor gets locked in the closet. Mr. Osborne tells us an un-child friendly story about a duck named Wilbur.

Super shows his new golf video, featuring Fuji, showing Super's golf tips. Peter Longo, the head of the heavy equipment area of the compound, tries to hit a golf ball off Super's mouth, with unfortunate results. Clarence Clemons plays "Garden of Memories". Super and Fuji give a tour of the Country Western area, where families can come and have a real Wild West experience. Tommy Arbor performs trick riding, and we see Bernie in the general store. Stunt fist fights and gun fights also happen from time to time to entertain the crowd. Super has a shootout with Jimbo North, and he gets shot and flies backwards through a window. He seems to be okay, though, and he explains how the stunt worked using a cable attached to his back and pulled by a car, as well as breakaway glass and mats.

Super tries to open the show with a poem he wrote, but he is interrupted once again by Michel Lauziere trying to impress Super with various tricks. Super Dave shows blooper footage of a girl from the audience who had to do many takes to throw it to Mike Walden. Super and Fuji introduce the new "Home Alone" house based on the hit movie. They have a game where Super plays Kevin, and Fuji and Mike play the robbers. Super stays in the house that's filled with fun traps, and Fuji and Mike will arm themselves with toys from the truck. Every prank Super plays that successfully hits the opponent earns points, and Fuji and Mike score points the further they get in the house.

At the Super Dave International Raceway, Super and Fuji introduce a special race where each car is sponsored by a male celebrity, but driven by a female celebrity. Super demonstrates driving the white pace car, which unfortunately blows up when he starts it. Crystal Gayle sings "Same Old Story". In the hospital, Dr Vargas is in the process of X-raying Super, which turns disastrous when he gets distracted by Mike. The Jeff Healey band sings "Full Circle". Dr Vargas has given Super a clean bill of health, despite him having to relocate a lot of bones, and he is recovering in a hospital room which also sponsored by the celebrities. To make him feel better, Mike shows a flashback of the Super Dave cola car.

Super and Donald open up the new Casino Circus, featuring games where you can win credit at the general store. One of the games is "Stunt Wheel", where you bet on specific stunts to come up on the wheel, and you need to answer a trivia question to win. The demonstration gives us a flashback of the "Atomic Yo-yo" stunt. They also demonstrate the slot machine, which gives a flashback of the "Outdoor Lip Synching Area". Super continues on to "Shoot for the Stars", where you shoot a basket to win money. The tour ends with the "Matilda" game where you sit on one end of a seesaw, and a 4000 pound dummy of a woman falls on the other end and you get launched up and grab a money bag. The dummy moves around, and you have to make it drop at the right moment.

Celine Dion sings "Where Does My Heart Beat Now". Donald and Super open the new Super Dave health expo, and Steven Kolodny shows his latest video compilation. The tour shows exhibits about staying healthy, including weight training, choosing the right shoes, and eating organic food. Dr Gerry Bennett the Heimlich expert helps Super demonstrate the Heimlich maneuver, and Super demonstrates Dr. Bennet's special Heimlich vest with arms that automatically detects when you're choking and performs the Heimlich on the wearer.

Super Dave participated in a contest where you make your own commercial, and he shows a commercial he made for Bugle Boy Jeans. Jeff Dunham performs with Peanut the Woozle. Fuji and Super give a tour of the new Senior Citizen's Amusement Park, which is an amusement park entirely staffed by seniors. He rounds off the tour with the Super Dave Haunted House Ride, which has "Monster Mash" by Bobby Pickett and the Crypt Kickers playing.

Candi and the Backbeat sing "The World Keeps on Turning". At the new Super Dave Ace Award hall of fame, Super has won his own Ace Award Ceremony after waiting so long for it. Fuji and Super give a tour of Super Dave memory lane. We see caricatures of guest stars, Super's outfits, and Super Dave memorabilia. You can even watch video clips of his stunts and check out the actual Ace Award ceremony. Super then dedicates the whole building by signing his name in wet cement in the middle of the building, which will then be sealed up.

Super tries to hold a contest where viewers guess how many bulbs are in the "SD" shown on the billboard, but he is once again interrupted by Michel Lauziere trying to impress the audience with his tricks. On the Super Dave Super Barge SS Super, Fuji helps Super to perform his big stunt to get into the Guinness book of records, where Super will be put in a straitjacket, locked in a safe, put underwater, and will solve a Rubik's cube in two minutes. As an added precaution, explosive charges and communications have been rigged into the safe in case of emergency. Back in the studio, Clarence Clemons performs with his band.

At the Super Dave Rolling Green Acres Memorial Golf Course, the 18th hole has just been finished. As Super plays the hole, Fuji then reveals what the land the final hole is on used to be. In the studio, Super brings a young man, Tony Ford, up on stage for his "Place the Face Contest", where he has to identify photos of celebrities, then play Jerry Lee Lewis' "Whole Lotta Shakin' Goin' On" on the piano. At the Super Dave test track, Fuji helps Super demonstrate the "Ultimate Safety Vehicle". A semi goes through and mows the vehicle down, and Super analyses the collision on his computer to see how much impact each part got in order to improve the safety features. He intends to send the truck through again, but he reads a glitch in the system, and orders the truck not to hit the car.

Fuji and Super open up the new "Super Dave Autograph Pavilion" by having Super sign autographs for little children and asking them their favourite stunt. Super then gives a heartfelt speech about not charging for autographs. Billy Vera sings "At This Moment". At the Super Dave Car Show of the future, Super shows off several cars powered by alternative energy sources, as well as some fancy bicycles. Fuji demonstrates his own invention, the "Friend", which is a car that responds to the owner's requests by tapping a secret code on the surface of the vehicle.

Time once again for the best of Super Dave! As per audience requests, we see the "Star Car", the Super Dave Golf video, the blooper tape of the girl throwing it to Mike Walden, the Senior's amusement park's haunted house, and the Home Alone house. Tony Cox is unable to attend the show, but he sends in his request, for Country and Western days.