In John McTiernan's "Last Action Hero" (Columbia, 1993) young Danny Madigan (Austin O'Brien) is in a 42nd St. New York City grindhouse called the "Pandora" (actually the Empire for exterior shots) when the end of one of his favorite movies, "Jack Slater III," goes way out of focus. The lobby and auditorium scenes were done at the Orpheum, 842 S. Broadway, in Los Angeles. The film is surprisingly funny and what's not to like? It's all about the joy of going to the movies in run-down old theatres.

The movie stars two Arnold Schwarzeneggers. One as the version of himself that we see later in the movie and one as Jack Slater, a fictional character from a series of films he's done. Also featured are F. Murray Abraham, Art Carney, Charles Dance, Frank McRae, Mercedes Ruehl, Robert Prosky as the projectionist, Tom Noonan, Anthony Quinn, Ian McKellen as death, Joan Plowright, Chevy Chase, Chris Connelly and Karen Duffy. The cinematography was by Dean Semler. Eugenio Zanetti was the production designer.

Austin yells upstairs but the projectionist is asleep. He runs to the lobby where we see this lovely snackbar installed for the production.

Heading up the Orpheum's artfully distressed stairs.

Up to the booth.

When Austin enters the booth we're no longer at the Orpheum. The booth there is rather small. The designers crafted a lovely set reminiscent of legit theatres in New York that had booths added up in the second balcony when they converted to movies. We get some nice plaster arches and other fine touches. Robert Prosky plays the projectionist and he's fallen asleep.

Adjusting the focus on the end credits for "Jack Slater III."

Austin looks at the display in the Orpheum's lobby for the upcoming "Jack Slater IV" as he leaves. "Meredith Caprice" is Jack Slater's daughter in the film. She's played by Bridgette Wilson.

We're out on 42nd St. as Austin heads for school. He's been cutting classes and his mother, played by Mercedes Ruehl, will be hearing about it. Robert Prosky has told Austin that he'll be doing a preview run of the new Jack Slater film at midnight. His mother works nights so he knows that he can be there. The "Pandora," as we see from the sign, is about to be demolished so it can be replaced with a new Loew's 10 screen multiplex.

When he gets inside we're back at the Orpheum, with its augmented exit doors. Robert is dressed in the uniform he first wore at the theatre. He started as an usher and worked his way up to projectionist.

Robert has saved a "magic ticket" that he gives Austin and this propels him into the other dimension of the movies. The ticket allows him to enter Jack Slater's world where the heroes always win and any injury the good guys get is never more than a scratch or a flesh wound.

A look up to the booth before the film rolls.

Commandeering a cab on 8th St. with another peek at the Olympic's vertical in the distance.

Back on the streets in a shot looking north on Broadway toward 8th St. The dark marquee of the is down in the next block. We have a number to call if you want to lease the vacant Tower Theatre on the right. But don't bother. It took them two more decades to find a tenant but it finally got leased to Apple for a new store.

The projection booth set:

"My guys built the projection booth (started it at Sony, moved it to the Spruce Goose Dome). Designed by mad genius Eugenio Zanetti, it was meant to represent old projectionist Robert Prosky's home-away-from-home, with all his old posters and paraphernalia. It was very like a legitimate theatre set. A joy to work on!"