INDIANAPOLIS – Warriors forward Al Harrington made no secret that he desperately wanted to put up huge numbers Monday against his twice-former team, the Indiana Pacers.

The only thing he wanted more was for teammate Stephen Jackson to do him one better.

Jackson delivered in bulk, dropping a season-high 36 points on his former employer in a 113-98 victory that breathed new life into a Warriors team that was missing guards Baron Davis and Monta Ellis because of injuries by game’s end.

“I was praying and hoping that one of us had a big game, and I definitely wanted it to be Jack, just because of all the stuff he’s been through, a lot of times being blamed for things that I don’t think were his fault,” Harrington said. “I’m happy we won. It’s the best revenge.”

“I’m not going to lie, it feels good to beat your old team,” said Jackson, who went 4 for 6 on three-pointers and 12 for 13 from the free-throw line. “I told Al that I knew one of us was going to play well tonight.”

The Warriors came in 3-5 after adding Jackson, Harrington, Sarunas Jasikevicius and Josh Powell in mid-January, while the Pacers were 6-2 blending the talents of Troy Murphy, Mike Dunleavy, Ike Diogu and Keith McLeod into their mix. But those numbers meant nothing once the ball went up.

Ellis had 21 points and 10 rebounds for his first double-double of points and rebounds. Harrington finished with 16 points, 10 rebounds and five assists. Andris Biedrins had 10 points and 15 rebounds, helping Golden State beat Indiana 57-42 on the glass.

“We just wanted to come out and be aggressive,” Jackson said. “They’d won six out of seven, and we needed this win because we were two games out of the playoffs.”

With the Denver Nuggets (23-23) losing to the Phoenix Suns on Monday, the Warriors (23-26) are 1 1/2 games out of the eighth and final playoff spot in the West.

With Davis out for what could be several games because of a bruised left knee, Jackson and Harrington filled the void offensively in the first quarter. They combined to evenly split the Warriors’ first 18 points, often torching Dunleavy or Murphy. The stretch was capped by Jackson blowing by Pacers forward Danny Granger at the top of the key and flushing a dunk.

“I think it was really personal (for Jackson),” Biedrins said. “He wanted to kill them. Every time he got the ball, he was really aggressive and he was looking to score.”

Pacers fans, who booed Jackson vociferously every time he touched the ball, got a charge late in the third quarter when Jackson glided in for a seemingly uncontested layup, only for Darrell Armstrong to fly up from behind him and swat it away.

But that was about as much excitement as the 12,736 could muster. Golden State led 34-18 after one quarter, 65-42 at halftime and, at its peak, 73-47 early in the third quarter.

Ellis was knocked out of the game 6 1/2 minutes into the third quarter when he suffered a left-knee contusion. That pushed Jackson into a point-guard role for the first time since he came to the Warriors, and he finished with seven turnovers, the biggest blemish on an otherwise lovely box score.