Archduchess Elisabeth Marie Henriette Stephanie Gisela of Austria, also known as Empress Mother Elisabeth Marié (Hungarian: Erzsébet Mária Henrietta Stefánia Gizella; 2 September 1883 – 16 March 1963) was the wife of Leopold, Prince Imperial and the mother of the future Jerome I of the French. The only child of Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria, and Princess Stéphanie of Belgium. Her father was the son and heir apparent of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria, and her mother was a daughter of King Leopold II of Belgium. She was known to her family as "Erzsi", a diminutive of her name in Hungarian. Later nicknamed The Red Archduchess, she was famous for becoming a socialist and a supporter of the Austrian Social Democratic Party.

Elisabeth quickly won over the hearts of the French for her strong willed and charming personality. Elisabeth was a prominent fashion icon in France, setting an ideal fashion look for French women. As Empress Mother, she continued her charity work and held considerable influence over her son.

Early Life[]

Archduchess Elisabeth, nicknamed 'Erzsi', was born at Schloss Laxenburg on 2 September 1883 to Crown Prince Rudolf and Stéphanie, daughter of King Leopold II of Belgium. She was named after her grandmothers, Empress Elisabeth of Austria and Queen Marie Henriette of Belgium. Erzsi was Franz Joseph's only grandchild through his son.

In 1889, when Erzsi was a little over five years old, her father and Baroness Mary von Vetsera, his mistress, were found dead in what was assumed to be a murder-suicide pact at the Imperial hunting lodge at Mayerling. Her father's death interrupted the dynastic succession within the Austrian imperial family, fractured her grandparents' already tenuous marriage and was a catalyst in Austria-Hungary's gradual destabilization, which culminated in the First World War and the subsequent disintegration of the Habsburg Empire.

After Rudolf's death, Franz Joseph took over guardianship of Erzsi; by his order, she was forbidden to leave Austria with her mother. At a young age she displayed a strong personality, as well as an opposition to the Viennese court.

Her grandmother, the capricious and image obsessed Empress Elisabeth, did not enjoy being identified as a grandmother and was therefore not close to any of her grandchildren. However, after her assassination in 1898, her will specified that outside a large bequest of the sale of her jewels to benefit charities and religious orders, all of her personal property was bequeathed to Erzsi, her namesake and Rudolf's only child. The Empress made no secret of her dislike of her daughter-in-law prior to the scandal, and after the Mayerling incident, blamed Stéphanie's jealous behavior for her son's depression and suicide. The crown princess herself was entirely dependent on the Emperor's charity, therefore the lack of imperial support towards Stéphanie following her husband's death negatively impacted her relationship with her daughter; the parent and child were never close.

In 1900, Stéphanie renounced her title of Crown Princess to marry the Protestant Hungarian Count, later Prince Elemér Lónyay von Nagy-Lónya und Vásáros-Namény. Although Franz Joseph provided her with a dowry and Lónyay eventually converted, Elisabeth broke off all contact with her mother as she disapproved of the marriage, feeling it a betrayal of her father's memory. Later, following her marriage, Stéphanie retaliated by disinheriting Elisabeth in 1934.

Marriage[]

Elisabeth was considered a potential bride for several princes in Europe; among them was her cousin Prince Albert, heir presumptive to the throne of Belgium. However, King Leopold II vehemently disapproved of Stéphanie's recent morganatic marriage to Count Elemér Lónyay and thus refused to give Albert his permission. Albert's sister Henriette was horrified at her brother's choice, feeling Elisabeth's background was too unstable for the marriage to be a success

However, an successful suitor for Elisabeth was Leopold, Prince Imperial, son of Napoleon IV. This said marriage was to eased tension between Austria-Hungary and France. By the behest of Emperors Napoleon IV and Franz Joseph, Elisabeth and Leopold met during his visit to Austria in 1902. Elisabeth was pleased with her groom and Leopold was captivated by her beauty and striking personality. Their engagement was announced later that year in July. They were married in a civil service at the Cathedral of Notre-Dame de Paris on 23 September 1903, one of the biggest royal weddings at the turn of the century.

Princess Imperial (1903—1924)[]

Life at the court of Paris[]

Elisabeth found the French court to be rather more relaxed than the Vienna court, She was also in awe with the fashion style and quickly became adjusted to her new role as Princess Imperial. She would often attend balls, revelations, and banquets with her in laws and husband.

Her marriage to Leopold was considered a success by contemporaries. Even though, they seemed to have first not have a lot in common and Elisabeth had originally mistaken his directness as coldness. However, the two respected each other's interests and became devoted to one another. Empress Beatrice noted that her serious-minded son would often warm up to his vivacious wife.

Elisabeth Marie was noted for her beauty and fashion in France, which many women sought to copy as the ideals fashion for a woman. She also brought over some trensa from Austria, which syncretized with some French trends. Elisabeth was also known to be dedicated to charity work as Princess Imperial to her later years.

Dowager Princess Imperial (1924-1936)[]