Enterprise software giant Oracle has acquired an Irish software company that targets Tier 1 telecoms firms for an undisclosed sum.

Oracle, one of the largest software companies in the world, employs 1,000 people in Ireland and has annual revenues in the region of US$18bn.

West-Dublin-based Netsure will become part of Oracle’s Communications Global Business Unit, which delivers communications-specific applications to service providers worldwide.

The transaction is subject to specific conditions and is expected to close later this month. Financial details were not disclosed.

Netsure’s analytics and business intelligence software has been deployed in Tier 1 operators including Vodafone, Cable & Wireless and Eircom.

The Dublin company’s products support open standards.

“The combination of Netsure’s applications, coupled with Oracle’s leading communications portfolio is expected to provide unmatched and differentiated value to service providers worldwide,” explained Netsure’s chief executive Barry Murphy.

Netsure’s product capabilities combined with Oracle’s network inventory, provisioning, and financial asset management applications, are expected to enable service providers to improve proactive network planning, modelling and optimisation, reducing operational costs and increasing the utilisation and efficiency of both leased and owned network capacity.

“In conjunction with Oracle’s ERP, supply chain, inventory management and network discovery solutions, Oracle plans to provide service providers the ability to improve their network ROI and increase their operational efficiency as they launch, deploy and profit from next-generation IP services,” explained Oracle Senior Vice President and General Manager, Bhaskar Gorti.

The acquisition of Netsure is indication that Oracle’s ongoing acquisitions spree is continuing, with no sign of a slowdown, said Ovum IT analyst David Mitchell.

“The communications industry is strategically important for Oracle, being one of the sectors with a high reliance on IT and, consequently, strong software spend. The latest acquisition is one in a long chain of communications industry acquisitions – HotSip, MetaSolv Software, Net4Call, Portal Software, and Telephony@Work.

Oracle has always been a major software player in the communications industry, with market share dominance in its database technology. The string of acquisitions has turned it an even more significant player in the market,” Mitchell added.

By John Kennedy