Presentation on theme: "Operations Support System"— Presentation transcript:

1 Operations Support System

2 Amdocs The company develops, implements and manages software and services for business support systems (BSS), including billing, customer relationship management (CRM), and for operations support systems (OSS)

3 Amdocs Acquisitions In August 2006, Amdocs purchased Cramer Systems, a Bath, UK based company that provides OSS (Operations Support Systems) "solutions" to telecom operators. The acquisition was reported at US$375 million. This allowed Amdocs to become one of very few companies claiming to offer a complete BSS/OSS product suite. Cramer Systems, combined with existing Amdocs OSS software groups, is now the OSS Division.

4 Oracle Corporation Overall timeline

December 15, 2006: A majority of MetaSolv stockholders approves Oracle's acquisition of MetaSolv Software, a provider of operations support systems (OSS) software for the communications industry.

5 Ericsson - Products and services

Business Unit Support Solutions focuses on Operations support systems/Business support systems (OSS/BSS), TV and media and Mobile commerce (M-Commerce).

6 Ericsson - Business Unit Support Solutions

Initially established in 2007 as Business Unit Multimedia, Ericsson announced a new strategy for its multimedia business in February Business Unit Support Solutions focuses on Operations support systems / Business support systems (OSS/BSS), TV and media and Mobile commerce (M-Commerce). Ericsson claims a leading position in charging and billing, serving 1.6 billion people with its solutions.

7 Ericsson - Systems integration

OSS or Operations Support Systems

8 Quality of service - Applications

Network operations support systems either for the network itself, or for customers' business critical needs

9 GSM - Network structure

* Operations support system (OSS) – network maintenance

10 National Broadband Network - Trial rollout in Tasmania (2010)

Mike Quigley said one of the reasons for the flat rate is the Operations support system|OSS and Business support system|BSS systems was not built to make the process automatic

11 Core network - Other functions

* OM: Operations Maintenance center or Operations Support Systems to configure and provision the core network nodes

12 Spirent - History It disposed of its automotive industry businesses in 1999, the same year that it bought Netcom Systems, a United States|US telecoms Software testing|testing business which makes network equipment testers,[ Bowthorpe ups test role with US buy] Electronics Times, 21 June 1999 and DLS, a Canada|Canadian telecoms Software testing|testing business.[ Bowthorpe buys DLS for $11.1m] Electronics Times, 5 July 1999 In 2000 it also bought Hekimian, a major Operations Support Systems business,[ Spirent buys Hekimian] Company Business and Marketing, January 2001 Zarak Systems, another communications software business[ Spirent Acquires Zarak Systems] Light Reading, 11 September 2000 and Net-Hopper, an access systems specialist.[ Spirent buy is optics boost - Net-Hopper Systems] Electronics Times, 23 October 2000

13 OS/ : Fading out Also, OS/2 was used for the host PC used to control the Public Radio Satellite System|Satellite Operations Support System equipment installed at National Public Radio|NPR member stations from 1994 to 2007, and used to receive the network's programming via satellite.

14 OS/2 - Historical uses OS/2 was used as part of the Satellite Operations Support System (SOSS) for National Public Radio|NPR's Public Radio Satellite System. SOSS was a computer-controlled system using OS/2 that NPR member stations used to receive programming feeds via satellite. SOSS was introduced in 1994 using OS/2 3.0, and was retired in 2007, when NPR switched over to its successor, the Public Radio Satellite System#ContentDepot|ContentDepot.

15 Optical Internetworking Forum - Organization

The scope includes but is not limited to a) planning, engineering and provisioning of network resources; b) operations, maintenance or administration use cases and processes; and c) management functionality and interfaces for operations support systems and interoperable network equipment

16 Service delivery platform - Relationship to SOA

SOAs can be used as an application integration technology within an SDP but are best served when used in the lower performance functions such as connections between the transactional Operations support system|OSS and Business support system|BSS applications and the SDP. SOAs need careful consideration if they are to meet the real time demands placed on the SDP by the converged event type services.

17 Microsoft Customer Care Framework - Agent Desktop

The primary user interface for CCF is the agent desktop. This is a desktop-based user interface (UI) that presents data aggregated from various Line of business (LOB) Operations support system|OSS/Business support system|BSS application front ends and presents them in a unified view. CCF does not include an Agent Desktop application, rather samples including source code are provided as part of the framework.

18 Tuxedo (software) - History

The original development targeted the creation and administration of operations support systems for the US telephone company that required online transaction processing (OLTP) capabilities.

19 Tech Mahindra - Tech Mahindra offices

Its activities spread across a broad spectrum, including Business Support Systems (BSS), Operations Support Systems (OSS), Network Design Engineering, Next Generation Networks, Mobility Solutions, Security consulting and Testing

20 List of software engineering topics - Software applications

**Operations Support System

21 Network resource planning - Next generation services

Furthermore, the importance of coordinating infrastructure investment activities across organizations is addressed to ensure that network capacity is provided when and where it is needed, and that human and Operations Support Systems|operational support system resources are appropriately included in the planning process.

22 *Operations support system used in the telecommunications industry

23 Mobile virtual network enabler

A mobile virtual network enabler (MVNE) [ Gartner Definition][ MVNO Dynamics][ MVNX Definitions] is a company that provides network infrastructure and related services, such as Network Sub systems, Business Support Systems, provisioning, administration and Operations Support Systems to MVNO

24 Quality-of-service - Applications

* Network operations support systems either for the network itself, or for customers' business critical needs

25 TL1 TL1 is used in the input and output messages that pass between Operations_support_system|Operations Support Systems (OSSs) and Network Elements (NEs)

26 AM/FM/GIS - Advantages

* Integration with Operations Support Systems (OSS)

27 Software defined networking - History

ATT wanted a soft switch that could reconfigure physical switches in the network and load them with new services from an Operations support system|OSS

28 Self-organizing network - Centralized SON

In centralized SON (C-SON), function are more typically concentrated closer to higher-order network nodes or the network Operations support system|OSS, to allow a broader overview of more edge elements and coordination of e.g. load across a wide geographic area. Due to the need to inter-work with cells supplied by different equipment vendors, C-SON systems are more typically supplied by 3rd parties like Celcite, Gladiator-Innovations or Cisco.

29 Operations support system

'Operations Support Systems' (OSS), or 'operational support systems' in British usage,See Wikipedia article Operations research. are computer systems used by telecommunications service providers to manage their networks (e.g., telephone networks). They support management functions such as inventory|network inventory, provisioning|service provisioning, configuration management|network configuration and fault management.

30 Operations support system

The acronym OSS is also used in a singular form to refer to all the Operations Support Systems viewed as a whole system.

31 Telecommunications Management Network

Modern telecom networks offer automated management functions and are run by Operations Support Systems|OSS software. These manage modern telecom networks and provide the data that is needed in the day-to-day running of a telecom network. OSS software is also responsible for issuing commands to the network infrastructure to activate new service offerings, commence services for new customers, and detect and correct network faults.

32 List of computing and IT abbreviations - O

* Operations support system|OSS—Operations Support System

33 STS-108 - Scientific experiments

Endeavour's middeck carried home the results of several experiments completed during Expedition 3's stay on the station. These included the Advanced Protein Crystallization Facility, the Dynamically Controlled Protein Crystal Growth experiment and cells from the Cellular Biotechnology Operations Support System (CBOSS).

34 Ericcson - Products and services

* Business Unit Support Solutions (BUSS) develops and delivers software-based solutions for operations support systems/business support systems (OSS/BSS), real-time, multi-screen and on demand TV and Mass media|media as well as solutions and services for the emerging mobile commerce (m-commerce) eco-system.

35 Ericcson - Business Unit Support Solutions

Business Unit Support Solutions develops and delivers software-based solutions for operations and business support systems (Operations support system|OSS and Business support system|BSS), real-time, multi-screen and on demand TV and Media solutions as well as solutions and services for the emerging m-commerce eco-system. Ericsson claims a leading position in charging and billing, serving 1.6 billion people with its solutions.