Council Bluffs, IA is nestled in the southwest of the Hawkeye State. The area was the historic starting point of the Mormon Trail and is a part of the Omaha, NE greater metropolitan region. The Council Bluffs community also has a rich history related to the transnational railroad, the Missouri River steamboat trade, and the Gold Rush.

For those ages 60 and over who are looking to join a safe, active community, Harmony Court in Council Bluffs offers a diverse and enjoyable experience. With us, residents will live fully independent lives full of activities and opportunities to remain social and busy.

A place to enjoy, a place to relax, and a place to study the art of living, Harmony Court is more than a regional senior living facility. For nearly two decades, our dedicated staff have accommodated and cared for all of those who are young at heart!

Council Bluffs, IA is nestled in the southwest of the Hawkeye State. The area was the historic starting point of the Mormon Trail and is a part of the Omaha, NE greater metropolitan region. The Council Bluffs community also has a rich history related to the transnational railroad, the Missouri River steamboat trade, and the Gold Rush.

For those ages 60 and over who are looking to join a safe, active community, Harmony Court in Council Bluffs offers a diverse and enjoyable experience. With us, residents will lie fully independent lives full of activities and opportunities to remain social and busy.

A place to enjoy, a place to relax, and a place to study the art of living, Harmony Court is more than a regional senior living facility. For nearly two decades, our dedicated staff have accommodated and cared for all of those who are young at heart!

At our independent living center for seniors, we strive to create a safe, convenient, and comfortable senior living community that has everything our residents need to remain active, social, and engaged. Harmony Court offers a variety of amenities and activities, setting us apart from other senior apartments and housing facilities in the area.

Stay active, fit, and young with the support and care of the Harmony Court community! Schedule your own private tour with your family and enjoy lunch on us! Call today!

Whether you're interested in transitioning your loved one to senior housing or looking for an apartment for yourself within an active and enriching senior living community, the team at Harmony Court would be happy to welcome you. With two locations within the greater Omaha, NE area, our facilities offer a variety of luxurious on-site amenities, as well as chauffeured transportation services into the city when needed. No matter your personal situation or preferences, when you choose our senior living community, you’ll discover that we work hard to ensure our residents continue to enjoy the art of living.

Call to schedule a private tour of our Council Bluffs, IA location today!

(712) 388-9000