Cyprus PIO: Turkish Cypriot Press and Other Media, 00-10-31

Cyprus Press and Information Office: Turkish Cypriot Press Review Directory - Previous Article - Next Article

From: The Republic of Cyprus Press and Information Office Server at <http://www.pio.gov.cy/>

TURKISH CYPRIOT PRESS AND OTHER MEDIA

No. 209/00 -- 31.10.00

[A] NEWS ITEMS

[01] Ecevit, Dutch counterpart on Cyprus issue, EU membership, ties with Greece.

[02] Turkey/s Gurel on Cyprus/ EU accession.

[03] Turkish Cypriots call on Palestinians, Israelis to end violence.

[04] Denktash leaves for Geneva.

[05] Forged USD banknotes.

[06] Opposition precluded from attending Geneva talks.

[A] NEWS ITEMS

[01] Ecevit, Dutch counterpart on Cyprus issue, EU membership, ties with Greece

Anatolia Agency (14:03 hours, 30.10.00) reports that Turkish Premier Bulent Ecevit explained on Monday Turkey/s opinions on the Cyprus question and Turkish-Greek relations to Wim Kok, the Dutch Prime Minister who is paying an official visit to Turkey, during their meeting.

Ecevit and Kok held tete-a-tete meeting. Turkish Foreign Minister Ismail Cem; Forestry Ministry Nami Cagan; Dick Benschop, the Dutch State Secretary for Relations with the European Union (EU); and the ambassadors of the two countries attended the tete-a-tete meeting.

Following this meeting, the inter-delegationary meetings were held.

Diplomatic sources said that Ecevit informed Kok about Turkey/s policies on the Cyprus question and Turkish-Greek relations in the inter-delegationary meetings.

The diplomatic sources quoted Ecevit as saying, ``a solution on Cyprus is only possible by accepting the existence of the two states''.

Ecevit also said that the economy of the pseudostate is in good condition despite the ``embargo''.

Touching on the Turkish-Greek relations, Ecevit drew the attention to the special situation of the Aegean Sea and informed Kok about the present Turkish policy saying that there are more than one problem regarding this sea between the two countries.

Anatolia (12:06 hours, 30.10.00) further reports that Prime Minister Ecevit and his Dutch counterpart Wim Kok responded to questions of journalists after their meeting.

Expressing his pleasure with hosting Dutch Prime Minister Kok, Prime Minister Ecevit told reporters, ``Wim Kok has made valuable contributions to relations between Turkey and the Netherlands, and relations between Turkey and the EU during his term in office as prime minister''.

Recalling that the Netherlands was among the countries which had rushed to help Turkey in the wake of last year/s devastating quake disaster, Prime Minister Ecevit said that Kok would pay a visit to the quake-stricken area within the framework of his visit to Turkey.

``After Germany and France, the Netherlands is the third country making important contributions to Turkey/s development and industrialization. There are 291 Dutch companies in Turkey. In the first seven months of this year, 228 thousand Dutch tourists came to Turkey to spend their holidays. The number of Dutch tourists increased almost 100 percent compared to the same period last year,'' he said.

Prime Minister Ecevit thanked the Netherlands for its contributions to Turkey/s candidacy to the EU.

He said, ``we are trying to maintain our preparations for full membership to EU at maximum speed''.

When asked, ``Did you explain Turkey/s expectations about the political and social criteria before the announcement of the Accession Partnership Document? Were the issues of capital punishment and education in Kurdish language brought onto the agenda of your meeting?'', Prime Minister Ecevit said, ``we discussed these issues in detail. We informed Kok on measures taken to reach economic targets and adjustment to the Copenhagen criteria''.

Wim Kok, the Dutch Prime Minister, said that it will not be right to give a date for Turkey/s European Union (EU) full membership.

Following the inter-delegationary meetings, Premier Bulent Ecevit and Kok staged a joint press conference.

Kok said that it will be meaningless to wait for more when required conditions are fulfilled for Turkey/s EU membership.

The meetings were held in a very frank and friendly atmosphere, Kok noted.

Kok said that the main message of his visit is to show the pleasure they feel about the perfect relations between Turkey and the Netherlands.

Kok noted that the EU decided that Turkey can become an EU member after it fulfils the required conditions by taking a historical decision at the Helsinki Summit.

He carefully listened to the initiatives that Turkey has done in several fields in the path of the EU during his contacts, Kok stated.

Kok added that Ecevit informed them about not only the economic and social issues, but also the developments marked in human rights, democracy, supremacy of law and minority rights which they call the Copenhagen criteria.

Kok said that the organs of the EU will decide when Turkey will become the EU member.

When asked about whether or not he can predict about the time when Turkey will become the EU full member, Kok said that they should be realistic and that this will mean that they should take seriously the criteria and each other.

Kok noted that the membership is related with the policies that will be determined and the developments which will be recorded by these policies.

The possible time for the start of the full membership negotiations depends on the results of the process that Turkey is undergoing, Kok stated, adding that it will not be right to mention a date.

When asked about the expectations of the EU about Cyprus and the Aegean issues, Kok said that they are pleased about the rapprochement in the Turkish-Greek relations in recent days.

Kok noted that the decisions taken at the Helsinki Summit was the indicator of the developing relations and that otherwise, everything would be harder.

There are more things that should be done, Kok said, adding that despite the negative developments in recent days, significant developments have been marked in the relations.

Kok stated that they support the Cyprus proximity talks held under the auspices of the United Nations (UN).

It is too early to say anything, and they should firstly see the result of the proximity talks, Kok said.

Prior to the press conference, Foreign Minister Ismail Cem and Dick Benschop, the Dutch State Secretary for Relations with the EU, signed the agreement which foresaw the inclusion of Turkey in the technical cooperation programs that contribute to the integration process of the EU candidate countries.

[02] Turkey/s Gurel on Cyprus/ EU accession Anatolia Agency (17:50 hours, 30.10.00) reports that Turkish State Minister

Sukru Sina Gurel, who continues to hold contacts in Hanover, the capital of the Lower Saxsony state of Germany, said on Monday that the European Union (EU) has to fulfil the financial obligations it undertook towards Turkey since 1963.

Speaking in a conference on ``Turkey on the Way to EU'' organized by the Union of European Turkish Businessmen, Gurel said that the real aim of Turkey/s becoming a full member of the EU is to ``reach the international advanced criteria''.

Regarding the full membership of Cyprus to the EU, Gurel said that ``if this is the case, the EU will put the last stamp on the divided Cyprus. I don/t think this will happen.

[03] Turkish Cypriots call on Palestinians, Israelis to end violence According to illegal Bayrak Radio 1 (10:30 hours, 30.10.00), the so-called

foreign affairs and defense ministry of the pseudostate has called on the sides concerned to do al that is necessary to put an end to the loss of lives and the violence in the incidents that have been continuing between Palestine and Israel for some time.

Expressing hope that the agreement reached between the sides at the summit meeting held in Cairo on 16-17 October will be implemented as soon as possible, it added that steps to be taken in that direction will help put a stop to the violence and pave the way to initiatives aimed at preparing the basis for a just and lasting peace.

[04] Denktash leaves for Geneva According to NTV ( a private TV channel in Turkey) (31.10.2000, 9:30 hours)

Turkish Cypriot leader Rauf Denktash, at the head of a delegation, left for Geneva to take part in the 5th round of proximity talks. Prior to his departure Denktash said that they are going to Geneva to defend their ``just case''. He claimed that ``we have come to the point of state-to- state talks'' and added that they want the Greek Cypriots to lift the ``embargoes''.

Besides Denktash the Turkish Cypriot delegation includes the following:

So-called foreign and defence minister Tahsin Ertugrul, so-called presidential under secretary Ergun Olgun, so-called foreign ministry under secretary Osman Ertug, Denktash/s constitutional and legal advisor Prof. Mumtaz Soysal, special political affairs advisor Necati Munir Ertekun, so- called political affairs director, Mustafa Evran, and so-called foreign ministry second secretary Gizem Korhan.

[05] Forged USD banknotes According to KIBRIS (31.10.2000) Denktash/s ``police'' have arrested two

people in the occupied Vasilia village, Kyrenia, in whose possession they found 49,800 forged USD 100-dollar banknotes.

The two suspects Can Atay (33) and Erol Dere (30) who arrived in the occupied area from Turkey as tourists, were staying at the ``Simena Holiday Village'' in the occupied area.

[06] Opposition precluded from attending Geneva talks YENIDUZEN (31.10.00) reports under banner headlines that the so-called

government in the occupied area precluded the representatives of the opposition parties from attending as observers the 5th round of proximity talks to begin tomorrow in Geneva.

YENIDUZEN reports that the ``council of ministers'' did not give the reasons for this decision which is contrary to the ``government/s'' stated aim for transparency.

From the Republic of Cyprus Press and Information Office (PIO) Server at http://www.pio.gov.cy/