Data networking hardware manufacturer Ascend Communications Inc, yesterday announced plans to sell off the computer division of Stratus Computer Inc to the unit’s management team in a deal worth between $100m and $150m. The new private company, to be called Stratus Computer Inc, will include all the division’s 950 employees and is expected to generate about $275m in annual revenues, according to Steve Kiely, president of the current division within Ascend and president and CEO elect of the new Stratus. Under the deal, the management team will partner with an investment firm, Investcorp, to purchase the company. Although Kiely said he couldn’t disclose a specific purchase price, he said that Stratus managers would own less than 5% of the equity in the new company. The announcement to spin off the unit hasn’t come out of the blue. When Ascend acquired Stratus back in August 1998, the company said it planned to divest itself of all the non-telco units throughout 1999 and yesterday’s news is the first of the expected spin-offs. In an official statement Monday, Ascend said two other non-telco divisions; TCAM and S2, would also be sold off some time later this month. Stratus specializes in Signalling System 7 (SS7) software and technology as well as making high-end, fault tolerant server systems, designed to enable the integration of voice on data networks. The latter is a rapidly growing market which Ascend, and the likes of its competitors, Cisco Systems Inc and 3Com Corp, are all desperate to get into. Since the acquisition, the Alameda, California- based Ascend has used Stratus’s SS7 technology to create its Ascend SS7 gateway. Once it’s divested itself of the unwanted units, Ascend will be left with 600 Stratus staff, who will continue the development and integration of Stratus’s fault tolerant technology. The technology is strategically important to Ascend if it wants to get into the voice market, Kiely told ComputerWire yesterday, up until now, data networking hasn’t supported 100% availability, but the voice network is different, you have to offer dial tone round the clock. Kiely said Stratus Computer would continue to sell into the same markets as it did under Ascend, notably the financial, securities, healthcare and emergency services agencies, but that, as part of the agreement, the company wouldn’t market or sell products to any other voice or data networking company. Kiely added that Ascend also plans to outsource the manufacturing of its hardware products to a third party company, which will then supply boxes to both Ascend and Stratus Computer. He said that the new company would continue to work with Ascend on R&D and on joint marketing initiatives with both TCAM and S2, once the divisions have been spun off.