Telecommunications-gear maker Ascend Communications announced Monday it has agreed to buy Stratus Computer for US$822 million in stock, a move that expands Ascend's offerings to telephone companies.

Until now, Ascend has specialized in devices that carry data through computer and telecommunications networks. Increasingly, though, telephone companies are looking for vendors that have gear that can handle both data and voice telephone calls in one box. With Stratus' gear, Ascend will be a more effective competitor to the likes of Lucent Technologies and Northern Telecom, until now the chief suppliers to the phone companies.

"Ascend realizes that the voice and data convergence that everybody's been talking about is starting to happen, at least in the corporate acquisition stage," said Dataquest networking analyst John Armstrong. "Ascend was probably under pressure to maintain some parity [with rivals] in the marketplace."

Under terms of the transaction, Ascend (ASND) will issue 0.75 of its shares for each share of Stratus (SRA). Based on Ascend's 31 July closing price of $44.47, the company would pay Stratus shareholders $33.35 per share, a 15 percent premium over Stratus' 31 July closing price of $28.88. The companies expect the transaction to be completed by the fourth quarter of this year.

Ascend also said it expects the acquisition to improve its earnings. Stratus will help Ascend post earnings of $1.70 a share in 1999, 14 cents above the analysts' consensus estimate, according to Zacks Investment Research. The disclosure eased some of the pressure on Ascend's stock, which started sliding Thursday when reports of the acquisition were leaked.

Ascend shares rose $2.34, or 5.3 percent, to $46.81 on the Nasdaq. Stratus shares jumped $4.88, or almost 17 percent, to $33.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.

Stratus makes computers that handle large numbers of transactions. Its key technology is Signaling System Seven (SS7) hardware and software, which form the heart of the existing telephone networks. The computers help connect thousands of telephone calls a minute and handle telephone features like call waiting, caller ID, and voice mail.

Stratus also makes computers to run the back office operations of stock exchanges. As part of the acquisition, Ascend will sell off Stratus businesses that don't have anything to do with telecommunications.

Ascend's purchase comes shortly after its competitors made similar acquisitions to beef up their voice and data integration capabilities. Northern Telecom (NT) in June agreed to buy Bay Networks (BAY), and Cisco Systems (CSCO) purchased switch maker Summa Four (SUMA) last month.

Ascend plans to integrate the SS7 gateways with its existing line of data networking equipment to provide voice and data solutions to telephone carriers, Internet service providers, and large corporate customers.

"This technology allows the Ascend equipment to interface with the existing telephone network," said William Rabin, an analyst with JP Morgan Securities. "This makes Ascend's products a lot more valuable immediately because they are accessible to more customers."

Rabin said he expects Ascend's shares to continue to regain ground, once investors realize Stratus' business really does fit with Ascend's.