Ascend Communications CEO Mory Ejabat plans to sell as much as US$4.75 million worth of his company's shares, just as the stock is hovering nearing a 12-month high and as speculation swirls that Ascend is about to make a big acquisition.

Earlier this week and on 17 July, Ejabat filed documents with the Securities and Exchange Commission showing that he plans to sell a total of 90,000 Ascend shares. It's unclear whether he has sold any yet.

Ejabat's decision comes at a time when Ascend's stock is recovering from a yearlong lull. It also comes amid reports that Ascend is about to announce plans to buy Stratus Computer for about $800 million, an acquisition that could affect Ascend's earnings and stock.

Six calls to Ascend's public relations department went unanswered. Ejabat's assistant referred calls back to public relations.

Ascend (ASND) makes telecommunication devices that shuffle information through computer and telephone networks. The company's stock began to descend last August from about $55 to a low of $22 in November, when the company warned of slowing growth because of Asia's economic woes and its own marketing missteps. Ascend also had trouble swallowing Cascade Communications, a rival networking firm it bought in June 1997.

Since January, Ascend's stock has been recovering.

But on Friday, Ascend shares fell after Bloomberg News and the San Jose Mercury News reported that Ascend is about to buy computer maker Stratus (SRA).

Ascend shares closed down $7.03, or 14 percent, at $44.47 on the Nasdaq. Stratus rose 88 cents to $28.88.

Ejabat has been selling shares regularly for the past few months. In May, April, and February, he sold 50,000 shares each month, according to insider selling tracker CDA/Investnet.

Here’s What Happens When You Give People Free Money

OpenResearch released the first results of the most comprehensive study on giving unrestricted cash grants to impoverished Americans. Researchers say it will flame both sides of the debate over welfare.

How IT Departments Scrambled to Address the CrowdStrike Chaos

System administrators and their teams sprang into action last Friday and worked tirelessly to get their companies back online amid one of the worst digital blackouts ever.

SearchGPT Is OpenAI’s Direct Assault on Google

The company behind ChatGPT is expanding into search, and leaning heavily on its relationships with publishers.

Google DeepMind’s Game-Playing AI Tackles a Chatbot Blind Spot

Google’s new advance combines a large language model with a self-learning AI. The technique could address some shortcomings with AI—although there’s a catch.

The ACLU Fights for Your Constitutional Right to Make Deepfakes

States across the US are seeking to criminalize certain uses of AI-generated content. Civil rights groups are pushing back, arguing that some of these new laws conflict with the First Amendment.

At the Olympics, AI Is Watching You

A controversial new surveillance system in Paris foreshadows a future where there are too many CCTV cameras for humans to physically watch.

Cars Are Now Rolling Computers, So How Long Will They Get Updates? Automakers Can’t Say

Phones are supported well beyond their average ownership lifetime. In stark contrast, automakers are struggling to work out how long their “smartphones on wheels” can be kept on the road.

Toyota Pulls Off a Fast and Furious Demo With Dual Drifting AI-Powered Race Cars

Algorithms designed to handle a car after it loses traction could potentially intervene on behalf of human drivers.