Charlestown Business and Home Security

American Alarm’s History in Charlestown

Based in New England since 1971, we’ve worked in the Charlestown area for decades. We know the landscape and we have good relationships with local police and fire officials. Our team of employees (200 strong and growing) live in the communities we serve, this means our customers are our neighbors.

Charlestown History

Prior to settlements, Charlestown was referred to as “Mishawum” by natives. The first settlers arrived in 1624, when Governor John Endecott sent others to map out a settlement. Charlestown wasn’t incorporated until 1847, when it was named after the Charles River which borders it to the north. About thirty years later, it was annexed by Boston, becoming the oldest neighborhood of Boston.

What Charlestown is known for…

After the original settlement was established, Charlestown became one of the largest cities in Massachusetts, and contained Arlington, Burlington, Cambridge, Everett, Malden, Medford, Melrose, Somerville, Stoneham and Woburn which would all eventually secede.

The settlement saw continual growth through the eighteenth century, and by the time of the Revolutionary War, there were over 2,000 settlers and 400 buildings. Following the Battles of Lexington and Concord, British forces went to Charlestown only to fight a much larger battle, in the Battle of Bunker Hill, where over 5,000 soldiers saw battle. Today it is commemorated by the Bunker Hill Monument, an obelisk which stands 221 feet tall. After the war, Charlestown went through a reconstruction and thirteen wharves were built so that the trade industry could blossom. The U.S. Navy set up a yard in 1800, and became one of the largest employers for over a century. Between the 1830’s-1870’s, the population of Charlestown tripled, and most immigrants that came to Charlestown were Irish and made up a lot of the culture now associated with Charlestown.

Short List of Historic Places or Recreation Spots

One of the main historical draws of Charlestown is the Freedom Trail; a two and a half mile trail connecting important historical sites throughout Boston. The first stop on the trail is Boston Common, America’s oldest public park which was established in 1634. Also located in Charlestown is the USS Constitution which is also the final stop on the trail. The USS Constitution is the oldest commissioned warship in the world after first sailing in 1798.

Famous People from Charlestown

Shawn Thornton, is a Left Wing for the Boston Bruins. Since coming to Boston for the 2007-2008 season, he has been embraced by Bruins fans for his enforcer role on the team. Thornton and his family currently live in Charlestown.

Howie Long is a retired NFL star who was selected for eight All-Star games before retiring in 1993. Long has three sons the oldest two, Chris and Kyle were both selected in the first round as Offensive Lineman. Prior to high school, Long lived in Charlestown where he was born.

Nathaniel Gorham was a merchant and politician who spent almost his entire life in Charlestown. Gorham’s biggest claim to fame is that he served as president of the Continental Congress after serving as a delegate.

Charlestown Helpful Links

http://charlestown.patch.com/

http://www.cityofboston.gov/neighborhoods/charlestown.asp

http://www.cityofboston.gov/police/districts/a1.asp