Frank D. Gilroy’s drama about a middle-aged, middle class, childless Brooklyn Heights couple stuck in an unhappy marriage. Starring Shirley MacLaine, Kenneth Mars and Chris Gampel.

Adapted from the novel of the same name by Paula Fox, which was published a year earlier, the story concerns Sophie Brentwood (Shirley MacLaine) who is down in the dumps, and not without decent reason.

Her gang of pals is collapsing, her Brooklyn, New York area is in abrupt decline and her marriage to an enthusiastically closed-off attorney named Otto (Kenneth Mars) is crumbling.

Sophie attempts to reach out to old acquaintances and her husband’s former partner (Chris Gampel), but these attempts ultimately leave her feeling even more isolated. She dreadfully hopes a weekend…

Be it SHAMUS (73), THE SENTINEL (77), WINDOWS (80), PRIZZI’S HONOR (85), MOONSTRUCK (87) or any Italian-produced cheapie that uses Brooklyn Bridge environs for a dash of American color I'm taken with movies shot in or near my neighborhood. An article about DESPERATE CHARACTERS author Paula Fox in the New York Times, which used a still of Hicks Street taken from the film adaptation, intrigued me, not that Fox nor star Shirley MacLaine (who does a rapey nude scene toward the end) much cared for it.

I can see why--it's stilted and "literary" and slow-going even at 87 minutes, though a coiled and largely reactive MacLaine and Kenneth Mars (in an unlikable part no star would touch) are very good…

The lack of attention for Desperate Characters has been disheartening since this is a very solid, well-made film with many strong ideas and a sense of complexity that indicates a remarkable amount of depth and nuance, the likes of which we may be surprised to find contained in such a small, relatively unassuming film. It is certainly not a film that has been particularly appreciated, especially in terms of the influx of character-driven dramas that took a more simple approach during this period – and it isn’t helped by the fact that it covers some very bleak subjects, which are far from comforting or endearing, which can sometimes keep us at arm’s length – but as one of the more…