Died MURCELL. -- On Tuesday evening last, after a lingering illness, borne with Christian resignation to the Divine will, Elias, son of Mr. Charles MURCELL, aged 27 years. The funeral of the deceased will take place on Saturday afternoon. Bazaar Notice It is intended to hold a BAZAAR, or SALE OF WORK in November, for the purpose of raising funds to repair the windows and increase the sittings in St. Stephen's Church, Greenspond. The following persons who form the Committee will gladly receive any help towards this object: -- Mrs. Geo. BLAKE, Mrs. D. BLANDFORD, Miss E.A. BLANDFORD, Mrs. S. SHAW, Miss EDGAR, Mrs. Wm. POND. New Church Opening New Methodist Church Twillingate. The new Methodist Church, North-side, Twillingate, will be opened (D.V.) on Sunday, Sept, 4th, 1881 when sermons will be delivered in the morning at 11 by the Rev. W.W. PERCIVAL., Financial Secretary, St. John's District. In the afternoon at half-past two W. W. WATERMAN, Esq., of Pool, England and in the evening at half-past 6 by Rev.. James PINCOCK, of Morton's Harbor. Sermons will also be preached in the Methodist Church, South-side, in the morning at 11 o'clock by the Rev. Jas. PINCOCK, and in the evening at half-past six, Rev. W.W. PERCIVAL. Collections will be taken up. Sept 1. Politics A communication from Alex J.W. McNEILY, Esq., Speaker of the House of Assembly, on the subject of the Railway, unavoidably remains over for next week. Man Saved A man fell in the water off Mr. WREY's wharf last night, and had it not been that Constable Lacey happened to be near to render assistance, the result of his ""dip"" might have proved serious. Mill Accident We learn that an accident of a melancholy kind occurred at Mr. PHILLIP'S mill, Exploits, Burnt Island, one day last week. While one of the men was at his post of duty he was accidentally caught in a wheel going with great rapidity close by, and was immediately drawn through certain parts causing instant death, one of his legs and other portions of him, being fractured to atoms. the poor fellow, we learn, belonged to Nova Scotia. The Weather A Bonavista correspondent says that the weather has been disagreeable there for a long time. Four English vessels and several schooners are waiting for fish. He also informs us that a little was done with catching fish there last week. The average catch for the season is fair; but a good deal of fish has been spoiled in consequence of bad weather. All the boats have returned from Straits and French Shore loaded and some have left for the second trip. Fish Export The English schooner ""Goonlaze"", Capt. BEAL sailed for a foreign market last week with a cargo of fish from the firm of E. DUDER, Esq. The ""Faith"" also sailed for Lisbon on Tuesday evening, from the firm of Messrs. W. WATERMAN & Co., with 2,500 qtls.. of fish. Steamer Arrival The coastal steamer ""Plover"", Capt. S. BLANDFORD, with mails, passengers and freight, called here on Wednesday forenoon. Appended is the list of passengers from St. John's:-- For Bay-de-Verd - Mrs. O'REILY. For Trinity - Mr. J.M. GREEN, Master VEITCH and Miss GILLAN. For Catalina - Mrs. CONNORS, Rev., A. WOOD, Miss HANLAN, Mr. BOGAN. King's Cove - Miss ENERETT and Miss KELLY. Greenspond - J. BRIEN, Dr. SKELTON, Mr. FENELON, Mr. SKIFFINGTON, Mrs. OSMOND, J.L. TAYLOR, Master BRIEN, Mr. SYME. Fogo - Mr. MUTCH, Mrs. BRETT, T. REES. Twillingate - Rev. Mr. PERCIVAL, Mr. SCOTT, Mrs. JACOBS. Little Bay - Miss DAVIS, Mr. J. LEMESSURIER, Capt. CLEARY. Seal Bay - Mr. MACKIM. Bett's Cove - Mr. SHEPPARD, Miss SHEPPARD. Tilt Cove - Rev. Mr. MYERS. Red Bay - Mr. PENNY. Battle Harbor - Mr. WILLIAMS, Mr. MITCHELL, Mr. M.A. HUDSON; 20 in steerage. From Twillingate: - For Little Bay Island - Mrs. STRONG, Miss RICE and Miss LINFIELD, Mr. and Mrs. McCOLM, Mr. R. WATSON, Miss HINDER. Little Bay - Mr. MORRIS. Tilt Cove - Mrs. and Miss ROTH. Lecture From an announcement in another column, it will be seen that the Rev. W.W. PERCIVAL will lecture in the Temperance Hall to-morrow (Friday) evening; to commence at eight o'clock. The subject will be; ""Hoe Your Own Row. " The lecture was delivered before a large audience in the St. John's Athenaeum hall lately. In referring to it, the Evening Telegram of Friday last says:-- The first of a series of lectures under the auspices of the Young Men's Christian Association was delivered in the Athenaeum Hall last evening by the Rev. W.W. PERCIVAL. Notwithstanding the unfavorable state of the weather, a large and highly respectable audience greeted the reverenced gentleman on this, the occasion of his first appearance before the St. John's public in the role of a lecturer. The subject - ""Hoe Your Own Row"" - was handled in a very interesting manner, and for the space of one solid hour sublime truths, clothed in the most appropriate and expressive language, flowed like a rippling stream from the talented gentlemen's lips. Ship Departure The ""Mary Parker"", Capt. CARTER, left for St. John's last Saturday with a cargo of fish and oil. The following took passage by her: - Messrs. R. LEWIS and James J. MILLEY, Misses Sarah SALTER, Hannah SALTER, Mary ROBERTS and Jane ROBERTS. Whale Caught A whale about 22 feet long, was caught in a net by Mr. KEEFE, Wild Cove, near Little Harbor, one day last week. Sheep Killed Destruction of Sheep By Dogs. - Four valuable sheep, belonging to Mr. CLARK, Back Harbor, were destroyed by dogs, on Monday night last. The law having reference to such veracious animals found at large should be strictly enforced. Ship Departure The English schooner ""Zeal"", sailed for a foreign market on Tuesday last with a cargo of fish from the firm of E. DUDER, Esq. Ship Arrival The ""Annie Harris,"" Capt. JORDAN, arrived from Cadiz this morning to the firm of Messrs. OWEN & EARLE. She anchored a short distance outside the premises of the consignees, and having afterwards left the position to go nearer the wharf, she grounded on the Harbor Rock where she remains as we to go press. The Railway The following telegram from St. John's via Trinity was received last mail: ""St. John's, Sept. 12th. 1881. Please publish with my authority, that to prevent disappointment and expense, no Green Bay men should come here seeking Railway employment. The agent tells me they will not be employed 'till the line gets to the Bay. All recommendations worthless. Alex. J. McNeily""" Ship Arrivals Arrivals From Labrador.- The ""Five Brothers"", YOUNG, master, and the ""Erebus,"" VATCHER, master, arrived from Labrador on Monday morning, the former with 440 and the latter with about 400 qtls. The Five Brothers was as far north as Ra a, some 250 miles below Hopedale. The weather there was very cold, the hills having been covered with snow long before leaving. She reports many of the craft poorly fished. Ship Arrival The steamer ""Hercules"" arrived here from St. John's on Friday evening last on her way to the mining settlements. Among her passengers we noticed the Hon. E. WHITE and John STEER Esq. The Hercules touched into port, returning to the Metropolis on Monday night, when W. STIRLING, Esq., M.D. came passenger by her from Little Bay. Religious Personal. - The Rev. J. EMBREE, Chairman of the Bonavista District, came by last ""Plover"" intending to visit Herring Neck and Change Islands, and to arrange matters in connection with the District. The Rev. T. W. ATKINSON, took passage by same steamer on Tuesday night purposing to visit the Horse Islands and other parts of White Bay, where members of his congregation have been residing for a long time without enjoying religious privileges. Ship Departure The coastal steamer ""Plover"" arrived here on Tuesday night, with mails and passenger. Remaining her usual time, she left for Labrador, touching at the various ports of call en route. The following are the names of the passengers from St. John's: -- Old Perlican - Mr. MARCH. Trinity - Mr. ROBINSON. Bonavista - Dr. SKELTON. Greenspond - Mr. NORTHFIELD. Fogo - Miss ROUSE, Mrs. FINILY and child, Miss J. RIELY. Twillingate - Miss E.R. MARTIN. Tilt Cove - Miss FOX and Mr. J. LINBERG. Salmon River - Mr. P.H. SWEET. Lance au Loup - Mr. WYATT; 20 in steerage. From Bonavista - Rev. J. EMBREE. Ship Arrival The steamer ""Leopard"", having on board the Judge and suite arrived here on Sunday evening. The following are on circuit this year: His Lordship Mr. Justice HAYWARD, Sheriff BEMISTER, Mr. L.W. EMERSON, Clerk of the Court, and Messrs. WALSH and EMERSON, Barristers-at-Law. Arrival of Premier Sir William WHITEWAY, Premier, arrived at St. John's from England, per ""Hibernia"" on the morning of Wednesday, the 7th. inst. A large number of citizens greeted him on his arrival and in the evening a torch-light procession was formed, and headed by a band they proceeded to Sir William's residence and presented him with the follow ...................... Lost Lost Berry Picking. -- An old woman aged eighty years, and her grand daughter five years old, at Chance Cove, Placentia Bay, went over the hills, on the 13th ult., picking berries, and have been absent from their home ever since. Parties have gone out searching for them, but failed in finding any trace of them except a child's foot-print four miles from where they started. It is thought they must have lost themselves in the woods and have perished. -- St. John's Patriot, Sept. 5. Death Take Notice. -- On the 13th December last Miss Fanny COLEMAN, aged 44 years, a native of this town, died at the New Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, Scotland. As no clue to her relatives can be obtained by a party in town who has made careful inquiry, if this should meet the eye of any relative we shall be glad to furnish the name of the gentleman, and he or she may hear of something to their advantage from him. We will be obliged if the other newspapers in the colony will copy this paragraph. -- St. John's Times. The Courts Court News. -- Before Magistrate BERTEAU. Tuesday, Sept. 20. - R. WREY having been summoned by Sergeant Wells for breach of License Act, sections 21 and 25, was fined 10 dollars and costs. Wednesday, Sept. 21. - T. HUNT of Catalina, drunk and disorderly, fined one dollar and costs, being the first offence. Marble Quarrying Marble. -- Lately we have been put in receipt of specimens of marble, from the marble quarry which is now being worked at Burn Bay. It appears to be of a fine quality, and some who profess to be acquainted with the like, pronounce it to be equal to any that can be produced in Europe or America. The quarry is being worked by four or five men, under the superintendency of Capt. McCLENAN, to whom is due the credit of bringing it to its present prosperous condition. Already we understand, considerable quantities have been excavated, and one shipment made. It is intended, we learn, to continue operations through the winter when several work-men will be employed in the quarry. The energy and perseverance which foreign speculators display in developing our resources and bringing the hidden treasures to light, which for centuries have been dormantly concealed, must be commended, and we trust that those interested in this undertaking may be amply rewarded for the outlay necessarily attendant upon a speculation of the kind. Schooner re-floated The English schooner ""Annie Harris"", which arrived from Cadiz to Messrs. OWEN & EARLE on Thursday last, and which grounded on the shoal near Harbor Rock, floated off soon afterwards without sustaining the least damage. The water was low at the time the vessel was going in, and being deeply laden she just caught on the shoalest part. Religious The New Methodist Hymn Book may be obtained at the Methodist Parsonage, Twillingate; from 1s and ea. upwards. -- Adv. Fishery We were wrongly informed last week as to the quantity of fish brought back by the schr. "Ebreus"", VATCHER, master. Instead of 400 qtls. as reported it should have been about 250. Fishery During the past week several of the Labrador fleet have returned, bringing small catches. A few have done well but the greater bulk have fared badly. The weather there of late has been very disagreeable, and at times considerably retarded the fishery operations. The Weather A continuance of unpropitious weather has been experienced here for some time past, which has completely prevented the curing of fish. It has been rather cold with wind North - East, and early this morning light snow - showers were experienced. Measles We understand that measles are prevalent at Little Bay Mines. A short time since there were upwards of one hundred cases, which through the medical skill of Dr. STAFFORD, have resulted favorably. Ship Arrival The coastal steamer ""Plover"", en route from St. John's, called here on Monday evening, having on board a large number of passengers from the North. The following is the list: -- Mr. WHYTER and family from Salmon River. Mr. JOYCE from the Straits. Lieut. VERY...., Messrs. SMITH and WILLIAMS from Battle Harbor. Capt. WHITE and Mr. STEER from Tilt Cove. Messrs. MALCOMB and LOWEL from Bett's Cove. Messrs. O'NEAL, McKAY, McBAIN, MONROE and Miss DUNN from Little Bay. Mrs. PIPPY from Little Bay Island. Messrs. CRANE, WINSOR and CAMPBELL from Exploits. Rev. J. EMBREE, Mrs. PAYNE and Mrs. DURRELL from Twillingate; 80 in steerage. For Twillingate from the North. - Rev. T.W. ATKINSON, Miss STERLING, Mrs. SPENCER and Mr. WALSHMAN. Advertisement Information Wanted. If any of the next of kin to James STARKIE, who died in Newfoundland about 45 years ago, are living they will hear something to their advantage on communicating with the undersigned. A.O. HAYWARD. St. John's, Sept. Local and General Mr. J.T. CROUCHER, of Fogo, will receive subscriptions for this paper in that direction, and all amounts paid him will be duly acknowledged. The Mails per ""Plover"" will close at 5 o'clock on Saturday evening. Ship Departure The coastal steamer ""Plover"" came here early on Wednesday morning, and after remaining two hours, left for the other ports of call North, proceeding as far as Battle Harbor, this being her last trip to Labrador for the season. The Fishery All the Morton's Harbor craft have returned from the Labrador, the greater part of them having been fairly successful. We are glad to learn that all the vessels owned and fitted out for the Labrador fishery by M. OSMOND, Esq., have been fortunate in securing respectable catches of the ""finny tribe"", the average catch per man being over 50 qtls., which must be looked upon as good for so many craft, considering the short catch for the season. Letter The following news items are from a private letter from Bonavista, dated Sept. 26th: -- ""The Judge and suit have been here since Saturday. Court opened to day. Grand Jury addressed by his Lordship. They were congratulated on the absence of crime, &c., and dismissed. Only one or two cases to come before the Court this year and these of a trivial nature. " ""Six or seven of the smaller craft have returned from the French Shore with full fares. This is the second trip with them. On the whole we are inclined to think that the voyage is rather above an average in this place. Our Labrador fleet is reported as having little or nothing. On Sabbath afternoon a young man named George ABBOTT, who was a member of the I.O.G.T. Order, was buried with Good Templar honors. The brethren accompanied the remains to the Methodist Church, where a very effective sermon was preached by the Rev. G. BULLIN and from thence to the grave. "" Religious Personal. -- The Rev. William TEMPLE, arrived here in the mission yacht ""Snowdrop"", on Tuesday last, from White Bay where for the past twelve months he has been zealously working in the holy office to which (he) has been called. We are glad to see him looking so well after encountering the hardships peculiar to the performance of the important duties connected with his mission. We are also pleased to see with us, J.G. LUCAS, Esq., Sub-collector of H.M. Customs, of Fogo, who came here by ""Plover"" on Wednesday morning. Shipping A cargo of provisions, &c., arrived from St. John's to Messrs. HOLDER & LINFIELD on Monday last. The ""Restem"", Capt. FRENCH, came from same place on the previous day, to J.B. TOBIN, Esq., with general cargo. The ""Mary Parker"", Capt. CARTER, also returned on Tuesday, making rather a long passage from St. John's, having been wind bound in Catalina for some days. Religious The Rev. J. PINCOCK, of Morton's Harbor, occupied the pulpits of the Methodist Churches on Sunday last, preaching on the North-side in the morning, and on the South-side in the evening. His discourses were earnest and practical, and were listened to by large and attentive congregations. He also preached at Little Harbor in the afternoon. The Rev. Mr. ATKINSON conducted the services at Morton's Harbor. Religious A Munificient Collection. -- On Sunday last the sum of £257 was taken up in the Roman Catholic Churches towards the support of the orphans of St. Michael's, Belvidere. This speaks volumes for the whole generosity of our Roman Catholic citizens who are very foremost in works of charity. -- St. John's Times. Ship Arrival The schooner ""Young Builder"", ROBERTS, master arrived from St. John's to J.B. TOBIN Esq., on Tuesday mooring with a cargo of provisions, having left St. John's early Monday thus making a very quick run. Appointment The St. John's Evening Telegram of the 26th. Sept. says:-- ""We learn from the London Times of the 12th. that Lieut. Malcolm DRUMMOND, Grenadier Guards, has been appointed Aide-de-Camp to Lieut-General Sir H.F.B. MAXSE, Governor of Newfoundland"". The Weather For the past three weeks the weather has been most unsettled and unsatisfactory as far as fish-curing and craft movements are concerned, and at the present time we are realizing a cold damp atmosphere which is very detrimental to the general interests of the people. On the 22 nd. ult., we had the first appearance of wintry weather, in the shape of a heavy shower of snow, and this morning the early risers were greeted by a white mantle all over the ground which, however, quickly disappeared as the sun rose. Several craft from White Bay and French Shore were detained over a week waiting for a favorable time to get home, but we hope that e're this, they have arrived safely to their destinations. Shooting Serious Shooting Affair at Bay of Islands. -- Advices from Humber Arm, Bay of Islands, state that much excitement prevails there in consequence of a fatal shooting affair which occurred yesterday. It seems that owing to some cause or other, at present unknown here, a mis-understanding arose between the Captain of the schooner ""Speculator"" and one of his crew, during which the Captain became excited and drawing a revolver, shot the seaman in the right side. The bullet entered just below the ribs, passed through the body and lodged close to the skin on the left side, where it can be easily felt by rubbing the hand over the part indicated. Immediately after the shooting, information was conveyed to the nearest Constable, who forthwith proceeded on board of the schooner for the purpose of arresting the Captain. The latter, however, escaped to the woods, where he is still hiding. We understand the wounded man will be sent to St. George's Bay on the S.S. Curlew, so that surgical treatment may be obtained for him with as little delay as possible. -- St.John's Telegram, Sept. 30th. The Courts In the Police Court, Harbor Grace, on Friday last William WILLS, a lad of about 12 years, was charged by Head Constable DOYLE with having assaulted a boy named James WEBBER, aged 12 years, and with having stabbed him with a pocket-knife. In this case, it appears that the two lads were ""sky-larking"" in front of Messrs. John MUNN & Co.'s premises, throwing mud at each other. WEBBER, who is the bigger boy, chased WILLS into the shop and kicked him. The two lads then struck each other several blows, and WILLS, who had a knife in his hand, (with which he had been a short time previously cutting chips), stabbed WEBBER twice. The first stab cut his coat, the second entered the chest on the right side, inflicting a serious wound. The evidence of Dr. W.M. ALLAN was taken. He stated that the boy was doing well this morning (Friday), but that he could not at all be certain of the result for a few days. Further hearing remanded till Friday next. -- Ibid, Sept. 27. Missing Crewman Driven to Sea in A Dory. -- A Renews correspondent, writing under date of Sunday last, acquaints us with the following painful incident: -- :On Wednesday night, 21st. instant, a young man belonging to the schooner ""Rio Grande"" (RYAN, master) left the vessel in a dory, evidently with the intention of coming ashore. It happened, however, that he had but one oar and as a strong breeze was blowing out the harbor at the time, it is more then probable that the poor fellow was driven to sea. Cries for help were uttered by the missing man and subsequently reported by those who heard them; but it does not appear that any effort whatever was made to render assistance. Nothing has been seen or heard of him since, although search parties have been out on several occasions. -- Ibid, Sept. 29. Ship Arrival The steamer ""Plover"" on her return trip to St. John's called here about 3 o'clock a.m. on Monday last, and after a short delay proceeded on her way. The following came passengers by her to this place, Misses K. STIRLING, A. PEYTON, L. RICE and others, the names which we could not ascertain. Business Trip The Editor of this paper left for business in Bonavista and Catalina by last steamer and will probably return next trip of the mailship. Shipping News We notice the following in connection with the firm of W. WATERMAN & Co., The schooner ""Anna Maria"" was cleared yesterday for Montreal with a cargo of cod-oil. The schooners ""Nymph"" and ""Busy"" arrived from St. John's with a cargo of provisions &c. The ""Branksea"" arrived recently from the collecting tour in Green Bay, having secured a good load. She leaves today for White Bay on similar work. The ""Juno"" arrived here en route from Horse Islands to St. John's with a load of dry fish. The ""Success"" arrived from Fogo and will leave to-day for Nippers Harbor to load fish for St. John's. The ""Runnymead"", ANTLE, master will leave the same place with a similar cargo in a few days. The English schooner ""Queen of the West"", CLARK, master arrived to E. DUDER on Sunday morning from St. John's, she has since left for Herring Neck where she will load with dry fish. The schooner ""Emeline"", (DEEK ?), master arrived from French Shore yesterday bringing a load of fish oil &c. Wedding (Part 1) Clerical Wedding. -- It was well known in Twillingate, and perhaps elsewhere, that the Rev. T.W. TEMPLE S.P.G. Missionary in White Bay, was waiting for the arrival of this ""Plover"" to unite in the bonds of Holy Matrimony with Miss Susan P. STIRLING, fourth daughter of our valued Physician, of that name. It ws, however, considered that to delay the actual Marriage Ceremony until the arrival of the steamer would throw matters into confusion, or cause too great detention in harbour, over and above the usual two hours; and therefore the Wedding was wisely arranged for Tuesday evening at 8 p.m.; and the breakfast left for Wednesday morning, as soon as the Plover should arrive. Accordingly punctual to the hour named, the wedding party arrived at St. Peter's Church and found a large congregation gathered to witness the ceremony, which was performed by the Rev. R. TEMPLE, R.D., only brother of the bridegroom, and enlivened by the assistance of the Church Choir, who sang one Hymn as the Bride entered, and a second before the last Exhortation; as well as chanting the Psalm Beati onmes. The Bride, who was given away by her father, was attended as bride-maids by her three sisters the Misses Kate, Janet, and Georgina STIRLING, and Miss Carrie M. TEMPLE, the little niece of the Bridegroom, who was himself supported as groomsmen by Rev. H. JOHNSON of Exploits, and E.C. WALLACE Esq., of Little Bay. Wedding (Part 2) The Bride's dress was puce cashmere and velvet, with wreath of orange blossoms and veil. The Bridesmaids wore ecru cashmere with mob caps and each carried a bouquet. After an hour or two spent at Dr. STIRLING's house, the Bride and Bridegroom retired to the Parsonage for the night in expectation of hearing the Plover's gun early on Wednesday. She arrived about 7 a.m.; and by the kindness of Captain BLANDFORD, as well as the ready sanction of the owners, Messrs. BOWRING, delayed until nearly 11 o'clock before leaving; so as to allow the Wedding Breakfast to be held as intended. The Rev. and Mrs. T.W. TEMPLE had also by the courtesy of Messrs. BOWRING, the happiness of being escorted in the Plover to their home in Western Cove, White Bay, a (distance of seventy miles beyond the usual terminus of Tilt Cove,) by almost the whole wedding party, the new Public Wharf, now nearly finished, being used for the first time for embarkation of passengers, on this happy occasion. If the display of bunting seen in harbour betokens good will, the newly married couple carry with them abundant good wishes from all. Beati sint. Visit of Governor His Excellency, Governor Sir Henry Fitzhardinge Berkeley MAXSE, arrived at St. John's per ""Nova Scotian"" on Thursday, the 6th. inst., accompanied by his aid-de-camp, Lieut. Malcom DRUMOND. His Excellency on landing was saluted by a guard of honor and received a cordial greeting from a large number of citizens who were on the wharf to receive him. Ship Arrival The coastal steamer ""Plover"" arrived here about 7 o'clock on Wednesday morning, bringing local and foreign mails. Cann Islands Within the past eight or ten days a number of men have been employed in mining on Cann Island. Several blasts have been made and indications of copper ore are apparent. We understand that a gold ""find"", has also been discovered there recently. Ship Arrival The schooner "Wild Rover," arrived from the Bay, to-day with a cargo of timber for the new coastal wharf, which is now nearing completion, and which will prove quite an acquisition to that part of the harbor. Visiting Clergy The Rev. Theodore NURSE, son of our respected townsman J. NURSE, Esq., arrived here per last ""Plover"". Mr. NURSE has been performing the ministerial duties of his holy calling, in Brooklyn, Bonavista Bay, for some time past, where his labors have been received with much acceptance. We hope that he may enjoy this visit to his native town, and return to his Mission, with renewed zeal to pursue the sacred duties of his office. J.W. OWEN, Esq., returned from St. John's by the same steamer. Ship Arrival The steamer ""Hercules"" came here from St. John's to-day. After landing a quantity of freight she left for the mining district. Accident on Ship Serious Accident on Board the S.S. "Juliet"". -- The steamer Juliet, bound from Liverpool to New York, put in here this morning for the purpose of landing a female passenger who met with a serious accident during the voyage. It seems that while the ship was rolling heavily the woman fell and sustained thereby a fracture of the skull which necessitated prompt surgical treatment. As soon as Dr. HARVEY went on board, he ordered her removal to the Hospital, where she is now receiving every attention from the kind-hearted officials of that excellent institution. -- St. John's Telegram. Loss of Schooner (Part 1) Loss of The Schooner Llewellyn. -- On Friday, Sept 30, writes our Randon correspondent - the schr. Llewellyn, left St. John's for home. She had her usual crew and some passengers. All went on well 'till they reached the North side of Trinity Bay when, unfortunately, they ran on the Shag Rock, near Ireland's Eye, and in less than ten minutes the schooner was completely under water. The passengers and crew - nine altogether - escaped with their lives and nothing more. The night was very dark and a stiff breeze blowing. The schooner was hired by William COOPER & Sons, of North West Arm, Random, who lost their winter's fit-out, which they had just bought. Perhaps the saddest part of the affair is in connection with the Rev. James LUMSDEN, Methodist Minister, who had only arrived from England by the last home boat, and was on his way to the Random Mission. Loss of Schooner (Part 2) He lost everything he had, and barely escaped without either a hat or a boot. He is now left nearly destitute of clothing. To him the loss is considerable, not only with regard to clothing; for he had a splendid collection of books, many of them being present from friends when leaving home. He had also a number of other presents. Few, upon the commencement of their missionary career in Newfoundland have met with such a disheartening incident. The unfortunate affair has elicited the unmistakable sympathy of the people. Mrs. TOOPE and others in Ireland's Eye treated the shipwrecked men with great consideration, and did their utmost to assist them in reaching their homes. The schooner was insured, but the poor man who owned her has lost heavily, as he had a large quantity of fishing gear on board at the time. --- Ibid" Births NURSE. - At Twillingate, on Thursday evening, Sept. 29th, the wife of the Rev. James NURSE, Methodist Minister, of a daughter. Births "CAHILL. - At Cupids, Sept. 13th, the wife of Mr. J.A. CAHILL, Methodist School Teacher, of a daughter. Births VINCENT. - At Bonavista, on the 8th inst., the wife of Mr. Alfred VINCENT, teacher of the Methodist Central day school, of a daughter. Sale For Sale. 2 prime pine mast pieces, 63 and 61 feet long. 1 spruce ditto. 56 feet long. Apply at the Post Office, Exploits. Oct 21. Ship Arrival The Steamer ""Hercules"" called here on Monday night, last en route for St. John's. The Captain expected to be here again about Monday evening or Tuesday night. Ship Arrival H.M. ship ""Fantome"" came into port on Saturday evening last, and left again on Wednesday morning. She has been engaged in protecting the fisheries on our coast the past season, and had lately left the Labrador coast. Ship Arrival The Revenue cruiser ""Rose"" from Labrador on her way to St. John's called her on Friday last, having on board the collector of H.M. Customs for that coast, Mr. BERTEAU, son of our worthy Magistrate, F. BERTEAU, Esq. Ship Arrival The coastal steamer ""Plover"" on her return to St. John's came here on Friday. Ship Departure The schr. "Flamingo,"" left for St. John's on Tuesday last, with a cargo of fish for Messrs. WATERMAN & Co. Advertisement Mr. M.F. SMYTHE, Water Street, St. John's, has on hand a large stock of excellent Sewing Machines. Any person requiring a genuine article in that line, cheap, may obtain it by sending their orders to that Sewing Machine Depot. Advertisement Books &c., -- Mr. G.N. GREEN, who arrived here by last ""Plover"" begs to intimate that he has a large assortment of books, pictures, and fancy goods, which he will dispose of until Tuesday next, at very low prices. Inspection invited at the store opposite the Sun office. As his stay is limited to a few days, an early call is necessary. -- Adv. Civil Disturbance On Saturday night while a number of the ""Fantome's"" men were on shore, they appeared to be conducting themselves somewhat disorderly, and having been spoken to by Sergeant WELLS, some insult, we understand was given, whereupon the Sergeant attempted to arrest a couple, and resistance having been made by them, a struggle ensued, when the prisoners received a good deal of injury. The matter was heard before the magistrate on Monday last, but no decision was arrived at regarding the justice or injustice of the course adopted by the officer. Died At North-West Arm, on the 15th of September, after a short illness, Mrs. Sarah MILLS, aged 78 years. She died happy. The deceased was grandmother of 71 children.