A fictional book is a non-existent book created specifically for (i.e. within) a work of fiction. This is not a list of works of fiction (i.e., novels, mysteries, etc.), but rather imaginary books that do not exist.

Inclusion criteria[]

This is a list of fictional books that appear in literature. Fictional books appearing in other print media, such as comics, are listed in List of fictional books from periodicals. Fictional books that appear in other types of media, such as television shows, are listed in List of fictional books from non-print media. Fictional books used as hoaxes or as purported support for actual research are usually referred to as false documents.

The fictional books on this list are ordered alphabetically under the name of the author who invented them.

A[]

Works invented by Ben Aaronovitch[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Edwin A. Abbott[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Gilbert Adair[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Douglas Adams[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Lloyd Alexander[]

In The Book of Three, there is a distinct and fictional tome named The Book of Three

Works invented by Martin Amis[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Poul Anderson[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Wes Anderson[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Piers Anthony[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Isaac Asimov[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Kate Atkinson[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Margaret Atwood[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

B[]

Works invented by John Barnes[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by L. Frank Baum[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Max Beerbohm[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list". Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by John Bellairs[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Hilaire Belloc[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Jedediah Berry[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Robert Bloch[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Roberto Bolaño[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Jorge Luis Borges[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by William Boyd[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by T. C. Boyle[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Richard Brautigan[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Marie Brennan[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Sarah Rees Brennan[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Elinor Brent-Dyer[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Frederic Brown[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by John Brunner[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Steven Brust[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Lois McMaster Bujold[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Katharine Burdekin[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by A. S. Byatt[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Algis Budrys[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

C[]

Works invented by James Branch Cabell[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Italo Calvino[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Cao Xueqin[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Peter Carey[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Thomas Carlyle[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Jonathan Carroll[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list". Script error: No such module "collapsible list". Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Miguel de Cervantes[]

In Don Quixote

Cosmography by Turpín

Le Bagatele

Works invented by Michael Chabon[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Robert W. Chambers[]

From The King in Yellow[]

The King in Yellow by Castaigne (Castaigne is either the author or the translator)

The King in Yellow has been adopted by authors into the Lovecraftian tradition.

From "The Repairer of Reputations"[]

The Imperial Dynasty of America by an unknown author.

Works invented by Raymond Chandler[]

Attributed to Aaron Klopstein (Klopstein committed suicide at the age of 33, shooting himself with an Amazonian blowgun):[1]

Cat Hairs in the Custard (poetry)

The Hydraulic Facelift (poetry)

Once More the Cicatrice (novel)

The Seagull Has No Friends (novel)

Twenty Inches of Monkey (short stories)

Works invented by Agatha Christie[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Clamp[]

In the manga Chobits

A City With No People (children's book series)

Vol. 1: A City With No People

Vol. 2: Someone Just For Me

Vol. 3: They Can Do Anything

Vol. 4: A Wish That Can't Be Granted

Vol. 5: Little By Little

Vol. 6: Please Find Me

Vol. 7: A Warm Heart

Works invented by Tom Clancy[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Susanna Clarke[]

Main article: Fictional books in the works of Susanna Clarke

Works invented by Jonathan Coe[]

In What a Carve Up!:

A Pox on the Box: Memoirs of a Disillusioned Broadcaster by Alan Beamish

The Winshaw Legacy: A Family Chronicle by Alan Beamish

Dropping in on Jerry: A Light-Hearted Account of the Dresden Bombings by Wing Commander "Bullseye" Fortescue

Accidents Will Happen by Michael Owen

The Loving Touch by Michael Owen

The A-Z of Plinths by Revd. J. W. Pottage

So You Think You Know about Plinths? by Revd. J. W. Pottage

Plinths! Plinths! Plinths! by Revd. J. W. Pottage

300 Years of Halitosis (unknown author)

Great Plumbers of Albania (unknown author)

I was Celery (unknown author)

A Life in Packaging - Fragments of an Autobiography:Volume IX - The Styrofoam Years (unknown author)

A Lutheran Approach to the Films of Martin and Lewis (unknown author)

Works invented by J.M. Coetzee[]

In Diary of a Bad Year:

Strong Opinions by JC

In Elizabeth Costello:

Fire and Ice by Elizabeth Costello

The House on Eccles Street by Elizabeth Costello

Works invented by Genevieve Cogman[]

In The Invisible Library[]

Midnight Requiems by Balan Pestifer

In The Burning Page[]

The Daughter of Porthos by Thomas-Alexandre Dumas

Works invented by Eoin Colfer[]

In And Another Thing...:

The Complete Maximegalon Statistics, Volumes 1—15,000

The Quick Guide to the Complete Maximegalon Statistics, Volumes 1—25,000

Works invented by Wilkie Collins[]

In The Moonstone[]

Life, Letters, and Labours of Miss Jane Ann Stamper (forty-fourth edition)

In Who Killed Zebedee[]

The World of Sleep

Works invented by Joseph Conrad[]

In Heart of Darkness[]

An Inquiry into some Points of Seamanship by a man Tower, Towson—some such name

Conrad is probably either conflating or making Marlow conflate two books: J. T. Towson's navigation tables, 1848 and 1849, and Nicholas Tinmouth's An Inquiry relative to various points of seamanship, 1845: so not really an invented book.[2]

Works invented by Cressida Cowell[]

In How to Train Your Dragon[]

How to Train Your Dragon by Professor Yobbish

Works invented by Richard Cowper[]

In A Dream of Kinship:

Codex Iniquitatis by Anonymous

Letters to Brother Matthew by Brother Francis of York (later called Saint Francis)

A Perspective of the Christian Dilemma by Brother Matthew (writing as V. O. V.)

In The Road to Corlay:

The Avian Apocrypha by anonymous

The Book of Gyre by anonymous

The Book of Morfedd by anonymous

Carlisle ms by anonymous

Old Peter's Tale by anonymous

Orgen's Dream by anonymous

Morfedd's Testament by Morfedd

In A Tapestry of Time:

Kentmere Psalter by anonymous

An unknown title by Master Surgeon Brynlas

Revelations by St. Francis

The True History of the Boy by St. Francis

History of Kinship in the United Kingdoms, Vol. 1 by Franscombe

Being and Non-Being by Hagendorf

Lexicon by Langley

Catalogue by Dean Pardoe

Leaves from an Antiquarian's Notebook by Dean Pardoe

Consolations of Philosophy by Pargeter

An unknown title (contains the word "Life") by Dom Sarega

In The Twilight of Briareus:

W. H. O. Regeneration Statistics. Vol. 3. 2004 by anonymous

L'Histoire Particulière de la Renaissance by Pierre Candel

Reminiscences by Margaret Hardy

Works invented by Edmund Crispin[]

In The Case of the Gilded Fly:[]

Metromania by Robert Warner (play)

Works invented by Justin Cronin[]

In The Passage[]

Belle of the Ball by Jordana Mixon

Works invented by John Crowley[]

In Little, Big:

Upstate Houses and Their Histories (pamphlet) by anonymous

Architecture of Country Houses by John Drinkwater

Brother North-Wind's Secret and other books (resembling Thornton Burgess's books) by John Storm Drinkwater

In The Solitudes:

Mythos and Tyrannos by Frank Walker Barr

Time's Body by Frank Walker Barr

Bitten Apples by Fellowes Kraft

The Book of a Hundred Chapters by Fellowes Kraft

Bruno's Journey by Fellowes Kraft

The Court of Silk and Blood by Fellowes Kraft

Darkling Plain by Fellowes Kraft

A Passage at Arms by Fellowes Kraft

Under Saturn by Fellowes Kraft

The Way's Far Turning by Helen Niblick

Steganography by Lois Rose

Dawn of the Druids, author unknown

Phaeton's Car, author unknown

Worlds in Division, author unknown

Works invented by Andrew Crumey[]

In D'Alembert's Principle[]

Tales from Rreinnstadt by Muller

In Mobius Dick[]

The Angel Returns by Heinrich Behring, translated by Celia Carter

Professor Faust by Heinrich Behring, translated by Celia Carter

Evolution Towards Perfection by Otto Hinze

The Teleology of Mental Degeneration by Otto Hinze

In Mr Mee[]

Epistemology and Unreason by Ian Muir

Rosier's Encyclopedia by Jean-Bernard Rosier

In Music, in a Foreign Language[]

Il Furto by Alfredo Galli

The Optical Illusion Last Friday by Alfredo Galli

Minds and Memories by Lowell

In Pfitz[]

Aphorisms by Vincenzo Spontini

Works invented by Chris Crutcher[]

In The Sledding Hill[]

Warren Peece by Chris Crutcher

D[]

Works invented by Mark Z. Danielewski[]

Template:Col-1-of-2In House of Leaves:

Absent Identification by Melissa Schemell

All in All by Bernard Porch

All Accurate by Nam Eurtton

All In the Name of Feminism: A Collection of Essays by Nadine (ed.) Muestopher

American Psychology: The Ownership of Self by Helen Hodge

Ancient Devotions by Tab Fulrest

The Anti-Present Trunk by Philippa (ed.) Frake

The Architecture of Art by Cassandra Rissman LaRue

Artistic Peril by Deacon Lookner

The Bad Bodhi Wall by Bazine Naodook

Beyond the Grasp of Commercial Media by Gabriel Reller

Black Heart, Blue Heart by Rita Mistopolis

Cinematic Projections by Naguib Paredes

Collected Essays on Self-Portraiture by Haldor (ed.) Nervene

Collected Essays on "Exploration #5 by Hans Staker

The Complete Feng Shui Guide for the Navidson Record by Luther Shepard

Concatenating Corbusier by Aristides Quine

The Constancy of Carl Jung by Oona Fanihdjarte

The Courage to Withstand by Daphne Kaplan

Creationist Myths by Hanson Edwin Rose

Delial by Dennis Stake

Delial, Beatrice, and Dulcinea by Jennifer Caps

Dialects of Divorce In American Film In the Twentieth Century by Anita Massine

Esau by Freed Kashon

The Faraday Conclusion by Devon Lettau

Fear Mantras by Alicia Hoyle

Flawed performances: A Consideration of the Actors in the Navidson Opus by Isaiah Rosen

The Fraying of the American Family by Florencia Calzatti

Gathered God by Darren Meen

Glorious Garrulous Graphomania by T. N. Joseph (ed.) Truslow

Gotta Go by Mary Widmunt

Greek Mythology Again by Ivan Largo Stilets

Grief's Explorations by Hank Leblarnard

Heaven's Door by Alan P. Winnett

The Holloway Question by Newt Kuellster

The House by Daniel Bowler

House Cleaning by David N. Braer

House of Leaves by Zampano

How Have You Who Have Loved Ever Love A Next Time? by Rosemary Enderheart

In These Things I Find by Mace Roger-Court

Incarnation of Spirit Things by Lantern C. Pitch

The Incident by Iben Van Pollit

Inside Out by Rosemary Park

Killing Badly, Dying Wise by Nupart Jhunisdakazcriddle

The Language of Torture by Rafael Geethtar Servagio

A Lexicon of Improbable Theories by Blair Keepling

The Many Wall Fugue by Eugenio and Scholfield Rosch

Maternal Intrusions by Eric Keplard

Template:Col-2-of-2

Mortality and Morality in Photographs by M. G. Cafiso

The Navidson Record by Johanne Scefing

The Navidson Record: Action and Chronologies by Thorton J. Cannon

The Navidson Record: The Novelization

Not True, Man: Mi Ata Beni? by Eta Ruccalla

Notes From Tomorrow by Lisbeth (ed.) Bailey

Objects of a Thousand Facets by Edwin Minamide

Operation #4: The Art of Internal Medicine by Leon Robbins

Origins of Faith by Candida Hayashi

Our Father by Tad Exler

Pale Micturitions by Justin Krape

Palladian Grammar and Metaphysical Appropriations: Navidson's Villa Malcontenta by Sebastiano Perouse de Montclos

Passion For Pity and Other Recipes For Disaster by Helmut Muir

Perversity In Dullness... and Vice-Versa by Celine Arlesey

The Phenomenology of Coincidence in the Navidson Recort by Marla Hulbert

Pieces by Will Navidson

The Places I've Seen by Teppet C. Brookes

Privacy and Intrusion in the Twenty-First Century by Clarence Sweeney

Recovery: Methods and Manner by Cora Minehart

Red Cross Faith by Janice Whitman

Riddles Within by Amon Whitten

Semiotic Rivalry by Yuriy Pleak

Shots in the Dark by Gavin Young

Simple Themes by Brendon Beinhorn

Sketches: The Process of Entry by Denise Lowery

Smile by Lester T. Ochs

The Study: Tom's Place by Neekisha Dedic

Tamper With This by Patricia B. Nesselroade

Terrible Thoughts: The Psychology and Biology of Navidson's Nightmares by Ernest Y. Hartmann

Theater In Film by Cassady Roulet

The Third Beside you: An Analysis of the Epistemological Echo by David Eric Katz

Thru Lines by Esther Hartline

Tick-Tock-Fade: The Representation of Time in Film Narrative by Frizell Clary

Twentieth Century Dub, Dub by Tony (ed.) Ross

Twenty Years in the Program by Cynthia Huxley

Ultrapure Water, the Super-Kamiokande Detector and Cherenkov Light by Gordon Kearns, L. Kajita and M. K. Totsuka

Understanding the Self: The Maze of You by Daniel Hortz

Violent Seeds: The Holloway Roberts Myst by Jeremy Flint

Violent Verses: Cinema's Treatment of Death by Danton Blake

War's Children by Melanie Proft Knightley

"What Are You Gonna Do Now, Little Man?" and Other Tales of Grass Roots Distribution by Kevin Stanley

When a Woman's Fear Makes Her Run from Commitment and What a Smart Man Can Do About It by Steve and Carter Sokal

Wilder Ways by Ryan Murray

Wishing Well by Virginia Posah

Works invented by Robertson Davies[]

In Fifth Business:

Celtic Saints of Britain and Europe by Dunstable Ramsay

Forgotten Saints of the Tyrol by Dunstable Ramsay

A Hundred Saints for Travellers by Dunstable Ramsay

Works invented by John DeChancie[]

In Castle Murders:

The Moswell Plan by Dorcas Bagby, a book believed to be fictional even in its own world

Eidolons of the King by Librarian Osmirik, the Castle books as they exist in the fictional world

In Castle Perilous:

Ervoldt: His Book by Lord Ervoldt

Works invented by L. Sprague de Camp[]

In Aristotle and the Gun:

On the Folly of Natural Science by Aristotle

Of Justice by Aristotle

On Education by Aristotle

Of passions and Anger by Aristotle

Lives of the Great Philosophers by Diomedes of Mazaka

Note: in this alternate history, the ill-considered meddling by a time traveler caused Aristotle to turn away from his study of natural science and write these books instead.

In The Fallible Fiend:

Material and Spiritual Perdection in Ten Easy Lessons by Voltiper of Kortoli

Love Eternal by Falmas

In The Tritonian Ring:

The Lay of Zorme, an ancient heroic epic by an unknown author

The Death of Zorme

The Song of Vrir

The Madness of Vrir

The Lay of Lord Naz

The Man Who Thought He Could Hold Back The Tides

The Fragments of Lontang, collected fragments from the writings of the ancient philosopher Lontang

The Golden Age, a cycle of mythology whose third book describes how the forest god Asterio raped the earth goddess Heroe of the Eight Teats and begat on her the first human pair.

With Foam-Bubbling Beer, a Lorskan drinking song.

Oma's Commentary, by Oma - a book so old that only a fragment survives and which is so old that it can't be dated.

The Legend of Kumio, an ancient tale referenced in Oma's Commentary and of which an intact copy unexpectedly turns up in the library of the book- collecting King Shvo.

Works invented by Philip K. Dick[]

In The Man in the High Castle:

The Grasshopper Lies Heavy by Hawthorne Abendsen

In A Maze of Death:

How I Rose From the Dead in My Spare Time and So Can You by A. J. Spectowsky

In The Transmigration of Timothy Archer:

Here, Tyrant Death by Bishop Timothy Archer

Works invented by Paul Di Filippo[]

In Plumage From Pegasus:

A History of Supermarket Fiction: How SF Swept the World by Roger Barnard

Corn Likker, Drag Racin' and Coon Huntin' by Andy Duncan and Michael Bishop

Great Mafia Science by Ben Bova

The Unsurrendered Fembot by Richard Calder

Faith-Based Fictions: A Conversation by Orson Scott Card, Andrew Greeley and Barry Malzberg

How to Pick Up Guys by Samuel Delany

Boy Magnate by Gordon Van Gelder

The Magazine Chums and the Case of the Disappearing Readers by C.J. Cutlyffe Heintz-Ketzep

The Magazine Chums Meet the Distributor of Doom by C.J. Cutlyffe Heintz-Ketzep

The Magazine Chums and the Great Paper Shortage by C.J. Cutlyffe Heintz-Ketzep

The Magazine Chums Apply for an Arts Council Grant by C.J. Cutlyffe Heintz-Ketzep

A History of Science Fiction and Fantasy in the New Yorker by Ursula K. Le Guin

Forever Plus! by Amber Max

Mega-Awesome SF: The True Story Behind Forever Plus! by Amber Max

Andre Norton's Smackdown by Andre Norton

Imaginary Realist: The Life of Timothy Eugene by Milton Sharp

Women Write Fantasy, Men Write Science fiction by Nancy Kress and Charles Sheffield

I was a Teenaged Pornographer! by Robert Silverberg

The Big Book of High-Tech Texas Bar-B-Q by Bruce Sterling

Works invented by Martin Donovan and David Koepp[]

In Death Becomes Her:

Forever Young by Helen Sharp

Works invented by Arthur Conan Doyle[]

In the Sherlock Holmes series:

Chaldean Roots in the Ancient Cornish Language by Sherlock Holmes

Early English Charters by Sherlock Holmes

Malingering by Sherlock Holmes

Of Tattoo Marks by Sherlock Holmes

On Secret Writings by Sherlock Holmes

On the Polyphonic Motets of Lassus by Sherlock Holmes

On the Study of Tobaccos and their Ashes by Sherlock Holmes

On the Surface Anatomy of the Human Ear by Sherlock Holmes

On the Typewriter and Its Relation to Crime by Sherlock Holmes

Practical Handbook of Bee Culture, with Some Observations upon the Segregation of the Queen by Sherlock Holmes

Upon the Dating of Old Documents by Sherlock Holmes

Upon the Influence of a Trade upon the Form of the Hand by Sherlock Holmes

Upon the Tracing of Footsteps by Sherlock Holmes

Upon the Uses of Dogs in the Work of the Detective by Sherlock Holmes

Whole Art of Detection by Sherlock Holmes

Heavy Game in the Western Himalayas (1881) by Colonel Sebastian Moran

Three Months in the Jungle (1884) by Colonel Sebastian Moran

The Dynamics of an Asteroid by Professor James Moriarty

A Treatise on the Binomial Theorem by Professor James Moriarty

In the Professor Challenger series:

Outlines of Vertebrate Evolution by Professor George Edward Challenger

Some Observations Upon a Series of Kalmuk Skulls by Professor George Edward Challenger

E[]

Works invented by Umberto Eco[]

In Foucault's Pendulum:

Diary of a Village Doctor

Diary of a Young Girl's Illness

The Wonderful Adventure of Metals

Chronicles of the Zodiac by Dr. De Amicis

The Carmassi Brothers by Adeodato Lampustri

The Dismissed by Adeodato Lampustri

Panther Without Eyelashes by Adeodato Lampustri

Chaste Throbs by Odolinda Mezzofanti Sassabetti

In The Name of the Rose:

On the Use of Mirrors in the Game of Chess by Milo Temesvar

Manuscript de Dom Adson de Melk, Le by Abbe Vallet

Works invented by David Eddings[]

In The Belgariad:

The Mrin Codex a prophecy made by a madman

Works invented by the author(s) of the Book of Esther[]

In The Book of Esther, Ch. VI

How Bigthana and Teresh Sought to Assassinate King Ahasuerus, And How Mordecai Foiled Their Plot as recounted in The Book of Records and Chronicles of the Persian Kings

The Achaemenid Persian Kings probably had actual Royal Chronicles, but historians consider this specific tale to be fictional rather than a quote from these.

Works invented by Joe Eszterhas[]

In Basic Instinct:

The First Time by "Catherine Woolf" (a pseudonym for Catherine Tramell)

Love Hurts by "Catherine Woolf" (a pseudonym for Catherine Tramell)

Shooter by "Catherine Woolf" (a pseudonym for Catherine Tramell)

F[]

Works invented by Sebastian Faulks[]

In A Week in foodDecember:

Bolivia: Land of Shadows by Antony Cazenove

Shropshire Towers by Alfred Huntley Edgerton

Alfie the Humble Engine by Sally Higgs (winner of the Pizza Palace Book of the Year)

A Winter Crossing by Alexander Sedley

The Potter's Tale by R. Tranter

Works invented by Philip Jose Farmer[]

In The Lovers and The Day of the Timestop:

The Western Talmud by Isaac Sigmen, the Forerunner (possibly, the later parts were added by others)

The main Scripture of the theocratic regime ruling much of the Earth in this future. Written in Hebrew, the regime's liturgical and scientific language. Including some Christian and Jewish elements but superseding and replacing all previous Scriptures such as the Hebrew Bible, the New Testament and the original Jewish Talmud. Recounting the creation of the Sturch (State Church) by Isaac Sigmen, the Forerunner; the period of His Glorious Rule on Earth; the failed attempt of the Scarlet Woman to seduce Him; and the moment when He boarded His Time Machine and went on His Journey to the Future - promising that He would emerge on The Day of the Timestop, to wage the Final Struggle with his Evil Brother, the Backrunner.

Works invented by Joshua Ferris[]

In Then We Came to the End:

Hiding Places Both Underwater and Underground a McLenox Publication

The Anarchist's Philosophy a McLenox Publication

How to Make a Fake Birth Certificate on Your Home Computer a McLenox Publication

Works invented by Ronald Firbank[]

In Caprice:

Ozias Midwinter by anonymous

In Inclinations:

Three Lilies and a Moustache by anonymous

Travels by Lady Cray

Violet's Virtue (or The Virtue of the Violet) by A Literary Lady (The Scottish Sappho)

Book of Cats by Miss Neffal

Six Strange Sisters by Geraldine O'Brookomore

Those Gonzagas by Geraldine O'Brookomore

Notes on the Tedium of Places by William Wordsworth

In Vainglory:

The Home Life of Lucretia Borgia by Mrs. Asp

The Women Queens of England by Mrs. Asp

Autobiography by Mrs. Cresswell

The Red Rose of Martyrdom by Mrs. Cresswell

The Leg of Chicken by Mr. Garsaint

Love's Arrears by Claud Harvester

New Poems by Claud Harvester

Vaindreams by Claud Harvester

Scroll from the Fingers of Ta-Hor by Miss Hospice

Sacerdotalism and Satanism by Miss Missingham

Beams by Bishop Pantry

Even-Tide by Bishop Pantry

Inner Garden by Bishop Pantry

Night Thoughts by Bishop Pantry

Verlaine at Bournemouth by Lady Anne Pantry

Works invented by Jasper Fforde[]

Template:Col-1-of-2In the Thursday Next novels:

Adventures in the Book Trade by O. Nakajima

At Long Last Lust by Daphne Farquitt

Bad Sofa by Landen Parke-Laine

The Books of H. Paige by Millon de Floss

Bradshaw's Guide to the Bookworld by Commander Trafford Bradshaw, CBE

The Brontës by W.H.H.F. Renouf

Bunyan's Bootscraper by John McSquurd (unpublished)

Cardenio - Easy Come, Easy Go by Millon de Floss

Caversham Heights (later retitled Nursery Crime, see also The Big Over Easy)

The Commander Bradshaw novels

Crimean Reminisces by Thursday Next

Death at Double-X Ranch

Degeneracy for Pleasure and Profit by Acheron Hades

Don't Desert Your Desserts by Cilla Bubb

The Earthcrossers by Mr S.A. Orbiter

Enid Blyton by Millon de Floss

The Extraordinary Career of George Formby by John Williams

The Emperor Zhark novels by Handley Paige

The Gravitube - Tenth Wonder of the World by Vincentt Dott

The Global Standard Deity by Professor M. Blessington, PR (ret.)

Great Expectations, A Study by Millon de Floss

The Great Samuel Pepys Fiasco

Hades: Family From Hell by Thursday Next

The Hardest Job in Fiction by the Bellman

A History of Gibbons by Ronan Empyre

How I Think Life Began on Earth by Dr Luciano Spagog

Journal of a LitreTec by Bowden Cable

The Jurisfiction Chronicles by Thursday Next

The Jurisfiction Guide to Book-Jumping by the Unitary Authority of Warrington Cat

The Jurisfiction Guide to the Great Library by the Unitary Authority of Warrington Cat

Jurisfiction Journals by the Unitary Authority of Warrington Cat

The Land Speed Record by the Very Reverend Toredlyne

Library Sub-Basement Gazetteer

Life After Death for Felix Tabularasa by Millon de Floss

Template:Col-2-of-2

A Life in SpecOps by Thursday Next

Also called Thursday Next: A Life in SpecOps and My Life in SpecOps

Memoirs of A Crimean Veteran by Landen Parke-Laine

The Middle of Next Week

Neanderthals: Back After A Short Absence by Gerhard von Squid

The New Whigs: From Humble Beginnings to Fourth Reich by A.J.P. Milliner

Once Were Scoundrels by Landen Parke-Laine

The Perkins and Snell novels

Remember Them? A Study of Mnemomorphs by Blake Lamme (Ex-SO-5)

Revealments of St Zvlkx

Revenge of the Thraals by Handley Paige

A Short History of the Special Operations Network by Millon de Floss

Spacestation Z-5 by Handley Paige

The Squire of High Potternews by Daphne Farquitt

Story Operating Systems - The Early Years by WordMaster Xavier Libris

Sword of the Zenobians

Timestream Navigation for ChronoGuard cadets module 6A by Bendix Scintilla

Thursday Next: A Biography by Millon de Floss

Thursday Next Casebook by Millon de Floss

UltraWord - The Aftermath by Millon de Floss

UltraWord - The Ultimate Reading Experience by WordMaster Xavier Libris

The Ups and Downs of Act Breaks by Jeremy Fnorp

Upstream/Downstream by Colonel Next, QT, CG (non-exst.)

Wales - Birth of a Republic by Zephania Jones

Who Put the Poe in Poem? by Millon de Floss

Wuthering Heights: Masterpiece or Turgid Rubbish? by Millon de Floss

In the Nursery Crimes novels:

The Berkshire Book of Records

Chymes - Friend or Foe?

The Foot Lectures by Professor Tarsus

A History of Reading

Inside the Guild of Detectives

Motoring Into Oblivion by A. Morris

A Short History of the NCD

Valleyhills Movie Guide

Watching the Detectives by Masie Gray

Who's What?

Works invented by Gardner F. Fox[]

In Kothar--Barbarian Swordsman:

The Lord Histories of Satoram Mandamor

In Kothar and the Demon Queen:

Attributed to Gronlex Storbon

Dialogue of Demons

Nights of Necromancy

Works invented by Michael Frayn[]

In A Landing on the Sun:

Fair Do's:Studies in the Perception of Social Justice by E J Maitland

Natural Man by Dr Elizabeth Serafin

Works invented by Cornelia Funke[]

In Inkheart:

Inkheart by Fenoglio

G[]

Works invented by Neil Gaiman[]

Works invented in Good Omens, co-authored by Terry Pratchett, are listed in the "Terry Pratchett" section of this article.

Works invented in The Sandman comics are listed in the "DC Comics" section of List of fictional books from periodicals.

Works invented by Yasmine Galenorn[]

In Legend of the Jade Dragon:

The Mistress of Peachtree Manor by Andrew

Works invented by Stella Gibbons[]

In Cold Comfort Farm:

Pard-spirit; A Study of Branwell Brontë by Mr. Meyerburg (Mybug)

The Higher Common Sense and The Pensées by the Abbé Fause-Maigre, translated by H. B. Mainwaring

Works invented by George Gissing[]

In New Grub Street:

Mr Bailey, Grocer by Harold Biffen

Margaret Home by Edwin Reardon

On Neutral Ground by Edwin Reardon

The Optimist by Edwin Reardon

Works invented by Robert Goddard[]

In Play to the End:

Lodger in the Throat by Joe Orton

The Plastic Men by Derek Oswin

Works invented by Edward Gorey[]

by C. F. Earbrass:

The meaning of the house

A moral dustbin

More chains than clank

The truffle plantation

The unstrung harp

Was it likely?

by Miss D. Awdrey-Gore:

The blancmange tragedy

The dustwrapper secret

The pincushion affair

The postcard mystery

The teacosy crime

The toastrack enigma

The toothpaste murder

by Dewda Yorger:

Dreary Rewdgo at Baffin Bay

Dreary Rewdgo on the Great Divide

Dreary Rewdgo in the Yukon

Works invented by John Green[]

In The Fault in Our Stars:

Midnight Dawns

The Price of Dawn

Requiem for Mayhem

An Imperial Affliction by Peter Van Houten

Works invented by Graham Greene[]

In The End of the Affair:

The Ambitious Host by Maurice Bendrix

The Crowned Image by Maurice Bendrix

The Grave on the Water-Front by Maurice Bendrix

Works invented by John Grisham[]

In Calico Joe:

The Beaning of Joe Casle by Paul Tracey

In Camino Island:

October Rain by Mercer Mann (2008; Newcombe Press)

The Music of Wave by Mercer Mann

Drunk in Philly by J. P. Walthall; National Book Award and 1999 Pulitzer Prize

My Favorite Tsunami by an unnamed author

Works invented by Lev Grossman[]

In The Magicians

The Fillory and Further books by Christopher Plover, comprising

1.The World in the Walls

2.The Girl Who Told Time

3.The Flying Forest

4.The Secret Sea

5.The Wandering Dune

These five books are widely known, a classic of children's literature - but the public is unaware that they are not fantasy but factual descriptions of an actual other world.

A mysterious sixth book, entitled The Magicians, seen only by a few, was written by Jane Chadwick, protagonist of an earlier book.

Magickal Historie - written by Le Goff, translated to English by Lloyd.

Practical Exercises for Young Magicians by Lady Amelia Popper (18th Century book).

History of Magic, 18th Century book, author's name not given. From outside looks slim but in fact contains, by subtle bibliographical magic, no less than 1,832 pages.

Book on dragons (precise title not given) by MacCabe, listing the dragons living in the world's rivers.

Abecedrian Arcana by Pseudo-Dionysius.

Works invented by Yaa Gyasi[]

In Homegoing:

The Ruin of a Nation Begins in the Homes of Its People by Yaw

H[]

i

Works invented by Radclyffe Hall[]

In The Well of Loneliness:

The Furrow by Stephen Johnson

Works invented by Carolyn Hart[]

Template:Col-1-of-2 In The Christie Caper:

The Ashen Prince by John Border Stone

Chimera by Bryan Shaw

The Clue at the Hacienda Dolores by Bryan Shaw

The Clue of the Chattering Parrot by Bryan Shaw

Death My Sister by Fleur Calloway

Death of a Nabob by Lady Gwenolyn Tompkins

Down These Steps by Natelie Marlow

Farewell, My Love, Forever by Pamela (as Pamela Gerrard) Bledsoe

The Grinning Skull by Emma Clyde

I Won't Let You Die by Fleur Calloway

Sing a Song of Sorrow by Emma Clyde

Template:Col-2-of-2 In Death on Demand:

The Agony Chain by Fritz Hemhill

Blood Tales by Elliot Morgan

Danny's Delight by Janis and Farley Farley

Deadly Diamonds by Harriet Edelman

Death in an Alley by Fritz Hemhill

Gentleman's Smile by Harriet Edelman

Kerrigan's Heart by Fritz Hemhill

Kiss a Stranger by Elliot Morgan

Murder in Casablanca by Emma Clyde

Ride a Wave by Harriet Edelman

Sad Song by Kelly Rizzoli

San Bernadino Heist by Hal Douglas

The Secret of the Red Dragon by Janis and Farley Farley

The Shuttered Mind by Kelly Rizzoli

Works invented by Anthony Hope Hawkins[]

In The Prisoner of Zenda

Burlesdon on Ancient Theories by Robert Burlesdon

The Ultimate Outcome, by a Political Student by Robert Burlesdon

Works invented by Scott Hawkins[]

In The Library at Mount Char:

Mental Warfare vol. III: The Concealment of Thought and Intention by anonymous

Works Invented by Shirley Hazzard[]

In The Transit of Venus[]

Abnegation as Statement: Symbol and Sacrament in the Achievement of Rex Ivory by Professor Wadding

Works invented by Mark Helprin[]

In Winter's Tale:

Pictures of Big White Horses by anonymous

Equine Anatomy by Burchfield

Catalog of Alabama Curry Combs 1760–1823 by Georgia Fatwood

Ride Like Hell, You Son of a Bitch! by Fulgura Frango

A River Moves Forward by Selena Haskins

Care and Feeding of the Horse by Robert S. Kahn

The Afro-California Jumping Style by Sierra Leon

Memoirs of a Military Groom by Moffet Southgate

Dressage by Turner

Works invented by Frank Herbert[]

In the Dune series:

Template:Col-1-of-2

Arrakis, The Transformation by Harq al-Ada

Lectures of Prescience by Harq al-Ada

Leto Atreides II, a Biography by Harq al-Ada

Riddles of Arrakis by Harq al-Ada

Testament of Arrakis by Harq al-Ada

The Book of Leto by Harq al-Ada

The Butlerian Jihad by Harq al-Ada

The Dune Catastrophe by Harq al-Ada

The Holy Metamorphosis by Harq al-Ada

The Mahdinate, an Analysis by Harq al-Ada

The Preacher of Arrakeen by Harq al-Ada

The Prescient Vision by Harq al-Ada

The Story of Liet-Kynes by Harq al-Ada

The Arrakis Workbook by Liet-Kynes

Bene Gesserit Training Manual

Dictionary Royal

Handbook of the Hajj

Kalima: The Words of Muad' Dib, the Shuloch Commentary

Orange Catholic Bible, Revised

Palimbasha: Lectures at Sietch Tabr

Stilgar, The Commentaries

Tagir Mohandis: Conversations with a Friend

The Apocrypha of Muad' Dib

The Book of Ghanima

The Book of Kreos

The Instruction Manual: Missionaria Protectiva

The Mentat Handbook

The Panoplia Prophetica

The Pedant Heresy

The Spacing Guild Handbook

The Spacing Guild Manual

Words of My Father: An Account of Muad' Dib

Works of the Mentat

Strangler Vines of Ecaz by Holjance Vohnbrook (an anagram of John Holbrook Vance)

The Pillars of the Universe by Muad' Dib (Paul Atreides)

St. Alia, Huntress of a Billion Worlds by Pander Oulson

A Child's History of Muad' Dib by Princess Irulan

Analysis: The Arrakeen Crisis by Princess Irulan

Arrakis Awakening by Princess Irulan

Collected Legends of Arrakis by Princess Irulan

Collected Sayings of Muad' Dib by Princess Irulan

Conversations with Muad' Dib by Princess Irulan

Count Fenring: A Profile by Princess Irulan

Dictionary of Muad' Dib by Princess Irulan

In My Father's House by Princess Irulan

Manual of Muad' Dib by Princess Irulan

Muad' Dib, Family Commentaries by Princess Irulan

Muad' Dib, the Man by Princess Irulan

Template:Col-2-of-2

Muad' Dib: The Ninety Nine Wonders of the Universe by Princess Irulan

Muad' Dib: The Religious Issues by Princess Irulan

Private Reflections on Muad' Dib by Princess Irulan

Songs of Muad' Dib by Princess Irulan

The Humanity of Muad' Dib by Princess Irulan

The Wisdom of Muad' Dib by Princess Irulan

Words of Muad'dib by Princess Irulan

The Last Jihad by Sumer and Kautman

Orange Catholic Liturgical Manual by the Commission of Ecumenical Translators

The Liturgical Manual and the Commentaries by the Commission of Ecumenical Translators

The Orange Catholic Bible by the Commission of Ecumenical Translators

Pirate History of Corrino by unknown

Assassin's Handbook

History of Muad'dib

Imperial Dictionary

Kitab Al-Ibar

Muad'dib Concordance

The Almanak en-Ashnof

The Azhar Book

Analysis of History by Bronso of Ix

Proverbs of Muad' Dib

The Dune Gospels

The Dunebook

The Dunebuk of Irulan

The Ghola Speaks

The Hayt Chronicle

The Irulan Report

The Qizarate Creed

The Steersman Guide

The Stilgar Chronicle

The Tleilaxu Godbuk

The Yiam-el-Din (Book of Judgement)

The Journal of Leto II

The Oral History

The Stolen Journal

Conversations with Leto II

Lessons of Arrakis

Leto II: Dar-es-Balat Records

Muad' Dib Speaks

Songs of the Scattering

Teachings of the Golden Path

The Apocrypha of Arrakis

The Bene Gesserit Coda

The Oral History of Rakis

Works invented by William Hope Hodgson[]

In Carnacki, the Ghost-Finder stories:

the Sigsand MS

Astral and Astarral Co-ordination and Interference by Harzam with addenda by Carnacki

Acrostics by John Dumpley

Astarral Vibrations Compared with Matero-involuted Vibrations Below the Six-Billion Limit by Professor Garder

Experiments with a Medium by Professor Garder

Induced Hauntings by Harzam

Works invented by Anthony Hope[]

In The Prisoner of Zenda

Burlesdon on Ancient Theories by Robert Burlesdon

The Ultimate Outcome, by a Political Student by Robert Burlesdon

Works invented by Robert E. Howard[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Samantha Hunt[]

In Mr. Splitfoot:

The Book of Ether by Zeke

Works invented by Aldous Huxley[]

In Brave New World:

Chemical and Bacteriological Conditioning of the Embryo by anonymous

Practical Instructions for Beta-Store Workers by anonymous

In Crome Yellow:

Biography of Men Who Achieved Greatness by anonymous

Biography of Men Who had Greatness Thrust Upon Them by anonymous

Biography of Men Who were Born Great by anonymous

Biography of Men Who were Never Great at All by anonymous

Cosmic Cuts by anonymous

What a Young Girl Ought to Know by anonymous

Wild Goose Chase, A Novel by anonymous

Humble Heroisms by Mr. Barbecue-Smith

Pipe-Lines to the Infinite by Mr. Barbecue-Smith

unknown by Mr. Barbecue-Smith

Dictionary of the Finnish Language by Caprinulge

The Tales of Knockespotch by Knockespotch

Certaine Priuy Counsels by One of Her Maiestie's Most Honourable Priuy Counsels, F.L. Knight by Sir Ferdinando Lapith

unknown by Hercules Lapith

unknown by Denis Stone

Thom's Works and Wanderings by Tom Thom

History of Crome by Henry Wimbrush

In Point Counter Point:

St Francis and the Modern Psyche by Denis Burlap

Works invented by James Hynes[]

In The Lecturer's Tale:

Das Ding an Sich: A Cultural History of Cultural Histories by Lorraine Alsace[3]

Les Mortifications by Jean-Claude Evangeline

To Reign in Hell: The Will to Power in Paradise Lost by Anthony Pescecane

Where's Waldo? The Representation of Everyman in Emerson by J. O. Schmeaux

Daughters of the Night: Clitoral Hegemony in LeFanu's Carmilla by Victoria Victorinix

Rhythm and Metonomy in Coleridge's Christobel by Victoria Victorinix

In Publish and Perish:

The Barbecued God: Death of a Yorkshireman by Joseph Brody

The Missionary Position: The Franciscan Construction of Rapanui Gender 1862–1936 by Virginia Dunning

(Re) Visioning Resurrection: The Myth of Human Sacrifice by Gregory Eyck

A History of Early Modern Witchcraft by Victor Karswell

Cooking the Captain: The Colonialist as Yorkshire Pudding by Stanley Tulafale

I[]

Works invented by John Irving[]

In The World According to Garp:

Confessions of an Ellen Jamesian by Anonymous

A Sexual Suspect by Jenny Fields (autobiography)

My Father's Illusions by T.S. Garp

The Pension Grillparzer by T.S. Garp

Procrastination by T.S. Garp

The Second Wind of the Cuckold by T.S. Garp

The World According to Bensenhaver by T.S. Garp

A History of Everett Steering's Academy by Stewart Percy

Lunacy and Sorrow: The Life and Art of T.S. Garp by Donald Whitcomb

In A Widow for One Year:

Before the Fall of Saigon by Ruth Cole

My Last Bad Boyfriend by Ruth Cole

Not for Children by Ruth Cole

The Same Orphanage by Ruth Cole

The Door in the Floor by Ted Cole

The Mouse Crawling Between the Walls by Ted Cole

A Sound Like Someone Trying Not To Make a Sound by Ted Cole

Coffee and Donuts by Ed O'Hare

A Difficult Woman by Ed O'Hare

Leaving Long Island by Ed O'Hare

Sixty Times by Ed O'Hare

Summer Job by Ed O'Hare

Followed Home from the Flying Food Circus by Alice Somerset

McDermid Reaches a Milestone by Alice Somerset

McDermid Retired by Alice Somerset

Missing Persons McDermid by Alice Somerset

In Until I Find You:

Normal and Nice by Emma Oastler

The Slush Pile Reader by Emma Oastler

In Last Night In Twisted River:

Baby in the Road by Danny Angel

East of Bangor by Danny Angel

Family Life in Coos County by Danny Angel

In the After-Hours Restaurant by Danny Angel

The Kennedy Fathers by Danny Angel

Kissing Kin by Danny Angel

The Spinster; or, The Maiden Aunt by Danny Angel

J[]

Works invented by Jin Yong[]

Jiu Yin Zhen Jing (九陰真經; Nine Yin True Classic), a fictional book on martial arts techniques and inner energy cultivation methods. It appears in all three novels in the Condor Trilogy.

Jiu Yang Zhen Jing (九陽真經; Nine Yang True Classic), a fictional book similar to the Jiu Yin Zhen Jing. It appears only in the second and third novels in the Condor Trilogy.

Works invented by Diana Wynne Jones[]

In The Lives of Christopher Chant:

Jones invented a series of children's books that are apparently similar to Enid Blyton's Malory Towers and St. Clair's series. The Millie, below, are about a girl, Millie, who goes to a boarding school called Lowood House School. There are reportedly about ten books in the series, but only six are named: the first five, below, and another book called Head Girl Millie.

Millie Goes to School

Millie of Lowood House

Millie Plays the Game

Millie's Finest Hour

Millie in the Upper Fourth

Works invented by Robert Jordan[]

In The Eye of the World:

The Essays of William of Maneches

The Travels of Jain Farstrider

Voyages Among the Sea Folk

In The Great Hunt:

The Dance of the Hawk and the Hummingbird by Teven Aerwin

Mirrors of the Wheel

To Sail Beyond the Sunset

In The Dragon Reborn:

A Study of the War of the Shadow by Moilin daughter of Hamada daughter of Juendan

In The Shadow Rising:

Dealing with the Territory of Mayene, 500 - 750 of the New Era

Travels in the Aiel Waste, with Observations on the Savage Inhabitants

The Treasures of the Stone of Tear

The Killers of the Black Veil by Soran Milo

A Journey to Tarabon by Eurian Romavni

The History of the Stone of Tear by Eban Vandes

In ''The Fires of Heaven:

The Flame, the Blade and the Heart

In Lord of Chaos:

Essays on Reason by Daria Gahand

Men of Fire and Women of Air by Elora daughter of Amar daughter of Coura

A Study of Men, Women, and the One Power Among Humans by Ledar son of Shandin son of Koimal

K[]

Works invented by Franz Kafka[]

In Der Prozeß/The Trial[]

Die Plagen, welche Grete von ihrem Manne Hans zu erleiden hatte

In Tagebücher/Diaries[]

Die Rache des Kommandeurs [series of columns]

Works invented by Caitlín R. Kiernan[]

The Mound Builders and the Stars: An Archaeo-Astrological Investigation by Charles L. Patrick Akeley

The Travels of Odysseus by Alfred, Lord Tennyson

Waking Leviathan by Jacova Angevine

The Last Loan Shark of Bodega Bay by Theo Angevine

The Man Who Laughed at Funerals by Theo Angevine

Pretoria by Theo Angevine

Seven at Sunset by Theo Angevine

What the Cat Dragged In by Theo Angevine

Memoirs of a Martian Demirep by anonymous

Pornographies of Pnakotus by anonymous

Red Book of Riyadh by anonymous

Famous Film Monsters and the Men Who Made Them by Ben Browning

The Magdalene Grimoire by Roderick Burgess (from The Girl Who Would Be Death miniseries, based on Neil Gaiman's Sandman series)

The Light Beyond Centre by Reese Callicot

The Ecstatic River by Reese Callicot

The Ark of Poseidon by Sarah Crowe

A Long Way To Morning by Sarah Crowe

The Red Tree by Sarah Crowe and Dr. Charles L. Harvey

Silent Riots by Sarah Crowe

Bloody Mary, La Llorona, and the Blue Lady: Feminine Icons in a Child's Apocalypse by Judith Louise Darger

The Children of Artemis by Fera Delacroix

Alice by Charles Lutwidge Dodgson ("Lewis Carroll")

New American Monsters: More Than Myth? by Gerald Durrell

Closing the Door: Anatomy of Hysteria by Elenore Ellis-Lincoln

Hollywood Land by William Faulkner

Evening at the Gates of Dawn by Sadie Jasper

Hauntings of Old New England by Sadie Jasper

Ode to Fanny Brawne by John Keats

The Boats of Morning by Alex Marlowe

The Breathing Composition by Welleran Smith

The Far Red World by Andre Tyson

Werewolvery in Europe and Rituals of Corporeal Transformation by Arminius Vambery

Lemming Cult by William L. West

Looking for Moreau: A Posthumanist Manifesto by Maxwell White

Works invented by Stephen King[]

Main article: List of fictional books in the works of Stephen King

Works invented by Barbara Kingsolver[]

In The Poisonwood Bible:

How to Survive 101 Calamities

In The Lacuna:

Pilgrims of Chapultepec by Harrison W. Shepherd

The Unforetold by Harrison W. Shepherd

Vassals of Majesty by Harrison W. Shepherd

Works invented by Dean Koontz[]

In Icebound

Changing Tomorrow by Rita Marzano

Works invented by Elizabeth Kostova[]

In The Historian:

The untitled dragon books which different characters in the book find.

Ballads of the Carpathians

Life of Saint George

Philosophie of the Aweful

The "Chronicle" of Zacharias of Zographou by Atanas Angelov and Anton Stoichev

Sisyphus by Thomas Aquinas

The Torture Commissioned by the Emperor for the Good of the People by Anna Comnena

The Cannibals by Henricus Curtius

Tales from the Carpathians published by Robert Digby

Fortunes of an Assassin by Erasmus

History of Central Europe by Lord Gelling

The Damned by Giorgio of Padua

The King of Tashkani by William Shakespeare, as a "lost work"

Works invented by Nicole Krauss[]

In The History of Love:

The History of Love by Leo Gursky

How to Survive in the Wild by Alma Singer

Life as We Didn't Know It

The Remedy

Words for Everything

L[]

Works invented by R. A. Lafferty[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Stanisław Lem[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Madeleine L'Engle[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Jonathan Lethem[]

In Chronic City:

You Can't be Serious, Dr. Jurow ghostwritten by Oona Laszlo.

Obstinate Dust by Ralph Warden Meeker. (Very likely a reference to Infinite Jest by David Foster Wallace)[4]

Works invented by C. S. Lewis[]

In The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe:

The Life and Letters of Silenus

Is Man a Myth?

Men, Monks, and Gamekeepers; a Study in Popular Legend

Nymphs and Their Ways

In Prince Caspian:

Grammatical Garden or the Arbour of Accidence pleasantlie open'd to Tender Wits by Pulverentus Siccus

In That Hideous Strength:

Dialect and Semantics by Dr. Elwin Ransom

Works invented by Sinclair Lewis[]

In It Can't Happen Here:

Zero Hour - Over the Top by Berzelius Windrip - A work that is "part biography, part economic program, and part plain exhibitionistic boasting" written by the fictional United States fascist senator Berzelius Windrip, and contains "more suggestions for remodeling the world than the three volumes of Karl Marx and all of the novels of H.G. Wells put together."

Works invented by David Liss[]

In A Conspiracy of Paper

The Unsuspecting Lover by Elias Gordon

In A Spectacle of Corruption

The Lively Adventures of Alexander Claren, Surgeon by Elias Gordon

Compared by its author with Daniel Defoe's Robinson Crusoe and Moll Flanders

Works invented by Barry Lopez[]

In The Mappist

The City of Ascensions by Onesimo Peña (pseudonym of Corlis Benefideo)

The City of Cod by William Smith Everett (pseudonym of Corlis Benefideo)

The City of Floating Sand by Frans Haartman (pseedonym of Corlis Benefideo)

The City of Frangipani by Jemboa Tran (pseudonym of Corlis Benefideo)

The City of Geraniums by Corlis Benefideo

Works invented by H. P. Lovecraft[]

This includes works by others in the Cthulhu Mythos.

Azathoth and Other Horrors by Edward Pickman Derby

Black Tome of Alsophocus

Book of Azathoth

Book of Eibon

Chronicles of Nath by James Sheffield

Chronike von Nath by Rudolf Yergler

De Vermis Mysteriis

Derby

Dhol Chants

The Eltdown Shards (tr. by Gordon Whitney)

Ghorl Nigral (also The Book of Night)

Ilarnek Papyri

Liber Ivonis

Liber-Damnatus

Livre d'Eibon

Necronomicon by Abdul al-Hazred

Pnakotic Manuscripts

Seven Cryptical Books of Hsan by Hsan the Greater (tr. Etienne-Laurent De Marigny)

Unaussprechlichen Kulten by Friedrich von Junzt

Works invented by Scott Lynch[]

In Red Seas Under Red Skies

Tragedy of the Ten Honest Turncoats by Lucarno.

The Heart-Eating Sword by Lucarno.

The Clarion Horn of Therim Pel by Lucarno.

The Empire of Seven Days by Lucarno.

The Assassin's Wedding by Lucarno.

Lucarno has produced many other works, defined as "Romances". His works remain popular even 400 years after his death.

Titles not given by Mercallor Mentezzo.

Mentezzo was a contemporary of Lucarno, less widely popular though he has adherents who consider his work to be much better.

The Letters by Lucestra of Nicora.

Seven Years Between the Gale and the Lash by Benedictus Montcalm.

Montcalm's book on pirate life is considered as "total bullshit" by real pirates who happened to read it.

True and Accurate History of the Wanton Red Flag by Suzette vela Ducasi.

Another book about the pirates, considered just a bit more accurate than Montcalam's. The author herself lives in Port Prodigal, a notorious pirates' haunt.

The Compendium by Velonetta.

Velonetta had been the foremost scholar of the period known as The Last Flowering, just before Emperor Talathri died in battle and his Empire fell. The three volumes of her Compendium dealt with such subjects as sculpture, painting, music and alchemy, but there were also detailed sections on the construction of exquisite furniture. These were much appreciated by the Master Carpenter Baumondain, who centuries later owned and treasured one of the six surviving copies of Velonetta's book.

Wise Mariner's Practical Lexicon, With Numerous Enlighting Examples From Honest History by Indrovo Lencallis.

An indispensable basic textbook for anyone seeking a nautical career.

Works invented by Robert Ludlum[]

Operation Atlantis in The Ambler Warning is an action-hero novel.

Works invented by Maja Lunde[]

The History of Bees by Tom Savage in The History of Bees

M[]

Works invented by Paul L. Maier[]

In The Constantine Codex:

Jesus of Nazareth by Jonathan Weber

Works invented by Thomas Mann[]

In "Death in Venice":

A prose epic on Frederick the Great by Gustav von Aschenbach

Maia by Gustav von Aschenbach

Ein Elender (The Abject) by Gustav von Aschenbach

Geist und Kunst (Mind and Art) by Gustav von Aschenbach

Works invented by Anthony Marra[]

In "A Constellation of Vital Phenomena ":

Chechen Civilization and Culture Under Russian Patronage by Khassan Ghesilov

Origins of Chechen Civilization: Prehistory to Fall of the Mongol Empire by Khassan Ghesilov

Works invented by Ann M. Martin[]

In The Baby-sitters Club series:

Alice Anderson by Henrietta Hayes

Alice Anderson's Big Break by Henrietta Hayes

Alice Anderson's Greatest Challenge by Henrietta Hayes

The Anderson Family Reunion by Henrietta Hayes

The Basics of Playwriting by an unnamed author

Bone Chilling Ghost Stories by an unnamed author

Ghosts and Spooks, Chills and Thrills: Stories NOT to be Read After Dark by an unnamed author

Ghosts: Fact and Fantasy by an unnamed author

Ghosts I Have Known by an unnamed author

Good Money by an unnamed author

Great Dog Tales by an unnamed author

A History of Stoneybrooke by Enos Cotterling

The Horse in Art by an unnamed author

Horses of the World by an unnamed author

Kids Can Cook … Naturally by an unnamed author

Live from New York by Amelia Moody

The Lost Grandmother by Amelia Moody

Mandy Mandango Takes the Bull by the Horns by Amelia Moody

Night Frights Number Thirteen! Don’t Get Out of Bed! by Theodore “Ted” Garber

Nitty Gritty Meatballs by Amelia Moody

Spirits, Spooks, and Ghostly Tales by an unnamed author

The Stoneybrook Who’s Who by an unnamed author

Works invented by John Masters[]

In To The Coral Strand

The Doughboy and the Duchess by H. Huntington Blauvelt

Published in 1919, it was an instant bestseller and made Blauvelt's reputation

Three or four unnamed books by H. Huntington Blauvelt

The Blauvelt books written in the 1920s were all "flops" and for a decade he withdrew from writing books and shifted to writing scripts in Hollywood

King of the Icefloes by H. Huntington Blauvelt

Safari by H. Huntington Blauvelt

An American Hunter by H. Huntington Blauvelt

The 1930s Blauvelt books all dealt with Hunting

Return to the Duchess by H. Huntington Blauvelt

A 1947 sequel to Blauvelt' first book, written after years as a WWII war correspondent

Works invented by W. Somerset Maugham[]

In The Moon and Sixpence:

A Modern Artist: Notes on the work of Charles Strickland by Edward Leggatt, ARHA, publ. Martin Secker, 1917

Karl Strickland: sein Leben und Schwingel und seine Kunst, by Hugo Weitbrecht-Rotholz, Ph.D., publ. Schwingel und Hanisch. Leipzig, 1914

Strickland: The Man and His Work, by Robers Strickland (his son). Wm. Heinemann, London. 1913

Works invented by Ian McEwan[]

In Saturday:

No Exequies (poetry) by John Grammaticus (winner of the Newdigate Prize)

My Saucy Bark (poetry) by Daisy Perowne (granddaughter of John Grammaticus, and also Newdigate prizewinner)

In Atonement

Works invented by Anne Michaels[]

In Fugitive Pieces:

Bearing False Witness by Athos Roussos

From Relics to Replica by Athos Roussos

Groundwork by Jakob Beer

Dilemma Poems by Jakob Beer

Hotel Rain by Jakob Beer

What Have You Done to Time by Jakob Beer

Works invented by David Mitchell[]

In Ghostwritten:

The Infinite Tether - You and Out of Body Experiences by Dwight Silverwind

In Cloud Atlas:

Knuckle Sandwich by Dermot 'Duster' Hoggins

The Pacific Journal of Adam Ewing by Adam Ewing

Half-Lives: The First Luisa Rey Mystery by Hilary V. Hush

The Ghastly Ordeal of Timothy Cavendish by Timothy Cavendish

In The Bone Clocks:

The Creepy Guy in the Yoga Class by Louis Baranquilla

Man in a White Car by Richard Cheeseman

Bushonomics and the New Monetarism by I.F.R. Coates

Route 605 by Nick Greek

Desiccated Embryos by Crispin Hershey

Echo Must Die by Crispin Hershey

Red Monkey by Crispin Hershey

To Be Continued by Crispin Hershey

Wanda in Oils by Crispin Hershey

The Icepick Man by Ersilia Holt

Across the Wide Ocean by Devon Kim-Ashkenazy

Horsehead Nebula by Maaza Kolofski

Soul Carnivores by Soleil Moore

Your Last Chance by Soleil Moore

In God's Country by Japheth Solomon

The Radio People by Holly Sykes

Wildflowers by Holly Sykes

How to Get Seriously Rich by Thirty by unknown

Works invented by Walter Moers[]

In The 13½ Lives of Captain Bluebear:

The Encyclopedia of Marvels, Life Forms and Other Phenomena of Zamonia and its Environs by Professor Abdullah Nightingale

Works invented by Lucy Maud Montgomery[]

In Anne of Avonlea:

Edgewood Days by Charlotte E. Morgan

Golden Keys by Charlotte E. Morgan

The Rosebud Garden by Charlotte E. Morgan

In Anne's House of Dreams:

A Mad Love by an unnamed woman (it has one hundred and three chapters)

The Life-Book of Captain Jim by Captain James Boyd and Owen Ford

In Rilla of Ingleside:

Morgan on the Care of Infants

In Emily's Quest:

The Moral of the Rose by Emily Byrd Starr

A Seller of Dreams by Emily Byrd Starr (unpublished)

A Royal Betrothal by Mark Delange Greaves

In The Blue Castle:

Thistle Harvest by John Foster

Magic of Wings by John Foster

Wild Honey by John Foster

Works invented by Richard Morgan[]

In the Takeshi Kovacs series:

Poems and Other Prevarications by Quellcrist Falconer

Things I Should Have Learned by Now by Quellcrist Falconer

Works invented by Haruki Murakami[]

In 1Q84

Air Chrysalis by Fuka-Eri (pen name of Eriko Fukada) and ghost written by Tengo Kawana.

Works invented by William Timothy Murray[]

In The Year of the Red Door[]

The Last Book of Nimwill by Nimwill

The Aldergiest Toll

Esin dur to Lumenii

Hope of the Stars

Poems of Starlerf of Everis

An Interview with a Late Traveler from the Dragon Lands, one Collandoth of Duinnor.

Legends and Tales of Magical Things by Raynor the Melnari

N[]

Works invented by Vladimir Nabokov[]

In Invitation to a Beheading:

Quercus

In The Real Life of Sebastian Knight:

Lost Property by Sebastian Knight

Success by Sebastian Knight

The Doubtful Asphodel by Sebastian Knight

The Funny Mountain by Sebastian Knight

The Prismatic Bezel by Sebastian Knight

In Lolita:

Histoire Abrégée de la Poésie Anglaise by Humbert Humbert

Lolita, or the Confession of a White Widowed Male by Humbert Humbert

The Proustian Theme in a Letter from Keats to Benjamin Bailey by Humbert Humbert

Who's Who in the Limelight (a theatrical yearbook of 1946), author unknown

The Little Nymph a play by Clare Quilty

Dark Age a play by Clare Quilty

The Strange Mushroom a play by Clare Quilty

Fatherly Love a play by Clare Quilty

The Enchanted Hunters a play by Clare Quilty

The Lady who Loved Lightning a play by Clare Quilty & Vivian Darkbloom

My Cue a biography of Clare Quilty by Vivian Darkbloom

In Pnin:

Suhie Gubi (Dry Lips) by Liza Bogolepov

Russia Awakes by Miss Herring

Response, A Hundred Love Lyrics by American Women

In Pale Fire:

A book on surnames (title unknown) by Charles X. Kinbote

Timon Afinsken (translation of Timon of Athens) by Conmal, Duke of Aros

Voluminous correspondence by Ferz and Oswin Bretwit

Zemblan variants of the Konungs skuggsjá collected or forged by Hodinski (also known as Hodyna)

Ten volumes' worth of novels (titles unknown) by Jane de Faun

Dim Gulf by John Shade

Hebe's Cup by John Shade

Night Rote by John Shade

Poems by John Shade

Supremely Blest by John Shade

Taming a Seahorse by John Shade

A psychology textbook (title unknown) by Professor C.

Birds of Mexico by Samuel Shade, illustrated by Carolyn Shade

Historia Zemblica

The Merman (play)

In Look at the Harlequins!:

The book begins with a list of "Other Books by the Narrator". Many, if not all, of these titles appear to be doppelgangers of Nabokov’s real novels.

Tamara (1925), relates to Mary

Pawn Takes Queen (1927), relates to King, Queen, Knave and The Defense[1]

Plenilune (1929), relates to The Defense

Camera Lucida (Slaughter in the Sun), relates to Laughter in the Dark (UK title: Camera Obscura)

The Red Top Hat (1934), relates to Invitation to a Beheading

The Dare (1950), relates to The Gift (Dar, in Russian) and Glory

See under Real (1939), relates to The Real Life of Sebastian Knight and Pale Fire[1]

Esmeralda and Her Parandrus (1941)

Dr. Olga Repnin (1946), relates to Pnin

Exile from Mayda (1947), a short story collection, could relate to Spring in Fialta and Other Stories

A Kingdom by the Sea (1962), relates to Lolita

Ardis (1970), relates to Ada

Works invented by Robert Neill[]

In Crown and Mitre

"Merlinus Verax Vondicatus" by Nicholas Culley.

In The Golden Days:

"Merlinus Hesternus Redivivus, wherein are exposed to the searching rays of truth the vain and idle writings of Mr. John Gadbury, touching the Celestial Sign of Scorpio" by Sir Nicholas Culley (a book of astrology with political implications, being insulting to the Duke of York).

"Merlinus Vexatus, wherein shall be found displayed the pains and tribulations lately come upon that most worthy Knight and Sage, Sir Nicholas Culley" written anonymously by Anthony Ashley Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury and other Whigs and falsely attributed to Sir Nicholas Culley.

"Merlinus Politicus, humbly offered, for the use of inquiring men", by Philomathes - (writer's real name unknown).

Works invented by Michael J. Nelson[]

In Mike Nelson's Death Rat!:

Absolutely Dogwood by Gus Bromstad

Ain't Nowhere I Won't Go by Bert Herzog

And Tyler Too: In the Shadow of Harrison by Pontius Feeb

Bald, Fat, Wattled, and Proud: The History of the Wild Turkey in America by Pontius Feeb

Better than Great: A Maritime History of Lake Superior by Pontius Feeb

Complainer's Moon by Ingrid Stufflebeam

Czech and Sea: Dvorak's Voyages to America by Pontius Feeb

Death Rat by Pontius Feeb and Jack Ryback

Dogwood, Anyone? by Gus Bromstad

Dogwood Downs by Gus Bromstad

A Dogwood Primer by Gus Bromstad

Everett M. Dirsken: The Other McKinley by Pontius Feeb

Gesta Danorum by Gus Bromstad

Go Skyward, Missile by Bunt Casey

The Hammer of Nippon by Bunt Casey

He Lived to Die by Bunt Casey

Hell, Oh, Copter by an unnamed author

In the Belly of the Moose by an unnamed author

Letters from Jenny by Gus Bromstad

Man One, Mountain Zero by an unnamed author

O'er the Ramparts by Bunt Casey

Old von Steuben Had a Farm: The German-American Settlement of the Midwest by Pontius Feeb

On Belay by an unnamed author

Push Me, Pull You: The Importance of Railroad Handcars to an Emerging Industry by Pontius Feeb

Reach Not the High Shelf Lonnie Dich

Red Debt by Bunt Casey

Sailors Take Warning by an unnamed author

Shall Not Perish by Bunt Casey

Stamp Your Ass MINE! by Bert Herzog

Where Did Amergio?: Vespucci and the New World by Pontius Feeb

White Pyramid of Doom by an unnamed author

Without an Ore: The Decline of Minnesota's Mining Industry by Pontius Feeb

Worse than Her Bite: The FBI's Vilification of Ma Barker by Pontius Feeb

You Can Bank on It: Senator Carter Glass and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation by Pontius Feeb

Works invented by Geoff Nicholson[]

In Hunters and Gatherers:

The Books of Power (18 vols.) by Thornton McCain

Works Invented by Garth Nix[]

In Sabriel:

The Book of the Dead (anonymous)

In Lirael:

The Book of Remembrance and Forgetting [anonymous]

Creatures by Nagi by Nagi

In the Skin of a Lyon [anonymous]

Works invented by Idra Novey[]

In Ways to Disappear:

by Beatriz Yagoda

O[]

Works invented by Patrick O'Brian[]

In Desolation Island:

New Operations for Suprapubic Cystotomy by Dr. Stephen Maturin

Suggestions for the Amelioration of Sick-Bays by Dr. Stephen Maturin

Thoughts on the Prevention of Diseases most usual among Seamen by Dr. Stephen Maturin

Tractatus de Novae Febris Ingressu by Dr. Stephen Maturin

In The Wine-Dark Sea:

Mariners: Consensus and Cohesion in Certain States of Adversity by Dr. Stephen Maturin

Some Remarks on Peruvian Cirripedes by Dr. Stephen Maturin

In Treason's Harbour:

Modest Proposals for the Preservation of Health in the Navy by Dr. Stephen Maturin

Remarks on Pezophaps Solitarious by Dr. Stephen Maturin

Works invented by Flann O'Brien[]

In At Swim-Two-Birds:

A Conspectus of the Arts and Sciences by Cowper

Flower o' the Prairie by William Tracy

Jake's Last Ride by William Tracy

Red Flannagan's Last Throw by William Tracy

In The Third Policeman:

De Selby Compendium by Bassett

Lux Mundi: A Memoir of de Selby by Bassett

Recollections by Bassett

Glauben ueber Ueberalls by Countess Schnapper

A Memoir of Garcia by de Selby

Codex by de Selby

Country Album by de Selby

Golden Hours by de Selby

Layman's Atlas by de Selby

Rural Atlas by de Selby

Histoire de Notre Temps by Du Garbandier

Great Towns by Goddard

The Man Who Sailed Away: A Memoir by H. Barge

Conspectus of the de Selby Dialetic by Hatchjaw

De Selby's Life and Times by Hatchjaw

The De Selby Water-Boxes Day by Day by Hatchjaw

Hatchjaw and Bassett by Henderson

De Selbys Leben by Kraus

Collected Works by Le Clerque

Extensions and Analyses by Le Clerque

De Selby - l'Enigme de l'Occident by Le Fournier

De Selby - Lieu ou Homme? by Le Fournier

Thoughts in a Library by Peachcroft

Bibliographie de de Selby

Works invented by George Orwell[]

In Nineteen Eighty-Four:

The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism - authorship attributed to Emmanuel Goldstein; in fact composed by a team of Thought Police operatives, among them Comrade O'Brien.

The Newspeak Dictionary by multiple authors, one of them Syme.

The Ninth and Tenth Editions, used in 1984, were provisional and contained many superfluous words and archaic formations which were due to be suppressed later.

The Eleventh Edition of the Dictionary, the final, perfected version, came out later, long after Winston Smith was convicted of thoughtcrime and vaporised. Also Syme was convicted of thoughtcrime and vaporised; therefore, though the Eleventh Edition included many of Syme's contributions, he was given no credit for them.

In Keep the Aspidistra Flying:

The World Beyond, by the author of Spirit Hands Have Touched me

Father Hilaire Chestnut's "latest book of R.C. propaganda"

London Pleasures, lengthy narrative poem which Gordon Comstock is working on but never completes—"a dreadful book that never got any further, and which, as he knew in his moments of clarity, never would get any further"

Mice, small volume of poetry by Gordon Comstock

High Jinks in a Parisian Convent by Sadie Blackeyes

Jesus the First Rotarian, Some Aspects of the Italian Baroque ("a snooty-looking volume"), Secrets of Paris and The Man She Trusted, none of whose authors are stated

In The Road to Wigan Pier:

Marxism for Infants by Comrade X, member of the CPGB

In Coming Up for Air:

Astrology applied to Horse-racing, "which proved that it's all a question of influence of the planets on the colours the jockey is wearing."

Wasted Passion—"The chap in the story finds out that his girl has gone off with another chap."

Works invented by Delia Owens[]

In Where the Crawdads Sing:

The Sea Shells of the Eastern Seaboard by Catherine Danielle Clark

The Eastern Seacoast Birds by Catherine Danielle Clark

Works invented by Helen Oyeyemi[]

In What Is Not Yours Is Not Yours:

An Outcast’s Apology by Matyas Füst

P[]

Works invented by Charles Palliser[]

In Betrayals:

The Armageddon Protocol by Drummond Gilchrist (unfinished)

The Atlantis Ultimatum by Drummond Gilchrist

The Importance of Being Jack, a play by Maturin within the fictional television show Biggert.

The Cincinnatus Papers by Jeremy Prentice

Down on Whores by Horatio Quaife

Enough Rope by Auberon Saville

The Finger Man by Cyril Pattison

For Richer, For Poorer by Jeremy Prentice

The Mystic Medicine Man: Henri Galvanauskas in Lithuania 1940-41 by Jacques Gicquiaux

The Greater Glory by Jeremy Prentice

Let Not Ambition by

The Hauptmann Ultimatum by Frederick Ludlum

The Quintain by Drummond Gilchrist

The Quintessence by Cyril Pattison

The Right Lines by Horatio Quaife

The Sensation Seeker by Cyril Pattison

Unmasking Strategies of Desire: Texts, Power, and the Phallus in the Work of Henri Galvaunauskas by Graham Speculand

The Sting in the Tail by Jeremy Prentice, unpublished

The Throat Surgeon by Lavinia Armitage

Too Clever by Half by Jeremy Prentice

The Twister by William Henry Ireland, unpublished

Works invented by Orhan Pamuk[]

In The Black Book:

Obscuri Libri by Bottfolio

Kitabü’z- Zulmet by İbn Zerhanî

Works invented by Christopher Paolini[]

In Brisingr:

Domia abr Wyrda

Works invented by Robert B. Parker[]

In Looking for Rachel Wallace:

Sisterhood

Tyranny

Works invented by Ann Patchett[]

In Commonwealth:

First City by Leon Posen

Septimus Porter by Leon Posen

Commonwealth by Leon Posen

The Seventh Story by John Hollinger

Works invented by Arturo Pérez-Reverte[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Iain Pears[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Elizabeth Peters[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Chaim Potok[]

In The Gift of Asher Lev:

The Cave of Now by Devorah Lev

Works invented by Stephen Potter[]

In Gamesmanship:

Bird Gamesmanship by Stephen Potter

Gamesman's Handbook (1949) by Stephen Potter

Gardens for Gamesmen, or When to be Fond of Flowers by Stephen Potter

Moth's Way and Bee's Wayfaring by O. Agnes Bartlett

Origins and Early History of Gamesmanship by Stephen Potter

The Silver Book of End-Play Squeezes by Stephen Potter

Twenty-Five Methods of Tee-Leaving by Stephen Potter

In Lifemanship:

Dictionary of Lifemanship and Gameswords by Symes

Kninghts, and How to Reasuure Them about their Social Position by unknown

MP-manship 1953 by T. Driberg

Periodship (volume 2) by J. Betjeman

Springs on the Arun by A.C.Y. Davis

In One-Upmanship:

The Birdsman in Society by B. Campbell

Bricks Without Straw by Olaf Pepacanek

The Tea Party by T.D. Pontefract

In Supermanship: '

Airborne Heritage by Stephen Potter

Down to Sixteen or Less by Stephen Potter

Literary Guide to the Thames Valley by Stephen Potter

My Fayre Sussex by Otto Carling

Rhododendron Hunting in the Andes by Dr. Preissberger

Works invented by Anthony Powell[]

For a list organized by author see "An Anthony Powell ABibliography." [5]

In Books Do Furnish a Room:

Borage and Hellebore by Nick Jenkins

Sweetskin by Alaric Kydd

Bin Ends by F.X. Trapnel

Camel Ride to the Tomb by F.X. Trapnel

Dogs Have No Uncles by F.X. Trapnel

Profiles in String by F.X. Trapnel

In the A Dance to the Music of Time series:

Dust Thou Art by St. John Clarke

E'en the Longest River by St. John Clarke

Fields of Amaranth by St. John Clarke

The Heart is Highland by St. John Clarke

Match Me Such Marvel by St. John Clarke

Mimosa by St. John Clarke

Never to the Philistines by St. John Clarke

In Fisher King:

An unknown title by Valentine Beals

In Hearing Secret Harmonies:

The Gothic Symbolism of Mortality in the Texture of Jacobean Stagecraft by Emily Brightman

Cain's Jawbone by Evadne Clapham

Death's Head Swordsman, The Life and Works of X. Trapnel by Russell Gwinnett

Bedsores by Ada Leintwardine

The Bitch Pack meets on Wednesday by Ada Leintwardine

In What's Become of Waring:

Fierce Midnights by O. Guiller-Lawson

An unknown title by Shirley Handsworth

Aristogeiton: a Harmony by Minhinnick

Than Whom What Other? by Redhead

Athletes Footmen by Quentin Shuckerly

An unknown title by T.T. Waring

Works invented by Richard Powers[]

In The Overstory:

The Secret Forest by Patricia Westerford

The New Metamorphosis by Patricia Westerford

Works invented by Terry Pratchett[]

In the Discworld series:

100 Walks in the Ramtops, by Eric Wheelbrace

Almanack de Gothic

Cooking with Brains, by Chef Aimsbury (Chef dé Canine Cuisine, Royal Bank of Ankh-Morpork)

Demonylogie Malyfycorum of Henchanse thee Unsatyfactory

Diseases of the Dragon

The Show Judges' Guide to Dragons, by Lady Sybil Ramkin

Diseases of the Sheep

Geoffrey and the Magic Pillow Case in Snuff, by Miss Felicity Beedle

Grim Fairy Tales

The Goode Childe's Booke of Faerie Tales

I Spy....Demons, by Professor Cuvee of Unseen University

Inne Juste 7 Dayes I Wille Make You a Barbearian Hero!, by Cohen the Barbarian

The Joye of Snackes, by "A Lancre Witch"

Koom Valley Codex

The Laws and Ordinances of the Cities of Ankh and Morpork

Liber Immanis Monstrorum, by Professor Cuvee of Unseen University

The Little Duckling Who Thought He Was an Elephant in Snuff, by Miss Felicity Beedle

Melvin and the Enormous Boil in Snuff, by Miss Felicity Beedle

Mr. Bunnsy Has an Adventure

Necrotelicomnicon

The Octavo

Res Centum et Una Quas Magus Facere Potest

The Summoning of Dragons, by Tubal de Malachite

True Art of Levitatione

Twurp's Peerage

Walking in the Koom Valley, by Eric Wheelbrace

What I Did On My Holidays, by Twoflower

Where's My Cow? in Thud! (A version exists in the real world which features the fictional characters reading the fictional version.)

The World of Poo in Snuff, by Miss Felicity Beedle (A real-world edition of this book also exists.)

In The Amazing Maurice and his Educated Rodents:

Mr Bunnsy Has an Adventure

In Good Omens (with Neil Gaiman):

The Nice And Accurate Prophecies of Agnes Nutter, Witch

The "Buggre Alle Thys" Bible (fictional edition of the Bible)

In Wintersmith:

Survival in the Snow (by T.H. Mouseholder)

Cooking in Dire Straits (by Superflua Raven)

Among the Snow Weasels (by K. Pierpoint Poundsworth)

The Habits of Wolves (by Captain W.E. Lightly)

Magnaventio Obtusis (by Perspicacia Tick)

Ancient and Classical Mythology (by Chaffinch)

Passion's Plaything (by Marjory J. Boddice)

Sundered Hearts (by Marjory J. Boddice)

Unexpurgated Dictionary

Works (possibly) invented by Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite[]

Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite' was a Christian theologian and philosopher of the late 5th to early 6th century, whose real name is unknown and who pseudonymously identifies as Dionysius the Areopagite, the Athenian convert of Paul the Apostle mentioned in Template:Bibleverse. He left a considerable corpus of works. Seven other works are mentioned repeatedly by pseudo-Dionysius in his surviving works, and are presumed either to be lost[6] or to be fictional works mentioned by the Areopagite as a literary device to give the impression to his sixth-century readers of engaging with the surviving fragments of a much larger first-century corpus of writings.[7] These seven other works are:

Theological Outlines (Θεολογικαὶ ὑποτυπώσεις),

Symbolic Theology (Συμβολικὴ θεολογία),

On Angelic Properties and Orders (Περὶ ἀγγελικῶν ἰδιοτήτων καὶ τάξεων),

On the Just and Divine Judgement (Περὶ δικαίου καὶ θείου δικαστηρίου),

On the Soul (Περὶ ψυχῆς),

On Intelligible and Sensible Beings,Template:Refn

On the Divine Hymns.Template:Refn

Works invented by Malcolm Pryce[]

In Aberystwyth Mon Amour:

On Pools of Love by Joyce Moonweather

Governing a Sloop by Captain Marcus Trelawney

Towards a New Pathology of Slovenliness by Dr Heinz X. Nuesslin

Roses of Charon by Job Gorseino

Corruption of the Deep: The Captain's Guide to Last Rites and Burials at Sea

Works invented by Philip Pullman[]

In The Secret Commonwealth:

An Analysis of Some Philosophical Implications of the Rusakov Field by Gerard Bonneville Ph.D.

Clavis Symbolorum by Andreas Rentzinger

Constant Deceiver by Simon Talbot

Alethiometrica by Spiridon Trepka

The Hyperchorasmians by Brande

Works invented by Thomas Pynchon[]

Adventures in Neuropathy by Puckpool

An Account of the Singular Peregrinations of Dr Diocletian Blobb among the Italians, Illuminated with Exemplary Tales from the True History of That Outlandish And Fantastical Race

The Book of Iceland Spar ('commonly described as "like the Ynglingasaga only different"')

The Chums of Chance and the Caged Women of Yokohama

The Chums of Chance and the Curse of the Great Kahuna

The Chums of Chance and the Evil Halfwit

The Chums of Chance and the Ice Pirates

The Chums of Chance at Krakatoa

The Chums of Chance at the Ends of the Earth

The Chums of Chance in Old Mexico

The Chums of Chance in the Bowels of the Earth ('for some reason one of the less appealing of this series, letters having come in from as far away as Tunbridge Wells, England, expressing displeasure, often quite intense, with my harmless little intraterrestrial scherzo.') (Pynchon 2006, p. 117)

The Chums of Chance Nearly Crash into the Kremlin

The Chums of Chance Search for Atlantis

The Courier's Tragedy by Richard Wharfinger (a Jacobean revenge play in five acts)

The Ghastly Fop (from Mason & Dixon)

How I Came to Love the People (anonymous)

The Italian Wedding Fake Book by Deleuze & Guattari

King Kong; 18 vls. by Mitchell Prettyplace (a 'definitive study')

Neil Nosepicker's Book of 50,000 Insults. The Nayland Smith Press, Cambridge (Massachusetts), 1933

The Pennsylvaniad, an epic poem by Timothy Tox featured throughout Mason & Dixon

On Preterition by William Slothrop ('among the first books to've been not only banned but ceremonially burned in Boston')

The Plays of Ford, Webster, Tourneur and Wharfinger by Dr. Emory Bortz

Plotting the Stealth and Intrigue of the Jacobean Revenge Plays by Dr. Emory Bortz

Swamp Wench, a pornographic paperback being read by Nathan "Lardass" Levine in the short story "The Small Rain"

Tales of the Schwarzkommando collected by Steve Edelman

Things That Can Happen In European Politics by Ernest Pudding

The Wisdom of the Great Kamikaze Pilots (with illustrations by Walt Disney)

R[]

Works invented by François Rabelais[]

Main article: List of fictional works in Gargantua and Pantagruel

Works invented by Ayn Rand[]

In The Fountainhead:

Clouds and Shrouds, a memoir by Lois Cook

The Gallant Gallstone, a novel by Lois Cook

Sermons in Stone, a book about architecture by Ellsworth Toohey

In Atlas Shrugged:

The Heart is a Milkman, a novel by Balph Eubank

The Metaphysical Contradictions of the Universe, a philosophy book by Dr. Simon Pritchett

The Vulture Is Molting, a nonfiction book by an unnamed author

Why Do You Think You Think?, a nonfiction book by Dr. Floyd Ferris

In No (a fragment published posthumously in The Early Ayn Rand)

The Young Communist

Red Weekdays

Red Harvest

Naked Year (about the Russian Civil War)

Sickle and Hammer( "A futuristic and profound book about class awakening of the village")

In Kira's Viking (a fragment published posthumously in The Early Ayn Rand)

The Viking by an unkown author

"There was only one book Kira remembered. She was ten years old when she read it. It was the story of a Viking. It was written in English. Her governess [in Russia] gave it to her. She heard later that the author had died very young. She had not remembered his name; in later years,she had never been able to find it".

Works invented by Mary Renault[]

In The Friendly Young Ladies:

By J.O. Flint:

Pillar of Cloud

Remission

By Tex O'Hara, pseudonym of Leonora Lane:

Lone Stair Trail

The Mexican Spur

Quick on the Draw

Silver Guns

Yippee-ih!

Works invented by Nora Roberts[]

In Year One:

Wizard King by Max Fallon

Works invented by Nora Roberts (writing as J. D. Robb)[]

In Dark in Death:

Sudden Dark by Blaine DeLano

Dark Falls by Blaine DeLano

Dark Deeds by Blaine DeLano (five more books in the "Dark" series are unnamed)

With Prejudice by Blaine DeLano

In other books of the In Death series:

The Icove Agenda by Nadine Furst (first mentioned in Salvation in Death)

Works invented by J. K. Rowling[]

This is a list of books mentioned in the Harry Potter series. Titles specifically mentioned as textbooks are listed first, by class, followed by other books listed by general topic. Note that three of the following fictional books have since been written and published in the real world: Quidditch Through the Ages by Kennilworthy Whisp (2001), Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them by Newt Scamander (2001), and The Tales of Beedle the Bard (2007, 2008).

Template:Col-1-of-2Hogwarts textbooks

Arithmancy

Book of Numerology

Numerology and Grammatica, a textbook that, in the movies, is divided into two separate textbooks:

Numerology by L. Wakefield

Grammatica by M. Carneiro

Care of Magical Creatures

Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them by Newt Scamander

The Monster Book of Monsters

Charms

Standard Book of Spells (Grades One, Two, Three, Four, Five, Six and presumably Seven) by Miranda Goshawk

Quintessence: A Quest

Defence Against the Dark Arts

Confronting the Faceless

Break with a Banshee by Gilderoy Lockhart

Gadding with Ghouls by Gilderoy Lockhart

Holidays with Hags by Gilderoy Lockhart

Travels with Trolls by Gilderoy Lockhart

Voyages with Vampires by Gilderoy Lockhart

Wandering with Werewolves by Gilderoy Lockhart

Year with the Yeti by Gilderoy Lockhart

The Dark Forces: A Guide to Self-Protection by Quentin Trimble

Defensive Magical Theory by Wilbert Slinkhard

Magical Me by Gilderoy Lockhart

Divination

'The Dream Oracle by Inigo Imago

Unfogging the Future by Cassandra Vablatsky

Death Omens: What to Do When You Know the Worst is Coming

Broken Balls: When Fortune Turns Foul

Predicting the Unpredictable: Insulate Yourself against Shocks"

Herbology

One Thousand Magical Herbs and Fungi by Phyllida Spore

Encyclopædia of Toadstools

Magical Mediterranean Water Plants and their Properties

Flesh-eating Trees of the World

History of Magic

A History of Magic by Bathilda Bagshot

Muggle Studies

Home Life and Social Habits of British Muggles by Wilhelm Wigworthy (Little Red Books, 1987)

Potions

Advanced Potion Making by Libatius Borage

Magical Drafts and Potions by Arsenius Jigger

Asiatic Anti-Venoms

Moste Potente Potions

Book of Potions by Zygmunt Budge

Study of Ancient Runes

Ancient Runes Made Easy

Transfiguration

A Beginner's Guide to Transfiguration by Emeric Switch

Intermediate Transfiguration

Guide to Advanced Transfiguration

Non-textbooks;

History

An Anthology of Eighteenth Century Charms

A Guide to Medieval Sorcery

Animal Ghosts of Britain by Mopsy Fleabert

Olde and Forgotten Bewitchments and Charmes

Great Wizards of the Twentieth Century

Nature's Nobility: A Wizarding Genealogy

Pureblood Directory by Cantankerus Nott (presumed)

Notable Magical Names of Our Time

The Rise and Fall of the Dark Arts

The Life and Lies of Albus Dumbledore by Rita Skeeter

Snape: Saint or Scoundrel? by Rita Skeeter

Armando Dippet: Master or Moron? by Rita Skeeter

Man or Monster? The Truth About Newt Scamander by Rita Skeeter

Dumbledore's Army: The Dark Side of the Demob by Rita Skeeter

Prefects Who Gained Power

Great Wizarding Events of the Twentieth Century

Hogwarts, A History, by Chroniclus Punnet

Sites of Historical Sorcery

Modern Magical History

Important Modern Magical Discoveries

A Study of Recent Developments in Wizardry

An Appraisal of Magical Education in Europe

Template:Col-2-of-2

Magical creatures

Dragon Breeding for Pleasure and Profit

Dragon Species of Great Britain and Ireland

Dreadful Denizens of the Deep

From Egg to Inferno: a Dragon-Keeper's Guide

Men Who Love Dragons Too Much

Handbook of Hippogriff Psychology

Fowl or Foul? A Study of Hippogriff Brutality

Why I Didn't Die When the Augerey Cried by Gulliver Pokeby (Little Red Books, 1824)

Hairy Snout, Human Heart by an anonymous author (Whizz Hard Books, 1975)

Blood Brothers: My Life Amongst the Vampires by Eldred Worple

Dark Arts

Magick Moste Evile

Secrets of the Darkest Art

A Compendium of Common Curses and Their Counter-Actions

Curses and Counter-Curses by Professor Vindictus Viridian

The Dark Arts Outsmarted

Self-Defensive Spellwork

Jinxes for the Jinxed

Practical Defensive Magic Its Use Against the Dark Arts

Magical cooking and housecare

Charm Your Own Cheese

Enchantment in Baking

Gilderoy Lockhart's Guide to Household Pests by Gilderoy Lockhart

One-Minute Feasts—It's Magic!

Practical Household Magic by Zamira Gulch

Magical healthcare

Common Magical Ailments and Afflictions

The Healer's Helpmate

A Study into the Possibility of Reversing the Actual and Metaphysical Effects of Natural Death, with Particular Regard to the Reintegration of Essence and Matter

Magical how-to

Weird Wizarding Dilemmas and Their Solutions

Where There's a Wand, There's a Way

The Invisible Book of Invisibility

Twelve Fail-Safe Ways to Charm Witches

Handbook of Do-It-Yourself-Broomcare

Magical theory

Magical Theory by Adalbert Waffling

New Theory of Numerology

Magical Hieroglyphs and Logograms

Spellbooks

Achievements in Charming

Basic Hexes for the Busy and Vexed

Spellman's Syllabary

Madcap Magic for Wacky Warlocks

Saucy Tricks for Tricky Sorts

Powers You Never Knew You Had and What to Do With Them Now You've Wised Up

Jiggery Pokery and Hocus Pocus by Brian Gagwilde

The Book of Spells by Miranda Goshawk

Sports and games

Beating the Bludgers—A Study of Defensive Strategies in Quidditch by Kennilworthy Whisp

Flying with the Cannons

Quidditch Through the Ages by Kennilworthy Whisp (Whizz Hard Books, 1952)

Quidditch Teams of Britain and Ireland

The Official Guide to the Quidditch World Cup, by The International Confederation of Wizards' Quidditch Committee

The Beater's Bible by Brutus Scrimgeour

Muggles

Muggles Who Notice by Blenheim Stalk (1972)

The Philosophy of the Mundane: Why the Muggles Prefer Not to Know by Professor Mordicus Egg (Dust & Mildewe, 1963)

Miscellaneous

Sonnets of a Sorcerer (cursed, anyone who reads it speaks in limericks for the rest of their lives)

The Adventures of Martin Miggs, the Mad Muggle - a comic Harry sees in Ron's room

The Tales of Beedle the Bard is a book of children's stories which is mentioned in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows.One, about the hairy heart, is too strong for a child to read or listen to, and so was omitted by Beatrix Bloxam from her anthology.

The Hairy Heart: A Guide to Wizards who Won't Commit

The Toadstool Tales by Beatrix Bloxam. This includes highly watered down versions of Beedle's stories.

Tom Riddle's diary, later revealed to be a horcrux, or part of Voldemort's soul.

Periodicals

Transfiguration Today

The Practical Potioneer

Challenges in Charming

Warlock at War

Which Broomstick

Witch Weekly

The Quibbler

Works invented by Carlos Ruiz Zafón[]

In The Shadow of the Wind:

By Julián Carax:

The Angel of the Mist

The Cathedral Thief

The Red House

The Shadow of the Wind

S[]

Works invented by Brandon Sanderson[]

In The Way of Kings,

Among the Darkeyed, a collection of folktales by Calinam

The Book of Endless Pages, a religious text

Dialogues, a famous historical work on political theory

Emperor, by Ixsix

Eternathis, a four-volume philosophy

Incarnate, by Guvlow

The Last Desolation, by Ambrian

Nearer the Flame, a novel

Palates of Personality

The Poem of Ista, a poem

The Poem of the Seventh Morning, a poem

Shadows Remembered, folktales of ghosts and Voidbringers

The Song of the Last Summer, a romance

Tales by Hearthlight, a collection of children’s folktales by Innia

Times and Passage, a Rosharan history since the Hierocracy by Rencalt

Topics, a multi-volume history by Barlesha Lhan

The Vavibrar

The Way of Kings, a scriptural work by Nohadon

Western Voyages, scientific sketches by Myalmr

In Words of Radiance,

Words of Radiance, a historical treatise

The Diagram, King Taravangian’s book containing his revelations from his single day of brilliance

In Oathbringer,

An Accountability of Virtue, an Alethi epic

Mythica, a volume on the Unmade, by Hessi

Oathbringer, My Glory and My Shame, by Dalinar Kholin

Relic and Monument, by Jasnah Kholin

Works invented by May Sarton[]

In Mrs. Stevens Hears the Mermaids Singing, by F. Hilary Stevens:

Bull's Eye, a novel

From a Hospital Bed, poems

Themes & Variation, poems

Dialogues, poems

Country Spells, poems

The Silences, poems

Most of the book is an interview of Mrs. Stevens at 70, and each book represents a section of her life.

Works invented by Dorothy L. Sayers[]

Template:Col-1-of-2 In The Documents in the Case:

Neglected Edible Treasures by George Harrison

I to Hercules by Jack Munting

In Gaudy Night :

A Study of Sheridan Le Fanu by Harriet Vane

Death Twixt Wind and Water by Harriet Vane

The Sands of Crime by Harriet Vane

Gas-Filled Bulbs by Jacqueline Squills

The Position of Women in the Modern State by Miss Barton

History of Prosody by Miss Lydgate

Passion-Flower Pie by Mrs. Snell-Wilmington

Mock-Turtle by Tasker Hepplewater

Ariadne Adams

Dusk and Shiver

Jocund Day

Primrose Dalliance

Serpent's Fang

The Squeezed Lemon

In Have His Carcase:

Murder By Degrees by Harriet Vane

The Fountain Pen Mystery by Harriet Vane

A Bid for a Throne

The Girl who gave All

The Trial of the Purple Python

In Strong Poison:

Death in the Pot by Harriet Vane

Can the Dead Speak?

Template:Col-2-of-2 In Thrones, Dominations:

The Suspect by Claude Amery

This Forked Plague by Claude Amery

Gee-up Edward by Mr. Clandon

Distinguished Gathering

Modern Aircraft, A Manual for Trainee Pilots

The Brazen Serpent

In Unnatural Death:

The Murderer's Vade Mecum by Lord Peter Wimsey

Notes on the Collecting of Incunabula by Lord Peter Wimsey

In Whose Body?:

An Answer to Professor Freud, With a Description of Some Experiments Carried Out at the Base Hospital in Amiens by Sir Julian Freke

An Examination into the Treatment of Pauper Lunacy in the United Kingdom by Sir Julian Freke

Cerebro-Spinal Diseases by Sir Julian Freke

Criminal Lunacy by Sir Julian Freke

Functional Disturbances of the Nervous System by Sir Julian Freke

Modern Developments in Psycho-Therapy: A Criticism by Sir Julian Freke

Some Notes on the Pathological Aspects of Genius by Sir Julian Freke

Statistical Contributions to the Study of Infantile Paralysis in England and Wales by Sir Julian Freke

Structural Modifications Accompanying the More Important Neuroses by Sir Julian Freke

The Application of Psycho-Therapy to the Treatment of Shell-Shock by Sir Julian Freke

The Borderland of Insanity by Sir Julian Freke

The Physiological Bases of the Conscience by Sir Julian Freke

In the Montague Egg stories:

The Salesman's Handbook

Works invented by Davis Schneiderman[]

In Drain:

The Book of Maneuvers by Fulcrum Maneuvers, plays a pivotal role

In Multifesto: The Henri d'Mescan Reader:

Summary Execution by Henri d'Mescan

Abstractions by Henri d'Mescan

Marginalia by Henri d'Mescan

The Trial and Death of Henri d’Mescan: Apoplectic by Henri d'Mescan

Spacecats of the World, Untie! by Henry Mescaline

Tupeat, Frompeet, Repeit by Henry Mescaline

Hallucigenome: The Henry Mescaline Reader by Henry Mescaline

Post-America" by Henri d'Mescan

'Touching a Careless God, or Were by Hans Dialectic

And the Pleasure Dome Decrees… by Lucien Spume

Kaballah?—Cab Allah! by Henri d’Mescan

Crocodilopolis, or, The Ribcage Sounds Like A Wooden Chest by Gact

The Breakers — Newport, RI. in 103 New World Sites: A Compendium of the Obtuse

Try and Catch God before God ACTs Up. by Tacg

In Dis:

Autobiomagicatomsexmonkey by Thelonius Bosh, edited by Ablaut the monkey.

Works invented by Charles M. Schulz[]

The Six Bunny-Wunnies series by Helen Sweetstory

The Six Bunny-Wunnies and Their Pony Cart

The Six Bunny-Wunnies Go To Long Beach

The Six Bunny-Wunnies Make Cookies

The Six Bunny-Wunnies Join an Encounter Group

The Six Bunny-Wunnies and Their XK-E

The Six Bunny-Wunnies and Their Water Bed

The Six Bunny-Wunnies and Their Layover in Anderson, Indiana

The Six Bunny-Wunnies and Their Female Veterinarian

The Six Bunny-Wunnies Freak Out

The Six Bunny-Wunnies Visit Plains, Georgia

Works invented by Michael Scott[]

In The Magician: The Secrets of the Immortal Nicholas Flamel

The Codex – or Book of Abraham the Mage by Abraham the Mage

A powerful book of magic. Its missing pages were found and used (for evil purposes) by Niccolò Machiavelli, still secretly alive in the 21st Century and hatching dark plots.

Works invented by Michael Shea[]

In Nifft the Lean:

The Aquademoniad

Thaumaturgicon, by Undle Nine-fingers

The Life and Personal Recollections, as well as Many pointed Observations, of Grahna-Shalla, son of Shalla-hedron of Lower Adelfi, who Fished in the Demonsea and Returned with Booty Marvelous to Tell

Thaumaturge's Pocket Pandect, by Balder Xolot

Pan-Demonion, by Parple

Works invented by Lionel Shriver[]

In The Mandibles:

Ad-Out by Enola Mandible

Better Late Than by Enola Mandible

Cradle to Grave by Enola Mandible

Gray by Enola Mandible

The Saint of Glengormley by Enola Mandible

The Stringer by Enola Mandible

Virtual Families by Enola Mandible

Works invented by Alix Kates Shulman[]

In Ménage:

Fire Watch, by Zoltan Barbu

Stories, by Heather McKay

In Burning Questions:

My Life as a Rebel, by Zane Indiana

Works invented by Robert Silverberg[]

In Roma Eterna:

The Book of Aaron, composition attributed to Aaron but probably written at some later time.

In this alternate history, The Book of Aaron provides the traumatic story of how the Israelite Exodus from Egypt failed: Moses and many of the Israelites drowned, and the remnant—led by Aaron—were fetched back to slavery in Egypt. Later on, however, the Hebrews were freed from bondage, and until the equivalent of the 20th Century remained a distinct religious-ethnic minority in Egypt, practicing a monotheistic religion, of which The Book of Aaron is a major Scripture.

Works invented by Clark Ashton Smith[]

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Script error: No such module "collapsible list".

Works invented by Cordwainer Smith[]

In Mother Hitton's Littul Kittons :

The Guild Encyclopedia

Standard reference work for the story's space-faring civilization

Contains some pieces of misinformation planted by inhabitants of the rich planet Norstrilia to trap those trying to rob their wealth

Works invented by Lemony Snicket[]

Template:Col-1-of-2In The Bad Beginning:

Inheritance Law and Its Implications

In The Miserable Mill:

Advanced Ocular Science by Dr. Georgina Orwell

Encyclopedia Hypnotica

The History of Lucky Smells Lumbermill

The Paltryville Constitution

In The Reptile Room:

The Big Peruvian Book of Small Peruvian Snakes

The Care and Feeding of the Androgynous Cobra

An Introduction to Large Lizards

The Mamba du Mal: A Snake That Will Never Kill Me by Tony "Mommy" Eggmonteror, quoted in Lemony Snicket: The Unauthorized Autobiography.

Template:Col-2-of-2In The Wide Window:

A Lachrymose Atlas

Basic Rules of Grammar and Punctuation

Handbook for Advanced Apostrophe Use

How Water Is Made

Ivan Lachrymose - Lake Explorer

Lachrymose Trout

The Bottom of Lake Lachrymose

The Correct Spelling of Every English Word That Ever, Ever Existed

The History of the Damocles Dock Region

The Tides of Lake Lachrymose

In The Penultimate Peril:

Odious Lusting After Finance

In The End:

A Series of Unfortunate Events

In Lemony Snicket: The Unauthorized Autobiography:

The Pony Party! (book 1 in the series The Luckiest Kids in the World), by Loney M. Setnick

On Lemonysnicket.com:

How I Snatched The Baudelaire Fortune by Count Olaf (unfinished).

The Complete History Of Absolutely Everything, Volume 127 - Cauldron to Caution

From Molars To Incisors: A Pictorial History Of The Tooth

Banking

Works invented by Muriel Spark[]

In The Finishing School :

The School Observed by Rowland Mahler

Who Killed Darnley? by Chris Wiley

In The Girls of Slender Means :

The Sabbath Notebooks by Nicholas Farringdon

In Loitering with Intent :

Warrender Chase by Fleur Talbot

In Memento Mori :

The Gates of Granella and The Seventh Child by Charmian Colston

In A Far Cry From Kensington :

Farewell, Leicester Square by Hector Bartlett

Works invented in The Spitting Image Book[]

Jennings Has Tweaky Nipples by Anthony Buggery

Jennings Buys a New Dress by Anthony Buggery

Jennings and the Hormone Implants by Anthony Buggery

Jennings Gradually Begins to Feel More at Ease When He is With Other Women by Anthony Buggery

Jennings Spends an Intimate Evening with a Signals Officer from the Royal Navy by Anthony Buggery

Jennings Undergoes Specialist Surgery by Anthony Buggery

Mrs. Jennings Has Twins by Anthony Buggery

Works invented by Norman Spinrad[]

In The Iron Dream :

The Master Race by Adolf Hitler

The Thousand Year Rule by Adolf Hitler

The Triumph of the Will by Adolf Hitler

Lord of the Swastika by Adolf Hitler

The author, Adolf Hitler, served in the Imperial German Army in the Great War. After briefly dabbling in radical politics he emigrated to the United States in 1919 and became a Science Fiction illustrator. After gaining fluency in English he became also an editor and author - eventually becoming known as a major writer of the Golden Age of Science Fiction. He wrote Lord of the Swastika, his final science fantasy novel, in six weeks in 1953, shortly before dying of cerebral hemorrhage[8] (possibly caused by tertiary syphilis). Lord of the Swastika subsequently won the Hugo Award and the "colorful uniforms" described therein become a regular feature of cosplayers at science fiction conventions. The novel was praised as a major work of Heroic fantasy and for its "haunting evocation of a Germany that never was".

Works invented by Neal Stephenson[]

In Cryptonomicon and Quicksilver:

The Cryptonomicon

In Anathem :
