LABORS OF DARTMOUTH ALUMNI.—CONCLUSION.

As Dartmouth was founded as an evangelizing agency, and every stone was laid in firm reliance upon Him to whom all was consecrated, there was good ground of hope that it would be a strong and durable pillar in the great temple of Christian learning. Its record is a realization of the hopes of its noble and devoted founders.

In his "Narrative" for 1771 (p. 29) Dr. Wheelock, alluding to the period immediately following his removal to Hanover, says: "there were evident impressions upon the minds of a number of my family and school which soon became universal, insomuch that scarcely one remained who did not feel a greater or less degree of it, till the whole lump seemed to be leavened by it, and love, peace, joy; satisfaction and contentment reigned through the whole. The 23d day of January (1771) was kept as a day of solemn fasting and prayer, on which I gathered a church in this college and school, which consisted of twenty-seven members."

His biographer, writing early in the present century, says: "The college has been repeatedly favored with remarkable religious impressions on the minds of the students. These showers of divine grace have produced streams which have refreshed the garden of the Lord, and made glad the city of our God. The young men in this school of the prophets have, at these seasons, been powerfully and lastingly affected; they have gone forth as 'angels of the churches;' the work of God has prospered in their hands; many of their people have been turned to righteousness."

Of President Tyler's administration it is said that the most remarkable thing was "a powerful revival of religion." All the later decades have been marked by manifestations of the Divine presence in the college. Scarcely a year has passed in which some of its members have not joyfully consecrated intellect and heart and life to the service of Him who gave them.

Not a few have been "bright and shining lights" in the church. Of Jesse Appleton, Rev. Dr. Anderson says: "I have been placed in circumstances to see much of not a few great men in the Church of Christ, but I have been conversant with only a few, a very few, whose attributes of power seemed to me quite equal to his. The clearness of his conceptions was almost angelic. If I am fitted to do any good in the world, I owe what intellectual adaptation I have very much to his admirable training, especially as he took us through his favorite Butler."

Few American divines have had a wider or more varied sphere of influence than Dr. Appleton's classmate, Ebenezer Porter, a pioneer in sacred Rhetoric, one of the originators of the American Tract Society, the most prominent of the founders of the American Education Society, which he adopted as his child and heir, the beloved and honored first president of the oldest Theological Seminary in the United States.

Of Samuel Worcester, the distinguished opponent of Channing, we have the following valuable record: "When the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions was formed, his labors as the Corresponding Secretary, with the whole system now in operation for the conduct of missions abroad, required the same processes of original evolution and determination of principles and rules, as so signally characterized the formation of our Federal government. Here was displayed his peculiar, if we may not say his transcendent, power among his eminent associates. The great value of 'the Constitution of the Board, as a working instrument,' 'the nicely adjusted relations of the voluntary and ecclesiastical principles,' the 'origination of what is peculiarly excellent in the Annual Reports, and also in the Instructions to Missionaries,' and the 'American idea' of 'organizing the missions as self-governing communities,' are justly ascribed to him by the present senior Secretary, [Dr. Anderson] as conclusive witness of his extraordinary 'sagacity' and of his being far 'in advance of the age.'"

Philander Chase could found parish and diocese and seminary with equal facility, performing a work for the Episcopal Church in America unrivaled by that of any contemporary.

Nor should we overlook such names as Asa Burton, teacher of teachers in theology, who could successfully measure swords with Emmons; Samuel Wood, whose impress never left the mind of Webster; Daniel Story, a pioneer of Marietta; Mase Shepard, Jonathan Strong, Walter Harris, Ethan Smith, Alvan Hyde, William Jackson, Rufus Anderson, the honored father of a not less honored son; John Fiske, Abijah Wines, Eliphalet Gillett, whose home missionary zeal in Maine made a lasting impression upon the rising state; Kiah Bailey, who first effectually moved the springs which gave to the same State the Bangor Theological Seminary; John Smith, an earnest and honored teacher in that Seminary; Theophilus Packard, whose pupils have performed honorable service for the Master in both hemispheres; Peter P. Roots, Bezaleel Pinneo, Asa McFarland, Caleb Jewett Tenney, a leading founder of the East Windsor (now Hartford) Theological Seminary; Thomas A. Merrill, Abraham Burnham, George T. Chapman, John Brown, Daniel Poor, the pioneer in Christian learning in Ceylon and Madura; Austin Dickinson, to whom the world is under large obligations for a higher type of periodical literature; Levi Spaulding, the worthy coadjutor of Poor; Nathan W. Fiske, Daniel Temple, who carried the first missionary printing-press to Western Asia, and made for classic lands a Christian literature; William Goodell, the leading founder of two flourishing Christian missions on heathen soil, and the translator of the whole Bible into the Armeno-Turkish language; Ephraim W. Clark, John S. Emerson, and Austin H. Wright, of similar spirit; Benjamin Woodbury, Aaron Foster, a leading founder of the American Home Missionary Society, and John K. Lord, whose early death in the Queen City of the West, was as the falling of "a standard-bearer."

To these we might add many eminent living heralds of the cross, and a Hovey and a Townsend in leading Theological Seminaries. We cannot more fitly close on this head than by remarking that of the last forty-four subjects in the second volume of Sprague's invaluable "Annals of the Pulpit," eleven were Dartmouth alumni, while all the others, save eight, numbered her alumni among their teachers.

Dartmouth has an honorable record in the various departments of Law and in statesmanship. Most naturally we dwell upon the name of Daniel Webster, towering in strength and grandeur, like the mountain beside which he was born, amid the surrounding granite, who left the impress of his genius upon the jurisprudence of his native State, upon the Constitution of his adopted State, and upon nearly every conspicuous page of America's civil or political history for half a century; who loved Plymouth Rock and Bunker Hill with an undying affection, dwelling alternately beside the one or the other; who cherished as the apple of his eye his Alma Mater and the nation for whose service she had prepared him; who in early life and middle life and old age advocated the universal brotherhood of man, whether pleading in behalf of the oppressed African, or the oppressed Greek, or the oppressed Hungarian; who gave all his sympathy and all his influence in aid of every pursuit, enterprise, and institution which could ennoble the human race; who made all other human law pay homage to the Constitution of his country, and all human law to the Divine Revelation; who gave to Dartmouth a more enduring fame throughout America, and to America a more enduring fame over the whole earth: of Levi Woodbury, who as Governor of his native State clearly comprehended and carefully regarded its various interests; as a Senator commanded the profound respect of the National Legislature; as a Cabinet minister, inaugurated "a series of reforms which pervaded the whole department, and penetrated to every branch of the service," and who upon the Supreme Bench of the United States gave judicial opinions which are "monuments of patient research, ripe, and rarely erring judgment, enlarged and liberal views, and eminent attainments:" of Thaddeus Stevens, of whom his biographer says: "Thoroughly radical in all his views, hating slavery with all the intensity of his nature, believing it just, right, and expedient, not only to emancipate the negro but to arm him and make him a soldier, and afterward to make him a citizen, and give him the ballot, he led off in all measures for effecting these ends. The Emancipation Proclamation was urged upon the President by him, on all grounds of right, justice, and expediency; the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution was initiated and pressed by him:" of Rufus Choate, who combined in more majestic and graceful proportions than any other American lawyer, the ripe scholar and the successful advocate; who with the beauty and power of his language could captivate a jury, a popular audience, or the American Congress with equal facility; who gave to English literature some of its most brilliant gems, and who in his immortal eulogy upon Webster, in the opinion of competent judges, gave to the world one of the most finished and impressive examples of elegiac eloquence to which it has listened since the days of Pericles: and of Salmon P. Chase, who, when our government needed, gave to it the "sinews of war," and in the eloquent language of Evarts, "Whether by interposing his strong arm to save Mr. Birney from the fury of a mob; or by his bold and constant maintenance in the courts of the cause of fugitive slaves, in the face of the resentments of the public opinion of the day; or by his fearless desertion of all reigning politics to lead a feeble band of protestants through the wilderness of anti-slavery wanderings, its pillar of cloud by day, its pillar of fire by night; or, as Governor of Ohio, facing the intimidations of the Slave States, backed by Federal power and a storm of popular passion; or in consolidating the triumphant politics on the urgent issue which was to flame out into rebellion and revolt; or in his serene predominance, during the trial of the President, over the rage of party hate which brought into peril the coÖrdination of the great departments of government, and threatened its whole frame,—in all these marked instances of public duty, as in the simple routine of his ordinary conduct, Mr. Chase asked but one question to determine his course of action,—'Is it right?'"

Nor should we forget others who have left a lasting impression upon the jurisprudence of New England, and indeed our whole country. Among them Samuel S. Wilde, who had few peers as an advocate in Maine, or as a judge in Massachusetts; Ezekiel Webster, who as lawyer and statesman left a monument in New Hampshire which shall never crumble; Richard Fletcher, "whose legal acumen, clear, distinct, and precise statement, closely reasoned argument, and conscientious mastery of his subject, adorned the bench no less than the bar;" Joseph Bell, who as advocate and legislator, in ability as in station, towered above most of his associates; Ichabod Bartlett, "the Randolph of the North," who could measure swords with Mason or Webster or Clay, without either shield or shame; and Joel Parker, who honored alike the bar, the bench, and the lecture-room.

As members of one branch or the other of our National Legislature, we record other honored names in alphabetical order:

Samuel C. Allen, who voted alone in his place in Congress, in favor of suffrage without regard to color. Helium Allen, Lemuel H. Arnold, Samuel Bell, Samuel N. Bell, Silas Betton, Abijah Bigelow, John Blanchard, Daniel Breck, Elijah Brigham, David Brunson, Joseph Buffum, Dudley Chase, Daniel Chipman, Martin Chittenden, Daniel Clark, in every public position a leading spirit, Judah Dana, Samuel Dinsmoor, Daniel M. Durell, Ira A. Eastman, Thomas M. Edwards, Walbridge A. Field, Benjamin F. Flanders, Isaac Fletcher, George G. Fogg, Sylvester Gilbert, Calvin Goddard, Daniel W. Gooch, John N. Goodwin, George Grennell, James W. Grimes, pioneer statesman of the far West, Matthew Harvey, Henry Hibbard, Henry Hubbard, a man of rare abilities and influence, Jonathan Hunt, Luther Jewett, Joseph S. Lyman, Asa Lyon, Rufus McIntire, Charles Marsh, George P. Marsh, the honored son of an honored father, Gilman Marston, Ebenezer Mattoon, Jeremiah Nelson, Moses Norris, John Noyes, Benjamin Orr, Albion K. Parris, James W. Patterson, whose eminent abilities and elaborate culture have placed him in the foremost rank of the present generation of New England statesmen, Charles H. Peaslee, Edward C. Reed, Erastus Root, Joseph Richardson, Eleazer W. Ripley, equally fearless as a soldier and a statesman, Ether Shepley, alike conspicuous for mental and moral powers, John S. Sherburne, George A. Simmons, who by his own efforts attained rare eminence, Peleg Sprague, Samuel Taggart, Amos Tuck, a pioneer in philanthropic politics, John Wentworth, who in large measure maintains the reputation of an ancient and honored family, Phineas White, Leonard Wilcox, Charles W. Willard, Hezekiah Williams, and William Wilson. To which should be added the names of James C. Alvord and Sylvanus Backus, who were elected to Congress, but did not live to take their seats.

When Daniel Webster entered the American Senate, five of its twelve New England representatives were Dartmouth alumni. Their labors in Congress form a part of the history of every Administration of our National government.

Amos Kendall, beside large usefulness, in other spheres, was an honored Cabinet Minister.

Amos T. Akerman has been similarly honored, as Attorney General of the United States.

The names of Charles B. Haddock, George P. Marsh, George G. Fogg, and Edward F. Noyes, deserve honorable mention in connection with public service abroad.

The names of Samuel Dinsmoor, the younger, John Hubbard, Ralph Metcalf, Peter T. Washburn, Nelson Dingley, and Benjamin F. Prescott should be noticed, as State Governors, in addition to several who have added this honor to others, of which we have already made mention.

In Judicial life many names attract our notice beside those, which have been mentioned in other connections; among them Nicholas Baylies, Nicholas Emery, Nathan Weston, Ira Perley, Jonas Cutting, Benjamin W. Bonney, Isaac F. Redfield, Robert R. Heath, Andrew S. Woods, William H. Bartlett, John S. Sanborn, and Benjamin H. Steele, of the deceased, and William G. Woodward, Timothy P. Redfield, George F. Shepley, James Barrett, Jason Downer, Jonathan E. Sargent, Lincoln F. Brigham, Oliver Miller, and Charles Doe, among the living. Nor should we forget that of living members of the American Bar few names have been honored more in the East than that of Charles B. Goodrich, and few names have been honored more in the West than that of James F. Joy.

Dartmouth has contributed largely to American Education.

Bowdoin's first two presidents were Joseph McKeen and Jesse Appleton.

Thomas C. Upham was one of its honored Faculty for more than forty years.

Oren B. Cheney was a leading founder of Bates College, in later years.

James Marsh, John Wheeler, and Joseph Torrey were successively presidents of Vermont University, and each left upon it a most valuable and durable impression.

William Jackson and Thomas A. Merrill inscribed their names indelibly upon the foundations of Middlebury College, which numbers Benjamin Labaree and Calvin B. Hulbert among its honored presidents.

Zephaniah S. Moore, as president of Williams College, gave to it the fruits of his valuable experience at Dartmouth, and materially enhanced its usefulness; nor should we omit the name of its earnest friend and guardian, Alvan Hyde.

In naming the leading founders of Amherst College, Professor Tyler does not hesitate to place first, Rufus Graves, and next, Samuel F. Dickinson. The value of Dr. Moore's services as first president has been referred to in a previous chapter.

A record of its obligations to Professor Nathan Welby Fiske is a material part of its history.

The biographer of George Ticknor says no one contributed more than he toward the impulse which has resulted in Harvard's progress during the last half century.

Amos Kendall was the honored founder of the College for Deaf Mutes at Washington.

John M. Sturtevant has an honored place in the history of education for the Blind in the South.

Jonathan P. Cushing resuscitated Hampden Sydney College when life was nearly extinct, and made it again "a power in the land."

Philander Chase, in founding Kenyon and Jubilee Colleges, gave to the Episcopalians of the West two of their leading literary institutions.

John M. Ellis founded Illinois College, which, with the influences that centered around it, in large measure "gave character" to the State.

Not less plainly did he write his name upon the foundations of Wabash College, and not less plainly have Charles White, Edmund D. Hovey, and Caleb Mills written their names upon the superstructure.

A proper estimate of the valuable labors of Joseph Estabrook, Stephen Foster, and George Cooke, successively presidents of the College of East Tennessee, can only be made by those who are familiar with the history of the institution.

Drury College, so admirably located, bears the impress of Nathan J. Morrison.

Beyond the Rocky Mountains, Samuel H. Willey and George H. Atkinson will ever be honored among the leading founders and guardians of the College of California, and the Pacific University.

No history of American education will be complete which does not portray the earnest and valuable labors, in numerous other collegiate institutions East, West, North, and South, of a long roll of Dartmouth alumni; among them, beside many others, already noticed, Joseph Dana, James Dean, Josiah Noyes, Frederick Hall, George T. Chapman, James Hadley, Rufus W. Bailey, Benjamin F. Farnsworth, George Bush, Cyrus P. Grosvenor, Oramel S. Hinckley, Samuel Hurd, Caleb S. Henry, John Kendrick, Charles D. Cleaveland, Leonard Marsh, Forrest Shepherd, Charles B. Dana, Nathaniel S. Folsom, Jarvis Gregg, Milo P. Jewett, Diarca H. Allen, Kendrick Metcalf, Jacob H. Quimby, John B. Niles, Daniel F. Richardson, Amos Brown, Calvin Tracy, John C. Webster, Edmund Q. S. Waldron, Augustus Everett, Erastus Everett, Jonas De F. Richards, Abner H. Brown, Henry L. Bullen, George P. Comings, David Dimond, Charles H. Churchill, Amos B. Goodhue, Joshua J. Blaisdell, Artemas W. Sawyer, Mark Bailey, Gideon Draper, Joseph O. Hudnut, Henry E. J. Boardman, Charles S. Farrar, Nathan S. Lincoln, John Ordronaux, John M. Hayes, Daniel Putnam, Martin H. Fisk, Isaac A. Parker, Ephraim March, William E. Barnard, Ambrose W. Clarke, Amos N. Currier, Richard C. Stanley, Albert S. Bickmore, George S. Morris, and John W. Scribner. It is hardly possible to overestimate the influence of these men in shaping the thought and life of our country.

If we turn to academies we find that Mark Newman, Osgood Johnson, and Samuel H. Taylor, especially the two latter, were largely instrumental in placing Phillips Academy, at Andover, at the head of such institutions in America. Few schools of the kind have a more brilliant record than Kimball Union Academy, and few American educators have acquired more permanent renown than Cyrus S. Richards.

The labors of Amos J. Cook at Fryeburg, of John Vose at Atkinson and Pembroke, of Andrew Mack at Gilmanton and Haverhill, of John Hubbard at New Ipswich, of Ezra Carter at Peacham, of Clement Long and William Nutting at Randolph, of James K. Colby at St. Johnsbury, of Ebenezer Adams at Leicester, of Proctor Pierce at Deerfield, of Caleb Butler at Groton, and Benjamin Greenleaf at Bradford, constitute a vital portion of the history of academic education in New England. Nor must we forget that such men as Albert C. Perkins, at Exeter, C. F. P. Bancroft, at Andover, and Homer T. Fuller, at St. Johnsbury, are still laboring in this important sphere, while Hiram Orcutt is performing valuable service in a somewhat similar sphere at West Lebanon. Worcester Free Institute is under large obligations to Charles O. Thompson and John E. Sinclair.

If we turn to the metropolis of New England we find that John D. Philbrick has made her schools and school-houses in their leading features models for a world, fit successor to Elisha Ticknor, the leading founder of her primary schools, and Caleb Bingham and John Park, who in large measure revolutionized female education in America.

Beaumont Parks taught successfully for forty years in Indiana and Illinois; Charles E. Hovey founded the Illinois Normal School—worthy followers of Daniel Story at Marietta, the pioneer professional teacher of the West.

John Eaton, as Commissioner of General Education, has stamped his name, indelibly, upon our country's history.

In Literature, Dartmouth has a worthy record.

In Philosophy, the names of James Marsh, Thomas C. Upham, and Caleb S. Henry, command universal respect.

In History, the names of George Ticknor, Joseph B. Felt, Joseph Tracy, George Punchard, Samuel Hopkins, John Lord, and Edwin D. Sanborn, will live as long as our language.

In Scientific popular literature, the names of Abel Curtis, who is believed to have given to America its first English Grammar in a separate and distinct form, of Caleb Bingham, who followed in his footsteps and enhanced the value of his work, of Daniel Adams, who gave to the world the invaluable Arithmetic, of Benjamin Greenleaf, whose mathematical works have added materially to the usefulness of his long and busy life, of Charles D. Cleaveland and Alphonso Wood, are stars of the first magnitude.

In Periodical literature, the names of John Park, David Everett, Thomas G. Fessenden, Asa Rand, Russell Jarvis, Absalom Peters, Nathaniel P. Rogers, Ebenezer C. Tracy, Amasa Converse, Henry Wood, Nathaniel S. Folsom, Alonzo H. Quint, and Henry A. Hazen, deserve especial notice.

In Polite literature, the names of Nathaniel H. Carter, Charles B. Haddock, Rufus Choate, George P. Marsh, Richard B. Kimball, and John B. Bouton, command universal admiration.

The writings of Samuel L. Knapp, Henry Bond, and Nathan Crosby are valuable contributions to American Biography.

In Professional and Classic literature, the alumni of Dartmouth have done a good work. We can only glance at leading names, many of which have been mentioned in their more appropriate places. Among them are Asa Burton, Jesse Appleton, Ebenezer Porter, Samuel C. Bartlett, Alvah Hovey, Luther T. Townsend, Isaac F. Redfield, Silas Durkee, Edmund R. Peaslee, W. W. Morland, F. E. Oliver, Jabez B. Upham, Edward H. Parker, Joseph Torrey, Nathan W. Fiske, George Bush, and Alpheus Crosby.

In Industrial literature, the names of Henry Colman and John L. Hayes will be honored so long as agriculture and manufactures shall have a prominent place among human pursuits.

In Medicine, a goodly proportion of her most eminent sons have given to Dartmouth their personal services as teachers; we have only to recall in this connection the honored names recorded in a preceding chapter,—Mussey, Perkins, Crosby, and Peaslee. But other names claim our notice. Amos Twitchell, by tireless industry and fidelity in his regular professional work, and his boldness and skill as an operative surgeon, gained a reputation equaled by few in New England, and extending to the Old World. The name of George C. Shattuck shines with equal lustre, as the benefactor of his Alma Mater, and the friend of suffering humanity in the metropolis of New England.

Luther V. Bell wrote his name as plainly upon the foundations of the McLean Asylum, at Somerville, as did his honored father, Samuel Bell, upon the jurisprudence of New Hampshire. The name of John E. Tyler is scarcely less conspicuous upon the superstructure.

New Jersey will never forget her obligations to Lyndon A. Smith for the earnest efforts which gave to that State a similar institution. Nor should we be silent in regard to the services of living men who are now conducting or prominently connected with similar institutions; among them, Jesse P. Bancroft, Clement A. Walker, John Ordronaux, Homer O. Hitchcock, William W. Godding, and John P. Brown.

As Medical lecturers, we cannot fail to notice other honored names; among them, Josiah Noyes, Joseph A. Gallup, James Hadley, Jesse Smith, Arthur L. Porter, Gilman Kimball, Benjamin R. Palmer, Noah Worcester, Abner Hartwell Brown, Nathan S. Lincoln, and Phineas S. Conner.

A reference to all the living medical alumni of Dartmouth, who are acting the part of useful practitioners or teachers, added to the above, would take us to nearly every leading medical institution, and nearly every family, in our broad land.

In Productive industry and the development of our national resources, the alumni of Dartmouth have an honorable place.

Eastern New England will never be unmindful of her obligations to William A. Hayes, for his successful efforts to introduce a better grade of wool than had ever before been produced in that region; nor will the country or the world forget their obligations to his honored classmate, Henry Colman, the American pioneer in scientific agriculture. The names of Thomas G. Fessenden and Amos Brown also deserve notice in this connection.

Petroleum, instead of being at the present time a leading American product, might have remained, in large measure, in its ancient bed, but for the skillful, persevering enterprise of George H. Bissell and Francis B. Brewer.

In Railroad enterprise, the names of Erastus Hopkins, Thomas M. Edwards, and Francis Cogswell, in the East, and James F. Joy, in the West, are "familiar as household words."

The sons of Dartmouth have performed honorable service in the field. More than a score were soldiers of the Revolution. Among them John S. Sherburne, who lost one of his limbs; Absalom Peters, whose efficient service in Vermont contributed largely to the protection of our Northern frontier; and Ebenezer Mattoon, who by forced marches with his gallant men furnished cannon which "told" at Saratoga.

In the War of 1812-1815 they acted well their part. Eleazer Wheelock Ripley, at Lundy's Lane, after General Scott had been disabled (with the aid of the gallant Miller), wrested victory from an almost triumphant foe, on the bloodiest field of the war.

In that War, too, Sylvanus Thayer gained a measure of the renown which has rendered the name of the most efficient founder of the Military Academy at West Point illustrious in both hemispheres.

In the late War one of the most valuable coadjutors of two of its leading captains—Grant and Sherman—was Joseph Dana Webster.

In letters of living light we write many other names, among them Charles and Daniel Foster—par nobile fratrum—Samuel Souther, Charles Augustine Davis, Isaac Lewis Clarke, Calvin Gross Hollenbush, Valentine B. Oakes, Franklin Aretas Haskell, Arthur Edwin Hutchins, Lucius Stearns Shaw, Horace Meeker Dyke, Edwin Brant Frost, William Lawrence Baker, Charles Whiting Carroll, George Washington Quimby, George Ephraim Chamberlin, Charles Lee Foster, Henry Mills Caldwell, and Stark Fellows, who at Bull Run, Antietam, Fredericksburg, the Wilderness, Cold Harbor, and elsewhere, gave their lives in defense of the American Union.

No aggregation of volumes would adequately portray the whole work of Dartmouth's alumni. In quiet places, the great majority, day by day, and year by year, have performed their allotted tasks. In such places all over America, and in other lands, they have built their most enduring monuments. The calm lustre of their lives is almost as widely diffused as the morning light.

Eleazer Wheelock founded the college, in faith and hope, for the enlightenment and evangelization of future generations in that mighty storehouse of thought and action, central New England.

John Wheelock carried forward the work with energy and zeal, and a large measure of success.

Francis Brown gave a valuable life for the protection of his still youthful Alma Mater.

Daniel Dana was a man of kindred spirit, and not less devoted to his work.

Bennet Tyler magnified his office, and, laboring in season and out of season, added "goodly ornaments."

Nathan Lord added new halls, new departments and modes of instruction, gave larger prestige, and left the impress of a great mind upon two thousand pupils.

Asa D. Smith added yet other halls, secured new endowments, and provided a long line of scholarships, for the development of latent talent, and the encouragement of genuine worth.

Samuel C. Bartlett brings to the accomplishment of his task the name of an ancient and honored family, and the experiences of an earnest and fruitful life.

Dartmouth has blessed New England and Old England, North America and the whole world.

Her location, unrivaled in many respects by that of any sister institution, her history, so full of romance and of reality, and her work, recorded first in the history of the eighteenth century, and indelibly impressed upon the history of the nineteenth, all warrant the hope that her walls may stand, through all the ages of the future, strong as the everlasting hills, and beautiful as the celestial dome.