(CS/ml) On January 23, 1995, the European Commission under its Luxembourg president Jacques Santer took office, with the latter leaving his post as Prime Minister to take on the challenge.

Speaking to the “Luxemburger Wort”, Santer said he is not sure whether he would make the same decision today. Leading a Commission with 28 member states is no enviable task, he said. Already 20 years ago, consensus building was a challenge, Santer said.

Even at the time Santer's appointment was not uncontroversial. Close friend and Belgian politician Jean-Luc Dehaene was blocked by the UK to lead the Commission in 1994. “Helmut Kohl [the German Chancellor at the time] told me, you are the only candidate supported by all member states,” Santer recalled. “I could not refuse his offer.”

Santer's departure from Luxembourg politics cleared the path for his successor, Jean-Claude Juncker, who took over the reins as Prime Minister in January 1995. Now, Juncker himself is European Commission president, the third Luxembourger to hold the title.

The first was Gaston Thorn, who headed the body from 1981 to 1985.

Resignation in 1999

One of the biggest highlights of Santer's presidency was the introduction of the euro, the 77-year-old said. The name “euro” was officially adopted in December 1995 and the currency was introduced at midnight on January 1, 1999, although national notes and coins were used as legal tender until 2002.

Also prepared under Santer was the 2004 EU enlargement. However, Santer explained, the plans during his term as Commission president foresaw a gradual expansion. This idea was abolished under his successor Romano Prodi, Santer said – a mistake, according to the veteran politician.

“In one fell swoop, the EU was extended by 10 countries. The citizens could not cope. We are still chewing on it today.”

In the end, political scandal brought down the Santer commission, which resigned in full in March 1999. Corruption allegations against French commissioner Edith Cresson prompted a wider inquiry, which found shortcomings in responsibility among a number of commission members.

However, the commissioners in question refused to resign and Santer did not have the power to dismiss them. “I had believed in the neutrality of these people. That shot backfired,” he said. “I did not have a choice. Instead of having to endure a vote of confidence in the EU parliament, we wanted to resign with dignity and united.”

Support for Juncker

Since the Lisbon treaty, the Commission president has more power, Santer said. However, he added that “coming from a small country, you are left to your own devices in such a situation.”

Fellow Luxembourger Jean-Claude Juncker had to face a vote of confidence right at the start of his mandate. According to Santer, the LuxLeaks case put Juncker in a difficult position. However, Santer added, he does not think it compromises his abilities as Commission president.

That the revelations were published around the same time as Juncker's swearing-in, despite the facts having been known for a long time, is “astonishing and irritating”, Santer said, expressing his support for Juncker's Commission.