How the mighty are fallen. Securing an interview with the former European Commission president two months ago required the patience of Job and the persuasive skills of Mark Anthony.

But now that Jacques Santer is a humble MEP, bagging an hour of the Luxembourger’s time is no longer an ordeal. There are no scary spokesmen to fend off and no cordon of bulky bodyguards to wriggle through.

Instead, a quick call confirms the meeting, a lift-ride to the top of the European Parliament’s snaking Brussels headquarters takes you to Santer’s office and a rap on the MEP’s door brings you face-to-face with the man who ran the Commission for more than four years and Luxembourg for a decade.

Santer looks more relaxed than he did at the height of the Commission crisis in March, but it is clear that the events leading up to the resignation of all 20 Commissioners still weigh heavily on his mind.

“I feel some bitterness and injustice because the political achievements of my Commission were not taken into account at all. I do not know of any Commission before which was so successful in its achievements,” he says.

Like disgraced US President Richard Nixon before him, it is an unfortunate fact of political life that Santer will be remembered more for his manner of leaving office than for what he did while in it.

For when the history of Europe in the late 20th century comes to be written, few are likely to remember the former president’s role in overseeing the launch of the euro or laying the foundations for the enlargement of the Union to central and eastern Europe. Instead, images of Edith Cresson’s dentist and a red-faced Santer claiming to be “whiter than white” are likely to spring to mind.

In his defence, the Christian Democrat MEP pleads that his team was a victim of its own success. “In 1995, we undertook the first reforms by the Commission for over 40 years,” he says, a touch disengeniously. However, these did not go far or fast enough and, in the end, the “reforms pushed away the reformers”.

Santer has no regrets about his handling of the crisis which brought the Commission to its knees earlier this year. “One is always cleverer afterwards,” he says wistfully.

Instead, the former president says that the Commission was forced to resign because of Acting Research Commissioner Edith Cresson’s refusal to accept criticisms levelled at her, over restrictive internal rules about collective responsibility and a lack of political will from national governments to resolve the crisis.

Santer, who stepped down in July to become an MEP, says the Commission was left with no choice but to fall on its sword after the committee of wise men published a damning report on cronyism, corruption and administrative incompetence in the EU executive. Although the Luxembourg ex-premier does not accept the “generalisation of irresponsibility” contained in the report, he admits that the parliamentary censure vote in January set in motion a chain of events that even offering Cresson’s scalp could not have stopped.

He also insists the Commission was hamstrung by rules which made the whole executive responsible for individual Commissioner’s errors.

The Amsterdam Treaty will go some way to solving this problem by giving the new president the right to reshuffle his team, but Santer believes future changes to the EU treaty should also give the Parliament the power to sack individual commissioners.

He argues that although Union governments backed him personally, they failed to help dig the Commission out of the hole it was in. This was aggravated, he maintains, by the fact that the institution underestimated the Parliament’s reaction to the crisis.

Never one to play down his own importance, Santer expresses his delight at the way incoming Commission President Romano Prodi has taken on board many of the changes proposed in the dying days of his reign. “Prodi’s reforms are going in the right direction because they are building on our reforms,” he says.

However, he believes that the new Commission will need to speed up the changes started by the old executive and reach an agreement with the Parliament’s main political groups in order to push through these measures in the face of resistance from the EU executive’s powerful staff unions.

The Commission will also have to make more effort to inform the public about these reforms. “In the past we failed to communicate our message,” admits Santer. But he insists that drumming up support for the European project is not only the responsibility of the Commission, but also of governments. “At the moment, all that goes wrong is the fault of Brussels and all that goes right member states take credit for. National governments must be better able to communicate European policy to their citizens,” he says.

Blaming the low turnout in June’s Euro-elections on an inability to connect with people’s daily concerns, the newly elected MEP says the solution is not less, but more Europe. “Now that the economic infrastructure is in place, what we have to do is draw the political consequences,” he says.

For Santer, who has always been a convinced federalist, this means Europe playing a bigger role on the world’s stage and punching its weight in the defence sphere. What it does not mean, however, is more and more EU legislation. “We must only focus on areas where the Union can bring added value,” he insists.

The 62-year-old politician’s decision to run for the European Parliament astonished many MEPs at the time, but Santer says that that there are no hard feelings from his colleagues. “Most are honoured that a former prime minister and head of the Commission is an MEP,” he says, adding: “It gives the Parliament some influence and political clout”.

Given his deep-seated commitment to the European ideal, it perhaps was not so surprising to see Santer quizzing would-be Commissioners during last week’s confirmation hearings. Besides, the Christian Democrat was an MEP for five years before direct elections to the Strasbourg-based assembly were first held in 1979. “One always returns to one’s first loves,” he says with a rare display of nostalgia.