20-03-2023

The Associated Chinese Chambers of Commerce and Industry of Malaysia (ACCCIM) would like to extend its heartiest congratulations to ACCCIM President, Yang Berhormat Senator Tan Sri Low Kian Chuan on his appointment as a member of the Dewan Negara (Senate) of Malaysia by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong on 20 March 2023.

This appointment underscores that YAB Prime Minister Dato’ Seri Anwar Ibrahim recognises the role played by the chamber in nation building. We believe that Prime Minister’s acknowledgment would be a much-needed shot in the arm for business community. ACCCIM lauds this move by the cabinet under the leadership of YAB Prime Minister to broaden the representation in the Dewan Negara.

It is indeed a proud moment for ACCCIM and also a major recognition of YB Senator Tan Sri Low’s outstanding leadership and enormous contributions to the business community and society.

YB Senator Tan Sri Low Kian Chuan has an impressive track record as reflected in his contributions to the Chambers at the national level and Terengganu as well as other business organisations. His networking abilities spans across borders as well. He is an excellent example for others to emulate.

As President of ACCCIM, YB Senator Tan Sri Low has demonstrated a high level of commitment in fulfilling the duties and tasks he is entrusted with. The ACCCIM council members have pledged to give their strongest support under his leadership to carry out his duty in safeguarding the welfare of rakyat and making greater contributions for the benefits of business community at large.

In this regard, YB Senator Tan Sri Low has consistently voiced out the concerns of the business community; proactively help to resolve the issues and problems; and put forward constructive inputs and suggestions to the authorities to ensure a sustainable development of the nation.

YB Senator Tan Sri Low has also served as the president of the National Chamber of Commerce and Industry (NCCIM) in 2021 to 2022. He was also a member of the National Economic Action Council (EAC). He is currently a member of the Special Task Force to Facilitate Business (PEMUDAH). He also sits in the Employment Insurance System Committee (EIS), PERKESO.

ACCCIM expresses confidence that YB Senator Tan Sri Low’s new appointment will strengthen the business community’s communication with Government; bring the voice of the people and represent the business community in the House of Senate.