FERGUSON, Ian

It is with profound sadness that we announce the passing of our brother, Ian Ferguson, at the age of 54. Predeceased by his mother Dorothy Ferguson, Ian leaves behind his father Graham, sister Kathryn and brother Bruce (Magda). He was well loved by his nieces Elyzabeth, Morgan, Abigail and his nephew Connor.Ian was a gentle soul who lived a life of giving, patience, and kindness to others. He would be the first to lend a hand to a friend or loved one without question and was an intellectual powerhouse. He led a life with a curious and artistic mind and will surely be missed by friends and family. The family will be having a celebration of Ian's life at Tubman Funeral Homes Garden Chapel on Saturday, May 22, 2021. This is a virtual service which will be live streamed to family and friends. Access to the link is available at . In lieu of flowers, the family have requested donations be made to Shelter Movers Ottawa. Tributes, condolences or donations may be made at .

Published online May 19, 2021

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of IanHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Ian

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree