Jose Mendoza (Full Name: Jose Angel Mendoza) Died In Chino Police Shooting

CHINO, CALIFORNIA (July 4, 2028) – A 43-year-old man identified as Jose Mendoza has died in a Chino police shooting at an apartment complex on the 12800 block of 10th Street.

San Bernardino County officials are saying that the incident took place on June 20th. Police officers received reports about a man allegedly armed with a knife.

When officers arrived at the parking lot of the apartment complex, they encountered Jose Mendoza. Officers attempted to de-escalate the encounter.

However, officers claim that the suspect advanced towards them with a knife above his head. It was at this point that an officer-involved shooting occurred.

Paramedics were called to the scene in order to help the suspect.

Liability For Chino Police Shootings

Far too many people are seriously injured or killed every year during police shootings. According to the Law Enforcement Epidemiology Project, “In one year, more than 50 million persons in the U.S. have contact with police during a traffic stop, street stop, arrest, traffic accident or resident initiated contact. About 1 million of these civilians experience police threat of or use of force during these interactions.” Police departments should take a number of measures in order to prevent fatal police shootings.

Police officers should be trained to de-escalate encounters.

Police departments should have mental health crisis units.

Police officers should have less-lethal options like beanbag shotguns and tasers.

Depending on the facts of any case, a police department could be liable if a suspect is killed. Officers have a great deal of discretion in how they carry out their job duties, but at no point are they permitted to use excessive force. Pursuant to California Penal Code 835a, “the authority to use physical force, conferred on peace officers by this section, is a serious responsibility that shall be exercised judiciously and with respect for human rights and dignity and for the sanctity of every human life.” Victims of police shootings tend to suffer very serious injuries.

Broken bones

Organ damage

Puncture wounds

Death

Many police shootings are preventable. They tend to involve situations where officers are either unwilling or unable to de-escalate encounters. Unfortunately, police departments will virtually never accept responsibility for the wrongful actions of their officers. This is why it is so important to seek legal counsel early on. A civil rights attorney can examine all of the unique facts of your case and let you know what your legal options are.

Investigating Chino Police Shootings

We at the Sehat Law Firm extend our deepest condolences to the family of Jose Mendoza. There needs to be a thorough investigation into what went wrong. It is our sincere hope that measures are taken to prevent other incidents like this.

Do you need more information about a Chino police shooting? Our team of civil rights attorneys is here to answer any questions that you may have. We care deeply that people are aware of their rights and that police departments are held accountable for their wrongful actions. Whether you just have legal questions or need a free, independent investigation into any incident, we are here for you. You can reach out to us anytime at (949) 825-5200.