The list of 130+ exceptional African American professionals have either;

1) Received their education in whole or in part at Silicon Valley colleges or universities.

2) Utilized their technical and scientific skills in Silicon Valley companies and corporations.

3) Contributed their talents and expertise to benefit Silicon Valley tech, bioscience, community, or government organizations.

Stephan Adams & William Adams, Co-founders Adamation

Adamation was co-founded by brothers, Stephan Adams and William Adams in 2012. The company was started with a simple vision, to deliver stylishly 3D printed products. Adamation embodies their passion for art and technology. Thet create stunning digital home décor and customizable figurines that they physically reproduced with 3D printers. All of their fine art and collectibles are commissioned works by talented artists with stellar artistic and technical backgrounds. Some of their artists envision and independently 3D models his/her work. While other works are collaborations between artists in traditional mediums and a modeler that transforms their work into renderings that can then be 3D printed. They’ve created two brands to showcase our collection of 3D printable art. The namesake of the company, Adamation is one brand. They’ve created a line of original figurines under this label. These action heroes, mythical mortals, and fantasy creatures depict the imaginative, whimsical, and fun side of Adamation. Their Artiful brand is more cultured and reflects an appreciation for beautiful art that anyone can buy for their home or give as a gift. They use 3D printing as a means to create inspiring fine art that’s approachable yet unique to this medium. We offer a diverse line of sculptures, reliefs, tiles, vases, and figurines to fill anyone’s home with our affection.

William James Adams (will.i.am), Director of Creative Innovation, Intel Corporation

William James Adams, professionally known by his stage name will.i.am is a rapper, musician, songwriter, singer, entrepreneur, actor, DJ, and producer. Technology is infused into the world of will.i.am as an essential element. It powers everything that he does. As the Director of Creative Innovation for Intel, will.i.am conceptualizes the next frontier of interactive technology by acting as an idea generator. Earlier this year will.i.am debuted the first song on another planet, premiering his song, “Reach for the Stars” from Mars to mark the successful landing of NASA’s Curiosity rover. His interest in the interplay between digital photography and augmented technology, will.i.am also created the i.am+ foto.soho, an iPhone case that dramatically improves the quality and social aspects of the built-in camera. will.i.am appeared at the kickoff event for the 2011 FIRST Robotics Competition, Logo Motion held at Southern New Hampshire University. He also performed a concert for FIRST at the 2011 FIRST World Championship at the Edward Jones Dome. will.i.am appeared in concert with the Black Eyed Peas as a part of a special concert for 2011 FIRST Robotics Championships. It was recorded for a special aired by ABC. In January 2012, he appeared on the BBC TV series Top Gear, as the Star in a Reasonably Priced Car, where he revealed he will be starting his own car company called IAMAUTO.

Asmau Ahmed, Founder and CEO, Plum Perfect

Asmau Ahmed brings over 11 years of experience in chemical engineering, math/statistical data analysis and strategic consulting to Plum Perfect. She holds an MBA from Columbia Business School and a B.S. with honors in Chemical Engineering from the University of Virginia. After leaving her chemical engineering career for Columbia Business School, Ahmed worked nights on developing a proprietary technology that analyzes skin, lip, hair and eye color, knowing that minute details like undertones are often undetectable to the human eye. In 2014, she launched the Plum Perfect mobile application, to which users upload selfies and receive makeup shade recommendations that complement their skin color. BeauTV was next. Launched in December on Plum Perfect, it generates personalized shade suggestions for makeup used in YouTube beauty tutorials. Plum Perfect’s technology isn’t solely consumer-facing—Ahmed licenses it out to IMAN Cosmetics, and a top-secret project with Macy’s Inc. is in the works. Though her vision for Plum Perfect has always been to help women find the right shade of makeup, Ahmed says her photo-based technology is at the forefront of changing consumer behavior.

Shellye Archambeau, CEO, MetricStream

Ms. Shellye L. Archambeau has been the Chief Executive Officer of MetricStream Inc. since joining in 2002. Ms. Archambeau serves as the Chief Marketing Officer of NorthPoint Communications Group Inc. Ms. Archambeau served as the Chief Marketing Officer and Executive Vice President of Sales at Opsware Inc. (alternate name Loudcloud, Inc.) since April 2001. She served as Chief Marketing Officer of NorthPoint Communications, Inc. from June 2000 to March 2001, where she led the design and implementation of all sales and marketing strategies. From May 1999 to June 2000, she served as the President of Blockbuster.com, the e-commerce division of Blockbuster, Inc. She has experience in global perspectives on developing and marketing emerging technology applications and solutions. She served for 15 years at IBM in various sales, marketing, general management, domestic and international executive positions. She co-founded Bankers Trust Venture Partners and served as its Partner. She also served at Northpoint Communications Group Inc. She serves as a Director of MetricStream, Inc. and CSW Research Ltd. She has been an Independent Director of Nordstrom Inc. since February 13, 2015. Ms. Archambeau has been an Independent Director of Verizon Communications Inc. since December 1, 2013. Ms. Archambeau provides the Board with valuable knowledge of technology, e-commerce, digital media and communications platforms. She serves on the board of directors for the Silicon Valley Leadership Group, IT Senior Management Forum and Watermark. She is a Member of the Information Technology Senior Management Forum, the Forum of Women Entrepreneurs and the Women’s Council to the Board of Trustees for the University of Pennsylvania. She served as an Independent Director of Arbitron, Inc. from November 2005 to September 30, 2013. She served on the Council on Foreign Relations and has been inducted into the National Hall of Fame of the Negro Business and Professional Women’s Club. She was recognized by Internet World as one of the Top 25 “Click and Mortar” executives in the country in June of 2000. Ms. Archambeau has a Bachelor of Science at the University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School of Business and attended the IBM Business Management Institute in Brazil.

Vernol Battiste, Research Psychologist – Human Factors, NASA

Vernol Battiste is principal investigator and co-lead of an Ames group investigating advanced cockpit displays of traffic information. This group has primary responsibility for advanced flight deck display and interface research and development. The groups’ primary focus is the development of advanced display principles, concepts, and requirements for the next generation air traffic management system (NEXTGEN). Mr. Battiste earned an MA in Psychology from San Jose State University while completing an internship at NASA Ames Research Center. He holds a B.A. in Research Psychology from California State University, Hayward. Mr. Battiste is a former Air Traffic Controller, with both the FAA and USAF. He is a former Jet Engine Mechanic with the USAF. His research has focused primarily on advanced display concepts, pilot geographical orientation, navigation, and workload.

Sheryl Y. Battles, Vice President Corporate Communications, Pitney Bowes, Inc.

Sheryl Y. Battles graduated from Stanford University with a degree in Human Biology. She is a seasoned professional that communicates Pitney Bowes’ strategies and developments to a variety of stakeholders, including investors, and provides strategic communications counsel to the COO/CFO and other executives. She also leads Pitney Bowes’ global diversity and inclusion strategy and develops leadership positions on key business issues and trends impacting global commerce. Pitney Bowes has recognized Sheryl’s contributions with several awards, including the highest employee honor – the Walter H. Wheeler, Jr. Award. She is a three-time winner of the Pitney Bowes One Standard Excellence Award for outstanding team accomplishments, including a Smithsonian Museum exhibit. She has received numerous honors including: “Donald H. McGannon Award” from the National Urban League, Women of Power Award from the Urban League of Southern Connecticut, Savoy Magazine “Top Influential Women in Corporate America” and Ebony Magazine “100 Most Promising Black Women in Corporate America.” She has been featured in The Harvard Business Review (“Leadership in Your Midst: Tapping the Hidden Strengths of Minority Executives”), Time Magazine (“Pathways to Power”) and PR Week (“Mothers of Invention”). Sheryl speaks at many important events including 2015 Women’s Empowerment Seminar for the Urban League of Southern Connecticut, 2015 Women in Leadership Symposium for the Tri-State Diversity Council, 2015 Women’s Day speaker at the historic Dixwell Avenue Church and The Bridgeport Rescue Mission’s Hearts of Hope event. Sheryl is a member of the Board of Directors and Executive Committees of the Stamford Center for the Arts and the Stamford Partnership. She is Co-Chair of the Arthur W. Page Society’s Diversity and Inclusion Committee and Vice President of the Fairfield County Chapter of The Links, Incorporated. She is a member of the Stamford-Norwalk Chapter of Jack and Jill of America, Inc., Fairfield County Alumnae Chapter of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority Incorporated, Public Relations Society of America, Stanford University Alumni Association and Stanford National Black Alumni Association.

Tiffani Bell, Founder, Pencil You In

Tiffani Bell is a Howard University-trained engineer from North Carolina. Tiffani pursues better living through software. She founded Pencil You In, enabling businesses as far away as Australia to operate more efficiently by accepting appointments online. Tiffani is a front and back-end developer working primarily with Ruby on Rails and iOS. Her latest work includes determining how to take full advantage of a Hadoop cluster. Tiffani holds a BS in Computer Science from Howard University. She has been programming ever since she was a little kid. When she was about six, her parents got her a V-Tech Precomputer 1000, a computer-type toy. Bell got bored with the games and checked out the manual, which explained ways to program with QBasic. Many years later she ended up getting a full ride to Howard University for computer science. Coming in as a double minority — a black woman — has been tough in the tech space. It’s also hard being located in North Carolina. Tiffani lives about an hour from Raleigh and Durham, where there’s a pretty healthy VC community. But the tech scene there is just as homogenous in some respects, plus you just don’t have the access to people like you do in Silicon Valley. So, Tiffani says it’s been great to talk to these big names — and to show that a lot of people in the tech space might not fit the image of what you’d expect. Tiffani was featured as an entrepreneur on CNN’s Black In America: The Promised Land Silicon Valley hosted by Soledad O’Brien in 2011.

Angela Benton, Founder and CEO, NewMe Accelerator

Angela Benton’s experience spans a variety of industries and roles. She has worked at several InterActive Corp businesses including RealEstate.com, LendingTree.com, and RushmoreDrive.com. Additionally, she has held roles at Bizjournals.com, UPS, and Homes of Color Magazine. Throughout her career, she has worked in a variety of roles in design, marketing, development, and digital strategy. Her expertise lies in New Media. Presently Angela is the CEO of Black Web Media, which publishes BlackWeb20.com the leading online publication for African-Americans interested in Technology and New Media. Black Web Media’s mission is to be a catalyst for innovation and inclusive ideas on the web for African Americans. She also Founded and Chairs’ the New Media Entrepreneurship Conference, whose goal is to steer the Internet economy to be more diverse and inclusive. Angela speaks on topics such as diversity in the web and media industries, web trends, web strategy, and web 2.0’s effects on urban media. She is one of Fast Company Magazine’s Most Influential Women in Technology for 2010 and one of Ebony Magazine’s Power 150, representing 1 of 3 African-Americans in the technology industry alongside David Drummond (Google). She is also the youngest Hall of Fame inductee at Minority Media and Telecommunications Council and a recent Woman of Power honoree by the National Urban League. Angela graduated Magna Cum Laude with a Bachelor of Fine Arts in Visual Communications with a specialization in Digital Design. She has also completed postgraduate coursework in Graphic Design from Savannah College of Art and Design.

Rosalind G. Brewer, President and CEO, Sam’s Club

Rosalind Brewer is President and CEO of Sam’s Club, a division of Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. (Walmart). Brewer joined Sam’s Club in February 2012, bringing a wealth of talent to the members-only warehouse operating segment that serves the needs of individual and small business members. She joined Walmart in 2006 as regional vice president, overseeing operations in Georgia. From 2007 to January 2012, she was division president of the Southeast. Most recently, she was executive vice president and president of Walmart East. The area includes nearly 1,600 stores in six regions—spanning from Maine to Puerto Rico—generates $110 billion in revenue, and includes more than 500,000 associates. Brewer currently serves on the board of directors for Lockheed Martin Corporation and is chair of the board of trustees for Spelman College. Brewer earned a bachelor’s in chemistry from Spelman College. She attended the advanced management program at The Wharton School and graduated from Director’s College at the University of Chicago School of Business/Stanford School of Law.

Arnold E. Brown II, VP Digital Development, ARTISTdirect

Arnold Brown, Vice President Digital Distribution for ARTISTdirect, was most recently CEO at Mjuice.com, a company he co-founded. He was appointed to his current role when ARTISTdirect acquired Mjuice.com early in 2000. Previous to founding Mjuice.com, Mr. Brown was an attorney at Venture Law Group (VLG), providing legal advice to Silicon Valley start-ups, often taking these companies through the IPOprocess. While at VLG, Mr. Brown conducted extensive research on the music industry and related technology. This research, combined with his life-long passion for music, was the inspiration for Mjuice.com, now DOWNLOADSdirect. Prior toVLG, Mr. Brown practiced law at Pillsbury Madison & Sutro, one of the largest and most prominent law firms in the country. Mr. Brown, who played in several Boston bands in the 1980’s, earned a BA in Government from Harvard University and holds a law degree from University of California’s Boalt Law School. He is a member of California Lawyers for the Arts, Black Entertainment Sports Lawyers Association, and the San Francisco Bar Association.

Kimberly Bryant, Biotechnology/Engineering, Entrepreneur, BlackGirlsCode

Kimberly Bryant is a Biotechnology/Engineering professional who has spent the last decade in the Biotechnology, Pharmaceutical, and Manufacturing industry in a series of technical leadership roles for various Fortune 100 companies such as Merck, Pfizer, and Dupont. Most recently Ms. Bryant spent 5+ years as a Senior Manager with Bay Area biotechnology company Genentech. Ms. Bryant is a native of Memphis, Tennessee and she received her Bachelors of Engineering degree from Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee with a major in Electrical Engineering and a minor in CS and math. Ms. Bryant founded BlackGirlsCode in April 2011 to meet the needs of young women of color who are underrepresented in the currently exploding field of technology. The program focuses on introducing girls of color between the ages of 7-17 to the field of digital technology and computer programming with a focus on emerging entrepreneurial concepts. Since launching BlackGirlsCode in 2011 in the Bayview Hunter’s Point community the very successful pilot program has experienced incredible growth with workshops now being offered in Oakland, Chicago, Atlanta, St. Louis, and various other cities as part of a national expansion effort. Among some of the honors BlackGirlsCode has achieved since its launch include being selected from amongst 400+ applicants for the prestigious Google R.I.S.E. (Roots in Science and Engineering) award for 2012 and its selection as a semifinalist in the Echoing Green Social Entrepreneur Fellowship Program. The program has received national recognition via feature articles on CNN, The Huffington Post, and The Melissa Harris-Perry Show on MSNBC, MadameNoire, and other major publications. BlackGirlsCode founder, Kimberly Bryant, was also selected to appear in an upcoming episode of SciGirls a nationally syndicated PBS show which focuses on introducing girls to science. In addition to her responsibilities as founder of BlackGirlsCode, Ms. Bryant serves on the National Champions Board for the National Girls Collaborative Project, and the K-12 Alliance of NCWIT. Although the digital divide is steadily eroding there is still a great disparity in the representation of women and people of color in STEM fields, the mission of BlackGirlsCode is to introduce programming and technology to a new generation of coders who will become the leaders and creators of tomorrow.

Mikey Butler, VP of Research & Development, EVault

Mikey Butler is VP of Research & Development at EVault, a company providing full-service backup and recovery delivered by a team of experts, leveraging cloud-connected technology and infrastructure. Mikey Butler’s 30+ year journey with computing began in high school with a science fair project and continued unabated ever since. After attending Harvard University, the first half of Mikey’s career focused on system coding contribution at places such as Digital Equipment, Bank of America, Data General, Rolm, and Sun. The latter half of his career has been forged through increasing roles of responsibility in engineering management for companies such as Sybase, Cloudscape, BEA Systems, SAP ,and Intuit. He later joined Cisco Systems as Vice-President, NSSTG Software Services, which included: Cisco 3.0 Initiatives, Software Product Delivery (SPD), Knowledge Management and Delivery (KMD), Software Tools and Engineering Process (STEP) and NSSTG Operations. Butler earned his degree in Econometrics and Government at Harvard University.

Eva Cabness, Marketing Manager Cloud and Managed Services, WW—Channels Partner Marketing, Cisco Systems

Eva Cabness is Marketing Manager of Cloud and Managed Services, WW—Channels Partner Marketing at Cisco Systems. She is a seasoned Marketing professional with over 13 years of service at Cisco Systems where her experience is currently utilized driving marketing excellence, improving the customer experience and enabling Innovation to drive business results. Cabness is a trusted advisor in relationships between Cisco executives and their peers at top Cisco accounts, and her industry specialties include Program Management, Customer Intimacy, Advisory Boards, Strategic Events, Marketing, Customer Engagement, Field Marketing, Sales, Service Providers, Relationship Building, Messaging/Communications, Demand Generation Campaigns, Diversity, Cloud and Managed Services. Cabness won the Cisco Teamwork and Collaboration award in conjunction with Cisco Powered Marketing, recognizing the MSCP program accomplishments. Her prior role was Program Manager where she led her cross-functional team to deliver the first and second annual Cisco Services Women’s Leadership (US/Canada Services Sales) Summit, focused on professional, personal, business growth. In addition, Cabness initiated the first Cisco Partner Operations Advisory Board (POAB), a global listening and feedback forum focused on improving partners’ operational quality satisfaction. She also served Cisco as Marketing Communications Manager, Enterprise/Commercial Accounts, creating inbound and outbound marketing and messaging of Cisco Services solutions. Before joining Cisco Systems, Cabness worked as Global Program Manager / Marketing Manager MCI Worldcom, formerly MCI, British Telecom, and McDonnell Douglas Corp. Cabness earned her Bachelor of Arts in Advertising/Business Marketing at San Jose State University.

Ralph A. Clark, President and Chief Executive Officer, ShotSpotter

A veteran of numerous successful technology start-ups, Ralph A. Clark brings 30 years of extensive corporate, financial and organizational leadership to his position as SST, Inc.’s President and Chief Executive Officer. Most recently, Clark was CEO of GuardianEdge Technologies Inc., where he led the transformation of the company into a leader in endpoint data protection and was instrumental in its recent acquisition by Symantec. Prior to GuardianEdge, Clark served as vice president of finance for Adaptec through its acquisition of Snap Appliance, which he helped engineer. He was responsible for worldwide financial planning and analysis of Snap Appliance, serving as its chief financial officer. Previous to his role at Snap Appliance, he worked at several venture capital backed start-up companies, leading several to successful acquisitions. Early in his career, Clark held executive sales and marketing roles at IBM; post business school he was an investment banker at Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch, where he was instrumental in many successful technology transactions. He is a member of the board of directors for PrintRoom and Tactical Survey Group, and also serves as a trustee at the Oakland Museum of California. Clark holds a bachelor’s degree in economics from the University of the Pacific, and a master’s degree in business administration from Harvard Business School.

Cedric T. Coco, Senior Vice President of Learning & Organizational Effectiveness, Lowe’s

Cedric T. Coco is Senior Vice President of Learning & Organizational Effectiveness at Lowe’s Companies. In this role, he has the strategic responsibility for the acquisition, development, and talent management of Lowe’s workforce, as well as the design and implementation of Lowe’s diversity and inclusion strategy for a global workforce of over 235,000 employees. Mr. Coco has authored numerous articles for business and trade magazines and was named Chief Learning Officer of the Year by CLO Magazine. He has nearly two decades of experience in learning and development and organizational performance at Microsoft, KLA-Tencor, and GE, where he held numerous leadership roles in engineering, business development, sales, management, and organizational learning. Mr. Coco serves on the Board of Directors for the Executive Leadership Council (ELC) and sits on various boards of community and non-profit organizations. He holds a BS from the University of Louisiana, and an MBA from San Jose State University.

Kurt Collins, Co-Founder and CEO, Enole

Kurt Collins is co-founder and CEO of Enole. Enole is seeking to change the world by enabling online users to interact with the offline world by unifying and authenticating their identity through Single Sign-On (SSO). Think about a world where (eventually) you could replace your wallet, your keys, your credit cards, and your passport with just one device? Wouldn’t it be even better if this turned out to be a more secure solution than the carrying around all that stuff? This is the problem Enole seeks to solve for the world. Kurt Collins and Aaron Knoll founded the company in October and launched December of 2009. Being entrepreneurs with lofty inspirations, they started out on their mission by bootstrapping the entire venture. Their first live demonstration of the product was ZapCash at the Future of Money and Technology conference and only a few months later they were a finalist at the Venture Beat Mobile Beat 2010 Competition. Already there are over 10,000 consumers on the platform, including users for the online dating site PickV.com. Previously, Collins was Vice President, Business Development at Ustrive2, Director, Business Development at Clearspring Technologies and Manager of Business Development at Photobucket. Collins is a graduate of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Milton Academy.

Gerald Commissiong, President & CEO, Amarantus BioSciences, Inc.

Gerald Commissiong is President & CEO of Amarantus BioSciences, a company he co-founded with Dr. John Commissiong Ph.D. They are entrepreneurs of a company building biotechnology developing novel therapies to address Parkinson’s disease and other human disorders. Gerald Commissiong attracted seed capital, acquired the intellectual property rights to MANF and recruited scientific and executive talent to Amarantus to allow for the further development of the technologies. Prior to becoming President, he served as Chief Operating Officer, where his duties included strategic transactions, licensing, research collaborations, mergers & acquisitions, fund raising and investor relations. He also served as Chief Business Officer where he was responsible for business development and corporate development. a Director. Prior to co-founding Amarantus, Mr. Commissiong played professional football for the Calgary Stampeders of the Canadian Football League. Mr. Commissiong received a B.Sc. in Management Science and Engineering with a focus Financial Decisions from Stanford University.

John W. Commissiong, Ph.D., Chief Scientific Officer, Amarantus BioSciences, Inc.

Dr. John W. Commissiong has served as the Chief Scientific Officer and a Director of Amarantus since co-founding the company in 2009. From 2000 through 2008 Dr. Commissiong served as the CSO of Neurotrophics Inc & Prescient Neuropharma Inc. Dr. Commissiong has been focused on the discovery of novel neurotrophic factors for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases as well as understanding the fundamental underlying biology of protoplasmic type-1 astrocytes that secrete neurotrophic factors. He was Chief of the Neural Transplantation Unit, NINDS-NIH, from 1989-94 where his research focused on identifying therapeutic approaches to spinal cord injury. Dr. Commissiong was Head of the Neurotrophic Factors Group, NINDS-NIH, from 1994-97 where he focused on developing technologies to systematically identify novel neurotrophic factors with applications for specific Central Nervous System disorders. He co-founded Prescient Neuropharma in 1999 and discovered MANF in 2003. MANF is currently in preclinical development for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. The work pioneered by Dr. Commissiong has led to significant advancements in the field of astrocyte-neuron biology. Dr. Commissiong believes that a fundamental understanding of astrocyte-neuron interactions in the Central Nervous System will lead to a new generation of therapies to treat brain-related disorders. Dr. Commissiong did his Postdoctoral work in the Lab Preclin Pharmac, NIMH-NIH, concentrating on the application of quadrupole mass spectrometry in the analysis of neurotransmitters. He holds a Ph.D. in Neurophysiology from the University of Southampton, an M.Sc. in Biochemical Pharmacology from the University of Southampton, and a B.S. in Biology and Chemistry from the University of the West Indies.

Cheryl Contee, CEO and Co-Founder, Fission Strategy

Cheryl Contee is the CEO and co-founder of Fission Strategy, which helps the world’s leading non-profits, foundations, and social enterprises use the Internet in innovative ways to create change globally. She is also the co-founder of Attentive.ly, which is a rising tech startup, specializing in cutting edge influencer marketing technology and #YesWeCode, which represents the movement to help over 100,000 low-opportunity youth to become high-quality coders. She was also the co-founder of Jack and Jill Politics writing as “Jill Tubman” on the leading top black blog during the 2008 election cycle. Cheryl was named as an Affiliate of Harvard University’s Berkman Center for Internet & Society. Cheryl was included in the first The Root 100 list of established and emerging African-American leaders. Huffington Post listed her as one of the Top 27 Female Founders in Tech to Follow on Twitter in 2011, as did Black Enterprise. Fast Company named her one of their 2010 Most Influential Women in Tech. She has over 15 years of award-winning interactive expertise and previously served as Vice President and lead digital strategist for Fleishman-Hillard’s West Coast region in San Francisco. Cheryl was also named in The Influencers 50 in Campaigns and Elections magazine. Cheryl has appeared in the Washington Post, New York Times, San Francisco Magazine, C-Span, Black Enterprise, BBC, Current TV, MSNBC, and CNN, among other media appearances. She is also proud to serve on several boards and advisory committees including Netroots Nation, Focus100/Digital Undivided, Guttmacher Institute, Citizen Engagement Lab and serves as an ambassador for Social Venture Network (SVN). She received her B.A. from Yale University and has an International Executive M.B.A. from Georgetown University.

Teresa D. Cox, Representative, US Department of Trade and Commerce

The Honorable Teresa D. Cox has a career that has spanned disciplines as broad as engineering, supply chain, investment banking, and contract management, Silicon Valley, Wall Street, and the White House, she is undoubtedly a woman to watch. Teresa Cox was appointed by Secretary of Commerce Gary Locke and the United States Trade Representative Ron Kirk to serve during the 2010-14 charter term on the Industry Trade Advisory Committee on Small and Minority Business (ITAC 11) as a representative of Vantec Thermal Technologies and of the U.S. computer industry sector. Ms. Cox works with the other members of ITAC 11 to provide trade policy and technical advice, information, and recommendations to the Secretary of Commerce and the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) regarding trade barriers, negotiation of trade agreements, and implementation of existing trade agreements affecting small and minority business; and ITAC 11 performs such other advisory functions relevant to U.S. trade policy as may be requested by the Secretary and the USTR or their designees. In 2012, The Honorable Teresa Cox has been appointed by Secretary of Commerce John Bryson to serve as one of the members of the U.S. District Export Council representing Northern California. Ms. Cox was elected to the Ohlone Community College Board of Trustees in November 2008. She became the first African American elected to this Board in 50 years. She is the first African American Commissioner at the Economic Development Advisory Commission for the City of Fremont where she chaired this commission in 2008-2009. She served as a member of the Fremont Delegation to China and visited the new Ohlone College in Suzhou, China. She has worked at The White House Office during the Clinton Administration where she coordinated White House events to strengthen community relations with constituent groups. She facilitated public policy briefings on Presidential business forums and organized Presidential delegations. She made national headlines as the first African American woman with a degree in Nuclear Engineering in the nation Ms. Cox earned a Bachelor’s Degree in Nuclear Engineering from Northwestern University in Illinois and an MBA from the Simon Graduate School of Business Administration of University of Rochester in New York. She has received numerous awards of distinction. She has over twenty years of experience in international trade and working with small and or minority-owned businesses in Federal Government and corporations in various industries including Silicon Valley. Ms. Cox currently works at the world’s leading enterprise cloud computing company. Ms. Cox has served in various leadership positions of community service organizations that promote family, healthcare, business, and education. She is the recipient of numerous awards and featured keynote speaker across the nation.

Pamela Culpepper, Senior Vice President Global Diversity and Inclusion Officer, Pepsico

Pamela Culpepper is Senior Vice President, Global Diversity and Inclusion Officer at Pepsico. Ms. Culpepper is responsible for providing leadership in guiding PepsiCo’s global Diversity and Inclusion strategy to bring together diverse strengths, backgrounds, and perspectives to achieve our strategic business imperatives, advance our Performance with Purpose goals and drive innovation. Building on PepsiCo’s leadership in Diversity and Inclusion, she helps PepsiCo ensure that D&I is part of everything we do and expand pathways for developing global, multicultural thinkers, do’ers and innovators. With nearly $60 billion in revenue, PepsiCo employs 285,000 people worldwide. Culpepper joined PepsiCo in 2000 and most recently served as vice president, Human Resources for Quaker Foods and Snacks. Before joining PepsiCo, Culpepper worked for McKessonHBOC, Inc., Clorox and Wells Fargo. Culpepper currently serves on the board of VSO International (United Kingdom) and an advisory board member, National Black MBA Association. Culpepper has a Bachelor of Arts from the University of Arkansas at Little Rocks and Master of Organizational Change from California State University, Hayward.

Craig Davis, Founder and CEO, Relevvant

Craig Davis is the Founder and CEO of Relevvant. Relevvant is the mobile marketing company that lets brands to leverage deep social data to engage better and increase sales across every mobile channel, including SMS, mobile Web, social and apps. Relevvant develops engagement and targeted marketing solutions for businesses. The company develops Facebook Page tab application TextualAds, which allows Page admins to collect phone numbers from fans and publish targeted SMS updates to them. Relevvant was founded in 2010 and is based in San Francisco, California. Davis earned his Computer Science and Economics degrees from University of California, Berkeley.

Dr. Joel Dawson, Professor EECS, MIT

Joel L. Dawson joined MIT as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (EECS) in September of 2004. He received his S.B. and MEng degrees in Electrical Engineering from MIT in 1996 and 1997, respectively. While attaining his MEng degree, Professor Dawson participated in the VI-A Internship program at Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, NJ. He went on to receive his Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from Stanford University in 2003. During his doctoral research, Professor Dawson worked in the area of RF circuit design as a part of Professor Thomas H. Lee’s research group. He investigated innovative techniques to improve power dissipation and linearity of power amplifiers, a key component of wireless systems. In 2003 he co-founded Aspendos Communications, a startup company based in San Jose, CA. Professor Dawson was also the recipient of an NSF Career Award in 2008 and was selected for the Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers (PECASE) in 2009.

Stephen DeBerry, Founder and CIO, Bronze Investments

Stephen DeBerry makes and manages investments that align strong financial returns with positive social impact. He is the Founder and Chief Investment Officer at Bronze Investments and a partner at Kapor Capital. Previously, Stephen was Investment Director at Omidyar Network, the mission-based investment firm started by eBay founder Pierre Omidyar and his wife, Pam. Before that, Stephen was a senior manager of business development at Interval Research, the research lab established by Microsoft co-founder, Paul Allen. Stephen is a Trustee and Member of the Investment Committee at The California Endowment. He is the Chairman of Friends of New Orleans and also serves the boards of The Association of Marshall Scholars and The Dalai Lama Foundation. Stephen earned a Bachelor’s degree in Anthropology with highest honors from UCLA as well as a Master’s degree in Social Anthropology and a Master of Business Administration degree from Oxford University. He is a Marshall Scholar and a Crown Fellow at the Aspen Institute.

Kenneth D. Denman, Member Board of Directors, Shoretel, Inc.

Kenneth D. Denman is a Member of the Board of Directors at Shoretel, Inc. and formerly served as the CEO of Openwave Systems, appointed November of 2008 after being an independent board member since 2004 and Chief Executive Officer since November 2008. From October 2001 to November 2008, Denman served as President and Chief Executive Officer of iPass, Inc., a global provider of software-enabled trusted connections and services for the enterprise and its mobile workers, and served as a director from December 2001 to November 2008 and as its Chairman from January 2003 to November 2008. In his role as Chief Executive Officer of iPass, Denman was responsible for the leadership and strategic direction of iPass, managing iPass and its executive team, and overseeing the overall operations of iPass, a company with approximately $190 million in revenues and approximately 500 employees. From January 2000 to March 2001, Denman was Chief Executive Officer of AuraServ Communications, a managed service provider of broadband voice and data applications. From August 1998 to May 2000, Denman was Senior Vice President, National Markets Group at MediaOne, Inc., a broadband cable and communications company, and from June 1996 to August 1998, he was Chief Operating Officer, Wireless at MediaOne International, a broadband cable and communications company. Denman is also a member of the University of Washington, Foster School of Business Advisory Board. Denman received his MBA from the University of Washington and a BS in accounting from Central Washington University.

James Diamond, CEO and Founder, Diamond Technology, Inc.

James Diamond is CEO and Founder of Diamond Technology, Inc. The specialists of Diamond Technology are experts in a wide range of Database, Computer Network, and IT solutions. Their database services include database platform installation and management (Oracle, Microsoft Access, SQL Servers and MySQL) and database development and customization among others. They also provide clients with computer network and PC support, ironclad disaster recovery planning as well as the installation of Remote Access Servers and VPNs. Founded in 1995 in the San Francisco Bay Area, Diamond Technology Inc. was born out of the idea that businesses, government, and other organizations can benefit from more cost and operational flexibility in meeting their IT infrastructure support needs. Too often, organizations decide to invest in hiring additional expensive IT employees, or make a conscious decision not to higher more employees, thus overburdening current IT staff with excessive workloads. DTI’s goal is to allow its clients to quickly address database and computer infrastructure support needs, all at a fraction of the time and cost of increasing or decreasing permanent staff members. Diamond previous worked at BNG-Bay Networking Group and World Affairs Council. Diamond is a graduate of San Jose State University, where he studied International Business and Finance.

Drafton, Founder and Engineer, Hustle & Code LLC

Silicon Valley has never been Sir Drafton’s stomping ground. He is a self-taught programmer and internet entrepreneur who heads up Hustle & Code, LLC. Raised in the San Francisco Bay Area, Drafton’s beginnings in the internet arena are traceable to his studies at the Academy of Art University (Computer Arts) located in San Francisco, California. The small company – Sir and his mother are its only employees – specializes in the development of web applications, mostly built on Facebook. Sir (his real name) is the founder, principal, and only engineer at Hustle & Code LLC, the company he started with his mother, Esther Charlene. They have put virtually all of their time, energy, and finances, for the last 6 years. It is their passion and they define what they do as ‘providing high-end web platforms for the people’. It is a daunting effort, but the pair makes it work. This unique and inspiring relationship between mother and son began about 15 years ago when Sir was a young developer honing his craft. He started with the basics of HTML and then moved on to more complicated languages. As he worked, he found that he picked up the concepts of object-oriented programming quickly and his skills improved. Soon, he was experimenting with ASP and more complicated concepts of web development. In time, he was being offered a six-figure salary to join the engineering team at a well-known financial institution. As a member of the larger team, the job entailed working to build web-based financial trading applications. But Sir wasn’t interested. The young engineer passed on the cash and set his sights on .NET and Adobe’s web application software development framework for building web apps called Flex. But, he eventually moved past that as well. Drafton leverages his start-up endeavors with 15 years of experience in web development, design, programming, and networking. Drafton’s web development background (for a financial institution and marketing agencies) provided the foundation for the creation of Facebbok Apps for brand marketers. Drafton is committed to developing apps with rich interactive media design which actively engages the user.

David Drummond, Senior VP and Chief Legal Officer, Google

David Drummond joined Google in 2002, initially as vice president of corporate development. Today as senior vice president and the company’s chief legal officer, Drummond leads Google’s global teams for legal, communications, government relations, corporate development, and new business development. Drummond was first introduced to Google in 1998 as a partner in the corporate transactions group at Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, one of the nation’s leading law firms representing technology businesses. He served as Google’s first outside counsel and worked with Larry Page and Sergey Brin to incorporate the company and secure its initial rounds of financing. During his tenure at Wilson Sonsini, he worked with a wide variety of technology companies to help them manage complex transactions such as mergers, acquisitions, and initial public offerings. Drummond has led Google’s efforts to create a huge digital library, which now contains more than seven million titles. A broad array of authors, academics, librarians and public interest groups found the Google Books project controversial. From July 1999 to February 2002, David served as Chief Financial Officer of SmartForce, an educational software applications company. In late 2009 Google and its partners, the Authors Guild and the Association of American Publishers, redrafted an agreement to resolve the conflict. Drummond earned his bachelor’s degree in history from Santa Clara University and his J.D. from Stanford Law School.

E. David Ellington, Co-Founder and President, GridSpeak

David Ellington is Co-Founder and President of GridSpeak Corporation. GridSpeak is an information service company that provides a real-time, web-based workflow, transaction and analytics platform between wholesale energy market participants (generation, load, transmission, utilities, power marketers and government). GridSpeak customer core values include Regulatory compliance controls for a dynamically changing electricity market; Real-time market information and analytics for critical decision-making; Workflow solutions for data integrity and corporate and market efficiency; Risk evaluation tools and risk mitigation pathways. Mr. Ellington is a licensed attorney in the State of California. He was formerly the Managing Partner of the Emory Capital Group, LLC, an advisory firm to IT entrepreneurs, CEOs, Executive Directors in Internet strategy, venture capital, and multimedia issues. Mr. Ellington is a former Trustee and Commissioner on the San Francisco Employees’ Retirement System (SFERS) Board (July 2002-January 2008). Before joining the SFERS Board, Mr. Ellington was chairman, president and chief executive officer of NetNoir Inc. (150+ employees; investors included Time Warner [NYSE:TWX]; Radio One [NASD:ROIA]), one of the first ‘community portals’ (the precursor to today’s ‘social networks’). Prior to NetNoir, Mr. Ellington was an attorney in Los Angeles. His firm specialized in international, entertainment and multimedia/new technology law. At that time, he served as the chairman of the international law section of the Beverly Hills Bar Association. Mr. Ellington received his BA in History from Adelphi University and MA in Comparative Politics and Government [subfield:Africa] from Howard University. He received his JD from Georgetown University Law Center, where he concentrated on international, corporate and tax law. He then completed Cornell University’s FALCON (Full Year Asian Language Concentration) Program in Japanese. Mr. Ellington has extensive international experience in Tokyo, Singapore, Bangkok, London, Dubai, Paris and India.

Phaedra Ellis-Lamkins, CEO, Green For All

Phaedra Ellis-Lamkins is the Chief Executive Officer of Green For All. Under her leadership, Green For All has become one of the country’s leading advocates for a clean-energy economy, and one of its most important voices on the intersection of economics and environment. Phaedra has led Green For All to several groundbreaking policy victories at the federal, state, and local levels. At the federal level, she led a successful effort to include two key provisions in the House’s climate and energy bill: securing funding for job training and guaranteeing broad access to clean-energy jobs. Under Phaedra, Green For All has helped states like Washington and New Mexico pioneer state-level green jobs and energy-efficiency programs. And the organization is helping cities like Portland and Seattle craft groundbreaking energy-efficiency home retrofit programs that use innovative financing mechanisms and community agreements about job standards to cut energy bills, create green jobs, reduce pollution, and expand business opportunities. Green For All is redefining the face of environmentalism through partnerships with popular artists such as The Black Eyed Peas, Drake, Wiz Khalifa and Wyclef Jean, Green For All is reaching new audiences about the benefits and opportunities of going green. Prior to joining Green For All, Phaedra was a leader in California’s labor movement, heading both the South Bay AFL-CIO Labor Council and Working Partnerships USA. This has given her a unique perspective that has enabled her to bring labor, environmental, business, grassroots, and government leaders together in common purpose. Her ability to speak to all of these groups has made Phaedra one of America’s preeminent leaders on green jobs and green pathways out of poverty. Phaedra leads on numerous boards including serving as the Chair of the Department of Labor’s Advisory Committee on Apprenticeship, the Commission to Engage African Americans on Climate Change for the Joint Center, the Economic Policy Institute, the Leadership Council of California Forward, the Tipping Point Community Board, and the Partnership for Working Families. Phaedra serves as a Young Global Leader with the World Economic Forum.

Ike Eze, Entrepreneur & Private Investor

Ike Eze advises and privately invests in early-stage companies. Prior to its sale, he was CEO of GPlay Inc. a subscription-based online entertainment company. He founded and served as CEO of QSpace Inc., an Internet finance company that was sold to Experian (the world’s largest credit reporting agency). Ike has worked for The Boston Consulting Group advising financial and pharmacology clients, and Bechtel Inc. in business development for its Advanced Systems group on global telecommunications, aerospace and defense projects. He holds an M.B.A. from The Wharton School in Finance and Strategic Management and is a graduate (Osberg Scholar) of San Francisco State University with a degree in Mechanical Engineering.

Michael Fields, CEO, KANA

In his career, spanning more than 30 years, Michael Fields (Unknown – 2010), led successful organizations at a number of large corporations, including Oracle U.S.A, where he served as president at Applied Data Research and Burroughs Corporation. In addition, Mr. Fields was the founder, chairman of the Board of Directors and chief executive officer of OpenVision Technologies, Inc, which was acquired by VERITAS in 1997. Mr. Fields took charge of KANA in September 2005. Under his leadership, he strengthened KANA operationally, financially and technologically through vision, focus, hard work and an absolute commitment to customer success. Mike was the driving force behind KANA’s vision: during the downturn of 2009, when many of KANA’s competitors decided to stand still or retrench, Mike invested heavily in innovation. His leadership led to the creation of the industry’s first Service Experience Management solutions — which have transformed customer service operations. Mike guided KANA through a series of strategic initiatives; most notably the acquisition of KANA by Accel-KKR, one of the most respected and successful private equity firms in the world. This decision strengthened KANA’s commitment to its customers and validated Mike’s confidence in the company’s potential to lead the industry. Michael Fields is a former president at Oracle and member of the U.S. Air Force, but he’s best known in the last decade for helping build one of the country’s top “multi-channel service” businesses at Bay Area-based Kana. Kana is a customer service software company that uses “center agent desktop, email,” chat management and “web self-service” for its clients, which includes half of all Fortune 500 companies. So there’s money to be made in good customer service tools! Fields started his career as a programmer and analyst for the Air Force and over time, developed major management skills, eventually landing at Oracle where he helped the management through a critical time in its history (mainly in the “deep discounting” of its services to gain market share). Later, he launched OpenVision Technologies and led the company through its initial public offering in 1996 (and its later acquisition by Veritas). Once he got latched onto KANA, he led the company to its first annual operating profit in company history. Mr. Fields served on the board of directors of Imation Corporation, advises Ford on key IT customer initiatives, and also managed the Fields Group, a VC-type incubator for minority-owned tech companies.

Michelle Fisher, Founder and CEO, Blaze Mobile

Michelle Fisher has a 20-year track record of innovation. She has led the development of over a dozen new commercial grade products taking them from conception to launch. Fisher said Blaze Mobile first invented the NFC payment sticker in 2006 and was looking to find a way to spur adoption of NFC when there were few NFC-enabled phones available for consumers. In the company’s announcement, Fisher said the continued lack of NFC phones on the market — only Google’s Nexus S currently has NFC capabilities — means the company’s NFC sticker “remains a relevant NFC-enabling solution.” The patent just awarded to Blaze covers an NFC payment sticker affixed to mobile devices not equipped with internal NFC capabilities and a mobile wallet product that interacts with it. The mobile wallet app for smartphones allows those devices to access NFC programs such as mobile payments, banking, and mobile coupons. Feature phones with the sticker affixed to them can access a version of the mobile wallet based on SMS messages to make payments at the point of sale even without a data plan. The company said the patent confirms that Blaze Mobile originated the NFC payment sticker technology and gives the company the credit it is due. Prior to founding Blaze Mobile in 2005, Michelle worked at Microsoft where she successfully drove the launch of The Microsoft Network in Europe, in only 6 months working with Deutcshe Telecom, France Telecom, Telia and other carriers which generated over $36 Million in revenue. During her 10 years there, she also worked on business plans and launched products in broadband, consumer wireless, and enterprise wireless. In 1994, while she was at telecommunications leader AT&T, Michelle created, raised funds and led the development of Media Park, a forward reaching broadband service which connected creative professionals in Hollywood, Silicon Valley and New York to digital content libraries, 5 gigabytes of storage, rendering and many other services all before many had even heard of the internet. Michelle has a Master’s Degree from Stanford University and a Bachelor of Science in engineering degree from U.C. Berkeley.

Hajj Flemings, Founder, Gokit

Hajj Flemings is the CEO/Co-Founder of Gokit, an online identity platform that enables users to manage, organize and curate their story and founder of Brand Camp University the largest personal branding conference in the Midwest. He has expanded his personal branding conference to New York and Boston. Flemings is also the author of “The Brand YU Life: Re-thinking Who You Are Through Personal Brand Management”, which was selected as one of Fast Company Magazine 2008 Readers Choice Business Books of the year. Flemings has been featured on WDIV 4 (NBC), Fox 2 News, ESPN.com, BusinessWeek.com and travels nationally speaking as a brand strategist enabling personal and business brands to remain relevant. His clients include Walt Disney, Ford Motor Company, Skechers Footwear, U.S. Department of Defense (Telecom Division). He has spoken at Iowa State University, Davidson College, University of Michigan and numerous colleges and universities around the nation on personal branding, social media and career development. Flemings is also a BlackEnterprise.com columnist who writes about technology, social media and branding for small business. Flemings earned his education from Lawrence Technological University and MBA from Michigan Technological University. Flemings was featured as an entrepreneur on CNN’s Black In America: The Promised Land Silicon Valley hosted by Soledad O’Brien in 2011.

Anthony Frasier, Founder, Playd

Anthony Frasier is passionate about fun business. Gaming, tech, and film are what he considers fun business. When he heard folks like Will Smith talk about his passion and how he makes a living, it inspired him to do the same. Frasier wants to create big ideas that leave an impact on all three. He started contributing a lot of content on forums for a certain video game website, and his commentary attracted so much attention that he brought the site a lot of extra traffic. Frasier figured, if this was going so well, then he might as well do it himself. So he started The Koalition, a gaming site aimed at urban youth. It was a new approach, and it really took off. Frasier started working with some other startups, which was great, but he still wanted to do stuff with video games. He thought, why not an app? That’s how Playd was born. Playd is like Foursquare for gamers: You can “check in” when you’re playing a game on a console or your phone, and rate how much you like it. You can also discuss and share with your friends. Frasier is launching a beta test and it hasn’t been easy, but he’s so excited. Frasier was featured as an entrepreneur on CNN’s Black In America: The Promised Land Silicon Valley hosted by Soledad O’Brien in 2011.

Kenneth A. Gaines, Sales Vice President, State, Local Government and Education, Cisco Systems

Kenneth Gaines is the Sales Vice President for Cisco’s U.S. Public Sector segment that focuses on Cisco’s strategy and go-to-market activities for State & Local Government, and Education. He is responsible for the Midwest, Mid-Atlantic and Northeast states and leads a team of 300 people. In addition to his sales executive role, he has served as a key member of the advisory board for Cisco’s World-Wide Inclusion and Diversity Council. Prior to joining Cisco, Mr. Gaines was Vice President of Sales for the US Americas region at PictureTel Corporation, where he was responsible for direct and channel videoconferencing sales and services in the US, Canada, and Latin America. Within the industry and the community, he is an active member of The Executive Leadership Council, a non-profit corporation dedicated to providing African-American executives from Fortune 500 companies a forum to share ideas and hone their leadership skills. He is also a board member for the Make-a-Wish Foundation of Illinois.

Tony Gauda, CEO and Co-Founder, Bitcasa, Inc.

Tony Gauda is CEO & Co-founder of Bitcasa. The company was founded by former employees of Mastercard, VeriSign and Mozy. Bitcasa provides secure, unlimited storage on any device. Users can view their entire lifetime of photos, listen to their entire music library, store all of their files and important documents and still have room for the contents of the Library of Congress. The data will always be accessible and shareable from any device. Bitcasa uses streaming instead of traditional upload/download, files are available quickly. Gauda’s engineering career includes previous work at Announce Media, Grail Inc. and MasterCard Worldwide. Gauda was Co-Founder and CTO of PrivSystems, Inc. and Nexxware LLC. Starting out, Gauda worked at his father’s computer consulting firm as a programmer for a fraud detection system sold to the cellular industry world-wide. Gauda holds a degree in Computer Science at University of Missouri-Saint Louis.

June Grant, Architect and Entrepreneur, founder, BLINK-lab

June Grant, a Yale University graduate, is founder and principal architect of BLINK-lab, an urban research lab located in Oakland CA. One goal of the lab is to understand the urban landscape through the practice of architecture by directly focusing on the average individual. The idea of architectural space being a catalyst for positive change lead Blink-Lab to participate in the VACANT LOT project. Grant and Blink-labs are devoted to the idea that architects can make the world a better place to dwell. “Communication occurs between people and place.” About the VACANT LOT project, in 2004, Blink-lab was commissioned to undertake a study in Richmond, CA, a city geographically close to Oakland, CA. The purpose of the study was to propose strategies for the City of Richmond’s over 500 vacant lots. The clients were an African American developer who had partnered with the largest church congregations in Richmond. The church was becoming more politically active and realized that in order to solve the problems of its high-crime districts, it had to be more creative. What this team of developer and church lacked was an ability to grasp the idea that by simply filling vacant lots with typically styled single-family houses would not change the economic cultural context of these neighborhoods. While the end-goal was to create a better neighborhood, the client believed the best answer was to fill the space.

Carl Hackney, CEO and Managing Principal, MSE Group

Carl Hackney is the CEO of MSE Group and is the managing principal. Hackney is a forward-thinking executive with progressive professional experience developing and executing strategic and tactical solutions for project financings and other mission objectives. Possessing a keen eye for creative processes, Hackney is adept at managing complexity while utilizing his team, results and quality-oriented management style. He has in excess of 40 years of experience in government, engineering, energy, publishing, broadcasting, and telecommunications. As an aggressive manager with a proven multi-industry experience base, Hackney has developed effective working/trust relationships with his clients, representatives of the regulatory community, and the public and community-based organizations. Also the managing principal, he directs the preparation of project cost proposals and schedules and leads negotiation between the company and the client. He directs MSE’s executive staff and has overall P&L responsibility. Hackney also oversees business development plans and strategies. Hackney is also the Vice-Chairman of 100 Black Men of the Bay Area.

Reggy Hardy, Senior Account Executive, Nimsoft – CA Technologies

Reggy Hardy is a Senior Account Executive with Nimsoft, an independent software vendor with products used to monitor and manage business services and specific systems within the IT infrastructure, including network components, servers, databases, applications, and virtualized environments. Hardy is a seasoned professional with strength in technology and strategic planning – working the entire sales cycle from the raw lead to closed business with companies of all sizes. His prior sales employment in the computer software industry includes work within; Cenzic, Marketo, SumTotal Systems, SugarCRM, Genesys and Webex Communications. Hardy earned his Bachelor’s degree in Marketing at San Jose State University.

Kermit Heartsong, Digital and Media Consultant, Triune Digital Media

Kermit Heartsong is a Digital and Media Consultant at Triune Digital Media. Triune develops mobile and tablet-based games for simultaneous distribution across platforms – Android, iOS, Web, etc., utilizing the latest in next generation software (HTML5, Unity3D, etc). Heartsong is also President and CEO of KHE Strategic Consulting, providing business consulting services for entrepreneurs, startups and small businesses that seek help with business and/or marketing plans, operational strategy, executive coaching/consulting, capital procurement, corporate ID and product development. Heartsong is a game designer and engineer who has run the companies Quantum Gameworks and Word Origin, Inc., a San Francisco puzzle and game company. He has sold 42 educational games through specialty stores in the United States and Canada – and he designed more than half of these games. He has previously worked for WellUs World, Inc., HTG Consulting, LLC, and Biosentients. Heartsong earned is BS in Electrical Engineering & Computer Science at University of California, Davis.

Tanya Henneman-Moore, Creator of Infinite Possibilities Conference

Tanya Henneman-Moore, a proud native of Berkeley, California, has demonstrated throughout the course of her life a commitment to community service and academic excellence. Currently, she is the co-chair and creator of the Infinite Possibilities Conference, a conference designed to support and empower underrepresented minority women in the mathematical sciences. She is also committed to the reduction of health disparities and is involved in designing a plan to reduce the rates of hypertension in the African-American community in South and West Berkeley. Dr. Henneman received her doctorate training in the field of biostatistics at the University of California, Berkeley. Prior to attending UC Berkeley, Dr. Henneman obtained a B.S. degree in mathematics from Spelman College and a master’s degree in science and engineering from the Department of Mathematical Sciences at Johns Hopkins University.

Sam Henry, Jr., Co-Founder, NoBadGift.com

Samuel (“Sam”) Henry Jr. is a consumer internet entrepreneur who loves building web-based products that solve challenging, real world problems. He found his passion for developing websites and web applications during his early college years. Sam taught himself to code by Googling, reading blogs and dissecting open-source software. He is currently working to take the guessing and stressing out of gift giving as co-founder of the NewMe incubated, social gifting startup, Given. At Given, Sam leads the product development and is also responsible for managing creative direction and operations strategy. Prior to taking the leap into full-time entrepreneurship, Sam consulted Fortune 500 companies such as Best Buy, Verizon, EMC, and HP as a Systems Integration Analyst for top tech consulting firm, Accenture. During his consulting years, he specialized in Salesforce implementation, Business Analysis, and Process Analysis. Sam completed several internships at Under Armour, the US Patent & Trademark Office and the Social Security Administration involving everything from opening mail, to writing official office actions on patent applications, to developing cost estimation models for supply chain and production planning purposes. Sam has experience with a variety of programming tools and languages such as; PHP, MySQL, CSS3, jQuery, CodeIgniter, CakePHP, GIMP, Notepad++, and Git. Sam earned his B.S. in Industrial Engineering at Morgan State University.

Heather Hiles, Founder and CEO, Pathbrite

Heather Hiles is Founder and CEO of Pathbrite. Heather has committed her life to closing the education and employment achievement gaps for youth and adults. Her leadership experience spans more than 20 years, during which she founded and led several private and public sector organizations. Her roster of leadership roles includes: Commissioner, San Francisco Unified School District; Executive Director of Silicon Valley Social Venture Fund (SV2); CEO of Hiles Group (a philanthropy consultancy firm); Co-Founder of EARN (Individual Development Accounts program); CEO of SFWorks (NGO to place women from welfare into careers); and COO of Break the Cycle (K-3rd grade tutorial program). Heather received her B.A. from UC Berkeley and her MBA from Yale University.

John W. Hines, Manager of Astrobionics, NASA Ames

Hines has a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from Tuskegee University and a master’s degree in biomedical and electrical engineering from Stanford University and has over 30 years of combined NASA and Air Force experience in biological and biomedical technology development, project management, engineering, and satellite and spaceflight hardware development. Hines is a leader of Team (IPPT) at NASA Ames Space Flight Center in Mountain View, CA. They are the recent recipient of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) 2006 Jeffries Aerospace Medicine and Life Sciences Research Award. The award is presented for outstanding research accomplishments in aerospace medicine and space life sciences. Hines is being recognized for committed outstanding work in developing and implementing biomedical and life detection sensors supporting both aerospace missions and application to civilian needs.

Charles Hudson, Venture Partner, SoftTech VC

Charles is a Venture Partner at SoftTech VC and the CEO and Co-Founder of Bionic Panda Games, a mobile games company based in San Francisco, CA. Until February 2010, he was the VP of Business Development for Serious Business, a leading producer of social games for the social web. Zynga acquired Serious Business in February of 2010. In addition to working at Serious Business, he also produces technology conferences focused on the intersection of gaming and social media. The two flagship conferences they produce are the Virtual Goods Summit and the Social Gaming Summit. He also works with Justin Smith from Inside Social Games / Inside Facebook on a series of research reports on the virtual goods market. You can check out their research at Inside Virtual Goods. Prior to joining Serious Business, he was the Sr. Director for Business Development at Gaia Online, a leading online hangout for teens and young adults. Prior to Gaia, he worked in New Business Development at Google and focused on new partnership opportunities for early-stage products in the advertising, mobile, and e-commerce markets. Prior to joining Google, he was a Product Manager for IronPort Systems, a leading provider of anti-spam hardware appliances that was acquired by Cisco Systems for $830 million in 2007. He spent several years working at In-Q-Tel, the strategic venture capital group for the Central Intelligence Agency. While at In-Q-Tel, he focused on identifying investment opportunities that could deliver significant value to the CIA and the commercial market in both the short and long term. He holds an MBA from the Stanford Graduate School of Business and a B.A. in Economics and Spanish from Stanford University. He is also on the Advisory Board for BizWorld, a nonprofit that educates students about business, and the MIT/Stanford Venture Lab, a nonprofit connecting entrepreneurs, ideas, and capital.

Larry Irving, President and CEO, Irving Information Group

Clarence “Larry” Irving, Jr. is President and CEO of the Irving Information Group, a telecommunication and information technology strategic planning and consulting business based in Washington, D.C. Irving is a familiar face in the nation’s capital — he’s worked on policies involving technology and innovation for more than 20 years and is widely credited with coining the term “the digital divide.” Irving was Vice President of Global Government Affairs for Hewlett-Packard Company which he joined in 2009 and left in 2011. Prior to starting his business, he was head of the National Telecommunications Infrastructure Administration (NTIA), an agency of the United States Department of Commerce that serves as the President’s principal adviser on telecommunications policies pertaining to the United States’ economic and technological advancement and to regulation of the telecommunications industry. He was a principal architect of President Bill Clinton’s telecommunications, Internet and e-commerce policies and initiatives and acted as a senior adviser to the President and to Vice President Al Gore and the United States Secretary of Commerce during his tenure from 1993 to 1999. Irving was a member of the Clinton-Gore transition team focusing on telecommunications issues. More recently, he worked with President Barack Obama’s transition team on science and tech agencies. Irving has a B.A. from Northwestern University and a J.D. from Stanford University School of Law.

Mae Jemison, Astronaut, Chemist, Physician

Young Mae Carol Jemison loved to read and to dance. She enjoyed science fiction, pure science, and learning about the formation of the universe. She graduated from Morgan Park High School in 1973, and entered Stanford University as a scholarship student, all at age 16. After graduating with a bachelor of science degree in chemical engineering and an A.B. in African and Afro-American studies, she earned her doctorate in medicine at Cornell University’s Medical College. Before joining NASA in 1987, Dr. Jemison worked in both engineering and medicine. As the science mission specialist on the STS-47 Space lab J flight, a US/Japan joint mission, she conducted experiments in life sciences, material sciences, and co-investigated the Bone Cell Research experiment. In 1992, Space lab J flight was a successful joint U.S. and Japanese science mission, making Mae Jemison the first black woman in space. After serving six years as a National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) astronaut, Dr. Jemison left NASA in 1993 to start The Jemison Group, Inc., which focused on the beneficial integration of science and technology into daily life. In 1994, Dr. Jemison founded and chairs The Earth We Share (TEWS), an annual international science camp where students, ages 12 to 16, work together to solve current global dilemmas. The four-week residential program builds critical thinking and problem-solving skills through an experiential curriculum. She also directs the Jemison Institute for Advancing Technology in Developing Countries. She has received many awards and honors, including induction into the National Women’s Hall of Fame. Dr. Jemison also holds a number of honorary doctorates. She serves on several corporate boards of directors as well as on the Texas Governor’s State Council for Science and Biotechnology Development. Her first book was “Find Where the Wind Goes: Moments From My Life,” 2001. Dr. Jemison speaks nationally and globally on vital 21st century issues including science literacy; sustainable development; education; achieving excellence; the importance of increased involvement of women and minorities in science and technology fields; and investing in the present to secure the future.

Crisson Jno-Charles, Co-Founder, Fetchmob

Crisson Jno –Charles attended Rochester Institute of Technology, earning his M.Eng / B.S., Mechanical Engineering, Economics. He was a Project Manager of Sustainable Systems Track Senior Design Project; Contributed to 3-month long Research Project on Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells. In 2010 Jno-Charles quit his job at a hedge fund to start Fetchmob as co-founder of the company. A friend in North Carolina was in a lot of pain and needed to pick up some Tylenol, but didn’t have a way to get there. It would’ve been great if someone who lived in his area and was already out shopping could have bought Tylenol for him. So they founded Fetchmob, a site where users can post shopping requests for friends to take on. Maybe your friend is at the grocery store and wouldn’t mind picking up some tomatoes for you. Or you could drop off an item for another student in your dorm. It’s all about making it simpler to help your friends and people who live near you. Crisson was featured as an entrepreneur on CNN’s Black In America: The Promised Land Silicon Valley hosted by Soledad O’Brien in 2011.

Emmitt Jolly, Ph.D., Assistant Professor of Biology, University of California San Francisco

Dr. Emmitt Jolly is a postdoctoral scholar in the Department of Pathology at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) studying drug regulation and identification of mechanisms for whole genome regulation in African sleeping sickness. He has been involved in issues concerning minorities and education since he was in high school, where he began giving motivational speeches and talks to junior high students in poor and at-risk schools. He continued in this tradition as a Tuskegee University college student, and as a student at the University of California, San Francisco, speaking on many occasions to junior high, high school, and undergraduates. He is known for his ability to connect to large and diverse crowds of people. Because of this quality, he was requested to speak for numerous groups including the American Association of Anatomists, where San Francisco Mayor Willie Brown and former Surgeon General David Satcher were also scheduled to speak, to address Vice President Al Gore on federal funding for graduate education, and to represent the UCSF student body for the inauguration of UCSF’s new Chancellor and Nobel laureate Dr. J. Michael Bishop. Jolly was a Ford Foundation Fellow and a UNCF/Merck Dissertation Fellow at UCSF and finished his Ph.D. in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology studying gene expression and transcriptional regulation during meiosis. During this time he was very involved in campus and community activities. Jolly was founder and president of the Student Literature Redistribution Project, an organization focused of donating scientific journals to schools and universities in need. He served as president of the Black Student Health Alliance for two years and oversaw numerous health related and community-related projects including Health Education Day in which students from local high schools were brought to UCSF to learn health careers in medicine, nursing, dentistry, pharmacy and medical/ basic research. He also assisted with UCSF’s Summer Research Training Program, a program he participated in as an undergraduate. He served as the Student Representative to the UCSF Black Caucus for several years. His numerous endeavors led to him being honored with the Chancellors Dr. Martin Luther King Award in 1999. Emmitt Jolly is committed to increasing diversity in science and science-related areas and BDIS is a new avenue to achieve these goals.

James Jones, Co-founder, ValenciaVentures

Mr. Jones is a proven operational executive in the software industry with a diverse background in financial planning, operational efficiency, acquisition deal structuring, post-merger integration, and strategic consulting management. He is the Vice President for Business Planning and Analysis at a privately held, software company. He is co-founder at ValenciaVentures, which invests in and builds funding syndicates for promising start-ups that are driven by passionate women and minority entrepreneurs that have a unique vision to capitalize on emerging market opportunities. Our goal is to harness the untapped potential of these pioneers who have been traditionally been underserved by funding institutions. Mr. Jones earned his MBA from Harvard and graduated with a B.S. degree in Systems Engineering from the United States Military Academy.

Van Jones, Civil Rights/Environmental Activist, Rebuild the Dream and YesWeCode

Van Jones is currently a driving force in the Rebuild the Dream political campaign. He is formerly the co-founder of the Oakland, California- based Green for All, a national organization that aims to build an inclusive, green economy that can resolve the ecological crisis and lift people out of poverty. Green for All grew out of Jones’ work in creating a Green Job Corps with the City of Oakland. At the national level, Jones worked with legislators toward passage of the Green Jobs Act of 2007, which authorizes funding for worker training. Jones is a globally recognized, award-winning pioneer in human rights and the clean-energy economy and co-founder of three successful non-profit organizations: the Ella Baker Center for Human Rights, Color of Change and Green for All. He is the best-selling author of the definitive book on green jobs: The Green-Collar Economy. He served as the green jobs advisor in the Obama White House in 2009. Van also holds a joint appointment at Princeton University, as a distinguished visiting fellow in both the Center for African American Studies and in the Program in Science, Technology and Environmental Policy at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs.

Anthony D. Joseph, Director of Intel Research and Assoc. Professor EECS, UC Berkeley

Anthony D. Joseph is Director of Intel Research Berkeley and a Chancellor’s Associate Professor in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at UC Berkeley. Joseph holds a Ph.D. and S.M. in Computer Science from MIT and a B.S. in EECS from MIT. His research includes adaptive techniques for cloud computing, distributed network monitoring and triggering, network and computer security, and security defenses for machine learning-based decision systems. His principal field of interest is systems and networking: cyber security, data center architectures, mobile systems and networking, and overlay networks.

Eric L. Kelly, President and Chief Executive Officer, Overland Storage, Inc.

Eric L. Kelly has served as Chief Executive Officer of Overland Storage, Inc. since January 2009, our President since January 2010 and a member of our Board of Directors since November 2007. From April 2007 to January 2009, Mr. Kelly served as President of Silicon Valley Management Partners Inc., a management consulting and M&A advisory firm, which he co-founded in April 2007. From July 2004 to August 2006, Mr. Kelly was Vice President and General Manager of storage systems solutions at Adaptec, Inc. From August 2002 to July 2004, he served as President and CEO of Snap Appliance, Inc., which was acquired by Adaptec. From March 2000 to June 2002, Mr. Kelly served as President, Network Systems Division of Maxtor Corporation. Prior to Maxtor, he served as the Chief Operating Officer of Isyndicate, Inc. From July 1998 to January 2000 he was the Enterprise Vice President for Dell Computer Corporation. From 1980 to 1998 he served in executive or managerial roles with Netpower Incorporated, Diamond Multimedia Systems Incorporated, Conner Peripherals Incorporated, Marq Technologies Incorporated and IBM.

Yemi Lalude, Managing Partner, Adelvo Capital

Prior to founding Adlevo Capital, Yemi Lalude was a Principal at Granite Global Ventures (GGV), a leading Silicon Valley-based expansion-stage venture capital firm focused on technology-related investments in the US and China. Yemi joined GGV as an early employee in its first fund and was involved in ten investments across three funds. Yemi joined GGV from Siebel Systems where he managed and was instrumental in the start-up of the customer satisfaction product line. Prior to Siebel, Yemi was with Hewlett-Packard where he held engineering and leadership positions in the manufacturing and R&D functions of the inkjet printer business. He was part of the core group of employees who started and built Hewlett-Packard’s Specialty Printing Systems business. Yemi received a B.Sc. in Mechanical Engineering (First Class Division) from the University of Lagos, an M.S. in Mechanical Engineering from Stanford University, and an M.B.A. from Harvard Graduate School of Business.

Lisa Lambert, Investment Manager, Intel Capital

Lisa Lambert manages the Software and Solutions Group of Intel Capital. Lisa and her staff of 5 Investment Managers are responsible for software equity and M&A investments in support of Intel’s platform and solution strategies with oversight responsibility for more than 50 portfolio companies worldwide. Her specific software focus areas include applications, middleware, services, open source/Linux, RFID, sensors, data warehouses, business internet, vertical markets, & various other software categories. Lisa’s group completed twenty-eight new and follow-on equity investments in 2001-2002 and fourteen investments in 2003-2004 and fourteen investments in 2005. Lisa personally completed new investments and follow-ons in application and infrastructure companies such as; The JBoss Group, Datallegro, Financial Engines, and Gigaspaces. Lisa’s team completed investments in Spikesource, Zend Technologies, Arched Rock, Black Duck, CollabNet, among others. Lisa is Board Observer for CollabNet and Datallegro. Lisa managed the $253 million Intel 64 Investment Fund. The original Fund participants included HP, Compaq, SGI, Dell, NEC, and Morgan Stanley who represented 14 Fortune 500 end-users. Lisa joined Intel in 1997 as a Product Marketing Engineer in the Desktop Products Group (DPG), and subsequently held a Product Marketing Management position in DPG with responsibility to perform traditional Intel component product marketing functions for the Pentium II, III processor family. Lisa managed enterprise desktop marketing programs with responsibility for creating product presentations for internal and field personnel, product positioning and roadmaps, PC OEM and analyst engagement, launch activities, and other product management functions before joining Intel Capital in 1999. Prior to joining Intel, Lisa worked as a software programmer from 1989-1992 and in various strategic planning and product marketing positions from 1992-1995 at Owen-Corning. She was selected by the Harvard Business School Professor of Managing International Trade and Investment to be one of six students (from ~200 students) to conduct a study and develop a report on Intel’s strategy to invest in Costa Rica in 1996. She received an MBA from the Harvard Business School in 1997 and a BS in Management Information Systems from the Pennsylvania State University in 1989.

Willie Lockett, A+ Training and Certification Instructor, The Stride Center

Willie Lockett is an A+ Training and Certification instructor at The Stride Center, a nonprofit social venture working to empower economic self-sufficiency for individuals and communities in the San Francisco Bay Area. They harness the power of technology and the digital economy to help men, women, and families on the road to self-sufficiency and independence. Lockett is an IT professional with strong leadership and customer service skills. His accomplishments in Service Delivery encompass department-level, branch-wide and region-wide scope and he is skilled in planning, scheduling, controlling, and successfully executing IT initiatives. Lockett is responsible to provide IT training and professional development so that graduates can compete in the job market and are successful and thriving in their career. He must apply a curriculum that responds to the unique circumstances of men and women who face barriers to employment and apply a comprehensive learning model that helps people gain jobs, self-respect and financial independence. Lockett delivers classroom instruction and guides students through a globally recognized certification process while providing detailed instruction into how computers are built and how they work. Prior employment includes ownership of Subway Restaurant and IT with Kaiser Permanente and Federal Reserve Bank. Lockett earned his B.S. in Information Systems Management at the University of San Francisco.

Dr. Iris Mack, CEO and Founder, Phat Math, Inc.

Iris Mack is founder and CEO of Phat Math, Inc., which publishes “edutainment” books to excite students about math. In addition, she teaches in the College of Business Administration at Florida International University. She received dual bachelor’s degrees in mathematics and mathematical physics and then earned the master’s degree in mathematics at the University of California San Francisco as a research fellow for Bell Laboratories, where she received a patent for her work in fiber optics. In 1983, Dr. Mack joined MIT’s Academic and Research Consulting Services as a consultant. Two years later the Johnson Space Center invited her to interview for a position as a NASA scientist. In 1986 Dr. Mack became the second black woman to receive a doctorate in applied mathematics at Harvard. That summer she worked at Salomon Brothers Inc. as a research analyst and consultant in mortgage and equity research, and in the fall she joined the applied mathematics faculty at MIT as an assistant professor. In 1988 she joined the Sloan faculty as a lecturer in management science. Iris Mack briefly taught at MIT after earning her doctorate in mathematics at Harvard in 1986, and she eventually started her own consulting firm called Associated Technologists in Atlanta while teaching at Clark-Atlanta University.

Nadya Mason, Assistant Professor Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

The American Physical Society announced that Nadya Mason, assistant professor of physics at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, will receive the Society’s 2012 Maria Goeppert Mayer Award. Her achievements have previously been recognized by a National Science Foundation CAREER Award (2007), a Woodrow Wilson Fellowship (2008), the Denice Denton Emerging Leader Award of the Anita Borg Institute (2009), and a fellowship in the UI Center for Advanced Study (2011). The Maria Goeppert Mayer Award recognizes outstanding achievement by a woman physicist in the early years of her career. In addition to a cash prize, the Award provides travel support for the recipient to present a series of public lectures in the spirit of Maria Goeppert Mayer, recipient of the 1963 Nobel Prize in Physics for her development of a mathematical model describing the nuclear shell structure of the atomic nucleus. Goeppert Mayer was the second woman to win the Nobel Prize in Physics, after Marie Curie. Professor Mason received her bachelor’s degree in physics from Harvard University in 1995 and received her doctorate in physics in 2001 from Stanford University, working in the group of Aharon Kapitulnik. Prior to joining the physics faculty at Illinois, Professor Mason was a Junior Fellow in the Society of Fellows at Harvard University, where she collaborated with Professors Charles Marcus and Michael Tinkham on projects related to both carbon nanotubes and nanostructured superconductors. Professor Mason’s research at Illinois focuses on how electrons behave in low-dimensional, correlated materials, where enhanced interactions are expected to give novel results. She is particularly interested in the effect of reduced dimensionality and correlations on electron coherence. The understanding and control of electronic coherence is relevant to a variety of systems, including quantum communication, information storage, and qubit control in quantum computers. Professor Mason plans to take advantage of modern fabrication techniques to make and study a variety of nanostructures, such as quantum dots and wires, as well as arrays of superconducting dots. So far Professor Mason’s research has focused on the quantum behavior of nanotubes and on 2D and nanostructured superconductors. In both of these areas, her previous work has allowed us to gain insight into coherence and correlations in low-dimensional materials. In her work with nanotubes, she developed new fabrication techniques to control quantum properties of dots and wires. In her work with two-dimensional superconductors, she discovered unusual correlated phases and developed ways of trying to control and understand these phases. Work in both of these areas will continue. Typical measurements will be of electronic transport at low temperatures, with the aim of investigating the effects of electron-electron interactions, disorder, dissipation, and sample geometry. All of these effects can be tuned to augment-or diminish-coherence in nanostructures. Tuning these parameters is also expected to produce novel states of matter, and should allow us to identify and characterize the various forms of correlated electronic states that are induced in nanostructures. Initial projects will include: (i) Tunneling experiments in carbon nanotubes, to study unusual correlated states such as Luttinger liquids, (ii) Tuning electronic correlations in nanotubes and nanowires via proximity effects caused by metallic, magnetic or superconducting current leads, and (iii) Creating planar arrays of superconducting dots, to control and understand collective phenomena in them.

Kevin McFall, Social Entrepreneur & Digital Media Connector, Red Clay Digital

Kevin McFall is a leader in emergent innovation and an impact driven media executive, with the most cool, calm and collected demeanor you’ll ever encounter, but with a vigor for product development, business development strategy, technology development and social media marketing. In his current role as Chief Executive Officer of AMightyRiver.com, he directs the growth of the leading career networking site for Black professionals and employers who value diversity and inclusion. Previously he served as Vice President of Global Business Development and Product Strategy for Cision, Founder of Red Clay Digital, Co-founder and VP of RushmoreDrive.com, and head of Affiliate Products and Programs for Zap2it.com.

James McLurkin, Assistant Professor Department of Computer Science, Rice University

James McLurkin is an Assistant Professor at Rice University in the Department of Computer Science. His current interests include distributed computational geometry algorithms for multi-robot configuration estimation and control, and defining complexity metrics that quantify the relationships between algorithm execution time, inter-robot communication bandwidth, and robot speed. Previous positions include lead research scientist at iRobot corporation, where McLurkin was the manager of the DARPA-funded Swarm project. Results included the design and construction of 112 robots and distributed configuration control algorithms, which culminated in robust software to search indoor environments. McLurkin was the 2003 recipient of the Lemelson-MIT student prize for invention. He holds an S.B. in Electrical Engineering with a Minor in Mechanical Engineering from M.I.T., an M.S. in Electrical Engineering from University of California, Berkeley, and an S.M. and Ph.D. in Computer Science from M.I.T. His passion for robotics has taken him to MIT and to the University of California, Berkeley. He worked as a manager at iRobot Corp., which makes mobile robots for home and commercial use. While there, he helped create the world’s largest robot swarm. He is now working toward his Ph.D. in computer science. James McLurkin is an award-winning robotics engineer who gets inspiration from an unlikely source: his ant farm. Each ant is a simple creature with simple rules governing its behavior, yet the colony as a whole performs complex tasks—a lesson McLurkin has adapted to develop a swarm of disposable robots for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.

Kelle Lynch McMahon, President and CEO, The Green Science Academy

Kelle Lynch McMahon, President and CEO of The Green Science Academy has over 25 years of experience in the construction and engineering fields. McMahon has completed over $200 million dollars in projects over the past ten years under her immediate direction and oversight. She has skills and detailed knowledge in projects that focus on schools, housings, transportation and local county infrastructure programs with various municipal agencies. TGSA creates and delivers educational programs for small businesses seeking green certification and education for staff. LEED, BPI and HERS I and II are programs that lead to certification and continuing education for engineers in green clean technology sectors. McMahon also has prepared education plans and developed curriculum for non-profit workforce development programs. She has shared her expertise in engineering and architecture to move forward the sustainable initiatives that will support long-term growth for the health and well-being of urban communities nationwide. McMahon brings expertise in development of high-level skills for technical and computer-based jobs for women in non-traditional fields. Previous career employment includes work at CBk Designs, Laney College and Gilbane Building Company. McMahon obtained her Bachelor of Science degree in Construction Engineering from the University of the District of Columbia and her Master of Science in Civil Engineering from UC Berkeley.

Kenneth McNeely, President External Affairs, AT&T California

Mr. McNeely is responsible for all legislative, regulatory, governmental and external affairs activities in California, a role he has played since November of 2000. He joined AT&T in 1991, serving as a corporate attorney in Atlanta, and subsequently represented the company as Vice President-Law & Government Affairs in Florida. McNeely came to San Francisco in February 2000 as Vice President-Law & Government Affairs. McNeely is a graduate of the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill. He graduated summa cum laude from the Howard University School of Law in 1987. After serving as a law clerk for the North Carolina State Supreme Court, he entered private practice in Charlotte in 1989. He is a board member of a new consortium to improve how small businesses in the state use technology. The website, http://www.techforsmallbusiness.org, focuses on networking and a series of ongoing forums that will allow small business owners one resource for gaining knowledge.

Lesley Slaton McNorton, Senior Manager and Acting Director Global Marketing, Hewlett-Packard Company

Lesley Slaton McNorton is Senior Manager and Acting Director of Global Marketing at Hewlett-Packard Company. As head of Growth Markets and Multicultural Marketing, Ms. McNorton’s charter is to increase brand awareness and preference and develop programs to drive increased sales revenue in high growth segments. McNorton develops and manages consumer and small and medium business strategies to showcase HP’s product and brand portfolio, provides thought leadership and drives integrated go-to-market programs that help advance HP’s relevance in the multicultural markets. As a former Big Brothers and Big Sisters mentor and Charter Co-founder and Chairperson of Volunteer’s For Youth, McNorton has also sat on the Board of Directors for The Boise State University Foundation, Boise State University Alumni Association and, The Idaho Black History Museum. She served as the state Co-Chairperson for PAYADA (Parent’s and Youth Against Drug Abuse), currently teaches branding workshops and mentors with the East Palo Alto School District. McNorton holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in Communications from Boise State University, with a concentration in Marketing and Organizational Leadership.

Dr. Samuel Metters, CEO, Metters Industries

Samuel Metters is the founder and CEO of Metters Industries, Inc., with 19 service provider, systems integration, document management. Dr. Metters began as a scientist and engineer developing defense applications before launching his own firm. He received a Bachelor of Science degree in architectural engineering from Prairie View A & M University; Bachelor of Arts degree in architecture design and city planning from the University of California at Berkeley; Master’s of science degree in systems management; Master’s of science degree in public administration and a Doctorate in public administration from the University of Southern California. He is also a graduate of Owner/ offices nationwide. The corporate headquarters is located in McLean, Virginia and consists of six wholly owned subsidiaries. The diverse enterprises of Metters include U.S. Black Online, the largest black-owned Internet President Management (OPM) Program at the Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Dr. Metters is a licensed professional engineer.

Frederick L. Moore, Co-Founder and CEO, PotentSci

Frederick L. Moore has helped carve a path for traditionally underserved students interested in the sciences. While finishing his Ph.D. at UC San Francisco eight years ago, Moore cofounded the nonprofit Building Diversity in Science to provide mentoring and resources to young people in hopes of improving their access to world-class universities and careers in science. He recently launched the Scientific Empowerment Movement, a statewide initiative that connects urban youth to science and technology through sports and entertainment. Moore is a role model who has been willing to share the details of his success in order to craft a better roadmap for others. A native of Fairfield, Calif., he began his academic pursuit at Solano Community College and later transferred to UC Berkeley, where he studied genetics and graduated with honors in 1996. He went on to study human reproductive genetics at UC San Francisco and received his Ph.D. in 2002. Moore has won fellowships from the National Science Foundation and Ford Foundation and he was awarded the Martin Luther King Jr. Award from UC San Francisco for his humanitarian and community service work. He most recently was awarded the prestigious Peter Haas Public Service Award from UC Berkeley, which is the highest honor bestow to an alumnus of UC Berkeley. The co-founder and CEO of PotentSci, a consulting and book-publishing company that focuses on science education, Moore co-edited Finding Your North: Self-Help Strategies for Science-Related Careers, which was published in 2006. Moore is also faculty in the chemistry department at City College of San Francisco,