EMC has announced upgrades to its hardware, software and cloud backup products, including four new Data Domain data deduplication backup target devices; a full number upgrade to the Avamar backup app; a point upgrade to the NetWorker backup app, and; Microsoft Active Directory integration for its Mozy cloud backup service.

The new Data Domain boxes – launched at an event in New York this week – are the DD2500, DD4200, DD4500 and DD7200, all of which fit into the midrange between the entry level DD160 and high end DD9200.

The key upgrades over the products they replace (the DD640, DD670, DD860 and DD890) are a CPU upgrade to Intel Sandy Bridge for a claimed 4x faster processing/throughput and higher capacity drives of 3TB in place of 2TB for a 10x capacity boost over the previous products.

Data Domain is EMC’s hardware data deduplication backup hardware family, acquired in 2009, which serves as a backup target at which data volume is reduced inline as it is ingested. That makes it most suited to use in datacentres, where bandwidth to the disk target is not an issue.

EMC has also added Data Domain backup integration with SAP’s HANA Studio and Oracle Exadata.

The Avamar product has undergone a full upgrade to version 7 and now supports backup to Data Domain of NAS/NDMP workloads. This is in addition to VMware, Microsoft Hyper-V, Oracle, SAP, IBM DB2 and Sybase, which were given Data Domain integration in Avamar previously.

To backup EMC Isilon scale-out NAS, remote offices, desktop or laptops, however, customers still need Avamar RAIN architecture storage hardware.

Further key Avamar upgrades include: newly-created virtual machines inheriting existing backup policies; VM Instant Access, which allows users to boot a virtual machine from Data Domain; NAS backup via the NDMP protocol, and; the ability for administrators to manage Avamar from vSphere.

EMC NetWorker 8.1 has added snapshot management that includes auto-discovery of snapshots, wizard-based configuration and intelligent assignment of snapshots to storage media.

EMC has also added the ability for NetWorker to use DD Boost – software that deduplicates data at source prior to Data Domain ingest – over Fibre Channel for a claimed 30% backup speed increase and 2.5% increase in restore time.

Networker now also incorporates the virtual machine backup features of Avamar.

EMC’s cloud backupproduct Mozy has added Microsoft Active Directory integration that includes automatic discovery of user account profiles and self-service operations.

Related Topics:Data protection, backup and archiving, Virtualisation and storage, Cloud storage, Computer storage hardware, VIEW ALL TOPICS