Frank Iero is a busy man. In the past four years, he’s released three full length albums, all under different guises . That’s on top of countless tours and shows played across the globe. Not content with that, he is back this year with four-song EP Keep the Coffins Coming, from his current project Frank Iero and the Patience.

From the audience’s perspective, this is a follow-up from 2016’s record Parachutes, but Iero describes this as a “missing link between Stomachaches and Parachutes.” He also describes this EP as “fuckin’ awesome.” He has every right to be excited about this release, considering he managed to tick recording a record with Steve Albini off his bucket list. Albini’s recording style is evident in Keep the Coffins Coming; it’s raw, unembellished music for the sake of music.

The first track will be familiar to Frank Iero and the Patience fans; “I’m A Mess” is the third song on Parachutes. It’s angry and fast-paced, with Iero’s guitar riffs providing its main structure. It sounds almost chaotic at times, Iero making full use of his vocal range from his time both as backing singer and rhythm guitarist for My Chemical Romance, and as vocalist for his hardcore punk side project Leathermouth. “I’m A Mess” celebrates and accepts any faults you might have, and that maybe you exist because of them instead of despite them.

“BFF” sounds like its first draft might have been in the back of a high school notebook, recounting the ups and downs of a dysfunctional friendship. There’s something juvenile about it, whether it’s the simplistic and repetitive song structure or its minimal melody, but it is comforting, mellow, and easy to listen to.

Frank Iero and the Patience do a complete 180° with the next song, “No Fun Club,” which is one minute and thirty seconds of pure noise and emotion. It is a very satisfying listening experience, and if you need to let out any pent-up aggression, I’d recommend giving this song a go. You’re guaranteed to feel better afterwards.

Completing the EP is a cover of “You Are My Sunshine,” a song so old that even the identity its original writer is disputed. Iero puts his own punk twist on the classic, with tortured vocals and slow, wailing guitars. “You Are My Sunshine” is usually a downbeat song to an upbeat tune, but this version matches the content and the melody’s tones.

Keep the Coffins Coming is a suitably morbid title for an overall melancholy EP. The songs vary from harrowing to irate, but there’s sincerity in all of the emotions which feed into this work. With Halloween just around the corner, this is an ideal collection of songs I’d highly recommend to get into the spooky spirit.

Frank Iero and the Patience UK/US tour tickets available here.

Find Frank Iero and the Patience on social media:

Facebook|Twitter|Youtube|Official Site

Keep the Coffins Coming will be released on September 22nd via BMG/Vagrant Records.