Rihanna and Karrueche Tran are reportedly fighting for the attentions of Chris Brown.According to The Sun, the women - who have both previously dated Brown - have been sending each other indirect messages via photographs on social media. [L: Chris Brown and Rihanna. R: Karrueche Tran]

Tran recently posted a photo of herself wearing a 'Chris Brown - A Bathing Ape' T-shirt he had previously been spotted in.

"Rihanna and Karrueche are really fighting over Chris and have been sending each other coded messages online for weeks," a source told the newspaper.

"They hate each other but Chris seems content to carry on with them at the same time. They were competing over Christmas to send Chris the most loved-up messages possible.

"Rihanna may have got Chris on Christmas Day but he sees no reason not to see Karrueche too."

The pair are both said to want to spend New Year's Eve with Brown next week.

Singer Christina Milian has claimed that her friend Tran is still dating Brown, despite reports that he had given her a lump cash sum after their reported split.

Earlier this month, Rihanna was said to have been hinting at relationship issues with Brown by posting several naked pictures online accompanied by cryptic Twitter captions including "examine what you tolerate".

In October, it was reported that Brown was planning to ask Rihanna to marry him, despite allegedly having a previous proposal turned down.

Source

itemprop="headline" style="font-family: Arial, sans-serif; font-size: 1.833em; font-style: normal; font-variant: normal; font-weight: normal; line-height: 1.05em; color: rgb(59, 55, 59); padding: 0px; margin: 0px 0px 5px; background-color: rgb(255, 255, 255);"Rihanna confirms Chris Brown reunion: "It's important that I'm happy"Rihanna has finally confirmed that she is back with Chris Brown, declaring that the R&B singer is "different now" and feels "disgusted" that he assaulted her back in 2009.The 'Diamonds' star addressed the speculated reunion for the first time while talking to Rolling Stone, explaining that she is willing to "take the backlash" if it means she will no longer feel "angry and dark".

"When you add up the pieces from the outside, it's not the cutest puzzle in the world," she accepted. "You see us walking somewhere, driving somewhere, in the studio, in the club, and you think you know. But it's different now.

"We don't have those types of arguments anymore. We talk about s**t. We value each other. We know exactly what we have now, and we don't want to lose that."

Insisting that she will walk away from Brown if he ever acts violently towards her again, Rihanna said: "He doesn't have the luxury of f**king up again. That's just not an option.

"I can't say that nothing else will ever go wrong. But I'm pretty solid in the knowing that he's disgusted by that. And I wouldn't have gone this far if I ever thought that was a possibility."

She added: "I decided it was more important for me to be happy. I wasn't going to let anybody's opinion get in the way of that.

"Even if it's a mistake, it's my mistake. After being tormented for so many years, being angry and dark, I'd rather just live my truth and take the backlash. I can handle it."

Rihanna and Brown were first rumored to have reconciled when they collaborated on remixes of their respective tracks 'Birthday Cake' and 'Turn Up The Music' last February.

The Bajan star described Brown as her "best friend" in an interview with Oprah Winfrey in August, and afterwards the couple began to appear together in public - including at the MTV VMAs in September, where they were spotted kissing.

A duet on Rihanna's Unapologetic album entitled 'Nobody's Business', Brown's appearance on the artwork for her single 'Stay' and a number of telling Instagram pictures meant that the pair were widely regarded as being back together before Rihanna's confirmation.

Brown is on probation until August 2014 for his 2009 assault against Rihanna. It has been claimed that Frank Ocean intends to press charges against him following their alleged altercation at an LA recording studio this week.

Source

Rihanna spent an evening avoiding Chris Brown in the same Los Angeles nightclub, according to reports.The couple, who recently confirmed they had reunited after splitting in 2009, were spotted at Playhouse Nightclub on Wednesday (February 13) evening, but refused to acknowledge each other, MailOnline reports.

A source told the website that Rihanna did not know Brown had been asked to attend Popular Demand's 1 Year Anniversary event. When the hosts asked if she would like to be seated with him, the Bajan performer asked to be moved elsewhere.

"Rihanna refused to sit with or even near Chris - and when Chris noticed she was there, he made a huge show of rubbing his presence in her face," the insider said.

"He promptly ordered three more bottles of Ace of Spades which came out with in a procession of sparklers and scantily clad cocktail waitresses, causing a spectacle, which he clearly wanted Rihanna to see."

The pair left separately, with Brown and his entourage departing at around 2.15am while Rihanna stayed until around 3am.

Rihanna and Brown were seen posing happily together at the Grammy Awards ceremony earlier this week. It has since been rumored that Rihanna's friend Katy Perry is avoiding the star due to her reconciliation with Brown.Source

itemprop="headline" style="color: rgb(59, 55, 59); font-size: 1.833em; padding: 0px; margin: 0px 0px 5px; line-height: 1.05em; font-family: Arial, sans-serif; background-color: rgb(255, 255, 255);"Rihanna, Chris Brown 'planning wild carnival wedding'

Rihanna and Chris Brown are reportedly planning a 'wild' summer wedding.The couple, who controversially announced their reunion earlier this year, will marry in Barbados this July, according to Now magazine.Rihanna is planning on wearing a bikini at the ceremony rather than a wedding dress as she and Brown want to break with tradition.A source close to the singer said: "This is her "F**k you!" to the world."Rihanna doesn't want a big dress or boring old confetti. She wants to get married in her bikini and have a carnival atmosphere."They want it to be relaxed and fun, like a 'playground', and to celebrate with the people who have stood by them."Rumors of a summer wedding surfaced last month with a source adding that the couple want "tattoo artists, fire breathers and a near-naked waitstaff" for the special day, as well as "pre-rolled joints at the reception".The 25-year-old announced her reunion with her former boyfriend in January, insisting that it is important that she is "happy". She has since said that Brown is not a "monster" despite his violent past. She sparked rumors of a wedding in February when she was seen wearing what appeared to be an engagement ring at the Grammy Awards. The 'Stay' singer was forced to postpone two of her 'Diamonds' tour dates last week while she recovered from the flu and laryngitis. She resumed the tour on Thursday night (March 14) in Philadelphia, promising "a little extra" for fans attending the rescheduled shows.Source