Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this story did not outline the correct timing of Rihanna's interview.

A 2012 interview of Rihanna opening up about her relationship with Chris Brown resurfaced today, reminding fans of a tumultuous time in the singer's life and the road she took to become the powerful entertainer and entrepreneur we know today.

Brown assaulted the singer, his girlfriend at the time, in an attack on Grammys night on Feb. 9, 2009. The incident left her bloody and bruised, and photos of her battered face were leaked to the public.

During a previous interview with Oprah Winfrey, which was republished as an episode of "Oprah’s SuperSoul Conversations" podcast Wednesday, Rihanna said that she and Brown were working on re-building their relationship.

"We've been working on our friendship again," she said. "Now we're very, very close friends. We've built up a trust again... We love each other and we probably always will. And that's not something we're ever going to change. That's not something you can shut off, if you've ever been in love."

She continued, "I think he was the love of my life. He was the first love. And I see that he loved me the same way... it's not even about us being together. I truly love him. So the main thing for me is that he is at peace. I'm not at peace if he's a little unhappy, or he's still lonely."

Rihanna also confirmed she was not seeing Brown romantically at the time.

"We have maintained a very close friendship ever since the restraining order's been dropped, we've just worked on it, little by little," she told Winfrey.

She also got emotional talking about the incident and the aftermath of it.

"I was hurt the most. Nobody felt what I felt," she said. "It happened to me in front of the world. It was embarrassing, it was humiliating, it was hurtful. It's not easy. I lost my best friend. Everything I knew switched. Switched in a night."

In March 2009, Brown was charged with felony assault after the altercation with Rihanna. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to serve five years probation and 1,400 hours of community service. In Aug. 2013, he was assigned an additional 1,000 hours, to be completed before the end of his probation on Aug. 25, 2014.

Contributing: Yohana Desta, Maeve McDermott

More: Rihanna felt like she was 'doing too much' at 2015 Met Gala, gives 'R9' album update