Who is Rihanna dating? Rihanna's dating history. All of Rihanna's loves, exes and hookups. Who Rihanna dated; list of Rihanna loves, ex boyfriends; breakup rumors. With all the troubles Rihanna has had in the dating world, it's a wonder she hasn't ended up on the list of celebrity tapes yet. The loves, ex-boyfriends and relationships of Rihanna, listed by most recent.

Rihanna's relationship with Drake has always been and always will be a hot topic. Since 2009, Rihanna and Drake have been reported to be dating on and off. In 2016, RiRi and Drizzy were reported to have officially been dating, but they decided to just remain friends. For now...

This is a list of Rihanna ex boyfriends and current beaus. Take a look and if you wanted to know who the pop princess has dated, have a gander.

Rumors kicked off in January 2020 that Rihanna had moved on from longtime boyfriend Hassan Jameel to A$AP Rocky. They had been spotted laughing together backstage at the 2020 Yams Day Benefit Concert in New York City.

Rihanna and A$AP Rocky had previously been linked in 2013.

A source told E! News that Rihanna is single, and the pair are just friends. "She's hanging out with A$AP Rocky, but she is not dating him," the source said.

However, in November 2020, a source reportedly confirmed to People that the longtime friends were officially dating. Page Six reported that they were seen having dinner with friends at the Beatrice Inn in New York that same month. In July of 2020, Rihanna featured A$AP Rocky in her Fenty Skin campaign, and the pair did multiple interviews together to promote the line.

The weekend of January 28, 2022, Rihanna revealed she and A$AP Rocky were expecting their first child together as they walked around his hometown of Harlem with the singer showing off her baby bump.

The couple welcomed their baby boy on May 13, 2022, per a report from TMZ. They have not yet shared the child's name.

Rakim Mayers (born October 3, 1988), better known by his stage name A$AP Rocky, is an American rapper, songwriter, record producer, and actor. He is a member of the hip hop group A$AP Mob, from which he adopted his moniker. Rocky released his debut mixtape Live. Love. A$AP, in 2011 to critical acclaim. The success of his mixtape led to a record deal with Polo Grounds Music, RCA Records, and Sony Music Entertainment. He subsequently recorded his 2013 debut album Long. Live. A$AP, which was also well received by critics and debuted at number one on the Billboard 200. In 2015, Rocky released his second studio album titled At. Long. Last. A$AP. The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, making it Rocky's second consecutive album to debut at number one and has received positive reviews from music critics. Rocky has also directed music videos for himself, Danny Brown and other A$AP Mob members. He is also a noted record producer, producing under the pseudonym Lord Flacko.

Age : 35

Birthplace : New York City, New York

Hassan Jameel

On June 27, 2017, Rihanna was spotted kissing Saudi billionaire Hassan Jameel. With a net worth of $1.5 billion, his family are the sole owners of the rights to sell Toyota cars in Saudi Arabia. Jameel has also been previously linked to supermodel Naomi Campbell.

Rihanna and Jameel split in January 2020, after three years together.

Since 2009, Rihanna and Drake were rumored to be an on-and-off relationship. In 2016, Rihanna was reportedly dating Drake again before separating after a few months. They remain good friends.

In 2015, Rihanna briefly dated rapper Travis Scott.

Jacques Berman Webster II (born April 30, 1992), known professionally as Travis Scott, is an American rapper, singer, songwriter, and record producer. Scott signed to Epic Records before eventually signing to Kanye West's GOOD Music production wing known as Very G.O.O.D. Beats, in November of the same year, as an in-house producer, after appearing on the label's debut compilation Cruel Summer. In April 2013, it was announced he signed with T.I.'s Grand Hustle imprint. He released his first official full-length project, an album titled Owl Pharaoh, on May 21, 2013. He released his most critically acclaimed and commercially successful album Astroworld in 2018; it produced his first Billboard Hot 100 number-one single, "Sicko Mode."

Age : 32

Birthplace : Houston, Texas

Rumor has it that Rihanna and Leonardo DiCaprio started dating in 2015. This unlikely couple have been spotted partying together on several occasions.

J. R. Smith and Rihanna got in an intense feud after a photo of them partying together surfaced during the Eastern Conference semi-finals.