Chris Brown has a new documentary out called Chris Brown: Welcome to My Life and, in a clip from it that’s floating around Facebook, he provides new details about his abusive relationship with Rihanna.

Chris starts off in the clip by describing his relationship with Rihanna as a “fairytale,” but says the couple struggled after he lied about sleeping with another woman early in their relationship. "After that, my trust was lost with her. She hated me after that," he says. "From there, it just went downhill because there were too many verbal fights, physical fights as well. Mutual sides. … We would fight each other. She would hit me, I would hit her and it never was okay."

On the night of Clive Davis' 2009 Grammy party, Chris says he and Rihanna started fighting after the woman he cheated with approached them. After the couple left the party, Chris says he offered to let Rihanna look through his phone to show he wasn't cheating but she spotted a message from the other woman and assumed he had lied again. Chris says that Rihanna started the violence, hitting him and attempting to kick him before he punched her in the face. (It should be noted that in the official police department affidavit of the incident from 2009 provided by a police officer, there is no mention of Rihanna attacking Chris.)

He says he felt like a "f—king monster" after the incident and says that things really sunk in when he saw the police photo of Rihanna's bruised face. "I look back at that picture and I'm like, 'That's not me, bro,'" he says. "I hate it to this day. That's going to haunt me forever."

RELATED: What You Need To Know About The Disturbing Sexual Assault Trend Called 'Stealthing'

Chris pled guilty and served five years probation and community service for the assault. The couple got back together briefly but broke up for good in 2013. Chris has since been accused of domestic violence by his ex Karrueche Tran, who obtained a restraining order against him in April according to the New York Daily News.

While both men and women are certainly capable of abuse, Chris' portrayal of their relationship is problematic. Katie Ray-Jones, CEO of the National Domestic Violence Hotline, says that while we don’t know the intricacies of his relationship with Rihanna, there often is a primary aggressor in an abusive relationship.“The images we saw coming out of that instance, clearly you could see a battered woman who was hit very violently,” she says. “When we saw pictures of Chris, we did not see injuries to him. In relationships where there’s violence, men have more capacity to cause physical harm.”

News stressing you out? Try this relaxing yoga pose:

​​

Chris continues to have many fans, many of whom seemed to imply on social media that the documentary clips justify his assault. This is a commonplace reaction, says Ray-Jones. “We are operating in a culture where people try to rationalize violence and justify something that must have caused someone they admire to behave in a certain way," she says. And it's not limited to domestic violence—many people (including celebrities) reacted similarly to the sexual assault allegations against Bill Cosby.

But no matter who a person is, or what potentially "provoked" them, Ray-Jones says that it’s important for people to understand that there is never an excuse for someone to put their hands on you. “We want victims and survivors to know that being assaulted is never your fault,” she says.

Rihanna hasn’t commented publicly on the clip or documentary.