Given the extreme cost of cleanroom environments, even a very small foreign particle can ruin a chip and reduce yield in a cleanroom environment, as well as make the entire production uneconomical. Under these...

By Tim Schneebeck DNV is a classification society that was created in 2013 after the merger of Det Norske Veritas (Norway) and Germanischer Lloyd (Germany). The company assesses ships and offshore structures for safety and...

By Andreas Muckes Today’s high-frequency-controlled drives and motors, known as Variable Frequency Drives (VFD), are demanding and technically sensitive. The servo cables used for this purpose are therefore not only a means to an...

By Andreas Muckes I don’t know any electrician who enjoys dismantling cables. Stripping the jacket is not much fun at a workbench. At a machine, lack of space and poor lighting often present us with completely...

By Sascha Mais In recent articles, we have looked at how chainflex® cables are used in storage and retrieval units and in crane systems. Today we take a closer look at the topic of robot applications, since...

By Nils Jäger Why are ASi bus cables are specially shaped? Is it possible to use a round 2×1.5mm² control cable instead? Let’s take a closer look at the AS-i bus. Where is the ASi bus...

By Andreas Muckes We are always mentioning the rigorous testing that we perform on our chainflex® cables, and now our testing process and guarantee is even verified by UL-Laboratories. However, there is one question you may still have—“How do...

By Avory Brookins Finding out that a product or process is UL verified is like getting an unsolicited pep talk from your distant uncle: It’s interesting, but you’re not really sure what it means...

By Andreas Muckes Choosing the right Ethernet cable might be more important than you think. If the right cable has not been selected, data will not be transferred correctly, which in turn could lead...

By Don Nester Cable failure can result in a waste of resources as well as time and effort applied to replacing the failed cables. This issue is one of the leading causes of downtime,...