LOS GATOS, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--iWatt, Inc., a developer of energy-efficient digital power supply control integrated circuits (ICs) used in leading-edge power supplies, today announced that it has received the International Organization for Standardization ISO 9001:2008 certification for its quality management system.

ISO 9001:2008 is accepted worldwide as the standard that defines quality. The certification indicates that an organization conforms to a quality management system which can consistently provide a product or service that meets customer and applicable regulatory requirements. iWatt’s quality system was assessed by Det Norske Veritas, which conducted audits in December of 2010 and awarded certification in January 2011.

iWatt’s extensive product quality assurance system includes iWatt Certified system level reliability testing, and a unique, Quality-Verification-Test (QVT) program. The company goes beyond individual chip tests and instead creates power supply reference designs integrating its chips in fully-functioning products so it can test them in real-world conditions. The QVT program measures the mixed parameters of the various components to identify issues with any of them, and validates that the iWatt chip meets its design specifications and production yields. iWatt tests a large volume of these reference designs before releasing any new product to the market.

The power supply reference designs iWatt creates for its QVT include Gerber files, bill of materials (BOM), and test files, so customers can take them right into production. Or, in iWatt’s optional “Quality by Design” program, the company will customize a power supply design to the customer’s specifications, speeding their time to market and improving their production yields. iWatt’s field application engineers (FAEs) in China, Taiwan, Japan, Korea, Europe, and the USA ensure quality implementation of all designs.

“Achieving the ISO 9001:2008 certification reflects our continuous efforts to achieve superior product quality and reliability, and assures our customers that our processes are well-documented and products are well-tested,” said Ron Edgerton, president and CEO of iWatt.

“I am also very proud of our on-time delivery statistics,” explained Edgerton. “Based on customer input, 98 percent of iWatt’s 2010 deliveries were within a two-day window of the promised delivery date.”

Edgerton went on to explain that iWatt has qualified additional fabs and increased its assembly and test capacity to enable the company to double shipments in 2011 if customers need that capacity. The company increased units shipped by 70% from 2009 to 2010 due to increased design support worldwide and its “Quality by Design” program.

About iWatt, Inc.