Kelis has shut down any hopes that her and ex-husband Nas will ever romantically reunite, and claims the rap legend is currently in debt to her.

On Monday (June 3), the veteran songstress responded to a social media user encouraging her and Nas to get back together. “NAS & KELIS y’all need to double back, give love another chance,” the fan wrote. “Blessings.”

Kelis expressed her preference not to live in the past, noting that she and Nas were more than a decade removed from being partners. She also asked whether the fan would want to reenter a relationship with a former mate from so long ago. “Stop, it was 15 years ago,” the New York native said of her and Nas’ split. “Do you want your ex from almost 2 decades ago?” she added.

When another social media user suggested Kelis to “give Nas his bread back,” the singer retorted by claiming that the Queensbridge icon owes her money, chiding the commenter for discussing her finances. “Lol he owes me actually,” Kelis shot back. “Get outta here, only a loser is worried about someone else’s money lol please.”

Nas and Kelis first met at an MTV Video Music Awards afterparty in 2002 and began dating soon after. The two stars got married in January 2005 and were together for several years before Kelis filed for divorce in 2009. They welcomed their lone child, Knight Jones, in 2009, months after Kelis’ filing for separation. The former couple’s divorce was finalized in 2010.

In 2018, Kelis opened up about her relationship with Nas, accusing the rapper of mental and physical abuse. “It was really dark,” the 44-year-old said of their time together. “There was a lot of drinking and a lot of mental and physical abuse. We would fight. I never just sat there but we would definitely fight.”

“I’ve waited nine years to say anything. The amount of airing out I could do — and I’ve chosen not to — our kids will find out. They’re finding out now. I’ve never painted myself as a saint. Did he hit me? Mmmhm. Did I hit him? Mmmhm,” she added.

Nas would deny Kelis’ account of abuse, accusing her of continuously accusing to taint his reputation while deeming her claims as “sad” and “fictitious.”

The 50-year-old fired back in a lengthy Instagram post at the time, writing, “Nothing surprises me anymore, including this. This is what your life has come to sis? Exploiting some people’s Real struggle and pain…just to get at me….to get attention ? Fame? Another fight against men?”

Nas continued, “I’m tired of you painting a bad picture of me. I’ve been tired of it but you never seem to get tired. I even had to be in a relationship with you AGAIN after we separated just so i could see my son & I AM JUST TIRED.”