Kelis and Nas were married for several years, and she claims there was once substance, physical, and psychological abuse all through the timeline of marriage.

While many celebrities thrive independently, some turn out to be much more well-known after dating another A-lister. Singer Kelis and rapper Nas have been public figures earlier than they crossed paths within the early 2000s. The two of them went on to turn out to be one of hip-hop’s most iconic couples.

Article continues under commercial

Nas and Kelis were married for 9 years prior to she ultimately filed for divorce. Since then, they’ve addressed several main points of what resulted in their split. Let’s look at Kelis and Nas' relationship timeline and where the exes stand now.

August 2002

Kelis and Nas met for the first time in September 2002. The musicians linked at Sean “Diddy” Combs’ MTV Video Music Awards afterparty. Kelis was once the one who made the primary transfer, as Nas reportedly pretended he didn’t know who she used to be. However, the “Oochie Wally” rapper quickly showed Kelis how a lot he sought after to be along with her.

Article continues beneath advertisement

“Everyone strikes out of the best way, and Nas stands up, and I put my hand out, and I’m like, Hey, I’m Kelis,” Kelis recalled to Vibe magazine. “And he goes, ‘Who?’… So I’m crawling into a f**king hollow, and he’s like, ‘Wait-huh? What’s your name? And I’m like, Kelis, and he’s like, ‘Oh, well, that’s nice, as a result of I’ve been ready to make you my spouse a lot of these years.'”

Article continues below advertisement

January 2005

After they met on the VMAs, Kelis and Nas turned into smitten with every different. In 2004, he proposed, and the couple married on Jan. 8, 2005. The marriage ceremony happened at Morningside Baptist Church in Atlanta, Georgia, in entrance of one hundred seventy five visitors. Kelis took the nontraditional course together with her wardrobe and wore a shocking inexperienced chiffon get dressed down the aisle.

Article continues beneath commercial

April 2009

Although Nas and Kelis tried to keep their marriage as personal as possible, the couple persisted a couple of infidelity rumors against the tip. Additionally, a intercourse tape that includes Kelis and rapper Infrared used to be released in March 2009, fueling more rumors of a break up. The “Milkshake” songstress mentioned that the videotape came about earlier than she and Nas were given together.

Article continues below commercial

On Apr. 30, 2009, Kelis officially filed for divorce from Nas, mentioning “irreconcilable variations.” At the time of the submitting, Kelis was once seven months pregnant with their son Knight. The couple’s divorce used to be finalized in May 2010.

Article continues under advertisement

July 2012

While Kelis apparently sought after to move on from her marriage to Nas, he wasn’t ready to let pass just yet. In July 2012, he released the quilt for his album, Life Is Good. Nas posed with Kelis’ wedding dress on his lap after discovering it in his home after the divorce. The rapper said the cover shoot was once his creative option to transfer on from the marriage. However, in October 2012, Nas published right through a performance that he texted his ex and asked her to “make love to me one ultimate time.”

Article continues underneath commercial

April 2018

In the years following their divorce, Kelis stored quiet about the details surrounding her and Nas. Nonetheless, she persevered receiving inquiries referring to what ended in her divorce.

Kelis broke her silence at the relationship with Hollywood Unlocked. During the interview, she admitted to Jason Lee that the wedding was once “truly dark” and riddled with infidelity, alcohol, and psychological and physical abuse. Kelis also credit getting pregnant together with her son for allowing her to leave when she did.

Article continues under commercial

“I almost certainly would have stayed longer had I now not been pregnant [with Knight] as a result of I in reality did love him and because we have been married,” she mentioned. “We weren’t dating, we have been married. Like, this was once my person.”

Kelis stated that she initially didn’t discuss out as a result of she’s a “private individual.” However, she insisted she could’ve shared extra about her ex-husband’s conduct however sought after to offer protection to their households.

Article continues beneath advertisement

"I’ve waited nine years to say anything,” Kelis declared. “I have never talked about this man, ever,” she tells Hollywood Unlocked. “The amount of airing out that I could do, and I’ve chosen not to … Our kids will find out. They’re finding out now. I’ve never painted myself as a saint. Did he hit me? Mhm. Did I hit him back? Mhm.”

Article continues below advertisement

September 2018

Nas responded to Kelis’ Hollywood Unlocked interview five months after it aired. He left a seven-page statement on his Instagram, refuting his ex-wife’s claims.

“I do not beat women,” Nas wrote, per Billboard. “I did not beat up my ex-wife. Stop.”

Nas also stated that Kelis was physically violent towards him during their time together. He then said his ex made it difficult for him to see their child.

Article continues below advertisement

“After ten years of keeping my silence during a decade of dealing with very hostile behavior and verbal abuse and even your stepfather holding you back from one of your physical violent attacks on me right outside your house THIS YEAR while trying to pick up our son while he watched from the window, it was my weekend, and you denied me that because your parents were in town,” he shared. “Even our son wonders why you treat me the way you do?”

Article continues below advertisement

Kelis and Nas have argued over their son’s custody for years.

Nas and Kelis’ issues continued after her abuse claims. In January 2019, TMZ reported that the exes disagreed over Kelis’ choice to move to a farm in Colombia with their son. According to court documents, the move violated their custody arrangement, which includes both parents taking Knight on their designated holidays. He also claimed that Kelis withdrew Knight from his private school in LA without speaking to him.

Article continues below advertisement

Before Kelis took their son overseas, the exes reportedly didn’t have a great co-parenting relationship, and it seems like they’re still working things out.

Since their split, Nas and Kelis have both found other lovers. In 2017, Nas briefly dated Nicki Minaj and Draya Michele but appears single now. In 2014, Kelis married for a second time to Mike Mora, and the couple had two children — Sheperd and Galilee. Sadly, Mike died in March 2022 of abdomen most cancers at age 37.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7pbXSramam6Ses7p6wqikaKhfoLKttdJmpZqrXaeyra3Toqanq5ievW7AyKacpaGemg%3D%3D