SINGER Kelis' husband passed away on March 14, 2022, when he lost his battle with cancer.

Kelis released her first album, Kaleidoscope, in 1998 which jumped to 144 on the US Billboard Top 200.

Who are Kelis's children?

Kelis, whose full name is Kelis Rogers, had her third child in September 2020, four years after she gave birth to her second son.

She welcomed her first child, Knight, in July 2009 with her then-husband Nas.

Kelis had her second child with her late husband, Mike Mora, in December 2015.

When Kelis was pregnant with their son, Shepherd, she kept the news private until she attended the Los Angeles Women's Expo in October that year.

"It enhances you. I don't know if it really changes you," she told E! News in 2015. "I think it just enhances who you already are. It makes the things that you do make sense. You're more poignant and more focused."

Kelis and Mora welcomed their daughter, Galilee, in September 2020 after a difficult pregnancy.

At 41 years old, Kelis told People, "After I had the baby — I'm 41. It wasn't the easiest. It wasn't like when I gave birth to my older son when I was 29."

Who was Mike Mora?

Kelis' late husband Mike Mora passed away on March 14, only five months after he was diagnosed with stomach cancer.

Mora was a photographer and had been married to Kelis since 2014. Kelis' representative released a statement on March 15 confirming Mora's death.

“Sadly, it’s true that Mike Mora has passed away,” Kelis' representative said in the statement to Entertainment Tonight. “We would ask all to respect Kelis and her family’s privacy as of right now. Thank you.”

It was after his daughter's birth that Mora announced he had been diagnosed with cancer and said at the time that he was told he only had 18 months to live.

Mora talked about his diagnosis in an Instagram post in September 2021 and said, “Life is full of the most unexpected situations. I never thought this could happen to me. At just 36, with three kiddos, and a wife that loves me.

“I want to be able to help those that might be experiencing something like this – a life-altering disease full of questions and doubt – maybe, hopefully. By showing that it’s possible to make it through.

“You always see people post about how life is too short. How you should reach out to those you love no matter where life has taken you. It is the truth.

"Don’t take your time here, your time with friends, family, for granted. Shit can be over just like that!”

Who is Nas?

Kelis married singer and songwriter, Nas whose real name is Nasir bin Olu Dara Jones, in 2005, and the couple shares their 12-year-old son, Knight.

The couple met at an MTV Video Music Awards party in 2002 and were married three years later.

Their marriage lasted five years before they divorced in 2010 citing irreconcilable differences.

Nas released his thirteenth album, King's Disease, in August 2020 and won his first Grammy Award for Best Rap Album at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards.

He since released two more albums with his most recent, Magic, being released in January 2022.

Is Kelis dating Bill Murray?

The Sun exclusively revealed on Thursday that the Hollywood superstar Bill Murray and the Milkshake singer have struck up an unlikely romance - with an almost 30 year age gap between them.

The Ghostbusters actor, 72, watched the mum of three, 43, perform from the side of the stage in London last weekend - having also been spotted at her other recent shows.

Sources say the pair were also together at the same hotel, and have been “getting close for a while” after first meeting in the US.

They have reportedly bonded since Mike Mora's passing, while Bill’s estranged wife passed away in 2021.

Father-of-six Bill was pictured during Kelis’s set at the Mighty Hoopla festival in Brockwell Park, South London.

A friend said: “They’ve met up in the States before which got people in the industry talking, and now are meeting up in London while they’re both here. They’ve clearly hit it off.

“But they’ve also both shared relatively recent bereavements and have that common bond between them.

“Whatever it is that has brought them together, and however unlikely it seems, they are both single and are having fun despite the fairly big age gap.”