Kelis has reignited claims that her ex-husband, Nas, owes her money, more than a decade after their tumultuous marriage ended.

Responding to an Instagram user who encouraged her to rekindle her relationship with Nas, Kelis quickly dismissed the idea, saying, “Stop, it was 15 years ago. Do you want your ex from almost 2 decades ago?” When another commenter suggested that she should return money to Nas, Kelis shot back, “Lol he owes me actually, get outta here, only a loser is worried about someone else’s money lol please.”

Kelis and Nas went through a bitter divorce in 2010, ending their seven-year marriage. In 2018, Kelis opened up about their intense relationship and accused Nas of physical abuse. “We had really intense highs and really intense lows,” she told Hollywood Unlocked. “It was never normal. The intense high would be like money was rolling in. We were young, too. I was 22 when I met him. I was a baby. We were drinking too much, smoking too much. We were too much. We were spending too much. We were balling out of control. It was all just too much.”

She continued, “We lived hard and so because of that, when that comes down, it goes really low – as low as possible. So it’s hard ’cause there’s no balance. There’s no normalcy. It was really dark. There was a lot of drinking and a lot of mental and physical abuse. We would fight. I never just sat there but we would definitely fight. I’ve waited nine years to say anything. The amount of airing out I could do – and I’ve chosen not to – our kids will find out. They’re finding out now. I’ve never painted myself as a saint. Did he hit me? Mmmhm. Did I hit him? Mmmhm.”

Nas later responded to these allegations in a lengthy Instagram post, writing, “I’m tired of you painting a bad picture of me. I’ve been tired of it but you never seem to get tired. I even had to be in a relationship with you AGAIN after we separated just so I could see my son & I AM JUST TIRED. Back then you asked me why didn’t I stop the divorce from happening. I tried! We are too different. Some things aren’t meant to be. We were meant to be so that we could have our son. Nothing more.”

The couple share a 14-year-old son named Knight Jones, and were involved in a bitter custody battle until reaching an agreement in early 2018.

The resurfacing of these claims adds another chapter to the long and tumultuous history between Kelis and Nas, revealing the deep wounds and unresolved issues that still linger between the former couple.