The league, European Cup, FA Cup and League Cup. For the top English clubs, that is probably the order that they prioritise the pots.

Thirty years ago, the FA Cup was the most treasured piece of silverware for Sir Alex Ferguson after an uninspiring run as Manchester United manager.

It's unfathomable to think that the Red Devils' legendary figure once struggled in the hotseat but that was very much the scenario during the 1989-90 campaign.

By this point, Ferguson was in his third full season in charge of the club - having joined in November 1986.

In those seasons leading up to 1989-90, United were very much in the doldrums by their lofty history.

With bitter rivals Liverpool dominating the landscape, Ferguson managed to steer his side to second in the old First Division in his first full season in 1987-88.

However, thoughts of a new dawn were very much in the distance as the club followed that up with an 11th-place finish in 1988-89.

Performances in the cup competitions were disappointing too. Ferguson hadn't steered them any further than the quarter-finals in the FA Cup (1988-89), while the best he could conjure up in the League Cup was a fifth-round appearance (1987-88).

As Ferguson continued his overhaul behind the scenes, his transformations were not yet showing on the pitch. By the time the 1989-90 season started some supporters were beginning to show their displeasure.

After smashing Arsenal 4-1 on the opening day of the season, United followed it up with four defeats in their next six games - which included a 5-1 mauling by rivals Manchester City at Maine Road.

Ferguson bemoaned their injury problems, especially summer signing Neil Webb who tore his achilles tendon on England duty, but his excuses didn't cut with some fans. Then on December 9, 1989 following a woeful 2-1 home defeat by Crystal Palace came the infamous banner calling for Ferguson's exit: '3 YEARS OF EXCUSES AND IT'S STILL CRAP … TA RA FERGIE,' it read.

Come January, it was widely seen that the FA Cup was the Scot's final chance to convince he had what it took to succeed in England - despite his glittering career in charge of Aberdeen (more to come about that later).

Ferguson, for his part, conceded so too: 'Everyone seems to have set the Cup tie as my trial,' he said at the time.

'I can cope with that because I know that I am doing the job the right way and the motivation of the players is no problem. We simply have to get on with it and remember that the game will be as hard for Forest as it will be for us.'

The third round pitted them against Nottingham Forest and on January 7, 1990 he backed up his words as United squeezed out a 1-0 win at the City Ground courtesy of Mark Robins' second-half header. That goal has gone into folklore since for its ramifications.

United would only win two of their next nine league games to see them 16th in the table. However, their FA Cup run was still alive following victories at Hereford (1-0), Newcastle (3-2) and Sheffield United (1-0).

They needed a replay to get past Oldham Athletic during the semi-finals - with both ties going into extra-time. After the initial encounter on April 8, 1990 ended 3-3, Robins again proved United's matchwinner - this time scoring in the 114th minute as Ferguson's side won 2-1 three days later.

United's reward for reaching the final saw them go up against Crystal Palace at Wembley on May 12. By now the league was over and it was another subdued campaign with them finishing 13th.

As a result, the Wembley showpiece was United's season. Defeat and Ferguson's future was precarious. Victory and a poor season would be offset by silverware.

An enthralling spectacle ended 3-3 after extra-time. A topsy-turvy game saw the lead change hands three times. Palace, in their first-ever FA Cup final, looked to have won when substitute Ian Wright grabbed his second of the afternoon. However, Mark Hughes forced a replay with just seven minutes left.

The replay five days later wasn't as dramatic. This time the result was decided inside 90 minutes thanks to Lee Martin's second-half strike.

For Ferguson though he didn't care as he finally delivered a piece of silverware to Old Trafford.

Then-chairman Edwards later insisted that he would still have given Ferguson more time if they had lost to Forest. The Scot had the pedigree having worked wonders across the border.

With Aberdeen he broke the Celtic/Rangers duopoly by winning 10 major honours for the Dons. That success stemmed from the 1979-80 season when they won the Scottish title - just their second in history. Ferguson had only joined the year before in 1978.

It was the manager's first major honour in a glittering career and this month marks the 40th anniversary of that milestone. Ferguson had many highs during his tenure at Pittodrie - and arguably none more so than when he guided them to victory over the mighty Real Madrid in the 1983 European Cup Winners' Cup.

These accomplishments saw him land the United job and a trophy-laden spell at Old Trafford that was ignited by the 1990 FA Cup triumph.

A year later, Ferguson added to the cabinet by winning the Cup Winners' Cup again and from there they never looked back under the legendary figure.