With the arrival of the anticipated Photo Mode for Death Stranding, and because Hideo Kojima has stated in the past that he’d like to get into film production, a fan has taken it upon themselves to beat Kojima in there ever was to be a Death Stranding film.

At least, in onesheet form.

A Reddit user by the name of 29_nov has created a pretty sweet-looking teaser poster for the metaphorical film, using the game’s tagline to indicate just what “film” this is. Then again, you could probably make a feature-length film from the game’s multitude of cutscenes, but that’s a given.

Death Stranding is out now on PlayStation 4 and the Xbox One, with the PC version due out via Steam and the Epic Games Store on June 2.

After announcing another release date change last month, GSC Game World has come back with a Developer Deep Dive video for S.T.A.L.K.E.R. 2: Heart of Chornobyl. Touted as “the biggest and the most comprehensive update on the game yet”, the video features a variety of never-before-seen content, including interviews with the devs, and new footage of the game, including a full video walkthrough of one of the story quests.

“We know you might be tired of waiting, and we truly appreciate your patience,” said Yevhen Grygorovych, Game Director at GSC Game World. “These two additional months will give us the chance to fix more “unexpected anomalies” (or simply “bugs”, as you call them). We are always grateful for your ongoing support and understanding – it means the world to us. We’re just as eager as you are to finally release the game and for you to experience it for yourself.”

In addition, thanks to the pre-order page on the Xbox Store for the Ultimate Edition of S.T.A.L.K.E.R. 2: Heart of Chornobyl, it’s been revealed that the game will receive two post-launch expansions as part of its Season Pass. That’s on top of the other goodies you’ll get in the Ultimate Edition, which includes a special extra quest, additional costume and weapon skins, a digital artbook, and a digital copy of the game’s soundtrack.

There are also pre-order bonuses available, which include “Early Bird” skins and “Extended Campfire Content”.

S.T.A.L.K.E.R. 2: Heart of Chornobyl launches November 20 for the Xbox Series, the Xbox Game Pass, and PC via Steam and the Epic Games Store.