What do all these games have in common? Nothing! Nothing I had in mind anyway, except I'm going to write about them in this blog.

Red Dead Redemption

I may be a year late, but I was thinking about Red Dead Redemption and I have 2 designs to do today for my daily design blog. Looking at vintage movie posters (mainly mean streets and the birds) I wanted to make a movie poster for the game. Initially I thought of doing it in the style of a western poster but that has already been done, so I didn't go with the obvious choice.

Personally? I had a lot of great ideas about the smoke forming mexico, the wedding ring being on the gun.... but I didn't combine them efectively enough. There's too much text and too much dead weight around in the composition.

Here it is. Leave comments and feedback, I love to read them.

View High Res

Love the game.

Portal 2

Portal 2 finally arrived. I went through it in one 8 hour sitting and enjoyed every minute of it. I could go on for an eternity about how enjoyable I found the story, characters, overall writing and gameplay but I won't. I got stuck a few times because I hadn't seen a surface I could shoot a portal on, but generally the game was easy enough. Like Jeff said on the bombcast, games are thrill rides. I want my thrill ride. Portal 2 makes you feel smart enough without challenging you too much.

Really enjoyed the section with the old test chambers and most of all, Cave Johnson.

I made a portal 2 poster during the wait which you can check out here.

I also just made this. A poster in the style of the safety posters during the 50s section of Portal 2.

View High Res

Tales of Monkey Island

I have had these forever after buying all 5 chapters in a Steam sale. I have wanted to get in to Telltale Game's adventure games for quite a while but they aren;t the most exciting or engaging games. Apart from being stumped on a puzzle or 2 I have had a very pleasant experience. Love the characters and world they have set up. The graphics are nice but the style of animation is so disjointed it bugs me sometimes.

I might do an illustration of Morgan soon. She has an impossibly thin waist.