3. Results and discussion

We examined the morphology and size of Au-NPs and Au@P-NPs by TEM. The NPs distributed uniformly, and the average dimensions of Au-NPs and Au@P-NPs were approximately 17 ​nm ( a–d). The hydrodynamic diameters of Au-NPs and Au@P-NPs were 27.6 and 29.1 ​nm, respectively and the corresponding zeta-potential values were −12.4 ​mV for Au-NPs and −15.6 ​mV for Au@P-NPs (Table S3). The polydispersity index (PDI) of Au-NPs was 0.278, while Au@P-NPs revealed PDI of 0.286, indicating the monodispersity of Au@P-NPs. To determine the stability of synthesized NPs, PDI values were measured after twelve months of storage at 25 ​± ​1 ​°C. Au@P-NPs revealed excellent monodispersity (PDI-0.293), while PDI of Au-NPs increased from 0.278 to 1.138 (Table S2), demonstrating the capability of phytochemicals-rich C. verum bark extract to act as superior capping and stabilizing agents than citrate. An absorption peak of Au@P-NPs was about 531 ​nm in the UV spectra (Fig. S3), which might be due to the SPR of gold-based NPs [42]. The appeared peaks at 3593, 3174, 1607, 1441 and 1047 ​cm−1 were denoted to O–H bond stretching vibration [43], C–H and alkene stretches [44], C–O stretch, the in-plane bending of the O–H group [44] and C–O bond stretching vibration [44], respectively in the FTIR spectrum of Au@P-NPs ( e). The –C Created by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019 O stretching and –OH stretching bands corresponded to the polyphenolic compounds [45] while the C–H stretching indicated the presence of aromatic compound(s) of C. verum [46], indicating that the phytochemicals of C. verum were capped on Au@P-NPs. It has been reported that the interaction of NPs-phytochemicals could occur through the electrostatic repulsion force of negatively charged polyphenolic compounds [47].

After corroboration of involvement of phytochemicals of C. verum in capping of Au@P-NPs, 1D 1H (proton) NMR analysis was performed to study the details of anti-obesity compounds present on the surface of Au@P-NPs. We identified 13 metabolites, viz., 3-hydroxybutyrate, cinnamyl acetate, glucose, myoinositol, glycerol, galactose, ferulic acid, catechin, rutin, pyrogallol, p-coumaric acid, cinnamic acid and cinnamaldehyde which were involved in the coating of NPs ( ; ). Although galactose is the major component of Au@P-NPs, several studies have reported that galactose and its derivatives act as linker agents to assemble various functional agents on the surface of metal NPs [48,49]. As such, the content of galactose present on the surface of Au@P-NPs was so less that it was unlikely to cause hyperglycemic-mediated obesity [50] rather it might have favoured gut microbes responsible for maintaining gut-microbiota-bile acid axis. In addition, p-coumaric acid [38], pyrogallol [51], cinnamaldehyde [52], ferulic acid [53] and cinnamic acid [54,55] present on the surface of Au@P-NPs have been reported for inducing thermogenesis and brown adipose tissue (BAT) activation in adipose tissues (ATs) to provide anti-obesity effects. Similarly, other cinnamyl acetate, rutin and catechin are known for anti-inflammatory activity [16,56,57] which can regulate metabolic inflammation in ATs of HFD-fed mice.

We administered Au-NPs and Au@P-NPs orally once a day to the obese mice induced by HFD throughout 8-weeks at a concentration of 10 ​mg/kg to assess their beneficial effect on obesity and related metabolic disorders. Au@P-NPs treatment prevented gain in HFD-induced body weight from day 14 onwards ( a and b) and these results were not related to alterations in energy intake ( c). The accumulation of fat in ATs is often related to obesity and related disorders [3,36]. Therefore, we examined whether the Au@P-NPs-induced prevention of weight gain is associated with alterations in ATs. Au@P-NPs prevented fat accumulation in all ATs namely, epididymal white AT (eWAT), retroperitoneal white AT (rWAT), mesenteric white AT (mWAT), inguinal white AT (iWAT) and interscapular brown AT (iBAT) ( d). Treatment of Au@P-NPs did not affect the weight of heart, gastrocnemius and pancreas as well as length of intestine, and caecum quantity (Fig. S4a–f). When compared with the CD group, liver weight in HFD-fed group significantly raised, but HFD-persuaded liver weight and hyperlipidemia were markedly prevented by Au@P-NPs administration ( e), as revealed by reduced contents of triglyceride, total cholesterol and LDL-c in both liver homogenate ( f) and plasma ( g) of Au@P-NPs group against HFD control group, measured by colorimetric kits. We noticed non-significant difference in everyday faecal energy production between Au@P-NPs-treated and HFD control groups, indicating that Au@P-NPs did not modify food assimilation ( h). Au@P-NPs treatment enhanced energy consumption, which was not related to reinforce physical movement ( i; Fig. S4g–l), ensuring a smaller amount of energy available for deposition ( j). In line with elevated oxygen utilization, Au@P-NPs-treated animals revealed an increasing interscapular temperature (36.66 ​°C ​± ​0.07) than HFD-fed (35.69 ​°C ​± ​0.08) animals ( k). On the other hand, Au-NPs did not impede HFD-induced weight gain and fatty liver parameters. Au@P-NPs were much more efficient in the prevention of weight gain, adiposity and dyslipidemia by accelerating energy consumption and thermogenesis than Au-NPs. These findings indicate that the involvement of anti-obesity phytochemicals of C. verum in coating of the NPs which play a key role in preventing the weight gain and inducing thermogenesis by Au@P-NPs in HFD-induced obese mice.

We next studied the levels of interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β), IL-6 and interferon-γ (INF-γ) in serum using ELISA kits to assess metabolic inflammation in the AT of HFD-fed mice without and with treatments. The mice belonging to HFD control and Au-NPs-treated groups exhibited greater IL-1β, IL-6 and INF-γ levels than the Au@P-NPs group ( a–c). We observed reduced levels of C–C chemokine ligand/RANTES, a chemokine, VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor), and chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2/MCP-1) in the Au@P-NPs group compared to the HFD control group ( d–f). Corresponding to decreased CCL2, an essential regulator of macrophage infiltration in the AT, we observed reduced expression of Adgre (F4/80) mRNA ( g). Au@P-NPs revealed decreased adipocyte size (Fig. S5a–c) and it has been reported that large adipose cells trigger an inflammatory cascade in ATs [58]. Au@P-NPs administration also obviated metabolic endotoxaemia, as showed by reduced LPS concentration in mice bloodstream ( h), suggesting regulatory effect of Au@P-NPs on AT and circulatory cytokines.

While fasting blood glucose did not change significantly between Au-NPs and HFD control groups ( i), Au@P-NPs treatment did obviate fasting hyperinsulinemia ( j), resulting in the enhanced fasting insulin sensitivity (IS) as revealed by reduced HOMA-IR, a technique applied to measure β-cell function and insulin resistance ( k). OGTT revealed that Au@P-NPs improved glucose tolerance ( l and m) and restricted HFD-induced hyperinsulinemia ( n and o). The IS 10 ​min after subcutaneous injection of insulin got improved in Au@P-NPs group as compared to HFD control group ( p). In summary, these results suggest that Au@P-NPs treatment improves glucose homeostasis and IS by preventing the HFD-induced obesity and visceral fat deposition and inflammation.

Since obesity is the results of high fat/or sucrose induced imbalance in gut microbial community, remodeling of gut microbial diversity is an important strategy in the prevention of obesity [3,59]. Mounting evidences have associated with the reduction of beneficial gut microbiota in obese people [8,10,11]. To confirm the consistency of the microbial profile, faecal specimens were collected at the end of the study and at the beginning of the study after acclimatization of mice on a CD. We sequenced 16 ​S rRNA genes by Illumina MiSeq platform, and assessed the gut microbial profile as sequenced, V3–V4 region of 16S rRNA genes using a 2 ​× ​300PE v3 sequencing kit. Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) showed that though all specimens of CD-fed group clustered at baseline, 8 weeks of HFD feeding severely altered intestinal microbial profile ( a). Au@P-NPs-administered group, however, clustered partly at a distance of HFD control group specimens, signifying fundamental alterations in Au@P-NPs intestinal microbial profile ( a). Au@P-NPs administration obviated the HFD-induced reduction in gut microbial richness, as indicated by Chao1 index ( b) and F/B ratio ( c and d), two key indicators of gut microbial diversity [9,60]. At genus level, Au@P-NPs protected the HFD-induced reduction in Akkermansia, Bifidobacterium, Barnesiella and Proteobacteria, and decreased the relative abundance of Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, Acinetobacter and Papillibacter ( e). We observed the most of the decline in Firmicutes in the gut microbiota of Au@P-NPs-treated group as compared to HFD control group ( d).

The linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe, an algorithm used for biomarker discovery and plotting in microbiome studies) method ranked Bacteroides, Parabacteroides and Barnesiella coupled with a foremost reduction in operational taxonomic units (OTUs, applied to categorize groups of closely related individuals) designated to Lactobacillus spp. and Streptococcus spp. as the major attributes distinguishing faecal microbial populations of Au@P-NPs group from that of HFD control group ( h). As we noticed a propensity towards increase of Akkermansia muciniphila and Bifidobacterium in Au@P-NPs group ( e), we quantified these bacteria by qPCR technique and detected a foremost enhance in their population in Au@P-NPs group ( i and j). Increasing abundances of A. muciniphila and Bifidobacterium were reported demonstrating the metabolic benefits of these gut bacteria [61,62]. Several researchers have earlier confirmed the relationship between consumption of dietary polyphenol-rich extracts and enhanced abundance of Bifidobacterium and A. muciniphila [63]. Our study also revealed the presence of polyphenolic compounds of C. verum on the surface of Au@P-NPs, which have known positive effects on A. muciniphila. Polyphenolic compounds found in the cell wall of certain plants increase the abundance of A. muciniphila and other probiotic bacteria [3,64,65]. Au@P-NPs is also coated with various polyphenolic compounds, such as cinnamic acid, cinnamaldehyde, ferulic acid, rutin, and catechin seem to promote the growth of beneficial gut bacteria, particularly A. muciniphila and Bifidobacterium in vivo. In early weaned rats, cinnamic acid and cinnamaldehyde from C. verum have been reported to decrease cardiometabolic risk through glucose uptake inhibition and appetite modulation by remodeling gut microbiome [66,67]. Similarly, rutin, another polyphenolic compound was reported to attenuate gut dysbiosis and inflammation in paneth cells of obese mice [68]. The positive effect of catechin, another dietary flavonoid present in green tea and C. verum, on gut microbes is also well-established in several pre-clinical studies [69,70]. Thus, the presence of above ingredients of C. verum on the surface of NPs with proven gut microbial regulatory effects provides an explanation how Au@P-NPs modulates gut microbiota of HFD-fed mice.

While OTUs designated to the genera Bacteroides and Parabacteroides ( h), their abundances were considerably low ( e). We thus decided to focus on the significant Au@P-NPs-associated actions, particularly on the phytotypes such as Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, Acinetobacter, A. muciniphila, Barnesiella and Bifidobacterium. Besides, no noticeable histological injury in major organs such as liver, lungs, kidney, heart and pancreas ( ) and no significant alteration in the level of blood serum parameters ( ) were observed in 8-weeks-old mice treated with Au@P-NPs as compared to CD-fed group, demonstrating the biocompatibility of the Au@P-NPs.

As bile acids are known to regulate glucose, lipid and energy metabolism in BAT and skeletal muscle [18,71], we wanted to assess whether alterations in the bile acids profile can be related to the impacts observed in Au@P-NPs-treated group. Although the relative proportion of ω-muricholic acid (ω-MCA; a secondary bile acid) was higher in the plasma of Au@P-NPs-treated group than the HFD-fed group, the abundance of conjugated bile acids such as tauro-α-murocholic acid (TαMCA) and tauro-β-murocholic acid (TβMCA) were lesser in the former group ( a and b). Besides, the relative proportions of unconjugated bile acids, viz., CDCA (chenodeoxycholic acid), DCA (deoxycholic acid), hyodeoxycholic acid and UDCA (ursodeoxycholic acid) were greater in the plasma of Au@P-NPs-treated group than the HFD-fed control group ( b; Fig. S6a-h). Bile acid content in faecal material was similar in HFD-fed control and Au@P-NPs-treated groups ( b; Fig. S6a-h), indicating that changed circulatory bile acids in Au@P-NPs group was related to variation in bile acid production rather than excretion/re-uptake. Based on the obtained results, we cerebrated that farnesoid X receptor (FXR)-stimulating bile acid synthesis may recompense for the prohibitory action of decreased bile acid pool size, thus hampering the FXR-led negative reaction link regulatory bile acid profile in Au@P-NPs-treated group and retaining the contents of plasma bile acids lower in comparison to HFD-fed control group. While more studies in the future are required to fully decode the mode of actions by which Au@P-NPs affect bile acid equilibrium, it is of primary concern that Au@P-NPs administration decreased circulatory bile acid synthesis in HFD-fed animals. Changed bile acid profile may regulate to reform the gut microbiota in Au@P-NPs-treated animals. Bile acids act as antimicrobial agents and the bile acid pool noticed on HFD feeding, which increases the abundance of taurine-conjugated bile acids (eg, TαMCA and TβMCA) in the enterohepatic circulation [3]. The presence of bile acids is linked with proliferation of bile-acid-resistant Lactobacillus species in the intestine atmosphere [72]. The decreased bile acid pool size observed in Au@P-NPs-treated group might have reduced the Lactobacillus population size in the gut environment.

Bile acids are microbial-secreted metabolic regulators that bind to FXR to activate Nr0b2 (Shp1) blocking the synthesis of bile acids in the liver and uptake in the ileum [73]. Activated FXR is also responsible for enhanced secretion of Fgf15 (fibroblast growth factor 15) in ileum, that reduces bile acid formation in the liver via binding with Fgfr4 [74]. Therefore, we hypothesized that Au@P-NPs treatment may down-regulate Nr0b2 expression. Next, we found that the Au@P-NPs were capable to decrease Nr0b2 mRNA expression in the ileum of animals. This Au@P-NPs impact was also adequate to reduce the mRNA expression of Fgf15 and FXR-regulated genes, viz., Slc51a and Slc51b in the ileum of treated animals ( c). Moreover, Au@P-NPs treatment reduced Cyp7a1 mRNA expression in the liver versus HFD-fed control group ( d), suggesting the decreased bile acid profile observed in Au@P-NPs-administered group which might be responsible for reducing FXR expression in the mice ileum. This conclusion is supported by decreased mRNA expressions of Nr0b2 and Fgf15 in ileum of Au@P-NPs group [75,76]. As we noticed a key reduction in the content of FXR antagonists (eg, TαMCA, TβMCA) along with an enhanced FXR agonist (eg, CDCA) in the bile acid profile of Au@P-NPs-treated group, we assumed that such FXR-activatory bile acid pool may repay for the impending result of decreased bile acid profile size, thus disturbing the FXR-mediated negative reaction directing bile acid synthesis in Au@P-NPs group and maintaining the contents of circulating bile acids lower than the HFD-fed control group. While detailed investigations are needed to completely unravel the mode of actions by which Au@P-NPs affect bile acid homeostasis, it is noteworthy that Au@P-NPs treatment decreased plasma bile acid pool in the HFD-fed animals.

We detected a notable increase in the mRNA expressions of Ucp1 (uncoupling protein 1) and Dio2 (deiodinase 2) in both iWAT and BAT of Au@P-NPs-treated group ( f and g). Further supporting iWAT browning, Au@P-NPs group revealed a trend of upregulated mRNA expression of Pparg2 (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ-2), Prdm16 (PR domain containing 16) and Ucp1 in iWAT compared to the HFD-fed control group ( f). With enhanced BAT activity, Au@P-NPs increased the mRNA expression of Pparg2 and Pgc1a (PPARγ coactivator 1α) in the BAT as compared to HFD-fed control mice ( g). The Fgf15, an intestinal hormone has been reported to activate the process of thermogenesis and browning of WAT by inducing Fgfr4 activation [77]. Constantly, we noticed higher Fgfr4 mRNA expression in the iWAT than in the eWAT and BAT of Au@P-NPs-treated group ( e-g), suggesting that increased browning of subcutaneous white fat in this group is linked to enhanced sensitivity to Fgf15. We observed a strong correlation between the mRNA expression profiles of many genes implicated in activation of BAT and iWAT browning ( h). Ucp1 and Dio2 genes in BAT had strong correlation with Ucp1 and Dio2 in iWAT. In addition, within the BAT, TGR5 was strongly correlated with Pgc1a, and within the iWAT, Ucp1 and Dio2 were correlated with Dio2 and fgfr4, respectively. Watanabe et al. in their study concluded that A. muciniphila ​is positively correlated with plasma CDCA and particularly the secondary bile acids, viz., DCA and UDCA that worked via ​TGR5 ​to increase the brown lipocytes and non-shivering thermogenesis (heat generation owing to metabolic energy alteration by burning of WAT) by promoting intracellular thyroid hormone activation [18]. Thus, the circulatory bile acids levels observed in our study in Au@P-NPs-treated animals were related to the increased BAT activation and browning of subcutaneous WAT through enhanced energy expenditure which might have been modulated through the gut microbiota.

However, quantifying how dietary polyphenolic compounds alter the intestinal microbial atmosphere to support the growth of A. muciniphila needs additional study. The interaction between this bacterium and bile acid pool size also needs to be investigated. No pathway connection to deconjugation/dehydroxylation of bile acid in the genome database (KEGG) of A. muciniphila was found. The ​capability ​of ​A. muciniphila to transform and resist to the antimicrobial action of various bile acids though indicated, ​further lab-based ​validations are needed. Although the direct involvement of changed bile acid profile size and composition observed in Au@P-NPs-treated group in increasing energy expenditure needs further study, the present study did bring novel insights into the cross-talk between bile acid and gut microbiota, and its association with the anti-obesity effects of phytochemicals-functionalized AuNPs.

We also assessed whether alterations in lipolytic/lipogenic event also contribute to decreased fat accumulation observed in Au@P-NPs-treated group. Besides increased plasma-free glycerol ( i) and upregulated expression of Ppara gene in both eWAT and iWAT of Au@P-NPs group ( e and f), we observed higher expression of Pnpla2, an adipose triglyceride lipase in eWAT and iWAT ( e and f). Also, we noticed the downregulation of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) inhibitor fasting-induced adipose factor (Fiaf) and monoacylglycerol lipase (Mgl1) in ileum of Au@P-NPs group ( c). These results highlight the enhanced fat breakdown/oxidation process fuelled by greater triglyceride removal. We observed downregulated protein expression of CD36 (cluster of differentiation 36) and FAS (fatty acid synthase) in the eWAT (Fig. S7a), and reduced FABP4 (fatty acid-binding protein 4) and FAS in the iWAT of Au@P-NPs-administered group (Fig. S7b). Au@P-NPs treatment failed to affect the protein expressions of CD36, PPARγ (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ) and acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) in the iWAT (Fig. S7d). Similarly, no difference was also observed between Au@P-NPs and HFD-fed control groups for the protein expressions of PPARγ, FABP4 and ACC in the eWAT (Fig. S7c). The results showed that, besides elevated energy expenditure, Au@P-NPs-treated group had enhanced fat breakdown process and reduced lipid formation in both visceral and subcutaneous fat depositories, which resulted in low weight gain in HFD-induced obese mice [3,36].

Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes are the key phyla that constitute more than 90% of gut microbiota in mice. Their relative population is directly associated with the obesity and metabolic disorders of the host [9,78,79]. We carried out FMT experiments on GF mice, colonized either with the faecal microbiota of Au@P-NPs or HFD donor mice. Recipient animals were fed a low-fat diet to eliminate a key obesogenic effect and hence to allow for an experimental effect of FMT on body weight in the short-term. During days 1, 2 and 3 ​PC of gut microbiota, Au@P-NPs receiver mice lost 3.7%, 4.9% and 2.1% of their initial body weight (IBW), respectively ( a). On the other hand, HFD receiver animals revealed 2.9% body weight gain on day 1 ​PC followed by a 3.4% and a 2.3% gain of their IBW on days 2 and 3, respectively ( a). This stemmed in noteworthy variations in body weight increase between Au@P-NPs and HFD receivers on days 1 and 2 ​PC and a trend to be sustained at day 3 ​PC. We observed no variation in energy intake of faecal energy expenditure between Au@P-NPs and HFD receiver groups ( b). We performed indirect calorimetry analyses during the initial days PC which showed a significant enhancement in energy expenditure not linked to physical movement on days 1 and 2 ​PC. This impact was decreased on day 3 ​PC and totally vanished on day 4 ​PC ( c; Fig. S8a-f). Illumina MiSeq analysis of 16S rRNA genes showed dissimilar gut bacterial populations in Au@P-NPs-receiver and HFD-receiver on day 2 ​PC (Fig. S8h). Bacterial populations grouped further separately on day 3 ​PC, that was revealed greater resemblance between HFD-receiver and Au@P-NPs-receiver intestinal microbiota on day 3 ​PC (Fig. S8i). The variations observed on day 2 ​PC were mainly led by a greater population of Verrucomicrobia ( d) and lower F/B ratio ( g). The enhanced population of Verrucomicrobia in Au@P-NPs receivers was intensified on day 2 ​PC, touching significant levels, and decreasing significantly on day 3 ​PC ( d). As Verrucomicrobia phylum is exclusively represented by A. muciniphila in the gut microbiota of rodents and humans [80], the closing was as plentiful as the previous in Au@P-NPs receivers in contrast to HFD receivers for the period of gut colonisation ( e). Moreover, 16S rRNA gene-based profiling at lesser taxonomic level on day 1 ​PC showed lower abundance of Streptococcus, Acetinobacter and Corynobacterium-1 in Au@P-NPs receivers in comparison to HFD-receivers ( e and f). Existence of Barnesiella got elevated in Au@P-NPs receivers on days 1 and 2 ​PC ( e and f). On day 2, Au@P-NPs recipients exhibited higher abundances of A. muciniphila and Bifidobacterium and lower proportions of Lactobacillus and Acinetobacter ( e and f). On day 3 ​PC, enhanced supremacy of Blautia, Prevotellaceae UCG-001, Rikenellaceae RC9 and Ruminiclostridium 5 in Au@P-NPs receivers significantly decreased the differences between the intestinal bacterial populations of animals reestablished with faecal resuspensions of Au@P-NPs-administered and HFD-fed donor animals ( e and f). The gut microbiota of HFD and Au@P-NPs receivers was usually dissimilar with that of donor groups ( d–g). The exemptions were the elevated proportion of Bifidobacterium and Barnesiella on days 1 and 2 ​PC, lower Streptococcus on day 1 ​PC and higher A. muciniphila on day 2 ​PC, characters noticed in Au@P-NPs receivers and also seen in Au@P-NPs-administered donor groups. The results recommend that though short-term colonisation is not sufficient to set up a steady gut microbiota similar to donor groups, a small number of taxa abundant in Au@P-NPs-administered group faecal microbial communities were adequate to enhance energy expenditure in the used mouse model. FMT experimentations also showed that the gut microbiota of Au@P-NPs-administered animals could moderately colonize in GF recipient animals.

We performed qPCR to examine the proportion of foremost phylotypes increased by Au@P-NPs-treated group in faecal samples of HFD receivers. The lower abundance of Streptococcus spp and enhanced proportion of A. muciniphila and Bifidobacterium were noticed in the faecal samples of Au@P-NPs receivers as compared to HFD receivers on day 1 ​PC ( h–j). Interestingly, both A. muciniphila and Bifidobacterium stayed considerably abundant in the fæces of Au@P-NPs receivers as compared to HFD receivers on days 2 and 3 ​PC ( i and j). The abundance of Barnesiella was found higher on day 2 ​PC in Au@P-NPs receivers ( k). The abundance of Lactobacillus was noticed lower on day 2 ​PC in Au@P-NPs receiver mice ( l). Similarly the abundance of Acinetobacter and Parabacteroides was found lower on day 2 ​PC in Au@P-NPs receivers in comparison to HFD-receivers ( m and n). These results indicate that A. muciniphila and Bifidobacterium are main microflora for enhanced energy expenditure and decreased weight gain on Au@P-NPs treatment in HFD-induced obese animals. This is backed by several earlier investigations revealing that the oral transplantation of A. muciniphila to HFD-fed animals inhibited weight gain and related metabolic disorders [61,79,81,82]. But the population size of A. muciniphila got elevated at the 3 day PC, as oxygen utilization and body mass alteration become similar between Au@P-NPs-receiver and HFD-receiver animals, indicating that reduced Lactobacillus and increased Bifidobacterium might play a key role. This is supported by earlier investigations revealing positive correlation between Lactobacillus and obesity [3,83], and negative association between Bifidobacterium and obesity [84,85]. The remains faecal suspensions from Au@P-NPs-treated and HFD-fed donor animals were combined and total phenolic content (TPC) in these suspensions was quantified [86]. We noticed 0.104 ​μg gallic acid equivalent (GAE)/mg of faeces in the slurry prepared from Au@P-NPs-treated stools (Fig. S8j). This content is 1099x lower than the TPC noticed in the aqueous extract of C. verum bark (AECV; 114.3 ​μg GAE/mg) (Fig. S8j), suggesting that the gut microbial community of Au@P-NPs recipients were responsible for the anti-obesity effect and not because of the polyphenols present in the faecal resuspensions.