An outstanding collection of contemporary homes.

Overlooking the waterside in the rural Sussex town of Horam, the Willows is an outstanding new neighbourhood of 53 contemporary two, three and four bedroom homes.

Architecturally designed with warm red bricks, large windows to bring the outside in, chic black doors, high specification interiors, easy parking and ample gardens, your home at the Willows will be a welcome rural retreat for you, as well as your friends and family.

Conveniently located for local transport links, but inviting a healthier way of living, nestled between mature trees and with refreshing countryside walks on your doorstep, this is a home to put down roots for the long-term.

Growing families will enjoy the pretty play-ground, proximity to the popular local schools and safe open spaces, whilst individuals and adventurers can make the most of the buzzy town and extensive nature trails.

A unique location to relax or ramble

Embrace a healthier lifestyle within the friendly village of Horam, a rural area in the Wealden District of East Sussex and just three miles south of the larger town of Heathfield.

Enjoy the fabulous array of independent stores, schools, and eateries, as well as the refreshing variety of countryside walks for all energy levels, from relaxing half mile strolls, to rambles of over twelve miles long.

Journey along the historic Cuckoo Trail by foot, bike, or horse. Formerly part of the Eastbourne to Tunbridge Wells railway, this local landmark closed in 1968 but is open for all to enjoy the former tracks, named after the Cuckoo Fair, which used to mark the start of the summer in the area.

Alternatively, head out for a jog at the award-winning Horam Manor Country Park which has a fabulous playpark for little ones too, or venture 20 minutes further to Eastbourne beach for a stroll along the promenade.

Keener to stay inside? Join events and classes at Horam Village Hall, make jewellery with local Goldsmith Kyle McIntosh, or spend a happy afternoon enjoying the produce of the area with a tasting at Hidden Spring Vineyard.

Find us by the weeping willow

Discover a lighter work life balance in a unique location, better connected for both work and nature.

Busy professionals can rely upon local transport, with an extensive bus network and a national trainline just 15 minutes away in the vibrant town of Polegate, providing a regular service for those journeying to London and beyond.

For those needing to drive, you can roll past The Willow’s picturesque weeping willow, calm pond, and quiet neighbourhood streets, directly on to the nearby A267 which will take you swiftly to wherever you need to go.

Families can easily reach a surprising number of first-class state and independent schools across the Horam catchment area too. Whether enticed by the peaceful nature of Maynards Green Community Primary, the impressive sports facilities of Bede’s, or the community bustle of Beacon Academy, there is a school nearby for everyone

Beyond the boundaries of work and education, Horam is the ideal hub to begin your ventures further afield. Just 6 miles to a fantastic family day out at Knockhatch Adventure Park, 8.5 miles to Herstmonceux Castle Observatory and Science centre, or 16 miles to the sunny Sussex coastline.

Find your own outstanding, contemporary home at: The Willows, Horam, East Sussex, TN21 0LJ

Enjoy high specification living

We have invested now, so you don’t need to later. We are all about the detail.

Seamlessly combining contemporary style with traditional joinery, long-lasting ceramic tiling and quality fittings from top brands Duravit, Amtico and NEFF, you can sit back safe in the knowledge that your home is ready to be enjoyed now and well into the future.