In the mid 90s, News Corporation's Fox Entertainment Group, Inc. was a strong player in Children's TV. It's Fox Kids Network, aired in the US exclusively on FOX Broadcasting Company stations 19 hours a week on Weekdays and Saturdays, and had the strong backing of hits like The Tick, Power Rangers, Goosebumps, X-Men, Eek! The Cat, Batman, and Animaniacs. After a Merger with Saban Entertainment and international expansion in 1996, Fox Kids Worldwide, Inc. became one of Fox's largest divisions. But despite its success, Fox was facing stiff competition from Cable Networks like Nickelodeon and Cartoon Network, who offered family friendly programing 24/7. For as popular as Fox Kids was, Fox and Hiam Saban knew their little broadcast Kids Network alone wasn't going to cut it, and the company decided they needed a more direct answer to Nick and CN.

Around that time, a little cable channel founded by, and later spun off from CBN known as The Family Channel, was doing well in ratings with its own niche. While it offered Kids programing, The Family Channel's strength was more with adults, who wanted a channel they can watch with their Kids. Recognizing they needed both a Cable venture, and a gimmick to distinguish itself from the other Kid-friendly cable channels, Fox Kids Worldwide saw The Family Channel as the perfect target, and in 1997, its parent company, International Family Entertainment, was sold to Fox for $1.9 Billion. IFE's Film library was merged into Twentieth Century Fox, and The Family Channel was placed under oversight of Fox Kids Worldwide, now renamed Fox Family Worldwide, Inc.

After months of retooling, and development, the Fox Family Channel launched on August 15th, 1998. Fox Family sought a dual audience. By day it would serve Kids 2-14, utilizing the already large Fox Kids programing library, and some off-network acquisitions. By Night, it'd serve the whole family similar to The Family Channel with Sitcoms, dramas, live shows and movies aimed at all ages. Fox Family quickly ordered 20 pilots for its daytime and primetime lineups, hoping to establish a bunch of hits quickly. For the daytime block, Fox Family took inspiration from an unlikely source, YTV. A Channel in Canada aimed at Kids and Youth that was similar to Nickelodeon. Live-Hosted Blocks and Canadian produced shows dominated much of the channel's early schedule as a result. Fox Kids aired several Fox Family shows, as a way to promote the Channel. Fox Family would go on to air shows such as Angela Anaconda, Donkey Kong Country, Big Wolf On Campus, S Club 7, Braceface, Totally Spies, and various reruns of Fox Kids shows.

Unfortunately the network would be plagued with struggles throughout its short 3 year run. While the network's daytime lineup did okay, finding a niche in shows aimed at "Tweens" (Kids roughly 10-13 in TV speak) the primetime lineup struggled, as the channel lost 35% of the Family Channel's audience dumping all the hit shows that made it successful. What's worse, Fox didn't even know what to replace those shows with, as the channel churned through series after series trying to find a hit for primetime. Even the daytime lineup wasn't doing as well as Fox hoped, regularly trailing behind Nick, Cartoon Network, and even Disney Channel in ratings among Kids 2-11. In 2000, Fox Family was given a facelift to address these concerns. The YTV influence was gone, and the channel adopted a sleeker, more grown up presentation that could still appeal to a younger audience. Things were starting to look up for the channel as well, the daytime block was growing in its tween viewership, and new series like State of Grace started to breathe life in its perpetually struggling primetime block. Sadly it was too little too late. The network lost so much money for Fox, and constant arguments with Hiam Saban (CEO and Co-owner of Fox Family Worldwide) made things even worse. Saban tried to buy back Fox's stake in the company, but it didn't work. Ultimately, the two parties decided to sell off the whole venture to someone else.

In July 2001, Fox agreed to sell Fox Family Worldwide, Inc. to The Walt Disney Company for $2.9 billion, more than what Fox initially paid for the channel. Disney would acquire the Fox Family Channel, Saban Entertainment, and the international Fox Kids Channels, along with all the programing and content the company owned up to that point. Fox Family became ABC Family (and Later Freeform), and the International Fox Kids Channels slowly morphed into Jetix (later Disney XD). What was left of Fox Kids in the US, was separately auctioned off to 4Kids Entertainment, Inc. in January 2002.

So what happened? Well it was pretty obvious, the channel didn't have shows worth watching. Ultimately, there was a lack of vision with Fox Family, it wasn't really sure what it was trying to be as a network. It wanted to be Nickelodeon, but it also wanted to be Nick at Nite. It was an American channel, yet it was taking influence from some Canadian network nobody in the US has heard of. It would take shows from literally anything and anywhere, and it really just felt like Fox was just cobbling together programing from nothing, without being grounded by a core philosophy or vision. Another problem was the constant Hardball between Hiam Saban and Fox over what exactly Fox Family as a company was trying to be.

So how could Fox Family have succeeded? There are a few possibilities.

1.) Launch Fox Family in a way that wouldn't have alienated The Family Channel audience - In other words, don't dump a whole channel's worth of programing just so you can put your stamp on it ASAP. Disney had the right idea when they bought the channel, they kept it mostly the same for the first year, and then slowly started putting their own name on it.

2.) Buy back Hiam's stake in FFWW - It was pretty clear that many of the problems with Fox Family, were the result of Hiam's partial ownership in the division. Convince Hiam to sell his stake in the company, and you're free. With Saban out of the picture, Fox would've had the creative freedom needed to actually find hit programing for the network.

3.) Find a core philosophy for the channel - Know what your channel is, and what shows will help define it as a brand. If your channel is grounded by a clear direction, finding successful shows becomes a lot easier. I'd also not segregate the daytime and primetime lineups as heavily either.

Fox Family is a channel that had a ton of potential, and could've done for Kids Cable, what the flagship Fox network did for broadcast. But shoddy programing, and poor management resulted in its quick death. It's ironic looking back, that Disney's entire acquisition of All Fox Entertainment assets was preceded by their purchase of Fox's failed answer to Nickelodeon.