While others were stockpiling groceries and overdosing on Netflix, Echo Splinter recorded the record they are revealing today. Today, this most unlikely of collaborations is releasing their new album, The Last Stand. The band formed during and because of the pandemic-related lockdowns. While society was going haywire, the trio of musicians that make up Echo Splinter were fortunate to find each other online.

You got lead guitarist Ameya Khare, who was in Switzerland and shared a couple of guitar demos with David Christian Bartlett, a drum programmer located in the U.S. These recordings ended up being shared online where lead singer Anders Ekenstierna discovered them. He decided to try his hand at lending these tracks some vocals, and suddenly, you had a rock band forming.

Discussing the writing and recording of The Last Stand, Khare comments:

“Growing up, we’d all imagined and dreamt that one day, maybe, it would be possible to get to a recording studio and release a single song — you know, a piece of music we could proudly proclaim, ‘hey, we’ve released some music to the world.’ Fast-forward 20-odd years and with the advancement in recording technologies, the three of us, who have never been in the same room at the same time, were able to create this work of music remotely.

“Comprised of musical ideas ranging from over a decade old to being merely a few months old when the record was being written, the songs refer to the current state of the world, gloomy as it may seem, with a glimmer of light and hope cutting through.”

The Last Stand is an amalgamation of styles and sounds that the three band members most enjoy. Most notably, it features a strong presence of hard rock, alternative metal, and post-hardcore sounds. There was no grand plan when the band members began sharing recordings remotely. The initial motivation was just to record music that they themselves would want to listen to. With no one being in the same room together, many of the songs started as solo instrumental pieces. But each member did their job very effectively, giving one another enough to work with so that it felt like a traditional collaboration. The drums and vocals took months to finetune, but they ultimately came up with both a heavy and melodic group of songs bursting with emotion, melody, and conviction.

The Last Stand Track Listing: