On the Contribution of Dnieper Ukraine Orthodox Priests to the Formation of Literary Ukrainian in the 19th c. The article deals with the contribution of the three Ukrainian Orthodox priests, Vasyl Hrechulevych (1791–1870), Stefan Opatovych (1832–1892), and Ioann Babchenko (?–?), to the formation of literary Ukrainian in the mid-19th century. The author analyzes the language of the collections of sermons and other homiletic works which were published before the Valuev Circular of 1863 in Russian-ruled Ukraine. Looking into the features of their vernacular-based idiolects, the author offers to posit their idiolects on the scale of the normalization of written Ukrainian in the 19th c.; he argues in particular that Reverend Opatovych’s idiolect is the closest to the vernacular standard of modern Ukrainian. The author proves that the contribution of the Dnieper Ukraine Orthodox priests can easily compete with that of the Greek-Catholic priests in Austria-Hungary.

The last quarter of the18th c. and the first part of the 19th century are fundamental for the development of the ‘new’ Ukrainian literary language. A correct interpretation of the historic-linguistic facts that led to the emergence of modern Ukrainian, e.g. the interaction of the dialectal substratum with the Ukrainian literary language(s), is also essential to appraise contemporary language variation and phenomena like Suržyk. This article draws attention to the relationship existing between the formation of the ‘new’ Ukrainian literary language on its vernacular base and the role south-eastern dialects played in this crucial period. Specific dialectal features, typical of the Ukrainian literary works of the late 18th and beginning of the 19th centuries, are also examined.

The purpose of the research. The purpose of the article is to clarify the place of the spiritual song in the genre system of sacred music of the main Christian denominations based on the analysis of the basic definitions of the spiritual song genre in various national traditions. The research methodology consists of a combination of comparative, historical, cultural and musical-liturgical methods, with the help of which the spiritual song was described as a component of the genre system of the European liturgical musical tradition from the Middle Ages to the present. The scientific novelty of the work lies in the fact that for the first time in Ukrainian science, based on the characteristics of the definitions of the genre of spiritual song in different national traditions and confessional centres, national and confessional features of the genre system of European sacred music were highlighted. Conclusions. The genre of spiritual song throughout the history of Christian music has been interpreted in different ways. In early Christianity, the spiritual song was interpreted as a poetic fragment of the biblical text, which came on behalf of the Old Testament or New Testament characters. This tradition has been preserved in Western Christian and Eastern Christian hymnography. In the late Middle Ages in Western Europe, the genre of spiritual songs transformed. The term «song» («cantio») began to denote musical and poetic works of the strophic form written in Latin, and later in national languages, which performed the paraliturgical function, but over time became the central musical and poetic genre of the liturgy of the Western rite, radically changing it genre system. In the Ukrainian-Belarusian lands, under the influence of the Western liturgical tradition, the term «song» as a musical and poetic work of a strophic form became the basis for defining the genre in all Christian denominations. In the Russian spiritual-song tradition, which was fundamentally different from the Ukrainian-Belarusian lack of long-term connections with the Catholic culture, the musical and poetic works of the strophic form were called psalms or spiritual verses. Key words: sacred music, spiritual song, church hymnography, genre system of liturgical music, Christian denominations.