17th Avenue All-Stars

The 17th Avenue Allstars are Colorado's premier a cappella performance; a group of passionate musicians celebrating the 31st year of the Allstars' legacy. With a fresh perspective and new talent, the Allstars bring their multifaceted, musically rich, and endlessly entertaining show to venues in Colorado and nationwide - in addition to private, corporate, and family-friendly events. The Allstars show is led by the incredible vocal stylings of Claudia McCarthy, Tristan Anderson, Alissa Kotranza, and Lily Timmons, driven by our rhythm section - Grant Hamilton and vocal percussionist Paul Lannon, and features choreography and a wide variety of songs and medleys. For a list of current repertoire and available performance options, please message us directly! Book today for your concert or special event and experience the magic that is the 17th Avenue Allstars.

Hometown: Denver, CO

5280 A Cappella

Named one of the "Top Vocal Groups" in Denver, 2019 Winners for "Best CD of the Year," and nominees in 2018 for, "Best Pop Group Of The Year" with the international Acappella Music Awards, 5280 A Cappella brings a burst of infectious energy to the stage. They take their audiences on an entertaining journey over the landscape of American music with jaunts through: rock & roll, jazz, country, folk, soul, doo-wop, sixties, eighties, nineties, and pop hits from today.

Hometown: Denver, CO

7th Avenue

From the mind of Chris Rupp, founder of Home Free and the "Chris Rupp Project," comes a brand new vocal quartet that is ready to forge a new identity in the music world. Each member has a unique musical and performance background, allowing for exciting possibilities. Combining elements of pop, swing, rockabilly, country, and much more, 7th Ave is aiming to reinvent and uproot the standard definitions of all of those genres through our innovative arrangements and fun music videos.

Aca-word

Yes we are. Formed in 2012, we have been performing original covers of everything from classic rock hits to contemporary pop tunes. As a 13 person a cappella group, we achieve a unique sound by fusing new and old music in sophisticated arrangements. We strive to bring joy to our audience and hope to share our Aca-love of singing to everyone within earshot!

Hometown: Concord, CA

Ardu

Ardu is an award-winning ensemble and a pioneer of contemporary vocal music in Ireland. This vocal band has a busy touring schedule and has so far represented Ireland in international festivals in London, Edinburgh, Finland, Croatia, Austria and Italy. Ardu regularly performs at high profile festivals in Ireland such as the City of Derry International Choir Festival (2020), MusicTown Festival (2020), K Fest (2019) and the Cork International Choral Festival (2018), where they performed alongside Swedish trio Solala. The group has featured on TV and radio including the Ray D'Arcy Show, the BBC Proms and Sing: Ultimate A Cappella on Sky One. They supported American a cappella group Straight No Chaser at the National Concert Hall, Dublin in September 2019.

Hometown: Dublin, Ireland

Backtrack

Founded in 2013, Backtrack is quickly defining itself as a powerhouse a cappella group throughout it's hometown, New York City, and beyond. This five member group performs a variety of music, with an emphasis on covers of today's top pop music.

Backtrack was originally formed to produce YouTube videos, and since its founding, the group has gained over 6.4 million views and 70,000 subscribers. Expanding from it's YouTube origins, Backtrack now performs live at music halls, corporate events, weddings and more!

Hometown: New York City, NY

Beyond Zebra

Beyond Zebra is a newly formed a cappella group who enjoys expressing unique, intricate arrangements with heartfelt emotion. Like the Dr. Seuss book On Beyond Zebra about an alphabet beyond Z, the music of Beyond Zebra takes audiences beyond what they might know and expect. When you go Beyond Zebra, who knows what wonderful things you might hear?

Hometown: San Bruno, CA

Blackout

BLACKOUT is a New York-based a cappella group reinventing the genre of a cappella music with innovative arrangements and a distinct, signature sound; delivering high-energy performances with a contemporary twist.

Since entering the a cappella scene in June 2012, BLACKOUT has performed for organizations such as the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society (LLS) and the Super Bowl Host Committee, joined fellow members of the a cappella community on stages across New York City, and produced award-winning studio recordings featured on professional a cappella compilation albums.

Hometown: New York City, NY

Blue Jupiter

Blue Jupiter's all-vocal performance is nothing short of explosive! The world-touring a cappella quartet has been described as "The real deal," by rock legend, Gene Simmons; "Simply terrific" by Scott Conant of Food Network, "Incredible!" by Jane Pauly from NBC; "Nothing short of magic," by the Sands Casino Entertainment Department, and "Simply the best music act we've ever had at our schools," by the Connecticut Public Schools Board. Blue Jupiter's energetic blend of pop lead vocals, jazzy a cappella harmony and funky beatbox has garnered standing ovations in over 40 states and around the world.

Hometown: New York City, NY

Chromatics

People often ask us how the Chromatics got started. It's a complicated story, but here's a brief summary:

Back in 1993, a group called the OK Chorale was formed at NASA'S Goddard Space Flight Center by Anne Raugh and Steve Leete. The OK Chorale was 12 members strong and sang mostly doo-wop tunes, standards, and classics from Sesame Street. None of the current Chromatics were in the group at its inception, but Padi Boyd and Karen Smale joined in 1993, followed by Alan Smale and Deb Nixon in 1994.

After numerous further changes in personnel, including the departure of co-founder Anne Raugh, the group decided to refocus and reinvent itself as The Chromatics. The Chromatics were incorporated in 1995, and have been performing continuously under that name ever since.

Hometown: Greenbelt, MD

Chromatix

Chromatix is a nine-member a cappella group based in Madison, WI, consisting of vocalists Taryn, Erin, Isolde, Melanie, Daan, Kyle, Jason, Danny and Chris. The group started in November 2014 and is known for their tight harmonies and stunning arrangements of contemporary pop and alternative songs. In addition to participating in the citywide musical festival Make Music Madison every year, Chromatix has entertained audiences with their music at several local venues.

Hometown: Madison, WI

Club For Five

Club For Five challenges conventional wisdom about the capability of the human voice. Their unique arrangements and original compositions combine jazz, pop, rock, and even classical music in such a chic and unique way, that they create a musical genre all their own.

During its relatively short career as a group, the band has performed with such distinguished ensembles as the legendary American vocal group "Manhattan Transfer" and the Finnish Radio Symphony Orchestra. Club For Five performs mainly in Finland but has also held concerts around Europe and in Asia. In the near future, the band will perform in such places as Germany, France, Ireland, Peoples Republic of China, and in various venues in North America (to name but a few).

Hometown: Helsinki, Finland

Collective Measures

We are a co-ed post-collegiate A Cappella group in the Boston area in our 20's and early 30's who love to sing and have fun together. We enjoy performing for our friends and family at different venues around Boston and when we aren't doing that we are singing at different events like weddings, corporate parties, or even wedding proposals! We arrange our own songs and enjoy performing a wide variety of styles to ensure each member of the audience can connect to at least one song!

Hometown: Boston, MA

Current

Founded in January 2011, we are presently a 12-strong group of a cappella-philes - mostly college group alums - now kicking off our eighth year on the scene. What we loved most about our former groups has been where we've always strived to start and end: a solid sonic blend, with some A-major value placed on camaraderie in the process - plus as much stage action as we can stir up.

Hometown: New York City, NY

Echo A Cappella

We are a semi-professional a cappella group here in New York City that pulls together singers from multiple different walks of life. Although we all have our day jobs, our love of music brought us together and Echo was formed.

Aside from working in a range of different fields, we also travel around the NYC metropolitan area performing a cappella covers of yesterday and today's hits.

Hometown: New York City, NY

Edoens

The Edoenss an Indonesian a cappella vocal ensemble founded in August 2021. The group consists of six dedicated singers - 1 soprano, 2 altos, 2 tenors, and 1 bass - covering a really broad vocal range from C2 to D6 (and possibly higher!). Its name is taken from a playful Sundanese word 'edoen' (edun), which means 'wow' as well as 'crazy'. The word was a label given to a social group we, the six singers, were part of during our college years; most possibly in a reference to our 'unusual' behaviours, ha! As a sextet of singers who are serious about our music but without taking ourselves too seriously, the name seems fitting.

Hometown: Bandung, Indonesia

Eight Tracks

The Eight Tracks are a close-knit, semi-professional, Boston based a cappella group who bring a wealth of musical experience and passion to their singing. They perform regularly around the greater Boston area, singing energetic arrangements of crowd-pleasing hits and popular classics. Their debut performance was in the Fall of 2013 at the Hard Rock Cafe in Boston, where they took third place/best vocal group among 11 other acts. For The Eight Tracks, it's all about sounding tight and letting loose.

Hometown: Cambridge, MA

Emerald City Voices

Emerald City Voices is a Seattle-based a cappella ensemble whose members have been singing together since 2005. Originally started as a group of friends who met in a community choir, they now sing extensively during the holidays, at Mariners games, and around the Seattle area, as well as host multiple concerts benefiting local charities. The members of ECV are committed to high-quality a cappella music, entertaining performances, and having fun together!

Hometown: Seattle, WA

Flex Pitch

FLEX PITCH is an a cappella group based out of NYC. Originally formed as a virtual acapella group during the pandemic, they have sung in numerous different styles of music including jazz, R&B, and pop. After coming in second at the New York Harmony Sweepstakes FLEX PITCH is ready to take on the live stage with their high energy and creativity!

Hometown: New York City, NY

Halfway to Midnight

Halfway to Midnight is a co-ed band of musical misfits who, having missed the thrill of the a cappella world and desiring an outlet to strengthen our individual instruments, serendipitously found each other in the midst of the great big beautiful Bay Area and begun gathering weekly to share in the blend of our voices together. Our life stories are as varied as our voices yet we find common ground in our love of instrument-free music-making and we truly hope you like what you hear.

Hometown: San Francisco, CA

Hot Teas

The Hot Teas is an a cappella group based in beautiful Vancouver, BC. Upon graduation from UBC (for some, with two degrees), we collectively realized that the only way to fill the a cappella-shaped hole in our hearts was to start a group of our own. While we may be young professionals by day, each singer has a musical history that includes at least five years of a cappella. Our group rehearses over cups of hot tea and laughter, blending friendship and a love of harmony into a signature style. We sing everything from pop to indie rock, and bring talent and a vast range of experience to the stag

Hometown: Vancouver, BC, Canada

Impromptu

Impromptu is an 8 member contemporary a cappella group based out of Indianapolis, Indiana. Founded in May of 2017, several members met at Ball State University or were good friends who wanted to come together, hang out and make music. Their unique sound is the result of a tight and soulful blend, some R&B and Jazz influences and a little sensuality.

Hometown: Indianapolis, IN

Lake Shore Jive

The members of LSJ come from various professional backgrounds, but we find common ground through our love of music and a cappella. We have sung at various venues, both publicly and privately, including major professional sporting events, stages at Navy Pier and once at Millenium Park! Lake Shore Jive is available for hire for private events, and our vast repertoire makes for an enjoyable time for all.

Hometown: Chicago, IL

Minor Mischief A Cappella

Minor Mischief A Cappella is a new ensemble of old friends, formed in 2020. The group is comprised of singers Christina Case (mezzo-soprano), Luke Ericksen (bass & vocal percussion), Ricky Pierce (tenor), Nathan Ringdal (bass), and Anna Torgerson (soprano).

Though the quintet itself is new, all of its musicians have been singing together for almost ten years, beginning their musical journeys together within the Vocal Jazz ensembles at the University of Minnesota, Duluth. With UMD Vocal Jazz, they have performed in over 50 concerts together, including most prominently as an opening act at the legendary Apollo Theater in New York, and in St. Mary's Cathedral in Limerick, Ireland.

Hometown: Minneapolis, MN

None of the Above

Celebrating 15 plus years of music-making and camaraderie, None of the Above (NOTA) is an a cappella octet performing an eclectic mix of early polyphony, cutting-edge modern harmony, familiar folk songs, uplifting spirituals, catchy pop tunes, and lush jazz standards. Based in Wellesley, MA, NOTA has performed all over New England at coffeehouses, libraries, churches and other aca-friendly performance spaces. We have won multiple cultural council grant awards in Natick and Wellesley, MA for our diverse programming - including our annual showcase concert, Spring Fev-ah. In 2009, NOTA took third place here at Boston Sweeps, our first and only appearance to date. Our wildly popular inaugural CD, "multiple choice", is now in its second printing, and is available at numerous online outlets. We are delighted to perform today for such a great aca-savvy audience!

Hometown: Wellesley, MA

Offbook A Cappella

Step 1) Get the music. 2) Learn your part. 3) Try to be Offbook! Offbook is a new a cappella group based in the Bay Area. This 10-person singing collective started when a contingent of Facebook employees, who share a love of making music with their mouths, wanted to continue their passion for singing outside the office. Offbook sings a wide variety of music from top 40 hits to classic rock, pop, and more. Despite being new on the scene, they are determined to make a name for themselves. OffBook is excited to share their love for music to all ears!

Hometown: San Francisco, CA

On Air Vocal Band

In the spring of 2013, when we met to practise singing Stefan's adaptation of the folk song "Wenn ich ein Voglein war", we couldn't have anticipated where this would take us within a very short time. In our first year, we went on to win two major competitions in Denmark and Austria, so that the call for our own concert programme quickly became loud.

Our first CD "Moon" appeared alongside the programme. To our great surprise it was awarded the prize as the best a cappella album in Europe. Our version of the song Wolf & I was even distinguished as the "Best Pop/Rock Song of the Year 2015" by the international a cappella organisation CASA.

We are inspired and grateful for everything we have been allowed to experience in our brief band history and are looking forward to everything that might still come.

Hometown: Berlin, Germany

Outpour

Outpour is composed of eight voices from all around the greater Seattle area. As live performances became available in 2022, Outpour aimed to emphasize self-expression, interconnectedness, and collaboration with audiences and other musicians in the PNW. Our set is a diverse collection of pop, r&b, jazz, and nostalgia, and each song is arranged by one of our very own creative members. Originally formed during the pandemic, the initial focus of the group was to bring awareness to resources in their local communities by pairing information with vintage and contemporary pop songs. Today, the group continues to look for ways to collaborate and connect with their community.

Hometown: Western Washington, WA

Pentatonix

Pentatonix (often abbreviated as PTX) is an American a cappella group of five vocalists originating from Arlington, Texas; Scott Hoying, Kirstin Maldonado, Mitch Grassi, Kevin Olusola and Matt Sallee. Avi Kaplan was formerly a member of the group. Their work - mostly in, but not limited to, the pop music style - consists of covers of existing songs, sometimes in the form of medleys, and some original material. Their music is defined by their own arrangement style, a strong presence of low bass vocals, and a diverse range of vocal percussion. In 2011 they won the 3rd season of "The Sing-Off". This won them $200,000 and a recording contract. Since then Pentatonix has been selling out shows all over the world.

Hometown: Arlington, TX

Rajaton

The Finnish word Rajaton translates as "boundless" - a word that so accurately describes the way this six-voice a cappella ensemble approaches music. Regularly performing over 100 concerts and workshops each year, Rajaton exposes audiences to the kind of diversity of repertoire, singing style, and stage presentation that has made them a phenomenon on the world stage.

Performing at concert halls, churches, jazz and choral festivals, this distinct group of musicians approaches all styles of music with the same level of commitment and integrity, making it difficult to imagine an audience that Rajaton could not inspire, or a type of music Rajaton could not make its own.

Hometown: Helsinki, Finland

Roomful of Teeth

Roomful of Teeth is an eight-voice vocal ensemble that embraces the full spectrum of vocal practices and, through an on-going commissioning project, develops new compositions for voices.

Founded in 2008 by singer, conductor and composer Brad Wells, Roomful of Teeth is built on the premise that the membranes that separate one vocal technique or style from another are permeable, that any singer can learn any "non-native" singing language.

International experts in a wide range of vocal techniques - throat singers Ayan-ool Sam and Sean Quirk of Alash, belting coach Gayle Lockwood, and master yodeler Kerry Christensen - trained the singers in their respective styles. Next, composers Judd Greenstein of NOW Ensemble and New Amsterdam Records, Rinde Eckert, finalist for the 2007 Pulitzer Prize in Drama, and Brian Simalchik of Williams College wrote music tailored specifically to the singers and their now wider range of vocal techniques. The collective performed these works, as well as compositions by members of the ensemble, (all music written in the space of eight days) to a sell out audience on Friday, June 26 at Mass MoCA.

Hometown: New York City, NY

Root7

Root 7 is a contemporary a cappella group located in the Burlington, Vermont area. We are a group of working professionals who make time to embrace the joys of singing with one another. We perform regularly throughout Vermont, including at the annual Burlington Independence Day celebration, 51 Main in Middlebury, the Champlain Valley Fair, the Common Ground Center in Starksboro, local farmers markets, weddings, private holiday parties, and at many other events, large and small. We have a lot of fun singing together, and we love to share that with new audiences.

Hometown: Burlington, VT

Scales of the City

We're Scales of the City, a San Francisco co-ed a cappella group that performs all around the Bay Area. Based on the model of a collegiate glee club, we're a group of performers who love singing pop music from our childhoods and today, with a sprinkling of showtunes just for kicks. We're all about making great music to share, and having a great time doing it.

Hometown: San Francisco, CA

Seatown Sound

Seatown Sound is a refuge for a cappella nerds for whom college is only a happy memory. Part social group, part professional chorus, our goal is to bring community members together to create and perform a unique variety of challenging choral pieces. Our group draws inspiration from independently-labeled artists, popular and traditional works, as well as the work of members and friends. United by our love of music, we've created a collaborative community of talented performers.

Hometown: Seattle, WA