DEATH OF MEHEMLT ALI.

The celebrated ex-Pasha of Egypt,

Mehemet Ali, died at Alexandria,

and on the following day his

body was taken up to Cairo, where

he was buried in the new

alabaster mosque built by himself in

the citadel. The funeral procession

from the palace at Ras-el-teen to the

canal was attended by a great concourse

of people, the European consuls in

uniform, with many of the European

residents, and a great number of troops

with arms reversed On emerging from

the palace the coffin was laid at the

foot of the grand marble staircase, the

attendants gathered round, and the chief

mufti, a venerable old man, advanced,

raised his hands, and amidst profound

silence, repeated three times, with a

pause for mental reflection between

each, "Allah hoo akbar" (God is

great) ; after which he twice repeated

" Salem aleykoun " (Peace be with

you) ; and then the procession started,

the principal officers and grandees

emulating each other for the honour of

carrying the coffin on their shoulders.

On passing the harem, a separate

building a little to the north of the

palace, the shrieks and lamentations

of the women were most piercing.

Twenty-six buffaloes were killed and

distributed among the poor, with twenty-

six camel loads of bread and dates, and

a considerable sum of money.

At Cairo there was no ceremony

attending the conveyance of the Pasha's

body from the Nile to its final resting

place, and even Abbas Pasha, the

present Viceroy, joined the funeral

only at the mosque.

Mehemet Ali's first severe illness

occurred in January, 1848, when he

proceeded to Malta and Naples, where

having rallied a little, he returned to

Egypt in April, improved in bodily

health, but with his constitution shat-

tered and his mental faculties totally

prostrated. The cares of the govern-

ment were, therefore, transferred to his

son Ibrahim Pasha, who was succeeded

at his death by Abbas Pasha.

Mehemet Ali is sincerely regretted

both by the European residents and the

natives of Egypt.

The following details respecting the

career of, certainly, one of the most

remarkable men of the age, will prove

interesting at this moment:—

Mehemet Ali was born in the town

of Cavalla in Roumelia, the ancient

Macedonia. In Mohammedan coun-

tries the natives keep no reckoning of

their age, but it was commonly said he

was born in 1769, thus making him at

his death of the age of 80 years, which

may be considered correct within a year

or two.

Mehemet Ali first commenced life as

a tobacconist in his native town, but he

afterwards volunteered into the army,

to which his taste was more congenial.

In his new career he soon obtained

high favour with the Governor of

Cavalla by his efficient assistance in

quelling and dispersing a band of

pirates, and on the death of his com-

manding officer he was appointed to

succeed him, and married his widow.

In 1792 the town of Cavalla having

been called upon by the Sultan to pro-

vide its contingent of 300 men for the

expulsion of the French from Egypt,

the Governor sent the required number,

headed by his son, with Mehemet Ali

under his orders; but shortly after

landing at Aboukir the son returned to

Roumelia and left Mehemet Ali in

command. In all the engagements

with the French Mehemet Ali distin-

guished himself by his conduct and

valour. He rapidly rose in rank, and

his lofty spirit gained him a strong

ascendancy over the minds of his

soldiers.

After the evacuation of Egypt by the

French in September, 1801, the Sultan

appointed Mohammed Khosrew Viceroy

of Egypt, who has since been several

times Prime Minister at Constantinople,

and between whom and Mehemet Ali

there always existed an inveterate

hatred.

The Mamelukes were, at that time,

actively engaged in endeavouring to re-

cover their ascendency, which had been

overthrown by the French. Mehemet

Ali joined their faction, and after various

changes of fortune, under successive

governors of the province, the inhabi-

tants of Cairo, suffering from the disor-

ders of a military insurrection, deposed

Khourshid Pasha—addressed themselves

to Mehemet Ali for protection, and

made him viceroy. He was subsequently

installed in the Pashalic of Egypt in

1806, on condition that he would send

to the Sultan 4000 purses, which repre-

sented, at that time, the sum of

about £240,000 sterling. The

Pashalic of Egypt was then commonly

called the Pashalic of Cairo, and it ex-

tended only to Middle Egypt and the

Delta ; Upper Egypt being divided into

several districts, administered by the

Mameluke Beys; and Alexandria, with

a part of the western province, by a

Pasha independent of the Pasha of Cairo.

A few months after the installation of

Mehemet Ali, in the Pashalic of Egypt.

the Porte consented to give him, also,

the Pashalic of Alexandria, as a reward

for the services he had rendered to the

Ottoman Empire, in 1807, on the occa-

sion of the evacuation of Lower Egypt

and the city of Alexandria, by the

English.

In 1808 Mehemet Ali received orders

from the Porte, to attack and disperse

the Wahabees, a fanatical sect of the

Mohammedan religion, who had pillaged

the holy cities of Mecca and Medina.

Before engaging in this war, and draw-

ing his troops out of Egypt, the Viceroy

determined upon putting a final end to

the power of his old allies, the Mame-

lukes. Accordingly, on the 1st of

March, 1811, the Mamelukes were in-

vited, in a body, to the citadel at Cairo,

to attend at the investure of the Viceroy 's

son Toussoon, as chief of the expedition

against the Wahabees. When the cere-

mony was over, the Mamelukes mounted

their horses, but on reaching the citadel

gates, they found them closed, and a

sudden discharge of musketry, fronm

soldiers placed on the walls, completely

annihilated them. A great many Mame-

lukes were put to death, at the same

time, in the provinces. It has been

computed that 470, with their chief

Ibrahim Bey, perished in the citadel;

and in the city and throughout the

country, no less than 1200 were killed.

Thus ended the power of these formida-

ble chiefs, who had kept Egypt in a

state of anarchy and warfare, ever since

the year 1382.

After the destruction of the Mame-

lukes, Mehemet Ali made himself master

of Upper Egypt. He obtained from the

Sublime Porte the government of that

part of the country, and, at the same

time considerably increased the land-tax

and the duties of customs on the internal

trade.

In the Autumn of 1811, Mehemet Ali

sent his army into Arabia, against the

Wahabees. This war lasted six years,

cost the Viceroy immense sums of

money and a great number of men, and

was finally brought to a close by Ibra-

him Pasha. In 1813 Mehemet Ali

himself went to the Hedjaz for a time,

to hasten the result of the expedition.

During his absence the Porte, jealous of

his power secretly appointed Lateef

Pasha Viceroy of Egypt, but Mahom-

med Bey, Mehemet Allis Minister of

War, pretending to enter into the views

of Lateef Pasha, engaged him to declare

himself publicly Viceroy of Egypt, and

then decapitated him.

In 1815, Mehemet Ali, convinced of

the great advantages of discipline and

military tactics in the art of warfare,

resolved upon having his army properly

drilled, but his soldiers were very ad-

verse to this measure, and threatened an

insurrection. He therefore sent his

mutinous troops into Ethiopia under

his third son, Ismael Pasha, who, on

that occasion, conquered the provinces

of Dongola, Berber, Shendy, Sennaar,

and Cordofan, whilst he raised a new

army, which was drilled by French and

Italian officers. He then offered the

Sultan to assist in quelling the Greek

insurrection against the Porte, and on

the 16th of July, 1824, Mehemet Ali's

fleet, consisting of 163 vessels, sailed for

the Mores, under the command of

Ibrahim Pasha, who for three years

kept the country m subjection, but was

obliged to retire after the battle of Na-

varino on the 20th of October, 1827.

Mehemet Ali then turned his thoughts

to obtaining possession of Syria, and six

thousand Egyptians having emigrated

to that country, he demanded the resti-

tution of them from Abdallah Pasha,

then Governor of Acre. The reply he

obtained was, that the emigrants were

subjects of the Sublime Porte, and that

they were in the Sultan's dominions as

well in Syria as in Egypt. The Vice-

roy sent him word that he himself would

come and tax his six thousand subjects

"and one man more." Accordingly,

on the 2nd of November, 1831, Mehe-

met Ali sent into Syria a powerful army

under the command of his son, Ibrahim

Pasha, who in a few months reduced the

whole country to submission. On this,

the Porte declared Mehemet Ali a rebel,

and sent a strong army into Syria; but

Ibrahim Pasha's troops invariably over-

came the Sultan's, and several important

battles were fought, which insured to

the Egyptians the possession of the

country. The European powers inter-

fered, and under their guarantee, peace

was signed on the 14th of May, 1833.

Syria and the district of Adana were

cened to Mehemet Ali, in conjunction

with the Pashalic of Egypt, on his

acknowledging himself a vassal of the

Sultan, and engaging to remit to the

Porte the same tribute as the former

Pashas of Syria. According to this

arrangement Mehenet Ali paid for

Egypt 12,000 purses; Syria and Adana

18,000 purses; and Candia 2,000 purses;

making together 32,000 purses, or

£160,000 sterling per annum.

Mehemet Ali continued in the quiet

possession of Syria until 1849, but the

Porte disliked very much the occupa-

tion of that country by the Viceroy of

Egypt, so that after organising an army

and a strong fleet in the beginning of

1820, the Sultan Mahmoud sent his

troops into Syria under the command of

Hafiz Pasha to expel the Egyptians,

but Ibrahim Pasha proved too powerful

for bim, and the Turkish army had to