Georgian National University SEU will host a presentation of the book titled ‘Handbook on Violence against Women and Children, and Combating Domestic Violence’ and a screening of a documentary on women and the progress and challenges of domestic violence on November 3.

The SEU Faculty of Law is one of the first to offer the subject ‘Legal Aspects of Violence Against Women and Domestic Violence’ as an academic course with more than 200 successful undergraduate students so far. The handbook will help students to apply the knowledge gained within the mentioned subject in their future professional activities.

The handbook is intended for students of the Faculty of Law, Social Sciences and Humanities, professors working in the field, as well as practitioners working on issues of violence against women and domestic violence, and other persons interested in this issue. The Handbook was published with the support of USAID/PROLoG.

The handbook provides explanations of existing legislation on violence against women and children and domestic violence, as well as strategies for enforcing legal instruments to combat violence, consistently and comprehensively addressing issues based on specific examples and court decisions.

16:00 - Opening of the event and welcome speech.

Speakers: Anna Phirtskhalashvili, Vice-Rector of SEU for Scientific Research.

Giorgi Chkheidze, Project Manager of ‘Promoting Rule of Law in Georgia’ (PROLoG) Activity.

Part I: Assessing progress and challenges in the field of violence against women and domestic violence through a documentary.

Moderator: Goga Khatiashvili, invited lecturer at SEU, author of the handbook.

Speaker: Tamar Dekanosidze, representative of the Eurasia Region - Equality Now.

Open discussion / exchange of views.

Part II: Presentation of the handbook.

Speakers: Tea Jugheli, Dean of the SEU Faculty of Law.

Goga Khatiashvili, invited lecturer at Georgian National University SEU, author of the handbook.

18:00 - Closing of the event.

The event will be held in open space in full compliance with the Covid-19 regulations. Those wishing to attend the event will have the opportunity to visit us on the spot or participate remotely.

Address: 9 Tsinandali St, Tbilisi, Georgia, Georgian National University SEU new campus.

Attendance at the event is free for registered students.