Quiz Answer Key and Fun Facts

1. In the opening scene, who confronted Griffin at David's Project Orpheus facility?

Answer: JR Chandler

Griffin arrived at David's lab where he perfected his medicinal skills to bring near dead people back to life. JR followed him there after getting the location from his private investigator. It was JR's belief that David had Babe stashed there. JR attacked Griffin but Griffin knocked him out via a sedative.

2. At Zach and Kendall's home, who mentioned that it had been so long since she attended a family barbecue?

Answer: Marissa Tasker

Marissa was over at Zach and Kendall's place with Bianca as they all planned on holding a barbecue. She stated how long it had been since she was at a family barbecue due to all the issues her family had faced in the past several months. She then sat down to get close to Bianca.

3. Zach and Ryan held a private meeting since the two of them planned to start a new business together. They signed documents relinquishing the casino with which person present?

Answer: Jack Montgomery

Kendall and Greenlee commented on how odd it seemed that Zach and Ryan would discuss business given all they had suffered lately. Zach and Ryan spoke of creating a brand new enterprise, which would involve them giving up the casino. Jack provided them legal counsel over this decision and therefore had official documents pertaining to this deal that both men signed in this episode with Jack right beside them.

4. Early on, Kendall complained to Bianca about which person's book?

Answer: Erica Kane

Erica wanted to publish a book detailing her experience in captivity along with other past stories and Kendall informed Bianca in the episode that she read it. According to Kendall, Erica divulged far too many private secrets which she felt nobody should be privy to, save for a few close family members and friends. Bianca agreed with her after hearing just what Erica disclosed in her latest memoir.

5. Erica shared the story about the time when Kendall confessed to being her daughter.

Answer: True

Erica spoke personally on the time when Kendall broke down to her about being the daughter she gave up for adoption. She reflected on how hurt and angry Kendall was at the time. However, Erica was exuberant at the progress they made over the years to which Erica considers Kendall a gift.

6. Marissa admitted to Bianca that there was nothing in Erica's book which would change her feelings about her.

Answer: True

Bianca and Marissa went to Krystal's to discuss what Erica spoke of in her book and Bianca had the manuscript with her. Marissa heard about Erica's details upsetting Bianca and was there to comfort her. However, Marissa assured her that nothing Erica could ever write of would change the connection she has with her.

The two spent a little bit more time at Krystal's before heading back to Zach and Kendall's home.

7. Who visited David while he was in jail?

Answer: JR Chandler

After JR came to, he saw there was nothing left at David's facility, prompting him to visit the guy in jail. JR demanded to know where Babe was since he figured David had her and this was when he also informed him about finding the lab. David refused to tell JR anything about who he was treating via his Project Orpheus methods.

8. When Erica mentioned making a movie on her book, Kendall said that which actress should play her?

Answer: Sarah Michelle Gellar

Erica spoke to Kendall, Bianca and more about her upcoming movie based on her latest book. Erica stated she would not hold back on putting into the film what she wanted there, even if it meant furor from her daughters. Kendall suggested that Sarah Michelle Gellar should portray her.

This was a tongue in cheek reference to Gellar originating the role of Kendall in the 1990s. The other three actresses mentioned in the multiple choice section also played characters on "All My Children".

9. Jack spoke personally about a depressing moment in his and Erica's relationship. Which one?

Answer: When he testified at Bianca's custody hearing in the early 1990s

Jack had a personal moment to recollect all the times he and Erica had over their twenty plus year courtship. The first instance which he brought forth was the very sad moment in the early 1990s during Bianca's custody hearing. Erica urged Jack to lie on the witness stand about their relationship so as to help her case. Jack testified about Erica's wanting him to perjure himself, resulting in her losing custody of Bianca. Jack reflected on this as being just one obstacle he and Erica overpowered, crediting their strength as people to not let anything tear them apart.

10. The final montage included clips of the Kane family and their personal friends over the years as they all gathered for a picture at Zach and Kendall's home. What was the final clip which was aired?

Answer: Jack and Erica sailing off on their honeymoon in 2005

To reflect on the Kane clan and their closest friends, the show put together an assortment of clips over the years. Some of the clips seen were of Erica's intervention, Zach and Kendall sharing a passionate kiss on New Year's and numerous intimate family moments. The montage ended on the shot of Jack and Erica sailing off on a beautiful yacht to jump start their honeymoon back in 2005.

Source: Author CAGuy0206

This quiz was reviewed by FunTrivia editor Gamemaster1967 before going online.

Any errors found in FunTrivia content are routinely corrected through our feedback system.