Drew Sidora has been sharing one exciting update after the next about her singing career. On Part Part 2 of the Real Housewives of Atlanta Season 15 reunion, the multihyphenate performed her emotional new song, "Throw Us Away." Shortly thereafter, she confirmed she will open Tamar Braxton's October 27 concert at Atlanta’s Buckhead Theatre.

“This week has been about walking in my purpose,” Drew captioned a September 12 Instagram post. “I am pleased to announce that I will be opening for [Tamar Braxton] ATL spot on her Love & War 10th Anniversary Tour… I’m so grateful for you, Tamar! If only you knew your new song [‘Changed’] got me through!”

But that's not where it ends. In a recent Instagram post, Drew shared a photo of herself in the studio, holding up a cocktail in a coupe. The celebratory drink hinted at some big news, which the RHOA cast member elaborated on in her caption.

Drew Sidora's career update

To caption the October 9 post, Drew wrote: "Announcement: Cheers and a toast to this amazing record!! 'Throw Us Away': The Visual is coming soon! Hold tight, I promise." And in the meantime, she teased more new music.

"'SHIFT': The Album coming soon!" she wrote. "This song is so personal to me and I’m so grateful that you all are receiving it in such a positive way."

In a previous statement to The Daily Dish, Drew shared more about her career, and what she plans to do next. “I’ve recorded so much music. At first, I was planning an EP, but now I have so much story to tell and so much music to express that I am finalizing my first full-length project," she said.

"As you all know, I’ve been in music for a while, but the timing now seems so right. I used to be so discouraged at what didn’t work out, but it’s all about God’s timing. Because I am in this shift in my life, I plan to tentatively title my debut project SHIFT.”

Indeed, Drew is experiencing some shifts, In her final interview for RHOA Season 15, the performer opened up about her split from Ralph Pittman. "A lot of things have been happening over the course of the marriage," Drew said during her interview. "And honestly, things were just not getting better." She added: "I lost my voice in the marriage and I allowed things that no woman should ever allow."