Entrepreneur, actress, singer, mom? That’s so Drew! Prior to becoming a cast member on The Real Housewives of Atlanta, Drew Sidora made a name for herself by starring in movies and TV shows from the time she was young.

Here’s a look at her history in the entertainment industry.

Drew Sidora's First Acting Roles

As a child, Drew was the youngest member of the “Hook Players Theater Ensemble” in Hollywood, California, which had a residency at the Richard Pryor Theater.

Her first on-screen role came at age nine, when she had a small credited role in the 1995 made-for-TV movie Divas, about an all-Black girl group.

Drew Sidora's First TV Series: That's So Raven

Fans might also remember Drew from That's So Raven, where she played recurring character Chantel during Seasons 4 and 5, which first aired in 2004 and 2005.

She also had guest spots on What I Like About You, Without a Trace, and Girlfriends between 2003 and 2006.

Drew Sidora's Early Movie Roles: White Chicks and Step Up

Drew made her first silver screen appearance in the Wayans Brothers movie White Chicks in 2004, playing Shaunice.

But many fans consider Step Up — the 2006 Channing Tatum and Jenna Dewan-helmed dance movie that spawned plenty of sequels — to be Drew's first big break. In the film, Drew played Lucy Avila, the best friend of Jenna's character, Nora.

"I love Drew," said Jenna during an April 2022 appearance on Watch What Happens Live with Andy Cohen. "She was so professional, so sweet, so talented, the best singer. I loved her."

Besides showcasing her dance moves, Drew also showed off her singing chops in the film and had two songs featured on the official Step Up soundtrack: "For the Love" and "'Til the Dawn."

Drew Sidora's Role in The Game — and Her Intro to RHOA

In 2007, Drew played a fictionalized version of herself on Seasons 1 and 2 The Game, the Girlfriends spin-off about a professional football player, Derwin Davis (Pooch Hall), and his medical student girlfriend, Melanie Barnett (Tia Mowry), who followed him to San Diego and became involved with the wives and girlfriends of other players. The show's version of Drew was a singer with whom Derwin had an affair, causing him and Melanie to break up the first time.

While on the show, Drew spent time with fellow actress and former Atlanta Housewife Eva Marcille — who played herself in the Season 1 episode in which Drew's character was introduced — who introduced her to RHOA.

Drew Sidora as T-Boz in CrazySexyCool: The TLC Story

Drew played Tionne "T-Boz" Watkins in the 2013 made-for-TV movie CrazySexyCool, which chronicled the girl group TLC's '90s rise to fame. In the film, she worked alongside Keke Palmer and Rochelle Aytes, who played TLC members Chilli and Pebbles respectively.

The film had a broader impact on Drew's life: While promoting CrazySexyCool, she met her now-estranged husband, Ralph Pittman.

"I met him when I was on the press tour," Drew revealed during an early Season 13 RHOA interview. "Three months later, we end up going for lunch. Six months later, we were married."

"It was amazing," she added. "It was a match made in heaven."

Drew Sidora's TV and Movie Roles after CrazySexyCool

Drew starred as a main cast member on JD Lawrence's Community Service (2013), One Love (2014), and Hindsight (2015). Most recently, she worked on the TV movie Line Sisters, which was released in 2022.

In April 2023, Drew shared some on-set photos to prove that she's thriving in her acting career.

"In my element," the multi-hyphenate wrote.

Drew Sidora in Kandi Burruss and Todd Tucker's The Pass

On August 25, Drew's RHOA cast mate Kandi Burruss and her husband Todd Tucker announced their latest movie venture, The Pass, which stars Drew Sidora and will stream exclusively on Peacock beginning Sunday, August 27.

Drew plays Nina, who is married to Maurice (Rob Riley) when the two give each other one night off from fidelity — a ‘hall pass’” — for their anniversary.

“Their lives quickly turn upside down as the one night of pleasure becomes a tool of deception,” a press release for the film states.

As viewers saw on RHOA Season 15, Drew plays a character who decides to use her hall pass to have a sexual relationship with a woman. Kandi also appears in the film as one of Nina’s friends who poses the idea of the hall pass in the first place, and asks Nina if she’s “ready to come to the dark side” in the trailer, which can be viewed below.

Drew's Music Career

During an August 2022 interview on the Up and Adam! YouTube channel, Drew revealed she'd been in the studio working on music. She'd also hinted at the songs to come in a May 2022 Instagram post.

"I'm super excited about that, because I've been doing music my whole life but it never 'happened' for me the way I thought it would," she said in the interview. "Now I just feel like, with everything I've been through [ ... ] I'm pouring that into my music."

Her newest single, "Already Know," was released in September 2022.

"SURPRISE. So we did a thing," Drew wrote via Instagram about the project. "I’m beyond grateful and excited to share something I’ve been passionate about throughout my entire career."

Drew Sidora's Time as a Real Housewife

Drew joined RHOA full-time in Season 13.

When asked to compare being a Housewife to acting in the interview above, Drew said the experiences are polar opposites.

"When I'm doing my theatrical work, it's a certain peace that comes over me. It's so zen and I'm in my zone and I'm so happy and everyone's so supportive," she said. "Obviously, being [on RHOA] is completely different."