The Italian Cultural Institute, in collaboration with l’École de Langues dell’Université Laval and the Québec Committee of the Dante Alighieri Society, are pleased to present the conference given by the Italian philosopher Diego Fusaro, entitled “Antonio Gramsci: the dissent of thought“.

Thursday January 17, 2019 at 7pm

Université Laval

Pavillon Charles De Koninck, Hall 3155

Québéc

The conference will be held in Italian

Antonio Gramsci is, above all, a fruitfully “untimely” author who is dissonant with respect to the spirit of our time. Indeed, what underlies the view that the present time of economic fanaticism has of Gramsci is the desire to remove his revolutionary passion, the ideal of the creation of a “future city” that is detached from the nightmare of capitalism and of its universal commodification. His timely untimeliness is the very reason for the failure of every perspective that today aspires to lay claim to Gramsci’s thought and to assimilate his message.

Diego Fusaro (Turin, 1983) teaches History of Philosophy at the Institute for Superior Strategical and Political Studies in Milan, of which he is also a member of the scientific steering committee. Graduated in Turin in History of Philosophy, he gained a PhD in Philosophy of History at the San Raffaele University of Milan in 2011 with a thesis on Reinhart Koselleck. He has been doing research at the University of Bielefeld in Germany. In 2017 he obtained the national academic teaching qualification as associate professor in History of Philosophy. Trained by Costanzo Preve and Gianni Vattimo in Turin, he is a Philosophy of History’s scholar; structures of historical temporality, focusing in particular on Fichte, Hegel, Marx’s thoughts and German “Conceptual history” are also his favorite subjects. He deepens the verbalization and praxis of a “critical history of ideas” as a discipline that, diachronically, takes into considerations rifts and discontinuities that arise in the transmission of the cultural and symbolic forms of given Culture; and that, synchronously, looks carefully to the connection coming at every historic moment between currents of thought and cultural codes on one hand, and the objective conditions of production and power, on the other. In order to picture out a grid rich in co-implications, he assumes as a privileged subject of analysis, the “exchanging zone” between ideas and reality, between conceptual and socio-political systems.