Chung Hwa Middle School, BSB Holds Walkathon

The Chung Hwa Middle School in the capital this morning held a walkathon in conjunction with the 90th anniversary of its establishment. The private school was established in 1922 by the Tiong Hwa community in the country.

Taking part in the walkathon around Bandar Seri Begawan was the Deputy Minister of Education, Dato Seri Setia Haji Awang Yusoff. More than a thousand students and staff of the school took part in the walkathon. As the oldest private education institution in the country, the Chung Hwa Middle School prioritises 3 languages in its education system – Mandarin, English and Malay – in line with Brunei Darussalam’s educational system.

The Deputy Minister of Education also received a cheque worth 3,000 Brunei dollars – a contribution from the Chung Hwa Middle School to the Pengiran Muda Mahkota Al-Muhtadee Billah Fund for Orphans. The school has 3 buildings which house 60 classes that accommodate more than 3,000 students. With 200 teachers and staff, the Chung Hwa Middle School offers kindergarten, primary and secondary education.

All gear up for 2012 Track and Fields Primary School Championship (Brunei I)

A meeting on the 2012 Track and Fields Primary School Championship for Brunei I was successfully held on 7 April 2012 in Chung Hwa Middle School, BSB. Representatives from 16 government and private schools, along with two officers from the Co-Curriculum Department, Ministry of Education Brunei, attended the meeting at 8.00am to prepare themselves for the much-anticipated sports event of the year.

Chaired by the school principal, Mdk. Kho Guik Lan, the meeting cast more light on the events competed and relevant sports and regulations.

Organised by the Co-Curriculum Department, Ministry of Education Brunei and hosted by Chung Hwa Middle School, BSB, the sports competition will engage outstanding athletes from 16 different schools in Zone I to vie for different titles in the Track and Fields events. The sports event will be held from 8.00am to 4.00pm on 22 April 2012 at Padang Kebajikan, Berakas. Gracing the championship as the guest of honour at the opening ceremony at 1.30pm that day will be the Director General of Education, Ministry of Education .

The school deputy principal Mr. Beh Hai Yau and other PE teachers also attended the briefing. Other school representatives were also sharing constructive suggestions under an amicable ambience.

In conjunction with National Day, Chung Hwa BSB kindergarten decorated the exhibition hall with national flags and other symbols of the country on 27 February 2012 to add gaiety to the meaningful day.

In the month of February, the kindergarten exuded an ambience of patriotism when teachers and students busied preparing hand-made national flags and maps of Brunei. The teachers also took the opportunity to teach their students the importance of respecting our national flag. Later, the future leaders of Brunei had an excursion around the school, waving the national flag and declaring their love to Brunei.

Miss Sim Man Ling, the Assistant Principal (kindergarten section) highlighted that the annual celebration is aimed to help students understand the independent day of Brunei and its importance. “We have to teach our children from young so they will appreciate the nation and contribute to its development in the future,” she concluded.

The celebration started as early as the day before National Day where the kindergarten briefed students about ways to show respect to the national flag. They were also taught to sing the National Anthem. The briefing culminated in the singing of National Anthem by fellow kindergarten students, in high spirit.