Hello all,

I have just created my first welcome newsletter email with MailPoet. I set the logo image and it appears within the preview of the email.

The logo image does not come through in the email sent from my site to my test user email.

The image and site are both hosted with Siteground. I did check the “blacklist” link provided to another user in this forum, but as with their experience, I don’t know what to do with that information.

Where might I look to see what’s wrong, here?

The page I need help with: [log in to see the link]

Hi there @commontater 👋🏽!

The logo image does not come through in the email sent from my site to my test user email.

I’m sorry to hear that you’re having issues with images in your newsletters!

If images are not showing on all devices, please check the following:

Check if you Hotlink protection enabled.

Check your site’s Folder’s permission are properly set up.

If images are not showing in Gmail:

Whitelist your domain’s URL and fix this issue by following these steps: https://support.google.com/a/answer/3299041?hl=en

If images are not showing in Apple Mail only:

Check your Mail Privacy Protection settings.

Check if Load Remote Content is disabled in Settings > Mail > Load Remote Content.

Check if your site’s URL is blacklisted on any public blacklist: https://mxtoolbox.com/blacklists.aspx.

You can see more details on each point here: https://kb.mailpoet.com/article/370-images-not-displayed-in-emails

Looking forward to hearing from you!

Cheers!

Hi @danielinhou ,

Thanks for getting back to me on this issue.

Regarding “Hotlink protection,” I am using Wordfence and Siteground Security Optimizer. On Siteground, I do not have any protected URLs listed. Wordfence does not appear to have any, either.

My site folder permissions are set to 755 for the wp-content/uploads folder.

Gmail/Apple mail – Both email platforms show images in all other emails, just not this one image from my site. I can select the logo image on my site, view it, and email it to a Gmail account and it is visible. Just doesn’t work within MailPoet. I did a test email from MailPoet that had images, and those showed up, except for my logo image (hosted locally in the media folder of my site).

I had previously looked at the blacklist issue you mention. I saw something there, maybe 2 out of the whole list, but didn’t know how to fix that. The site is brand new, as is the URL. How could it be blacklisted?

Your help is appreciated!

Hi again,

Thanks for the update.

I had previously looked at the blacklist issue you mention. I saw something there, maybe 2 out of the whole list, but didn’t know how to fix that. The site is brand new, as is the URL. How could it be blacklisted?

Sometimes this list blacklist new domains for a while until they can verify they are trustworthy. If you know in which lists your site is listed you can research how to get in touch with them so that they can unlist you.

Getting back to the specific issue, you mentioned that it is only an image that is now showing up in your emails. In this case you could host the image on a different server or service and see if that fixes the issue.

Cheers

Hi @danielinhou ,

I don’t really have any experience with hosting an image on some other server. Do I need to buy some kind of server space somewhere? And how can I be sure that the other server space will not have the same issue?

Question: Why does MailPoet not allow me to use media from my media folder? If it is allowed, what makes that work?

Thanks for your help!

Hi @commontater , You can try to format the image in a different format and reupload it to your site and try the new image as well. You mentioned, your other images were working, consider converting your logo to the same format (jpg/png) and using that image, in a test email to yourself. Perhaps that image formatting is what is tripping it from loading.

You can also use an image sharing service like this one here and check if the above step fails. Using third-party hosting for images should be a last resort. It is better to build your domains’ reputation instead of using third-party services.

Thanks for your help @mrejhan .