Solo & Ensemble is an annual event that takes place among all the schools in the greater Cleveland area and is open to all high school band members. Solo & Ensemble provides you with the experience of working up a piece of music by yourself, with your private teacher and/or with a small group of ensemble members in order to enhance your musical skills. All students will perform their pieces in front of a judge who will then assign you a score based on your performance. This is a fantastic opportunity for you to perform and receive constructive comments on how to improve on your instrument. All students who are willing to commit and work hard are encouraged to participate. Students may perform one solo, and participate in one ensemble, unless more events are OK’d by Mr. Komperda. Additionally, students may play piano, guitar or string solos.

2025 Greater Cleveland Solo & Ensemble Contest

I will help anyone interested in this event select music that best suits you; however, it is ultimately your responsibility to make sure you have a piece selected.

Students must commit to rehearsing with directors and/or ensemble coaches for guidance in preparation for their performance. You may sign up for times before and after school.

RRHS covers the entry fee for this event (which is $10 for each soloist and $5 for each ensemble member).

All solos that have published piano accompaniments MUST be accompanied. Students must either find an accompanist (a private teacher, family friend, etc.) or Mr. Komperda can help connect you with an accompanist, but note that fee payment and scheduling rehearsals is up to you. Expect to pay around $50 for accompaniment, though if your piece is difficult, it may be more. Usually, each student will have two rehearsals and their performance with an accompanist.

Please see the other links on the web page that have information about scale and rudiment requirements.

Important Dates:

Wednesday, January 15th: All ensembles and soloists have music picked out and have shown Mr. Komperda for approval. All forms are due.

Saturday, February 22nd: Event day at Olmsted Falls Middle School; performance times will be available approximately one week before the event.

Other Important Info

Transportation to and from the contest is the responsibility of the performers. Car-pooling is recommended. You will receive a list of the students participating in the contest.

Breakfast/Lunch/Snacks are available in the cafeteria.

Parents are invited to attend the performances of any students at the contest.

No Video or Audio recording is permitted in the performance rooms.

RRHS will be DISQUALIFIED if the judges see any recording devices used.

There is no required music list but no pop, jazz, Broadway, or light music is allowed. Mr. Komperda and students’ own private teachers will help them select appropriate music.

Performers dress up for the contest just like you would for a concert at school. Remember that you want to impress the judge in a way that shows you recognize the importance of looking professional for the contest! Appearance and behavior do make a difference.