oscar2.jpg

Singer Michael McDonald (left) poses with Oscar L. Peterson Jr. at the 2016 Syracuse Jazz Fest.

(Warren Linhart)

SYRACUSE, N.Y. -- Oscar L. Peterson Jr., the longtime board president of the M&T Syracuse Jazz Fest, would have turned 55 today.

Peterson died from natural causes on Monday, Oct. 3, eight days shy of his birthday. He was born in Philadelphia but adopted Syracuse as his hometown. He lived here for 25 years and dedicated himself to volunteering in his community.

Peterson served as the Jazz Fest board president for a decade. Frank Malfitano, executive director of Jazz Fest, called Peterson his brother and best friend of 31 years. They met in 1985, working together on the Legends of Jazz Series for the Cultural Resources Council.

Malfitano said he was devastated and broken-hearted when he heard news of Peterson's passing.

"We were very close," said Malfitano. "He was a wonderful man with incredible intellect, indomitable will and a great spirit. He had the best laugh I ever heard. I love him so much. He lit up this community."

As board president, Malfitano described Peterson as the annual jazz festival's best ambassador and a backstage fixture. Some of Peterson's favorite artists were Aretha Franklin, Ray Charles, Sonny Rollins, Dizzy Gillespie, Dave Brubeck, Gil Scott-Heron, Gregory Porter, Les McCann and Wynton Marsalis.

"All artists loved him and he loved the artists," Malfitano said. "His apartment was filled with every Jazz Fest T-shirt and hat from the last 20 years. It comprised a good chunk of his wardrobe."

In the past year, Peterson spent months in treatment at the Syracuse VA Medical Center (he served in the U.S. Marine Corps.). He felt well enough in July to attend one day of the 2016 Jazz Fest, where he met Michael McDonald.

"He was dealing with a lot of illnesses and battled them all quietly right until the end," Malfitano said. "He never stopped fighting, never gave up and never complained. He considered each day a blessing."

In 2011, a reporter for The Post-Standard wrote about Peterson's work as a polling site manager. In his second year as a volunteer, Peterson took a taxi at 4:30 a.m. to St. Lucy's Church to set up papers and tables for an election, all while recovering from a leg amputation.

At the time, Peterson explained why he volunteers.

"Being a former member of the military, I have protected people in order to give them the right to do this," Peterson said. "Knowing, as an African-American, how many people sacrificed their lives in order to give people the right to vote is important."

Later in life, Peterson became more involved in politics and served as a vice chairperson of the Syracuse Republican Party. In 2015, he unsuccessfully challenged Toby Shelley as a primary candidate for Onondaga County Executive. Current County Executive Joanie Mahoney had recruited Peterson to run on the Conservative line to undercut Shelley's support.

"He was a high achiever, very passionate about things he believed in," Malfitano said. "He had an enormous amount of energy. I'm gonna miss him. Everyone's gonna miss him."

Peterson's funeral arrangements and obituary are still pending at this time. The 2017 Syracuse Jazz Fest will be dedicated to Peterson's memory.