By Clare Muhindo

Known by his stage name Exodus, George Lubega Timothy, is a Ugandan singer.

He made his musical debut in 2004, with his single hit “Ganja Man.”

Exodus describes himself as a down-to-earth, serious about business and God-fearing person, who was molded by the life on the streets where smoking marijuana was the order of the day.

His early life

Exodus who was born on 8 June 1984, was raised by a single mother, who passed away when he was 10 years old.

He was then taken in until he was 12 years old by his polygamous father.

Exodus had to join the streets of Kampala after being rejected by his physically and mentally abusive father.

At age 12 in 1996, he started feeding in dustbins, smoking marijuana, sniffing petrol and pickpocketing for a living around Katwe, Dewinton road and Owino market which was his base.

In 2001, he left the streets for Nakulabye in Kiyaaye where together with a friend, Dan Kimuli, began a new life.

Knowing Jesus

Kimuli suggested that he visit Pastor Robert Kayanja‘s Miracle Centre church.

“I wanted to taste this Jesus that was preached that day, and the following week I went back and gave my life to Jesus,” said Exodus in an interview.

His first hit as a solo artist “Once a Ganja Man” narrates the journey of his life on the streets of Kampala to his transformation as a follower of Christ.

In “Once a Ganja man” he narrates, “Remember the days of Ganja, when we used to smoke Ganja.”

This single became an anthem in churches, conferences and even at secular concerts. The “Once a ganja man” single became so massive and it got huge airplay on radio and Television stations worldwide.

At his age, his first serious single managed to get airplay on MTV base yet those that joined the industry years back and even have the funds to facilitate their projects have failed to have their songs played on MTV.

With just one song, Exodus won several awards from religious organizations and Buzz Magazine.

Music Career

After meeting Pastor Kayanja in 2002, in 2004 he became a leader and singer in the church choir.

It is the same year that Isaac Rucibigango (Rucci) recruited Exodus and two others, Bahati Nsereko and Kenneth Tusubira, to form the Sauti band that toured the Great Lakes region.

He toured Tanzania, Rwanda and Kenya.

While in Kenya in 2007, he left Sauti.

In 2008, he released his first song Ganjaman. The song later became very big and it took over Uganda and beyond.

He followed that single with Addicted, I am Walking and his biggest hit yet, Igwe.

Personal Life

On July 1, 2011, Exodus wed his long time fiance, Brenda Mwanje, in a colorful ceremony at Rubaga Miracle Cathedral.

The ceremony was witnessed by about 300 guests. The couple rented two limousines.

Pastor Kayanja and his wife, Jessica Kayanja were the guests of honor.

The wedding reception was held at Speke resort, Munyonoyo, where Aroma Band, Morgan Isaac, and Kupper were some of the artistes that entertained the guests.

Exodus crowned the event at around 11. 30 pm, with a thrilling performance.

Charity

Exodus works as the Artistic Director and Peace Ambassador of the Irene Gleeson Foundation (IGF) based in Northern Uganda.

IGF is a charitable organisation taking care of more than 10,000 ex-child soldiers. On 19 August 2012, Exodus held a concert in Kampala, Uganda, in the Victoria hall of Serena Hotel to raise money to support the children of IGF.

Exodus performed with featuring artists such as Isaiah Katumwa, Maurice Kirya, Isaac Rucci, G Way, Hum Kay and Tabu Flo. All the proceeds went to the Foundation

Exodus is remembered for contributing goods worth sh 10m to the people of Bududa in eastern Uganda who were affected by the deadly landslide early in 2010.

Awards and nominations

With only four songs under his belt, Exodus has been nominated for, and won more awards than many musicians who have been in the field much longer.

In 2009, He was nominated for an MTV Africa Music Awards and won four Buzz teen awards.

He has also won the Groove awards based in Nairobi, Pearl of Africa Music Awards; won two Olive gospel awards and was nominated in the All Africa Gospel Music awards in London as one of Africa’s best gospel artistes.

Table 1. Showing his awards and nominations

Year Award Category Result 2008 Groove Awards Best Uganda Artist Won 2009 Buzz Teeniez Awards Best Gospel Artist Won 2009 Groove Awards Best Artist/Group of the Year (Uganda) Nominee 2010 Groove Awards Artist of the Year (Uganda) Won 2011 Buzz Teeniez Awards Teeniez Gospel Artiste Won 2011 Olive Gospel Music Awards Best Male Artist Won 2011 Groove Awards Artist of the Year (Uganda) Won 2012 Olive Gospel Music Awards Best Contemporary Artist Won 2012 Groove Awards Artist of the Year (Uganda) Won 2012 Groove Awards Video of the Year (Alemba & Exodus) Won 2012 Groove Awards Ragga/Reggae Song of the Year (Alemba & Exodus) Won 2013 Buzz Teeniez Awards Teeniez Hottest Gospel Song Nominee 2013 Groove Awards Artist of the Year (Uganda) Won 2014 Buzz Teeniez Awards Teeniez Hottest Gospel Song (Prophecy) Won 2014 Groove Awards East and Central Africa Artiste of the Year Nominee

Please follow the link below for a detailed presentation, on the life of Exodus. The presentation includes videos, audios and more photos.