We take a comprehensive approach to design, working from inception to completion to turn an architectural vision into reality. We work across sectors, applying our distinctive approach to projects in education, public estates, residential, commercial office, and urban regeneration. Architectural Engineering focuses on the following:

Structural integrity of buildings.

Energy conservation issues.

Acoustics.

Lighting planning.

Efficiency and design of plumbing, fire protection, electrical systems.

Silicon Valley is an Architectural Engineering CAD outsourcing company with highly qualified staff having vast experience in the field. Silicon Valley offers following services for architectural Engineering:

Schematic design.

CAD systems development.

Shop/ coordination drawings.

Delivery systems Standardization.

Code compliance analysis.

Architectural Institutional Projects Leuven

We Silicon Valley offer the Architectural Institutional Services in Leuven. Our experts are prepared to cater each person as indicated by their specific desires they need to have from us or would reflect their creative energy in genuine Architectural Design that we are going to give them. Under the sphere of Institutional Architecture our work so far incorporates public and private instructive and recreational offices venture, for example, however not constrained to:

College Buildings.

School Buildings.

University Campuses.

Library Buildings.

Laboratories.

Sports Complex.

Auditorium.

Community Hall.

Educational Museum.

Architectural Industrial Projects Leuven

At Silicon Valley through expansive information of materials and the always up and coming requests and patterns in the Architectural Engineering industry we ready to offer individual and particular design arrangements bringing about every improvement having its individual outstanding method and character. Silicon Valley as an Architectural Consulting organization has overseen numerous ventures in the circle of Industrial Projects furthermore has effectively overseen numerous Industrial Turnkey Projects including Industrial Construction Projects from arranging, planning, origination, supervision to consummation. The master group of Silicon Valley has catered Industrial Clientele everywhere throughout the world by taking care of taking after sorts of Industrial Projects, (for example, yet not constrained to):

Assembly Plants.

Power Plants (hydro-electrical, fossil fuels, uranium, solar, wind, etc).

Refineries.

Gas Plants.

Mills.

Dairies.

Factories.

Workshops.

Warehouses.

Brewery.

Architectural Residential Projects Leuven

Residential Planning is one of the core circles among Architectural Engineering disciplines and the same require ideal Architectural Planning aptitudes as it might reflect the creative energy and determinations of an individual or Home Owner and at Silicon Valley our Architects works with the nearby interest and association of our customers with their particulars and we likewise give 3D Architectural Visualization Services that at last changes over customers dream house in actuality on computerized site. With aggregate endeavors and solid cooperation has made Silicon Valley a spot where we can deal with a Residential Projects regardless of multifaceted nature or effortlessness included with it and equivalent quality guidelines and a unique consideration is dependably there to keep up International Standards. We have taken care of taking after sorts of Residential Projects, for example,

Bungalows.

Twin Tenements.

Flats: High Rise and Low Rise.

Duplex Flats and Bungalows.

Villas.

Farm Houses.

Single and Multi Family Dwelling.

Apartment Houses.

Remodel/Repair/Renovation.

Architectural Landscape Planning and design Services Leuven

Landscape Architecture Planning includes both a art and science. At Silicon Valley, our master Landscape Architects and Landscape Planners can consolidate creative and innovative sight with most recent innovation to meet the customer's prerequisites. Our specialists can create Landscape Design from hand drawn sketches, furthermore create rises and get ready 3D renderings to itemized development archives. We use different innovation devices and creative abilities to provide food the finished undertaking to our regarded customers. Landscape Planning and Design Services is one of the disciplines among Architectural Engineering that includes numerous contemplations to accomplish some particular objectives as yield, for example,

Optimum utilization of given space with functional arrangement for maximum use and satisfaction.

Serving the Landscape Design with a perfect and desired visualization between the structure and surrounding place there by.

Optimal Landscape Management Planning decreases landscape maintenance to a sensible level

Energy efficient design solutions.

Accurate take offs for estimating.

Detailed planting layout.

Architectural Urban Planning Services Leuven

Urban Planning Development includes entirely extensive and multifaceted procedure that gets a decent measure of expertise and experience. It is not as basic as to pick a plot of area and outlining a couple of structures. Urban Planning and Design Services likewise requires experiencing different in the background conventions, for example, city process, administrative system and ecological contemplations. With the significant business information Silicon Valley has put more underscore on procedure driven Urban Planning Development way to deal with create environment agreeable and energizing group surroundings that are aggressive and exceed customer's desires.

At Silicon Valley we provide services in the sphere of Urban Planning and Design include but are not limited to :

Land Usage Appraisal and Observance.

Land Use Re-Designation.

Urban Revitalization.

Master Planning.

Regional Planning.

Site Planning.

Community Planning.

Environmental Planning.

Sustainable Community Consultation.

Architectural Interior Design Services Leuven

Silicon Valley's Interior Designing group offers a completely far reaching Interior Projects Development Service. The outline group has quality experience to oversee nearby and global Interior Project inside of our premises or at offshore areas. The group of experts is very productive to handle any sort of Interior Project going from single rooms and small aparments to whole houses and corporate spaces, and their configuration portfolio incorporates extravagance private homes, flats, second homes, show apartments, office receptions and business premises. Silicon Valley in the field of Interior Designing has gotten to be commensurate with exceptional, agile living and inventive configuration.

We give consultancy administrations in the fields of Architecture, Interior Projects Management and Project administration, embraces ventures identified with residential, commercial, hospitality and retail. We offer after sorts of administrations under the circle of Interior Projects, for example,

Site Survey.

Interior Space Planning & Conceptual Designs.

Initial consultation.

Project design and development including relationship with suppliers on all aspects of the project.

Space plans and 3d visuals of project.

Lighting system design.

Budget preparation.

Project management & installation including instruction of professionals.

Procurement Services.

Site Supervision and progress reports.

Our team is also aware about International Standards of designs and pretty much capable to handle offshore projects for all sorts of architectural engineering, by outsourcing your projects with Silicon Valley you will experience efficient management of your architectural engineering Projects with resourceful coordination, all of these together provides an engaging, practical, and long-lasting environment for you and your community.