Disruptive research opens up new markets, not yet covered or under development in existing companies. This is where entrepreneurship within MICAS meets research. MICAS is very successful in this model, leading to the creation of one spin-off every four years. The total amount of employment to date due to these spinoffs is over 300 full-time employees, mostly highly skilled IC designers and electronic-system engineers. As most companies are closely situated around the KU Leuven, this creates a local Silicon Valley ecosystem in the Leuven area. These spin-offs regularly operate in close collaboration with KU Leuven and the MICAS researchers.

Ansem

AnSem was founded in 1998 as a spin-off from theMICAS research group of the KU Leuven. AnSemis a fabless analog ASIC design service company,designing and delivering state-of-the-art analog, RFand mixed-signal integrated circuits to customersworldwide. It takes control over the complete ASICdevelopment and supply fl ow, being a true one-stopshopfor its customers. AnSem is ISO 9001 certifi ed,and is predominantly active in the healthcare,communications, industrial and aerospace & defense markets.

ICsense

ICsense was founded in 2004 as a spin-off from the MICAS group of KU Leuven and currently has the largest fab-independent European design group with world-class expertise in analog, digital, mixed-signal and high-voltage IC design. The company develops and supplies customer exclusive ASIC solutions for the automotive, medical, industrial and consumer market compliant with ISO9001, ISO13485, IEC61508-ISO26262. ICsense’s core expertise is in Sensor/MEMS interfacing, high-voltage design, power management, ultra-low-power IC designs and communication. Since 2017, ICsense is an independent subsidiary of the TDK group. With design centers in Leuven/Ghent and in-house mass production development capabilities, ICsense is recognized as one of the leading ASIC suppliers worldwide.

MinDCet

MinDCet was founded in 2011, as a spin-off from the MICAS research group. MinDCet is an ISO9001 certifi ed, fabless, mixed-signal IC design company, developing Power Management ICs. MinDCet develops highly/fully integrated and discrete DC-DC converters, motor drivers, high-speed GaN and laser drivers, control systems, class-D amplifi ers, power and battery management. Currently, MinDCet is active in the following markets: automotive, industrial, aerospace & space, biomedical, high-reliability & harsh environments.

Zenso

Zenso NV was founded in 2007 as a MICAS spinoff, designing and producing electronic circuits and systems. Zenso NV is active in the medical sector, as well as in the industrial, automotive and consumer sectors. Zenso is ISO9001 and ISO13485 for medical design certified. The core services it offers are centered around: feasibility studies, electronic system and PCB design, software development, system integration, prototyping & series production, test & validation, CE testing (safety, immunity, emission, radio) and technical writing. In 2022, Zenso joined Comate, the Leuven-based engineering and design company.

MAGICS Instruments

MAGICS Instruments is a spin-off company of MICAS since 2015, specializing in the design of radiation-hardened, integrated circuits. They deliver customized state-of-the-art, radiation-tolerant electronics to their customers and they provide radiation qualifi cation services on ASICs or commercial-off-the-shelf components. As such, they identify potential risks and improve reliability. The MAGICS Instruments technology is qualifi ed under extreme radiation conditions. MAGICS Instruments is currently active in the following markets: space industry and high-energy particle physics.

Hammer-IMS

Hammer-IMS was founded in 2016 as a provider of industrial measurement solutions based on the technology of wireless millimeter waves. Hammer-IMS stands for reliable, realtime, contactless and clean measurement equipment for semi-finished goods in the synthetics, paper, textile, glass and composite industries. The Marveloc 602 is Hammer-IMS's innovative measurement platform and excels in sensing thicknesses and weights of sheets and web materials in these industries.

Tusk IC

Tusk IC was founded in 2018 as a spin-off from the MICAS research group. Tusk IC offers extensive research and industry experience in the field of millimeter wave IC design in silicon technologies. They provide state-of-the-art IC design services and high-frequency measurements for millimeter wave circuits in CMOS and SiGe BiCMOS, from 3GHz to 300GHz and beyond. From 5G to car radar for autonomous vehicles, wireless VR to contactless sensing: the millimeter wave spectrum will enable a wide range of revolutionary applications. Tusk IC is where these millimeter waves meet silicon.