A leading reformer in the Indonesian military, who recently exposed evidence of high-level corruption in a key combat unit, is being investigated for possible violations of discipline and may be dismissed from the army.

General Endriartono Sutarto, who took over officially Wednesday as the new army chief, said that a military investigation team was collecting information to determine whether Lieutenant General Agus Wirahadikusumah had broken the military's oath and code of conduct, and should be brought before an officers' council to be disciplined.

General Agus, the former head of the Army Strategic Reserve Command, has been in the spotlight since the summer, when the respected weekly magazine Tempo disclosed that an independent audit he ordered into an army foundation had revealed that 189 billion rupiah (dollars 21 million) was missing. General Augus denied leaking the story to the press.

Some government officials now say that they believe the actual amount removed from the foundation was dollars 41 million dollars and that a substantial portion of this money was used to finance Muslim extremists fighting Christians in the religious war ravaging the Moluccan islands in eastern Indonesia.

General Endriartono, in an interview published in Singapore on Wednesday by The Straits Times, said that the case against General Agus concerned alleged violations of military discipline, and not the fact that he had exposed the corruption case to the Indonesian media.

But Indonesian military analysts and Western officials said that General Agus, who is widely regarded as the most outspoken advocate of reform among senior officers in the armed forces, was being victimized for revealing graft in military businesses that could implicate other commanders.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.