Monday, September 25

Giddy-up to Derby City for updated Season 12 appraisals including a Dirk Van Erp lamp from around 1910, a J. Falter "Listening to the Sea" illustration and a 1919 Cincinnati Reds championship baseball. One is now valued at $150,000-$200,000. Antiques Roadshow Vintage Louisville 2021 Hour 1 at 7:00 pm.

Look back at Louisville treasures from 2007 including a Kentucky cherry corner cupboard made around 1815, a Qing period nephrite jade basin and a 1911 Julian Onderdonk landscape oil. Which has skyrocketed in value and is appraised for $125,000? Antiques Roadshow Vintage Louisville 2021 Hour 2 at 8:00 pm.

Exploring the fascinating life and unique art of Walter Anderson (1903-1965). He was a painter, potter, and sculptor whose genius was realized only after the posthumous discovery of hundreds of previously unknown works. Walter Anderson: The Extraordinary Life and Art Of The Islander at 9:00 pm.

While traveling through the Amazon, Uyra shares ancestral knowledge with Indigenous youth to promote the significance of identity and place, threatened by Brazil's oppressive political regime. Through dance, poetry, and stunning characterization, Uyra boldly confronts historical racism, transphobia, and environmental destruction, while emphasizing the interdependence of humans and the environment. POV Uyra: The Rising Forest at 10:00 pm.

Tuesday, September 26

Henry Louis Gates traces the roots of actors Brian Cox and Viola Davis, uncovering records from workhouses in Scotland and slave plantations in South Carolina that reveal individuals who battled to build a better life for their families. Finding Your Roots with Henry Louis Gates, Jr. Rising from the Ashes at 7:00 pm.

Now married and living in Depression-era USA, Frida sees the ugly side of capitalism, while political scandal engulfs Diego. Miscarriage and bereavement propel Frida to her greatest work yet. Becoming Frida Kahlo Love and Loss at 8:00 pm.

The story of one journalist's battle to defend free speech in Putin's Russia. With unique access, the film follows Nobel prize-winner Dmitry Muratov as he fights to keep his newspaper alive and his reporters safe amid a government crackdown. Frontline Putin Vs. The Press at 9:00 pm.

Many parent caregivers for children or adults who are disabled or medically complex are exhausted and isolated. Their mental and physical struggle is a public health crisis that costs us all. Unseen gives an unfiltered, honest glimpse into their lives to enable a change for millions of caregivers and their families. Unseen: How We're Failing Parent Caregivers & Why It Matters at 10:00 pm.

Wednesday, September 27

Oregon is known for its wild coastline and misty forests, but it's a place where a few hours in your car can take you from the coast to the high desert or the Cascade mountains. Embracing this incredible variety, Baratunde embraces forest bathing, goes spearfishing to discover underwater kelp forests, rides along with cowboys on the cutting edge of sustainable ranching and rollerblades through Portland. America Outdoors with Baratunde Thurston Oregon: New Heights at 7:00 pm.

A visual journey through our telecommunications history, using archival photos, footage, newscasts, advertising, and entertainment clips to transport viewers. The film captures the story of this revolution through the voices of key players - innovators, economists, policy makers, industry executives, and Congressional leaders - and how their actions can inform us as we confront the global communications technologies and challenges of today. When Wire Was King: The Transformation of Communications at 8:00 pm.

At the planet's frozen extremes, shifts in animal movement and behavior reveal vital information about our future world. Examine polar bears in the Arctic, penguins in Antarctica and other animals wandering on icy islands. Evolution Earth Ice at 9:00 pm.

Enjoy fresh perspectives in song from Olivia Rodrigo and Phoebe Bridgers. The chart-topping Rodrigo performs tunes from her bestselling debut Sour, while Bridgers sings songs from her critically acclaimed LP Punisher. Austin City Limits Olivia Rodrigo/Phoebe Bridgers at 10:00 pm.

Thursday, September 28

The War of Independence charts the violent struggle by Mexicans to break free, the subsequent loss of almost half of its territory to the U.S., and the resulting decades of instability that followed. Examine the initial uprising led by revolutionary priests Hidalgo and Morelos, who both lost their lives as a result, and the role played by one of Mexico's most controversial characters, General Antonio Lopez de Santa Ana. Empire Builders: Mexico The War of Independence at 7:00 pm.

From the campus of SMU, Chet visits the Bush Library, and eats with locals at a legendary burger joint. He bikes along White Rock Lake and encounters the local legends. He finishes the day at a famous steakhouse and speakeasy. The Daytripper North Dallas, TX at 8:00 pm.

Check out the vibrant contemporary murals that are bursting on the walls of Austin and energizing the city's urban architecture. Meet the artists who are transforming and beautifying spaces with their uplifting public art. Muraling Austin Big, Bright & Bold at 8:30 pm.

Morwenna's missionary parents pay her a surprise visit and are taken aback by her relationship with Al. As Louisa starts her new counseling course, Penhale investigates a break-in at the school, in which nothing was stolen. Guest stars Kevin Doyle (Downton Abbey) and Rebecca Lacey (Monarch of The Glen). Doc Martin Faith at 8:59 pm.

Lovestruck Callum is put out when a handsome 'friend' of Leila's turns up in Port Devine. Inspector Finn has more serious concerns. He's convinced the visitor is here to do Leila serious harm - and she's nowhere to be found. Hope Street at 9:46 pm.

Sunny and Jess' personal lives go from bad to worse while they struggle to keep focused. Meanwhile, the suspect list grows, and a mother and son are put under the microscope. Unforgotten on Masterpiece Season 5, Episode 4 at 10:30 pm.

Friday, September 29

Indie artist Adia Victoria grew up not far from Nina Simone’s childhood home in Tryon, NC. Host Rhiannon Giddens meets her there to share music and hear stories about her strict religious upbringing and her self-discovery through the blues. My Music with Rhiannon Giddens Adia Victoria at 7:30 pm.

Celebrate the recipients of the 36th annual Hispanic Heritage Awards. The evening commemorating Hispanic Heritage Month includes performances and appearances by some of the country's most celebrated Hispanic artists and visionaries. 36th Hispanic Heritage Awards at 8:00 pm.

This is a documentary film that explores the life and work of Cesar Chavez, a civil rights activist and labor leader who used music as a tool to unite and inspire workers during the United Farm Workers' struggle for better labor conditions. The film sheds light on the challenges that Chavez and his followers faced, and how they managed to overcome them through solidarity and perseverance. The film also touches on the broader historical context in which the United Farm Workers' struggle took place, including the social and economic realities of farm workers in the mid-20th century United States, the role of political activism and organizing in the civil rights movement, and the power of music as a medium for political expression and social change. Directed by Andres Alegria and Abel Sanchez. American Masters A Song for Cesar at 9:00 pm.

Chronicling the life and music of Ramon "Chunky" Sanchez, from his humble beginnings as a farmworker in Blythe, California to the dramatic moment when he received one of our nation's highest musical honors at the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C. Chunky's arc of transformation from marginalized farm kid to charismatic social activist shows how one person can mobilize people to change the world. Singing Our Way to Freedom at 10:30 pm.

Austin City Limits #4709 "Olivia Rodrigo/Phoebe Bridgers" Enjoy fresh perspectives in song from Olivia Rodrigo and Phoebe Bridgers. The chart-topping Rodrigo performs tunes from her bestselling debut Sour, while Bridgers sings songs from her critically acclaimed LP Punisher. Austin City Limits The Very Best of John Prine at 11:30 pm.

Saturday, September 30

Pati explores the vibrant streets of Yucatan's capital, Merida, in search of its flavors. She tries "the best tacos in Merida" at Wayan'e. The aroma of freshly made cookies lures her to Donde Fabric, where their globitos and bizcochitos are an important part of Merida's mornings. She has sorbet at a shop run by the same family for generations and tastes a unique Yucatecan liqueur at Casa D'Aristi. Recipes in Pati's Kitchen: Pea Soup with Basil and Mint Crema. Pati's Mexican Table Flavors of Merida at 1:00 pm.

Sheri shares her delicious recipes for cooking with heirloom field peas with an extra helping of her Hoppin' John Risotto with Collard Pesto and an "oh so beautiful" Lady Field Pea and Tomato Salad in Lemon Vinaigrette. Sheri takes a field trip to the Utopian Seed Project Farm and cooks with chef and farmer Jamie Swofford, who cooks up a delicious Field Pea Succotash. Key Ingredient with Sheri Castle Field Guide to Field Peas at 1:30 pm.

Chatham Rabbits go back to where it all began with a night at Cat's Cradle in Carrboro. This music venue holds many special memories for Austin and Sarah: it's where Austin first saw Sarah on stage and a place that the couple sold out a few years ago. Chatham Rabbits play a concert with their full band to celebrate being back on the road. On The Road with Chatham Rabbits A Night at Cat's Cradle at 4:30 pm.

Ecuador is one of the most biodiverse places on the planet, yet its wild spaces are among the most threatened. In 2008, the country became the first nation in the world to enshrine the "rights of nature" in its constitution-granting wild species their own legal rights to exist. Today, conservationists are putting that powerful tool to the test as they battle to save biodiversity hotspots. Wild Hope Does Nature Have Rights? at 6:00 pm.

Celebrate six-time Grammy-winning Americana singer/songwriter Brandi Carlile raising the roof for a full hour of passionate and powerful songs from her acclaimed album In These Silent Days. Austin City Limits Brandi Carlile at 7:00 pm.

Father Brown's past collides with the present when he investigates a missing person, a murder and a mythical wild cat. Father Brown The Beast of Wedlock at 8:00 pm.

Agatha Christie's Poirot The ABC Murders at 8:45 pm.

An artisan baker is found dead after receiving death threats. Is it a case of revenge or is the killer closer to home? Professor T uses his criminological insight to help the police identify the murderer. Professor T DNA of a Murderer at 10:30 pm.

Fi finally discovers the truth behind the house sale and confronts those responsible. Meanwhile, Bram, on the run, must come to terms with his own actions. Our House at 11:30 pm.

Sunday, October 1

In Cali, Colombia, Kim joins hundreds of Afro-Colombians as they converge on the salsa capital of the world for a rhythmic four-day festival named after the legendary musician, Petronio Alvarez. She gets a hands-on lesson in salsa dancing and drumming at the Salsa Museum and meets one of the most revered marimba players alive today. Along the way, Kim tastes creole cuisine and even gets a new hairstyle! Afro-Latino Travels with Kim Haas The Sound of Salsa In Cali, Colombia at 11:30 am.

Enjoy Strauss' Viennese comedy with Lise Davidsen as the aging Marschallin opposite Samantha Hankey in the "pants role" as her lover Octavian with Erin Morley as the younger woman who steals his heart. Simone Young conducts and Deborah Voigt hosts. Great Performances at the Met Der Rosenkavalier at 12:00 pm.

As a major trial gets underway, Professor T presents the case to his students--it involves a caretaker accused of shooting dead his rich employer. It seems an open and shut case, but the Professor turns expert witness to prove otherwise. Professor T The Trial at 7:00 pm.

Sunny and Jess attempt a reset as they follow the clues in the case. Unforgotten On Masterpiece Season 5, Episode 5 at 8:00 pm.

The team is taken to the edge of reality following the death of a participant in a magical ritual invoking a demon. Is there a supernatural cause for the murder, or is there a much more earthbound explanation? Van Der Valk On Masterpiece Magic in Amsterdam, Part 1 at 9:00 pm.

Examine the significance of the royal wardrobes of English monarchs over the last 400 years. Learn why most kings and queens have carefully choreographed every aspect of their apparel and why, for those who haven't, the consequences have sometimes been calamitous. Tales from the Royal Wardrobe at 10:00 pm.