2023 Mileage Rates + FAQsThis item revises the Mileage Rates Frequently Asked Questions on the DTMO website to reflect revised calendar year (CY) 2023 standard mileage rates established by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). CTD for CAP 06-23(I), “Expiration of FTR Bulletin 22-07”This item removes certain provisions from the JTR which implemented Federal Travel Regulations (FTR) Bulletin 22-07, “Relocation Allowances – Extended waiver of certain Federal Travel (FTR) provisions during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.” The bulletin temporarily waived certain provisions of the FTR governing official relocation travel and renewal agreement (RAT) travel during the COVID-19 pandemic. FTR Bulletin 22-07expired effective December 31, 2022. CTD for CAP 22-24(E), Shipment of Alternative Fueled POV or Circuitous Route to New PDSThis item inserts clarifying language identified in General Service Administration’s (GSA) Federal Travel Regulation (FTR) Case 2022-03, which issued a final ruling to allow agencies greater flexibility for authorizing shipment of an alternative fueled privately-owned vehicle (POV) or authorizing a circuitous route for these types of POVs to a new permanent duty station (PDS). These changes will provide Services with additional factors to help determine whether shipping a traveler’s alternative fueled POV is more cost-effective and advantageous to the Government than authorizing the traveler to drive their POV to the new permanent duty station (PDS). CTD for CAP 31-21(R) Unaccompanied Baggage for Dependent Student TravelThis item specifies the rules for unaccompanied baggage for travel of a civilian employee’s dependent student, to mirror the Service member rules. The Department of State Standardized Regulations (DSSR) Section 285.1 contains the allowances for dependent student travel but does not specify the weight limitation for unaccompanied baggage. CTD for CAP 35-24(S), Redefining Temporary Quarters Subsistence Expenses (TQSE) AllowancesThis item implements a mandatory provision of the Federal Travel Regulation affecting Title 41 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Parts 300-2, 302-6, and 302-17, issued by the General Services administration on May 7, 2024. This item inserts changes to the Temporary Quarters Subsistence Expenses (TQSE) allowances and establishes TQSE Lodgings Plus (LP) as the preferred reimbursement method. Effective July 1, 2024. CTD FOR CAP 50-20(E) OCONUS CIVILIAN TOUR LENGTHS REVISIONS.PDFThis item makes updated to the Civilian Tour Lengths section of the Tour Lengths and Tours of Duty OCONUS website document. The change removes locations that are no longer relevant and clarifies what the applicable accompanied and unaccompanied tour lengths are for each location. CTD for CAP 50-23(I), Update Administrative Household Goods (HHG) Weight Allowance Locations Table for Poland and RomaniaThis item updates the Joint Travel Regulations Supplement, Administrative Household Goods (HHG) Weight Allowance Locations Table to rescind household goods weight allowance restrictions for Navy civilian employees assigned to Poland and Romania. Civilian employees assigned to Redzikowo, Poland and Deveselu, Romania are now authorized the full HHG weight allowance. CTD for CAP 53-23(I), Update Tour Lengths and Tours of Duty OCONUS to Remove Outdated InformationThis item updates the Joint Travel Regulations Supplement, Tour Lengths and Tours of Duty Outside of the Continental United States (OCONUS) to remove outdated information regarding Air Force Management Interns. The Department of the Air Force no longer uses the Management Intern Program. CTD FOR CAP 55-22(I) EXTENSION OF GSA COVID-19 FTR WAIVER AUTHORITY.PDFThis item rescinds Federal Travel Regulation (FTR) Bulletin 22-04, “Waiver of Certain FTR Provisions During the COVID-19 Pandemic” and replaces it with FTR Bulletin 2207, re-establishing the authority to waive certain FTR requirements for extension of the 1-year time limit for using all PCS allowances, renewal agreement travel (RAT), household good shipments, storage in transit (SIT), and house hunting trip (HHT). FTR Bulletin 22-07 will expire December 31, 2022.