KANRYŌ VS. SHOMIN: CONTRASTING DYNAMICS OF CONSERVATIVE LEADERSHIP IN POSTWAR JAPAN

Kent E. Calder

One spring day in March 1929, as several hundred members of the Tokyo establishment watched approvingly, young Fukuda Takeo of Gunma Prefecture received the coveted Gin Dokei at the command of Emperor Hirohito. Receipt of this silver watch, given to the top-ranking graduate of the elite Tokyo Imperial University Faculty of Law in prewar days, symbolized one’s entry into the realms of the best and the brightest. It was a major initial step on the road to leadership in the fixed, elitist society that was prewar Japan.

While Fukuda Takeo was receiving the Gin Dokei to the plaudits of the Tokyo establishment, his rival-to-be in the prime ministerial contests of the 1970s, Tanaka Kakuei, was a fifth grader in rural Niigata Prefecture, of impoverished Ura Nihon on the Japan Sea coast. In years to come, Tanaka never received a high-school diploma, much less the Gin Dokei. While Fukuda was moving predictably from post to post within the elite Ministry of Finance (MOF) in his early professional years, Tanaka was moving erratically from one menial job to another, working successively as day laborer, insurance-firm employee, apprentice journalist, army draftee, and small-scale contractor. Tanaka, who sang naniwa bushi, or traditional folk songs, on NHK national radio weeks after taking his first Cabinet post, was the quintessential shomin, or commoner, a sharp contrast to the elite kanryō, or bureaucrat, Fukuda. Tanaka was also thirteen years Fukuda’s junior in a seniority-oriented society, and acquired a reputation as a “computerized bulldozer” in a nation placing great store in slowly and carefully crafted consensus.

Yet, in July 1972 Tanaka was selected over Fukuda to succeed Satō Eisaku as prime minister. Tanaka’s proxy, Ōhira Masayoshi, was chosen prime minister over an incumbent Fukuda in December 1978. Tanaka had been elected Dietman at twenty-eight and appointed Cabinet minister at thirty-nine, younger than any of his contemporaries. At fifty-four he became the youngest prime minister modern Japan has ever had. The Japanese political system allowed Tanaka also to maintain preeminent political influence in wide areas of policy and government personnel recruitment even after two arrests and three resignations from high public office because of scandal. Richard Nixon, one could speculate, might have been envious.

The contrasting social origins and ultimate political fates of Tanaka Kakuei and Fukuda Takeo reveal much about the dynamics of conservative leadership in postwar Japan. To analyze these careers in a fashion generating hypotheses about leadership in general which might be tested comparatively, it is useful to ask three basic sets of questions:

(1) How were these leaders recruited? In terms of the specific cases at hand, how did Fukuda and Tanaka happen to rise to leadership positions within the postwar political order?

(2) What function did the leaders in question actually perform within the political system? Were they legitimators, originators, or brokers among preexisting interests? Why did they assume a given function at a particular point in time?

(3) What are the consequences of the particular patterns of leadership exhibited by these men for the larger econo-political systems within which leadership takes place?

The Elite Route and the Entrepreneurial Route to Leaders hip Status

Throughout Japanese political history, there has been a pronounced bias toward conservatism in personnel recruitment. For over one thousand years, from even before the days of the Fujiwara, there has been a strong tendency in Japan for leaders to be succeeded by relatives or former close associates and for self-perpetuating establishments to develop and persist. This pattern, while observable to some degree world-wide, seems especially pronounced in Japan, particularly in comparison to developments in North American frontier societies such as the United States.

While conservative leaders have generally perpetuated themselves and their associates with unusual consistency in Japan, there has been a recurring pattern of periodic shocks to the established order, throwing hierarchical relations into turmoil and allowing leaders of new backgrounds to rise. During the late Muromachi period, and the fluid sengoku jidai following (late sixteenth century), leaders of peasant origin such as Hideyoshi Toyotomi rose to contend with those of higher social backgrounds such as Oda Nobunaga. The early Meiji era (1868 to perhaps 1880) was to some extent another such period.

Contemporary Japanese have compared the lawlessness and absence of coherent leadership during the sengoku period with the difficulties the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) had in providing leadership in the 1970s, especially during its temporary loss of a stable majority in the Diet between December 1976 and June 1980. (See Krauss, this volume.) But a more appropriate parallel with the sengoku jidai is the 1941–1955 period. Despite the persistence and even increase in the influence of the conservative bureaucracy during the 1940s that Chalmers Johnson, John Dower, and others observe, the chaos of war and the subsequent purge, land reform, and zaibatsu dissolution induced temporary fluidity in existing leadership hierarchies. New institutions and new types of leaders had a brief chance to rise, profoundly affecting the dynamics of conservative leadership ever since.

This chaotic era was the period when the contrasting careers of Tanaka Kakuei and Fukuda Takeo got underway. When Imperial Navy planes attacked Pearl Harbor on December 8, 1941 (Tokyo Standard Time), Fukuda had just left his post as budget examiner for the Army Ministry to become financial advisor to the collaborationist regime in Nanking. At war’s end he was bureau chief in the MOF Secretariat, and by 1947 chief of the Budget Bureau; he was clearly a candidate for MOF jimujikan (administrative vice minister), the most coveted bureaucratic position in Japan. In 1950, Fukuda was arrested in the Shōwa Denkō scandal (for receiving a bribe of ¥350,000), and forced to resign from the Ministry of Finance without becoming vice minister. But he was nevertheless able, two years later, to garner a Diet seat on the basis of his almost impeccable bureaucratic credentials. Gin Dokei recipient Fukuda progressed with equal rapidity under both Tōjō and Mac Arthur, and his professional career proceeded untouched by the chaos around him. That career epitomized the continuity which was one major dimension of Japanese life during the turbulent 1940s.

For Tanaka, on the other hand, the coming of war had profound career implications. In 1939 he was drafted into the Imperial Army and sent to Manchuria. By Pearl Harbor Day, he had been released from military service, after a near-fatal bout of pneumonia, and had returned to a menial part-time, construction-industry job in Niigata while trying to regain his strength. Within four years, however, his economic standing had been strikingly transformed. Tanaka had become a prosperous contractor, reputedly wealthy mainly from largesse gathered through entrepreneurial activities in Korea at war’s end (Tachibana 1976a:149-59). And in 1947, when Fukuda assumed directorship of the MOF Budget Bureau, Tanaka became a Dietman, at only twenty-eight years of age.

Two incidents transformed Tanaka’s prospects. In 1942 he married the daughter of a Niigata contractor with numerous contacts in the Home Ministry, Army Ministry, and other agencies rapidly expanding their construction activities under the demands of wartime. In 1944, largely as a result of his father-in-law’s contacts, the twenty-six-year-old Tanaka landed a major army contract for relocating a piston-ring plant from Oji, Japan, to Taejon, Korea, to render it less vulnerable to allied bombing. In 1980 yen, the contract was worth ¥9–10 billion, or around $50 million (Tachibana 1976a:150).

Tanaka was given a sizeable advance by the army to undertake the relocation of the piston-ring plant, and went to Korea in early 1945 to plan the logistics of the undertaking. But in the chaos of war’s end, the project was never completed, and a final accounting for the funds Tanaka received was never made. In his autobiography, Tanaka explains ambiguously that the project resources at his command were used “for the good of the new Korea” (Tanaka 1966:170-71). But it appears likely that a substantial portion of the army funds were appropriated by Tanaka and used to launch his political career (Tachibana 1976a:154-68). Shortly after war’s end, Tanaka, in any case, became a significant financial benefactor of the new Progressive Party (Shimpo Tō) headed by Machida Chūji and in 1947 financed his own successful campaign for the Diet.

War and reconstruction exerted a profound influence on the dynamics of conservative leadership in Japan that greatly transcends the case of Tanaka Kakuei. They weakened many of the mainline establishment groups, such as the major zaibatsu. Wartime profiteering created vast pools of hoarded wealth in a largely impoverished land and new loci of political power, often operating mostly behind the scenes. Kodama Yoshio, made wealthy by trafficking in precious stones and contraband as a procurement agent for the Japanese Imperial Army in China, rose to political influence in conservative ranks as a result of the war. In the early postwar years he is reported to have provided at times well over half the total campaign funding for Yoshida Shigeru and Satō Eisaku’s Liberal Party. Kishi Nobusuke, Minister of Munitions in Tōjō’s Cabinet and coordinator of the Sangyō Setsubi Eidan (Industrial Equipment Corporation) in the latter stages of the war, is said to have profited substantiallly from the dispersal of military raw material stocks, enriching himself sufficiently to support his political career. Kodama, Kishi, and Tanaka were three of the most important financial pillars and power brokers in conservative ranks throughout the postwar period, and all gained a financial base for their political operations during World War II and the period immediately following.

Wartime chaos and its aftermath, then, greatly aided Tanaka Kakuei in his early career, but did little to promote the advancement of Fukuda Takeo inside the bureaucracy. Why these two individuals advanced steadily (after their debuts as freshmen Dietmen—Tanaka in 1947 and Fukuda in 1952) can be answered by looking at the roles they played in the overall Japanese political system.

Conservative Politicians as Resource Brokers

Leaders (both formal and informal) can be seen as having at least three major functional roles in relation to policy formation—legitimizing particular patterns of policy, originating policy positions, and brokering preexisting demands for some form of policy output. The frequency with which leaders perform one or another of these functions varies significantly from nation to nation, with legitimation and brokerage particularly pronounced in Japan.

A cultural predisposition to settle major issues of policy in private through intermediaries, and in public only to ratify, rather than to decide, policy questions may account for the frequency with which formal leaders appear as legitimators rather than as originators of policy in Japan. (Some formal leaders, such as the emperor and many elderly corporate presidents, act exclusively as legitimators, participating in decision making only ceremonially to ratify decisions which have already been made.) However, structural characteristics of the Japanese political economy appear most important in explaining why Japanese conservative leaders function so frequently as brokers and why ability at brokerage has been such an important precondition for success in modern Japanese politics.

In this paper, “brokerage” is understood to mean the act of mediating between private-sector groups or individuals desiring direct material benefits or regulatory actions conferring such benefits, on the one hand, and governmental bodies perceived capable of providing such services, on the other. The mediation of more abstract demands for “national security,” “clean government,” “crime control,” and other public goods is not construed as brokerage, nor are nonmediatory policy initiatives by public figures themselves. The heart of brokerage as considered here is the mediating role of politicians in “pork-barrel politics.” “Brokerage” can be thought of as a major subcategory within the broader classification which Theodore Lowi calls “distributive” policy making (Lowi 1972:299–300).

Every nation, of course, has its “smoke-filled rooms” where political intermediaries hammer out patterns of compensation for private-sector clients. What is distinctive about Japanese politics is that brokerage is a major part of total political activity, and central ability at brokerage determines who leads the nation. In sharp contrast to Europe, and to a lesser degree the United States, basic ideologically oriented debates on the proper nature of the domestic political system and of class relationships do not rend the Japanese political order, nor are foreign-policy controversies high on the political agenda. Public-works expenditures, allocation of government land, and the distribution of subsidies for farmers, small business, and so on are the questions which agitate Japanese politicians, especially those in conservative ranks. The salience of brokerage-related, “pork-barrel” politics is clear from the composition of the national budget. Subsidies comprised a percentage of the whole much higher than the average for the OECD over the two decades 1955–1975, and public works expenditures were also unusually high.

The correlation between brokerage skills and tenure in national leadership positions also appears unusually strong in Japan, suggesting the importance of brokerage abilities in determining who leads the nation. Of the eight United States presidents since Franklin D. Roosevelt, only three (Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon, and Gerald Ford) had extensive brokerage experience in national politics before being elected chief executive. Of the remaining five nonprofessional politicians, one was a former general, another a former actor, and the third a former peanut farmer. France has routinely elected aristocratic presidents like Charles de Gaulle and Valery Giscard d’Estaing, who disdain the political process and who are relative newcomers to its intricacies. Even parliamentary democracies like Britain frequently place higher priority on policy orientation than on brokerage skills in selecting leadership, as the selection of figures such as Margaret Thatcher, Edward Heath, and Winston Churchill to head the Conservative Party suggest. In Japan, however, factors other than brokerage skill (ideological orientation, charisma, rhetorical skill, and so on) have been relatively unimportant to leadership success.

Brokerage ability in Japan derives preeminently from stable, institutionalized ties with the bureaucracy which allow a politician to consistently deliver resources formally controlled by government ministries (such as budget allocations and construction permits) into the hands of private-sector groups. Former bureaucrats, with a wealth of personal contacts developed from years of government service, tend to be best able to mediate for private-sector groups. Not surprisingly, such former officials (including Yoshida Shigeru, Kishi Nobusuke, Ikeda Hayato, Satō Eisaku, Fukuda Takeo, and Ōhira Masayoshi) served as prime minister for over 80 percent of the period 1952–1980. Such nonbureaucrats as have served were mostly either compromise candidates like Suzuki Zenkō, who possessed their own intraparty mediating skills, or leaders like Tanaka Kakuei, who developed institutionalized ties with the bureaucracy like those the former officials already possessed. Practically the only common distinguishing trait of all postwar Japanese prime ministers is that they have been first and foremost skilled brokers of some variety.

The central factor forcing conservative Japanese politicians into brokerage roles has been the tradition of a strong central bureaucracy capable of profoundly affecting the livelihood of citizens. This reality, combined with the uneven responsiveness of the bureaucracy to demands from various sectors of the population, has caused some interest groups to rely on party politicians, often with bureaucratic origins, to satisfy their demands. Following the Meiji restoration, for example, bureaucrats allocated budget funds preferentially to areas such as southern Kyushu and western Honshu which had spearheaded the restoration and from which the bureaucrats themselves came. Other regions, such as Tōhoku in the northeast, felt deprived and allied with party politicians to seek compensation. Not surprisingly, the leading political broker of prewar Japan, Hara Kei, was a native of Fukushima Prefecture in the northeast, an area (within the Mito domain) which had supported the Tokugawa Shogunate. Through extensive brokerage activities during ten years as Home Minister—particularly in providing railroads to outlying areas not favored by the bureaucracy—Hara ultimately rose to the prime ministership in 1918, the first party politician to do so. (For further details on Hara Kei, see Najita 1967.)

Although Hara Kei himself was clearly a great political broker and rose to the prime ministership on his skills in that area, brokerage was still not normally performed as extensively by politicians, nor was it as central to their success, as was to be the case after World War II. Brokerage became more crucial in conservative politics, and success at brokerage a more important determinant of political success for conservative politicians, for the following reasons:

(1) Reestablishment of a multiparty democracy, which made politicians more vulnerable to demands by constituents for brokerage services.

(2) Continuous one-party rule for more than a generation from 1955. The increasingly institutionalized relationship between bureaucrats and the LDP makes it relatively simple for politicians to call on the services of bureaucrats and increases conservative politicians’ influence on the inner workings of the bureaucracy.

(3) Rapid economic growth within a highly regulated political system. The headlong economic growth of the 1950s, 1960s, and early 1970s created imbalances between supply and demand (for credit and raw materials, for example) which had to be brokered whenever the bureaucracy refused to let the market work, as it did frequently.

Rapid growth promoted brokerage in several ways. It transformed population distribution and industrial structures, creating conflicts between regulatory patterns and economic realities that needed to be brokered. For example, population during the 1960s grew rapidly in certain prefectures around metropolitan Tokyo, such as Saitama and Chiba. These areas needed more bank branches, for which authorization was controlled by the Ministry of Finance. LDP politicians, especially those with MOF backgrounds, were often enlisted as brokers to lobby for new branch authorizations. Pressure for political brokerage also developed in the transportation industry—increased numbers of taxis and expanded airline networks had to be authorized, for example. Points of tension between business and regulation are natural sites for political brokerage, and they were numerous in the Japan of the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. This was because these decades were a period of extraordinarily rapid growth and social transformation, supervised by a powerful bureaucracy which found changes in its accustomed formal modes of operation unpleasant and difficult.

Perhaps the most important consequence of rapid growth for patterns of political brokerage in Japan was that the resources available to the state for allocation increased: between 1955 and 1978 net government expenditures increased more than thirtyfold, from ¥2.7 trillion to ¥96.7 trillion (Nihon Ginkō 1979:210). The proportion composed by the politically strategic, public-works expenditures (for roads, bridges, ports, and so on) was rising also: in 1934–1936, public works comprised 7.5 percent of the central government’s general account budget; in 1955, 10 percent; in fiscal 1979, 17.5 percent (Ōkurashō 1979:274). Grants in aid to local government, some of which comprise a highly politicized resource, rose from 0.3 percent of the national budget in 1934–1936 to 15.5 percent of a massively larger budget in 1979 (Ōkurashō 1979:274).

Rapid growth also helped increase the value of government lands, which are sold to the public by the Ministry of Finance in an often highly politicized process. The increasing international competitiveness and trade surpluses that accompanied growth also created, at times, a demand for emergency import programs which were often politicized and naturally involved substantial brokerage by politicians. Foreign aid contracts, which began to multiply rapidly during the 1970s, have also become a major resource brokered by politicians—particularly large aid contracts subsidizing trade with the People’s Republic of China.

Given the pressures on Japanese conservative politicians during the 1950s and 1960s to become resource brokers, and the rapidly expanding volume of resources to be allocated, it is not surprising that skills at allocating existing resources, and even at creating new resources to allocate, were a key factor in the political rise of Tanaka Kakuei and, to a lesser degree, of Fukuda Takeo. Fukuda’s brokerage has involved allocating loans, budget quotas, and certain regulatory benefits bestowed by the Ministry of Finance, where he served as a bureaucrat for over twenty years and as minister for a total of four and one-half years between 1965 and 1974. Tanaka’s brokerage activities have been mainly in the construction, transportation, and broadcasting sectors, and only secondarily in finance. Fukuda’s brokerage style is somewhat less direct than Tanaka’s; he is said to work more through intermediaries, such as former MOF kobun (junior associate) Sumita Satoshi, and son-in-law Ochi Michio. (During Fukuda’s prime ministership there were, however, important nonbrokerage issues of policy, such as the 7 percent growth issue in 1977–1978, on which he directly and personally asserted himself.)

Despite differences of style and area of policy concern, Tanaka and Fukuda faced the strategic problem of all Japanese political brokers: establishing a consistent capability to deliver resources formally controlled by the bureaucracy (budget allocations, construction permits, approvals of bank merger applications, and so on) into the hands of private-sector interest groups. The solution to this problem has, in both Tanaka’s and Fukuda’s cases, been developing close, institutionalized relations between themselves and the bureaucracy. One key element in such relations has been their bureaucratic support networks strategically placed in ministries important for brokerage operations.

John Campbell and other analysts have pointed to the importance in Japanese policy making of vertically organized “sub-governments” composed of bureaucrats, politicians, and interest-group representatives with common policy goals. (One such group is the agricultural lobby, intent on assuring high income levels for farmers.) Equally important, at a different level of analysis, are the personal “support networks” of politicians like Fukuda and Tanaka. These are also composed, like “sub-governments,” of bureaucrats, politicians, and interest-group representatives—but their purpose is to sustain the brokerage deals a particular politician makes and to be compensated in return, rather than to press for any specific policy measures.

The case of Fukuda Takeo is a classic example of the power of support networks and how they can aid a politician’s success in policy making and his consequent rise to leadership. Throughout the 1970s, between fifteen and thirty former MOF officials were continuously serving in the Diet. This number rose to thirty-two in the June 1980 general election (Nihon Keizai Shimbun, June 24, 1980). But none of these former officials recorded achievements in financial-sector brokerage equal to Fukuda Takeo’s. Fukuda was known from his early days in MOF for his subtle understanding of complex legal details. This skill alone, however, can hardly explain his unusual policy achievements. In 1965, Fukuda coordinated financing of the first national budget deficit in seventeen years, despite complex legal and political obstacles. In 1971 he engineered the creation by merger of Dai Ichi Kangyō Bank (Japan’s largest commercial bank) over stiff political, banking-sector, and MOF opposition. After the oil shock, Fukuda was instrumental in securing concessionary government financing for the Sumitomo Group’s proposed massive petrochemical complex in Singapore, by having it declared a “national project”—a new appellation for a private, Japanese, overseas investment.

The crucial factor in Fukuda Takeo’s brokerage success was his long stint in powerful political positions inside the Ministry of Finance. Fukuda served as MOF minister, deputy premier, or prime minister for more than eight years between 1965 and 1978. Before reaching these positions, he had also, of course, spent over twenty years in the ministry as a career government official. Through most of this long association with MOF, Fukuda has been able to influence the promotion patterns of other bureaucrats, and hence to develop a network of officials and former officials who are beholden to him.

One such person is Sumita Satoshi, vice governor of the Bank of Japan (1979–1984) and its prospective next governor. Sumita, a kobun of Fukuda’s who, like Fukuda, hails from Gunma Prefecture, became MOF vice minister in 1969 without having served as Budget Bureau chief. This striking departure from MOF tradition was made possible, it is widely said, by Fukuda’s personal intervention as MOF minister. Sumita subsequently served Fukuda loyally—he assisted Fukuda’s brokerage in the 1971 Dai Ichi Kangyō Bank merger case, arranged key Export-Import Bank loans (while Sumita was head of Ex-Im), and so on.

Tanaka Kakuei, of course, never served as a bureaucrat or as cabinet minister of any given ministry for more than three years. Tanaka nevertheless created a strong network of bureaucratic supporters, which proved invaluable to his brokerage efforts and helped to assure his selection over Fukuda as prime minister in 1972. Many of Tanaka’s strongest supporters, including Aichi Kiichi, a key campaign lieutenant in 1972, were members of the Ministry of Finance, Fukuda’s bailiwick.

Like Fukuda, Tanaka placed high priority on “capturing” key ministerial positions for sufficient lengths of time to affect intraministerial personnel selection policies in a systematic way. Although Tanaka personally served as MOF minister for only three years (1962–1965), his close political allies (including Mizuta Mikio of his own faction and members of the Ōhira-Suzuki faction) monopolized the MOF ministerial post for the entire thirteen and one-half years between 1960 and 1980 that the Fukuda faction did not hold the post. (For more details, see Hyōron 1973–1977.) At least two former MOF vice ministers, Hatoyama Iichirō and Aizawa Hideyuki, are reputedly indebted to Tanaka for their career advancement within the MOF. Not coincidentally, these two were jimujikan (administrative vice minister) and Budget Bureau chief respectively during the massive 20–25 percent annual expansions in budget expenditures engineered by Tanaka during the early 1970s.

Tanaka has also placed great emphasis on “capturing” other strategic ministerial posts consistently enough to affect intraministerial dynamics. His top priority has been the Construction Ministry. Between 1967 and 1970, three of six Ministers of Construction were Tanaka faction members; between 1970 and 1976 seven consecutive Ministers of Construction came from the Tanaka faction (Hyōron 1973). Tanaka has also aided the tiny Mizuta faction, over which Tanaka traditionally has had great influence, in having Mizuta faction members named four consecutive times to the Post and Telecommunications ministerial position during 1972–1976.

Other means Tanaka Kakuei has often employed in cultivating the Japanese bureaucracy include the following:

(1) Willingness to expand or to create public corporations, and to support budgets for them large enough to assure handsome salaries, perquisites, and retirement benefits for the ex-bureaucrats who join them. During the two years that Tanaka was prime minister, for example, salaries of public corporation chairmen (almost all of them former bureaucrats) jumped 67 percent, from an average of ¥480,000/ month to ¥800,000/month (Seirōkyō Chōsa Honbu 1979:77). In 1974 Prime Minister Tanaka Kakuei secured Diet approval to establish the Chiiki Shinkō Seibi Kōdan (Regional Promotion Facilities Corporation). This public corporation had the largest complement of ex-bureaucrats (sixteen—five from Transport, four from Construction, and three from Finance) of all public corporations in Japan at the time of its formation.

(2) Support for the political aspirations of top bureaucrats. Of the ten former bureaucrats elected in the national constituency in the June 1980 upper-house election, for example, four were Tanaka supporters, including two former Vice Ministers of Construction, one Vice Minister of Finance, and one Vice Minister of Agriculture (Nihon Keizai Shimbun, June 25, 1980). A typical case was that of former MOF Vice Minister Hatoyama Iichirō, who, together with his MOF contemporaries, had made Tanaka an honorary member of their dōki-kai (entering class association). Tanaka’s brokerage insured critical electoral support from several small Buddhist religious groups he had aided in the late 1960s on behalf of Hatoyama, an elite MOF bureaucrat who had had no previous connection to those groups.

(3) Aid in sustaining within the Diet policy positions advocated by bureaucrats. During 1968–1969, for example, when Tanaka was chairman of the LDP Rice Price Committee, he is said to have cooperated with MOF bureaucrats in moderating producer rice-price increases. One of the most attractive features of Tanaka Kakuei, in the view of Japanese bureaucrats, is his dependability, stemming from his ability to deliver on promises made.

Although Tanaka and Fukuda both cultivated close relations with the bureaucracy, their brokerage activities have been rather different. Fukuda, with his establishment credentials, succeeded in most cases despite a diffident, low-key, and often passive approach to nonbureaucrats, waiting for private groups to come to him or his representatives with problems to solve. Fukuda has been able to concentrate, in his intraparty activities, on policy definition (rather than on political organization) in the fashion of the classic eighteenth- and nineteenth-century British statesmen. Aside from his four and one-half years as MOF minister, Fukuda has spent more time as chairman of the LDP’s Policy Affairs Research Council (Seichō Kai) than in any other political position.

Tanaka Kakuei, by contrast, has been forced by his lowly origins to aggressively “sell on” (i.e., to place others in his debt by seeking to do them favors). His brokerage has consisted not so much of passively mediating among contending positions, or in formulating abstract policy, as in giving and demanding favors in a continuous stream of discrete transactions. Tanaka’s major intraparty activity, which aided him mightily in gaining the prime ministership, was more than four years’ service as LDP secretary general.

Examples which illustrate the dynamics of Tanaka’s brokerage include the following:

(1) Allocation of government land. While MOF minister during 1962–1965, Tanaka “sold on” in the form of choice national lands (koku yūchi) to large numbers of major construction companies and manufacturing firms. Tachibana estimates that during Tanaka’s three-year term at MOF he sold as much government land to the private sector as all the other MOF ministers during the 1957–1971 period combined (Tachibana 1976:75). During this period Tanaka offered first-rate, central-Tokyo parcels of government land to all three major Tokyo-based dailies—the Yomiuri Shimbun, Asahi Shimbun, and Nihon Keizai Shimbun. They all accepted, and have been remarkably conciliatory for most of the period since. In 1966 the Nihon Keizai Shimbun published Tanaka’s autobiography. All three papers were complimentary when Tanaka became prime minister in 1972 and were slow to publicize Bungei Shunjū’s revelations in mid 1974 of scandals involving Tanaka. Tanaka also reportedly “sold on” at later dates to such established institutions as Mitsui Bussan, Sanwa Bank, and the Palace Hotel (frequent meeting place of zaikai leaders). He did so by helping these organizations acquire prestigious sites for headquarters buildings on land close to the Imperial Palace which was formerly owned by the national government.

(2) Creation of the Kankyō Eisei Kinyū Kōkō (Environmental Sanitation Industry Financial Institution). One evening in 1968 Tanaka, as secretary general of the LDP, met with representatives of the all-Japan ryokan, teahouse, and bathhouse industry associations, who wanted assured access to low-cost government credit. In a single night’s discussion, Tanaka hammered out an agreement with these groups to establish a special government financial institution to service their needs, which he later convinced the MOF to support. All the above pressure groups vigorously supported the Tanaka faction in the subsequent 1969 general election.

(3) The Bank of Japan special loan to Yamaichi Securities (1965). Only once in postwar history has the Bank of Japan granted a direct loan to a business firm other than a bank. The exception was made in 1965 at the express order of MOF minister Tanaka Kakuei. Yamaichi Securities, one of the “big four” securities firms, was threatened with collapse, because of the precipitous decline in Tokyo stock prices and transaction volume during the early 1960s. Yamaichi and many private-sector financial leaders, such as Nakayama Sōhei, chairman of the Industrial Bank of Japan, wanted dramatic action to prevent financial panic. Tanaka provided it. He reportedly convinced the MOF and Bank of Japan bureaucrats to extend the unprecedented special loan to Yamaichi at a dramatic all-night meeting at MOF headquarters in Kasumigaseki.

(4) Tanaka brokerage during the U.S.-Japan textile crisis (1971). After less than six months as MITI minister, Tanaka was able in October 1971 to negotiate an agreement to restrain Japanese man-made fiber exports to the United States which both the American and the Japanese textile industries would accept. Ōhira Masayoshi and Miyazawa Kiichi, the MITI ministers preceding Tanaka, had been trying unsuccessfully to do this for nearly two years. Skillful use of the carrot (promise of large-scale government subsidies for the textile industry) and the stick (invocation of fears of strong U.S. sanctions against Japanese exports) secured domestic consensus on an agreement the Americans could accept. (For full details, see Destler, Fukui, and Satō 1979).

(5) Tanaka’s road-tax proposal. In 1969 LDP Secretary General Tanaka proposed in the Diet introduction of a special road tax of ¥50,000 per motor vehicle per year. The Japan Auto Manufacturers’ Association (JAMA) came out strongly in opposition and is reported to have sharply increased its contributions to the LDP’s funding arm, the Kokumin Kyōkai, during 1970–1972. Tanaka proposed subsequently to reduce the auto tax to ¥15,000/year, and then let even that bill die quietly in the Diet, thus vindicating JAMA’s foresight in cultivating Tanaka. By creating a crisis and then allowing it to die, Tanaka increased his financial support from business and, to some extent, his political support from business groups. (For details, see Tachibana 1976a:20.)

(6) Dealings with Lockheed (1972). In early 1972, Lockheed Aircraft’s major commercial goals in Japan were: a) to sell its Tristar jet to All Nippon Airways (ANA), in competition with Douglas Aircraft’s DC-10; and b) to sell its PXL anti-submarine-warfare (ASW) aircraft to the Japanese Defense Agency. Lockheed is reported to have approached Tanaka, through a major trading company, and offered him ¥500 million ($2.5 million) in return for his brokerage services. Tanaka appears to have been instrumental in convincing ANA to opt for the Tristar over the DC-10. ANA wanted new, high-traffic domestic routes, as well as the chance to fly overseas. These “resources” were being allocated by key Tanaka-faction Dietman Hashimoto Tomisaburō, the transport minister.

In the case of the PXL, Tanaka used foreign pressure (gaiatsu) to buttress his brokerage. The Defense Agency had reputedly decided tentatively against Lockheed’s PXL, in favor of a domestically produced ASW aircraft. Tanaka, intervening, used Richard Nixon’s growing impatience with the U.S.-Japan trade balance to sway the Defense Agency. At the Hawaii Summit on September 1, 1972, Tanaka and Nixon agreed that Japan should undertake a $320 million emergency aircraft import program, which Tanaka agreed would include the Lockheed PXL.

A striking trait of Tanaka’s brokerage—one which promoted his rise to the prime ministership—has been his ability to create resources for allocation. Tanaka was the first MOF minister to aggressively use koku yūchi (national land) sales to advance his political position. His power to choose locations for public works projects made information concerning such projects a valued political resource Tanaka could allocate. Other resources created by Tanaka to be allocated by him included foreign-aid projects, emergency import programs, and administrative spots in government corporations. His “plan for remodeling the Japanese archipelago,” announced in the early 1970s, massively expanded the range of resources that he and his associates could allocate.

Tanaka Kakuei and Fukuda Takeo are not the only significant conservative political brokers in recent Japanese history. Some brokers remained largely behind the scenes, like Nezu Kaiichirō, Gotō Keita, and Kobayashi Ataru, who rose during the depression on the strength of entrepreneurial ability at reorganizing bankrupt companies, and others like Kodama Yoshio, who were spawned by the fortunes of war.

Other brokers have played both private and public roles. Men like Kishi Nobusuke (industrial-policy and foreign-aid brokerage), Kawashima Shōjirō (real estate and foreign aid), Nakasone Yasuhiro (transportation), Mizuta Mikio (finance and broadcasting), Ikeda Hayato (finance), Satō Eisaku (transportation), Kōno Ichirō, Ono Bamboku, and others have been Diet leaders while at the same time being powerful in informal, private transactions.

Behind-the-scenes brokers (kuromaku) and brokers with a public role share two key traits: (1) an independent power base, usually financial (giving them initial resources to facilitate brokerage), and (2) institutionalized connections with key parts of the existing power structure (allowing them to influence that structure when necessary). The greater their financial backing and the stronger their bureaucratic connections, the more influential brokers have been in national decision making. Ex-bureaucrats have an advantage as brokers. Not surprisingly, the prime ministers who have exerted the greatest impact on post-Occupation policy formation (Yoshida, Kishi, Ikeda, Satō, and Fukuda) have been former bureaucrats. The only striking exception is Tanaka Kakuei.

Resource brokerage, like most of Japanese “compensation politics,” has thus far been the province largely of Liberal Democratic Party politicians, mainly from rural constituencies, and behind-the-scenes conservative kingmakers. Opposition politicians desiring material benefits from the government for their constituents, therefore, must work closely with the ruling conservatives behind the scenes. Sometimes they even join the conservatives formally, as Prime Minister Suzuki Zenkō did in December 1948.

With the waning of conservative power during the late 1960s and early 1970s, groups other than the ruling conservatives began participating significantly in brokerage, first at the local and subsequently at the national level. The growing significance of opposition groups in policy making may have been arrested by the conservative resurgence that began with the 1979 local elections and has continued through the LDP “double election” victory of June 1980. But in the consensus-oriented Japanese political system, which tends to respect established human relationships, opposition politicians during the early 1980s must still be consulted in a manner disproportionate to their declining legislative strength. The Japanese resource-brokerage process is also rendered more complex by the shift of the ruling LDP from a rural to an urban electoral base, a long-term trend quite clearly confirmed in the 1980 returns. This development presages both the rise of new types of conservative political brokers and a new range of demands on such brokers, perhaps with a considerably stronger consumer orientation than heretofore.

Conservative Political Brokerage and the Evolution of the Japanese Economy

As was noted earlier, political brokers capable of interceding with the bureaucracy on behalf of private-sector interest groups have come to the fore in Japanese politics and persisted at the top in a remarkably consistent pattern. During 1952–1980, six politicians with particularly strong brokerage capabilities (Yoshida, Kishi, Ikeda, Satō, Tanaka, and Fukuda) held the prime ministership for a total of 22.5 years, for an average term of 3.75 years. The other four (Hatoyama, Ishibashi, Miki, and Ōhira), who were less active as brokers, held power for a total of 5.5 years, an average term of 1.375 years.

One criterion for judging the brokerage capabilities of Japanese politicians must be the quality of their ties with powerful ministries. Close, institutionalized ties to officials with regulatory clout and allocative power are a vital precondition to delivering the resources which private-sector interest groups desire. Each of the six “strong brokers” listed above had such ties. Yoshida was a former Foreign Ministry official, rising to the premiership during the Occupation era when that ministry controlled the avenues of approach to the all-powerful Allied Forces. Kishi was a former vice minister of the Shōkō Shō (Ministry of Commerce) who entered politics just when the Shōkō Shō’s postwar successor (MITI) was at the height of its control powers. Ikeda Hayato was an MOF alumnus during the same period, while Satō Eisaku hailed from the prewar Railway Ministry and the postwar Transport Ministry as the pattern of transport regulation was undergoing considerable flux. The strong personal networks binding Fukuda and Tanaka to strategic ministries have already been noted.

The five strong brokers hailing from the bureaucracy all served a full career in their respective ministries before entering politics. This gave them a chance to develop the tight web of bureaucratic ties necessary for effective brokerage, as well as to gain private-sector allies. Their ability to develop support networks was also aided by their elite university backgrounds; all were graduates of imperial universities, and all but Ikeda were from Tokyo University. Ōhira Masayoshi, by contrast, graduated from Hitotsubashi University and resigned early from MOF to enter politics. These two developments made it harder for him to create the personal networks so valuable for brokerage which the other five ex-bureaucrats possessed.

The reports of Japanese journalists and politicians also tend to confirm the unusual involvement in brokerage of the six strong brokers listed above. Ikeda, for example, was noted for his involvement in brokering government loans to industry during the credit-short, late 1940s, as were Fukuda and, at a later date, Kishi, Satō, and Tanaka. None of the prime ministers less active were so known. With the exception of Japan’s 1956 recognition of the Soviet Union, engineered by Hatoyama, virtually all the major departures of postwar foreign and domestic policy have been made under “strong” brokers, suggesting once again their capabilities within the political system.

Of the leaders less active as brokers, all but Hatoyama were to a large extent temperamentally disinclined to play an active brokerage role. Ishibashi, a former journalist, disdained compensation-oriented aspects of the political process and may have been the most ideological of Japanese premiers; Miki, his kobun or younger confidante, was strikingly similar in orientation. Ōhira, also highly intellectual, was disposed to leave many aspects of brokerage to his political ally, Tanaka, and to leave issues to play themselves out in the political arena rather than actively brokering them. Hatoyama, although skilled at mediation, was handicapped by his own purge at the hands of the Occupation, the disruptive effect of the purge on his network of personal associates, and his relatively weak ties to strategic, economic, policy-making bodies like the Ministry of Finance.

Forces deep within Japanese society have been responsible for this striking prominence of brokers in the nation’s political leadership. Strong cultural predispositions toward decision making outside the public view and against direct, confrontational resolution of conflict produce a great need for mediators of various types. Rapid economic growth has created new resources (expanded state budgets, newly valuable government land, and so on) for allocation, while at the same time creating gaps between regulatory policy and new economic realities crying out for brokerage. Bureaucratic power, coupled with unevenness in its application, has also intensified private-sector demand for resource brokers and helped those skilled at such mediation to move to the center of the political process.

This prominence of brokers in Japanese political processes has had several important consequences for the political economy:

(1) It has generally complicated the task of bureaucratic control, since brokers are tempted to arbitrate controls for the sake of political or material gain. This has, for example, clearly been true in the field of credit allocation where actions such as Tanaka’s support for expansion of government small-business-oriented credit facilities has often undercut bureaucratic efforts to reshape industrial structures.

(2) It has often facilitated the operation of market mechanisms, albeit in somewhat politicized forms. For example, it has aided in the development of new entrepreneurial groups (the Fuyō Group, the Sanwa Group, and so on), rising in response to the operation of competitive forces, regularly allying themselves with brokers for protection against efforts by more established enterprises to suppress them.

(3) It tends to impart an expansionary, and often an inflationary, bias to Japanese economic policy because it creates a class of intermediaries whose tasks are facilitated by an expanding resource pie and vastly complicated if they are forced to mediate conflict-ridden, zero-sum allocation processes. This broker-induced bias toward expansion was clearest in 1971–1974, when Tanaka Kakuei was first MITI minister and then prime minister. Large-scale satisfaction of interest-group demands drove national budgets up 20–25 percent annually and induced a trend toward double-digit inflation well before the 1973 oil shock. But the bias surfaced at times even during the regimes of fiscal conservatives like Fukuda Takeo. This occurred, for example, in 1978, ironically just as the nation was entering an era of low growth and budgetary constraint. As competition for the LDP presidency with an expansionist Ōhira Masayoshi (backed by Tanaka) intensified and as foreign pressure for reflation also grew, Fukuda expanded public works expenditures massively and drew up a national budget projecting spending over 35 percent greater than revenue.

The expansionary bias of Japanese public policy induced by the prominence of brokers also induces a greater measure of order and harmony into Japan’s domestic politics and its international economic relations than would otherwise be the case. Tanaka’s expanding budgets, for example, had room for the welfare spending and aid to local governments which opposition parties wanted. Those budgets also provided for the foreign aid and the support for emergency imports into Japan which foreign countries desired. The generous use of subsidies, facilitated by headlong fiscal expansion, also made domestic interest groups, such as the textile industry, tractible in their disputes with foreign countries.

There are important variations among Japanese conservative political brokers in their paths to political power and their leadership styles once in positions of responsibility. Broadly, Japanese conservative leadership divides between bureaucrats (kanryō), epitomized by Fukuda Takeo, and political entrepreneurs without elite backgrounds (shomin), epitomized by Tanaka Kakuei. Kanryō tend to rise predictably from outstanding academic backgrounds at Tokyo University to top-level posts in strategic ministries like MOF, and hence into politics. They tend to be technically proficient, often issues-oriented, and relatively passive in leadership style. Shomin, by contrast, are of necessity pragmatic, aggressive promoters, reliant for success on their ability to curry favor with an establishment to whom they are essentially outsiders. Shomin are of necessity more concerned with the dynamics of political power than with the substance of public issues and are, as a result, often more reliant on the bureaucracy in the formulation of concrete policy proposals than the former bureaucrats themselves.

The distinction between kanryō and shomin is also often important in analyzing the impact of conservative leadership on the Japanese political economy. Broadly, shomin tend to be more consistently expansionist because of their need to create resources to reinforce their essentially vulnerable political positions. Kanryō, because of their established status, can generally afford to be more dispassionate in their judgment of macroeconomic questions and occasionally oppose growth-oriented policies which they feel are leading the nation toward economic or political instability.

When the established status of individual kanryō in the political hierarchy is for some reason called into question, or when growth coincides strongly with the interests of the ministries they represent, such ex-bureaucrats often adopt the expansion-oriented policies more typical of shomin. Thus, Ikeda Hayato and Ōhira Masayoshi, two of the rare MOF alumni not part of the elite, Tokyo University alumni network, both led somewhat precarious political lives and tended to bolster their positions with elite business and bureaucratic groups through expansion-oriented policies. The orientation of Satō Eisaku and Kishi Nobusuke may also have been influenced by the expansionary bias of the Transportation and MITI Ministries from which they hailed. But while these kanryō may at times have pursued expansionary policies, they tended not to be as aggressively entrepreneurial in using such policies to build political IOUs as shomin like Tanaka.

A major dilemma for Japan in the 1980s is that the dominant pattern of high-growth-oriented political brokerage adopted by both shomin and, to a lesser degree, Kanryō retains its political attractiveness even as it becomes increasingly inappropriate to the times. In an era of low economic growth rates, budgetary revenues are unlikely to be sufficient to resolve conflicts just by lavishly compensating the protagonists. And increasing claims on resources from new quarters, such as defense, may further reduce the funds available for politically attractive allocation. Yet Tanaka Kakuei, with the largest faction in the Diet (101 seats in both Houses combined in mid 1981) and informal political power undiminished by his legal travails, remains committed to the techniques which have brought him to the center of the Japanese political scene.

But Japan cannot avoid the dilemma by opting for Fukuda and his leadership style. Elite-status brokers can no longer, in an increasingly egalitarian and pluralistic society, command automatic respect because of their educational or bureaucratic credentials. Gradual deregulation of the economy since the early 1960s has also undermined Kanryō capabilities. In addition, the passing of the closely knit “purge-survivor” generation, now in its seventies, is disrupting closely knit networks of business contacts that ex-bureaucrats have long mobilized to enhance their influence.

Substantial political entrepreneurship of a variety alien to the experience of both Kanryō and shomin of the past generation will most likely be required as the 1980s progress. Politicians will have to focus the concerns of the electorate increasingly on matters other than material compensation so as to moderate the political implications of the extremely slow growth of the resource pie. At times leaders may need to induce the electorate to accept sacrifice. Nakagawa Ichirō, as Agriculture Minister presiding over reduction in the real rice price during the late 1970s, and Watanabe Michio, as Finance Minister laying groundwork for tax increases in the early 1980s, provide examples of the sort of flamboyant, relatively charismatic “brokers of the scarcity era” who could emerge, and of their leadership style.

Like conservative brokers of the recent past, emerging brokers of the future such as Watanabe and Nakagawa maintain close ties with the bureaucracy. But they appeal to bureaucrats not so much because of the direct compensation they provide as for their ability to assure passage of politically unpalatable legislation desired by bureaucrats. The brokers obtain support for this through appeals to nationalism, aspirations for a more just society, and other nonacquisitive sentiments, as well as through more traditional compensation-oriented brokerage.

The evolution of Japanese conservative politics away from a preoccupation with material compensation should be aided by the gradual transformation of the ruling LDP into an urban-based party. Many new supporters of the party are relatively young blue- and white-collar urban workers, many in service industries, who are not organized to demand benefits from government. This transformation also reduces the relative influence of highly organized rural constituencies which have consistently pressured the conservative regime for large agricultural subsidies.

The dynamics of Japanese conservative leadership in the 1980s could well differ significantly from those of the previous generation, if only because of the new strategic problems relating to low growth which that leadership now confronts. But cultural predispositions toward indirect, nonconfrontationist decision making, together with structural peculiarities of the Japanese economy, will assure the continued prominence of political brokers. And as long as Japan has a clear conservative establishment with “insiders” and “outsiders” vying for political status, many essentials of the kanryō vs. shomin struggle for primacy will continue to reappear long after Fukuda Takeo and Tanaka Kakuei have passed from the political scene.

References

Destler, I. M., Haruhiro Fukui, and Hideo Satō. 1979. The textile wrangle. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Destler, I. M., Hideo Satō, Priscilla Clapp, and Haruhiro Fukui. 1976. Managing an alliance. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

Fukui Haruhiro. 1970. Party in power: The Japanese liberal democrats and policy-making. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Gendai Seiji Kenkyū Kai, ed. 1976. Tanaka Kakuei: sono eikō to zasetsu (The glory and disgrace of Tanaka Kakuei). Tokyo: Kokusai Shōgyō Shuppan.

Hatakeyama Takeshi. 1975. Habatsu no uchimaku (The inside story of factions). Tokyo: Tachikaze Shobō.

Hyōron Shinsa. 1973-. Kokkai giin sōran (Diet members almanac). Tokyo: Nihon Minsei Kenkyū Kai.

Ikuzō Tajiri. 1978. Daifuku no kenkyū (Research on Ōhira and Fukuda). Bungei Shunjū, September.

Katō Yoshiyuki. 1973. Tanaka Kakuei. Tokyo: Sankō Sha.

Lowi, Theodore. 1972. Four systems of policy, politics, and choice. Public Administration Review, 32 (July-August).

Mainichi Shimbun Sha Seiji Bu. 1975. Seihen (A political incident). Tokyo: Mainichi Shimbun Sha.

Mayumi Yoshihiko. 1972. Ningen Tanaka Kakuei (The human side of Tanaka Kakuei). Tokyo: Diamondo Sha.

Miyasaka Masayuki. 1970. Seifu-Jimintō-zaikai (Government-LDP-business world). Tokyo: Sanichi Shobō.

Najita Tetsuo. 1967. Hara Kei in the politics of compromise. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Nihon Ginkō Tōkei Kyoku. 1979. Keizai tōkei nenpō (Economic statistics annual). Tokyo: Nihon Ginkō Tōkei Kyoku.

Ninagawa Masao. 1976. Tanaka Kakuei shinazu (Tanaka Kakuei doesn’t die). Tokyo: Yamate Shobō.

Ochi Michio. 1973. Chichi: Fukuda Takeo (Father: Fukuda Takeo). Tokyo: Sankei Shimbun Sha.

Ōkurashō Shukei Kyoku. 1979. Zaisei tōkei (Financial statistics). Tokyo: Ōkurashō.

Pempel, T. J., ed. 1977. Policymaking in contemporary Japan. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Roberts, John G. 1973. Mitsui. New York: Weatherhill.

Satō Yūichi. 1976. Fukuda Takeo ron (An explanation of Fukuda Takeo). Tokyo: Jutaku Shinpo Sha.

Seirōkyō Chōsa Honbu. 1979. Chōsa jihō (Current Research). Tokyo: Seifu Kankei Tokushu Hōjin Rōdō Kumiai Kyōgi Kai.

Tachibana Takashi. 1976a. Tanaka Kakuei kenkyū (Research on Tanaka Kakuei), Vols. I and II. Tokyo: Kōdansha.

. 1976b. Shin Tanaka Kakuei kenkyū (New research on Tanaka Kakuei). Bungei Shunjū, September, 114-35.

Tahara Sōichirō. 1978. Kool na saishō kōhō (The cool candidate for the top job). Tokyo: Gakuyō Shobō.

Tanaka Hiroshi, ed. 1974. Hoshu kakumei ni kakeru (Betting on conservative revolution). Tokyo: Yomiuri Shimbun Sha.

. 1977. Fukuda Takeo: hoshu saisei ni tatsu (Fukuda Takeo: standing at the rebirth of Japanese conservatism). Tokyo: Yomiuri Shimbun Sha.

Tanaka Kakuei. 1966. Watashi no rirekisho (My autobiography). Tokyo: Nihon Keizai Shimbun Sha.

. 1972. Rettō kaizō ron (A plan for remodeling the Japanese archipelago). Tokyo: Nikkan Kōgyō Shimbun Sha.

Thayer, Nathaniel B. 1969. How the conservatives rule Japan. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Togawa Isatake. 1972a. Sōri Tanaka Kakuei (Prime Minister Tanaka Kakuei). Tokyo: Kōdansha.

. 1972b. Tanaka Kakuei den (The story of Tanaka Kakuei). Tokyo: Tsuru Shobō.

. 1973. Tanaka Kakuei: Mogoku (The violent pronouncements of Tanaka Kakuei). Tokyo: Shobunsha.

Urate Susumi. 1978. Fukuda Takeo. Tokyo: Kokusai Shōgyō Shuppan.