When was the language developed (originally, and any major revisions)?

To begin with, ALGOL was created in 1959 by a joint meeting in Zűrich,Switzerland by GAMM (Society of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics [German group]) and ACM (Association of Computing Machinery). The conference lasted 6 days and ended with the creation of ALGOL 58. Originally ALGOL 58 was meant to be used as a universal algorithmic programing language, but the disputes over the implementation and other areas caused another conference to be called in 1960; this time in Paris, France that resulted in ALGOL 60.Since there were still disputes about the language, another branch of ALGOL was created ALGOL 68. But due to the difficulty of understanding its two-level grammar (hyper rules and meta rules i.e. ‘ALPHA:: beta.’), which was meant to be used like templates to enable multiple different types of production, it never caught on.

Original: ALGOL 58

Revisions ALGOL 60, and 68

What individuals or organizations were responsible for its development?

Organizations Responsible:

GAMM (Society of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics [German group])(ALGOL 58)

ACM (Association of Computing Machinery)(ALGOL 58)

Notable Figure:

John W. Bakus, the leader of the group which developed the language FORTRAN(Specifically involved in ALGOL 60)

Which languages did it influence and/or was influenced by?

The influence of ALGOL is far extending, such as recursive procedures which are still used by Java and C, which according to www.tiobie.com have been the top 2 programing languages in the last 10 years. Also, can be noted as a precursor to PASCAL language. As far as influences go, ALGOL was originally developed as a reaction to the FORTRAN language which is why FORTRAN had the most impact on ALGOL’s development.

Influence: Java, C, PASCAL

Influenced By: FORTRAN

For what paradigm or domain was it developed and/or used?

To put it bluntly and straight forward ALGOL was used for mathematical programming. Hence the name ALGOL(ALGOrithmic Language).

ALGOL 60 was an implementation language, one of the few around during its creation. At the time, people were having issues with compilers, so having it as implementation language made it a better language choice in computing society (Wegner, 12).

Where was it used? Great question thank you for asking! AlGOL started to generate some american excitement around the two companies of SHARE and IBM, but never became the accepted language.

According to History of Programming Languages, Edited by Richard L. Wexelblat,

“Perhaps it is just as well that IBM and its users accepted ALGOL 58 as a model for language development but did not settle upon it as a computing standard . . . too much would have to have been fixed too soon.”

What are its most important features?

Some of the most noticeable abstractions of ALGOL 60 that were new, was the block statement, parameter passing to procedures (Dainth, para 2) and nested if-then-else statements(Wegner, 7). These abstractions have continued to be used ever since. In its differences to FORTRAN during the time, ALGOL 60 was able to handle dynamic arrays and recursive procedures (Wegner, 7), which were also introduced for the first time.

Important Features: The introduction of nested if-then-else, recursive procedures, parameters passing to procedures and block statements

Is it still in use today?

ALGOL can be written and compiled today (on most computers) using a program called Marst, which compiles it into C code which then can be compiled and executed as C code. ALGOL is not very common in any working condition, in fact, many consider the language to be obsolete so it is unused except by those who have an interest in it.

Answer: No, ALGOL is no longer in use

To what can you attribute its success or failure?