The Legend of White Fang is an animated television series based on the 1906 novel White Fang by Jack London.[1] The show focuses on the main dog protagonist and a young human companion, 12-year-old female Wendy Scott, in the place of the novel's male trail guide, Weedon Scott.[2] Spanning 26 episodes for one season.

Production

Quebec-based Cinar (now WildBrain) produced the series and writer/journalist/popular historian, Pierre Berton, was a history consultant for the series.

Plot

12-year-old Wendy, a brave and kind girl, befriends wolf-husky mix White Fang. They share many adventures in Yukon's rugged Klondike territory during the Klondike Gold Rush where they encounter wolf packs, gold thieves, First Nations people, otters, poachers and treacherous avalanches.

Voice cast

Mark Hellman as White Fang

Patricia Rodriguez as Wendy

Terrence Scammell as Weedon/Alex

Pierre Lenoir as Sgt. Oakes

Neil Shee as Raven Moon

Michael Rudder as Beauty Smith

Rick Jones as Matt

Thelma Farmer as She Wolf

Anik Matern as Jeannie/Bella

Eramelinda Boquer

Sonja Ball

A.J. Henderson

Thor Bishopric

Michael O'Reilly

Kathleen Fee

George Morris

Susan Glover

Richard Dumont

Vlasta Vrána

Harry Standjofski

Bronwen Mantel

Jeannie Walker

Daniel Brochu

Greg Morton

Liz MacRae

Maria Bircher

Norman Groulx

Gary Jewell

Gordon Masten

Alan Keiping Legros

Dean Hagopian

Pauline Little

Johni Keyworth

Arthur Holden

Teddy Lee Dillon

Ian Finlay

Jane Woods

Carlyle Miller

Telecast and home media

The Legend of White Fang was first aired on the pay-TV network Family Channel in 1994. It also aired on Global Television Network and TF1 in France. HBO later broadcast in the U.S

Two volumes were released on DVD in 2006, each containing four episodes.

On 14 September 2010, Mill Creek Entertainment released the entire series on DVD in Region 1. It includes bonus episodes of Busytown Mysteries, The Busy World of Richard Scarry, Flight Squad, and The Country Mouse and the City Mouse Adventures.[3] The first disc was also released as single DVD on the same day called Wild and Free containing the same Busytown Mysteries episode.

As of 2022, the full episodes were available on YouTube.

External links

White Fang at The Big Cartoon Database

White Fang at Toonariffic.com

Notes and References