Hidayat Nur Wahid Origin/Culture/Country: Indonesian

Hidayat Nur Wahid: was elected as the leader of Indonesia's Constitutional Assembly (MPR) on 6 October 2004. He resigned as the leader of Prosperous Justice Party (Partai Keadilan Sejahtera/PKS) on 11 October 2004

Hidayat Khan Origin/Culture/Country: Indian

Hidayat Khan: an Indian sitar player, the youngest son of classical great Vilayat Khan (1928–2004).His father was one of India's most famous classical players, and Hidayat was born into the tradition of the Imdadkhani or Etawah Gharana (school), named after Hidayat's great grandfather or the village outside Agra where he lived. Throughout Hidayat's childhood, however, his father taught him as a singer, but at 14, formal sitar training in the family style began. One of the highlights of Hidayat's performances is the melodic movements that completely replicate the human voice in the true form of "gayaki ang". This style of sitar playing was introduced by his father, Ustad Vilayat Khan. In order to enhance this style more in Hidayat's sitar playing, his father initiated him into vocal music first.He is a great artist and teaches Hindustani vocal as well as Sitar.

Hidayat Inayat Khan Origin/Culture/Country: French

Hidayat Inayat Khan: a classical composer, conductor and Representative-General of the International Sufi Movement [1]. Is the son of Sufi Master Hazrat Inayat Khan and Pirani Ameena Begum. His western musical education began in Paris[2] 1932 at the L'Ecole Normale de Musique, in the violin class of Bernard Sinsheimer; the composition class of Nadia Boulanger; and the orchestra class of Diran Alexanian. Later, he attended chamber music courses given by the Lener Quartet in Budapest.

Hidayat Orujov Khudush Oglu Origin/Culture/Country: Armenian

Hidayat Orujov Khudush Oglu: is a notable writer and an Azerbaijani politician serving as the Chairman of State Committee for Work with Religious Organizations of Azerbaijan Republic. In 1992-1993, Orujov served as the State Advisor on Interethnic Relations to the President of Azerba

Taufik Hidayat Origin/Culture/Country: Indonesian

Taufik Hidayat: is an Indonesian badminton player. He is a former world champion and the current Olympic champion in men's singles. He has also won the Indonesian Open six times (1999, 2000, 2002, 2003, 2004 and 2006). When he was young, he joined the SGS Club, a badminton club in Bandung. Having been trained by Iie Sumirat, Taufik learned his characteristic confusing and tricky net play.

Mohammad Hidayatullah Origin/Culture/Country: Indian

Mohammad Hidayatullah: was the Chief Justice of India. He served as the acting President of India and was also the sixth Vice-President of India for one complete term. The Hidayatullah National Law University at Naya Raipur is named after him. While at Cambridge, Hidayatullah w