Brief History of Tucson Arizona

The name Tucson comes in Spanish from O’odham Tu-Uk-So-On

Meaning “Black Base”, a reference to the mostly volcanic mountains on the city’s west side.

Tucson is the main city in Arizona’s Sun Corridor, the largest city in southern Arizona and the second largest city in the state after Phoenix. Tucson is Arizona’s second most populous city after Phoenix, both located along Arizona’s sunny corridor.

While Arizona and Tucson continued to be part of the New Mexico Territory until 1863, the Arizona Territory was formally created earlier that year. Tucson was in territory that was acquired by Mexico from the United States after the Gadsden Purchase (1854), and the city served as the territorial capital of Arizona from 1867 to 1877. During this time, Tucson was Arizona’s largest city and commercial center, and Phoenix was the seat of state government and agriculture.

Homesteaders first arrived in Tucson under the provisions of the federal Homestead Act of 1862. The land has been developed into Sam Hughes neighborhood, known as one of Tucson’s best-known and most desirable residential areas.

The University of Arizona was established and housed the School of Agriculture with classrooms, labs and eating hall.

Wheeler Ranch / Rancho Santa Catalina: James W. Wheeler, real estate developer from Seattle WA., purchases 120-acres east of Tent City. The Wheeler family built two large tents and lived off the land. You could say they were famous Homesteaders in Tucson. This land would develop into the buildings you see today as the Potter School and Casa Seton.

According to the 2020 U.S. Census, it is Arizona’s second-largest city with a population of 542,629, while the entire Tucson Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) has a population of 1,043,433. TUSD ranks second among school districts in Arizona, behind the Mesa Unified School District in the Phoenix metropolitan area.

Tucson Is Home To:

33rd Largest City in the United States

233 Elementary Schools

158 High Schools with Varying Degrees of Excellence

Over 1-Million People are Living in Pima County

Throughout history, Tucson has been an important route and intersection, agricultural center, and communications hub. As one of the oldest continuously inhabited areas in North America, Tucson is a city that has always been a popular destination in Arizona.