This article is about the German Chancellor. For the father of Martin Luther, the theologian, see Hans Luther (15th century).

Hans Luther (10 March 1879 – 11 May 1962) was a German politician and Chancellor of Germany for 482 days.

Life and career[]

Born in Berlin, Luther started in politics in 1907 by becoming the town councillor in Magdeburg. He continued on becoming secretary of the German Städtetag in 1913 and then mayor of Essen in 1918. In December 1922, Chancellor Wilhelm Cuno appointed Luther minister of Food and Agriculture.

He kept his position in 1924 when Wilhelm Marx became Chancellor. In 1925, he was appointed Chancellor of Germany, but Marx resumed office the following year. Luther also briefly acted as head of state following the death of Friedrich Ebert.[citation needed]

In 1930, Hans Luther was made president of Reichsbank. Soon after he was made German ambassador to the United States, a position he held from 1933 to 1937, after which he retired.

In 1933, Luther lectured at the Columbia University campus. Luther's speech stressed Hitler's "peaceful intentions" toward his European neighbors. Nicholas Murray Butler, Columbia's president, rejected student appeals to cancel the invitation, calling the request "illiberal" and citing the need for academic freedom.[1]

After the Second World War, Luther came out of retirement to become an advisor for the new government.

He died in Düsseldorf.

Hans Luther's First Cabinet, January – December 1925[]

Hans Luther, Chancellor

Gustav Stresemann (DVP), Minister of Foreign Affairs

Martin Schiele (DNVP), Minister of the Interior

Otto von Schlieben (DNVP), Minister of Finance

Albert Neuhaus (DNVP), Minister of Economics

Heinrich Brauns (Z), Minister of Labour

Josef Frenken (Z), Minister of Justice

Otto Gessler (DDP), Minister of Defence

Karl Stingl (BVP), Minister of Posts

Rudolf Krohne (DVP), Minister of Transport

Gerhard Graf von Kanitz, Minister of Food

Changes

26 October 1925 – Schiele, Schlieben, and Neuhaus resign from the Cabinet. They are replaced on an acting basis by Gessler (who remains also Defense Minister) at Interior, Luther (who remains also Chancellor) at Finance, and Krohne (who remains also Transport Minister) at Economics.

21 November 1925 – Frenken resigns as Justice Minister and is replaced on a temporary basis by Chancellor Luther

Luther's Second Cabinet (January – May 1926)[]

Hans Luther, Chancellor

Gustav Stresemann (DVP), Minister of Foreign Affairs

Wilhelm Külz (DDP), Minister of the Interior

Peter Reinhold (DDP), Minister of Finance

Julius Curtius (DVP), Minister of Economics

Heinrich Brauns (Z), Minister of Labour

Wilhelm Marx (Z), Minister of Justice

Otto Gessler (DDP), Minister of Defence

Karl Stingl (BVP), Minister of Posts

Rudolf Krohne (DVP), Minister of Transport

Heinrich Haslinde (Z), Minister of Food

References[]

Further reading[]

Clingan, C. Edmund (2010). The Lives of Hans Luther, 1879–1962: German Chancellor, Reichsbank President, and Hitler's Ambassador. Lexington Books.