Bloemfontein

General Information

Bloemfontein, is located in the Motheo and Xhariep region of the Free State Province in South Africa. This city acts as the Free State’s capital and as South Africa’s judicial capital. Bloemfontein does not feel like a big, bustling city but rather more like a small village with many opportunities. Once the university is in session, this city comes alive with movement.

Bloemfontein is the perfect central base for tourists wishing to explore the Free State Province. While the tourist attractions are limited in this city, visitors to the province will most likely have to visit at least once as most of the main highways cross through the city. The business industry in Bloemfontein is thriving and is most probably the main attraction.

Accommodation

Being the capital of the province, Bloemfontein offers a great variety of tourist accommodation. Facilities in the city include luxury hotels, exclusive country retreats, cosy bed and breakfasts, self-catering chalets and excellent camping facilities. For a complete list of places to stay, please view our accommodation directory.

Activities and attractions

Bloemfontein is more of a business city, but also offers many interesting places to visit.

Things to do in Bleomfontein include the following:

Manguang Township

Hobbit Boutique Hotel (Home of local J.R.R. Tolkien literacy society)

Oliewenhuis Art Museum

National Women’s Memorial

Anglo-Boer War Museum

Naval Hill

Franklin Game Reserve

Orchid House

National Museum

Businesses

Apart from being the main business centre for the Free State Province, Bloemfontein has created an image as a major tourist destination with its attractions. This city offers a great shopping experience together with many restaurants waiting to tantalise your taste buds. For more information on businesses you can find in Bleomfontein, please visit our business directory.

For more information on Bloemfontein, please see :

www.bloemfontein-information.co.za

Suburbs

Latest Listings - View All