History of Bloemfontein

The name Bloemfontein derives from the Dutch word for "fountain of flowers".

Warden originally chose the site largely because of its proximity to the main route to Winburg, the spacious open country, and the absence of horse sickness. Bloemfontein was the original farm of Johannes Nicolaas Brits born 21 February 1790, owner and first inhabitant of Bloemfontein. Johann – as he was known – sold the farm to Maj Warden.

Though historically a predominantly Afrikaner settlement, Bloemfontein was officially founded in 1846 as a fort by British army major Henry Douglas Warden as a British outpost in the Transoranje region, at that stage occupied by various groups of peoples including Cape Colony Trek Boers, Griqua and Basotho.

Although modern day Bloemfontein has a reputation for its flowers in an otherwise arid region, the origin of the city's name is unclear.

Popular legends include an ox named "Bloem" owned by one of the pioneer farmers that was taken by a lion near a fountain on his property, while another story names Jan Blom (1775–1858), a Korana KhoiKhoi leader who inhabited the area.

Bloemfontein literally means fountain of flowers or flower spring in Dutch.

With colonial policy shifts, the region changed into the Orange River Sovereignty (1848–1854) and eventually the Orange Free State Republic (1854–1902).

From 1902–1910 it served as the capital of the Orange River Colony and since that time as the provincial capital of the Free State. In 1910 it became the Judicial capital of the Union of South Africa.

Bloemfontein is the capital city of the Free State Province of South Africa and one of South Africa's three national capitals.

Bloemfontein is also the judicial capital of South Africa.

Until 1994, the city was the sole judicial capital of South Africa. It remains the seat for the Supreme Court Of Appeal (formerly the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court) and is therefore generally regarded as the judicial capital.

It is also an administrative centre with many private hospitals and educational institutions.

Phalima Shuttle Services can organize tours of all the major sights in Bloemfontein. Contact us for more information.

Game Reserves near Bloemfontein

Franklin Game Reserve:

Antelopes roam in this reserve freely

Soetdoring Nature Reserve:

The Soetdoring Nature Reserve borders the Krugersdrif Dam. Black wildebeest and gemsbok roam free but predators such as lions and wild dogs are kept in large camps, a large abundance of bird life can be found here.

Willem Pretorius Game Reserve:

The Willem Pretorius Game Reserve is located 150km north of Bloemfontein. It has a great variety of game and bird life. The Allemanskraal Dam forms the central part of the reserve and on the northern side of this dam is a range of hillocks and on the summit of one of these is Doringberg. Here one can find a well-preserved ruin of a prehistoric settlement. Years ago this belonged to the Leghoya people who built extremely small huts, cattle kraals and walls, all from stone, but without mortar.

Naval Hill:

Naval Hill in Bloemfontein dominates the city to the north-east from where magnificent views can be enjoyed from the top of this beautiful hill. Naval Hill was the site of the British naval gun emplacements during the Anglo-Boer War. On the eastern side is a large white horse, a landmark for British cavalry during the war. On the summit the University of Michigan (USA) built an observatory in 1928, but it was closed in 1972, this is a theatre today. The Franklin Game Reserve is on the hilltop where antelopes roam.