Steve Forbes is Chairman and Editor-in-Chief of Forbes Media.

The company’s flagship publication, Forbes, is the nation’s leading business magazine, with a circulation of more than 900,000. Forbes combined with Forbes Asia, Forbes Europe, and the company’s licensee editions together reach a worldwide audience of more than 5 million readers.

Forbes.com has become one of the world’s most influential websites, with more than 80 million unique visitors a month.

Mr. Forbes writes editorials for Forbes under the heading of “Fact and Comment.” A widely respected economic prognosticator, he is the only writer to have won the highly prestigious Crystal Owl Award four times. The prize was formerly given by U.S. Steel Corporation to the financial journalist whose economic forecasts for the coming year proved most accurate.

In both 1996 and 2000, Mr. Forbes campaigned vigorously for the Republican nomination for the Presidency. Key to his platform were a flat tax, medical savings accounts, a new Social Security system for working Americans, parental choice of schools for their children, term limits and a strong national defense. Mr. Forbes continues to energetically promote this agenda.

Mr. Forbes’ new book: Reviving America: How Repealing Obamacare, Replacing the Tax Code and Reforming the Fed will Restore Hope and Prosperity, co-authored by Elizabeth Ames (McGraw-Hill Professional), came out in December, 2015.

His other books include Money: How the Destruction of the Dollar Threatens the Global Economy – and What We Can Do About It, co-authored by Elizabeth Ames (McGraw-Hill Professional); Freedom Manifesto: Why Free Markets are Moral and Big Government Isn’t, co-authored by Elizabeth Ames (Crown Business, August 2012); How Capitalism Will Save Us: Why Free People and Free Markets Are the Best Answer in Today’s Economy, co-authored by Elizabeth Ames (Crown Business, November 2009); and Power Ambition Glory: The Stunning Parallels between Great Leaders of the Ancient World and Today…and the Lessons You Can Learn, co-authored by John Prevas (Crown Business, June 2009). He also wrote: Flat Tax Revolution: Using a Postcard to Abolish the IRS (Regnery, 2005); and A New Birth of Freedom (Regnery, 1999), a book of bold ideas for the new millennium.

In 1985, President Reagan names Mr. Forbes Chairman of the bi-partisan Board for International Broadcasting (BIB). In this position, he oversaw the operations of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty. Broadcasting behind the Iron Curtain, Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty were praised by Poland’s Lech Walesa as being critical to the struggle against communism. Mr. Forbes was reappointed to his post by President George H. W. Bush and served until 1993.

Steve Forbes was born on July 18, 1947, in Morristown, New Jersey. He received a B.A. in history from Princeton in 1970.

Mr. Forbes serves on the boards of The Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation, the Heritage Foundation and The Foundation for the Defense of Democracies. He is on the Board of Overseers of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and on the Board of Visitors for the School of Public Policy of Pepperdine University. He previously served on the Board of Trustees of Princeton University for ten years.

Wilbur L. Ross, Jr. was sworn in by Vice President Mike Pence as 39th Secretary of Commerce on February 28, 2017. Secretary Ross will be the principal voice of business in the Trump Administration, ensuring U.S. entrepreneurs and businesses have the tools they need to create jobs and economic opportunity.

Secretary Ross is the former Chairman and Chief Strategy Officer of WL Ross & Co. LLC and has over 55 years of investment banking and private equity experience. Mr. Ross has restructured over $400 billion of assets in the airline, apparel, auto parts, banking, beverage, chemical, credit card, electric utility, food service, furniture, gypsum, home-building, insurance, marine transport, mortgage origination and servicing, oil and gas, rail car manufacturing and leasing, real estate, restaurants, shipyards, steel, textiles, and trucking industries. He has been chairman or lead director of more than 100 companies operating in more than 20 different countries.

Named by Bloomberg Markets as one of the 50 most influential people in global finance, Mr. Ross is the only person elected to both the Private Equity Hall of Fame and the Turnaround Management Hall of Fame. He previously served as privatization advisor to New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani and was appointed by President Bill Clinton to the board of the U.S.-Russia Investment Fund. President Kim Dae-jung awarded Mr. Ross a medal for helping South Korea during its financial crisis and, in November 2014, the Emperor of Japan awarded him The Order of the Rising Sun, Gold and Silver Star.

As a philanthropist, Secretary Ross recently served as Chairman of the Japan Society, Trustee of the Brookings Institution and Chairman of its Economic Studies Council, the International Board of the Musée des Arts Décoratifs in Paris, the Blenheim Foundation, the Magritte Museum in Brussels, and the Palm Beach Civic Association. He was also an Advisory Board Member of Yale University School of Management.

Secretary Ross is a graduate of Yale University and of Harvard Business School (with distinction). He and his wife Hilary Geary Ross have four children, Jessica Ross, Amanda Ross, Ted Geary, and Jack Geary.

Neil Shen is Founding and Managing Partner of Sequoia Capital China. He is also Co-Founder of Ctrip.com and Home Inns.

He is in the Forbes Midas List from 2012 to 2017 as the highest ranking investor from China, and has topped Forbes China ranking of “Best Venture Capital Investors" for five years since 2010. He has won numerous awards including the “Top Investors in China” by Chinaventure.cn and Financial Times and 2016, “50 Most Influential Business Leaders in China” and “30 Most Influential Investors in China” by Fortune Magazine in 2015 and also 2016, “Top 100 Venture Capitalists” by CB Insights partnered with The New York Times in 2016, “Figure of the Year” by “Figure” Magazine in 2015, “25 Most Influential Business Leaders” by China Entrepreneur Magazine from 2014 to 2016, “The Best Business Leaders in China: New Economy Hero of the Year” by China Business Network in 2016, "Venture Capital Professional of the Year" by AVCJ in 2010 and 2015, and “Top Ten Economic Figures of the Year” by CCTV in 2006.

He is the Board Chairman of Yale Leadership Center in China, Director of Yabuli China Entrepreneur Forum (CEF), Vice Chairman of VC Funds Committee of Asset Management Association of China, Member of Hong Kong Financial Services Development Council, Trustee of Brookings Institution, Trustee of Asia Society, Rotating President of Future Forum in 2016, and Trustee of Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

He received Master's degree from Yale University and Bachelor's degree from Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

Mr. Suphachai Chearavanont is the Chief Executive Officer of Charoen Pokphand Group (C.P. Group), one of Asia's leading conglomerates that consists of over 100 companies operating in 20 countries in agri-food, retail and telecommunications. He also serves as the Chairman of the Executive Committee of True Corporation (the telecommunications business of C.P. Group that is listed on the Thai Stock Exchange) and heads C.P. Group’s management committees that oversee group-wide strategies on sustainability policies and corporate communications. Previously, he was the President and Chief Executive Officer of True Corporation since 1999 and before then was Senior Vice President for Planning since 1992. In 2004, he oversaw the successful restructuring and rebranding of True Corporation, transforming it into one of Asia’s leading telecommunications companies offering mobile, fixed-line phones, broadband and pay TV services.

Mr. Chearavanont has been a member of the Thai Government’s Independent Committee for Educational Reform since May 2017 and Chair of the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Global Compact Network Thailand since 2016. In 2013, he helped launch Thailand’s first telecommunications infrastructure fund (Digital Infrastructure Fund) and established True’s CSR initiative that helped deliver education to underprivileged children in 6,000 schools in rural areas of Thailand.

He was awarded “Frost & Sullivan Asia Pacific Telecom CEO of the Year” in 2015 at the Asia Pacific ICT Awards in Singapore for his outstanding achievements in the telecommunications industry. He was President of the Telecommunications Association of Thailand appointed under The Royal Patronage, appointed a Counselor and Advisory Board Member for One Young World Summit 2015 and was the Head of Private Sector Team of Public Private Partnership in Education and Leadership Development.

He graduated with a Bachelor’s Degree in Business Administration focusing on Financial Management from Boston University, and subsequently awarded an Honorary Doctorate degree in Mass Communications from Ramkhamhaeng University in March 2016 for his outstanding leadership in the telecommunications sector.

The Cultural Entrepreneur behind New World Development and Chow Tai Fook Jewellery Group, the world’s largest jeweller with over 2,300 stores in greater China, Adrian Cheng is the fourth-generation leader of one of the world’s most prominent families and its business empire (#58 on Forbes 2016). The Harvard-graduate is also the brain behind The Artisanal Movement, a new creative undertone of New World Development’s culture. With his international background, together with a passion for arts and culture, he’s leading a cultural change for the new generation.

The Artisanal Movement curates a bespoke and contemporary lifestyle for the millennials, injecting a dash of creativity in their everyday life, as Adrian believes that innately everyone is an artisan, that everyone can appreciate art, design, architecture, as well as every fine detail that elevates life. The motto of the Movement – We Create, We are Artisans – is evident in all of Adrian’s projects. From K11, the world’s first museum-retail lifestyle concept, to wabi sabi-themed residential project The Pavilia Hill, to Luxba Group, his fledging fashion establishment in China, projects led by Adrian have in recent years firmly established the visionary as a global cultural entrepreneur in creative disciplines and enterprises. Recently, he is named the Creative Advisor of NOWNESS, a digital video channel created by LVMH.

Adrian injects zest into the family business empire, instilling innovation, art and culture into all businesses. In 2016, he introduced Chow Tai Fook’s first art jewellery collection, Le Labyrinth Artistique, a visually arresting collection inspired by exoticism and masterpieces of famous abstract artists. The exclusive collection, of which Adrian acted as Creative Director, marked a new milestone for the 88-year-old jeweller.

He also founded the K11 Art Foundation, the first non-profit and non-state-owned art foundation in China to incubate emerging contemporary Chinese artists and curators, and to promote public art education. His contribution to arts and cultural development propelled him to No. 54 in the 2016 ArtReview Power 100 list.

Miwako Date is President and Chief Executive Officer at Mori Trust Co., Ltd., one of the foremost major developers in Japan, which works with a wide variety of high-class hotels originating from outside Japan. She’s the third generation of leaders hailing from one of the foremost business-owning families in Japan.

Her grandfather, Taikichiro Mori (who Forbes ranked number one on its World’s Billionaires List in 1991 and 1992) founded the Mori Group, the precursor to the Mori Trust Group, which was later formed by Taikichiro’s third son, Akira Mori (who is consistently ranked on the Forbes’ World’s Billionaires List since taking over the business in 1993 and was ranked as Japan’s richest person in 2008). Akira Mori is Miwako’s father and serves as Chairman of the Board at Mori Trust Group. Miwako Date took over the business in June 2016.

With a primary focus on the real-estate and hotel & resort businesses, Mori Trust Group is also involved in a wide range of investment businesses (such as overseas investing and M&A).

Even before taking over the company as President and CEO, Miwako expanded upon its business. She took on ventures such as the supervision of numerous large mixed-use development projects in major cities across Japan, projects purposed with attracting to Japan various luxury hotels originating abroad, and has been personally involved in operations.

In Mori Trust’s mid-to-long term vision, released at the same time Miwako assumed her post, the company expressed its readiness to spend more than JPY 800 billion on new investments by 2027. In the year since assuming her post, Miwako has aimed for the creation of an international business base in Tokyo and given shape to the Tokyo World Gate plan (a large mixed-use development project in the heart of Tokyo spanning a total floor space of around 200,000 square meters), and the Akasaka 2-Chome Project (tentative name; scheduled for completion in FY 2022). Furthermore, she actualized investments into two large buildings found at choice locations in Boston in the US, as well as the listing of a REIT specialized in hotels (which has been evaluated as top-class within Japan). As she moves forward with the acquisition of new sites, she’s also been vigorously moving business forward, which is evident by occurrences such as the July 2017 announcement of the company’s success in attracting EDITION (a luxury lifestyle hotel that’s enthralled celebrities from across the globe) to Tokyo’s Toranomon and Ginza districts.

Miwako is currently looking ahead beyond the 2020 Tokyo Olympic Games to 2030 and aiming for the creation of luxury destinations in Japan. As the leader of luxury hotel development in Japan, she has deployed various projects not bound by precedent, such as those entailing the opening of 10 new luxury hotels featuring 1,000 rooms by around 2023.

Miwako has been recognized for many achievements such as these and despite her young age, she currently serves as Permanent Secretary at Keidanren (Japan Business Federation), Secretary at the Japan Association of Corporate Executives, and as Director at the Japan Hotel Association. What’s more, Miwako has been invited to give recommendations as a member of numerous expert panels hosted by entities such as the governments of Tokyo and Japan, thereby contributing significantly to the development of Japan’s business world and tourism industry.

Jeongdo Hong is the President and CEO of JoongAng Media Network (JMnet), the largest media group in South Korea with 23 subsidiary companies and 24 brands including newspapers, TV channels, magazines, a multiplex cinema chain, and leisure resorts. Mr. Hong is also the President and CEO of JTBC, the fastest growing general programming channel in Korea since he founded it in December 2011. He is concurrently the President and CEO of the JoongAng Ilbo, a major national newspaper in Korea.

Since Mr. Hong joined the JoongAng media group in 2005 as a member of the Strategic Planning Office, he has developed overall corporate strategies for the group. He played a crucial role in one of JMnet’s most important projects, which also marked a key chapter in Korea’s recent media history. It was the regaining of broadcasting rights for TBC (Tongyang Broadcasting Company), Korea’s most popular channel in the 1960s and 70s, which was confiscated from the JoongAng media group by a military government in 1980. After years of work and preparation, the nationwide TV channel JTBC was finally launched in December 2011.

JTBC has been growing rapidly since its launch. The channel, which offers news, documentaries, dramas and a variety of entertainment programs, has been named in a viewer survey as the most balanced and informative channel for two consecutive years. It is setting new standards for dramas and entertainment programs. Popular JTBC programs such as “Non-Summit” and “Please Take Care of My Refrigerator” are broadcast around the world through the sale of broadcast rights to overseas networks.

Mr. Hong has also led a sub-branding strategy to strengthen JTBC’s brand, creating synergies as a result. In addition to JTBC, the flagship general programming channel, there is also JTBC2, the entertainment channel formerly known as QTV, and JTBC3 Fox Sports, a partnership with Fox International Channels Asia. J Golf was relaunched as JTBC Golf in 2015.

Another highlight of Mr. Hong’s work was in 2009, when he led the JoongAng Ilbo’s ambitious project to switch the paper’s printing format to Berliner, the first such innovative change in all of Asia. In 2011, Mr. Hong headed the successful merger and acquisition of two major movie theater franchises, Megabox and Cinus. The M&A strengthened JMnet’s position in the entertainment industry.

Mr. Hong is a member of the WAN-IFRA (World Association of Newspapers and News Publishers) Asia Pacific Committee. He was named a World Economic Forum Young Global Leader in 2010. Mr. Hong studied history at Yonsei University in Seoul before earning his BA in Economics from Wesleyan University and his MBA from Stanford University.

Enrique K. Razon Jr. is Chairman of the Board and President of International Container Terminal Services, Inc. (ICTSI), a Philippine-based company involved in the management and operation of 27 ports and terminals in 17 countries. He is also Chairman of Bloomberry Resorts Corp. (BRC), owner of Solaire Resort and Casino, an integrated resort complex in the Philippines’ Entertainment City. ICTSI and BRC are both listed in the Philippine Stock Exchange.

Mr. Razon belongs to the third generation of a family involved in the business of marine cargo handling. The Razon Group has a long-standing reputation of being pioneers and innovators in the management and development of ports, terminals and related facilities. The group’s proven track record stems from over 90 years’ experience in integrated cargo handling, stevedoring and other port services in the Philippines and abroad.

In 1987, the Razon Group and the Soriano Group incorporated ICTSI, initially to bid for the Manila International Container Terminal (MICT) in the Philippines. After winning the MICT contract 1988, Mr. Razon spearheaded the MICT’s development program. The MICT today is the country’s premier international gateway. ICTSI also operates seven other terminals in the Philippines.

After consolidating and strengthening its base and flagship operation at the MICT, ICTSI launched an international and domestic expansion program in 1994. ICTSI is recognized today as a leading operator, innovator and pioneer in the field of port management with a track record that confirms its ability to rapidly adapt to different operating environments, and to add substantial value to its operated terminals by enhancing their efficiency at every level. The company continues to pursue prospects in Asia Pacific, the Middle East, Africa, the Americas and Europe.

Mr. Razon sits on the board of most ICTSI subsidiaries worldwide and of several leading foreign and Philippine corporations. His other investments are in real estate, power, mining, oil and gas exploration, and leisure facilities including a golf course in the Philippines. Mr. Razon also chairs the ICTSI Foundation, Inc., which oversees the ICTSI Group’s corporate social responsibility advocacies.

Mr. Razon is a member of the Management Association of the Philippines, the US Philippines Society, the ASEAN Business Club and Philippines, Inc.

Mike Perlis is a media industry CEO with deep experience managing a wide range of content and multimedia brands. He has a strong track record in mergers and acquisitions.

Mr. Perlis, who serves as Forbes Media CEO and Executive Chairman, is the first non-Forbes family member in 98 years to run Forbes. He spearheaded the innovative strategy that has transformed the company, dramatically shifting towards digital and branded products, resulting in the sale in 2014 of a majority ownership in Forbes to a group of Hong Kong-based investors.

He joined Forbes in 2010 from SoftBank Capital, where he served as a General Partner for ten years and continues to be a Special Partner. At Softbank he specialized in digital content startups working very closely with Beliefnet, Huffington Post, Associated Content and Buzzfeed.

Before joining SoftBank, he served as President and CEO of Ziff-Davis Publishing until its sale in 2000 to Private Equity investor Willis/Stein. Earlier in his career, Mr. Perlis served as Publisher of GQ, President of Playboy Publishing, President of TVSM, Publisher of Runner’s World and Men’s Health, and Chairman and CEO of IDG Peterborough. He began his career, entrepreneurially, as the co-founder of special interest publisher New England Publications in Camden, Maine.

He served on the Boards of Beliefnet, Buzzfeed, GSI Commerce (sold to eBay), and was Chairman of Associated Content before its sale to Yahoo! Previous board observer positions include Huffington Post (sold to AOL) and KickApps (sold to KIT digital).

He is on the Board of Advisors of the Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University and is a trustee of Outward Bound International. He speaks regularly on leadership, digital transformation and branding.

Helman Sitohang has been the Chief Executive Officer for Credit Suisse Asia Pacific since 2014. In 2015, he was appointed to the Executive Board of Credit Suisse Group AG and Credit Suisse AG. He is the first Indonesian to sit on the Executive Board of a global bank.

Under his leadership as CEO, Credit Suisse has won more than 200 country and deal awards in Asia Pacific including, most recently Asia’s Best Bank for Wealth Management and Asia’s Best Bank for Financing at the Euromoney’s Awards for Excellence 2017, as well as House of the Year by AsiaRisk and Best Private Bank by Asian Private Banker in 2016. In 2015, Mr. Sitohang was awarded the Outstanding Achievement Award by FinanceAsia. In 2009, Mr. Sitohang was named as an inaugural member of Finance Asia's "Club" of the 50 most influential people in Asia's financial markets.

Mr. Sitohang joined Credit Suisse in 1998 from Bankers Trust, where he worked in the derivatives group. Upon joining Credit Suisse, Mr. Sitohang worked as part of the Indonesian coverage team and rose to become head of the team. He continued to take on additional responsibilities across Southeast Asia, until in 2009 he became the Co-Head of the Investment Banking Department (the corporate advisory business, covering M&A and Capital Markets) for Asia Pacific. In 2012 he was appointed as Head of the Investment Bank in Asia Pacific, responsible for all Credit Suisse’s Fixed Income, Equity and Investment Banking Department activities across the region.

During his career with Credit Suisse, Mr. Sitohang has been responsible for over US$200 billion of M&A and capital raising across the globe. He has led the origination of many of the bank's high profile deals across Asia and Australia.

Mr. Sitohang holds a BS degree (Engineering) from Bandung Institute of Technology.

Jane Jie Sun serves as the Chief Executive Officer and a member of the board of directors of Ctrip.com International, Ltd. (NASDAQ: CTRP) from November 2016. Prior to that, she was the Chief Operating Officer since May 2012 and Co-President since March 2015, and Chief Financial Officer from 2005 to 2012. Ms. Sun is well respected for her extensive experiences in operating and managing online travel businesses, mergers and acquisitions, and financial reporting and operations. In 2017, She was named as one of the most influential and outstanding business women by Forbes China and one of FastCompany’s Most Creative People in Business. During her tenure as the Chief Financial Officer of Ctrip, she won the Best CFO Award by Institutional Investor and Best CFO Award by CFO World. Prior to joining Ctrip, Ms. Sun worked as the head of the SEC and External Reporting Division of Applied Materials, Inc. since 1997. Prior to that, she worked with KPMG LLP as an audit manager in Silicon Valley, California for five years. She is a member of American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and State of California Certified Public Accountant. Ms. Sun received her bachelor’s degree from the business school of the University of Florida with high honors. She also attended Beijing University Law School and obtained her LLM degree.

NBA Legend DIKEMBE MUTOMBO was born in the capital city of Kinshasa in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Mutombo is the seventh of ten children born to the late Samuel and Biamba Marie Mutombo. He arrived in the United States in 1987 on an academic scholarship to attend Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. In his second year, legendary basketball coach John Thompson invited the 7'2" Mutombo to try out for the university's renowned basketball team. After joining the team, Mutombo re-directed his pre-med ambitions and graduated from Georgetown with dual degrees in Linguistics and Diplomacy. Mutombo is fluent in nine languages, including five African languages. He played professional basketball in the NBA for 18 years before retiring from the Houston Rockets in 2009.

Giving back has always been a trademark of Mutombo ever since he entered the NBA in 1991. As a former spokesman for CARE, the international relief agency, Mutombo visited the Somali refugee camps in Northern Kenya in 1993 and traveled with NBA Commissioner David Stern and Georgetown colleagues Patrick Ewing and Alonzo Mourning to Cape Town and Johannesburg.

In 1996, Mutombo paid for the Congo’s women’s basketball team’s trip to Atlanta for the Summer Olympics games and also picked up the tab for the track team’s uniforms and expenses. He is the first Youth Emissary for the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) and he also served on the Advisory Board for the Fogarty International Center at the National Institutes of Health.

Mutombo presently serves on the boards of the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the National Constitution Center, Special Olympics International and on the National Board for the U.S. Fund for UNICEF.

Mutombo has been named ABC’s Person of the Week, Essence Magazine’s 2001 Achiever, and Sporting News’ No. 1 Good Guy. He has been featured in Europe’s TIME magazine, Sports Illustrated for Kids, the New York Times, the Philadelphia Inquirer, the Houston Chronicle and Forbes magazine.

In 2009, then NBA Commissioner David Stern appointed Mutombo to the newly created position of NBA Global Ambassador where he continues to work to grow and celebrate the game of basketball through international sporting events while working with NBA Cares to bring attention to important social issues.

Honors and awards:

2017 Trumpet Humanitarian Award – Trumpet Foundation

2016 NCAA Silver Anniversary Award

2016 Professional Honoree ­ Boys Scouts of America/Atlanta Chapter

2015 Naismith Memorial Basketball ​– Hall of Fame

2015 Caring Award ­ The Caring Institute

2014 Global Leadership Award – Upwardly Global

2014 Global Leadership Award – French­American Chamber of Commerce

2014 Chairman’s Award – 100 Black Men of America

2014 Trailblazer Award – 100 Black Men of America

2014 Humanitarian of the Year - FOCOS

2013 Congressional Humanitarian Award

2013 Legacy Award – Big Brothers/Big Sisters of Metro Atlanta

2013 Gateway Award for Excellence in Humanitarian Service – Washington Adventist University

2011 Goodermote Humanitarian Award – Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health

2011 Public Service Award – Big Brothers/Big Sisters of New York City

2010 Laureus World Sports Award

2010 B.C. Forbes Peopling of America Award for Sports – Ellis Island Foundation

2010 Miracle Corners of the World Award

January 2010, President Barack Obama served as a surprise guest at the eighth annual "Let Freedom Ring!" event celebrating of the life and legacy of the late Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. and honoring NBA great and philanthropist Dikembe Mutombo who received the John Thompson, Jr. Legacy of a Dream award.

2010 Humanitarian in Sport Award during the Beyond Sport Summit, which was attended by former British Prime Minister Tony Blair

2010 Steve Patterson Award for Excellence in Sports Philanthropy awarded to the Dikembe Mutombo Foundation by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation

2007 - Mutombo was recognized by President George W. Bush during his State of the Union address

2003 – Helen Hayes MacArthur Award

2000 - The President's Service Award awarded by President Bill Clinton

World Economic Forum - Young Global Leader

Wilt Chamberlain Award - Operation Smile

Honorary Degree, Doctor of Humane Letters – SUNY/Cortland

Honorary Degree, Doctor of Humane Letters – Georgetown University

Honorary Degree, Doctor of Humane Letters – Haverford College

NAACP Phoenix Award

The Henry Iba Citizen Athlete Award

J. Walter Kennedy Citizenship Award - NBA

Ernie Davis Humanitarian Award

The Samuel J. Halsey Award - Georgetown University

Constituency for Africa's Trailblazer Award

Dikembe Mutombo is the Chairman and President of the Dikembe Mutombo Foundation which he created in 1997. Headquartered in Atlanta, Georgia the Foundation’s mission is to improve the health, education and quality of life for the people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. One major project of the Dikembe Mutombo Foundation was the construction of a new general hospital in the capital city of Kinshasa.

In December 2007 and at a cost of $29 million, the Biamba Marie Mutombo Hospital opened in the Congo. Named in memory of Mutombo’s beloved mother, the hospital has treated close to 200,000 men, women and children.

Dikembe Mutombo and his wife Rose live in Atlanta, Georgia with their 3 children.

Mr. Ronnie C. Chan is Chairman of Hang Lung Group Limited and its subsidiary Hang Lung Properties Limited, both publicly listed in Hong Kong. Founded in Hong Kong in 1960, the Group expanded into mainland China in 1992, developing, owning and managing world-class commercial complexes in key tier one and tier two cities. Mr. Chan co-founded Morningside, an international investment group established in 1986 with venture capital and private equity investments in manufacturing, TMT, biotechnology, and clean technology. In 1996, he co-founded the Morningside Center of Mathematics at the Chinese Academy of Sciences and helped establish the triennial International Congress of Chinese Mathematicians where Morningside Medal of Mathematics are awarded. In 1997, he helped found the North America based Morningside Music Bridge for young classical musicians. Mr. Chan is active in many other non-profit and educational organizations. Mr. Chan is Chairman of the Executive Committees of One Country Two Systems Research Institute and of The Better Hong Kong Foundation. He founded and chairs the China Heritage Fund, is a co-founding Director of The Forbidden City Cultural Heritage Conservation Foundation in Beijing, and is former Vice President and former Advisor of the China Development Research Foundation in Beijing. He is founding Chairman of the Centre for Asian Philanthropy and Society, and founding Chairman Emeritus of Asia Business Council. He is also former Chairman of the Hong Kong-United States Business Council. Mr. Chan is Co-Chair of Asia Society and Chairman of its Hong Kong Center, a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and a member of the Council on Foreign Relations, the National Committee on United States-China Relations, and Committee of 100. He serves or has served on the governing or advisory bodies of several think tanks and universities, including Peterson Institute for International Economics, World Economic Forum, East-West Center, Pacific Council on International Policy, Eisenhower Fellowships, The Maureen and Mike Mansfield Foundation, University of Southern California, Indian School of Business, Yale University, Tsinghua University, and Fudan University. Mr. Chan is a frequent speaker at named lectureships and international conferences and has published numerous articles in Financial Times, International Herald Tribune, Newsweek, Fortune, Asian Wall Street Journal, Far Eastern Economic Review, and Japan Times.

Adam Tan is the Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors and CEO of HNA Group. Mr. Tan has served as a Director of HNA Group since 2001 and was named Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors in 2013. He assumed the role of CEO in 2016.

Under Mr. Tan’s leadership, HNA Group is executing on a two-pronged strategy of organic growth and strategic investments to become a global market leader in each of its three core pillars – tourism/aviation, logistics and financial services. In the past year, Mr. Tan has overseen investments in Hilton, Carlson Hotels, Ingram Micro, Gategroup, Avolon and Swissport, among others, further positioning the company at the forefront of its core business areas.

As a Co-Founder of HNA Group, Mr. Tan has held executive positions in each of the company’s core businesses. Prior to becoming CEO, Mr. Tan served as Chairman of HNA Capital, the financial services unit of HNA Group. From 2007 to 2011, he served as Executive Chairman of HNA Industry Holding, which has since been renamed HNA Capital. Currently, he is also the Chairman of HNA Innovation Finance Group.

Mr. Tan also serves as the Chairman of the Boards of Directors of Avolon, Gategroup, Swissport and Ingram Micro.

Mr. Tan graduated from the Capital University of Business and Economics with a Master’s Degree in Economics and received an MBA from St. John’s University in New York. He also studied at Harvard Business School from 2000 to 2001.

Mr. Jaime Augusto Zobel de Ayala is the Chairman and CEO of Ayala Corporation, the oldest and one of the largest business groups in the Philippines. Ayala has interests in real estate, banking, telecommunications, water, industrial technologies, power, infrastructure, education, and healthcare.

Apart from his responsibilities on the boards of the Ayala group companies, Mr. Zobel is a member of various international and local business and socio-civic organizations, including the JP Morgan International Council and the Mitsubishi Corporation International Advisory Committee. He is also Chairman of the Harvard Business School Asia-Pacific Advisory Board; Chairman of the SMU Advisory Council in the Philippines; and a member of the Harvard Global Advisory Council, the University of Tokyo Global Advisory Board, and the board of trustees of Endeavor Philippines. He was a former Chairman of the Asia Business Council, Ramon Magsaysay Foundation, and the World Wildlife Fund Philippine Advisory Council. He was also the Philippine Representative to the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Business Advisory Council from 2010-2015.

In 2007, he received the Harvard Business School Alumni Achievement Award, the school’s highest recognition. Mr. Zobel is a 2009 recipient of the Presidential Medal of Merit, awarded by the President of the Philippines for enhancing the prestige and honor of the Philippines both at home and abroad. He was then bestowed the Philippine Legion of Honor, with rank of Grand Commander in 2010, in recognition of his outstanding public service to the country. In 2015, he received the Order of Mabini, with rank of Commander, for his vital contributions during the Philippines’ hosting of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Summit.

Mr. Zobel graduated with a B.A. in Economics (Cum Laude) from Harvard College in 1981 and obtained an MBA from the Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration in 1987. He is married to Ms. Elizabeth Eder Zobel de Ayala and has four children. He enjoys adventure motorcycling in his spare time.

Francine LeFrak is an award-winning theatrical, television and film producer, a successful entrepreneur and a distinguished philanthropist.

In 2008, Francine founded Same Sky, a jewelry initiative that provides training and employment to women survivors of the Rwandan Genocide who are living with HIV/AIDS. Francine offers women a hand-up, not a handout, by providing them with the dignity of work and the tools they need to lift themselves out of poverty. In addition to work abroad, Same Sky now provides employment to women who have recently been released from jails in America, helping them to re-enter society. All proceeds are reinvested into expanding the business and spreading the “women empowering women” mission of Same Sky.

In recognition of Francine’s humanitarian efforts, she received the Chevalier of the Legion of Honor as presented by the French government, the Ellis Island Medal of Honor from the National Ethnic Coalition of Organizations, the UN Women for Peace Award, and the Human Spirit Award from the Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation. Francine is the Chair Emerita of Harvard Kennedy School’s Women’s Leadership Board, a body of influential women leaders that advance issues related to gender equality and gender research.

Before her work as a social entrepreneur, Francine launched her career on Broadway as a producer for the Pultizer Prize-winning drama Crimes of the Heart. She has captivated audiences with My One and Only, Les Liaisons Dangereuses, Nine and many other productions that have been awarded with more than a dozen Tony’s and forty-one Drama Desk awards.

Her numerous films have been hailed for putting a human face on important social issues: such as the ravages of war, injustices in the prison system, and the price of intolerance. Her movie for Hallmark Hall of Fame, Miss Rose White, was honored with four Emmy awards. The HBO movie Shot Through the Heart, about friends torn apart by the war in Sarajevo, won a Peabody Award. Her film series Prison Stories: Women on the Inside helped promote changes in prison legislation.

Now, Same Sky continues to grow by employing more women each year and spreading the Same Sky Model, which emphasizes that the best philanthropy is a good job. Francine remains a leader in the ethical shopping movement, a regular contributor to The Huffington Post’s What’s Working section, and a speaker at renowned conferences all over the world.

Mr. Ho is the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Melco Resorts & Entertainment Limited (NASDAQ: MLCO), one of the world's largest integrated resorts operators. Mr. Ho has served as the Co-Chairman, Chief Executive Officer and Executive Director of Melco since 2004, successfully leading the Company through different phases of development and pioneering innovative entertainment in the region. Melco owns and develops casino and entertainment resort facilities in multiple jurisdictions, employing more than 20,000 people worldwide. Listed on NASDAQ for more than 10 years, Melco’s enviable portfolio in Macau includes City of Dreams, its flagship integrated resort; Studio City, a cinematically-themed integrated resort; and Altira Macau, a Forbes five-star casino hotel. Elsewhere, Melco also operates City of Dreams Manila, an integrated resort in the Philippines. April 2018 will mark the opening of Melco’s another landmark hotel in Macau: Morpheus, a new iconic luxury hotel designed by the late Dame Zaha Hadid located at City of Dreams.

With the innovative spirit, 5-star-plus service culture and long-standing partnerships with global brands, Melco has garnered over 280 international awards and accolades over the past 10 years, including the most Michelin-starred restaurants and the most Forbes 5-star hotel facilities in Macau, and Best Casino Resorts Design, Corporate Governance and Social Responsibility awards.

Mr. Ho is a Member of the National Committee of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference. He also serves on numerous boards and committees of privately-held companies in Hong Kong, Macau and mainland China.

He was named one of the “100 Most Influential People across Asia Pacific” by Asiamoney magazine. Mr. Ho has also been selected as one of the “Best CEOs in Hong Kong” by FinanceAsia and “Asia’s Best CEO” by Corporate Governance Asia magazine numerous times. In addition, he has garnered the “Leadership Gold Award” at the Business Awards of Macau.

Mr. Ho graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in commerce from the University of Toronto, Canada and was awarded the Honorary Doctor of Business Administration degree by Edinburgh Napier University, Scotland for his contribution to business, education and the community in Hong Kong, Macau and China.

Jean Eric Salata is the Chief Executive and Founding Partner of Baring Private Equity Asia, Chairman of the Investment and Portfolio Management Committees. Mr. Salata oversees all investment and divestment decisions made at the Firm, as well as its strategic direction. Mr. Salata has been responsible for the investment activity of the Firm since 1997 when he started the regional Asian private equity investment program for UK-based Baring Private Equity Partners Ltd. Mr. Salata later led the management buyout of this program in 2000 to establish Baring Asia as an independent Firm. Mr. Salata has lived and worked in Hong Kong since 1989, and graduated magna cum laude from the Wharton school of the University of Pennsylvania with a B.S. in Finance and Economics.

Baring Private Equity Asia is one of the largest and most established independent alternative asset management firms in Asia and advises funds that manage more than US$10 billion in committed capital. The firm runs a pan-Asian investment program sponsoring buyouts and providing growth capital to companies for expansion or acquisitions, as well as private credit and a pan-Asian real estate private equity investment program. The firm also invests in the US and Europe in companies seeking to expand to Asia. Notable investments include Nord Anglia, the world’s largest premium international school operator, St. Georges University, the world’s largest private medical college, HCP, a leading prestige packaging company for cosmetic products, and Hexaware Technologies, a leading Indian IT services company. Baring Asia has been investing in Asia since its formation in 1997 and has over 140 employees located across offices in Hong Kong, China, India, Japan and Singapore. Baring Asia currently has over 40 portfolio companies across Asia with a total of 178,000 employees and sales of approximately US$35 billion in 2016. Baring Asia has received numerous awards for its outstanding performance, including 2015 “Large Cap Firm of the Year in Asia” by Private Equity International. Asian Venture Capital Journal selected Baring Asia as the 2015 winner for “Fundraising of the Year – Large Cap” and Jean Salata as “PE Professional of the Year.”

Dato’ Seri CHEAH Cheng Hye is Chairman and Co-Chief Investment Officer of Value Partners. He is in charge of the Group’s fund management and investment research, business operations, product development and corporate management. He sets the Group’s overall business and portfolio strategy. In 2007, he led Value Partners to a successful listing in Hong Kong, making it the first asset management company listed in the city. Dato’ Seri CHEAH has over 30 years of investment experience and is considered a leading practitioner of value investing in Asia. Prior to founding Value Partners, Dato’ Seri CHEAH worked at Morgan Grenfell Group in Hong Kong and had a stint as a financial journalist.

Dato’ Seri CHEAH currently serves as an Independent Non-executive Director of Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing Limited (“HKEX”) since April 2017. He has been a member of the Financial Services Development Council (“FSDC”), a high-level, cross-sector advisory body established by the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Government, since 2015, following a two-year term as a member of the New Business Committee of FSDC since 2013. In addition, he has been a member of The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (“HKUST”) Business School Advisory Council since June 2011.

In August 2016, Dato’ Seri CHEAH was conferred Darjah Gemilang Pangkuan Negeri (“DGPN”), one of the highest civil honours granted by the state of Penang in Malaysia to recognize exceptional individuals. The DGPN award comes with the title of “Dato’ Seri”. In 2013, he was conferred Darjah Setia Pangkuan Negeri (“DSPN”) with the title of “Dato’ ”. In the same year, he was named an Honorary Fellow of the HKUST for outstanding achievements.

Ho Kwon Ping is the owner-founder and Executive Chairman of Banyan Tree Holdings, which owns both listed and private companies engaged in the development, ownership and operation of hotels, resorts, spas and galleries, residential homes, and other lifestyle activities around the world. He is also Executive Chairman of Thai Wah Public Company, a family business engaged in starch and food products, founded by his parents and listed in Thailand.

Mr Ho is the founding and current Chairman of the Board of Trustees of Singapore Management University and also a Board Director of Diageo, the UK-listed spirits company.

Born in 1952, Ho Kwon Ping was educated in Tunghai University, Taiwan; Stanford University, California and the University of Singapore. He worked as a broadcast and financial journalist and was the Economics Editor of the Far Eastern Economic Review in Hong Kong from 1978 to 1981.

He joined the Thai Wah family business in 1981 and in 1994, after the success of rehabilitating an abandoned tin mine into Laguna Phuket, Asia’s first integrated resort, he launched Banyan Tree Hotels & Resorts. Banyan Tree currently manages more than 40 hotels and resorts, 70 spas and 80 retail galleries, as well as three golf courses. Another 20 resorts are currently under development around the world.

Among various awards, Mr Ho received the London Business School Entrepreneurship Award (2005); CEO of the Year at the Singapore Corporate Awards (2008); Lifetime Achievement Award at the China Hotel Investment Summit (2009) and at the Australia Hotel Investment Summit (2015); CNBC's Travel Business Leader Award Asia Pacific (2012) and the National University of Singapore FASS Distinguished Arts and Social Sciences Alumni Award (2017).

In 2010, he became the first Asian to receive the American Creativity Association Lifetime Achievement Award in recognition of his creativity and innovation in various spheres of endeavour. And in 2013, Mr Ho was awarded the Singapore Government’s Meritorious Service Medal for his contributions as the founding chairman of Singapore Management University, a position which he has continued to hold since SMU was founded in 2000.

Mr Ho has also been conferred two honorary doctorates, from Johnson and Wales University in 2000, and from Hong Kong Poly University in 2015.

In 2015, his book The Ocean in a Drop: Singapore in the next Fifty Years, was published as a compilation of public lectures he gave as the Inaugural Fellow of the SR Nathan Lecture Series, named after the Sixth President of Singapore.

Mr. Ho is married to Claire Chiang, Senior Vice President, Banyan Tree Holdings. They have three children – two sons and a daughter and welcomed their first grandchild in 2015.

Tan Sri Francis Yeoh is Managing Director of YTL Group of Companies. He took over the running of his family company in 1988 and grew it into a multi-disciplinary conglomerate comprising five listed entities. YTL Corporation Berhad, YTL Power International Berhad, YTL Land & Development Berhad, Starhill Global REIT and YTL Hospitality REIT have a combined Market Capitalisation of approximately RM31.3 billion (US$7.8 billion) as at 31 March 2016 and total assets of over RM70.1 billion (US$16.3 billion) as at 31 December 2016. YTL Group owns and manages regulated utilities and infrastructural assets.

Besides managing YTL Group's core listed entities, Tan Sri Francis is Executive Chairman of YTL Starhill Global REIT Management Limited, the manager for Starhill Global REIT. He is Chairman of YTL PowerSeraya Private Limited, which is responsible for 20% share of the Singapore Electricity market. He is Chairman of Wessex Water Services Limited, recognised as the best water and sewerage company in England and Wales (2010-2011) by the water industry regulator, Ofwat.

Tan Sri Francis is an Independent Non-Executive Director of The Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Limited.

Ranked as one of "Asia's 25 Most Powerful and Influential Business Personalities" by Fortune and Business Week, Tan Sri Francis firmly advocates responsible stewardship in business. He serves on YTL Foundation’s Board of Trustees, actively supporting education initiatives throughout Malaysia. He also serves on the Board of Directors of the Suu Foundation, a humanitarian organisation committed to improving healthcare and education in Myanmar. In 2016, he was conferred the prestigious Muhammad Ali Celebrity Fight Night Award in Arizona for his philanthropic efforts.

Ardent advocate of ethical corporate governance, he is Founder Member of the Malaysian Business Council and Capital Markets Advisory Council, Member of Asia Business Council, Trustee of Asia Society and former Member of Barclays Asia-Pacific Advisory Committee. He is also on the Advisory Councils of London Business School, Wharton School and INSEAD. He chaired the judging panel of the Ernst and Young World Entrepreneur of Year 2011 in Monte Carlo, having been Ernst and Young Malaysian Entrepreneur of the Year 2002.

Tan Sri Francis is the first Non-Italian Board Member of the historic Rome Opera House. He champions Arts enterprises like Kuala Lumpur Performing Arts Centre and Singapore Dance Theatre, and is Regional Chairman of International Friends of the Louvre. He also promotes environmental conservation and renewable energy, serving on Nature Conservancy’s Asia Pacific Council.

In 2010, a panel of Nobel Laureates made him 'Primus Inter Pares Honouree' of the Oslo Business for Peace Award for encouraging socially responsible business ethics and practices. In the same year, he received the Corporate Social Responsibility Award at CNBC's Asia Business Leaders Awards.

Tan Sri Francis was awarded the Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (CBE) by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II in 2006.

He holds an Honorary Doctorate of Engineering, as well as a Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering from the University of Kingston (UK). He also has an Honorary Degree of Doctor of Laws from University of Nottingham.

Tan Sri Francis married the late Puan Sri Dato' Paduka Rosaline in 1982 and they have 3 sons and 2 daughters.

Spencer Fung is Group Chief Executive Officer and is leading the 110-year-old company through its transformation to create the supply chain of the future to help the Company’s customers navigate the digital economy and to improve the lives of a billion people in the supply chain.

Spencer has been an Executive Director since 2008. Prior to becoming CEO in July 2014, he was the Group Chief Operating Officer responsible for building the company’s global infrastructure.

Since joining Li & Fung as a merchandiser, he has been involved in all aspects of the group’s operations, serving customers across three continents and managing acquisitions and integrations in over 20 countries. During his time as President of LF Europe, Spencer built the operating group into one of the largest private label suppliers in Europe.

Spencer began his career as a Certified Public Accountant (CPA) with PwC in Boston in 1996. In 1999, he co-founded HelloAsia.com, a Silicon Valley startup with $30 million of venture capital funding and created one of the first pan-Asian online marketing platforms.

Spencer is an independent non-executive director of Swire Properties Limited, a director of the Young Presidents' Organization and a member of the General Committee of The Hong Kong Exporters' Association. He is a member of the Hong Kong - United States Business Council and also a member of the Board of Trustees at Northeastern University. He had served on the Advisory Board of the British Fashion Council and the Committee of The Hong Kong Association (London).

He holds a Bachelor of Arts degree from Harvard University and Master of Science in Accounting and Master in Business Administration degrees from Northeastern University in the US. He is a US-Certified Public Accountant.

Prakash P Hinduja, affectionately known as ‘PP’, is Chairman of the Hinduja Group (Europe), member of the Board of Directors of Hinduja Bank (Switzerland) Ltd and Trustee of the Hinduja Foundation. He is the third son of the late Parmanand Deepchand Hinduja, founder of the Hinduja Group and Foundation.

After University, PP joined the Group and executed in Thailand, Turkey, Tehran and later moved to Geneva to manage the Group’s expanding European operations. Together with his brothers Srichand, Gopichand and Ashok, he conceived the diversification and growth of the Hinduja Group into a transnational conglomerate which today operates across ten sectors in over 38 countries.

This growth over the past 40 years is a remarkable success story, starting with the first acquisition of globally renowned iconic brand, Gulf Oil, in 1984, then, in 1987, the first major Non-Resident Indian investment into India with the acquisition of Ashok Leyland, the struggling Indian automotive manufacturer, to more recent acquisitions in the USA with Houghton Inc, a global leader in manufacturing specialty metal working fluids.

As a member of the Board of Directors of Hinduja Bank (Switzerland) Ltd, the first Indian-owned bank to receive a Swiss Banking Licence in 1994, PP has helped guide the Bank’s strategy and growth offering both individuals and institutions, with strong entrepreneurial and growth interests, innovative solutions and services in wealth management and private banking, trade finance, and corporate advisory services.

Taking a keen interest in the Hinduja Foundation’s philanthropic activities in India, the United Kingdom and USA in the areas of education, healthcare and promoting multicultural understanding, PP is a trustee of the Foundation, as well as the PD Hinduja National Hospital and the KPB Hinduja College of Commerce in Mumbai.

PP plays an active role promoting the Hinduja Group’s international profile and reputation: he is a partner of the World Economic Forum as well as a visiting participant at the Annual Meetings of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Africa World Bank forums and the Asian Development Bank. Furthermore, he is a member of the Board of the Swiss-Indian Chamber of Commerce and the Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce.

PP speaks four languages and has an honorary doctorate in Law from the University of Westminster and Economics from Richmond University in the UK as well as Civil Jurisprudence from the European University in Switzerland.

He is married to Kamal, with two sons, Ajay and Ramakrishnan, both active members of the Hinduja Group, and one daughter, Renuka.

Beth A. Brooke-Marciniak is Global Vice-Chair - Public Policy at EY and is a member of the firm’s Global Executive Board. Beth has public policy responsibility for the firm’s operations in 155 countries. In addition, she is the global sponsor for EY’s Diversity and Inclusiveness efforts. She has been named nine times to the list of Forbes "World's 100 Most Powerful Women", and in 2009 was named Woman of the Year by Concern Worldwide. In 2017, Beth received the Theodore Roosevelt Award, the top individual honor bestowed by the US National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). She has also been inducted into the Indiana Basketball Hall of Fame.

During the Clinton Administration, she worked in the U.S. Department of the Treasury, where she was responsible for all tax policy matters related to insurance and managed care. She played important roles in the healthcare reform and Superfund reform efforts.

Throughout her career, Beth has been actively engaged in numerous civic and business organizations. She chairs the Board of Vital Voices and co-chairs the International Council on Women’s Business Leadership, both founded by former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. She serves on the Advisory Board of Out Leadership and the Boards of The Conference Board, The Aspen Institute and the Women’s Advisory Board of the World Economic Forum. She is a member of the inaugural class of the Henry Crown Fellows of The Aspen Institute, the Committee of 200, and the International Women’s Forum.

Beth played basketball at Purdue University where she earned her undergraduate degree with highest distinction and received an honorary doctorate.

Mario Moretti Polegato was born in Treviso in 1952. After studying oenology, he followed in the steps of three generations by joining the family's renowned winemaking business.

In the mid 1990s, he revolutionised the shoe industry by inventing and patenting a new technology that allows the foot to breathe while wearing a rubber sole. With this invention, Mario Moretti Polegato turned Geox into an industry leader worldwide in just a few years.

Mario Moretti Polegato is Chairman of the Geox group, the leading footwear brand in Italy and a major player in the lifestyle and casual industry worldwide,

with 30,000 employees and collaborators working in over 110 countries. On 1 December 2004, Geox was listed on the Milan Stock Exchange.

He has been named Italian World Entrepreneur by Ernst&Young, Borsa Italiana and Il Sole 24 Ore for his strategic use of market opportunities in Italy and worldwide and his consistent ability to innovate.

He was awarded the title of "Innovator of the year" by CNBC and the Financial Times during the European Business Leaders Awards, for developing a brand that combines fashion and technology.

Mario Moretti Polegato dedicates a great deal of personal time to lecturing on intellectual property in schools and universities in Italy and abroad.

He is a lecturer in intellectual property.

He holds a degree in "Chemistry and environmental compatibility" from the Ca’ Foscari University of Venice.

He holds a degree in "Economic Science" from the University of Florence.

He holds a degree in "Industrial Design and Product Development" from Cardenal Herrera University, Valencia.

He is Honorary Consul General for Romania in North-East Italy.

He is a member of the General Council of Confindustria.

He is a member of the jury of the “European Inventor Award”, organised by the European Patent Office.

He is a member of Aspen Institute Italia.

He is founder and CEO of the charitable organisation “Il Ponte del Sorriso”, an Italian association which helps underage Romanian orphans in trouble.

Matt Dalio is the founder, CEO and Chief of Product of Endless Technologies, a company focused on using technology to deliver education, healthcare and livelihood to the next billion consumers in emerging markets. The core of Matt’s work rests on the premise that the lives of 3 billion people are being touched by technology for the very first time. Through its core product aimed at delivering greater internet connectivity and its venture and philanthropic arms, Endless seeks to encourage a vibrant startup ecosystem at the intersection of technology and emerging markets.

Matt’s most pivotal life moment came when he lived with a Chinese family in Beijing at 11 years old. At the age of 16 Matt founded the China Care Foundation, a nonprofit that has raised over $15 million to provide surgeries, financial aid grants and foster placements to orphans in China. His online media venture, The Issue, curated the best of citizen journalism and was merged into PBS's world news program. Matt has been honored as one of Oprah Winfrey's “People Changing the Lives of Children Around the World” and one of Teen People's “20 Teens Who Will Change the World,” and is the youngest recipient of the Fulbright Award for furthering peace and international understanding. He is a Harvard '06 graduate, and an adoring alumnus of the Stanford Graduate School of Business ('12).

Binod K. Chaudhary is the Chairman of CG Corp Global, a multi dimensional conglomerate with a portfolio of over 100 businesses spread over 30 countries with a 10,000-strong staff. Some of the major businesses of the group are present in the US, Africa, Dubai, Maldives, Sri Lanka, Thailand, India, Nepal and China.

He is the only Forbes-listed billionaire from the Himalayan republic of Nepal. Some of his core strengths are his vision for the future, an unshakable commitment to work, high adaptability and an ability to lead his team through turbulent times. Contrary to popular perception, he has proved that an entrepreneur can build business in challenging environments and still emerge successful.

Binod has controlling shares in Nabil, the largest private-sector bank in Nepal, and numerous hotel investments, joint ventures and brands worldwide (such as Taj, Alila, Fern, Radisson and the ultimate wellness destination The Farm at San Benito).

He is a global player in FMCG and is the man behind WaiWai, the iconic brand from CG, which has earned him the sobriquet Noodle King. Thanks to WaiWai, he has 2.3% shares of the world's noodles market. His other business interests include energy, infrastructure, realty, telecom and education among the 15 business verticals he runs within CG.

Besides business, Binod is an internationally renowned philanthropist. He led the rehabilitation works of Chaudhary Foundation after the 2015 earthquake in Nepal and built almost 3000 houses and 40 school buildings in the affected areas. He has been awarded several humanitarian awards and accolades due to his post-earthquake rebuilding initiatives in Nepal. He has been awarded Honorary Doctorate from His Holiness Sri Sri Ravi Shankar (Founder, Art of Living) on behalf of Sri Sri University.

Some of the important positions Binod has held are: Member of Nepal’s First Constituent Assembly, President Emeritus of Confederation of Nepalese Industries (CNI), President of Federation of Nepalese Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FNCCI), Advisor to the Prime Minister of Nepal, World Economic Forum’s Global Leader for Tomorrow (1995), and Member of World Presidents Organization (WPO/YPO).

Dr. Hanson brings a strong history of innovation and leadership in robotics, arts, academia, and entrepreneurship. Envisioning, organizing, and executing renowned projects in cognitive robotics, AI, the arts, education, product design, and business. In the past decade, he has built a worldwide reputation for creating the world’s most humanlike, empathetic robots, endowed with remarkable expressiveness, aesthetics and interactivity. He has produced many renowned, one-of-a-kind robot characters that have received massive media and public acclaim.

Dr. Hanson publishes regularly in materials science, artificial intelligence, cognitive science, and robotics journals, including SPIE, IEEE, the International Journal of Cognitive Science, IROS, AAAI and AI magazine. He has been featured in numerous popular media outlets including New York Times, Popular Science, Scientific American, the BBC and CNN. He has been labeled a "genius" by both PC Magazine and WIRED, and has earned awards from NASA, NSF, AAAI, Tech Titans’ Innovator of the Year, and Cooper Hewitt Design Triennial.

At Walt Disney Imagineering, Dr. Hanson worked as both a sculptor and a technical consultant. He has spoken at venues including IEEE, SPIE, AAAI, DARPA, MIT, Dartmouth, Brown, Google, Sandia Labs, UCSD and AAAS annual meeting. Dr. Hanson received his BFA from Rhode Island School of Design in film/animation/video, and his Ph.D. from the University of Texas at Dallas in interactive arts and engineering.

Dr. Hanson is working towards radical breakthroughs in humanizing robots—for machines with human-level intelligence, creativity, and physical capabilities, as well as humanlike compassion and understanding, to enable them to truly care, become our friends, and collaborate with us towards a better future. Ultimately, he aims to create a new generation of robots that exceed human brilliance, compassion, and wisdom—robots that he calls “Genius Machines.” He believes that, in addition to science and tech, arts and aesthetics are key, both to inspiring humans to care about machines, and to enable robots to achieve human standards of social intelligence, relationships, and ethics.

Mr Sam Goi Seng Hui is the Executive Chairman of Tee Yih Jia (“TYJ”) Group and GSH Corporation (“GSH”). Tee Yih Jia is a global food and beverage group with operations in Singapore, Malaysia, USA, Europe and China, and exporting to over 100 countries worldwide.

He acquired the company in 1977, and turned this small, labour-intensive spring-roll pastry manufacturer into an automated giant by increasing daily production by 1200% to 35 million Popiah Skins and subsequently brought it global via organic and inorganic expansion strategies.

To seek growth and stay at the forefront of the industry, he also recognized the need to venture globally. He entered China early on with Tee Yih Jia, and subsequently his property business. The Group has built food manufacturing plants and invested in many food manufacturing-related joint ventures with government and private entities since the 1980s. In 2003, he saw opportunities to acquire Chinese land, some of which have been developed into high quality homes.

Listed on the Mainboard of the Singapore Exchange, GSH is a premium property developer in the region. The Group owns and operates the 5-Star Sutera Harbour Resorts, Marina and Golf Course in Kota Kinabalu, and has prime properties currently under development in in Kuala Lumpur and Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia.

Buoyed by the long-term fundamentals of China, the Group has also expanded its presence into the country, investing over RMB200 million in a largest-of-its-kind food logistics and warehousing hub in Zhengzhou in the Henan Province. This centrally located hub offers its diverse tenant base of over 1,000 companies unparalleled connectivity with linkages to major highways and train routes. Comprising high quality cold storage rooms, food warehousing, retail outlets and food factories focused on frozen foods, this project will eventually scale up to cover 350,000 sqm of facilities.

Mr Goi also serves on the board of other Mainboard-listed companies in Singapore – as Vice-Chairman and Non-Executive Director of Super Group; Vice-Chairman of Envictus International Holdings Limited; and JB Foods Limited – as well as Director of Tung Lok Restaurants (2000) Ltd. In addition, he has investments across a range of listed and private entities in numerous industries, including food and beverage, consumer essentials, recycling, distribution and logistics.

Mr Goi has vast experience of doing business in the region, including Singapore. He is a member of Business China, Vice Chairman of IE Singapore’s “Network China” Steering Committee as well as its regional representative for Fuzhou City and Fujian Province. He is a member for the Singapore Zhejiang Economic & Trade Council and Singapore-Jiangsu Cooperation Council, as well as Senior Consultant to Su-Tong Science & Technology Park and advisor to several China provinces. Mr Goi also served as the Enterprise 50 Club’s President and is now the Honorary Past President. He is also the Singapore Manufacturers’ Federation and Honorary Council Member of the Singapore Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Industry. He is also bestowed as Honorary Resident of Yangzhou and Honorary Resident of Yixin.

Mr Goi is also a member of the Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD) Board of Trustee, and Chairman of Dunman High School Advisory Committee and Ulu Pandan Citizens Consultative Committee.

Mr Goi was awarded “Businessman of the Year” at the Singapore Business Awards (2014) and the “SG50 Outstanding Chinese Business Pioneers Award” (2015). For his social and business contributions in Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia, he was conferred the State Award of Panglima Gemilang Darjah Kinabalu (PGDK), which carries the title of Datuk, from the Head of State of Sabah. At the 49th National Day Awards, Mr Goi was conferred the Public Service Star (Bar) - BBM ( L ) - by the President of Singapore for his contributions to the community.

Mr Goi was also awarded the Enterprise Asia’s Lifetime Achievement Award in 2015 and the Asian Strategy and Leadership Institute’s Lifetime Achievement Award in 2016. Most recently, on 8 January 2017, Mr Goi became the first Singaporean and only overseas Chinese to be honoured for his contributions and success in China as an overseas Chinese by The People’s Tribune Magazine in Beijing.

Rich Karlgaard is the Editor-at-Large / Global Futurist of Forbes Media. In each issue of Forbes magazine he writes a featured column, Innovation Rules, known for its keen assessment of technology, business and leadership issues.

Karlgaard has been a regular panelist on cable news' most popular business show, Forbes on FOX, since the show’s inception in 2001. He is a co-founder of Upside magazine, Garage Technology Partners (with Guy Kawasaki) and Silicon Valley’s premier public business forum, the 7,500-member Churchill Club.

Karlgaard’s 2004 book, Life 2.0, was a Wall Street Journal business bestseller. His 2014 book on innovation culture, The Soft Edge: Where Great Companies Find Lasting Success, rapidly became Amazon’s top seller in the category of Strategy and Competition. Management guru, Tom Peters wrote: “The Soft Edge is brilliantly organized and written—and its peerless message is right on the money for our chaotic times.” Harvard Business School professor Clayton Christensen, wrote: “Rich Karlgaard is a navigator for the rest of us.” The Soft Edge made the lists of top business books of 2014 for Inc., Time.com, Value Walk, 800-CEO-READ, Huffington Post, and Forbes India.

Karlgaard’s 2015 book, Team Genius: The New Science of High Performing Organizations, drew praise from Satya Nadella, CEO of Microsoft; Fred Smith, Founder/Chairman/CEO of FedEx; and Beth Comstock, vice chair of General Electric. Team Genius made the “Best Business Books of 2015” lists of Time, Inc., Huffington Post and Forbes India.

Karlgaard holds a B.A. in Political Science from Stanford University.

S D Shibulal (Shibu) is one of the co-founders of Infosys. Shibu served as the CEO and MD of Infosys from 2011 to 2014 and was a Member of the Board of Infosys. He retired from Infosys in 2014. From 1991 to 1996, Shibu worked with Sun Microsystems in the US and he led the team that designed and implemented Sun’s first e-commerce application.

In 2014, Shibu co-founded Axilor Ventures – a new generation platform supporting innovation and entrepreneurship. Through its programs which include Accelerator, Scale-up and Early Stage Funding, Axilor aims to support early stage entrepreneurs improve their odds of success.

Shibu serves on the board of several organisations promoting education, science and technology. He is trustee of the Infosys Science Foundation, a member of the board of trustees of Boston University, Boston, a member of the board of governors of Indraprastha Institute of Information technology, Delhi, a member of the board of managers of Haverford College, Pennsylvania, and Member of Dean’s Advisory Board for Metropolitan College, Boston University. He is also the chairman of the board of governors of the Information and Communication Technology Academy of Kerala.

Shibu holds a master’s degree in computer science from Boston University and a master’s degree in physics from the University of Kerala.

Mr. Yoshito Hori established GLOBIS Management School in 1992 and GLOBIS Capital Partners in 1996. In 2003, GLOBIS started its original MBA program which, in 2006, gained “university”status. GLOBIS started a part-time MBA program in English in 2009 and a full-time MBA program in English in 2012.

A Harvard MBA graduate and former Sumitomo Corporation employee, Mr. Hori founded the EO Japan Chapter in 1995 and became the first board member from Asia in charge of Asia Pacific region in 1996. He also served on the World Economic Forum (WEF)’s New Asian Leaders Executive Committee and Global Agenda Council on New Models of Leadership, as well as the Harvard Business School Alumni Board from 2005 to 2008. Currently, Mr. Hori is a trustee of the Keizai Doyukai (Japan Association of Corporate Executives), and serves as co-chair of WEF’s Global Growth Companies.

In 2008, he launched the G1 Summit – a Japanese version of the WEF’s annual Davos forum. This led to the foundation of G1 Summit Institute in 2013, which Mr. Hori serves as Representative Director.

Just days after a huge earthquake struck northeast Japan in March 2011, Mr. Hori launched Project KIBOW to support the rebuilding of the disaster-affected areas. The following year Project KIBOW was incorporated as the KIBOW Foundation, which Mr. Hori serves as Representative Director.

Mr. Hori received his BS in Engineering from Kyoto University and his MBA from Harvard Business School.

He is an avid swimmer and enjoys spending time with his family, especially his five sons.

Brendan Blumer is the Founder and CEO of block.one, the publisher of EOS.

Brendan became an early investor in blockchain and began transition to full time involvement in the space in 2016 when he met business partner Daniel Larimer. Larimer is the inventor of DPOS which is the underlying technology behind the most used and highest performance blockchains; in 2014 Larimer introduced the concept of Decentralized Autonomous Collectives, or “DAC’s, which empowers open source communities to disrupt existing centralized business models.

Prior to getting involved in the blockchain space, Blumer founded Okay.com, a collaborative data sharing ecosystem for the Asia Pacific property market. Okay.com has grown to be Hong Kong’s largest digital property agency and is used by nearly all brokers in the country to find accurate property listings.

Brendan Blumer has been building disruptive technology companies since 2001, when he was 14; this started with Gamecliff, which automated the valuation, purchasing, and reselling of in-game items in the world largest online video games such as Everquest and World of Warcraft. In 2005, Gamecliff was acquired by a market leader and Brendan relocated to Hong Kong to help grow the business.

Block.one’s first project EOS is an Operating System on which scalable DAC’s can be easily built, launched, and governed; this technology was made possible by the invention of asynchronous smart contract communication and will enable the development of the next era of disruptive organizations.

EOS is the most successful token sale in history already having already sold more than 250m USD of EOS tokens in the first 30 day of the 11 month sale.