The Russian navigator rescued after his jet was shot down has promised to keep flying missions as revenge for the death of his pilot, Lt Col Oleg Peshkov, who was shot dead by Syrian rebels.

Capt Konstantin Murakhtin gave an interview at the Russian base in Syria where he was taken on Wednesday, saying that he was sure their plane had not entered Turkish airspace and that the crew received no warnings from F-16s scrambled to intercept them.

Dressed in combat fatigues and speaking with his back to the camera, he said he was anxious to keep flying missions from the base "to pay them back for my commander".

The Turkish military has said that they have been in contact with the Russian defence attaches and have told their Russian counterparts that they were unaware of the nationality of the jet when they issued the warnings.

The military said they told the attaches that they implemented the rules of engagement when the jet did not heed their warnings.

In an attempt to ensure the crisis does not become a full-blown diplomatic row, the military said they have been in contact with military authorities in Moscow and "expressed readiness for cooperation".

For anyone who understands Turkish, here is a screenshot of the press release:

Here is a brief paraphrasing of what the above means (with thanks to Daily Sabah):

1. Regarding the downing of the SU-24 jet that belongs to the Russian Federation, Russian military attaché and army attaché have been invited to the headquarters of the general staff on November 24 and 25 to inform officials on Turkey's downing of a Russian Su-24 warplane at the Syrian border and to answer their questions regarding the incident

2. These are what was discussed:

a) That we warned the jet but did not know its nationality

b) We were insistent and gave 10 warnings and received no answer but when a plane violates our airspace, we invoked the rules of engagement

c) The Turkish military and state sought to find and rescue the two pilots

d) We gave answers to all questions asked and the Russian side understood the rules and how the radar was used and Turkey made clear it was ready to share any information

e) Separately, earlier meetings held with the Russian side expressed the sensitivity of Turkey regarding compliance with the rules of engagement, that the nationality of the plane was not known and that because the plane was warned and came near to Turkish airspace, the rules of engagement were automatically used

3. This information was passed to Moscow military authorities on the phone and expressed readiness for "all kinds of cooperation".

More details have emerged of the Russian-Syrian mission to rescue Konstantin Murakhtin, the SU-24 navigator who survived yesterday's shoot down, reports Roland Oliphant in Moscow.

According to Russian tabloid Komsomolsksya Pravda, Captain Murakhtin landed in a forested, mountainous area after bailing out from the jet when it was struck in the tail by an air-to-air missile at 9.30am yesterday.

Following his escape and evasion training and equipped with a special survival kit issued to all Russian combat pilots, he moved as quickly to put as much distance as possible between himself and the spot where he landed to avoid capture.

He spent the whole of Tuesday in hiding from search parties of fighters dispatched to find him, and made radio contact with rescue parties only after dark, informing Russian commanders that he was still alive and describing his whereabouts.

Russian and Syrian special forces then launched a joint rescue mission. At 11pm he linked up with a group of Syrian special forces operating in the rebel rear, by 2am he had been extracted back to regime-held territory, and by 3am he was back at the Russian airbase near Latakia.

The tabloid also claims that the rescuers noticed intense radio activity from rebel fighters in the area, from which it infers Turkey had intercepted Russian communications and handed information about Capt Murakhtin's whereabouts.

It is unclear how much of this story has been confirmed, and how much Komsomolskaya Pravda's writer inferred from public statements and knowledge of Russian military doctrine. Capt Murakhtin did not mention anything about his rescue when he spoke to Russian journalists on Wednesday evening, presumably for operational security reasons.

• A Russian pilot who was rescued after his plane was shot down by Turkey claims that he was not given any visual or audio warning. However, a new - and unverified - audio recording has emerged with Turkish authorities telling the pilot he was approaching Turkish airspace.

• Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov described Turkey's shoot down of a Russian jet as "planned provocation" and says Russia will "seriously reassess" relations with Ankara. But he seems to have ruled out military retaliation, saying Russia is not going to war with Turkey.

• Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdogan said Turkey does not want escalation with Russia over downed plane, adding: "we are only defending out own security and the rights of our brothers".

• The Turkish prime minister warned Russia that attacks on the Turkmen minority could not be justified using the pretext of fighting Isil.

• The pilot, Captain Konstantin Murakhtin, said he couldn't possibly have flown over into Turkish airspace because the crew knew the region "like the back of their hand".

• Russia urged its citizens to stay away from Turkey, and protesters hurled eggs and stones at Moscow's Turkish embassy. Russians also attacked a Turkish brewery.

"Provocation" is one of the most important words in the Russian diplomatic lexicon, explains Roland Oliphant.

It can be used in a straightforward sense to accuse another country of a pre-meditated aggressive act to provoke a response, but it more usually implies something else - that the incident in question was staged by another power in order to frame Russia or one of its allies.

In short, it is an accusation of premeditation, implies a certain degree of hostile conspiracy, and wholly places the blame on the other party. It saw a lot of use during the crisis in Ukraine.

In this context, Sergei Lavrov appears to be saying that Turkey either had ordered its pilots to shoot down a Russian aircraft as soon as there was scrap of pretext for doing so (if the SU-24 did indeed stray into Turkish airspace), or that, even more nefariously, it deliberately fabricated the claim of an airspace violation to justify a pre-planned shoot down.

At one level, this is simply an expression of outrage that any government would make if someone shot down one of its aircraft.

It's also a choice of words that plays into the narrative, voiced by Vladimir Putin yesterday, that Turkey "stabbed Russia in the back" for attacking its terrorist clients Isil.

But Mr Lavrov has also implied that America may bear some responsibility, since Turkey is a Nato ally flying US-built planes with US-built weapons. There's a hint - but not quite an open accusation - that Washington and Nato may have had a hand in this.

Among some pro-government newspapers, editorials support the actions of the Turkish government but among some commentators in Turkey, there is concern for Russia-Turkey relations, writes Raziye Akkoc.

One writer in Hurriyet Daily News, an English-language newspaper in Turkey, fears that if tension is not defused, then Syria could "transform into a battlefield where the Turkish and Russian militaries will even more frequently confront each other".

Serkan Demirtas, a Turkish journalist, suggests relations could also take a while to return to normal and an expected visit in the near future by Mr Erdogan to Moscow could be in danger of cancellation. Of course, this is not surprising since the Russian foreign minister cancelled his visit for today on Tuesday afternoon.

There is no doubt among many within the establishment, a breakdown in relations is not wanted since Demirtas highlights how the two countries have a "unique relationship" and makes much of Turkey and Russia's trade ties. He says that bilateral trade volume is nearly $35 billion (£23 billion).

This is perhaps why Turkey is keen to stress publicly that their target was not a country, despite Mr Davutoglu's warnings about attacks on Turkmen mentioned earlier.

Daily Sabah, a pro-ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) newspaper, has an an editorial with the provocative headline: "Peril posed by Putin in Mideast runs parallel to Daesh," using the Arabic acronym for Isil.

The editorial condemns Russia's actions in Ukraine and Crimea, saying it had a "total disregard of the international system".

The newspaper then adds that Russia's "repeated violations of the airspaces of Nato member countries places it at an international threat level at least equal to that of Daesh in the eyes of the West". The piece goes on to claim that Russia's actions are "no different" to Isil.

Vladimir Putin has elaborated on the Russian foreign ministry's advice for Russians to avoid visiting Turkey, writes Roland Oliphant.

"After what happened yesterday, we cannot rule out other incidents, and if they occur one way or another we will have to react. And our citizens in Turkey, of course, could be exposed to considerable danger, and the foreign ministry is obliged to talk about that," he said.

Yesterday Sergei Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, advised Russians against holidaying in Turkey because the terrorist threat was similar to that in Egypt, where a Russian airliner was attacked by terrorists last month.

About four million Russians visit Turkey every year, so if Russians stop visiting it could have a big impact on the country's tourism economy. Some kind of limit on tourist travel - possibly in the form of flight suspension or forbidding travel firms from selling package tours to Turkey - appears to be one retaliatory measure Russia is considering.

The Turkish prime minister has warned Russia that attacks on the Turkmen minority could not be justified using the pretext of fighting Isil, writes Raziye Akkoc.

Ahmet Davutoglu was speaking today and said: "No one can legitimise attacks on Turkmens in Syria using the pretext of fighting Daesh," using the Arabic acronym for the extremist group.

He added that he personally gave the orders to the Turkish general chief of staff about shooting down jets which intruded into its airspace.

In his same speech, he criticised the way Turkey was described as a dictatorship but when France acted in a high-handed manner, it was not given the same criticisms.

"After Paris attacks, France prohibited protests. If Turkey had done so, people would say there's ‘dictatorship’ in Turkey."

But here Mr Davutoglu is making wild claims. France had just seen 130 of its citizens killed when it declared a state of emergency while in Turkey, people can be taken to court for "insulting the president" or sharing images critical of Mr Erdogan.

The shooting down of a Russian warplane by Turkey has complicated the process of finding a political solution in Syria and everything must be done to avoid a further escalation, German Chancellor Angela Merkel said on Wednesday.

"The situation has been aggravated by the shooting down of a Russian plane by Turkey," Merkel said in a speech in the lower house of parliament, in reference to the situation in Syria.

"We need to do everything to avoid an escalation," she added. "Of course every country has a right to defend its territory but on the other hand we know how tense the situation is in Syria and in the surrounding area. I spoke yesterday with the Turkish prime minister and asked him to do everything to de-escalate the situation."