This is is the sample Od Dr Iwan CD-rom without illustration and not edited, the complete Cd with illustration exist but only for premium member please subscribed via comment

The Dai Nippon War In Indonesia

Book Three

The dai Nippon Occupation Eastren Area of Indonesia

Created By

Dr Iwan suwandy.MHA

Private Limited E-book In CD-rom Edition

Special for Sebior Collectors

Copyright @ 2012

While in Tokyo

Major-General Kawaguchi

was informed that the enemy strength in British Borneo was estimated at approximately 1,000 regular soldiers (mostly Indians) and 2,500 native volunteers, with a probable further

5,600 Dutch soldiers in Dutch Borneo.

Intelligence sources reported that the entire island was covered with dense jungle with only a few poor roads near the river mouths. The only means of transportation was possible by water. Information in regard to weather and terrain was very scant and not very reliable and there was only one small scale map of the island available.

Immediately upon his return to

Canton

from Tokyo, the Detachment commander proceeded to

Sanya,

Hainan Island,

to attend a conference with the Commander-in-Chief of the Southern Expeditionary Fleet and the Direct Escort Fleet commander in order to reach an agreement on co-operative measures in the event of war.

It was decided that the first Japanese landings would be made at aerawk in

Miri

and

Serian

in order to capture vital oilfields and airfields in these towns. Part of the force would remain in this area to reestablish Miri oilfield while the main body would advance and capture the Kuching airfield. All units of the Kawaguchi Detachment had to receive special training in landing under cover of darkness and in jungle fighting, and naturally they also had to change their equipment and would have to be given special survival and field sanitation training.

On 20 November 1941,

The Kawaguchi’s Brigade was activated in Tokyo (Japan), and placed under

the direct command of the Southern Army.

It was commanded by

Major-General Kiyotake Kawaguchi

and it was composed mainly of

the following Japanese units stationed at Canton, southern China, which had been previously

under the command of the Japanese 18th Infantry Division:

Order of Battle for Japanese forces

Sarawak, December 1941 Major-General Kiyotake Kawaguchi(commander) 35thInfantry Brigade Headquarters 124th Infantry Regiment one platoon of the 12th Engineer Regiment a unit from the 18th Division Signal Unit a unit from the 18th Division Medical Unit 4th Field Hospital, 18th Division a unit from the 11th Water Supply and Purification Unit

In addition, the following units from Japan and Manchuria were to be used to reinforce the Detachment:

33rd Field AA Battalion one company of the 26th Independent Engineer Regiment

(minus two platoons) 2nd Independent Engineer Company 80th Independent Radio Platoon 37th Fixed Radio Unit a unit from the Oil Drilling Section of the 21st Field Ordnance Depot 1st Field Well Drilling Company 2nd Field Well Drilling Company 3rd Field Well Drilling Company 4th Field Well Drilling Company 48th Anchorage Headquarters 118th Land Duty Company

On December 8, 1941

Han Samethini was conscripted into

the KNIL 6th Infantry Battalion in Balikpapan in 1941

KNIL ID Card

This was the core unit of the town’s 1,100 man garrison

.Balikpapan BPM management

hurriedly arranged evacuation of the employees’ families to Java.

Embracing Anna and Margie one last time before they departed, Han could only hope they would be safe at his mother’s house in Surabaya

Trajectory of the Japanese army Papua

Jejak Militer Jepang di Papua

The AASC element commanded by Capt J.R. Burns had been cobbled together with transport, supply, bakery and butchery elements totalling 40 members in Sydney in July, moved to Darwin and dispatched to Ambon

on 14 December 1941.

The main supplies and ammunition stocks were held at Laha Airfield, defended by two infantry companies, while immediate stocks, bakery and butchery were initially positioned at Galala.

the Malaya and Borneo operations northeast of Natoma Island from 15 to 17 December 1942

The Support Force consisted of

Rear-Admiral Takeo Kurita

Rear-Admiral Takeo Kuritawith

the cruisers Kumano and

Suzuya

and the destroyers Fubuki

and

Sagiri.

Distant cover for the Malaya and Borneo

operations northeast of Natuma Island

operations northeast of Natuma Island from 15 to 17 December 1942

is provided by

Vice-Admiral Nobutake Kondowith

the heavy cruisers Atago and

Takao,

the battleships Haruna and

Kongo and

the destroyers Ikazuchi,

Inazuma,

Asashio,

Oshio,

Michishio

and Arashio. To protect westwards,

the Japanese submarines I-62, I-64, I-65 and I-66 are stationed in the passage between Natuma Island and northwest Borneo.

The convoy at first proceeded toward the southwest but, during the night, it changed course to the southeast and made directly for Miri.

About this time the Left Flank Unit aboard IJN

transport ship Hiyoshi Maru separated from the main body and proceeded toward Seria.

The Japanese invasion plan called for a landing to be made at

Miri city centre

Miri

and Serian

to capture the oil fields.

A large force would then be left behind to initiate repairs to these oil facilities, while the rest of the force would then make their way to capture

Kuching

and

its nearby airfield.

(Dr Iwan ever visit Kuching,Serian,Miri,Brunei,Labuan Island and Kota Kinibalu(before North Borneo) read the adventure of Dr Iwan)

Japanese destroyer Fubuki.

The destroyer took part in the British Borneo Operation, December 1941, as part of Support Force.

(2)Japanese aircraft sank

the HMS Repulse and

Prince of Wales,

eliminating the only Allied capital ships in the region.

The invasion of Luzon commenced the same day. In both Malaya and the Philippines, Japan’s tough, superbly trained armies quickly overcame forward defenses and swept south towards Singapore and Manila. Hong Kong surrendered on Christmas Day.

Japanese infantry storms ashore in the Natuna Islands, west of Borneo

Photo Source: The Dutch East Indies Campaign

The Japanese offensive in Malaya and the Dutch East Indies

Map of Borneo with arrows indicating the locations of Tarakan, Samarinda, and Balikpapan

(Click map to enlarge)

Following their rapid thrusts against the British and the Americans, the Japanese launched a great, three-pronged offensive against the Netherlands East Indies. The invasion of Borneo began on the night of

December 16th/1941

In Malaya

there was no clear demarcation between the first and second phase. There the Japanese, driving in two columns down the east and west coasts of the peninsula, continued to advance without halt.

troops of the japanese army 5th infantry division landing on a beach in malaya (december 1941)

troops of the japanese army 5th infantry division landing on a beach in malaya (december 1941)

japanese soldiers using boats for transports (malaya 1942

Combining amphibious encirclement with frontal assault, General Yamashita was able to force the stubborn British defenders back time after time

japanese soldiers of the 5th division trying to move a truck stuck in the mud (malaya 1942)

The first force, 2/21 Bn Group designated Gull Force, was landed

on 17 December 1941

to protect RAAF aircraft at Ambon; the aircraft were eventually withdrawn but not their

supposed protectors.

heavily camouflaged Toyota KB Truck and a type 97 tankette moving on a poorly pavemented road of malaya (1942)

art work showing tanks of the japanese army 6th Tank Regiment commanded by tank commander Colonel Kawamura attacking the british in malaya 1942

japanese soldier using a Type 97 light machine gun above a transport truck (malaya 1942)

Type 11 37 mm Infantry Gun crew on a hiden position (malaya 1942)

North Borneo,

Miri Serawak at the border of Brunei,

Serian serawak.

commander of the 2nd Yokosuka Naval Landing Force Lieutenant Colonel Watanabe giving orders to his troops before landing (Borneo, december 1941)

west borneo

Singkawang

Read more info

The Invasion of British Borneo in 1942

The following article is taken from the British Official History book:

The War Against Japan – Volume I – The Loss of Singapore (Chapter XIII) by Major-General S. Woodburn Kirby,

the Japanese Monograph No.26: Borneo Operations 1941-1945, USAFFE 1958 and

from numerous additional information kindly provided by

Allan Alsleben, Henry Klom, Tim Hayes, Coen van Galen, Pierre-Emmanuel Bernaudin and Graham Donaldson.

The Invasion of British Borneo 1942

The Brooke Government which had already heard of

the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor (on 7 December 1941)

quickly ordered the complete and total destruction of the oil fields and airfields at Miri and Seria. Orders for the demolition of the refinery at Lutong and the denial of the oilwells reached the officer commanding at Miri

on the morning of the 8th December,

and by the evening of the same day the task was completed. On the following day the landing ground there was made unfit for use, and on the 13th the Punjabis and the oil officials left by sea for Kuching. The destruction of the oilfields had been completed none too soon.

(Japanese troops advancing through Malaya)

Throughout much of World War II, British Malaya, North Borneo and Sarawak were under Japanese occupation.

The Japanese Empire commenced the Pacific War with the invasion of Kota Bahru in Kelantan

on 8 December 1941 at 00:25,

about 90 minutes before the Attack on Pearl Harbor in Hawaii at 07:48 on 7 December Hawaii time, or 01:48 on 8 December Malayan time.

They then invaded the island of Borneo in mid December 1941, landing on the west coast near Miri in Sarawak; invasion was completed by 23 January 1942 when they landed at Balikpapan in Dutch Borneo on the east coast. During the occupation an estimated 100,000 people were killed.

Defence in Sarawak and North Borneo

The main objectives were the oilfields at Miri in Sarawak region and Seria in Brunei. The oil was refined at Tutong near Miri. Despite rich oil supplies, the Sarawak region had no air or sea forces to defend it.

Only in late 1940 did Air Chief Marshal Sir Robert Brooke-Popham order the 2nd Battalion, 15th Punjab Regiment, a heavy 6-inch gun battery from the Hong Kong-Singapore Royal Artillery, and a detachment of 35th Fortress Company (Royal Engineers) to be positioned at Kuching. They numbered about 1,050 men. In addition, the Brooke White Rajah government also organised the Sarawak Rangers. This force consisted of 1,515 men who were primarily Iban and Dyak tribesmen. Altogether these forces were commanded by British Lieutenant Colonel C.M. Lane and was known as “SARFOR” (Sarawak Force).

After having heard of the attack on Pearl Harbor, on 8 December 1941, the Brooke government instructed that the oilfields at Miri and Seria and refinery at Lutong be quickly demolished.

Japanese landing and the battle

The main Japanese force, led by Major General Kiyotake Kawaguchi, consisted of units from Canton, southern China:

35th Infantry Brigade Headquarters

124th Infantry Regiment from Japanese 18th Division

2nd Yokosuka Naval Landing Force

4th Naval Construction Unit

1 platoon of the 12th Engineer Regiment

1 unit from the 18th Division Signal Unit

1 unit from the 18th Division Medical Unit

4th Field Hospital, 18th Division

1 unit from the 11th Water Supply and Purification Unit

(The Japanese landing off the west coast of British North Borneo, 1942)

The Japanese forces intended to capture Miri and Seria, while the rest would capture Kuching and nearby airfields. The convoy proceeded without being detected and,

at dawn on 15 December 1941,

two landing units secured Miri and Seria with only very little resistance from British forces. A few hours later, Lutong was captured as well.

Meanwhile, on 31 December 1941,

the force under Lieutenant Colonel Watanabe moved northward to occupy Brunei, Labuan Island, and Jesselton (now called Kota Kinabalu). On 18 January 1942, using small fishing boats, the Japanese landed at Sandakan, the seat of government of British North Borneo.

The North Borneo Armed Constabulary, with only 650 men, hardly provided any resistance to slow down the Japanese invasion.

After securing the oilfields, on 22 December,

the main Japanese forces moved westwards to Kuching. The Japanese airforce bombed Singkawang airfield to prevent a Dutch attack. After a battle between the Japanese fleet and a Dutch submarine, the fleet approached

the mouth of the Santubong river on 23 December.

The convoy arrived off Cape Sipang and the troops in twenty transport ships, commanded by Colonel Akinosuke Oka, landed at 04:00, 24 December. Although 2nd Battalion, 15th Punjab Regiment resisted the attack, they soon became out-numbered and retreated up the river. By the afternoon, Kuching was in the hands of Japanese forces.

At about 16:40 on 25 December,

the Japanese troops successfully captured Kuching airfield. The Punjab regiment retreated through the jungle to the Singkawang area. After Singkawang was secured as well on 29 December, the rest of the British and Dutch troops retreated further into the jungle southward trying to reach Sampit and Pangkalanbun, where a Dutch airfield at Kotawaringin was located. South and central Kalimantan were taken by the Japanese Navy following attacks from east and west. After ten weeks in the jungle-covered mountains, the Allied troops surrendered on 1 April 1942. Lastly, Sarawak fell into the hands of The Empire of Sun.

(Hinomaru Yosegaki – Japanese WWII Good Luck Flag)

The map of the Dutch East Indies 1941-1942

On 1 January 1942,

two infantry platoons commanded by a company commander landed on Labuan Island, capturing the British Resident, Hugh Humphrey who later recalled: “I was repeatedly hit by a Japanese officer with his sword (in its scabbard) and exhibited for 24 hours to the public in an improvised cage, on the grounds that, before the Japanese arrived, I had sabotaged the war effort of the Imperial Japanese Forces by destroying stocks of aviation fuel on the island”. [1] On 8 January, Kawaguchi proceeded to Jesselton and having occupied that town and Beaufort, where he disarmed the small police unit. Using ten small fishing boats, two infantry companies (minus two platoons), commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Watanabe, captured Sandakan, the seat of government of British North Borneo, and rescued the 600 interned Japanese citizens.

On the morning of the 19th January,

the Governor Robert Smith surrendered the State and, refusing to carry on the administration under Japanese control, was interned with his staff. This unit then captured Tawau and Lahad Datu on the 24th and 31st respectively. This time they freed a further 1,500 Japanese citizens. The Japanese forces suffered no combat casualties during this operations.

The convoy which left Miri

on the 22nd of December

was escorted by the cruiser Yura, the destroyers Murakumo, Shirakumo and Usugumo, the minesweepers W 3 and W 6 and the aircraft depot ship Kamikawa Maru. Covering Force was consisted of cruisers Kinu, Kumano and Suzuya, with the destroyers Fubuki and Sagiri.

West of Covering Force was the 2nd Division of the 7th Cruiser Squadron (Mikuma and Mogami) with destroyer Hatsuyuki. It was sighted and reported to Air Headquarters, Far East, by Dutch reconnaissance aircraft on the morning of the 23rd, when it was about 150 miles from Kuching.

At 11.40 that morning

twenty-four Japanese aircraft bombed Singkawang II airfield, so damaging the runways that a Dutch striking force which had been ordered to attack the convoy was unable to take off with a bomb load.

Despite the critical situation the Dutch authorities urged the transfer of their aircraft to Sumatra.

Air Headquarters, Far East, agreed

and during the afternoon of the 24th

the aircraft were flown to Palembang.

The convoy did not however escape unscathed.

On the evening of the 23rd

it was first attacked by Dutch submarine K-XIV (Lt.Cdr. C.A.J. van Well Groeneveld) sank two enemy ships and damaged two others,

and the following night of 23/24 December 1942

another Dutch submarine K-XVI (Lt.Cdr. L.J. Jarman) torpedoed the IJN destroyer Sagiri (1,750 tons) near Kuching, Sarawak.

Their own torpedoes caught on fire and the ship simply blew up, killing immediately 121 officers and men.

The IJN destroyer Shirakumo and minesweeper W 3 rescued 120 survivors. The K-XVI was herself sunk by Japanese submarine I-66 (Cdr. Yoshitome) on her way back to Soerabaja.

Five Bristol Blenheims of 34th (B) RAF Squadron from Singapore, at almost extreme range, bombed the ships at anchor the same evening, but did little damage.

The convoy was seen at 6 p.m. on the 23rd

approaching the mouth of the Santubong River. Two hours later Colonel Lane received orders from Singapore to destroy the airfield.

It was too late to change back to mobile defence and, as there seemed to him no point in attempting to defend a useless airfield, he asked General Percival for permission to withdraw as soon as possible into Dutch north-west Borneo.

While awaiting a reply Lane concentrated his battalion at the airfield, with forward detachments in the Pending area east of the town and on the roads to the north of it, 18-pounder gun and 3-inch mortar detachments covering the river approaches, and a Punjabi gunboat platoon, working with the Sarawak Rangers and the Coastal Marine Service, patrolling north of Kuching.

The convoy proceeded westward, arriving at a point, east of Cape Sipang

at 0300 on the 24th. At 0120,

the IJN transport Nichiran Maru with Colonel Akinosuke Oka arrived at the prearranged anchorage off the mouth of the Santubong River.

At 0400,

the unit aboard the IJN transport Nichiran Maru, commanded by Colonel A. Oka, completed its transfer to landing barges and proceeding west of Cape Sipang.

At about 9 a.m.

twenty enemy landing craft were observed approaching the shore.

The small Punjabi gunboat platoon, hopelessly outnumbered, withdrew up the river without loss.

At 11 a.m.

as they neared the town the landing craft were engaged by the gun and mortar detachments, who sank four before themselves being surrounded and killed. During the afternoon three more craft were sunk by gunfire, but the remainder were able to land their troops on both sides of the river,

and by 4.30 p.m.

the town was in Japanese hands.

Meanwhile Lane had been instructed by Percival to hold the Japanese for as long as possible and then act in the best interests of west Borneo as a whole.

Since the capture of the town threatened to cut off the forward troops, Lane ordered them to withdraw to the airfield.

The Japanese followed up

and before dark

made contact with the airfield defences.

Throughout the night

sporadic firing went on as they felt their way round the perimeter.

Major-General Kawaguchi received a report from his intelligence officer that there was approximately 400-500 British troops in the vicinity of the Kuching airfield.

December,25th.1941

As Christmas Day dawned,

firing temporarily ceased and advantage was taken of the lull to send the hospital detachment with the women and children on ahead into Dutch Borneo.

During the morning

the Japanese encircling movement continued, and a company was sent to hold the ferry crossing at Batu Kitang so as to keep the road clear for escape.

A general withdrawal into Dutch Borneo was ordered to start at dusk, but heavy firing was heard to the north of Batu Kitang shortly after noon and, fearing that his line of retreat would be cut, Lane decided on immediate withdrawal.

The enemy, reinforced by the 2nd Yokosuka SNLF, soon aware of his intention, launched a full-scale attack on the two Punjabi companies forming the rearguard.

Of these two companies only one platoon succeeded in rejoining the main body. The remainder, totaling four British officers and some 230 Indian troops, were cut off and either killed or captured.

At about 1640 on the 25th,

the Japanese troops completely secured the Kuching airfield. The Japanese losses during this operation (including those at sea) were about 100 killed and 100 wounded. The rest of the battalion reached Batu Kitang without loss to find the village deserted and the ferry unattended.

They had great difficulty in crossing the river, but by dark all except the covering force were over. Most of the transport had to be left behind.

. From the 26th

‘Sarfor’ ceased to exist as a combined Indian and State Force, and the Punjabis, much reduced in strength, carried on alone

December,27th.1941

Following the capture of Kuching airfield, the Detachment commander ordered Colonel Oka to secure the strategic area around Kuching with the main force of the 124th Infantry Regiment, while he with one infantry battalion (excluding two companies)

left Kuching on the 27th and returned back to Miri.

The main body made its way to Krokong. There the road ended, and the remaining vehicles and heavy equipment had to be abandoned. There, too, the Sarawak State Forces, in view of their agreement to serve only in Sarawak, were released to return to their homes

December,31st.1941

Renewed Japanese attacks threatened to cut off the covering force, but it managed to make good its escape to the southward, and after a march of about sixty miles through dense jungle with little food or water

rejoined the battalion at Singkawang II airfield on the 31st.

.

On the morning of the 27th

the column crossed the border into Dutch Borneo and two days later arrived at Singkawang II airfield where there was a garrison of 750 Dutch troops.

It was realized at Headquarters, Malaya Command, that the Punjabis would be urgently in need of food and ammunition.

On the 30th December

japanese navy paratroopers attacking the dutch troops in Longoan airfield (january 1942)

ship’s crane.

commander of the 2nd Yokosuka Naval Landing Force Lieutenant Colonel Watanabe giving orders to his troops before landing (Borneo, december 1941)

Finally between 0510 and 0610

the Right Flank Unit completed its landing, while the Left Flank Unit landed about 0440. The Right Flank Unit quickly captured the government buildings and the post office at Miri as well as the surrounding district with plantations.

In the meantime, the Left Flank Unit landed on the west coast near Serian and occupied the large copra plantations, the Serian oilfields, and the strategic sector north of Serian to prepare for an attack against Brunei. There was offered very little resistance by the British forces, and during the morning on the 16th, the two units secured the oilfield at Serian and oilfields and airfield at Miri. The main body of the Kawaguchi Detachment found only about 50 members of the police unit defending Miri. They surrendred with very little fighting. Two companies of the 2nd Yokosuka SNLF landed on the coast near Lutong and within two and a half hours captured the important Lutong oil refinery. It then proceeded to occupy and secure the Miri airfield without meeting any resistance.

Part of the Detachment was immediately assigned the mission of restoring the oilfields at Miri and Seria, while, after 17 December, the main body of the Detachment prepared for the next operation – the landing at Kuching. The Japanese troops suffered only 40 casualties between 16 and 23 December, most were drownings as a result of Japanese amphibious operations.

News of the landing did not reach Air Headquarters, Far East,

until 9 p.m. on the 16th.

Reconnaissance aircraft from Singkawang II were ordered to investigate

at daylight on the December,17th.

New Airbase in Singkawang: Ki-43 of the 77th

Singkawang:

Up and running; an AIR HQ is on it’s way and will unload tommorow, so it will soon be VERY up and running! But I already have planes, 2 Base Forces there

Photo Taken at our New Airbase in Singkawang: Ki-43 of the 77th Sentai:

In the meantime, the word of the invasion had also reached Tarakan Island on the eastern coast of Borneo, where the three Dornier flying boats of Naval Air Group GVT-7 (Marine Luchtvaart Dienst) were immediately prepared for attack. These three aircraft, (with registrations X-32, X-33 and X-34) were Dornier Do-24K’s, capable of carrying a payload of 1,200 kg.

Japanese attacked in the early morning of December 17th.1941

The flying boat X-34 (Luitenant ter Zee 3e klasse A. Baarschers) never made it to Miri. He had to made an emergency landing in the jungle, while it was heading for the Japanese invasion fleet near Miri

DECEMBER 17th, 1941:

After the reconnaissance report from 2 Vl.G.I,

Dutch Air Headquarters ordered 1 Vl.G.I, which operated from Samarinda II airbase, to attack the same target.

In the early afternoon

three flights (Flight Commanders Beckman, Butner and Vrijburg) flew to Miri. When they reached the target area, they observed a burning Japanese warship.

Though the crews thought that this must have been the result of 2 Vl.G.I’s earlier attack, P.C. Boer credits this damaged ship to the Dorniers of Naval Air Group GVT-7, since we already saw that van den Broek’s crews claimed no hits during their first raid.

The first two flights (Beckman and Butner) bombarded the ships with no results (“far from near misses”) but were attacked by Mitsubishi F1M fighters.

One of the crews of the third flight claimed a hit on a Japanese transport but this Glenn was also attacked by F1M floatplanes, one of which was shot down.

The last plane to attack the Japanese fleet was the Glenn Martin of the Flight Commander of the third flight (Vrijburg).No Japanese fighters and AA fire this time, so Vrijburg took his time to drop his two 1000 pounders on a large destroyer.

They could not again find the ship after the attack and claimed it as destroyed, which was not confirmed by Air Headquarters by the way.

In late 1941,

a total of 24 Hurricane Mk IIB´s in crates on route to Singapore for the Royal Air Force were rerouted to Tjililitan (Java) for use by tbe Dutch East Indies Air Force.

DECEMBER 18th, 1941:

Two flights of 2 Vl.G.I (Flight Commanders Theunissen and Cooke) repeated the attack in the early morning of this day. The weather was excellent and so were the bombing results.

The first flight (Theunissen) to attack scored two hits on a large transport which, according to Japanese records, was badly damaged but did not sink.

Again the Glenn Martins were intercepted by F1M floatplanes but the air gunners shot down one of them. The second flight (Cooke) hit a “cruiser” and the belly gunners of the Glenns observed it as it went down.

Cooke’s flight was also attacked by Japanese fighters and this time the Glenn Martin M571, flown by Lieutenant Groeneveld, was shot down. Groeneveld and his crew bailed out and eventually ended up at Long Nawang (Borneo) where they were executed by Japanese troops in August 1942.

P.C. Boer credits Cooke’s flight with the sinking of IJN destroyer Shinonome since this attack was made near Lutong (4 24’N – 114 00’0) whereas the Dorniers made their attack near Seria (20 miles north-east of Miri).

The 1 Vl.G.I also tried to attack the Japanese fleet again later that day, but by now the weather conditions had changed completely. Only two planes managed to reach the target area but were unable to locate the ships.

[2] This is the article written by Allan Nevitt “Fleeting Glory: The Fubukis of DesDiv 12” at Nihon Kaigun. There are more errors in this article, in the passages about later operations by this division.

This work was delayed

Dutch naval aircraft attacked the ships at anchor later that day and

again on the 18th December 1941

, but without effect.

On the 19th December 1941

the Dutch flying boat X-32 from Tarakan Island

IJN destroyer Shinonome

sank the Japanese destroyer Shinonome (Cdr. Hiroshi Sasagawa)

of 1,950 tons off Miri, while another flying boat X-33 damaged a transport ship.

The destroyer could not take the pounding and went down with her entire crew of 228 officers and men. Kuching realized that its turn was soon to come and work went on day and night to complete the airfield defences.

.

Read more info

Who sank IJN destroyer Shinonome, December 1941?

The IJN destroyer Shinonome (1,950 tons) was a powerful ship, completed in 1927 as one of the Fubuki Class fleet destroyers. At the outbreak of war in the Pacific, she was under command of Commander Hiroshi Sasagawa. His ship had been assigned to Destroyer Division 12 under the command of Commander Nobuki Ogawa, which was initially deployed as escort for the valuable troop transports steaming towards the virtually unprotected shores of the Malaya Peninsula. On December 16, she left Cam Ranh Bay (French Indochina) for Miri, British North Borneo, together with the other two ships of Destroyer Division 12, the IJN destroyers Shirakumo and Murakumo, the light cruiser Yura, the seaplane depot ship Kamikawa Maru, a few sub-chasers and two minesweepers. In addition, a cover force (Rear-Admiral Takeo Kurita) with two heavy cruisers Kumano and Suzuya, a light cruiser Kinu and the destroyer Fubuki were sent out as reinforcement. The invasion fleet reached Miri in the night of 15 and 16 December 1941, where the troops went ashore almost unopposed. The 2,500 men of the Kawaguchi Detachment were able to capture Miri and Lutong without much fighting.

IJN destroyer Shinonome

The next day proved to be far less comfortable for the Japanese invasion force. In the early morning of December 17, 1941 a flight of 2 Vl.G.I, operating from Singkawang II airbase, found several Japanese ships near Miri. That same morning the 1st “Patrouille” (Flight Commander Van den Broek) of 2 Vl.G.I attacked these ships from 4,500 meters but claimed no hits. The crews reported heavy AA fire and two of the Glenn Martin bombers returned slightly damaged [1].

In the meantime, the word of the invasion had also reached Tarakan Island on the eastern coast of Borneo, where the three Dornier flying boats of Naval Air Group GVT-7 (Marine Luchtvaart Dienst) were immediately prepared for attack. These three aircraft, (with registrations X-32, X-33 and X-34) were Dornier Do-24K’s, capable of carrying a payload of 1,200 kg.

They attacked in the early morning of December 17.

The flying boat X-34 (Luitenant ter Zee 3e klasse A. Baarschers) never made it to Miri. He had to made an emergency landing in the jungle, while it was heading for the Japanese invasion fleet near Miri.

He later reached, together with two of his crew members, a refugee camp at Long Nawang, only to be massacred there by Japanese troops in August 1942.

The other two flying boats X-33 and X-32 were able to attack the fleet. The X-33 (Officier-Vlieger 2e klasse J.G. Petschi) attacked a Japanese transport ship without succes, while X-32 (Officier-Vlieger 2e klasse B. Sjerp – unit commander) did far better.

He dropped 5 bombs of 200 kg each, scoring two hits on a IJN destroyer Shinonome and a near miss. The latter apparently did most of the damage, as the target was immediately rent by a thunderous explosion, and fires broke out aboard. A few minutes later, when the smoke cleared, the waves closed over the Shinonome, who had disappeared beneath the surface, taking below its captain, Commander Hiroshi Sasagawa, and the entire crew of 228 men.

Dornier Do-24K

After the war, a committee was formed to assess the casualties the Allied naval and airforces had inflicted on the Japanese Navy and merchant navy during the war. They reached a remarkable conclusion regarding Shinonome’s loss. This warship was supposedly sunk by a Dutch mine. Although the author has little doubt about the true cause of the sinking, it is interesting to see how the committee reached this conclusion.

In 1998, an article was posted on the Nihon Kaigun website, narrating the history of Destroyer Division 12 during its short career [2]. The passage about the Shinonome mentions that the Commander of Destroyer Division 12, Commander Nobuki Ogawa, thought she had been lost to a mine or an internal explosion. He nor anyone else had apparently observed the air attack by the flying boats. The Assessment Committee adopted this theory, and never gave other possibilities much thought. There may be a few reasons why the Imperial Japanese Navy thought a mine was responsible:

– There were no survivors of IJN destroyer Shinonome to account for her loss.

– The stormy weather prevented the Dutch aircraft from being sighted, and therefore caused the confusion.

I put in a few hours of research to try to find out if there were any mines in the vicinity, but I am pretty sure there were none in the area. The Dutch minelayer Prins van Oranje made a sortie to British Borneo to pick up Japanese inhabitants, but there is no record of any mine being laid. The same goes for the British Royal Navy in Singapore, which restricted her operations to the waters of Malaya.

Note This article was written by JAN VISSER (The Netherlands). Much thanks also goes to BERT KOSSEN (the Netherlands).

[1] The description of this event according to P.C. Boer’s excellent book “De Luchtstrijd rond Borneo”:

on the December 19th

by a raid on the town by fifteen Japanese bombers which set fire to a large petrol store but otherwise did little material damage. A large part of the native population however fled from the town, and labour, which had been difficult to obtain before, became almost unprocurable

On the 22nd December1941

the main body (two battalions) of the Japanese invasion force re-embarked at Miri and left for Kuching, leaving one battalion to secure all British Borneo outside Sarawak.

Although after the occupation of Miri the Detachment commander, Major-General Kawaguchi, was unable to obtain any additional information in regard to the enemy’s strength or disposition, he did learn that there is one small railway on the western coast and no roads through the jungle. Consequently, an attack on north Borneo would have to be made from landing barges.

The first signs of the increased tempo of Japanese operations in the Netherlands Indies came very quickly.

Then, on 22 December, 1941

General Homma put the bulk of his 14th Army ashore at Lingayen Gulf, north of Manila.

japamese army officer Lieutenant General Kyoji Tominaga shaking hands with raiders of the Kaoru Special Attack Corps before leaving to a mission against a USAAF landing strip on Leyte (oct 1944)

Lieutenant General Kyoji Tominaga giving sake wine to soldier of the Kaoru Special Attack Corps before leaving to a mission against a USAAF landing strip on Leyte (oct 1944)

The remainder landed two days later at Lamon Bay, south of the capital, to form the southern arm of a giant pincer movement converging on Manila. But Homma quickly discovered he was dealing with a determined and able foe.

MacArthur did not, as Homma and Imperial General Headquarters expected, stay to fight it out on the central plain of Luzon. Instead he put into effect the long-standing ORANGE plan and withdrew his forces to the Bataan Peninsula in a skillful and dangerous double retrograde movement, made in two weeks under the most difficult circumstances and constant pressure. At the same time he proclaimed Manila an open city and transferred his headquarters to Corregidor. Thus, when Homma,

On returning back to Miri on 28 December1941,

Major-General Kawaguchi ordered Lieutenant Colonel Watanabe to advance on the 31st by landing barges to Brunei with one infantry battalion and there to collect small boats to be used for the attack on north Borneo.

The Japanese soldiers of the Watanabe Force, however, discovered that the British had already destroyed all big ships in the harbour, so that only small native boats remained.

The ABDACOM Interlude

While the American and British heads of state with their military staffs were in Washington establishing the strategic basis and the organization for the conduct of the war, the Japanese Army and Navy had continued their drive into Southeast Asia and the Southwest Pacific with unabated vigor.

Operations during the first phase of their plan for seizing the southern area had been remarkably successful and

.

In the last week of December1941,

Field Marshal Hisaichi Terauchi, commander of the Southern Army, and Vice Adm. Nobutake Kondo, 2d Fleet commander, jointly recommended advancing the schedule of operations against Sumatra and Borneo, thus making possible the invasion of Java a month earlier than planned.

At Japanese Imperial General Headquarters

the Terauchi-Kondo proposal met a favorable reception, for it would not only speed operations in the south and keep the enemy off balance but it would also make available at an earlier date the troops needed in Manchuria if the Soviet Union should enter the war — a danger that continued to haunt the Japanese. Early in January, therefore, Imperial General Headquarters approved the recommendation and advanced the timetable for the seizure of the southern area.29

Late in December 1941

the Japanese had gained control of British Borneo and the South China Sea approaches to the Malay Barrier.

January,1st.1942

JAPANESE PRISONERS,

captured on Bataan, being led blindfolded to headquarters for questioning. On 1 January 1942 the Japanese entered Manila and the U.S, troops withdrew toward Bataan. Army supplies were either moved to Bataan and Corregidor or destroyed. The remaining forces on Bataan, including some 15,000 U.S. troops, totaled about 80,000 men. The food, housing, and sanitation problems were greatly increased by the presence of over 20,000 civilian refugees. All troops were placed on half-rations

On January 2th, 1942

, the Philippine capital of Manila was occupied by the japanese

January 1942

primarily to show whether one could be drawn “which would leave the Supreme Commander with enough power to improve the situation and still not give him power to destroy national interests or to exploit one theater without due consideration to another.”16

The task was a difficult one and the results were not entirely satisfactory, the British Chiefs objecting on the ground that the limitations placed on the commander were too heavy. It was sent to the Allied planners, therefore, for further study and a revised draft was prepared. This one, with slight modifications, proved acceptable and was finally approved, though with some reluctance, by all the governments involved on 10 January 1942.17

The new command Wavell was to head was to be known as ABDACOM, for the initials of the national forces involved (American, British, Dutch, and Australian) and included Burma, Malaya, the Netherlands Indies, and the Philippines. The inclusion of the Philippines in Wavell’s command was a formal gesture and one Wavell himself wished to avoid.18 Significantly, neither China nor Australia was included in the ABDA area. (Map 2) As much for political as military reasons the former was organized as a separate theater commanded by Chiang Kai-shek, but independent of Allied control.

The Australians, though they protested their omission from the discussions in Washington and their lack of representation in the Combined Chiefs of Staff, accepted the terms of the directive and permitted their troops in the ABDA area to become a part of Wavell’s command. USAFIA (U.S. Army Forces in Australia), however, was not included in the new command on the ground that its primary responsibility was to MacArthur and its main task to support the defense of the Philippines. Soon after Wavell assumed command, when it became apparent that only limited aid could be sent to the Philippines, the mission of USAFIA was broadened to include the support of operations in the ABDA area. And the northwest portion of Australia was also added to ABDACOM at General Wavell’s request.19

The staff of the new command, it was understood, would represent all the nations concerned. The American and British Chiefs of Staff did not attempt to name Wavell’s staff, but they did seek to guard against the preponderance of one nationality in his headquarters. Thus, they stipulated that his deputy and the commander of the naval forces would be Americans, and that a British officer would command the air forces and a Dutch officer the ground forces.

The problem of protecting the interests of each nation represented in ABDACOM without unduly restricting the commander was resolved by limiting Wavell’s authority to the “effective coordination of forces.” He was given command of all forces “afloat, ashore,

MAP 2: The ABDACOM Area

and in the air,” but was permitted to exercise that control only through subordinate commanders whom he could not relieve and who had the right to appeal to their governments if they considered their orders and national interests to be in conflict. Though he could assign missions to his forces, form task forces for specific operations, and appoint their commanders, he was prohibited from altering the tactical organization of the national forces in his command, using their supplies, or controlling their communications with the home government. And in matters of logistics and administration he could exercise only the most general control.

The severe limitations placed on General Wavell’s authority were in marked contrast to the heavy responsibilities laid upon him by the chiefs in Washington. Not only was he given the task of maintaining “as many key positions as possible” under the strategic objectives already outlined (that is, to hold the Malay Barrier, Burma, and Australia), a formidable enough undertaking in itself, but he was also enjoined “to take the offensive at the earliest opportunity and ultimately to conduct an all-out offensive against Japan.” “The first essential,” the Chiefs told him, “is to gain general air superiority at the earliest possible moment.” With the lesson of the first Japanese successes still fresh in mind, they cautioned Wavell against dispersing his air forces or using them in piecemeal fashion.20

These instructions, with their emphasis on offensive operations, were probably motivated by an understandable reluctance in Washington to dedicate a command to defensive action, but there was a clear realization that the forces in the theater were then and for some time would be hard pressed even to hold their own. And even as these instructions were being written the enemy was moving swiftly and in force toward those “key positions” Wavell was to hold.

Having established the ABDA area and appointed General Wavell its commander, the American and British staffs in Washington had still to settle the problem of reinforcements to the Southwest Pacific, for it was obvious with each passing day that the situation there was rapidly worsening. This problem brought the assembled planners up against the hard fact, which was to plague them throughout the war, that there were not enough ships to do all the jobs required. They had earlier in the conference agreed ‘that American troops would be sent to Iceland and northern Ireland, and that landings might be made in North Africa later in the year. The shipping requirements for these operations alone were so great that the North Atlantic sailings were approved only on the understanding that they would be discontinued “if other considerations intervened.”21 The necessity for speeding up the schedule of reinforcements to the Southwest Pacific created an additional and immediate demand for the ships already allocated to the North Atlantic projects and led to a re-examination of the entire shipping shortage.

The debate over Atlantic versus Pacific priority on shipping was precipitated

(ibid American Army In WW II)

Both left Davao at the same time, 9 January 1942.

The first landed at Tarakan on 11 January and, after overcoming slight resistance from the Dutch defenders aided by American B-17’s based near Surabaya, took that town the same day.

The second force, reinforced by about 330 naval paratroopers and supported by the seaplane tenders Chitose and Mizuho and three heavy cruisers, took Menado at the same time.

The seizure of these two points completed the Japanese control of

the Celebes Sea

And

the northern approaches to Makassar Strait.

Through that strait lay one of the routes to Java.30

JANUARY 1942

amazing story of Louis Rapmund.

Louis Rapmund

During one of my many late night internet searches I found his name in two obscure articles published in a New Guinea journal in the late 1940s. Rapmund was a Dutch NEI (Netherlands East Indies) officer who worked in western New Guinea facilitating the recovery of Indian, Papuan, and Dutch nationals who had been held by the Japanese. Rapmund assisted Nellist and Rounsaville Teams (of the Alamo Scouts) on their famous mission to liberate a Dutch governor and his family, along with 40 Javanese and twelve French civilians from an internee camp at Cape Oransbari

Last photo of the Rapmund Family – Madang 1940

“The last time I saw my father was in 1942 in Java,” said Louise. “He was literally running out the back door of our house as the Japanese were coming in the front door.

They were looking for him. This has helped heal a wound in my soul that festered for over sixty years. I loved my father. He was a wonderful man.”

Over the next week Louise gathered what photos she could find of her father and sent them to me for the ASA Photo Archive.

As the photos attest, Louis Rapmund was a striking figure; a handsome young man struck down in the prime of his life in a brutal war. But now thanks to modern technology, the undying love of a daughter, and the generosity of a total stranger, the words he penned a lifetime ago have helped bring others a little closer.

Louise & husband

until by 10 January

General Yamashita stood at the gates of Kuala Lumpur, on the west coast of Malaya, which his 5th Division captured the next day.

His eastern column meanwhile had advanced to within 100 miles of Singapore. By the middle of the month, he had united his two columns and was preparing to attack the single line the gallant defenders had formed before the plain which constitutes the southern tip of the peninsula.28

January,12th.1942

the battle of manado

commander of the 1st Yokosuka SNLF paratroopers during the japanese invasion of the dutch east indies, in january 1942 during

the battle of manado January 1942

commander Horiuchi was tasked to conquer the Longoan airfield, 09:00 hours

January 12th, 1942,

334 Japanese paratroopers were dropped on and around the airfield, Having heard the dropping dutch commander Captain van den Berg ordered the two remaining Overvalwagens (armoured car) to attack the airfield. Although the Japanese paratroopers suffered heavy casualties, they succeeded to capture the Langoan airfield. Enraged by the heavy losses, the Japanese executed a large number of KNIL POW’s

It was at this juncture, on 10 January,

that General Wavell reached Batavia, capital of the Netherlands Indies, located on the northwest coast of Java. Already there or soon to arrive were his deputy, General Brett, and the commanders of his ground and naval force, Lt. Gen. H. ter Poorten and Admiral Hart. In the absence of Air Marshal Sir Richard E. C. Peirse, General Brereton was appointed deputy commander of the air forces. On the 15th, General Wavell formally assumed command of the ABDA area (ABDACOM) with headquarters at Lembang, inland from the capital and about ten miles north of Bandoeng.31 (Chart 2)

From the start it was apparent that the defense of the ABDA area, even in the unlikely event that the promised reinforcements arrived in time, had little chance of success. Already the Japanese had taken Hong Kong, isolated the Philippines, landed in Borneo and the Celebes, and were making rapid progress down the Malay Peninsula.

To oppose their advance Wavell had, in addition to the British forces fighting a losing battle in Malaya and the American forces in the Philippines, two Dutch divisions in Java and small Dutch garrisons elsewhere in the Indies; a naval force — including the U.S. Asiatic Fleet — of heavy and 8 light cruisers, 23 destroyers, and 36 submarines; and an air force of 4 fighter and 6 bomber squadrons, including the remnants of the Far East Air Force, plus 250 more planes in Burma and Malaya. With these meager forces General Wavell could only try to hold back the Japanese tide while waiting for reinforcements which never came.32

The urgent need for reinforcements was only one of Wavell’s problems. Keeping the peace within his own small international headquarters, unraveling the confused command relationships between his forces, and reconciling conflicting national interests and strategic concepts were others almost as serious. Even so minor a matter as the location of the headquarters could not be settled amicably and it was only after he had overridden the strong objections of his naval commanders that Wavell established his headquarters at Lembang.33

The relationship between Wavell and MacArthur, though it created no difficulties, illustrated the confused situation in ABDACOM. In addition to the task of holding the Malay Barrier, Wavell had also been instructed to re-establish communications with Luzon and to support the Philippine garrison. Before assuming command, he objected to this assignment and proposed that the islands be excluded from the ABDA area. President Roosevelt, without consulting his military advisers, approved this suggestion to avoid any delay in Wavell’s assumption of command. When General Marshall learned of this action he saw

on 11 January,

the Japanese moved on to Kendari

Tarakan is an island off the east coast of Borneo.

The island is about 303 square kilometers and consists largely of swamps and hills covered with impenetrable jungle.

One of the main objectives of Japan during the Second World War, these oil wells to get.

End landed Japanese troops on 11 January 1942

on the coast of Tarakan defeated and there a small garrison of the Indian army during a two-day battle in which half the garrison was slain.

Although the oil fields were destroyed by the Dutch troops before the landing of the Japanese took the Japanese were able to produce oil quickly recover.

And

then Japanese troops landing Tarakan,

They managed to get through barbed wire, to destroy all machine-gun nests and killing almost all Dutch commanding officers with knives.

They soon captured the first and second row of barracks.

At daybreak the Dutch garrison commander, Lieutenant Colonel S. de Waal, discovered that front line is weak and that all further resistance would be useless.

He dispatched a messenger, under a flag of truce, with an offer to surrender.

Colonel Kyohei Yamamoto, commander of the Right Wing Unit, immediately wired the commander of the Sakaguchi Detachment, informing him of the enemy’s surrender.

After the Dutch troops finally surrendered, the 2nd Kure Special Naval Landing Force advanced rapidly to the Tarakan airfield and occupied it

by the morning of January 12th.

During this advance the unit was bombed by Dutch bombers from Samarinda II airfield and 18 Japanese soldiers were killed. At 1200 hours one infantry company dispatched from the Right Wing Unit also

Japanese troops occupied the village of Djoewata

with a Dutch coastal battery located there at the north end of the island.

During this first fightings Japanese managed to capture a group of about 30 KNIL soldiers. When this group refused to tell them how to get to the main city of the island, they were all stabbed to death with Japanese rifles. Only one men survived this massacre. He managed to drag himself to a hospital where he recovered. The Left Wing Unit Operations, Tarakan Island, January 1942

The Left Wing Unit landed at the prearranged point at 0300

On January, the 11th

1942

and advanced west into the jungle toward the rear of the Dutch coastal battery which it was supposed to destroy. Due to the dense jungle and the steep terrain, the unit was able to advance only 100 meters per hour. After losing its way several times, the unit finally came out in the rear of the Dutch coastal battery around 1700 on the 12th. The Sakaguchi Detachment Headquarters had lost track of the movements of the Left Wing Unit and there had been no report from the officer who was sent out to contact the unit.

Therefore, at midnight on the 11th, Lieutenant Colonel Namekata from the artillery unit was ordered to land with one infantry company with the mission of capturing the Dutch coastal battery, which was the main objective of the Left Wing Unit. At approximately 0200 on the 12th Lieutenant Colonel Namekata’s unit landed at the same point as had the Left Wing unit, proceeded along the coast and by daybreka reached a position in front of the battery. Initially, it was planned that the Detachment Headquarters was to land in the same area as the Right Wing Unit, immediately after the area was secured and than proceed by land to city of Tarakan. However, because Right Wing Unit had lost it way the Headquarter could not land as scheduled. On the 12th, upon learning of the Dutch forces to surrender, the Headquarter arranged with the Navy to land on Tarakan Island.

On the 12th,

the following message was received by the Naval Forces: “Although the enemy has offered to surrender, it is feared that the coastal battery located at the south end of the island is not aware of this and it would be dangerous to proceed to the Tarakan pier, therefore held up your sailing”. In spite of this message, the warning was ignored and the movement went on as planned. When the six minesweepers entered the bay, they were fired on by the Dutch coastal battery and two minsweepers W 13 and W 14 were hit by 4.7 inch grenades and sank with most of its crew.

This were Japanese only naval losses in this action.

The naval commander later promised amnesty for the guncrews and based on this promise the Dutch Island Commander managed to persuade the guncrews to surrender. The Japanese Army Commander on the other hand was to brutal to have the prisoners turned over to him. So he ordered to tie the men into small groups of three. Some time later they were thrown into the water where all 219 Dutch soldiers drowned.

The commander of the Sakaguchi Detachment,

Major-General Shizuo Sakaguchi,

left his ship at about noon on the 12th and landed at

the mouth of Amal RiverTarakan

arriving at the office of the British Petroleum Manufacturor at sunset.

On the morning of 13th, he accepted the enemy commander and formally accepted his surrender. Mopping-up the island was completed on the 13th. On the 14th, the entire Sakaguchi Detachment boarded the ships and left the island. Their new objective was Balikpapan All prisoners of war were executed by the Japanese in retaliation for the destruction of the oil installations; an event that was repeated later in Balikpapan. The Japanese soldier on guard on Tarakan Island, 1942. The photo was taken shortly after the Japanese occupied the island

a Dutch possession, fell on

January 12th 1942

after a brief but vicious struggle, the Japanese killing most of the Dutch officers at close quarters with knives. Tarakan in hand,

Battle of Tarakan

Part of World War II Date

11 January 1942

Location Tarakan Island, Netherlands East Indies Result Decisive Japanese Victory Combatants Empire of Japan Kingdom of the Netherlands Commanders Major General Shizuo Sakaguchi Lieutenant Colonel S. de Waal Strength Over 6,600 Over 1,300 Casualties 255 killed All killed in battle or executed after surrendering

156: Tarakan Island – Dortmund Amateur Wargamers – Best of Show award

the Japanese commander, General Sakaguchi, prepared to move against his next objective, Balikpapan.

He sent two captured Dutch officers as envoys to Lt. Colonel C. van den Hoogenband, the Balikpapan garrison commander.

They delivered a written ultimatum demanding surrender.

The message included a warning:

When the Balikpapan garrison destroys the natural resources and oil installations at Balikpapan and the surrounding country, all commanding officers, their Dutch soldiers and other Dutchmen related to them will be killed without exception. [2]

Undaunted, Hoogenband ordered the oil facilities to be put to the torch. Samethini took part in this operation, the resulting fires and explosions sending thick pillars of black smoke into the sky.

General Sakaguchi’s ultimatum

Smoke rises from burning oil facilities at Balikpapan (January 1942)Photo Source: Netherlands Institute for War Documentation

The remaining troops of the Indian army were executed in 1942 as punishment for the destruction of the oil fields.

Now, in the first week of January, the 16th

Army, which had been given the 38th Division to accelerate its drive into the Indies, completed its preparations for the advance. At Davao in the southern Philippines it organized two task forces, one to take the important oil center of Tarakan in northern Borneo, and the other Menado in the Celebes.

Both left Davao at the same time, 9 January 1942.

The first landed at Tarakan on 11 January and, after overcoming slight resistance from the Dutch defenders aided by American B-17’s based near Surabaya, took that town the same day. The second force, reinforced by about 330 naval paratroopers and supported by the seaplane tenders Chitose and Mizuho and three heavy cruisers, took Menado at the same time.

The seizure of these two points completed the Japanese control of

the Celebes Sea

And

the northern approaches to Makassar Strait.

Through that strait lay one of the routes to Java.30

in the first week of January 1942

Japanese Forces opened the second phase.

The objectives of this phase of the plan included the seizure of the Bismarck Archipelago and Malay Peninsula; the capture of Singapore; and, in preparation for the final assault on Java, heart of the Indies, the acquisition of air and naval bases in southern Sumatra, Dutch Borneo, the Celebes, Amboina, and Timor.

The occupation of Java itself and of northern Sumatra was scheduled for the third phase, after which the Japanese would complete their operations in Burma and consolidate their position in the conquered area.

So rapidly had their forces moved and so light had been resistance that even before the end of the year Japanese commanders in the field were urging their superiors in Tokyo to speed the timetable of conquest

。It is the Imperial Army officer was drawn to follow the style of “Yamato-e painting” by Japan during the Meiji restoration painting

[War paintings] 03 war paintings

February 14, 1942,

just before the fall of Singapore, the Malay Peninsula took off aboard the Russian transport aircraft and transport aircraft Hyakushiki expression of Teishin flying squadron of the 2nd Regiment 329 Teishin 悌団 first drop troops army, (and between linear 掩掩 this formation flight and squadron 64 squadron 59 squadron combat flight Kato Hayabusa is responsible, from the Captain Kato is shot down two aircraft during Operation Hurricane RAF)

Operation Hurricane RAF)

』

At 11:30,

the unit head machines drop on both sides east and west of the airport that is 10 km north Palembang, carrying the operational commander Colonel Kume was crash-land in the wetlands.

Despite reaching the airfield while gathered sequentially, our members defend the airfield only grenade pistols and not available to the ammunition, firearms that dropped another heavy bomber Type 97 of the squadron 98th flight, members of the Many carry war with the Dutch troops.

Became a battleground approximately 500 Allied armored troops arrived from Palembang city further, I was drop troops securing the airfield before 21:00.

15 pm the next day,

entered the conquered city to cooperate with the first 悌団悌団 second drop to the southern city of Palembang wetlands. 14 days to arrive in Bangka flagship division and the 38th Army as originally planned. Advance team is on the 18th mainstay invaded Palembang city on the 15th of the next day, I had completed a strategy to secure play area. In 329 personnel, 39 people killed, damage of drop troops were injured 48 people.

Work was drawn to the theme of this strategy

Drops to Palembang soldier God “Goro Tsuruta

）

Feeling that war paintings, I am the most favorite work これぞ.

We are drawn to the early days of World War II was still bitch (laughs), it is better then bright spirited. There was much I want to decorate reproductions (!)

But Mr. TOYO says that “pundit” shadow of German friend, “there are too many parachute (` · ω · ‘) smartly “

Well I wish you do not have a dream … though it is certainly true (laughs)

I’m not fooled … fake says

Tsuruta artist has said of this composition.

Process to jump’m a mono “This is difficult. From an airplane, process that opened the parachute, process got off the ground, processing was transferred to combat, but I want everyone to this, the angle of the screen a piece of all this in the rabbit if movie Nde I can not be resolved in … “

After the war, Goro Tsuruta 1942, we worked on war paintings painter actively chosen to dispatch the south as an elevated suspended cooperation with Foujita war. Or said, “what you want to draw and I wonder what it’s all about the painter we do not draw it in the thinker,” he, and but …

Was conducted prior to the capture of Palembang Army, Tsuruta Goro is also the theme of strategy by drop Menado (first special naval brigade Office guardian Yokosuka) Naval forces drop.

“Parachute” Navy

Tsurutaartistin productionin the studio

[War paintings] 02 war paintings

Picture of the last image is added after major corrections by the author himself after being returned from the military, the title was changed as well. Infrared light was shed on the recent survey it, the picture was named “Mars” before the modification has been emerged.

war paintings

“China Zhi shield” voice fall Kobayakawa

The hope that it will be greater than or influence began to … I think about the last decade Mirifigu, August began to think about the war in the past in Japan. In particular I have experienced from the earthquake and nuclear accident · · ·. And at the same time look back on your life, will want redirecting to study the history of Japan (in Japan? Especially) have time to think of such a thing with it … Hey, What is that even castor much inevitable with age maybe? (Laughs)

I wanted to learn more about war paintings of Japan can be seen unexpectedly the “war paintings of suicidal Foujita” Sunday Museum new last month, was broadcast on NHK on the 26th, there was interest from the previous. A war paintings referred to here is the painting that was intended was completed after returning to cover while served and volunteered their celebrated painter of the time, or being asked to the military, to carry forward national prestige-enhancement fight. Work group was born there was a suit excellent work big time, masterpieces by painters to represent the Japanese art world.

However, I have never in spite of suit masterpieces by artists representing the Japanese art world, allowing its value as was the propaganda of war of aggression and after the war is no longer allowed, was released on a large scale so far . Work of the whole body of the genius artists, we keep hidden in a shitty reason is really annoying. If Foujita left the great works of world-class as well as anything in particular point, I discard the result Japan · · · Shimai been Owasa the responsibility of the art world war cooperation.

Well, the work of painters were going to draw a picture of war, and carry forward national prestige is the diversity that rendering technology personalities and artists, such as such as those devoted to realism at all is reflected, or those of a similar theme does not seem show. Among them, the military has refused to work while receiving the work is excellent and there is.

One of them is this.

As you can see, the cherry blossoms and petals studded with countless looked like the background of the dark, it can be seen that the atmosphere was totally different before correction.

This painting is a work in 1943, served in the forces, while overlapping coverage to Tensen into Burma from Thailand, was completed in the next 19 years. It is likely something that is expected and the workmanship Gagyo so far, was commissioned as a special order from the War Department of the imperial inspection yet.

By the author of being subjected to imperial inspection, I think Is not drew in the sense that praise that die Junjiru the national polity and the emperor, it seems could not intended to show a “corpse” to His Majesty the military (divisional commander and his men of the 16th Division Army saw the work, and it was standing at attention before saluting the picture though).

Does seems voice fall Kobayakawa have submitted this work with commitment and confidence, cover the flower background in proprietary technique Japanese painting called “debauch” even after they rejected the work from the Department of the Army, the title because there is a section that had been waiting to see the light of day again this work several times while changing. But it is said that there was a resolution to the war, and he was arrested as a war criminal … such.

Other works fall Kobayakawa voice

The versatility of the author works glimpse.

Aki Kobayakawa voice went to mainland China after the Manchurian Incident in 1934, there was also one of the pioneer of the painter who served. From the texture of the surface, or oil? It is a work which I think

.

The Molucca Sea approach to the Malay Barrier fell into Japanese hands as a result of amphibious hops and naval-air engagements in which the Allies fought a desperate but losing battle. From Menado, which they had taken

on 15 February 1942

In the campaign, which concluded with the fall of Singapore on 15 February 1942, Yamashita’s 30,000 front-line soldiers and 200 tanks fought against a poorly equiped force with no armored force, Yamashita’s force captured 130,000 British, Indian and Australian troops, the largest surrender of British-led personnel in history

officer of the 5th infantry division sergeant saito leading his man (singapore, 1942)

The Japanese Campaign and Victory 8 December 1941 – 15 February 1942: Lieutenant-General Percival and his party carry the Union Jack on their way to surrender Singapore to the Japanese.

The Japanese landing off the west coast of British North Borneo, 1942

Now, in the first week of January, the 16th

Army, which had been given the 38th Division to accelerate its drive into the Indies, completed its preparations for the advance. At Davao in the southern Philippines it organized two task forces, one to take the important oil center of Tarakan in northern Borneo, and the other Menado in the Celebes.

The Japanese assault on 23 January

was in sufficient strength to break resistance by the end of the day, the garrison falling back to the south without any pre-arranged escape or reassembly plan.

The attackers, intending Rabaul as a main base for operations in the South West Pacific, were thorough in pursuit and elimination of the fugitives, culminating in the execution of about 150 prisoners in the Tol Plantation area.

Of this group, Dvr W.D. Collins of 2/10 Fd Amb was shot twice and left for dead, but survived to join a 160-man escaping group organised by 2/22 Bn company commander Maj W.T. Owen, who got them to the vessel Laurabada organised by District Officer J.K. McCarthy and back to Townsville.

A previous similar sized group led by another company commander Capt E.S. Appel included Sgt A.L. Frazer and Dvr J.C. Ross of the AASC Detachment, getting back to Cairns on another of McCarthy’s vessels the Lakatoi36. A total of over 400 escaped out a force of 1,400 which had become another dismal sacrifice of penny-packeted forces whose function had evaporated before they were attacked, but were left to inevitable defeat for political purposes on Wavell’s principle of not giving up territory without a fight, regardless of the profitless losses involved.

on the January,24th.1942

The landings had been made only after a battle with U.S. naval forces — their first of the war — in which the American destroyers won a tactical victory but failed to stop the enemy. The Japanese took Balikpapan easily but failed to capture the oil refineries there. These, the Dutch had already gutted.

. Only a day before, another Japanese force had sailed through the Molucca Sea to land at Makassar on the southwest tip of Celebes Island, facing Makassar Strait. By 10 February that strait and the north shore of the Java Sea were under Japanese control

The Island Garrisons

After the collapse in Malaya and the Philippines the only real forward area of resistance which could be contemplated was centred on Java, where the American, British, Dutch and Australian (ABDA) Command was created under Wavell, based on a cruiser naval force, two Dutch divisions and an assortment of allied army and air units. It had been envisaged that 7th and 6th Divisions now returning from the Middle East would form a pivotal element of this force, but the speed of events in Malaya left the Australian component of this force, designated Blackforce and placed as usual under British command, at the less than brigade strength of 2/3 MG Bn, 2/2 Pioneer Bn and other elements.

Included was the bulk of 2/105 GT Coy under Capt C. Howitt returning from the Middle East which, with units of other arms,

was reprieved from landing at Palembang for airfield defence duties,

only to be disembarked instead in Java

on 18 February 1942.

2/3 Res MT Coy was also added to the force after its withdrawal from Singapore,

its organisation being adjusted to create a supply column for the Force. 2/105 GT Coy was used initially to defend Batavia’s Kemajoran Airfield and provide transport detachments for ambulance duties then, reinforced from 2/3 MT Coy and other units,

it also established a 70 vehicle troop carrying group for the reaction element of the Force concentrated at Buitzenorg.

The Japanese landed

from 28 February onwards

Growing likelihood of a Japanese thrust to the south had led a year earlier, in February 1941,

to plans being prepared to establish garrisons at Ambon, Timor and Rabaul for airfield defence. They were ill conceived, manned and supported, as the protests of the field commanders and events demonstrated 33, but like the decision to sacrifice Blackforce, were also essentially political decisions, made on an inadequate military appreciation and comprehension of the risk-effectiveness tradeoff.

At least these mistakes might have provided lessons for later defensive actions, yet they were not taken in the following operations in Papua, where remote commanders and staffs in Australia not only had little or no understanding of conditions in the combat area, but also made no effort to see and understand them until the crisis was over.

A Japanese landing on the north of the island eventuated

on 30 January 1942,

then a second landing at Baguala Bay the following day outflanked Dutch defences there, so the AASC element and its stocks from Galala, under Capt S.A. Rose, were moved to Kudamati to join the B Echelon of 2/21 Bn.

In the following Japanese attack the position held out and was bypassed, but as the rest of the battalion on the Laitimor Peninsula surrendered

on 3 February,

those elements in the Kudimati position had no alternative but to follow suit.

At Laha, attacks had begun

on 31 January,

with the force holding out until 2 February.

The AASC element there was more actively engaged in the defensive fight – a tribute to one Dvr Doolan who was reputed to have successfully ambushed three truckloads of Japanese appears in Chapter 20; Capt Burns and other members were missing at the end of it. After the surrender in both areas, half of the AASC detachment was taken prisoner, the remainder being battle casualties or beheaded by the Japanese after capture 34.

Map 8: Ambon 1941-42

A parallel Sparrow Force, comprising 2/40 Bn Group, was dispatched to Timor to protect the airfield used to stage aircraft to Java.

A parallel Sparrow Force, comprising 2/40 Bn Group, was dispatched to Timor to protect the airfield used to stage aircraft to Java.

The force landed at Koepang on 14 December 1941 and a detachment based on 2/2nd Independent Company was then sent north to Dili in Portuguese Timor.

The AASC Sparrow Section comprised a 42-strong supply and transport detachment formed in Sydney in July 1941 by Capt J.F. Read, moved to the Northern Territory, and embarked for Timor on 7 December ‘with much enthusiasm’ after three and a half months of fatigue duties and training at Darwin and Noonomah. In view of the precariousness of the defensive positions Read was obliged to effect a supply plan based on a series of dumps, the establishment of which occupied the detachment until the invasion.

Following their quick success at Ambon, the Japanese moved on to Timor, landing at Koepang and Dili on 20 February 1942. While 2/2 Indep Coy extricated itself inland, the landing force in the south trapped 2/40 Inf Bn against a blocking force of paratroops and, cut off from its supply base and short of ammunition, it was forced to surrender.

Map 9: Timor 1941-42

After this surrender, newly arrived Sparrow Force commander Brig W.C.D. Veale moved his headquarters north towards Portuguese Timor with a guard of AASC members and walking casualties.

On 1 March 1942,

after receiving advice of a Japanese approach, he ordered every man for himself, Read distributed the remaining rations, and the 250-strong survivors broke up into small parties, some seeking escape by sea, others overland to the north.

The senselessness of the order was eventually realised after contact with 2/2 lndep Coy in Portuguese Timor, and the remnants were concentrated on the border.

The fittest, including the remaining AASC members, organised as K (Koepang) Platoon under 2/2 Indep Coy’s Lieut C. Doig, were used to patrol south to cover that flank. Capt Read became supply officer, organising food supply and distribution at Mape.

Veale decided that K Platoon should join 2/2 lndep Coy and it was put into a week of commando training at Mape in early May, the sub-unit being renamed D Platoon to complement the existing A, B, C Platoons, and coincidentally recognise their acceptance into the unit, rather than as the stragglers from Koepang.

With this changed status came commitment to operations: commanded first by Lieut D.K. Turton, 2/2 Indep Coy’s engineer officer, then by Doig. D Platoon was based in the Atsarbe area of the arc which the Company strung around the Japanese forces based on Dili. It saw continuous action, first three months of successful aggressive raids and ambushes,

as the Dutch resistance crumbled then collapsed, Blackforce, supported and moved by 2/3 Res MT Coy and 2/105 GT Coy,

withdrew through Bandung towards Pameungpeuk

on the south coast hoping for evacuation but without prospect of this or effective resistance, it was surrendered

on 9 March 32.

then from August

as reinforced Japanese took the initiative, in defensive operations culminating in their evacuation to Darwin on 11 December 1942 35.

Prisoner work party

Singapore March 1942

Prisoners at Changi were drafted into work parties on Singapore docks and clearing the battle area.

The Japanese guard lent his souvenired camera to photograph himself with WO2 S.G. Barber and Pte R.C. Holberton of 8 Div Amn Sub-Park, and an Indian forced labourer.

At this stage of reasonable work conditions and food the men were in fair condition. The real toll came with the drafts to Burma, Thailand, Borneo and Japan, Barber being included in D Force to Thailand.

Australian War Memorial P78/01/01

Rabaul Evacuation

Defence of Papua

Buildup of a military base in the Port Moresby area began

in May 1940.

Included in this was an embryo unit designated AASC Port Moresby, comprising a small supplies and transport element to support the small force allotted.

This grew after Japan’s attacks in the Pacific firstly to an HQ CAASC NG Force with 9 Coy, 141 GT Coy, NGF Base Depot and 13 Fd Bakery, then by a year later to a DDST on HQ NG Force and ADST Port Moresby, 2/2, 9, 25 Coys, 2/102, 2/105, 2/106, 141, 152 GT Coys, 1, 2 Pack Tpt Coys, 1, 2 Air Tpt Sup Pls, 2/1 MAC, 2/3 DID, 15 Sup Dep Coy, 2 BIPOD, 1 Bulk Pet Storage Coy, 2 Farm Coy, with HQ Comd 11 Div AASC and rear details of HQ Comd 3 Div AASC also in place by early 1943 37.

Japanse bezetting van Saparoea

Uit Wikipedia, de vrije encyclopedie

Ga naar: navigatie, zoeken

Japanse bezetting van Saparoea Onderdeel van Azië in de Tweede Wereldoorlog Fort Duurstede op Saparoea Datum 8 december 1941 – augustus 1945 Locatie Nederlands-Indië Resultaat Japanse bezetting Strijdende partijen

Nederland JPN

Commandanten

Soldaat Jacob Litamahuputty

sergeant Petrus Leihitu, Kapitein Yisida

Portaal KNIL

De Japanse bezetting van Saparoea was de periode van 1942 tot 1945 waarin Saparoea, onderdeel van de Molukken, tijdens de Japanse bezetting van Nederlands-Indië door de Japanners was ingenomen.

Inhoud

[verbergen]

1 Inleiding

2 Activiteiten van het verzet

3 Maatregelen van het Japanse bestuur

4 Afbeeldingen

[bewerken] Inleiding

Wal en spietoren van Fort Duurstede

In juni 1942 vertrok het bataljon van de Japanse landmacht, dat Saparoea bezet had, per schip richting Ambon en bleven slechts enkele tientallen Japanse soldaten achter. Zij werkten vooral op het Toketaikantoor in Saparoea-stad en deden dienst bij de uitkijkpost te Itawaka. Daarnaast was nog een kleine Toketai-afdeling in Porto gevestigd. Kapitein Yisida voerde het bevel over de Japanners en was tevens hoofd van het burgerlijke bestuur, de Minseibu.

Er waren daarnaast nog 15 hulpsoldaten gehuisvest in Fort Duurstede; op het nabijgelegen Ambon bevond zich echter gedurende de gehele bezettingsperiode een macht van 5.000 tot 10.000 Japanse militairen – Ambon was nabij genoeg om binnen een dag een hele compagnie Saparoea te laten bezetten. Na de Japanse bezetting van Saparoea waren er aldus voor het verzet weinig mogelijkheden om de Japanners schade toe te brengen. De meeste bewoners leefden van landbouw of visserij of waren van het eiland weggetrokken om dienst te nemen in het Indische leger; er bestonden verder geen fabrieken, kazernes of spoorlijnen. Binnen de muren van Fort Duurstede was wel een radiostation, maar dat werd zwaar bewaakt.

Er was één verzetsgroep op het eiland actief: dat was de groep rond Jacob Litamahuputty; de belangrijkste doelstelling van deze groep was het voorbereiden van de komst van de geallieerden. De meeste handelingen van de groep waren aldus beperkt tot het verzamelen van inlichtingen en wapens. Een aantal leden van de groep kreeg van Litamahuputty de opdracht naar Haroekoe of Ambon te vertrekken om de legeringen en de stellingen van de Japanners nader te onderzoeken.

RAF Aircraftman William Mundy sailed from Gourock in Scotland on 3rd December 1941, bound for Kuala Lumpur, but as the Japanese made rapid advances through Malaya he was re-routed to Batavia.

He was captured at Garut, and later spending time at Glodok Prison (now demolished) and Tandjong Priok

After surviving Typhoid Fever he was shipped with 1000 other men to Ambon, to work on a Japanese airfield construction at Liang in the North East of the Island. More than two thirds of these men were destined to die in Ambon or on the Hellships, such as the Suez Maru and Maros Maru, used to transport them back to Java a year later.

William said “I think most people would ask why on earth I would want to go back to where I had such a traumatic experience. There are the war graves, where some of the 775 out of the 1,000 who didn’t survive are buried, and I would appreciate the opportunity to reflect on their sacrifice”.

“Visiting the graves would also provide an opportunity to thank Almighty God for his grace, mercy, love and preservation which brought me safely back to the UK”.

Mr Mundy’s friend died on the Maros Maru and is commemorated at Kranji.

By the time William left Liang in a sick draft for Batavia he had advanced Beri-Beri, and was blind from Pellagra and glare from the white coral airstrip

“Visiting the graves would also provide an opportunity to thank Almighty God for his grace, mercy, love and preservation which brought me safely back to the UK”.

Source

. http://singaporeevacuation1942.blogspot.com/

[bewerken] Activiteiten van het verzet

Zie ook Molukse verzet tijdens de bezetting van Nederlands-Indië door Japan voor het hoofdartikel over deze strijd

Rede van Saparoea met Fort Duurstede

De groep van Litamahuputty probeerde ook informatie te verzamelen over de bezigheden van de Japanners op Saparoea zelf. De Japanners hadden aldaar een vier meter hoge wachtpost opgericht om van daar het prauwverkeer op Straat Ceram in de gaten te kunnen houden, wat de mogelijkheid tot verzetsactiviteiten van de groep enigszins beperkte tot het verzamelen van wapens en munitie; deze werden na de capitulatie van het Indische leger verzameld bij voormalige KNIL-militairen en gestolen uit Japanse barakken. Toen de Japanners in juni 1942 voor een groot deel weer vertrokken waren, kreeg de groep van Litamahuputty de kans om een wapendiefstal te plegen in het gouvernementsgebouw en wist een tiental karabijnen en munitie mee te nemen.

Litamahuputty werkte onder meer samen met sergeantPetrus Leihitu, die hij aan wapens hielp. Mannen van de groep van Leihitu braken met behulp van een kaart, hen verschaft door Litamahuputty, in een wachtlokaal van Fort Duurstede in en ontvreemden daar onder meer wapens. In de tweede helft van 1942 werden de omstandigheden steeds slechter; de bevolking van Saparoea werd steeds angstiger doordat de Japanners een netwerk van verraders hadden opgezet en in ieder dorp woonde wel een persoon die voor de vijand actief was. Niemand kon zich meer zonder risico voor eigen leven in de dorpen ophouden en het was alleen nog maar mogelijk het eiland te verlaten als men de juiste papieren had. Voor zover bekend vond er slechts tweemaal een landing van Nederlandse geheime agenten in dit gebied plaats; de eerste keer was in december 1942, toen een landing met behulp van een onderzeeboot aan de zuidkust van Ceram plaatsvond maar deze agenten werden binnen enkele dagen allen gearresteerd. Veel inwoners dachten, door allerlei geruchten beïnvloed, dat Julius Tahya, de “held van Tanimbar”, tot de bemanning had behoord. De tweede landing van Nederlandse agenten in dit gebied, op Saparoea zelf, vond in februari 1945 plaats.

Nadat de eerste Amerikaansebommenwerpers begin 1943 onderweg naar Ambon over Saparoea vlogen, werden tientallen mensen door de Japanners mishandeld omdat ze vuren zouden hebben gestookt en op die wijze signalen aan de vliegtuigen zouden hebben gegeven. In Saparoea-stad werd door het verzet een kantoor en een opslagplaats in brand gestoken. De bommenwerpers wierpen pamfletten boven Saparoea uit, waarin aan de bevolking werd opgeroepen de dorpen te verlaten. In de jaren van de Japanse bezetting werden steeds meer bewoners te werk gesteld bij de aanleg van vliegvelden in Lialang en Pelauw of ingezet bij de sago-productie op Ceram. De verzetsgroep verliep langzaam; een aantal leden was gearresteerd, een deel was gedwongen te werk gesteld en steeds minder mensen wilden het risico lopen de overgebleven leden in de bossen van voedsel te voorzien. Daarnaast werd de Japanse regering actiever in het opsporen en straffen van de leden van het verzet.

[bewerken] Maatregelen van het Japanse bestuur

De Japanners benoemden Azis, voorheen assistent-bestuursambtenaar, tot districtshoofd en Piet Warella, voorheen taxichauffeur, tot hoofd van de plaatselijke politie. Iedere maand werden op het eiland rechtszittingen gehouden, voorgezeten door de Makkasaarse rechter Sonda Daeng Mattajang. Op de nieuw opgerichte school, de Sempoerna, werd de leerlingen geleerd ieder eerste uur van de dag te buigen voor de Japanse vlag en Japanse liedjes te zingen. In 1943 ontmoette een verzetsgroep een Japanse patrouille, waarna een vuurgevecht ontstond en een der leden in Japanse handen viel. Hierna nam het tempo, waarin de Japanners het verzet oprolden, toe; er vonden diverse zoekacties, arrestaties en executies plaats. In veel huizen werden voorwerpen aangetroffen die het oude Nederlandse gezag hadden vertegenwoordigd, zoals foto’s van leden van het Koninklijk Huis, Nederlandse vlaggen en insignes van het KNIL. Een voormalige KNIL-militair werd met een zweep doodgeslagen nadat hij een portret van koningin Wilhelmina weigerde te verwijderen.

Later moesten alle bewoners van Oelat van 16 jaar en ouder voor het gouvernementsgebouw verschijnen, waarop de Japanners met een verrader langs de rijen liepen en op diens aanwijzigen een groot aantal personen arresteerden. Aldus voelden de leden van het resterende verzet zich gedwongen naar Ceram uit te wijken, alwaar zij naar korte tijd door omstandigheden werden gedwongen weer naar Saparoea terug te keren en aldaar de bergen in te vluchten, waar de leden uiteindelijk door de bezetter werden overvallen. Alleen Litamahuputty wist te ontkomen, waarna de Japanners ertoe overgingen zijn familieleden te arresteren en te martelen. Hierop gaf Litamahuputty zich aan en werd, samen met de rest van de gearresteerde personen, overgebracht naar de gevangenis te Saparoea-stad, alwaar hij verder ondervraagd en mishandeld werd. Met name Piet Warella, hoofd van de politie, was berucht door zijn hardhandige ondervragingsmethoden.

Om een afschrikwekkend voorbeeld te geven werd Litamahuputty vastgebonden aan een paal op het veld en verschrikkelijk mishandeld. In de loop van de maanden die volgden werd het grootste gedeelte van de gevangenen afgevoerd naar de Toketai in Amboina, waar zij werden verhoord en gemarteld. Een getuige verklaarde later dat Litamahuputty en zijn manschappen op een dusdanige wijze (door sergeant-majoor Yoshinori Komatsu) met een stuk hout werden afgeranseld dat zij om vergiffenis smeekten. De groep kwam op 22 februari 1944 voor de rechter; tegen 21 personen (waaronder Litamahuputty) werd de doodstraf uitgesproken en zij werden allen op 2 maart bij Amahoesoe geëxecuteerd.

[bewerken] Afbeeldingen

Jacob Litamahuputty, uiterst rechts

Fort Duurstede

Wal van Fort Duurstede

Raadhuis in een dorpje op Saparoea

Bronnen, noten en/of referenties

1992. B. Immerzeel. Moluks verzet WO II. De rol van de Molukkers in het verzet in de Tweede Wereldoorlog. Moluks Historisch Museum Sedjarah. Utrecht

1993. B.R. Immerzeel en F. van Esch (redactie). Verzet in Nederlands-Indië tegen de Japanse bezetting 1942-1945. SDU. Den Haag

1996. E. Melis (redactie). Verzet contra de Japanse bezetting van Nederlands-Indië tijdens de Tweede Wereldoorlog. De geuzen van het Indisch verzet. 1942-1945. Comité Ancol

The force landed at Koepang

on 14 December 1941

and a detachment based on 2/2nd Independent Company was then sent north to Dili in Portuguese Timor.

The AASC Sparrow Section comprised a 42-strong supply and transport detachment formed in Sydney

in July 1941

by Capt J.F. Read, moved to the Northern Territory, and

embarked for Timor on 7 December

‘with much enthusiasm’ after three and a half months of fatigue duties and training at Darwin and Noonomah. In view of the precariousness of the defensive positions Read was obliged to effect a supply plan based on a series of dumps, the establishment of which occupied the detachment until the invasion. Following their quick success at Ambon, the Japanese moved on to Timor,

December,17th.1941

The Australian battalion group of about 1100 men known as ‘Gull Force’ had arrived in Ambon on 17 December 1941 after a three-day trip from Darwin. The group comprised the 2/21st Battalion, which was part of the 23rd Brigade, 8th Australian Division, together with anti-tank, engineer, medical and other detachments.

Their task was to join Netherlands East Indies troops – about 2500 men – to help defend the Bay of Ambon and two airfields at Laha and Liang. The Dutch commander, Lieutenant-Colonel J R L Kapitz, was senior to the Australian commander, Lieutenant-Colonel L N Roach, and took control of both forces, dispersing them into two groups.

One group was sent to defend the airfield at Laha on the west side of Ambon Bay and the others were deployed to the east of the bay, south of the town of Ambon.

1942

January.6th.1942

Both the Australian and the Dutch forces were inadequately prepared and under-equipped. Lieutenant-Colonel Roach, aware of the futility of their task, made repeated requests for reinforcements of both men and equipment from Australia, even suggesting that Gull Force should be evacuated from the island if it could not be reinforced.

Instead, lieutenant Colonel Roach was recalled to Australia and Lieutenant-Colonel John Scott, a 53-year-old Army Headquarters staff officer from Melbourne, replaced Roach as commanding officer of Gull Force in the middle of January.

Sunglasses made by an Australian POW in

Tan Tui camp on Ambon. They were made for

Private M J Gilbert, 2/21st Battalion AIF,

to protect his eyes from the glare when

he worked in sand-shovelling parties.

[AWM REL31317]

The first Japanese air attack on Ambon was on 6 January and by 24 January the Japanese were less than 1000 kilometres from the island.

The last of the Allied aircraft were withdrawn on 30 January.

January,30th.1942

Fall of AmbonviewThe Japanese attack on Ambon, January–February 1942.The Japanese landed on the island of Ambon on 30 January 1942. February,3rd.1942 After just four days of bitter fighting the under-equipped and poorly prepared Australian and Dutch forces on the island surrendered.The Japanese landed three battalions on Ambon during the night of 30-31 January.

The Australians lost contact with the Dutch who capitulated the next day on 1 February. Scott, the Australian commander, surrendered two days later on 3 February.

The Japanese landed on the island of Ambon on 30 January 1942.

February,3rd.1942

After just four days of bitter fighting the under-equipped and poorly prepared Australian and Dutch forces on the island surrendered

The Japanese landed on the island of Ambon on 30 January 1942.

February,3rd.1942

After just four days of bitter fighting the under-equipped and poorly prepared Australian and Dutch forces on the island surrendered.

Some small groups of men escaped and made their way back to Australia but almost 800 surviving Australians became prisoners of war.

The Australians together with about 300 Dutch prisoners of war were put back into their barracks at Tan Tui, north of Ambon town.

February,15th.1942

Lieutenant Ian Jaffrey, 2/21st

Battalion, one of the POWs killed

when American aircraft bombed the

Japanese bomb dump next to the Ambon

POW camp, 15 February 1943.

February 6th.1942

The very high (over 75%) death rate on Ambon had been exacerbated when an American bomber dropped six bombs on the Japanese bomb dump right next to the Tan Tui POW camp. The dump ignited and exploded, killing six Australian officers, including the doctor, four other ranks and 27 Dutch women and children. A number of Dutch and Australian casualties died later.

After the Japanese surrender it was discovered that about 300 servicemen who had surrendered at Laha airfield had been killed in four separate massacres between 6 and 20 February 1942. Not one had survived.

The prisoners on Ambon and Hainan were subjected to some of the most brutal treatment experienced by POWs anywhere during World War II. Over three-quarters of the Australian prisoners there died in captivity.

landing at Koepang and Dili on 20 February 1942.

While 2/2 Indep Coy extricated itself inland, the landing force in the south trapped 2/40 Inf Bn against a blocking force of paratroops and, cut off from its supply base and short of ammunition, it was forced to surrender.

Map 9: Timor 1941-42

After this surrender, newly arrived Sparrow Force commander Brig W.C.D. Veale moved his headquarters north towards Portuguese Timor with a guard of AASC members and walking casualties. On 1 March, after receiving advice of a Japanese approach, he ordered every man for himself, Read distributed the remaining rations, and the 250-strong survivors broke up into small parties, some seeking escape by sea, others overland to the north. The senselessness of the order was eventually realised after contact with 2/2 lndep Coy in Portuguese Timor, and the remnants were concentrated on the border. The fittest, including the remaining AASC members, organised as K (Koepang) Platoon under 2/2 Indep Coy’s Lieut C. Doig, were used to patrol south to cover that flank. Capt Read became supply officer, organising food supply and distribution at Mape. Veale decided that K Platoon should join 2/2 lndep Coy and it was put into a week of commando training at Mape in early May, the sub-unit being renamed D Platoon to complement the existing A, B, C Platoons, and coincidentally recognise their acceptance into the unit, rather than as the stragglers from Koepang. With this changed status came commitment to operations: commanded first by Lieut D.K. Turton, 2/2 Indep Coy’s engineer officer, then by Doig. D Platoon was based in the Atsarbe area of the arc which the Company strung around the Japanese forces based on Dili. It saw continuous action, first three months of successful aggressive raids and ambushes, then from August as reinforced Japanese took the initiative, in defensive operations culminating in their evacuation to Darwin on 11 December 1942 35.

An initial 25-man supply and transport unit drawn from 8 Div Sup Coln and designated AASC Rabaul was lodged at Rabaul in May 1941 to support the 2/22 Bn group known as Lark Force; also included was the AASC transport element of the detachment of 2/10 Fd Amb. The prospects for this force were as bleak as those of the sister battalion groups at Ambon and Timor, however the opportunity for the type of resistance offered in the latter was negated by lack of preparation. Although the AASC detachment commander Lieut R.I. Allen proposed to HQ 8 MD at Port Moresby that he cache supplies and ammunition in the mountains it was ignored as ‘defeatist’, a tag which brought dismissal of the commander of the Ambon force; the only effort made was a late and too limited local one by the battalion second in command to move some part of the supply stocks at the airfield to the rear of the position.

The Japanese assault on 23 January was in sufficient strength to break resistance by the end of the day, the garrison falling back to the south without any pre-arranged escape or reassembly plan. The attackers, intending Rabaul as a main base for operations in the South West Pacific, were thorough in pursuit and elimination of the fugitives, culminating in the execution of about 150 prisoners in the Tol Plantation area. Of this group, Dvr W.D. Collins of 2/10 Fd Amb was shot twice and left for dead, but survived to join a 160-man escaping group organised by 2/22 Bn company commander Maj W.T. Owen, who got them to the vessel Laurabada organised by District Officer J.K. McCarthy and back to Townsville. A previous similar sized group led by another company commander Capt E.S. Appel included Sgt A.L. Frazer and Dvr J.C. Ross of the AASC Detachment, getting back to Cairns on another of McCarthy’s vessels the Lakatoi36. A total of over 400 escaped out a force of 1,400 which had become another dismal sacrifice of penny-packeted forces whose function had evaporated before they were attacked, but were left to inevitable defeat for political purposes on Wavell’s principle of not giving up territory without a fight, regardless of the profitless losses involved.

Rabaul Evacuation

Defence of Papua

Buildup of a military base in the Port Moresby area began in May 1940. Included in this was an embryo unit designated AASC Port Moresby, comprising a small supplies and transport element to support the small force allotted. This grew after Japan’s attacks in the Pacific firstly to an HQ CAASC NG Force with 9 Coy, 141 GT Coy, NGF Base Depot and 13 Fd Bakery, then by a year later to a DDST on HQ NG Force and ADST Port Moresby, 2/2, 9, 25 Coys, 2/102, 2/105, 2/106, 141, 152 GT Coys, 1, 2 Pack Tpt Coys, 1, 2 Air Tpt Sup Pls, 2/1 MAC, 2/3 DID, 15 Sup Dep Coy, 2 BIPOD, 1 Bulk Pet Storage Coy, 2 Farm Coy, with HQ Comd 11 Div AASC and rear details of HQ Comd 3 Div AASC also in place by early 1943 37.

The build up was a less than happy story during 1941 and 1942, until the imperative of Japanese landings at Lae and Salamaua on 7 March 1942, Finschhafen on 10 March and Gona on 31 July, followed by the thrust through Kokoda towards Port Moresby, forced a change from the tropical ennui of both Administration public service and base military command – the former replaced by the military Australian New Guinea Administrative Unit, the latter by Headquarters New Guinea Force. The effect of the Japanese attempts on Port Moresby and Milne Bay was to galvanise Land Headquarters into pouring increasing supply, transport and construction effort into the bases in the all too familiar pattern of post-trauma oversupply. In consequence, while the force was starved of basic needs in the early critical period, over the following two years when the threat had subsided and operations moved to the north coast, an unnecessarily large component and installations were retained in a base which became progressively less used as ships resupplied direct to bases on the northern coast and islands.

The Japanese thrust from Buna made first contact with 39th Battalion on 23 July 1942 at Awala, pressing on through a strong rearguard action to take Kokoda and its only forward airfield on 10 August. From there the advance continued until, opposed by an effective brigade position at Imita Ridge and having outrun its supply line, the enemy force was stopped and then made a clean break in withdrawal on 27 September. Loss of the Kokoda airfield had earlier meant a similar crippling resupply situation for the two defending Militia battalions, then for the two AIF brigades rushed in piecemeal to stem the advance. While insertion of fresh units was necessary to replace exhausted and broken battalions, they simply added to the difficulties of maintenance over a single foot track through the mountains, so it was not until the defence was pressed back to the southern end of the Kokoda Track that it could receive reliable resupply, and the problem was inherited by the invaders.

The Track was 80 km from the roadhead at Ower’s Corner to Kokoda, but this was best measured as eight days walking time. Initial deployment of 39th Battalion forward of Kokoda was supported from supplies landed at Kokoda, then delivered forward by native carrier lines organised by ANGAU. In the withdrawal after loss of the airfield, when the three battalions of 21st Brigade were moved forward over the Track, the available carrier line capacity which could be recruited locally was completely inadequate for even rudimentary maintenance of the units. Expedients were tried at various stages of the route to provide alternatives. New Guinea (1st) Independent Light Horse Troop was put together by AASC horsemen mustering local horses and brumbies to cover the first leg, but could not negotiate the steep mountainsides and steps forward of Uberi. Attempts to air drop supplies and ammunition on to the dry lake beds at Myola were limited to mostly free drops by both shortage of parachutes and aircraft