Stage 3, 13 November 2022: Direct access to the CBD and Marina Bay

Stations: 13

Interchanges: Stevens (DTL), Orchard (NSL), Outram Park (EWL & NEL), Marina Bay (NSL & CCL)

Stations: *Mount Pleasant - Stevens - Napier - Orchard Boulevard - Orchard - Great World - Havelock - Outram Park - Maxwell - Shenton Way - Marina Bay - *Marina South - Gardens by the Bay

*Mount Pleasant and Marina South stations will open in tandem with the completion of developments in the respective areas. Opening date to be advised.

To meet the commuter demand along the line, there will be 91 new, fully-automated, four-car trains – the first in Singapore – and with more doors for faster boarding. The trains will be 92.9m long, compared to the 70m-long three-car Circle Line (CCL) and Downtown Line (DTL) trains, and also boast exciting features including the LCD Dynamic Route Map Display (DRMD).

Find out how a TEL Train is assembled in this video!

The TEL will have the world’s first four-in-one train and bus depot, with three train depots and one bus depot having the capacity to house 220 trains and 760 buses in multi-storey complexes. This translates to a land savings of over 60 football fields (44ha). This elevated depot will be the first of its kind, built to support the immense weight of hundreds of trains.

For the first time, a retractable micro-tunnel boring machine was used to install internally interlocking pipes to connect the underpass across Orchard Boulevard to the TEL and North-South Line’s station platforms. To ensure this could be done safely, improvement works were carried out to stabilise the ground and facilitate the micro-tunnelling and mining.

24-7 monitoring for settlement and movement with real-time monitoring instruments kept disruption minimal to Orchard MRT Station, one of the busiest in Singapore.

Special methods to assess soil conditions were used in place of traditional borehole methods in some areas. These ‘non-invasive’ methods include using ground vibrations or electric currents to determine the resistance of the soil, which is useful in built-up areas where digging is not feasible.

Ice walls were used for the first time in our construction to stabilise the earth before tunnelling works were started for the TEL’s Marina Bay station. The ground-freezing method was used in this area because of the high permeability of the soil increased the risk of water seepage.