Does anyone feel that Woody’s personality changes throughout the trilogy? I mean, In Toy Story, to me he seems kind of bossy and, well a mean guy. I do understand with Buzz there Woody’s jealous, but even before he meets Buzz, he has a very bossy attitude to the toys. “All right! All Right! If I send out the troops will you all calm down?!” In Toy Story 2 and 3, he is generally nicer, I guess. What do you guys think?

Yes, i know what you mean. in the early day’s of Toy Story Woody was a mean and angry cowboy as you can see in The Pixar Story. later after some big changes i think woody still got some common traits.

In Toy Story 2 & 3 he’s is more friendly maybe because he learend of his early actions from the first part.

Its called Character Development[url]http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/CharacterDevelopment[/url]

Yes, I’ve noticed. One thing I love about Pixar is their mastery of Character Development, and Woody is the best example of it perhaps in the Pixar collection.

I totally see what you mean. I love how he grows. Though, I never get tired of his obtuse personality from the original. He reminds me of myself. Suppose that’s a bad sign for me…

Anyway, I love Woody’s personality. He’s one of my two favorite two male Pixar characters, and my favorite over all TS character. I love him. <3

I noticed that I think that’s one of the best things about Woody. how he goes from this Cowboy toy who’s obsessed with being the leader who is jealous of Buzz to much nicer who really cares about his friends.

But I completely love Woody’s personality. He’s just amazing. Plus he kind of reminds me of myself when I get jealous of people. Lol

Am I the only one who doesn’t really like him that much? In TS1 he was a jerk, bossing everyone around and hating on Buzz when he arrived, in TS2 he was a jerk to both groups of toys - he pretty much make Jessie break down into tears and then changed his mind about leaving and started ranting on to Buzz about how they’re all dispensable and that Andy would replace them. In TS3 he was a MASSIVE jerk, whining about how they needed to be there for Andy despite everything he said in TS2, then rejecting Buzz’s handshake and leaving them at Sunnyside.

He does redeem himself at the end of each movie, but I’ve always seen him as self-centered, bossy and hypocritical.

Although, when I saw the storyboard of the Black Friday screening of the original Toy Story, I’ve eased up on Woody a bit. In the first draft he was a COMPLETE jerk.

He is supposed to be the ‘straight man’ to Buzz’ maverick antics. It’s the staple of basically every buddy cop show in existence.

Eh, I adore Woody. In the first movie, no lie, he was the only character I liked. Similar effect with TS3.

In the first movie, I did not like Woody at all, even as a little kid. But when the second movie came out, I started to like him because he was more of a relateable character and not a bossy jerk. In the third movie, Woody was not as much of a jerk as he was in the first one, but he was still very mean at some parts, especially decling Buzz’s hand shake

Woody was only being mean to Jessie before he knew about her story with Emily, after that he understood why she would be upset about that.

Well, Woody has always been my favorite character, and the only one out of the Toy Story Franchise that I even liked for 1 and 2. I like him because he is a flawed character, and how his character sort of grows and changes throughout each film. I guess I like Woody because he sort of reminds me of myself in a lot of ways… Haha.

I love how she stays quite cynical throughout all of the movies though, like he was initially very cold towards Lotso when noone else suspected a thing. But then, that probably (I’m guessing) comes from him being afraid of getting abandoned?

But yeah, he has come down a peg since TS1.

Wow. You sound just like me. Only, I liked Jessie in 2, and only Woody in 3.

I think it’s great that Woody doesn’t have ideal personality and has flaws that normal people have. He can be mean sometimes and make mistakes, but once he chooses what’s right and wrong for him and others, he corrects those mistakes himself. Oh, and he really cares about his toy “family”. I guess that’s why Woody is my favourite character from Toy Story.

I completely love and agree with this statement.

Sorry i already put this in another thread so im taking it off here since its off topic with this one…

I see what you mean. But, if they thought they were dead, there would be no reason to look for them, you know?

well i made a topic for this if you want to discuss im just kinda wondering why no one even worried seemed like no one cared but i guess its understandable

To begin with, he was painted as a very capable leader character. He was nice to all the toys, and did his best to keep order in Andy’s room. The introduction of Buzz was what brought about a nastier side of his personality. At first he’s a bit mean, but you can’t help but feel sympathetic for him after ‘Strange Things.’ It’s Woody’s attempt to knock him behind the desk that shows Woody’s taken it too far.

From then on, Woody was firm about what he thought was right (going to Japan, staying with Andy).

I agree totally. They never intended for us to think Woody was a bad guy. I think he’s the most human character in all 3 movies. Jessie comes close in 2.