Paradise Police Department is an animated sitcom which like Brickleberry was created by Waco O'Guin and Roger Black. The series premiered on Netflix on August 31, 2018.

A crossover between the two shows occurred in Season 2, and it's established that Woody and Randall are cousins.

Please proceed to the Paradise PD Wikia for more information on the show!

Biography[]

The series is very similar to Brickleberry itself but there is no censored profanity and a harder emphasis on vomiting, drugs, genitalia and mental disorders. The show satirizes contemporary issues such as Donald Trump's rise to presidency, news media found of political bias and Black Lives Matter. Some Paradise characters are exact replicas of Brickleberry characters but with different names, uniform / clothing and only slight differences in appearances.

Episodes are longer than on Brickleberry because being on Netflix, Paradise PD does not have to free up air time for commercials to air like Brickleberry did. Therefore, Paradise PD is allowed to have more material per episode, as while Brickleberry was forced to wrap up stories in a matter of seconds.

Characters[]

Main Cast[]

Kevin Crawford (Voiced by David Herman) - A highly underweight incompetent cop who was freshly hired by his mother because there was a shortage of cops on the field in his town, even though Kevin's not very competent as a cop. He can come off as a bit of a coward and people-pleaser.

Chief Randall Crawford (Voiced by Tom Kenny from Spongebob) - The chief of Paradise PD and Kevin's father who has no nutsack and is extremely prone to anger as a side-effect of wearing testosterone patches. He weighs 403 lb.

Bullet (Voiced by Kyle Kinane) - The PD's drug enforcement German Shepard who is a junkie himself and will do anything to get to drugs. He enjoys having sexual relationships with hookers and human males.

Dusty Marlow (Voiced by Dana Snyder) - A childish cop with an infantile mind who hoards cats and does a good job at being a policeman since he doesn't believe in sparing criminals. He weighs 600 lb.

Gina Jabowski (Voiced by Sarah Chalke) - A female cop who enjoys busting and is very violent, might as well be the most competent cop on the force. She has a crush on Dusty due to his weight - an attraction created by mental dysfunction due to a bullet being lodged in her brain.

Gerald Fitzgerald (Voiced by Cedric Yarbrough) - The natural black cop who almost never does his job because he suffers from PTSD from his time as an officer in Chicago. He plays the piccolo as a therapy tool, so he gets called a "wuss" or "pussy". Though he never gets fired either (possibly because of affirmative action requiring that he stay). He also has a dolphin for a wife.

Stanley Hopson (Voiced by Dana Snyder) - An elderly diaper-wearing homosexual cop who is too old (born circa 1890) to keep his job but stays because the PD can't retire him because they're broke and can't afford his pension.

Recurring Characters[]

Robbie (Voiced by Waco O'Guin) - A dumbass hillbilly who sells meth, who runs a video store filled with movies that give away its entire plot in its names. He is the equivalent to Bobby Possumcods.

Delbert (Voiced by Roger Black) - Robbie's friend, who is the equivalent to BoDean Lynn.

Mayor Karen Crawfish (Voiced by Grey Griffin) - The town mayor, Kevin's mother, and Randall's ex-wife.

Hobo Cop - A rambling, crazy homeless man, who lives under the highway. He occasionally provides assistance to the police force, and has become the unofficial "8th member" of the team, who at times might be the most grounded of the entire police force.

Terry Two-Toes - The mastermind behind argyle meth. Got his nickname for chewing eight of his toes off, while high on meth.

Vladimir - A Russian drug dealer, supportive of the argyle meth crime.

Episodes[]

Welcome to Paradise

Ass on the Line

Black & Blue

Karla

Dungeons & Dragnet

Meet the Jabowskis

Police Academy

Task Force

Parent Trap

Christmas in Paradise

Paradise Found

Big Ball Energy

Tucker Carlson is a Huge Dick

Who Ate Wally's Waffles?

The Father, The Son, and the Holy Post-It Note

Flip the Vote

Paradise PD Meets Brickleberry

Operation: D.D.

Fallout

Top Cops

Ice Ice Babies

Trigger Warnings

Showdown at the O-bese Corral

How the Cookie Crumbles

Blind Drunk

Blimp City

The World According to LARP

Fetal Attraction

What Happens in Twatemala

PARAD-ISIS

The Brozone Lair

Diddy's Home

A Star is Porn

Good Jeans

The Shartist

The Butt Cut

Boat!

King of the Norf

Sack to the Future

The Eternal Reckoning

Similarities to Brickleberry[]

Every main character, with the exception of Stanley Hopson, directly mirrors a main character from Brickleberry, albeit more likeable, sharing either the same archetype, character design, and/or voice actor.

Randall Crawford = Woody Johnson: Both are fat, angry, screaming bosses of their companies. Tom Kenny voices both of them in the exact same manner. Unlike Woody, however, Randall isn't corrupt and is rather decent, though he is described as sexist.

Kevin Crawford = Steve Williams: Both have the same character base and voice actor, and are portrayed as dim-witted, incompetent morons, who want to do good, but always screw things up. They're both voiced by David Herman. Kevin, however, is arguably both a bit more smarter and competent compared to Steve.

Bullet = Malloy: Both are trash-talking animals, with no respect for anyone, though Bullet is not as rude as Malloy.

Dusty Marlow and Gina Jabowski are Connie Cunaman and Ethel Anderson, respectively, but with their personalities swapped.

Gerald Fitzgerald = Denzel Jackson: Both are the only black members of their groups.

Robby and Delbert = Bobby Possumcods and BoDean Lynn, respectively, as of respective personalities, respective appearances, and respective voice actors.

Both police officers and national park rangers are law enforcing government employees.

Both shows take place is a redneck, white-trash, inbred, environment.

Paradise P.D. has the same style of comedy, which is gross-out and shock humor. Jokes are generally about sex, people getting violently killed, racist and bigoted stereotypes, drugs and alcohol, etc. However, Paradise P.D. seems to rely less on gross-out humor and violence.

Several locations and background characters use the exact same models as locations and background characters in Brickleberry, with just a few slight tweaks and color pallete swaps.

Every theme song (except for the Pilot), has a background gag going on, that coincides with the events of the cold opening, just like in the second and third seasons of Brickleberry.

Trivia[]

In "Parent Trap", Fitzgerald called Kevin a "Brickleberry looking asshole." Kevin broke the fourth wall, saying that Paradise P.D. and Brickleberry were two completely different shows. Later, Fitzgerald called him this again, and Kevin further denied the similarities of their shows, by pointing out how park rangers and police officers were different jobs. However, right after that, Kevin addressed Fitzgerald as "Denzel". Also, Randall uses Malloy's "I'm trying to give a fuck" line in the same episode.

In "Dungeons & Dragnet", a stuffed Squabbit doll can be seen in a claw machine, during a scene where Randall, Gina, and Gerald have a conversation in the kiddie restaurant, Possum Pizza.

Paradise PD has 7 members, but only 6 of them have Brickleberry counterparts:

Randall is the PD counterpart of Woody.

Kevin is the PD counterpart of Steve.

Gerald is the PD counterpart of Denzel.

Gina is the PD counterpart of Ethel.

Dusty is the PD counterpart of Connie.

Bullet is the PD counterpart of Malloy.

*Stanley is the only PD member to not have a Brickleberry counterpart.

Woody Johnson and Steve Williams are the only Brickleberry members who share the same voice actors with their PD counterparts, Randall and Kevin, respectively.

Ethel is the only Brickleberry member to have 2 voice actors instead of one.

Because Connie's PD counterpart is a male, Gina is the only female in her crew.

Dusty and Stanley are the only PD members who share a voice actor with each other. The first letters of their first names are even references to the first letters of their voice actor's first and last names (Dusty/Dana both begin with D, Stanley/Snyder both begin with S).