Krystal Barter, the founder of breast and ovarian preventative cancer charity Pink Hope is dedicated to vigilance.

Barter, who discovered that just like many members of her family carried the BRCA gene (the same gene fault that Angelina Jolie made headlines with in 2013), underwent a double mastectomy when she was 25. Last year, at 31, Krystal had her fallopian tubes and one ovary removed to reduce her risk of ovarian cancer. Currently, more than 240,000 women and men are at risk of hereditary cancer or carry a genetic fault that could lead to breast, ovarian, prostate and other cancers. Many don’t find this out until it’s too late.

For Barter, raising awareness of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer is critical, and in its fourth year of Bright Pink Lipstick Day (Friday, September 25) the charity’s major fundraising day, they’re going big.

“This year we aim to raise $250,000 and invest the funding into our critical prevention programs and support services which help families assess, understand and manage their risk of breast and ovarian cancer,” says Barter.

Bright Pink Lipstick Day has once again signed on model sisters Jess and Ashley Hart as ambassadors, with Jess Hart designing a Pink Hope lipstick for her LUMA cosmetics range. The lipstick retails for $19.95, with all proceeds going to the charity. (You can buy it here!)

The support from influential women in the community – from Kyly Clark, to Emma Stone, Nicole Trunfio and Lara Bingle – is something that Barter is deeply appreciative of.

To show your support for Pink Hope on Bright Pink Lipstick Day you can buy one of Jess Hart’s Pink Hope lipsticks, donate online at Pink Hope and definitely wear your brightest pink lipstick and share a selfie using the hashtag #brightpinklipstick.

As Barter puts it,

“Bright Pink Lipstick Day is giving power to the people, as a nation we will start a conversation that will save lives. 3 questions is all it takes 1) how many people in my family have had cancer 2) at what age 3) what time of cancer – this information can give you the opportunity to assess your risk of breast and ovarian cancer.”