We love to collaborate with companies who give back!

In March, the REIQ held their annual Women in Real Estate Luncheon. The luncheon hosted over 360 Real Estate Professionals, being the largest WIRE event to be held to date!

This year, they supported an amazing women's charity, Pink Hope. Pink Hope is a preventative health hub that gives the community tools to assess, manage and reduce their risk of breast and ovarian cancer, while also providing personalised support for at-risk women. To spread the word about the great work they do, I'd like to tell you a little bit more about this charity.

Pink Hope was founded by Krystal Barter who was inspired by her own family's experience with cancer. Pink Hope is a preventative health hub that gives our community the tools to assess, manage and reduce their risk of breast and ovarian cancer, while also providing personalised support for at-risk women.

Pink Hope empowers people to take charge of their own health by assessing, understanding, and reducing their risk of breast and ovarian cancer. And we offer support every step of the way. They want to ensure every woman is empowered to take control of their breast and ovarian cancer risk, by providing tools, education and support to members of the at-risk community. We also work collaboratively with healthcare providers to ensure a better transition for at-risk women as they move through each stage of their journey, and we promote open discussion around family health history in Australia through targeted campaigns and education. We also advocate for women at risk of breast and ovarian cancer and their families with the aim of earlier diagnoses, risk reduction, and better treatment options.

At the REIQ event, Sarah Powell, CEO of Pink Hope, shared her personal story as a breast cancer survivor as well as valuable insight into what the charity is about and how they can assist all women in their health journey.Country Culture was proud to partner with REIQ in being one of the sponsors to donate a generous raffle prize for the Pink Hope Raffle at a recent REIQ Event. The raffle raised $15.020.00 which was an incredible effort and congratulations tor REIQ for this initiative. Our donation played a small part in helping Pink Hope in its mission to reduce the risk and support victims of breast and ovarian cancer. ?

Thank you so much to REIQ for allowing us to partner with them for this important cause and to Pink Hope for the wonderful work they do!

#knowyourrisk