“Krystal first became a volunteer and then Ambassador for the National Breast Cancer Foundation when she was just 14 years old. She has maintained a steadfast commitment to improving the lives of women impacted by breast cancer for almost 20 years. As the Founder of Pink Hope, Krystal has demonstrated her entrepreneurship growing the business from a start up to an internationally recognised program supporting young women impacted by the BRCA genes. Krystal is a young woman full of hope for a brighter future for others and an ambition to succeed in all that she does.”

“Krystal is truly inspiring and has a wealth of knowledge within the preventative health space and is always wanting to help. Krystal has touched many and is willing to help and empower those she comes into contact with. Personally and professionally I know Krystal would go the extra mile in any circumstance.”

“It is indeed a rare breed of person that can not only conceptualise a future made brighter for others but also have the tenacity, capability and passion to ensure it is truly brought to life. Over the many years I have known and worked with Krystal, I have been in awe of her ability to help charter new grounds in both the awareness and prevention of cancer as enabled through advancing genetic science. Highly respected through the Pink Hope community as well as throughout local and global networks, Krystal is an astute and brilliant leader that makes the seemingly impossible, possible. As a speaker, facilitator, author and Pink Hope's founder, I have been privileged to witness the development of Krystal's career and work alongside such an inspirational woman. She is a unique Australian woman that is certainly one to 'watch'!”

“Krystal has a passion that is infectious. She is respected by many in government and business. She has an exceptional ability to see the destination and put in place the steps necessary to make sure you get there. Loyal and determined and a wonderful person to have on your side”

“Krystal is a dedicated advocacy entrepreneur. Not only a patient, but a strategic connector of people, government, and industry. Krystal’s passion for delivering game changing solutions for patients and their ecosystem comes from a place of personal experience and a vision for a world where patient co-design and shared decision making is second nature for all stakeholders. I always enjoy working with Krystal because she produces high quality, transformative and highly valued patient outcomes.”