Wednesday Column

Acer Durban Collegians have set the early pace in the Fidelity Security Premier Division rugby league after picking up another valuable five log points in their 28-5 win over their hosts Goss and Balfe Crusaders on Saturday.

Collegians were made to work for their fourth try to earn the full log points scoring in the dying minutes of the game. Crusaders fielding a young side are going to be a lot more competitive as they grow in stature. Certainly they didn’t let Collegians simply run away with matters and whilst the game wasn’t all that entertaining it did have its moments.

Former South African Schools centre Piet Lindeque opened the scoring for Collegians with a superb try. The former Grey College midfielder from Bloemfontein is a huge talent and certainly looks destined for bigger things in the game. Their other tries came from wing Kyle Hartley, Carl Marx and No 8 Matthew Hill with flyhalf Willie du Plessis kicking four penalties.

Crusaders replied with the try of the match scored far out in the right hand corner by scrumhalf Nolan van Staden after a great backline move.

In another game Bluff Superspar Harlequins made their intent known with an impressive 49-18 win over FNB UKZN Pietermaritzburg out on the Bluff. This result gives every indication that this year’s competition is going to be even more hotly contested than in the last few seasons. Their winning tries came from Jaco van Tonder who crossed for two, Thinus Volker, Dean Lovett and Rhyk Welgemoed with Sibongile Njomba kicking the balance.

Jonsson College Rovers had a hard fought away win beating Thanda ZRA Zululand Rhinos 38-20 at Mick Kelly Park in Empangeni with the star of the show flanker Kosie ‘Bonus Point’ Haarhof crossing for four tries with the others going to Nico Claasen and fullback Chris Mickelwood who also kicked the balance.

In the remaining game Varsity College Old Boys beat Jaguars 45-10 with Dean Stow scoring two of their seven tries.

In the First Division, Ricoh Maritzburg Collegians had a walkover against Wentworth while Hillcrest suffered an unexpected set back going down to Teichmann Bell Ballito Dolphins up the North Coast. Amanzimtoti had a narrow home ground win against their neighbours South Coast Warriors edging home 32-28 while FNB UKZN Durban accounted for Kokstad 48-15.

In the Under 20 ‘A’ division Durban Collegians remain in command with another impressive performance beating Pietermaritzburg 45-23 while Empangeni thumped Oldies 48-0 and Quins edged out a luckless Crusaders line up 28-26 in Durban North.

The Blockmans Grill in Pinetown will be hosting another Yesterdays Heroes Dinner on Monday 30 May-for further information contact Snowy Suter at