Big win in Bloemfontein

Hoërskool Jim Fouche of Bloemfontein are the Media24 champions after beating Hoërskool Grens of East London 39-12 in the Final in Bloemfontein on Saturday. For a brief while the visitors led – a brief and deceptive while.

The satisfied Jim Fouché coach, Gerrie Coetzee, said afterwards: "That was the best we have played."

To play so well, they had to overcome the late loss of their flyhalf Bernd Theisinger who was taken to hospital on Friday with a blood clot on his lung.

This necessitated a shuffle. Inside centre Ruan Adriaanse moved to flyhalf, outside centre Jaco Swarts to inside centre and wing Andries Akkerman to outside centre. Peuti Spoelstra, usually a flank, came into the side on the right wing – and scored the first try of the match.

Jim Fouché could have been forgiven for a tentative start, given the reshuffling, but they did not. They piled in from the go and scored first when Piet Spoelstra went over. 5-0.

Then came Grens's most hopeful moment when left-wing Bennie Wiese went over for a try which Jannie Myburgh converted. 7-5 to Grens after five minutes.

Then Jim Fouché took over and led 24-7 at the break as fullback Cornel Greyling created opportunities. But it was above all the Jim Fouche pack which created the victory with their tigerish play that won several turn-overs.

By the end of the second half Jim Fouché had all seven replacements on the field so that everybody could join in the victory. Then they went to the Bloemfontein Medi-Clinic to share their victory with Berndt Theisinger.

Scorers:

For Jim Fouché:

Tries: Peuti Spoelstra, Luan Fouche, Marnus Briedenhann, Stefan Kleinhans, Ruan Adriaanse, Jeabn van Zyl

Cons: Cornel Greyling 4

Pen: Cornel Greyling

For Grens;

Tries: Bennie Wiese, Jacques Bezuidenhout

Con: Jannie Myburgh

Teams:

Jim Fouché: 15 Cornel Greyling, 14 Peuti Spoelstra, 13 Andries Akkerman, 12 Jaco Swarts,11 Luan Fouché, 10 Ruan Adriaanse,, 9 Barry Conradie, 8 Ruaan Erasmus, 7 Stefan Kleynhans, 6 Jaco Lotter, 5 Marnus Briedenhann, 4 Ruaan Lombaard, 3 Hardus van den Berg, 2 Arrou Uitenweerde, 1 Jean van Zyl.

Replacements: 16 Mike Potgieter, 17 Wynhard Appelgryn, 18 Joe Malherbe, 19 Jaco Swanepoel, 20 Pierre Cloete, 21 David le Roux.

Coach: Gerrie Coetzee

Grens: 15 Vernon Comley, 14 Jacques Bezuidenhout, 13 Gerhard Pretorius, 12 Jannie Myburgh (vice-captain), 11 Bennie Wiese, 10 James Swanepoel, 9 Adriaan Botha, 8 Romano Lamprecht (captain), 7 Ruan Jordaan, 6 Daniël Petzer, 5 Jaco Swanepoel, 4 François Schoeman, 3 Mario Engelbrecht, 2 Peerie Groenewald, 1 Roelof Koorsen.

Replacements: 16 Tiaan Bezuidenhout, 17 Angelo Landoli, 18 Nellis Dreyer, 19 Johannes van Staden, 20 Bennie Lindeque, 21 Marius de Lange.

Coaches: Flippie Slabbert, Pierre Sieberhagen

Referee: Jaco Peyper (Free State)