The South African Schools Rugby Association (SAFRA), on Saturday announced the SA Schools team that will participate in friendlies against Italy and England in August.

The SA Schools squad will gather on Sunday 2 August in Kimberley in preparation for their match against Italy on Tuesday 4 August and England on Friday 7 August. Both fixtures will take place at the GWK Stadium in Kimberley.

Lindsay Mould, the Bloemfontein-based chairman of SA Schools announced the team and said: “The Coca-Cola Under-18 Craven Week has most definitely produced lots of talent.

“I am very proud to be able to announce this team and I am sure that they will make us proud in our matches against Italy and England.

“The players that we have selected have been the best performers in their respective positions at the Coca-Cola Under-18 Craven Week.”

The team will be captained by Pieter Rademan, captain of Grey College and Free State.

The provincial representation in the 22-man squad is as follows:

Free State: 6

Western Province: 5

Blue Bulls: 3

Border: 2

Eastern Province, Eastern Province Country District, Golden Lions, KwaZulu Natal, Pumas, SA Academy: 1

Two of those not in the team are Garth April and Gareth Topkin who were in the 2008 SA Schools team.

SA Schools Team: 15 Riaan Britz (Grey College, Free State), 14 Sizo Maseko (Ermelo, Pumas), 11 Brian Skosana (St Andrew’s, Eastern Province Country Districts), 13 Piet Lindeque (Grey College, Free State), 12 Andile Jho (Dale, Border), 10 William van Wyk (Paarl Gymnasium, Western Province), 9 Pieter Rademan (Grey College, Free State) (captain), 8 Siya Kolisi (Grey High, Eastern Province), 7 Jean Cook (Grey College, Free State), 6 Lean Schwartz (Waterkloof, Blue Bulls), 5 Carl Wenger (Grey College, Free State), 4 Frederick Schnetler (Glenwood, KwaZulu Natal), 3 Frans Malherbe (Paarl Boys’ High, Western Province), 2 Bongi Mbonambi (St Alban’s, Blue Bulls), 1 Stephanus Kotze (Grey College, Free State).

Replacements: 16 Siyabonga Ntubeni (KES, Golden Lions), 17 Zolani Faku (Grey High, SA Academy), 18 Chris Cloete (Selborne, Border), 19 Nizaam Carr (Bishops, Western Province), 20 Ricky Schroeder (Paul Roos Gymnasium, Western Province), 21 Tony Jantjies (Menlopark, Blue Bulls), 22 JP du Plessis (Paul Roos Gymnasium, Western Province).

Coaches: Chris October (Western Province), Golie Gouws (Lions)

Manager: Jimmy Jimlongwe (Free State)