Extra Label

Submission deadline

Due Date

Mo 24.10.2022

22 h

The Wolf Prizes in the sciences and the arts are awarded annually since 1978 to outstanding scientists and artists for their achievements for the benefit of humanity and brotherly relations among people, regardless of nationality, race, color, religion, gender, or political views. To date, 365 scientists and artists from all over the world have been awarded the prestigious Wolf Prize.

Every year, the Wolf Foundation awards four prizes in the Sciences and one prize in the Arts. Prize fields in sciences include Agriculture, Chemistry, Mathematics, Medicine, and Physics. Prize fields in the Arts include Architecture, Music, Painting and Sculpture. Each prize consists of a diploma and 100,000$. In the event of co-recipients sharing one prize, the

honorarium is equally divided among them.

Process of Nomination

In accordance with the Wolf Prize principle of rotation, candidate(s) for the 2023 prize can be nominated only in one of the following five fields: Agriculture, Chemistry, Mathematics, Medicine, and Arts.

A Nominator may submit more than one nomination package.

An international Prize Committee makes the selection of the Wolf prize Laureates. Committee decisions are final and irrevocable.

The submission package should include:

a. A duly completed Nomination Form. Please fill out all fields according to the instructions without exceeding the allotted space.

b. Three or four letters of support from experts who are not affiliated with the candidate's organization. The signed letters must be written on formal letterhead.

c. Candidate’s portfolio.

d. A recent candidate's photograph at high resolution of at least 300 dpi.

e. A short biography, up to one page.

Submitting the nomination package:

a. Submission via E-Mail only to: Office@wolffund.org.il.

b. Submission deadline: October 24th, 2022 at 23:00 (Israel).

c. In case of a large size of submission package, we suggest using Dropbox/ Wetransfer/Google drive for easy delivery.

d. The Form must be completed in full.

e. Edited Official Form will not be accepted. Do not make changes using editing software in the original form.

f. Please send us all nomination materials in a single E-mail message.

g. All files should be named according to their contents, including the candidate name. For example: Gross photo, Gross form etc.

h. DO NOT PRINT AND SCAN the Nomination Form.

i. DO NOT LOCK DOCUMENTS with passwords.

j. Each nomination is automatically valid for two cycles. The nominator can update the nomination at any time during this period. After two cycles a new nomination package is required.

Limitations:

a. The Prize is awarded to individuals.

b. A person cannot nominate himself/herself.

c. The Wolf Prize is awarded in Jerusalem by the President of the State of Israel. Nominators should reconsider proposing candidates who, to the best of their knowledge, may not be able to attend the ceremony.

For more information, please see here.