Dayton Ward Books In Order

Book links take you to Amazon. As an Amazon Associate I earn money from qualifying purchases.

Publication Order of The Last World War Books

Publication Order of Standalone Novels

Publication Order of Star Trek: TOS (Original) Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: Vanguard Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: Mere Anarchy Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: The Fall Books

Publication Order of 4400 Books

Publication Order of 24 Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: The Next Generation (Original) Books

Publication Order of Predator Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: The Next Generation (Relaunch) Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: Seekers Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: TOS: Legacies Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: Discovery Books

Publication Order of Hidden Universe Travel Guides Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: Coda Trilogy Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: TOS (Numbered) Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: Vanguard Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: Starfleet Corps Of Engineers Books

Publication Order of Star Trek Corps of Engineers Books

by Ilsa J. Bick

Publication Order of Star Trek: The Next Generation: A Time To... Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: Typhon Pact Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: Mirror Universe Books

Publication Order of Anthologies

Dayton Ward is a published American author of fiction born in Tampa, Florida.

Ward has also worked as a software developer. He was in corporate America following his time serving in the Marines. He was enrolled in the United States Marine Corps. for 11 years. When he left his home and decided to join the military, it was after he had graduated high school and it was ironically because he felt that he was tired of being in the situation where people were giving him orders.

Ward has since pivoted in his career to full time novelist. He has done quite well and has had his name attached to several books. He has written several things with his friend Kevin Dilmore and is the writer of several Star Trek based novels, including Open Secrets, among others.

He is also the author of his own original science fiction genre novels. These include The Genesis Protocol and the novel The Last World War. He is also the composer of several short stories that have been published in several Star Trek anthologies (the first three of the ‘Strange New Worlds’ compilations). He has also contributed to Houston, an anthology from Yard Dog Press as well as various other magazines and anthologies.

The author currently resides with his family in Kansas City. He is married to Michi, his wife. They have two daughters together. He is a native of the state of Florida where he spent a lot of time living. Even though he is not there anymore, he still has a long distance relationship going with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, his beloved team. He will always be a fan!

Dayton Ward is the creator of the Last World War fictional series of novels. The first novel came out in 2003. It carries the same title for which the series is named. It would be a couple of years before the sequel came out, but the second installment of this series became available to readers in 2010.

The Last World War is the first novel in the series with the same name by Dayton Ward. If you have been looking for an interesting sci-fi story to read, then check out all the action in a book that you’ll want to read to the very last page!

The operation started out small. A small group of reservists in the Marines are totally unprepared for what they discover. In Missouri’s mysterious back woods area, they manage to run into some visitors that are out of this world. That would be because they are extraterrestrial in origin and the bad news is that they are deadly.

It’s a strange place to have a first contact type of meeting like this, but you can’t really care about the location of a first encounter when you are stone cold dead. A fatal run in turns out to have dire consequences when this meeting quickly gets out of hand, escalating into a true crisis that is happening on a global scale.

Humanity starts to question what they know as they figure out that aliens have come to Earth at last. Two different species are having an alien war against the other and now have chosen to invade the world using a clever network of portals. The hidden portals are able to span dimensions and now humanity is facing down a very unique situation that they have never seen before.

The aliens are given the names of Grays and Blues to distinguish them. The conflict level between the species is at an apocalyptic level, and it already took out their home. With their previous battle ground scorched, Earth is now the place that has turned into a grand, final place for battle in the middle of a really big war where the starting point is just not that clearly understood.

Now the human race has to pick a side and they quickly attempt to align with the Blues. They are going to have to try and resist the Grays and brave an onslaught that will come at them on every part of the planet. From Washington to Atlanta and all over the globe, the human race is going to have to link up and stand strong if they want to get through this and live.

What will happen at the end of this book? Pick up a copy for yourself to find out!

Counterstrike is the second novel in the World War series of fiction by Dayton Ward. When a war between aliens that takes over a far away planet comes to the planet Earth thanks to some crafty portals, the history of humanity is never going to be the same again.

That’s all well and good, but the human race also has bigger fish to fry. They’ve gotten caught up in a nasty conflict between two raging alien species that want to take the other out. They already ruined a planet, and if the citizens of Earth don’t watch out, they’re next.

Now humanity has to takes sides between the Chodrecai race and the Plysserians. The battle has been going on for generations, but it just has not been able to come to any type of conclusion. No side has won and no peace treaties have been signed. So the battle goes on.

It’s been several months following some of the strongest military forces on Earth forming their own alliance with one of the alien races. Joining the Plysserians, humanity is gambling on picking between a rock and a hard place.

Doing so will mean that they choose to take on what the Chodrecai have to offer. In this case this is an offensive attack that has three prongs. Those that survive go on to fight the battle on Planet Earth. With unrest rampant and martial law in place, the resistance of sympathizers with the enemy grow stronger, and two Marines are trapped on a alien planet known as Jantashreena.

Engineers and scientists are doing their best (Plysserian and human) to crack open the portals. Meanwhile, Earth is getting ready for a huge battle. As Colin Laney joins the fight, can Earth be saved? Read this book to find out!