Funeral services are scheduled for 10:00 AM, Tuesday, July 9, at First Baptist Church for Alisha Ann Phipps of Artesia, New Mexico.

Alisha, 47, entered the loving arms of God on July 1, 2019.

Pastor Rick Sullivan will officiate at the services and burial will follow at Woodbine Cemetery. First Baptist Church is hosting a reception in the TLC. Pallbearers will be Freddy Florez, Steve George, Chad Kucel, Joel Kucel, Stanley Hammond, Rob Walker, Lewis Wesson, and Kevin Willard.

Visitation will be at Terpening & Son Mortuary Monday, July 8, from 5:00 p.m. - 7:00 p.m.

Alisha was born on June 12, 1972 in Gloversville NY, to Hollice Glass and Susan (Houserman) Glass. She came to Artesia in 1975. Alisha graduated from Artesia High School in 1990. She attended the College of Sante Fe for one year. Alisha gave birth to a beautiful baby girl, Brianna Danielle, on June 4, 1993. On July 8, 1995 Alisha married Thad Phipps at the Pouder Canyon Chapel near Fort Collins, CO. Alisha and Thad lived in Alamogordo for six months after they were married where she was studying to become a parallegal. Soon, both Alisha and Thad decided to become teachers and moved to Hobbs for two and a half years. Alisha received a Bachelor's in Special Education from the College of the Southwest and a Master's Degree in Curriculum and Instruction. Alisha graduated with Honors from both universities. In the Fall of 1998, Alisha and Thad returned to Artesia for their student teaching. Alisha taught at Central Elementary and Artesia High School for one year before starting a 20 year career as a special education teacher at Hermosa Elementary School. Alisha taught summer school for the past five years. She will always be remembered for her compassion for her students and excellent instruction. Alisha loved her students as if they were her own children. She would do anything to help them and wrapped them in her arms every day. Alisha was a member of First Baptist Church of Artesia. She accepted Jesus Christ as her Lord and Savior on August 15, 1999. Pastor Rick Sullivan baptized Alisha on that day, as well as Brianna and Thad. Alisha was pregnant with Michaela, so she always said that Michaela was baptized before she was even born. She gave birth to Michaela on September 6, 1999. Alisha was a loving wife and mother. She was so sweet to Thad. There wasn't anything she wouldn't do for him. From the day they met in high school, both Alisha and Thad knew they were made by God for each other. Alisha supported both of her girls in all of their endeavors. She spent tremendous time watching them in their sports and activities. She served on many of the booster clubs and was always willing to lend a helping hand. Her influence on Brianna and Michaela led them to become the Christian women they are today. Spreading the love of Jesus was the most important thing in her life. Alisha enjoyed working in her garden and grew many of the flowers for Brianna's wedding. Alisha made their house a home by carefully decorating it with family pictures and encouraging words from scripture. Her Christian influence extended beyond her home. She had tremendous compassion for those in need. Many times, she would buy food for the homeless people of Artesia and deliver it to them. She always stayed for a moment to visit. She also sponsored several children in Africa and local teens in their mission efforts to spread the gospel.

Survivors include: husband, Thad Phipps of Artesia; mother and father, Susan and Hollice Glass of Artesia; two daughters, Brianna Danielle Willard and husband Kevin of Artesia; and Michaela Ann Phipps of Artesia; one sister, Christina Otley of Artesia; one brother, Wayne Glass of Carlsbad; one grandmother, Shirley Houserman Meschino of Artesia; five nieces, Paig Florez and husband Freddy of Artesia; and Victoria Hufnagle of Fresno, CA; Raina Wesson of Lubbock, TX; Hannah Wesson of Artesia; and Addison Walker of Milton, GA; two nephews, Quinn Glass of Texarkana, TX; and Austin Walker of Milton, GA; four aunts, Sandra Henze and husband Fritz of Northville, NY; Kim Kucel and husband Joel of Ruidoso; Lisa Doyal of Carlsbad; and Tina Houserman of Tinnie; one uncle, Gary Houserman of Artesia; mother and father-in-law, Kathy and Mike Phipps of Artesia; two sister-in-laws, Shelley George and husband Steve of Artesia; and Callie Walker and husband Rob of Milton, GA; cousins, Kelli Hammond, Joel Kucel, Chad Kucel, Brent Henze, Scott Henze, Keith Henze, Brian Houserman, Kent Houserman, and Shelley Brockman.

Alisha was preceded in death by her brother, William Glass; grandfathers, Keith Houserman and Hollis Glass; grandmother, Gertrude Glass; two uncles, Dean Glass and Curtis Doyal; and cousin, Jimmy Doyal.

Arrangements have been entrusted to Terpening & Son Mortuary. Please remember Mrs. Phipps at www.artesiafunerals.com