Martin Northrup Taylor, 62, of Lancaster died March 21st, 2017. He was born in Marietta, Ohio on December 30th, 1954 to Milton and Joan (Becker) Taylor. He was educated in the Lancaster public schools and attended Ohio University, an institution he whole-heartedly supported throughout his life. Martin was always proud to say his primary early learning was finding trouble alongside the dear friends with whom he grew up in Lancaster, and was very close to until death. Martin often shared his favorite childhood memories of being in Cocoa Beach, Florida with his VonThron cousins and in Montana with George, Louise, Laurie and Jack.

Mr. Taylor, along with his brother Milton J. Taylor Jr. owned and operated the Taylor Team of Dealerships in Lancaster and Athens, Ohio. Mr. Taylor was a passionate businessman and over his decades of ownership the company grew and thrived. Mr. Taylor was grateful to the Lancaster and Athens communities for this success and was always glad to see and help anyone he’d met or worked with throughout his career. He took an enormous amount of pride in the generations of families that frequented the dealerships, as customers and as co-workers. Mr. Taylor especially enjoyed having his home filled with all of these special people during the many community events and parties he hosted at his home on Wheeling street. He leaves three children; his daughter Emily Taylor Huestis and her husband David; his son John David Taylor; his son Joseph William Taylor and his husband Enrique Jimenez; (with Iris Wooster Taylor.) He also leaves a brother and four sisters; Milton J. Taylor Jr. and his wife Nancy of Lancaster, OH; Catherine Bailey of Roswell, GA; Jane Gartrell of Hilliard, OH; Ellen Allen and her husband Tom of Canal Winchester, OH; Bea Cardenas and her husband Joe of Lancaster, OH. He is also survived by his beloved Aunt Jane VonThron and her husband Joseph. He is also survived by his two grandsons, Robert and Timothy. He also leaves his beloved nieces and nephews; Ben and his wife Jenna, Jessica and her husband Bobby, Alex and his fiancée Christina, James and his wife Kaily, Katy and her husband Shane, Milton III, and Julia.

A memorial service will be held at St. John's Episcopal in Lancaster on Saturday, April 1 at 10am, officiated by Reverend. G. William Pursley and Father Denis Kigozi, with a gathering at Lancaster Country Club following at 11:30AM. Memorials can be made in Martin's name to the Lancaster High School, 1312 Granville Pike, Lancaster, OH 43130 in care of Jack Greathouse. Arrangements are being handled through the Frank E. Smith Funeral Home, Lancaster. Online condolences can be made at www.funeralhome.com

Memorial Service

10:00 AM ,Saturday, April 1, 2017

St. John's Episcopal