If you are curious about the provenance of this confessional, you can read about my fund raising experience and the subsequent meltdown.

If you survive the meltdown, the truly hardy then sign up for the grind. This has the uncertain promise of fame and glory in return for building a “real business”. Lots of entrepreneurs fall for this. Like so many others, I too am afflicted with this learning disability.

As a child, I loved a board game called Snakes & Ladders. Each new business model was a painful inflection point like resetting a dislocated joint. The team composition changed every time to better suit the new plan. Co-founders and early employees who toiled with you are often casualties at this stage. It is painful and rightfully feels like a betrayal. This traumatic experience is casually referred to as “pivot”.

We executed three pivots before we sighted the promised land.

Pivot 1 - Enterprise Software

After the meltdown and the subsequent downsizing from 45 to 9, it was clear that the SAAS model was not sustainable. We cleared out of the data center, bailed out of our office space, and moved in with our investors who were going through their own meltdown. Nine of us moved into swanky offices that we could never afford, to continue our toil - rent-free.

Cockroaches…

After 9-11, we positioned the alerting features in our platform as general purpose notification system that could be plugged into any system. Our reference application was an integration with, of all things, CA Unicenter! We sold a copy to the US army. It helped make payroll. We also negotiated to develop some custom software for our investor - Intel. As the lead developer, I had a standing Skype chat with a team in Auckland, between 2-4 am several times a week. I was yet to learn the lesson of fast-fail. Death was an option, but I was too stubborn to take it. Famine focuses the mind. It also makes you desperate. One specific board conversation stands out.

Board member: “Ajay, we are very impressed with your work. Good job!”.

Me: Thank you. I appreciate the love. However we need money! Can you get them to pay us on a monthly basis so that we can make payroll?

They paid! We survived for several months due the accelerated payments.

As an entrepreneur, you can survive almost anything. Consider the opportunity cost before continuing the death march.

Pivot 2 - A Frankenstein

While we were busy scrounging for morsels from fat cat federal contractors, our rapidly imploding venture parent had another portfolio company in distress. Semio corporation in San Mateo had just flatlined when an acquisition fell through at the last minute. Semio had patented technology for content categorization with a loyal customer base of 65+ in Life Sciences and Federal Government. We merged and renamed the company “Entrieva”.

This deal was a head scratcher - how does one put together a telco company with a content categorization company? More importantly, why would you do that? In our case, it was survival. Webversa had less than 10 customers. Semio had 65. We renamed the company to Entrieva and tried to make a go of it with two business lines. This is like walking while simultaneously getting an enema.

65 is more than 10. We shortly made a choice to kill off the telco business and focused on the categorization business. This turned out be our best move to date.

Make choices. Quickly and surgically.

Navigating the Military Industrial Complex

For novices like me, federal procurement was a confusing and infuriating experience. Navigating this strange world with its own budgetary cycles, pecking order, and rules of engagement was an exercise in frustration. We unearthed the federal procurement uncertainty principle - the position and velocity of your deal cannot be measured exactly, ever. In the previous segment I wrote about my disdain for “good meetings”. The consulting and purchasing ecosystem around government procurement is particularly fertile ground for this sin. Federal spending has a unique way of flowing out of the government coffers into the many businesses that feed off of it like parasites on a comatose whale. After we hired some experienced sales leaders, we made some headway.

Do you understand how money flows in your target sector?

The House Burned Down List

When our 9 person company acquired the assets of Semio, we were the baby python swallowing a reindeer. There were 25 talented developers on the Semio team. No way we could afford to hire all of them. In order to understand the architecture, I gathered the team around a large whiteboard. Each developer stepped up to the board and drew the component that he worked on. At the end of the exercise, we had a picture like the solar system. The central component containing the core IP was the categorization engine. Less than five developers actively worked on it. We hired two. It was enough to continue to support the software. I call this my "house burned down list". It is the core set of people that you can rebuild with when everyone else has bailed.

Do you know who is on your "house burned down" list?

A New Superpower

After the Semio acquisition, I was the CTO for a product whose core I didn’t have a clue about! I bought a book on Natural Language Processing and read it. While one book is no substitute for a Ph.D., it was enough of a foundation to understand our value proposition, and develop a clearer view of the marketplace. I had discovered another one of my superpowers - I can teach myself anything! This was an important confidence booster, as we pivoted two more times.

Have you taken stock of your superpowers?

Talking to Customers

With a new product to support, I went on a road trip to meet every customer. While the product roadmap had major features that were exciting, most of our customers had small gripes that had been ignored for a long time. Basic components such as crawlers and importers had annoying bugs that degraded the utility of our software. By simply prioritizing some of these fixes, we improved the experience for our customers. Almost all of them stayed with us, till we chose to pivot and discontinue the product!

Little things matter. It shows that you care.

Reaching the Plateau

After stabilizing the business by retaining the customers, we tried hard to grow it. Despite our best efforts, we plateaued. Searching for a growth path, I set out to better understand how our product was utilized. Categorization was a component of a typical enterprise search or enterprise portal procurement. Customers would first choose the portal (Oracle, Plumtree, etc.) or search (Verity, Autonomy, etc.), and then plug in a categorization engine. In other words, we were always an add-on, never the primary. This often put us in the unenviable position of a squirrel trying to get reluctant elephants to mate. Larger deals got too complex and often fizzled out.

Is your company a feature or a product?

Pivot 3 - Ad Tech

Having plateaued, we continued to hunt for new customers. By chance our rep on the west coast sold software to a company I had never heard of - Overture. Overture needed software to categorize keywords for one of their largest customers - Amazon. The application was so different from the the typical life sciences or federal customer, that I personally spent over two months understanding the applications and developing new tools for them. The experience at Overture opened my eyes to the opportunity in AdTech.

AOL!

AOL was still flying high, even though they had basically ceded search to Google. We talked our way into a one month pilot to prove that our categorization could improve AOL Search. Halfway through the pilot, it was still not clear if any follow on business was possible. In a fit of desperation, I offered to spend time in Bangalore with the AOL team to figure out how to generate incremental revenue. In return, my sponsor promised me full access. The opportunity was clear in the first few local conversations. For the next month, we worked a 24/7 schedule - I worked during the day in India while my team in Reston developed new features overnight. We settled on a revenue-share agreement. Our monthly revenue kept us alive and in the black for next year or so.

Figure out if you can truly drive incremental revenue.

Ad Networks - The Ephemerals of our time

Circa 2000, the ad network was the most effective way to find online audiences of meaningful size. This was a relationship business with sketchy technology foundations. They have to resolve the same catch-22 facing any network connecting buyers and sellers: Buyers want a scaled seller base and vice versa. How do you break this stalemate? Simple - You lie.

Here is how the shell game was played:

Promise the buy side (typically an agency) exclusive inventory. Everyone knows this is mostly rubbish, but they go along anyway.

Tell the sell side (publishers) that you have exclusive relationships to drive large buys.

In this sea of sameness, where every one is looking to distinguish themselves, we realized that we had a very desirable widget. Every agency fears damaging their brand by showing their ad on inappropriate content. Our content categorization service could filter out unsafe content effectively. As a bonus, we could provide deep category information for insights, and targeting.

We sold this as a service to a lot of the ad networks during that period. I worked on most partnerships to cut these deals. This was uncomfortable for a mildly introverted nerd. It required every ounce of extroversion that I could muster.

Sales and business development is hard. Every tech co-founder needs this experience to get better at listening to customers and partners.

Hockey Stick?

For a brief period, it looked like we were onto something. Sadly this was a mirage. Our service was a cost of goods line item for the ad network. Their stated desire to cap their cost, meant that our revenue could not be indexed to their growth. In short, the plateau was within sight.

Fortunately for us, a revolution was in the making. RightMedia, the first ad exchange, had just been launched. Ad networks would die soon and give way to a new set of creatures (DMP, SSP, DSP), and never before contemplated modes of transacting business.

That is subject of the next segment - LucidMedia.