Lords of Industry (pt. 1)

Morgan Industries, the American Reclamation Corporation, Struan’s Pacific Trading Company, Dai Seung Heavy Industries, Comprehensive Transport - such were the incandescent edifices of enterprise that lit up the Unity with lavishly paid-for supplies, armies of employees and contract workers, and teams of heavily-armed corporate security. But they are far from the only corporate presence that grace Chiron. Whether declared to the Mission Industry Standards Board or not, numerous private sector actors went along for the ride, minnows under the shadow of whales. Or else were titans of their own, immensity shrouded by frenetic movements of the herd.

NoxCo

Acting Director Eric Preston said:

Roust up the sunners. All powertechs must be in place to maintain absolute operational precision. No one- no one- is to break until every microjoule is accounted for. Do that, and this facility is ready for business. Tomorrow the market opens, and we’ll have owned it. - Opening rally of the Chandor Grand Energy Bank

The Nox Conglomerate, founded in the late seventeenth century by the commodore Nottington, the chemist Osbourne, and the coin collector Xanthos as the Axis Mundi Joint-Stock Company. Already well-to-do, the Three sought to hoard their wealth away from royal levies by pooling them into exploration and exploitation of the New World. It was a road fraught with dead ends and dead colonists, but for every Darien scheme or New Klein-Venedig, there was a Tortuga or a Santa la Noche. As the Age of Exploration turned into the Age of Revolutions, the Three’s descendants parroted Enlightenment values and sold arms to anti-colonial uprisings in exchange for sovereign bonds from ensuing republics. The company’s coffers compounded and its leaders reinvested it into endeavor after endeavor.

Signing of the Plan Nox, Risso Leones de Córdoba, oil on canvas. Azzarello Conglomerate Gallery, Croatoan Station, Ceres​

By the twenty-first century, the rechristened Nox had become a centuries-old tax sheltered money printer, adroitly hiding the wealth of its sworn clans across generations. Money bred schemes begat more money, now operating at the speed of circuitry. Rumored to have both funded- then thwarted- the analog computing work of Charles Babbage himself, the Conglomerate ran on some of the finest financial algorithmic modeling this side of Soviet Cybersyn.

The centerpiece of this empire of financiers was in private equity. Immense amounts of capital went into not only trading assets and complex instruments, but to bring distressed businesses into the conglomerate fold. Tended over by managers of loving grace, these takeover targets ranged from mom and pop boutiques selling homespun trinkets to massive space age industrial concerns. Nox executives then went to ruthless work skinning, gutting, and reconstructing these hapless companies into the very image of profitability. With this, legions of layoffs and customer satisfaction scores fell. But each shell of a business became perfectly resellable to outside buyers and public markets. Along the way the Conglomerate collected tidy sums and harvested intellectual property amassed by these companies.

Container complex at Port Emrys, a United Nations Space Authority exploration outpost on Ceres, converted to trade depot after Nox acquisition. Overcrowding resulted from rapid influx of contract workers solicited for intra-system shipping, and chronic underinvestment into employee residences​

Ultimately, the U.N. looked askance at the Nox Conglomerate’s quickly shifting array of temporary acquisitions and flipped shops, denying them the opportunity to be a Prime Contractor even as they built oodles of space infrastructure to support their kingdom of the secondhand. The scandals of the so-called ‘Ceres Syndicate’ didn’t help their opinion any. But thanks to deep pockets, Nox was able to buy a place on the Unity. Individual high-ranking employees contributed lavishly to the project at crucial moments, appealing to carefully selected officials, who graciously granted them tickets to Alpha Centauri as Unity Franchise Holders.

Almost-exclusively executives, these Nox representatives were regarded with suspicion by their fellow passengers and with obsessive envy from those who could not make the trip. In other words, little different from any of the gigacorporate set. But unlike those who lorded over billets of hapless stakeholders, these corpos did not have the authority to enact decisions of life or death over other passengers. They simply wore the imperial indigo of franchise holders, which unlocked access to exclusive observation lounges, improved ration selections, even private cryotube bays aboard the ship. They were an obscenely wealthy minority whose presence seemed to confirm the worst fears of those who saw the mission as a means for the same elites to establish themselves in humanity’s last redoubt.

Even though the Nox Conglomerate was present as mere passengers and not as a corporate force, outrageous rumors still swirled among them. Independent analysts charted out elaborate family trees and highlighted the company’s efforts in resuscitating failing life sciences companies, swearing that the heirs of the original founders were plotting an escape to the new world. In reality, the upper echelons of Nox saw the Unity mission as a curio to be studied and kept track of, but unnecessary for the company’s longevity. These living descendents of the Three were not secretly hidden away in the bowels of the ship, but actually in residence at Ganymede aboard the Nox corporate station of Avalon, slumbering in cryostasis for tax purposes.

Divisional Head Preston assumes control of all eastern seaboard trading operations at the start of the Shadow Bank Run​

Eric Jared Preston was born with a spoon of mere silver, not rhodium. A scion of one of the many attendant families of the Three, his existence was not unlike that of the conglomerate whose citizenship he held: living capital in service of ancient bloodlines. Just another raised from childhood to manage the age-old continuously growing coffers of the founders so that their descendants would continue to live in absolute prosperity, even while getting his fat slice of the pie. He did so with expected efficiency and sharkmanship. Clever enough to out-maneuver his fellows both inside and outside of the conglomerate, he rose to be a division head.

Then came one of the worst global downturns since the Markethack Crash. And Preston delivered, flooding the market with distressed equities before any had caught on. By the time the music had ended, Nox was sitting pretty even as its competitors had their chair repossessed from them. He then designed the company’s mother of all leveraged buyout campaigns, seizing control of floundering firm after firm. During the crisis, Nox seized a hefty chunk of commercial space assets beyond Martian space, acquiring mining and zero-g research companies whose leadership had failed to navigate the crisis.

Rush said:

Fly by night, away from here

Change my life again

Fly by night, goodbye, my dear

My ship isn't coming and I just can't pretend

- “Fly by Night”, Datalinks

For his successes, Preston was made manager of the Ceres division, now virtually a Nox company planetoid. But the downfall of the ‘Ceres Syndicate’ was his as well, felling his young star, fast-tracking him to involuntary retirement. So instead he chose exile, with a fresh gameboard to start over from. He volunteered to be a franchise holder, to go far into the frontier in ostensible service of the conglomerate.

Even prior to Planetfall he had spent the years-long training period doing market research on his fellow travelers, pinpointing those who would be pliable or readily indebted. During the crisis Preston broke out his chequebook in the form of the excess of hundreds of millions of dollars worth of precious metals, jewels, and hard currency stashed in his very own franchise holder-clearance level personal effects. Even in atmo, gold preserves its luster. Having just awoken after decades of hibernation, the technicians, medics, security officers still remembered the value of money. This cultural inertia aided Preston in winning more than a few to his side, dazzled by stacks of pounds sterling and purses of Krugerrands. By the time they realized that cash was of little more use beyond historical nostalgia, these workers were already sworn subordinates to him.

A turncoat Unity librarian, jacked into a newly gifted state-of-the-art Togra Labs metavisor, slashed into the datacore, fetching a list of Nox passengers and shipboard locations. Fighting through waves of stowaway survivalists, the ragtag coalition of the billing reunited Preston with his fellow employees, who, after some prompting, contributed their own personal treasuries. These fellow franchise holders and former executives now formed the core of his new- or perhaps renewed- venture. And for their first order of business, he bade them not to commandeer yet another spare landing pod, but to blend in with the fleeing masses.

Shift workers head to supper as dawn breaks over Nox City​

The Preston party joined with a group of refugees who settled on a base with no name. Numbering little over a hundred, they were embedded into a larger host over ten times their size. Nominally still declaring themselves for the U.N. mission, this group was isolated on a moderately resourced island in the Bight of Bienor. In the mission decades that followed, Preston and other conglomerate veterans established themselves as a pillar of the frontier. With their executive experience, particularly among the ex-Ceres set, the Nox corpos constantly gave advice to the fledgling colony. From food production to harnessing Centauri’s rays, they were seen as knowing what they talked about. Setting up a development bank, Preston used their hidden wealth, lending to initiatives from a metalworks to xenobiology expeditions.

After two mission decades, the settlement had a fully operational mixed recycling center and funeral home, a multi-tiered residential hab complex, and the necessary facilities for an industrial base. In its wake was also a score of failed local businesses that had fallen into arrears with the Preston party. Half of the colony council owed them one way or another, and the other half relied on their advice. Meanwhile, the former conglomerate members formed an unofficial nobility, strolling around with drone manservants in tow.

Even as news broke of the discovery of other survivors outside of the base, Eric Preston declared the re-founding of his company upon Planet, branded as NoxCo. The base was formally named to Nox City, its dome ceiling beginning to be bathed in the perpetual twilight of industrial byproducts. Taking a humble sub-VP-level title for himself, the new Acting Director declared that NoxCo was again ready to service humanity’s investment needs, and to provide wise counsel and executive oversight.

Midnight general meeting at Arna Tower, Nox City, on the eve of the initial public offering for a restructured firm​

Though currently possessing only two bases (the second worksite of Ceres Rising was founded on the mainland at a junction of winding canyon paths), NoxCo now presumes to be another corporate player. Like Unicorp (New Unity Industries-née-Dai Seung Heavy Industries), this corp exists as a private institution, operating autonomously across faction lines. It claims no single jurisdiction and insists on its own corporate regulations within its borders. But it also maintains offices in other polities. As such, it is considered a Bahadur-class corporeal actor, with characteristics similar to factions or sub-factions, but ultimately an entity of capital.

The NoxCo re-formation has been met with the usual mixed wariness from most factions at the prospect of yet another gigacorp trying to muscle into the affairs of states. One notable exception is Hutama of the Peacekeeping Forces, who has called for a trade deal directly with the wealthy conglomerate, in effect recognizing it as a de facto faction. The bullishly pro-trade Under-Secretary of Economic and Peacecrafting Efforts claims that far from being a vulture fund, Nox has always served the public good by reviving businesses that were doomed to fail, making them leaner and meaner. Terminated employees can be reallocated more effectively in the job market. And at times, it even serves antitrust regulators by doing the dirty work of breaking up businesses, while asset stripping. That’s the theory, at least.

Independent corprobes, on contract with NoxCo, infiltrate the Paramount​

Among its competitors, NoxCo has selectively targeted both Morgan Industries subsidiaries and Chiron Cartel local companies for leveraged buyouts and hostile takeovers. Choice targets are corporate divisions or startups engaged in speculative technological research while suffering from unsustainable business models. After being identified by Interloper analyst-probes, these units receive heavy bombardment of capital by corporate raiders seeking to gain ownership to them and their IP. Needless to say, this is quite a nuisance. And yet, this has received mostly tepid responses. CEO Nwabudike Morgan is said to relish competition, and has countered gallantly with his own elaborate business schemes instead of open vendetta. Director Nathan Weismuller, on the other hand, is hamstrung by ideological commitment to the non-interventionism of the Cartel Charter, and can only urge his free enterprise zone faction’s businesses to just say no to Nox money. Though he has also directed Cartel Security to embark on covert “property protection” operations against the vultures, in line with the NAP.

The few outright hostile factions to NoxCo aren’t even in the same verticals. The Emporium considers the conglomerate an enemy ever since the dissolution of the pact they once held in Ceres; with little love lost between them, Brigadier James “Admiral” Heid has gleefully accepted any contract to attack conglomerate assets, whether in outright vendetta or in hardprobe smash-and-grab operations. And while for the longest time, the idea that Eric Preston and his confederates are seeking to reintroduce the Founding Three’s bloodlines on Planet was nothing but the stuff of conspiracy theories, recent probe activity orchestrated by the Interlopers against the Human Ascendancy has stirred up old legends. Repeated intrusions into DNA databanks has led Director Tamineh Pahlavi to declare a shadow vendetta against NoxCo, deploying everything from the elite Immortals probes to Legionnaire military forces.

Casting

Eric Preston is portrayed by Simon Baker as Jared Cohen in Margin Call

Notes

Eric Preston is the leader of the Noxium Corporation from Pandora: First Contact (Manual with lore)

My portrayal of Nox’ as a private equity firm comes from my overthinking Pandora lore, along with the general themes of financial corporations existing as social AIs to perpetuate capital, the thin line between plutocracy and aristocracy, etc.

The Ceres Syndicate is also based on the Ceres Cartel concept from Pandora

The British East India Company was once nicknamed “The Company Bahadur, the valiant, hero company

Interlopers are those who breach an established monopoly

Image Credits

Renaissance-type painting of men signing document is from 100 Bullets, issue #50, by Brian Azzarello and Eduardo Risso

Giant shipping container loading dock is “Metallum City” by Tamas Medve

Pedestrians in night city is “Mining Colony” by Rasmus Poulsen

Midnight boardroom meeting is from Tron: Legacy

Mercenaries in front of bioscience secret plans is from Syndicate (2012)

Further Reading

The Secretive Industry Devouring the U.S. Economy, The Atlantic

Lords of Industry (pt. 1.5)

Priests of the Temple of Ceres

Associate Partner Kaydown Harper said:

You say you took an idea from a napkin sketch to the NEXTDAQ. Nurtured it, protected it, bled for it. Big deal. Do it a thousand times more. That’s our job. - Final sales call with Tetra Vaal CEO Joshua Abdon Haldeman. Client signed.

A funny thing happened on the way to Alpha Centauri. As the Unity project dragged on with every change in leadership, aerospace enterprises sprung up to profit from the perpetually postponed mission. Independent rocket companies and orbital infrastructure schemes vied to get a cut of the juicy budgets put forth by the U.N. and national governments, scrambling over each other to be recognized by the Industry Standards Board. Sometimes in their haste, they produced half-cocked designs and shoddy construction that blew up shortly after launch, or doomed test astronauts to the void. Since these ventures were often founded in North America, after the bottom of the market fell off during the various Reconstruction hiccups, they soon found themselves moribund.

The Nox Conglomerate swooped in and bought many of these premature unicorns for the price of a song, securing vast holdings in the asteroid belt and majority control over Ceres. But that is only half the story. For large companies that could not yet be acquired, the stewards of the Three’s wealth profited from them differently. Instead they offered armies of advisors to counsel them on their space operations. Nox sent in the consultants.

Lyonesse Strategies, a proud Nox Conglomerate subsidiary, had cut its teeth in the shadow of the Big Six while on Earth. Experts in modern scientific efficiency methods, they were sent around the globe to dissect and suture all sorts of failing projects. These management consultants strategized on everything from keeping the Concorde flying and Pan Am solvent, to increasing crop yields in modernized Golden Chinese factory farms, to hiding the cooked books of the petty kingdoms in the Indian Ocean- not to mention massaging their PR records even as human rights violations came to light.

Resident consultants, or Residents, discuss monetization strategies at Piazzi Harvest​

Overpaid, detached, master-of-none spreadsheet and slidedeck jockeys, the Lyones and Lyonesses of Nox approached the too big to bail companies with plans on how to revitalize their remote desolate starfields and attract customers out to the Main Belt. If these clients recovered, they would be a success story. If they failed, they might shatter into chunks that could be digestible by the conglomerate. Either way, the consultants got paid.

The default solution, of course, was to cut costs to the bone. Investors responded well to trimming fat, even if in its wake hundreds of experienced laborers were shipped the long way back to Earth, safety precautions were tossed out the airlock, vital supplies were neglected until machinery started electrocuting staff and load-bearing structures collapsed entire shafts. The long-suffering workers of the Main Belt did not take kindly to “payroll right-sizing,” nor when Lyonesse published reports calling for mass exporting Cererian water to buyers millions of miles away. Company Organizers stopped giving nostrums to their psych patients and began marching alongside them against the bosses.

So the assets started depreciating. Strikes, sabotage, shutdowns. Rumors of organizing. Insubordination. Even the specter of direct action against the various companies’ leadership. Publicly, the Residents paid them little mind, dazzling earthside investors with promises of substantial rebounds and massive payoffs. And privately, they began reaching out to an old business partner of theirs.

Brigadier James “Admiral” Heid in reinforced armor, flanked by ex-SAS Imperial Military Focus security consultants, on a contract​

Nox’s Lyonesse consultants first contacted the Imperial Military Focus in the heart of Africa. While advising the imperial Bokassa regime on food production, Residents witnessed firsthand the professional brutality of in-country IMF operators, crushing local dissent and defeating People’s African Union decolonialist foreign fighters. So after cargo loaders staged a sit-in at the Port Emrys docks on Ceres, Lyonesse Residents flipped through the firm's Holodex and dialed up Brigadier James Heid, offering the mercenary company their first contract in space. Eager to spill blood on a new frontier, the warmonger agreed. This was the formation of the so-called Ceres Syndicate.

The IMF served as able strikebreakers, cost-reducing all leaky assets within a fortnight. Accused union leaders were tagged and bagged. (Residents replaced unsalvageable stock by suggesting their client companies hire new contractors from nations willing to turn a blind eye to exploitation of their citizens in space.) But troubles continued. Now that the Pandora’s box of violence had been opened on Ceres, corporate rivals, smarting from Nox’s capital conquest of swathes of the Main Belt, attacked their clients’ facilities with special corporate security, freelancers, and deniable assets like rock pirates. Some of these were even stirred up by rogue elements within the very clients that Lyonesse was advising, wishing to discredit the Residents and shake off their influence.

Not unlike ARC’s relationship with the IMF in the wars against North American hypersurvivalists, Nox, via Lyonesse, provided intel and strategic specifications for Heid’s mercenaries to fulfill. And their commander could not be happier, having no end to foes to slay in order to keep the conglomerate king in Ceres. As the incursions grew more bitter, rival gigacorps resorted to sponsoring terrorist insurgencies in the Belt to deal indiscriminate property loss against Nox and clients alike. In response, the conglomerate directed Heid’s men to attack competitor space assets in the Kessler Ring in Earth’s very orbit. Fierce firefights and even mass accelerated manmade mini-meteorite strikes lit up the skies, and in intrasystem transit lanes the Transportation Authority Police did not watch.

Mid-21st century Lyonesse Strategies recruitment propaganda showcasing Ceres Syndicate orbital operators attacking rival corporate security as far as the earthsphere​

While Heid’s precision is as renowned as his bloodlust, collateral damage was inevitable. After a United Nations Life-Saving Service medical transport at Callisto was mistaken for a dummy vehicle- a common tactic used by both sides in the commercial war- and destroyed by heavy assault astronauts, Earth demanded order in the Belt. The United Nations Space Authority sent in its Hammershields alongside Comprehensive Transport’s finest. The peacekeepers and the corporate lawmen directed all parties to stand down. And Nox did, albeit with some grumbling from its IMF partners.

Arduous rounds of peace talks followed, drawing in the likes of Rylance Torquay as witness and John Garland himself as negotiator. The gigacorps were essentially given slaps on the wrist in exchange for full demobilization. Nox itself was not implicated, nor even mentioned in the proceedings; Lyonesse had acted as consultant to dozens of client companies who were the patsies of the conflict, while the Conglomerate was not easily held liable. In fact, U.N. investigators soon discovered that the Residents had been consulting with so many struggling companies in the Main Belt, there were multiple occasions when different teams had consulted with each other’s competitors. IMF forces had even been employed by opposing sides, though never in the same battle. This spiderweb of conflicts of interest, coupled with Nox’s ample layers of deniability and deep legal pockets, prevented them from being prosecuted.

A Ceres Syndicate vacuum trooper attacks a Main Belt distribution center asteroid towards the end of hostilities​

The Outer System Plowshares Treaty dismantled all mercenary camps and special corporate security facilities in the Main Belt, at least those not approved by the United Nations Space Authority, the Transportation Authority Police, and other relevant authorities. But voices still bayed for a sacrifice to answer for the damage done. Ceres division head Eric Preston crossed across intracompany lines and ordered the Residents to counsel out their erstwhile partner: to frame the Imperial Military Focus as an aggressor force and escalator of violence, which, to be fair, it was. Scrutiny shifted to the weapon and not its wielder. Under the terms of the Treaty, the IMF was banned from space. Heid retired back to Africa, his dreams of space war temporarily paused, cursing Nox for all eternity.

The Ceres Syndicate era really lasted for about fifty months. After all the public hearings and investigations had closed, the economic fortunes of the Main Belt had scarcely improved. Between all of the fighting and Lyonesse cost-cutting procedures, many of the consulted clients had experienced worse fates. They were readily absorbed by Nox’s private equity arm. The payday was substantial, but the public fallout was far from optimal. To distance itself from the mounting scandal, the conglomerate renamed Lyonesse Strategies to Nox Consulting Services. Preston himself received a 10x bonus for his work, a handshake, and a push out of the division. As much as a scapegoat as the mercenary captain he had betrayed, he would make his way to the Unity.

Managing Partner Alaric De said:

Selling is selling. Whatever it is, wherever you are. To whoever the seller thinks they are. We’re here to sell the story that we know their business better than they do. In times of old, kings came and went, but a good advisor could outlive generations of kings. You tell a good story, you’re that advisor. You live forever. - New grad welcoming speech

Given their checkered part in the Ceres Syndicate imbroglio, many Residents were axed, or chose to go into exile. Some cultivated their remaining public sector contacts and found ways to worm themselves into the Unity project- to some opportunistic officials, the experience of these spacefarer managers outweighed any ethical lapse. Bureaucratic empire-builders sought to include ex-Lyonesse resident consultants in future colonial regimes as administrators, using their prized advice to justify their diktats. Yet when Planetfall struck, the canny Residents slipped away, joining their mainline Nox coworkers under the leadership of Preston.

Among their number was Principal Manager Alaric De and his understudy Case Leader Kaydown Harper. The two former securities salespeople entered the Conglomerate after the liquidation of one of its biggest portfolio companies, an investment bank based in the City of London. Nox psych profilers scrutinized their strengths and, rather unexpectedly, shuffled them into Lyonesse Strategies.

The two proved more than able to master their first case: advising WorldCom on how to navigate ongoing hypersurvivalist attacks against their cellular infrastructure. De, the well-connected, irascible hardnoser, weaved together an impromptu coalition of corporate rent-a-cops, amnestied militiamen, even disaffected Kellerites, all financed through creative use of capital spending. Meanwhile, Harper, the keen-eyed, ever-hungry ladder-climber, wheedled and false-promised her way into securing a no-bid contract from Congress, ensuring priority in federal protection. She even cut a deal with the American Reclamation Corporation for fire support at adjacent worksites. WorldCom was happy and the case was closed within time. Later on, when the telecom giant stumbled and came crashing to earth, Nox was able to acquire wodges of the flailing company and flip them to Oscar van de Graaf himself, strengthening ARC’s position as the face of Reconstruction. Both De and Harper received bonuses for afterwork. Thus, like their colleagues abroad, these investment bankers turned management consultants turned into nation-builders.

Kaydown Harper’s first trade as a junior analyst under the mentorship of Alaric De, prior to Nox​

The former Residents had a prominent role on the road to NoxCo. They were famed as smoother communicators and cannier bargainers than many of their Conglomerate fellows, though disreputable given what happened in the Main Belt. Perhaps because of his lack of visible association with the Ceres Syndicate, and his force of personality, Alaric De took control of NoxCo Consulting Services. As leader of the Residents on Chiron, he and his apprentice, Kaydown Harper, serve Preston’s agenda by supporting the Interlopers in their attempts to access new markets. Residents are sent to forge relations with new factions, offering their trusty strategies wherever they go. Ancient wisdom from a lost planet. And sowing the seeds for future opportunities for NoxCo to swoop in to devour.

So far, Managing Partner De is quite content with being a king within a new empire. But his hunger for greater wealth and glory is no less than that of his suzerain’s. The same, of course, goes for the notorious and duplicitous Associate Partner Harper. Both have their own connections to key figures in factions beyond Nox City. So do, for that matter, many of those working below them. And what final move the Residents will play in Preston’s great game, no one knows.

Casting

James Heid is portrayed by James Purefoy as SAS Captain Gulliver "Gully" Troy on Pennyworth

Kaydown Harper is portrayed by Myha'la Herrold as Harper Stern on Industry

Alaric De is portrayed by Ken Leung as Eric Tao on Industry

Notes

The Earth Sphere is a concept from Gundam, encompassing the Earth, the Moon, and the Lagrange points.

The Ceres Syndicate (IMF-Nox) is based on the Ceres Cartel concept (Empire Management-Noxium) from Pandora: First Contact

During colonial India, Residents were political agents- officials of the East India Company, then post-1813, the British government itself, who acted as diplomats and advisers to the rulers of the princely states

Lyonesse rebranding to Nox Consulting Services is a bit of a reversal of how Andersen Consulting became Accenture

Image Credits

Corporate meeting is "Corpo Meeting" by Bernard Kowalczuk

All zero-g combat imagery is from Shattered Horizon

Further Reading

In Clover (review of When McKinsey Comes to Town: The Hidden Influence of the World’s Most Powerful Consulting Firm), London Review of Books

This excerpt of When McKinsey Comes to Town by Walt Bogdanich and Michael Forsythe

Lords of Industry (pt. 2)

Chiron Cartel - Origins

Director Nathan Weismuller said:

One hopes you find the virtue in this enterprise self-evident. What it promises is protection from tyranny- that gnawing hunger biting from beyond the gravity well, that unshakeable qualm sitting at each regulation meal at the end of each regulation day. The fear of losing yourself to the laws of another, the yearning to live true to your own purpose. All banished, what’s left is a chance to exercise the highest virtue: to prosper by your own hand and will. And ye shall become free, and freedom will bring ye truth. - Address to the First Investors

Born New Los Angeles, United States of America. Descended from postwar economic refugees from the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Fascinated by the intersection of science and property rights from an early age. Attended high school in Century City during the Aquacola Uprising, an early precursor to the eventual Water Wars that comprised the SoCal Theater of the Hypersurvivalist Wars. Before rescue by the California National Guard, witnessed firsthand a semblance of order maintained in the emergency zone by local businesses providing security to protect residents’ private possessions, and distributing supplies with professional-grade supply chains.

Inspired, Nathan organized the Entrepreneurs’ Club at Noah Cross High to create a coalition of campus orgs to investigate a rumored water source. Sneaking past angry mobs of drought-stricken residents throwing firebombs at NLAPD units, the students sought an overlooked aquifer beneath the abandoned ruins of the Maroon Studios backlot. His trust in the Local Historians’ research was founded: the Young Hydrologists determined there was likely groundwater present. Some digging with a backyard drill by the Future Earth Scientists later, the children received confirmation of the long-forgotten water source. They notified their neighborhood hydro corporation, who swiftly exploited the resource to sell at a reasonable special drought rate to residents. As a reward, Nathan and his team became newsvid heroes for a cycle, even receiving a crisis award from Togra Labs. His parents moved north, and he spent the remaining years of childhood in the San Fernando Valley of Ayn Rand.

The Battle of Mount Lee, one of the bloodiest clashes between law enforcement and water demanders in the Aquacola Uprising​

Studied Philosophy of Economics at Patrick Henry University of Cleveland. Co-founded a series of technological startups beginning with Terminus Systems, an automated accounting firm that soon pivoted to designing tax lawyer programs to scour business codes for tax loopholes and exemptions. Despite being a boon in the SMB space, delivering small shops with counsel to rival megacorp legal teams, IRS scrutiny shut down Terminus. Praised in disruptor spaces from Silicon Valley to Silicon Prairie, toasted on Wall Street, Weismuller became the face of a good idea killed by the meddling federal government that had driven the country into civil war.

Subsequently started Anacreon Automics to realize the Ford Nucleon nuclear-powered concept car for American families. Shuttered by joint action between the EPA and the Department of Energy. Kalgan Cures, his life-extension therapies moonshot, drew international praise from the Zakharov Research Institute but was terminated by FDA disapproval. Bel Riose Bionics, an attempt to create a chess machine to take on the likes of IBM’s Deep Hooloovoo or the Soviet Union’s Kasparov³ by adapting the neural patterns of past grandmasters, was stymied by an alliance of anti-artificial intelligence doomsters, anti-scan bioconservatives, and chess traditionalists.

Last-ditch effort was a cybernet security company built from the bones of Terminus code. MacMillan Utility, so named after the astronomer and cosmologist, was lucky enough to gather a stable of talented nonconformist codetechs drawn to the founder’s controversial track record. Promising antiviral protection with a pronounced emphasis against surveillance- both non-state actors, and otherwise- the upstart soon began winning over corporate clients. Then he offered consumers an unbeatable price point. As competitors dropped out, the company similarly won up-market, securing its leading position. Weismuller planted his seed money.

Founder Weismuller makes the fateful product announcement that won MacMillan Utility the security war​

Success was a whirlwind phase. Having finally made a hit, Nathan Weismuller grew his company and leaned into his experience tussling against regulators, eventually joining the ranks of founders turned venture capitalists. Started the Mutiny Fund, focusing on iconoclast entrepreneurs with a rebellious streak against convention. Subsidized the “seditious seven” who broke from Cantwell-Rogers Electronics to found Wildchild. Continued to invest in space projects even after the popping of the Belt Bubble caused by the dissolution of the Ceres Syndicate, defying the rest of the market. His unorthodox bets as a VC created a sizable fortune.

With wealth, came influence. The government, eager to bury the hatchet as it appealed to deep-pocketed corporations to aid Reconstruction, appointed Weismuller to the National Board for Prosperous Recovery. His civic duty was to oversee Innovate for Individualism state grants for promising new companies- employing the investment skills he honed at Mutiny with America’s sovereign wealth fund. He quickly grew disillusioned as it became clear that the job was to blatantly pick winners and losers, playing power games on behalf of bureaucrats and politicians, market competitiveness be damned. He was further disgusted when fellow private sector board members rejected his concerns, eagerly snapping up public funding where they could, even accusing him of being a Soviet agent undermining American industry. Like Leonard Read on the National Industrial Conference Board over a century ago, Weismuller stuck to the principle that markets should take precedence over business, and resigned.

Mutiny Fund leadership photoshoot, shortly before Weismuller’s brief stint in public service​

Weismuller gradually drifted away from day-to-day work. Despite despising the statist dirty business of politics, he co-created the Forces of Economic Freedom, a free market think tank in the tradition of Read’s FEE. The FEF looked to new frontiers where truly laissez-faire policies could be pursued- in the rising new landmasses of the Indian Ocean, at the warming polar regions, on or under the sea, and into space itself. He frequently became a holovid news commentator renowned for his staunchly pro-capitalist views.

While private pensions, financial advising firms, and banks wooed him as an in-house economist, Weismuller rebuffed their advances, jaded by their hypocritical acceptance of neo-New Keynesianism. Despite not actually having an economics degree, his alma mater asked him to be a guest lecturer, which he did accept, and became a frequent fixture, molding young minds to follow in his stridently freedom-focused thinking. But they were the very few in a future marked by public-private collusion.

And so, Weismuller escaped to the one place that hadn’t been corrupted by crony capitalism: space.

Director Nathan Weismuller said:

Your compatibility depends on what money means to you. Is it simply wealth, a tool to acquire possessions, happiness abstracted? Or is it how a free society speaks? What gives voice to value, calls forth contracts, expresses endorsement or invective? Rest assured, if you believe in the latter, you will find it here. - Address to the First Investors

Weismuller’s admittance to the Alpha Centauri mission as a Unity Franchise Holder was a foregone conclusion that shocked only industry insiders. The futurist financier had invested in extraorbital endeavors for years, and was in the top twentieth percentile of individual donors to the Unity project itself. As for Mutiny, he handed it off to choice former pupils from Patrick Henry U, as he did with MacMillan Utility. In training and on the ship, he wore the indigo-trimmed uniform of the wealthy astro-tourists, fading into their number as a colonist.

Then came Planetfall. Waking up to a state of emergency, Weismuller saw the rational world of due process, civilization, and sanity fall apart. Insurrection, looting, mass swindling into indentured servitude, all manner of lawlessness raged across the massive ship. Rejecting the illicit fire sales of the crisis markets that emerged in the Unity’s last days, where slaves and stolen goods were traded between gigacorpos and warlords, he formed his own hardscrabble on-ship bazaar. In a room of empty Olympic-sized swimming pools at the Unity rec center, shivering refugees exchanged modest treasures and supplies following rudimentary human rights guarantees under the watchful eyes of basic security patrols organized by Weismuller himself.

Foreshadowing what was to play out on the surface, ‘Planetfall Pool’ managed to escape the Sauronian eye of the corporate giants. The Morganites who stumbled upon the motley exchange sniffed at the poor imitation and the limited selection of goods on sale. Struan’s traders could not even find it. Back home, ARC CEO Oscar van de Graaf had been denounced by Weismuller as a mass market manipulator and rent seeker extraordinaire, the worst faux-capitalist who collaborated with governments; as such, CFO-CHIO Suzanne Marjorie Fielding directed her human asset harvesters to skip the bazaar, writing it off as a hostile market.

Finally, Gangnam-based Dai Seung Heavy Industries (later on Planet renamed to New Unity Industries, popularly known as Unicorp), behaved worst at all. Employees of the chaebol boorishly streamed into the pool, attempting to muscle in on the proceedings. Led by a sinister consultant barking orders in perfect Korean, they insisted that their prices were superior and demanded shoppers to submit to employment contracts with the construction/mining corporation. Claiming to be from Crimea while speaking urbane English with a German accent, the consultant declared that this market, like all others, deserved no less than the visionary leadership of Dai Seung. Only by Weismuller strategically positioning his patrols- from thence on, his faction’s security would forever be nicknamed the Lifeguards- and some tense negotiating was bloodshed averted. The chaebol consultant retreated, but promised the investor that they would one day meet again, on solid ground.

The anonymous Dai Seung consultant assesses Planetfall Pool from afar for a forced acquisition​

The poolroom was operational only briefly, but like so many institutions hastily built during the crisis, it was the seed for something far greater on Planet. The participants were gratified to have a temporary place of trade and refuge away from the disruptions in the rest of the ship. But as Zakharov’s grim heralds arrived to tell of Unity’s imminent destruction and the need to evacuate, all eyes turned to Weismuller.

The economist seized his chance to explain his vision: a new colony enshrined by liberty for its members to build the life and prosperity they wanted, offering protection of law under a minimal and un-meddlesome state. In fact, something better than a state- he proposed that this colony be governed by an insurance company of sorts, restrained by a corporate charter that would be responsible for protecting all subscribers. Subscription, like the protection services, would be opt-in and non-compulsory, though it would be the only guarantor to access to property registries and the judicial system.

And, to be precise, this insurance company would be something akin to Lloyd’s of London- it would provide an organized marketplace where syndicates of investing underwriters would pool and spread risk, offering differing services to cover all citizens wishing to subscribe to the colony’s protection. Unlike a traditional government, continuous competition would result in the best quality of care and accountability, as all citizens would be free to switch over to superior providers if they were dissatisfied with their current level of coverage. In short, Weismuller concluded, rule by the market would let everyone be free to create a better life.

Rush said:

What you say about his company

Is what you say about society

Catch the mist, catch the myth

Catch the mystery, catch the drift

- “Tom Sawyer”, Datalinks

He called it a Cartel. An ironic name, perhaps, but no less ironic than the Objectivist cabal that Rand had named The Collective.

A Cartel Charter was drafted, fixing low rates for subscription. Already, members in attendance were devising protection plans against one another, planning to offer greater levels of protection above the factional baseline. It seemed that enlightened self-interest would be the foundation of this faction founded at the ship’s pools. Like so many would-be Moses that day, Weismuller led his chosen people to a spare landing pod, and set sail for the surface--

After the initial mission years of toil, the Chiron Cartel has gradually arisen from the alien soil of Planet. A sprawling mass of corporations nestles on the banks of a great roaring river, its citizens seeking out new frontiers and corresponding profits. Bases named after founding firms, each issued a sub-charter but also hosting a bevy of other businesses, even competitors, sprout like mushrooms. As seen in many Bahadur-class corporeal actors, corporate quasi-factions tend to attract the necessarily motivated and cunning self-starters. (Though ironically enough, scholars consider it closer to a standard faction than most single-corporation entities.)

Overseen by a Board of Directors, of which Nathan Weismuller is simply the first of many, the Chiron Cartel boasts a powerful, efficient economy and technological prowess. But the embrace of freedom belies its utterly weak central government and vulnerability to threats external, and within. Indeed, the internal peace within the faction is often dubbed the “miracle on the New Delaware.” Its relatively low drone population is owed to the guilds formed from the free association of Cartel working classes, whose powers overshadow those of the shambling, gutted labor unions of latter-era Earth. Protected not by state power, but by their own force of arms thanks to unrestricted weapons access, guild-girded workers have become corporate powers of their own. Some even engage in secondary ventures from small crafts to new startups, blurring the line between labor, owner, and manager. And they are well-armed indeed, like most corporate bodies within the Cartel.

Its member firms, remarkably, squabble but not often to the point of open bloodshed- while industrial probe activity runs rife, the fear of foreign competition unites them. Yet the Board espouses a pacifistic diplomatic policy, seeking mutual coexistence and unfettered trade even as few factions share their regard for limited government and natural rights. Shackled to the self-limits imposed by the Cartel Charter, underfunded and starved of resources, and denied of power by the people, what passes for a state within the faction perennially fails to prevent infiltration, data and IP loss. Not to mention, those who live outside of Cartel law, either the impoverished underclass, and unrelenting individualists who refuse to pay dues to anyone.

But how does this shifting, freewheeling, amorphous entity constitute a faction? And how has it managed to survive in a world of aggressors and oppressors? The answers, of course, are as in flux as the Chiron Cartel itself.

Casting

Nathan Weismuller is portrayed by Lee Pace as Joe MacMillan on Halt and Catch Fire

The consultant is portrayed by Christoph Waltz as Regus Patoff on The Consultant

Notes

Chiron Cartel is a custom faction from the SMAC Fac Pack by Nathan Weismuller and Adam Gieseler, txt file here

Unicorp, or New Unity Industries (formerly Dai Seung), is a custom faction from the SMAC Fac Pack by Nathan Weismuller and Adam Gieseler, txt file here

Southern California being struck by "water wars" is from Killing Time by Caleb Carr, in which the concept is rather superficially explained

Togra Labs is an adaptation of Togra University from Pandora: First Contact

(Tax) Lawyer Programs are from Earth by David Brin

The concept of replacing government with an insurance company comes from the original faction concept, additional details (and the idea of money as speech) from What is Anarcho-Capitalism? by CallMeEzekiel

Libertarian research from The History of Libertarianism Part 1 | Rand, Mises, Hayek, Rothbard, FEE, & Spiritual Mobilization by CallMeEzekiel

Image Credits

Shootout by the Hollywood sign from the cancelled Police Warfare