Silicon Flatirons, ATLAS, and ITP present Greg Maffei and Michael Zeisser as our featured entrepreneurs with moderator Brad Feld.

Gregory Maffei is President and Chief Executive Officer of Liberty Media Corporation. He leads the team transforming this diversified company with interests in media, technology, and telecom into a more focused operating company to maximize shareholder value and compete in the digital age. Liberty’s assets include some of the world’s most respected media companies including DIRECTV, QVC, Starz, Overture Films, SIRIUS XM, GSN, Expedia, and the Atlanta Braves. Mr. Maffei became CEO of Liberty in March 2006. Previously, Mr. Maffei has served as president and CFO of Oracle, CEO of 360networks Corporation (a regional broadband carrier), CFO of Microsoft, and chairman of Expedia. He has an MBA from Harvard Business School, where he was a Baker Scholar, and an AB from Dartmouth College. Mr. Maffei serves as a director of DIRECTV, Electronic Arts, SIRIUS XM, Zillow.com, and 360networks.

Michael Zeisser is Senior Vice President of Liberty Media Corporation, a leading media holding company. Michael oversees Liberty Media’s activities in eCommerce, interactive gaming and digital media. At Liberty Media, Michael has led numerous M&A transactions and oversees Liberty’s eCommerce Group of companies. Michael has served on the boards of IAC/InterActiveCorp.(Nasdaq:IACI), Fun Technologies (TSX:FUN), OpenTV (Nasdaq:OPTV), QVC Inc., Provide Commerce, BuySeasons Inc., Backcountry.com, BodyBuilding.com, CommerceHub, GSN/The Network for Games, GoPets Ltd, and SlingMedia. Prior to joining Liberty Media in 2003, Michael was a partner at McKinsey & Company in New York, where he co-founded McKinsey’s Internet Practice, and was a member of McKinsey’s Media & Entertainment and Private Equity practices. Michael is a frequent speaker on industry issues. He serves on the Advisory Board of the Silicon Flatirons Center, University of Colorado, and was named Technology Executive of the Year 2009 by the Colorado Technology Association. Michael earned a business degree with honors from the University of Strasbourg, France and an MBA with distinction from the J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management at Northwestern University, where he was a Procter & Gamble International Academic Scholar.

Entrepreneurs Unplugged is a meeting place where faculty, students and community members with technical backgrounds learn about and get involved in entrepreneurship. In particular, the program offers students and faculty an opportunity to learn how a successful start up is created as well as an opportunity to network. Each Entrepreneurs Unplugged meeting features food, drink and – most importantly – an experienced entrepreneur to discuss his/her start-up experiences.