Cours de théologie à la Sorbonne. Enluminure de la fin du XVe siècle, Bibliothèque de Troyes.

École Normale Supérieure (ENS) is an elite higher education institution (or grand établissement) located in Paris, France. Established in 1794, it is one of the most prestigious and selective universities in France, and is known for its rigorous academic standards and commitment to intellectual freedom and innovation.

Admissions to ENS are notably competitive, employing a rigorous examination process known as a concours, a system common in French higher education.

This involves written and oral examinations, and candidates are often those who have demonstrated exceptional academic prowess. The ENS does not follow the conventional application processes of universities in the United States, and therefore GPA, SAT, and ACT scores are not typically part of their admission standards.

La pose de la première pierre de la nouvelle Sorbonne, le 3 août 1885, huile sur toile de Joseph Wencker. Salle des Actes de la Sorbonne, Paris. Salon de 1889, n°1379.

Miniature représentant le “Cours à la faculté de médecine” de l’ouvrage “Livre des propriétés des choses”, BNF, Paris, département des Manuscrits, Français 216, fol. 43

The tuition cost at ENS is significantly subsidized by the French government, making it comparatively affordable, especially for European Union students. Non-European Union international students might experience higher tuition fees, but it is still less expensive compared to many U.S. and U.K. institutions. Keep in mind, however, that the cost of living in Paris can be high, considering accommodation, meals, transportation, and other personal expenses.

ENS is known for its historical and academic prestige, regularly ranked as one of the best universities globally, particularly strong in the humanities and sciences. ENS boasts an impressive roster of alumni and faculty, including multiple Nobel laureates, Fields medalists, and other distinguished scholars.

Plan des fondations de la chapelle de Robert de Sorbon ‘1326), mis à jour pendant la construction de la Nouvelle Sorbonne en juillet 1897

The acceptance rate at ENS is extremely low, as it admits only a small number of students each year. This ensures a highly focused and intensive academic environment. The student-faculty ratio is also quite favorable, enabling personal attention and fostering strong intellectual relationships between students and professors.

Paris from le Panthéon. Sorbonne avec dôme de la chapelle Sainte-Ursule et tour du laboratoire.

The retention and graduation rates at ENS are impressive, with most students completing their programs and many going on to prestigious careers in academia, research, government, and industry.

Map of Sorbonne Louis-Le-Grand : security area against demonstrators.

In summary, ENS offers an academically intense and intellectually stimulating environment, making it a desirable choice for ambitious students who are passionate about their chosen field of study. Its historical prestige, commitment to academic excellence, and the unique cultural and intellectual opportunities offered by Paris make it a world-class educational institution.

Interior of the Studio of Van Dael and his students at the Sorbonne.

École Normale Supérieure École Normale Supérieure

See ourTop 25 Colleges In The US list!

Amherst vs Williams: The Infamous Debate

For countless years, recent high school graduates have looked to two of the top liberal arts colleges in the nation:

Amherst and Williams College!

Furthermore, debating where to spend their next four years!

Amherst College Dean talks with Rebellion Research

Babson College President talks with Rebellion Research

Barnard College President talks with Rebellion Research

Berkeley Dean talks with Rebellion Research

Dartmouth College President talks with Rebellion Research

Harvard Business School Executive Director talks with Rebellion Research

Harvard Law School Dean talks with Rebellion Research

MIT Board Member Talks With Rebellion Research

MIT Professor & Physics Nobel Prize Winner Talks With Rebellion Research

Stanford Professor & Nobel Prize Winner Talks With Rebellion Research

Pulitzer Prize Winner & Columbia University Professor talks with Rebellion Research

As a result of the acceptance rate, financial aid, and graduation rate of both school’s, which are nearly indistinguishable, students often turn to ask:

Which school offers the better academic possibilities? Or better housing? And lastly, which school holds the better student life experience?

Amherst or Williams?

Williams College – Jewish Religious Center. Williamstown, Massachusetts, USA. Architect: Herbert Newman Associates AIA, P.C., according to Williams College website.

While both schools offer intensive learning environments, Amherst allows students to explore their academic interests to a greater degree.

Amherst’s College Row, consisting of Williston, South, North, and Appleton halls, with Johnson Chapel at center.

Firstly, Amherst promotes a curriculum which promotes flexibility and independence. Other than a first year seminar, a standard practice across the nation, the school has no core requirements.

This allows students to take responsibility for their intellectual growth, prompting many to double major, without the hindrance of balancing required classes. Furthermore, Amherst is a member of the five college consortium, enabling students to explore classes across schools. Although Williams offers an open curriculum, the school still requires students to take three classes in the arts and humanities. Three in science and mathematics and three in social sciences.

Additionally, students become required to take one course to improve students’ ability to reason abstractly. Furthermore, one course that examines various cultures, and two writing intensive courses. These requirements often prevent students from being able to fully explore their academic interests. As a result of preventing them from taking classes that overlap with core requirements.

Williams College – Williams dormitory. Williamstown, Massachusetts, USA. Architects (Ralph Adams) Cram, Goodhue and Ferguson, according to Williams College website [1]. Daderot – Own work

In a similar manner, Amherst’s housing, particularly the first year housing, trumps that of Williams.

Rebellion Research’s CEO lecturing at Amherst College.

First-years at Amherst become housed around the main quad on campus, in newly renovated dorms. Oftentimes in the warmer months, first-years awaken to student’s playing music on the quad or the sounds of frisbee games.

After a student’s first year, student’s are able to choose their dorm location for the following year. Students are able to enter the housing process with friends, often being able to live in the same dorm.

The majority of dorms on Amherst’s campus you will find centrally located. Moreover, several of them are air conditioned with elevators and lounges. In addition to newly renovated dorms, Amherst also boasts a new state of the art science center. Filled with labs and study spaces, the science center is an integral part of campus life.

Finally, Amherst offers a more enjoyable student life.

Amherst College “Lord Jeffs” vs Cornell ice hockey game on Beebe Lake, Ithaca (January 14, 1922).

The surrounding town offers a vast array of restaurants. In addition, direct access to larger grocery stores that fulfill the needs of college students. The surrounding area also provides access to an expansive campus farm. And a winding bike path that allows students to explore the surrounding mountains and trails. This runs contrary to the surrounding town of Williams, which is significantly more rural and offers substantially less dining options.

The debate between Amherst and Williams will forever drive the competition between the schools. However, if you look past the similar numbers and statistics of each school. Lastly, Amherst clearly offers a better experience for incoming students.

Written by Amherst College Student Henry LeCates

Which University has the largest endowment?

We like to think of the value of a university as one that balances several things in a way to serve the student the best.

For example, if you are a school that doesn’t have an incredibly strong brand and are not selective, you had better have a reasonable cost and be able to demonstrate more than others that you deliver tangible outcomes for your students. If you are a big brand and selective (selectivity signals to the market that students have been “vetted” and are the cream of the crop) then the cost and demonstrated outcomes become less important. That said, demonstrated outcomes for students at such institutions usually exist but that may have more to do with the fact that those schools got the best students at the outset – i.e., they would have been successful anyway.

Said another way, what makes a poor university is one that gets the variables out of whack – if the brand is not powerful, it’s not selective, it’s expensive, and outcomes are not there, that is the worst possible place to be.

Endowments help but they are the tail on the dog, not the dog.

In other words, endowments (for the most part) get big at schools that have very powerful brands, are very selective, and have amazing outcomes for their students. Those amazing outcomes are what generate the wealth that then goes back to the school in the form of gifts, thus increasing the endowment and allowing the institution to continue to secure fabulous students. To belabor the point, it’s no surprise that the top ten endowments in the U.S. fit the profile of selective schools with amazing brands:

1. Harvard

2. Yale

3. Stanford

4. Princeton

5. MIT

6. Penn

7. Notre Dame

8. Texas A&M

9. Michigan

10. Washington University St. Louis

Is Arizona State University good?

A palm tree avenue (landscape allée) on the Arizona State University.

Unleashing the “ASU”perpowers: Making the Most of My Non-Ivy League Adventure

President Theodore Roosevelt addresses a crowd of students on the steps of the Old Main at Tempe Normal School (future Arizona State University), March 20, 1911. Undetermined – https://shprs.clas.asu.edu/roosevelt

When embarking on my college journey at Arizona State University, I was aware that it was not an Ivy-League institution or top ranked university. Due to extenuating financial and family related issues, I decided to let go of my acceptances to these “higher ranked” universities and committed to ASU, or better known as, “The Harvard of The West”.

Williams College Ranking!

I firmly believe that the university name on my diploma does not determine my success! But rather the determination and opportunities that I create during my undergraduate education.

Old Main on the Arizona Territorial Normal School (future Arizona State University) campus, circa 1890. ASU/Arizona Board of Regents – http://lib.asu.edu/librarychannel/2010/11/03/tns125/

While prestige and reputation are correlated to certain institutions, I am confident that my success is not confined to the U.S. News and World Report rankings.

I am determined to make the most of my time here at ASU by actively creating and seeking out opportunities that align with my interests and career goals. So far, my interests and goals lie between finance and technology, or to some, “FinTech”. I have joined technology related research labs and clubs and have fought tooth and nail to increase the presence of FinTech and artificial intelligence related opportunities at ASU. I will ensure that ASU does not fall behind in Industry 4.0! Within my first year here at Arizona State University, I founded a “FinTech” club, launched a research lab on how artificial intelligence can be used in asset management that has grown into 15+ students, and am in the works of hosting an “AI in Finance” conference here at ASU in the fall of 2024.

Sun Devil Stadium.

Being a student at Arizona State University has allowed me to strike a balance between my educational pursuits and family responsibilities.

Ringing of the Victory Bell, Arizona State University circa 1956.

Because I am able to be close to home and to my familial duties, I have been able to maintain a strong connection with my family and their well-being. Every day, it is through this commitment and sacrifice that remind me of the values of determination, success, and hard work.

ASU provides me with an environment that nurtures personal growth, self-empowerment, independence, and resilience. The diverse student body at ASU has exposed me to various cultures, backgrounds, and viewpoints, nurturing a deeper appreciation for diversity and enhancing my ability to collaborate effectively. ASU offers an abundance of student clubs, organizations, and events catered to almost any range of interest or background. I am in awe of ASU’s dedication to ensure that all students can find or create a community to belong to and pursue their passions.

During my time here at Arizona State University, I am also impressed with ASU’s strong emphasis on innovation and entrepreneurship. ASU actively encourages me to think outside of the box and explore new ventures. Along the way, I have forged strong connections with amazing mentors and professors who are all key factors to who I am today. These strong, genuine connections have helped me stay focused on my path and have empowered me to become a creator, problem-solver, and change-maker all in one. Forks up!

Is the University of Maryland a good school?

I remember my first time at the University of Maryland. It was during my orientation, and I couldn’t help but glance around as I walked around the university. It was exciting! I sightsaw several locations, like the STAMP food court, the stadium, the McKeldin Library, and more. It wasn’t anything like I’ve experienced before. Everything just seemed so vast. I didn’t know if it was the number of people or the tall buildings, but I knew right then that this university was going to be my home for the next few years.

XFINITY Center, home of Maryland basketball

Although everyone seemed nice, being in this new environment made it harder for me to talk to people. However, after gathering some courage, I introduced myself. And soon, I made a group of friends of my own. That was probably my most favorite part. And I met so many people that loved coding and math as much as I did. The idea of college just seemed so fun at that moment. And honestly, I’m more excited than ever for my next math and computer science courses that I’m taking in the fall.

I also remember my first class! The Art of Communication and Presentation.

The University of Maryland campus as it appeared in 1938 before the dramatic expansion engineered byPresident Byrd

The class was much smaller than I originally thought. I was pretty shocked to realize there was only me and another student in the class. However, the instructor and other students were both really nice, and it made me feel like I fit right in at University of Maryland. I found the class itself to be pretty interesting, especially since I knew I had to improve my oral communication skills. Overall, I learned how to communicate effectively through this class in a wide case of different scenarios.

As I just started college this summer, I can’t say too much on the campus experience. However, I’m already part of the University of Maryland’s Competitive Programming Club! It was the first club I joined at the University of Maryland, and I plan to stay until I graduate. I met some pretty cool people there, even a few who have participated in the ICPC, the greatest college competitive programming competition there is.

I also hope to join the competition by next year, and so far, we have weekly practice, which will help me towards that goal. Collaborating with others in the club has helped me tremendously, and pushed me to improve my problem-solving and coding abilities constantly.

Statue of Testudo on campus

I’m also a research assistant at the University of Maryland, on a project led by Professor Saggese. Honestly, the work was pretty confusing at first, and I didn’t know how to start, but after trial and error, I started to get the hang of things. Everyone seemed pretty hard-working towards the project’s goal and it had an effect on me too. I initially started simply converting documents into markdown files and researching basic pair trading.

University of Maryland ProfessorGiacinto Paolo Saggese

In the fall, we’ll be delving more into the advanced topics and research arbitrage in cryptocurrency. In my opinion, the research opportunities that UMD offers is one of the biggest parts of their learning experience. Through this opportunity, I learned how to use tools I normally don’t use, such as Docker and linters, and more. It is also one of my favorite activities to do at UMD.

While my overall campus experience is still in its early stages, I love it. So far, it’s been a great journey, and I can’t wait for all the exciting memories that I’ll continue to make.

Larry David, co-creator of Seinfeld and creator of Curb Your Enthusiasm attended University of Maryland.

Is Johns Hopkins a good school?

Johns Hopkins University rivalsMIT,CalTech &Stanford for the best engineering school in the nation!

Gilman Hall, flagship building of the Homewood campus.

JHU produces some of the nation’s most accomplished and acclaimed minds!

Is Bucknell a good school?

Bucknell University Ranking

We spoke with one of the most popular professors of Johns Hopkins University’s Carey Business School. Professor Jim Liew who told us:

“Throughout my ten years of teaching at Johns Hopkins Carey Business School, I have found in-class discussions to have intrinsic value— something that cannot be replicated online. When face-to-face, students feel more comfortable sharing diverse viewpoints, creating a more inclusive and supportive environment. In my experience, Zoom fails to recreate such environments for energized and passionate discussions that emerge during in-person class.”

Professor Jim Kyung-Soo Liew, Ph.D. with his students!

Professor Jim Liew!

An alumnus & leading Ai mind Garrett Wang told us:

“Originally as an international student attending graduate school at JHU, it gave me unparalleled opportunities to get access to truly world-class faculty and employers. I was able to work with AI startups in NYC while studying back in Baltimore and ended up joining an AI startup in NYC after graduation. Almost 9 years out of JHU and currently doing my own AI startup, the wisdom that originated from the conversations during my time there are still among the guiding principles in my day-to-day work and life. The ROI is tremendous if you’re looking at a time span of 10 years or even longer, love you JHU!”

Garrett is the Co-founder and CEO of cerbrec.com & Ex-Principal Engineer of UnitedHealth Group!

Garrett Wang

JHU’s Peabody Institute

We then spoke with a current Johns Hopkins University student who told us:

“I think the learning environment plays a great role in establishing the attention and helping us form a correct study habit. For example, when it comes to an efficient and centralized studying environment, I can hardly be distracted by something else or be absent-minded, otherwise I can’t keep up with the majority. And it’s a common form of learning to study in groups where members could be assigned with different assignments, which it’s an appropriate chance to dig out about what I’m really good at.

Johns Hopkins Hospital

Also, this kind of studying form could also exercise the ability to communicate with others explicitly to enhance collaboration capabilities. Johns Hopkins, which is recognized as one of the top schools in the world, could give me the quiet atmosphere to immerse myself in my study. For the cooperation work, JHU will have as many chances as possible for me to get along with excellent students who have come here from different countries to share our opinions about one project, which might widen my knowledge based on my existing knowledge. So spending my study life in JHU will definitely be a fresh-new challenge but also a great leap for my career. I must train to think independently and learn the whole new knowledge by myself, which is totally unlike the study form in junior school or in high school. I think I could get accustomed to it and feel free not long after.”

Washington D.C. Campus (SAIS)

We then spoke with superstar tech CEO Tom Jaklitsch whose firm Order.co has raised over $44 million:

“Johns Hopkins provides a unique blend of a smaller school’s level of attention with huge research opportunities and exposure to massive healthcare applications due to the school’s medical prowess. In my time there, I found the small class sizes and hands-on teaching from word-class professors like Yair Amir, Joanne Selinski, and Peter Fröhlich incredibly engaging, and I was able to learn alongside students and network with alumni and faculty that helped me launch my startup. Most excitedly for new students with an entrepreneurial goal, Johns Hopkins has invested significantly into purpose-built startup programs and funding that are allowing more students to gain experience starting companies and scaling, with built-in access to entrepreneurial alumni like myself as mentors and judges for pitch competitions.”

Tom Jaklitsch

An incoming student at the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studie, Hantong Wu, told us how JHU stood out in the search process:

“During my search for masters programs in international relations, SAIS appears to have a refreshing degree of inclusion that will enable me–somebody caught up in the China-U.S. rivalry–to go beyond the political impasses and access wide-ranging opportunities in international development.”

Hantong attended Amherst College prior to starting a master’s study at JHU!

Is Syracuse a good University?

Campus circa 1910.

College is a transformative period in our lives!

Holden Observatory is part of the Comstock Tract Buildings.

Moreover, providing us with exposure to a broader world, diverse professions, and deeper levels of knowledge.

Campus layout in 1909

https://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/2007661167 : English Home (hec.gov.pk)

Furthermore, serving as a crucial stage in shaping our unique personalities and individual understandings of the world. For me, attending Syracuse University has offered an influential environment to interact with diverse individuals and embrace vibrant college life.

Manley Field House.

Additionally, pursuing the business program at the Whitman School of Management equipped me with valuable skills! And expertise for future career endeavors.

College of Sport and Human Dynamics Main category: David B. Falk College of Sport and Human Dynamics.

There are many challenges throughout my college experiences. managing time effectively was one of the challenges. I had a hard time balancing coursework, extracurricular activities, and my individual learning in interest areas. Initially, I struggled to find the right balance and often found myself overwhelmed.

Tennity Ice Skating Pavilion. Syracuse offers an abundance of winter sport activities.

Syracuse alumnus Joe Biden ‘68, 46th President of the United States. Adam Schultz – https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/president-biden/ (direct download). U.S. President Joe Biden’s official portrait, 2021

This was because the level of difficulty of the initial courses in college took most of my after-class time. I had to review all of the materials for daily classes. Additionally, preview the materials that would become covered for the next day’s class.

Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs Main category: Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs.

As a result, I sacrificed my extracurricular activities and my individual learning time. As a result, it made me stressed and increased my anxiety level. To overcome this, I implemented two steps!

Is NYU as good as the Ivy League?

Firstly, finding a more efficient way of learning and note taking strategy. I learned the SU-Cornell notes-taking strategy from the student help center to increase my class learning and maximize time efficiency.

Sims Hall, College of Visual and Performing Arts‎ Main category: Syracuse University College of Visual and Performing Arts‎.

Secondly, implementing a structured schedule allocating dedicated time slots for studying, socializing, and self-care. By following this routine, I was able to streamline my activities, reduce stress levels, and maintain a healthy work-life balance.

The Warehouse

Within the academic realm, I encountered a particular issue related to group projects—specifically, a leadership style problem. I used to be a high-authority leadership style. Where I expected my teammates to conform to my planning and ideas for the project. This approach made it challenging for me to accept the perspectives and contributions of others. As I believed my thoughts and viewpoints were more valuable.

Whitman School of Management‎ Main category: Martin J. Whitman School of Management‎.

However, through a close conversation with one of my teammates about this potential issue. I began to realize the inappropriateness of my actions.

Haven Hall

Based on that, I learned that successful leaders in the world share a common characteristic. One of being good listeners and being open to diverse perspectives. This is extremely important because an individual’s ideas normally remain limited and biased based on their knowledge.

Day and Graham Halls.

By combining others’ ideas. It could ultimately reduce bias. And form a better project idea after brainstorming with a variety of people.

Is Andover worth it?

This realization prompted me to reassess my approach! In addition, incorporate a more inclusive and collaborative leadership style

Alpha Chi Rho House. The fraternity system remains a large component of the Syracuse University social scene.

In conclusion, my college experience at Syracuse University has been a profound journey of personal growth and transformation.

von Ranke library housed in the Tolley Building (Circa 1910).

The exposure to diverse individuals and engaging college life has broadened my horizons and expanded my understanding of the world.

Booth Hall

Through overcoming challenges and embracing new perspectives, I have developed resilience, adaptability, and improved interpersonal skills. It has empowered me to become a better individual. Equipped with the skills and mindset necessary to navigate the professional world. And lastly, contribute meaningfully to society.

Bird library is the main campus library

Is McGill a good school?

The Albany Lumber District was home to the largest lumber market in the nation in 1865.

Is Wisconsin a good school?

From Timid Girl to Confident Dream Chaser: My Journey at the University of Wisconsin- Madison

An early illustration of the campus, from the 1885 edition of the Wisconsin Blue Book.

Two years ago, I left everything behind and ventured into the unknown, hoping to chase my dreams in the land of opportunity.

Bascom Hill

When I first arrived at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, I was a timid girl who could barely utter a word, and the thought of navigating a foreign country was daunting. However, the university’s exceptional resources and facilities provided me with the courage to pursue my dreams here and helped me to grow into a confident dreamchaser.

School alumnus Charles Lindbergh – aviator and military officer, remembered for the first nonstop solo flight across the Atlantic Ocean

I still vividly remember my first year in Madison. I lived in a dormitory with a friendly girl from Milwaukee who was the first person to introduce me to American culture and help me adjust to life here.

Looking back to that year, I learned so much about the ideas, logic, and worldview of my roommate, and a portion of American youth, represented by her. It was a transformative experience that helped me integrate better into American society.

During that year, the university’s libraries became my second home.

Overhead view of central campus in the 1920s

The largest and most popular library, the college library was filled with extensive collections of books, journals, and online resources, allowing me to delve deep into my studies and explore a wide range of academic disciplines, from mathematics to anthropology.

Bascom Hall fire that destroyed the dome in 1916[22]

In addition, the library is equipped with the best ergonomic chairs on campus, allowing me to study here for the whole day without feeling fatigued. Especially during the final week when I need to pull all-nighters, these chairs enable me to preoccupy my revisions completely.

Men’s basketball game as seen from the student section at the Kohl Center

Apart from, College library, the business library also deserves a mention. It provided me with the necessary equipment and tools to conduct projects and pursue market analyzing inquiries. The Business Learning Lab provided eight Bloomberg terminals for students to track company information and stay updated on the market.

A 1920 image of the first dairy school in the University of Wisconsin. Melvin Diemer – https://www.wisconsinhistory.org/Records/Image/IM28340

The university’s commitment to providing top-notch equipment and resources truly enhanced my learning experience.

Men’s hockey game played at the Kohl Center.

Is Wisconsin a good school?

Furthermore, the University of Wisconsin-Madison offers a diverse range of clubs and organizations that cater to various interests and career aspirations. In the second year, I joined the Wisconsin Sales and Trading and Asset Management Club, where I met many like-minded individuals who were also interested in the financial market and were determined to enter Wall Street. The club provided a platform for us to learn the ins and outs of the industry, develop our skills, and network with senior professionals. The university’s support for extracurricular activities and career development truly sets it apart.

View of downtown and Capitol from Washington Street, 1865.

Today, as I reflect on my journey, I am filled with a deep sense of gratitude and wonder. The University of Wisconsin-Madison has provided me with exceptional facilities and resources that have played a pivotal role in my personal and academic growth. I am excited to continue exploring all that this university and country have to offer. I know that with the support of my friends and school, I will be able to make my dreams a reality.

Written by Rachel Liang

Map of Madison, 1920

Automobile Blue Book – http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/historical/madison_wi_1920.jpg

Is Georgia Tech good?

If I had to describe Georgia Tech in one word, it would be – opportunistic!

President Barack Obama at Georgia Tech, 2015.

I came in as an applied mathematics major and was easily able to find research, club and competition opportunities in my first year. When my interest switched to quantum computing, I was easily able to find the same amount of opportunities, even for such a niche field. Finally, when I settled with my ultimate career interest in quantitative finance, I met brilliant fellows, with whom I was able to share ideas and passion for this industry.

An early picture of Georgia Tech.

My most favorite academic perk that’s unique to Georgia Tech is the ability and ease to do research with world class professors as an undergraduate student!

Georgia Institute of Technology Ramblin’ Wreck and Cheerleaders.

I was able to explore fields of applied mathematics and physics. Later going into algorithms and quantum computing, ending with uncertainty quantification. This unique ability to explore not only improved my overall understanding of science but also provided me with the ability to use concepts I researched to approach any complex task creatively.

This goes far beyond academics and career!

A birds-eye view of the campus of the Georgia School of Technology. Unknown author – https://smartech.gatech.edu/handle/1853/26080 Technique, Volume VII, No. 14, February 12, 1918.

As a professional powerlifter I was able to find support from the university and local clubs to be able to prepare and continue competing for international titles. Continuing my chess career was great since we have a strong chess team. I was fortunate enough to join and meet plenty of fellows from the quantitative finance group.

IBM Deep Blue Kasparov : A Chess Story

Moreover, the balance that Georgia Tech has between rigorous academics and ability to fully express your interests makes it a perfect fit for ambitious and versatile students.

Of course it can be tough. Our professor gave a good quote: “If students took just this class, everyone would have an “A”. But balancing 5 or 6… very tough”. It’s true, but it also comes with rewards. The rewards are a rapid increase in time management skills, collaboration, and even networking. Personally, to succeed in the class I read a lot of “Learning-how-learn” books to increase my productivity like Barbara Oakley – “Think like a Mathematician”, as well as meditation and concentration techniques which increased my productivity and research results.

As an international student it’s easy to feel lonely or homesick!

A panoramic photograph of the student body of the Georgia School of Technology in March 1918, taken by Francis E. Price, a photographer for the Atlanta Constitution. Francis E. Price – https://smartech.gatech.edu/handle/1853/26138 Technique, Volume VII, No. 17, March 5, 1918.

And even though I had previous experience from studying in the UK, that was not at all the case. I was able to find a surprisingly large jewish community! One with plenty of cultural and religious events, and even Israeli career opportunities. Although, I was surprised that the majority of my friends ended up being in-state. It was great to learn the “southern” culture and provide a lot of international experience in return.

In the end I think being a student at Georgia Tech is a very unique experience since the college takes the best of both worlds – the academic and research rigor of a world class institution with endless opportunities, and support/community building of a great and diverse southern college.

Engraving of the early en:Georgia Institute of Technology campus (then Georgia School of Technology), published in the 1888-89 Annual Catalog. Source: http://www.space.gatech.edu/danshiki/Tower/Engravings.html

This combination is perfect for someone like me. Who didn’t have many opportunities for research and rigorous work in high school! However, now I can build that knowledge and network with passionate and unique people.

Georgia Tech’s first two graduates were H.L. Smith (top row, center) and G.C. Crawford (top row, far right).

Is Georgia Tech good?

Review of MIT Graduation 2023

A time-honored institution! Moreover, globally known for its innovation and academic prowess! Thus attending the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Graduation ceremony in 2023 was a huge thrill!

The most significant issue was the weather – the day was unseasonably hot. In addition, there was an acute shortage of shaded areas for guests. It seemed as though the event planners had not fully taken into account the sun’s intensity. And as a result, many of us needed to brave the scorching heat for the duration of the ceremony.

The choice of a YouTuber as the commencement speaker was initially an intriguing surprise!

Given MIT’s traditional leaning towards esteemed academicians, industry leaders, and luminaries in various fields. It seemed to be a nod towards the evolving landscape of influence and success. Furthermore, initially, it seemed to offer a different perspective.

Is UConn a good school?

However, the speaker’s performance didn’t quite hit the mark. Despite his fame and popularity in the digital realm, his speech lacked the dynamism and inspiration typically expected in such an important occasion.

On a brighter note, the setting of the MIT campus provided an exceptional backdrop for the event!

The iconic architecture of MIT really served as a majestic backdrop! Especially to this lifelong engineer! And of course the proud faces of the graduating students brought a palpable amount of excitement.

In conclusion, the MIT Graduation 2023 included its drawbacks. Moreover, particularly in terms of weather management and the choice of speaker, it was a momentous occasion worthy of celebration. The stunning photographs taken will forever remind us of the pride and joy of the day.

Is MIT ivy league?

University at Albany, SUNY – Wikipedia

is Umass Amherst good?

Yes, Umass Amherst stands as an excellent university.

Moreover, it is considered among the top 200 globally in almost every university ranking index.

Furthermore, the school offers a spectacular array of fields of study. From agriculture, to biotechnology to finance & accounting.

Furthermore, the university is a member of the Five College system. As a result, students enjoy access to Amherst College, a school that rivals Harvard & Princeton. In addition, to Smith, Mt. Holyoke & Hampshire College! (see: Five College Consortium – Wikipedia)

Rebellion Research CEO lecturing at UMass

The Claire T. Carney Library

Cumnock Hall, on North Campus

Graça Machel (DHL), First Lady of South Africa

Amherst

Wikipedia

Is Boston University good?

688 Boylston Street, the early home of the College of Liberal Arts, the precursor to the College of Arts & Sciences

Before we begin our University examination, let’s look at the story of a current BU student:

My journey at Boston University (BU) unfolded like a roller coaster ride!

Marked by dynamics of highs and lows. Ultimately forging a complex love-hate relationship with the institution and the city of Boston.

Boston University’s East Campus along Commonwealth Avenue

Upon my arrival at BU, I was initially excited by the anticipation of a curriculum tailored to my chosen concentrations. However, the structure of the business school led to disappointment. The design of the curriculum demanded we undertake a multitude of courses outside our major before specializing. Thus, leading me to partake in classes in fields like philosophical logic and global health.

While these courses were not my primary focus, they broadened my range of education and my intellectual curiosity.

Is the University of Delaware a good school?

Parallel to my academic journey, the city of Boston itself represented another aspect of my BU experience. Having become raised in the chaotic natures of global metropolises like New York, Shenzhen, and Taipei. As a result, Boston’s pace and quieter winters proved a challenging transition.

The early closing hours of shops and restaurants. Coupled with the city’s serene winters, proved a difficult transition for an individual like me!

The Talbot Building located on the medical campus houses the School of Public Health

Amidst these challenges, BU has been a transformative force, profoundly shaping my personality and career aspirations. This institution introduced me to an extraordinary array of individuals. Friends, mentors, and advisors who have become an integral part of my life. Their unwavering support and guidance have been instrumental in defining my outlook and preparing me for my professional career.

In retrospect, despite the rocky start and unexpected obstacles. My tenure at BU and life in Boston have been both enriching and rewarding. The downturns have become balanced by incredible relationships and personal growth. So, while my BU experience has indeed been a roller coaster ride. It’s been an exhilarating one that I would not trade for anything.

BU, or Boston University, is a private research university located in Boston, Massachusetts.

Let’s discuss the academic prestige of BU. Moreover, the cost of living in Boston, STEM and liberal arts offerings. In addition, the history of the school. Academic standards for acceptance, the admissions process. Additionally, expected GPA and SAT scores for admission, teacher faculty ratio, and the cost of attending the university.

Academic Prestige?

Boston University, considered one of the top universities in the United States. And particularly renowned for its programs in business, communications, and the arts. The university has a strong reputation for research excellence and innovation. And it has produced numerous Nobel laureates and other distinguished scholars. BU is also well-known for its commitment to diversity and inclusion, with a diverse student body and faculty.

Inside Agganis Arena after a hockey game

Cost of Living?

The cost of living in Boston can become relatively high compared to other cities in the United States. However, it is still generally more affordable than other major cities like New York or San Francisco. Housing and dining costs can be significant expenses for students. However, the university offers a range of affordable housing options for students, including dormitories and shared apartments. Additionally, there are many student discounts available for transportation and entertainment, which can help to offset the cost of living.

STEM and Liberal Arts Offerings?

Boston University offers a wide range of STEM and liberal arts programs!

Is IIM Ahmedabad good?

Including majors in engineering, computer science, mathematics, biology, history, literature, philosophy, and many other fields. The university also offers a variety of interdisciplinary programs, such as the Global Health program and the Digital Media program.

Martin Luther King Jr. earned a PhD from BU in 1955

History of the School?

Boston University was founded in 1839 as a Methodist seminary. However, it has since grown into a major research university with a diverse range of academic programs. Over the years, the university has undergone many changes and transformations. But it has remained committed to its mission of providing a high-quality education to students from all backgrounds.

BU Known for?

Known for its research excellence and innovation, particularly in the fields of business, communications, and the arts.

Also known for its commitment to diversity and inclusion. With a diverse student body and faculty. Additionally, BU has a beautiful campus and its location in the heart of Boston. Moreover, it is a major cultural and intellectual hub in the United States. I’ve driven through the campus one hundred times. It’s great!

Is St Andrews a good university?

Academic Standards for Acceptance: Boston University has high academic standards for acceptance, particularly for its most competitive programs. The university requires students to have a strong academic record, with an average GPA of around 3.5. Additionally, students become required to submit standardized test scores, such as the SAT or ACT. BU also considers other factors such as extracurricular activities and letters of recommendation.

Admissions Process?

Moreover, the admissions process at Boston University is highly competitive. With thousands of students vying for a limited number of spots each year. Students must submit an application, transcripts, test scores, and letters of recommendation. The admissions process is holistic. As a result, Boston University considers a range of factors when making decisions. Including academic performance, extracurricular activities, community service, and personal characteristics.

Expected GPA and SAT Score for Admission?

Boston University typically requires students to have an average GPA of around 3.5 or higher. Although the exact GPA requirements may vary depending on the program and level of study. The university also requires students to submit standardized test scores, with an average SAT score of around 1400 or higher.

Teacher Faculty Ratio?

Boston University has a relatively low teacher faculty ratio, with a ratio of about 10:1. This means that students have the opportunity to work closely with faculty members. Experts in their fields, and students receive individualized attention and support.

The cost of attending Boston University as an undergraduate can vary depending on a number of factors. Such as whether you are an in-state or out-of-state student. Whether you live on or off campus, and what program you become enrolled in. However, here are some general estimates for the cost of attendance for the 2022-2023 academic year:

Tuition and Fees?

Tuition: $58,560 per year

Fees: $1,188 per year

Room and Board?

On-campus housing: $11,480-$16,190 per year, depending on the dormitory and meal plan chosen

Off-campus housing: $10,600-$16,800 per year, depending on the location and type of housing

Now let’s look at two of the best high schools in America! Trinity School NYC & Phillips Exeter! Moreover, through the eyes of current students and recent graduates!

A Critical Look At NYC’s Legendary Trinity School by Current Students & Recent Graduates!

Trinity’s arguably most famous alumnus, Truman Capote, photographed by Carl Van Vechten, 1948.

Trinity’s Computer Science (CS) and Robotics programs need a revamp. Moreover, there is one track of CS classes so there is only one class you can take a year — not like science electives etc, and I only know one person in the whole school who got a grade below an A in the class. This is because the CS curriculum is not challenging nor rigorous. Trinity needs more CS classes, teachers, and a better curriculum if they truly want to educate their students well.

Separately, there are only two CS classrooms and they are the most unattractive classrooms ever. The CS department office is basically a closet. This shows how unimportant the school considers the CS department.

The Trinity robotics team is also not taken seriously!

The Upper West Side and Central Park as seen from Top of the Rock observatory at Rockefeller Center. In the background to the west are the Hudson River and the George Washington Bridge.

The team meets twice a week — not enough to actually make anything good — and the coach is less of a coach and more of a chaperone. As a former member of the team I can attest that the coach mostly sat on his laptop scrolling through Amazon.

This meant that all the coaching and organization was left to the one senior geek kid who knew a bunch about robotics through outside of school programs. Of course, this one senior is not an equipped coach and basically spent all his time doing everything robotics related because no one else was good enough or could receive the proper education to become good at robotics. Moreover, while our school may occasionally win awards at robotics tournaments, that is because we participate in the biggest joke of a competition. Our peer institutions — Horace Mann and Dalton — all have serious robotics and CS programs, have teams and coaches that are actually good and compete at a more advanced level.

Horace Mann Vs Trinity

Is Dalton a good school?

Trinity’s English, History, and language teaching is some of the best in the country!

Verdi Square at the intersection of Broadway and Amsterdam Avenue. The 72nd Street subway station on the 1, ​2, and ​3 trains is in the center of the square.

Furthermore, I don’t necessarily expect the school’s math, science, and CS curricula to be at that level. However, it’s undeniable that STEM, especially CS, is becoming increasingly important in a tech-driven world. I’d even go as far as to suggest that Trinity should require students to take 1-2 years of CS. Of course, they should greatly expand the CS department to accommodate that.

For instance, the school could shift the sophomore year CS course to freshman year (I did not find the freshman year courses, Design Thinking and Digital Storytelling, to be especially meaningful) and then open up multiple electives in junior and senior years, similar to what the History and English departments offer. I think the Math curriculum could also have more advanced course offerings in senior year, such as Multivariable Calculus, a fixed Linear Algebra course, and a rigorous proof-based course (in addition to Topics in Mathematics, which is a great elective.)

With all that said, I understand that teacher retention is especially tough in STEM (as evident from the number of STEM teachers leaving this past year) and I think the school should focus on addressing that issue.

Increased salaries for teachers and more investment in STEM facilities (as above said, better CS rooms) could go a long way!

Trinity truly does a phenomenal job in the humanities — I see that especially now as I take humanities courses at Columbia — and the school could be even more impressive if its STEM department could offer a similarly formative experience for Trinity students, especially those who don’t consider themselves STEM students when they enter Trinity. I know that I was very much a math kid when I came into Trinity in seventh grade, and my high school experience truly expanded my interests into English, history, debate, journalism, and more.

Student-teacher relations are great (one of the best benefits of a Trinity education.) I greatly appreciate all that the school has given me.

Is Elon University a good school?

Is IIT Jodhpur good?

I think that Trinity’s STEM departments are substantially weaker than their excellent humanities counterparts. My largest issue with Trinity’s STEM classes, definitely Trinity’s problem-based math curriculum. The math department overwhelmingly supports the problem-based approach, and they only hire teachers who support the problem-based approach, leading to comparatively under qualified math teachers.

Is GGU a good university?

Is UCF Good? (rebellionresearch.com)

When my entire math class was complaining about the curriculum during our class last year, my teacher, who has been at Trinity longer than anyone else in the math department, responded with “stop complaining, it won’t change anyway,” which I find very telling!

While the problem-based curriculum is a good idea in theory, Trinity’s ‘problem packets’ became poorly crafted and often led kids to be more confused than enlightened. PBL (problem based learning) discourages students more than it creates a lifelong passion for math.

Best High Schools in NYC??

To speak from personal experience, math was my favorite subject before attending Trinity, and I proudly considered myself a ‘math kid.’ Within two years of entering Trinity, and still to date, I see math as one of my weaker subjects and have little to no interest in pursuing a career in math or even taking any math classes in college.

PBL, predicated on students teaching themselves math with guidance from teachers. Trinity teachers assign five two-sentence questions for homework, all of which require formulas and logic not yet derived or explained in class. Students work on the problems for hours every night, trying to achieve enlightenment. Unfortunately, this goal, usually not achieved.

Aside from students not having hours to spend on math homework every night, students will not blindly persevere to throw different math tools at the page in the hope of getting a correct answer.

Realistically, students will instead give up on the homework and look up answers, which is wholly detrimental to the learning process.

PBL diminishes the responsibility of teachers to teach and instead places that responsibility on the students themselves. Our math classes are incredibly repetitive. We enter the classroom to review the previous night’s homework, and continue by working on new problems in groups. That lesson plan does not include any time for the teacher to instruct students; rather, the vast majority of teachers’ responsibilities are moderating discussions among the class and assigning students to present certain problems.

A significant amount of the problems with PBL could become mitigated if teachers intervened to explain concepts when the class clearly stands highly confused. However, that has largely not taken place in my experience. In place of this teaching, I have heard more iterations of ‘reconsider your givens’ and ‘try that problem again’ than any human should have to endure.

Somewhere between one third and one half of the students in Trinity’s honors track at the beginning of high school have elected to move to the regular math track.

As my friends, assorted acquaintances, and I often say, the goal of Trinity’s math department is to decrease enrollment in honors classes and to destroy everyone’s passion for mathematics.

Moreover, the vast majority of the students dislike the PBL curriculum. Even if I grant PBL the greatest amount of benefit of the doubt, it only works if you have phenomenal math teachers, of which Trinity has very few.

There are only a few ways to succeed in the Trinity PBL curriculum (this especially applies to the honors curriculum):

Be a math whiz compared to your peers. This is true for 10-20% of the honors classes.

Get an out of school tutor. This is expensive, an unfair burden to put on families financially, and time consuming. Also, many students get tutors and see their grades stay stagnant.

Spend all of your free periods in the math lab (where students can go to get help). Many students do not have the time for this because of meetings with other teachers and having full schedules. There’s also the distinct possibility that they want to hang out with their friends during their free periods, because they want to enjoy high school. Even if you do spend a ridiculous amount of time in the math lab, many of the teachers are unhelpful. My freshman year math teacher was probably the worst teacher I have ever had. Convinced that I “gave up on problems too easily.” Even when I would ask for help on problems that I had been struggling with for many minutes, sometimes hours, she would just reply “reconsider your givens.” Even worse, she would actively stop other teachers from helping me whenever she saw me talking to them, telling them “He gives up too easily, let him struggle with it.” This both painted me in a negative light to the other math department faculty and stopped me from learning.

I’ll add some quotes I’ve heard from some students at Trinity which reflect the student body sentiment about it:

“PBL is like taking a textbook, ripping out the explanations, ripping out the answers, then ripping out the problems and jumbling them randomly.”

Once in sophomore year math class, we brought up some concerns about the curriculum to our math teacher. She responded, “I’ve found that Trinity students like to be spoon fed.” One of my classmates replied, “there is a big difference between being spoon fed and starving.”

I agree with statements from people above about Trinity’s STEM departments being weak. I think there are two reasons for this:

The people in the administration almost entirely come from humanities backgrounds, and they ultimately have final say in the hiring process. They need someone in the administration with more STEM expertise in order to choose better faculty.

My History teacher last year, who is one of the deans, told us that they pay humanities teachers the same amount as they pay the STEM teachers. This is problematic because qualified STEM teachers are harder to come by than qualified humanities teachers. This is because the most qualified STEM major graduates have better job opportunities, whereas many of the most qualified humanities major graduates do not. The salaries for teachers should reflect supply and demand, in order to hire better stem teachers. As the teacher himself said “we humanities teachers come a dime a dozen.”

Moreover, I also think that the whole club system needs to be revisited. A couple changes need implementation, in my opinion:

They need to hire someone full-time to solely look over clubs. ‘Right now, two administrative assistants supervise the clubs. They both have many other responsibilities. As a result, clubs often become put on the back burner. As a result, they become incentivized to put policies in place that reduce their workload but are not necessarily good for the clubs. Because the Parliamentary Debate team had some administrative issues, Trinity decided to stop the parliamentary debate team from competing for the first quarter of this academic year. Although this has certainly reduced the administration’s workload. Thus, several dozen debaters have become frustrated that they cannot attend tournaments.

Furthermore, freshmen and sophomores find themselves disincentivized from joining a team if they cannot compete for it.

They need to hire someone full-time to be the director of all forensic teams (like Parliamentary Debate, Model UN, Public Forum Debate, Model Congress, etc). For many students in the Upper School, forensic teams are as serious or more serious than a sport in terms of time-commitment. Many of Trinity’s peer institutions have such a position, yet Trinity does not. For these clubs, the responsibility largely rests on the student leaders, who have to manage organizational chaos. In some cases, the faculty advisor can help take care of some of the administrative aspects, but most of the time the faculty advisor does not have the time to do so.

They need to increase pay for teachers who are faculty advisors and allow forensic teams to hire coaches.

Forensic teams need coaches. Almost all participants in Trinity forensic teams are either self-taught or taught by student leaders who do not have the qualifications to be educators.

Forensic teams need faculty advisors in order to have chaperones for competitions. Trinity’s current overtime pay for faculty advisors is not high enough, so many teachers reject the opportunity to be a faculty advisor. As a result, many forensic teams cannot send students to tournaments, robbing them of an amazing extracurricular opportunity. Raising the overtime pay would incentivize more teachers to be faculty advisors.

Trinity Vs Horace Mann: Read our analysis!

Forensics – Trinity is lacking when it comes to support for forensics, compared to other schools like Regis with its debate team, and Dalton with its Model UN team. In its current form, Trinity essentially requires students to bear the brunt of organizational work and costs. This is an unfair burden to place on students who are already so busy, and it unfairly limits forensics to kids with the resources to do so. The burden means that a lot of time becomes wasted by Trinity students. As they have to take lots of time to organize and teach themselves as well as struggle to find faculty advisors. The cost of going to tournaments can already be financially challenging for some students, and this only further increases the cost.

PBL. Most of my complaints have already become sad. And it is a terrible system which disadvantages almost all Trinity students, robbing them of their time and a good STEM education.

Club Support. Trinity needs a more robust club system, because we are severely lacking compared to our peer institutions. It is an absolute organizational mess, and the administration can feel hostile and are rarely helpful when it comes to the club dynamics, putting unnecessary burdens on club leaders.

Is Phillips Exeter worth it?

During my time at Phillips Exeter. I have become exposed to countless new cultures, religions, customs, and people from across the world. It is in stark contrast to the generally homogenous community of the public high school I attended before coming to Phillips Exeter!

I can say with certainty that never before coming to Phillips Exeter did I sit around a Harkness table. With people from up to four different continents at the same time. Furthermore, discuss the pressing issues that our society faces today.

Phililips Exeter broadened my horizons greatly. In addition, it allowed me to obtain a greater understanding of the world I live in.

As the math problems I faced in classes became increasingly difficult throughout my highschool years, I looked for help. I sought help from teachers, textbooks, online learning services, parents, as well as peers. Having a classmate or older student explain complex problems to me almost always yielded a stronger understanding than any of the other aforementioned methods.

For this reason, when I was given the opportunity to become a math peer tutor in my freshman year of high school. I graciously accepted. It began a bit rocky! As my level of understanding in certain areas was often less than or equal to the students who I was trying to help. However, this led me to seek a deeper understanding in all the topics I learned about. As a result, I was always able to assist those who came to me. It drove me to dig deeper. Furthermore, answer the “why” of every problem I encounter. Rather than just memorizing a method to get the right answer. This skill has served me well in many facets.

The atrium inside the £38m Manchester Institute of Biotechnology.

Choosing the University of Manchester was a natural decision, as it is a highly-ranked institution!

Attending this university provided me with a wealth of knowledge and valuable experiences. Moreover, the course content offered at the university was highly appealing.

Old Medical School on Coupland Street (photographed in 1908), which now houses the School of Dentistry.

For example, my major was Mathematics with Finance, it allowed me to study both Mathematics and Finance, with a ratio of 3:1. During the first year, all courses were compulsory, which laid a strong foundation. Whereas for the second- and third-years courses, the mandatory courses including Introduction to Financial Mathematics, Financial Derivatives and Mathematical Modelling in Finance allowed me to learn about quantitative finance. Students also got the opportunity to tailor studies to align with specific interests. Recognizing the increasing importance of programming, I personally chose to take courses in Python and MATLAB.

Additionally, the university provided a diverse array of unique interdisciplinary units and language courses for students to explore and select from.

The entrance to the Manchester Museum.

Taking an introduction to Korean course helped me to know more about Korean culture and the basic vocabulary of Korean.

The University of Manchester is not only a prestigious institution but also a remarkably inclusive and diverse community. There is no divide between home and international students, this multicultural setting has broadened my horizons and exposed me to different perspectives. Furthermore, my time at the university has instilled in me the value of independent learning.

The Whitworth Art Gallery.

Moreover, each week, we became required to engage with course materials through videos, lecture notes, and supplementary readings. Followed by review sessions to consolidate our knowledge. Although initially challenging, I soon recognized the immense importance of independent learning. Throughout the learning, I built my own understanding of the whole area and decided what I want to focus on in the future. Collaborative projects with my classmates during the semester further honed my teamwork skills, preparing me for the collaborative nature of the professional world.

The campus of the University of Manchester is a captivating blend of beautiful old buildings and modern architecture!

Hulme Hall, the oldest hall of residence at the university.

Abundant libraries are scattered throughout the campus, each offering an conducive environment for studying and collaboration. My personal favorite spot was the main library, with its various sections and divisions catering to both individual study and group meetings. I always went there for my academic study.

There were lots of Careers Fairs on campus as well, where we could speak directly and in-person with local and national organizations and find out more about their opportunities. I gained a lot of knowledge of different industries and businesses during these fairs.

Moreover, the University of Manchester boasts excellent sports facilities, including a gym and swimming pool. During my leisure time, I engaged in physical exercise to maintain a healthy lifestyle and find balance among academic life.

Reflecting on my time at the University of Manchester, I am grateful for the transformative impact it has had on me. It has shaped me into a well-rounded individual.

Albert Square

Top 25 Colleges In The US

MIT

Harvard

Stanford

Williams College

CalTech

Princeton

Yale

Johns Hopkins

UC Berkeley

Amherst College

Northwestern

University of Chicago

Carnegie Mellon

Dartmouth

Illinois Tech

Columbia

Cornell

UPenn

Swarthmore

Brown

Rice

Emory

NYU

UCLA

Pomona

How hard is it to get into Phillips Exeter Academy?

View from the tower of Phillips Church in 1911, showing Alumni Hall (1903. Moreover, now Mayer Art Center), and third Academy Building (1872–1914)

View from the tower of Phillips Church, Exeter, New Hampshire. At right is the 3rd Academy Building, designed by the Boston architectural firm of Peabody & Stearns. Built to replace the 2nd Academy Building, which burned on December 20, 1870. And would itself burn on July 4, 1914. In the distance is the Squamscott River.

Phillips Exeter Academy, located in Exeter, New Hampshire, is a prestigious, highly selective, co-educational independent boarding school. Widely regarded as one of the most academically rigorous and competitive schools in the United States. Admission to Phillips Exeter Academy is a challenging process that requires dedication and effort from applicants.

Let’s explore the application process! Furthermore, the factors that the school considers when making admission decisions. Additionally, the level of difficulty of getting into Phillips Exeter Academy.

The application process for Phillips Exeter Academy is comprehensive and rigorous, involving multiple stages. The first stage of the process is the submission of the application. Moreover, which includes essays, transcripts, standardized test scores, recommendations from teachers, and an interview. Thus, the application process is highly competitive. Furthermore, with the school receiving thousands of applications every year. And as a result, only admitting a fraction of the applicants.

Abbot Hall

When making admission decisions, Phillips Exeter Academy considers a range of factors. Including academic achievement, extracurricular activities, character, and potential for leadership! The school looks for students who have demonstrated exceptional academic achievement. Additionally, a commitment to intellectual curiosity and academic rigor. Additionally, the school values students who have shown leadership potential. Moreover, through their involvement in extracurricular activities, community service, and other forms of engagement.

The level of difficulty of getting into Phillips Exeter Academy is high, with an acceptance rate of around 15%. As a result, means that out of thousands of applicants, only a small fraction will become admitted. The school is highly selective! And looks for students who are not only academically strong. However, they also demonstrate leadership potential, intellectual curiosity, and a commitment to serving their communities.

Student body, Phillips Exeter Academy, ca. 1903

E. Chickering & Co. – http://lcweb2.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/I?

The school’s high level of academic rigor and selectivity makes it an attractive option! Especially for students who are seeking a challenging and rewarding academic experience. However, it also means that the application process is highly competitive. And applicants need to become well-prepared and dedicated to their studies and extracurricular activities.

In conclusion, getting into Phillips Exeter Academy is a challenging process that requires dedication, effort, and commitment from applicants. The school is highly selective and values academic achievement, leadership potential, and character.

Letter from President Abraham Lincoln to Mary Todd Lincoln Written from Exeter, where Lincoln was visiting son Robert Todd Lincoln, then an Exeter student. March 1860. English Home (hec.gov.pk)

Abraham Lincoln – http://memory.loc.gov/mss/mal/mal3/434/4340100/001.jpg

The application process is comprehensive and rigorous, involving multiple stages and requiring applicants to demonstrate their abilities and potential. While getting into Phillips Exeter Academy is challenging. It is also a highly rewarding experience for students who are seeking an academically rigorous and stimulating environment.

Imperial College London

My first and last impression of Imperial College London is the Royal Albert Hall! Where the graduation ceremony is held.

The first performance at the Hall. The decorated canvas awning seen beneath the dome.

It seemed like it was just an instant: from the time in my high school, I accidentally watched an online video of an Imperial senior graduating in the Hall; to the time when I worked hard with Imperial College as my dream school; and finally to the time when I was truly standing on my graduation ceremony in the grand and imposing Royal Albert Hall. It was like a dream. The ceremony has written a perfect ending for the colorful campus life of every Imperial student.

College coat of arms, recorded 1915.

Imperial College London is a place full of colorful life. Thanks to the unique location of Imperial College London, its extracurricular life is very rich: students can jog, ride a bike, and watch the swans in the Hyde Park; we can also go to nearby Museums to experience the charm of nature, history, and art; we can participate in a variety of activities held in school dormitories; we can also enjoy the authentic cuisines from around the world around Kensington and Chelsea.

Prince Albert was the main patron of the early Royal Colleges and the development of an area of culture in South Kensington

Additionally, there are also attractive seasonal activities. In Winter, there is the fantastic Winter Wonderland held in Hyde Park and the skating square in front of the Natural History Museum.

Kensington Gardens

In Summer, there is Street food Festival and Summer Ball held in the College. You will never become bored!

Cycling in Hyde Park

There is one more thing I have to talk about is the various societies in Imperial College. There are lots of them, and I, myself, am a member of Mathematics, Finance, Dancing, Jogging and Photography Societies. At Imperial College, you can easily find your fellows, no matter where your interests are.

Imperial College is a place full of kindness. We have the best professors in the world, who have already found great success in their research field. However, they are still patient! Furthermore, always nice and answering our “stupid” questions. Or discuss our thoughts and confusions on every proof.

Additionally, give us advice when we find ourselves confused, not only on our study, but also on our future and life. To help students adapt to the high-speed developing world, Imperial College never sticks to its past honors. Instead, it keeps updating its course structures, which could assure us students always get access to the hottest spots and the most cutting-edge fields, such as big data, machine learning and Artificial Intelligence.

Imperial College is a place full of opportunities. Most of the ways you want to improve yourself can be found here. We can learn new languages through Horizons, explore new cultures through various events, and use your skills for good globally. When I was a mathematics undergraduate in Imperial College, I could attend a lot of world trips held by the Finance Society to financial centers around the world, like New York and Hong Kong. Also, we could have opportunities to be an exchange student to other world-leading universities, such as MIT and ETH. Obviously, as long as you want, there are many platforms and opportunities for you to enhance your insights and improve yourself.

1922 aerial view of Imperial College London

Last but not the least, Imperial College is a place full of responsibility. Besides the professors being friendly and responsible, the Career Service together with the good reputation and rankings of Imperial College will support your career path starting from your first day in Imperial College to years after you graduate. Many top Companies, not just UK ones, will come to Imperial College to hold career events. And every Imperial student can attend them for free. These events not only fully demonstrate the companies’ acknowledgement of Imperial College. In addition, also give us countless opportunities to learn more and make a more clear plan on our future career.

How hard is it to get into Phillips Exeter Academy?

What does it mean to be an ‘Exonian’ or Phillips Exeter’s best students?

What happened at Phillips Exeter?

Culture is a complex anthropological concept. John Monaghan, in his book Social and Cultural Anthropology: a Very Short Introduction, writes that “there have probably been more anthropological definitions of ‘culture’ than there have been anthropologists.” From this, it is clear that even at the scholarly level, there is difficulty nailing down an all-encompassing definition for the term.

Evidently, there will exist similarities between different definitions of culture. Which can become used to generally characterize what is, and what is not culture.

It is through these similarities that a working definition for culture will become synthesized. And used to analyze the origins of cultural identity at Phillips Exeter Academy.

Also in Social and Cultural Anthropology: a Very Short Introduction, Monaghan says that:

“However we define culture, most anthropologists agree that it has to do with those aspects of human cognition and activity that are derived from what we learn as members of society, keeping in mind that one learns a great deal that one is never explicitly taught.”

Here, the insinuation is that culture is a summation of thoughts and actions learned over time. And also learned indirectly, rather than taught in something akin to a classroom environment. The idea of learning culture is studied more in depth by Katherine Dettwyler. In Cultural Anthropology and Human Experience: The Feast of Life.

She says that culture can be simplified into three categories:

Firstly, what’s inside people’s heads. Secondly, what people do, and what people make!

Within the first category, she emphasizes that culture becomes learned, shared, and patterned!

Moreover, it becomes learned because culture isn’t steadfast, it is constantly changing. Culture, shared since individuals will have overlap in terms of their beliefs, knowledge. In addition, attitudes which help them identify with a particular group. Culture becomes patterned because:

“We find organized systems of thought and belief, patterns of thinking and systems of knowledge, not just a random hodgepodge of factoids and unrelated ideas.” Specifically, it is this pattern of ideas and factoids that gives culture significance.

Comparing the two expanded definitions of culture from both Monaghan and Dettwyler, a few concepts are clear. Culture is not instantaneous.

That is to say, it takes time to develop. Also, there is no explicit teaching. However, rather ingrained into the individual by the society in which they exist. Logically, the next question is how exactly culture becomes ‘ingrained’ into an individual.

In the book The Best of The Best, the author Ruben Gatzambe-Fernandez explores the development of cultural identities at “Weston”, a pseudonym for the elite boarding school Phillips Exeter Academy, or “Exeter”. He evaluates admissions, language, and framing, in his consideration of how a student comes to identify themselves with Exeter, which is most often through the use of the term “Exonian”.

The first step towards a student identifying themselves as an Exonian, and thus a member of the group of people which form the culture at Phillips Exeter, is the admissions process.

First Academy Building c. 1910, where the school opened in 1783

Students, not made aware of the explicit reason that they become admitted to Exeter when they receive notice of admission. The effects of this are twofold. One, it disbands the possibility of a student who did not become admitted comparing themselves to those who were with specific evidence as to why.

Secondly, “it is the initial step toward internalizing the notion that, while ‘Weston is not for everybody,’ it is certainly for them.” The offer of admission confirms this notion in the student’s mind. It is a rite of passage. Meaning it represents a passing from one world to another, in this case, the transition into Exeter from a different school environment.

Within the broad category of rites of passage, there exists a subgroup of transition rites, exemplified by the likes of betrothal, or in this case, initiation.

After students receive their admissions letter, students reflect on why they belong at Exeter. Jack Mitchell, one of Fernandez’ interviewees, attributes his acceptance to his willingness to have meaningful discussions. In his admissions interview, he recalls saying:

“I feel that I always have things to say, and if I don’t have things to say, I’m interested in what someone else has to say.”

Phillips Church in 1911

As Fernandez mentions often, discussion skills are crucial to becoming Exonian. And Jack is trying to show that he has what it takes.

When Jack is explaining why he believes he belongs at Exeter, he is legitimizing his presence there.

John Phillips, the founder of Phillips Exeter Academy

The term Legitimation, as defined in Peter Berger’s The Social Construction of Reality is “this process of ‘explaining’ and justifying.” In this instance, legitimation takes the form of spoken language, and allows Jack to rationalize his place at Exeter.

Is the University of Cape Town a good school?

He reasons that because he is good at discussion, one of the key parts of becoming an Exonian according to many students interviewed by Fernandez, he deserves to be at Exeter.

Post admission, and the legitimation of their own personal place in the ranks of Exeter students, individuals continue to construct their cultural identity through language. “Language might be called the domain of articulations … Language can also be compared with a sheet of paper: thought is the front and the sound the back; one cannot cut the front without cutting the back at the same time.”

Is Wesleyan a good school?

Furthermore, Language becomes connected to thoughts. Which are key to internalizing a particular cultural identity. The word that Fernandez found most intertwined to the cultural identity of Exeter students is “smart”. A good way to see this becomes through the constructing of boundaries between groups on campus. Who become considered “smart”, and those considered not. “Students use the category of PG as a way to distinguish and draw boundaries around themselves as Westonians who are smart and work hard.” The word smart becomes associated with exclusively students who are not of the PG category.

Since most students view PGs as “Weston students who are not Westonians”. As a result, distinguishing themselves from PGs thus makes a student more “Westonian”.

The Beatles exemplified changing cultural dynamics, not only in music, but fashion and lifestyle. Over a half century after their emergence, they continue to have a worldwide cultural impact.

In essence, language becomes used to reinforce their cultural identity as Westonian. As a result of separating themselves from the group considered not to be. In addition to language, there is another underlying anthropological concept in this method of cultural identification. It is framing. Frames “are mental structures that shape the way we see the world.” An example of a frame would be that Ethan is a PG, so Ethan is dumb. It allows individuals to reinforce their own ideas about culture.

Culture has no unilateral definition.

Exeter baseball team in 1881, including a student from the Chinese Educational Mission 1909 advertisement for the school

However, the case study of Phillips Exeter provides great insight into what exactly culture has manifested itself into. Additionally how it becomes constructed. Furthermore, students at Exeter begin as outsiders. Thus, begin the creation of their cultural identity as Exonians upon acceptance to the institution. From there, they legitimize their presence.

In conclusion, language structures separate themselves from those considered not Exonian. And thus, more closely associating themselves with the term. Furthermore, it is a process that takes time, as culture is not instantaneous. Lastly, through what they think, what they do, and what they make. Lastly, Exeter students slowly come to associate themselves with the cultural identity of an Exeter student, being Exonian.

is Instituto de Estudios Bursátiles good?

is Instituto de Estudios Bursátiles good?

Madrid. — Fachadas principal (con la andamiada correspondiente al pórtico) y lateral de la nueva Bolsa de Comercio, en construcción.

IEB Opinion Article by Luis Encinas.

Felipe II trasladó a Madrid la Corte.

The Instituto de Estudios Bursátiles. Known as IEB. A private university located in Madrid, Spain. Specializing in the finance and business administration sector, offering a very complete formation in this sector.

Stands out for its wide specialization in the financial sector. Offering real and updated knowledge of the needs and problems about business. In addition, an updated knowledge of the day-to-day needs and problems of companies. Thus, fundamental in such a global and competitive world.

In addition to the university degrees offered by the IEB, it also offers a very favorable particularity compared to other Spanish or European universities, in 4 years you can complete your undergraduate studies plus the master’s degree and internships. The average is 5 or 6 years.

Moreover, the complementary or extracurricular training in the form of courses is very valuable for acquiring a wide range of knowledge in courses of a relatively short duration.

Dibujo del Alcázar de Madrid en 1534 y 1535.

They are also very practical and enjoyable courses. Thanks to the extensive knowledge of the teachers! Who explains current economic trends in a clear and concise manner. As far as postgraduate or Master’s degree training is concerned, the IEB is one of the best universities at a national level. According to the awards and various recognitions it has received.

As basic principles that characterize the University in such a privileged situation, the following should become highlighted:

Bolsa de Comercio de Madrid. Plaza de la Lealtad 1. Construido en el solar donde estuvo el Teatro El Dorado entre 1886 y 1893 por Enrique Mª Repullés y Vargas. En su proximidad se encuentra el Monumento a los Caídos por España.

1.) The teaching staff stands highly involved with the training of students!

Furthermore, a highly qualified teaching staff, are highly qualified professors with extensive professional experience in the financial sector.

As they have professional careers in the financial sector, as they have been working in the financial sector or are still working in the sector or continue to combine it with teaching.

Many of them, in addition to their great professional experience,have a great training, with degrees and doctorates from the most prestigious universities and business schools.

View of Calle de Alcalá in 1750 by Antonio Joli – https://barbararosillo.com/2013/02/12/los-espanoles-de-antes/antonio-joli-vista-de-la-calle-de-alcala-h-1750-fundacion-casa-de-alba-madrid/

2.) The connection with reality is a fundamental point of all teaching in these changing times, what is out of touch with reality is almost no longer valid. This is a very strong point of the IEB.

As a student who is looking for an updated education this school fits perfectly. Moreover, constantly updating itself allows this university undoubtedly to stand out as a great option.

The IEB is one of the few Spanish universities that has managed to provide its students with a formation that is at the real needs of the financial sector, this training becomes oriented to the daily practice of these great companies.

The daily practice of these large global financial companies, with which we work very closely getting to know their problems and needs first hand.

Façade of Madrid (Spain) Stock Exchange Building.

Achieved by orienting the training to the real needs of the companies, for example, teaching us operations that don’t appear in the manuals of study. However, their knowledge is very important because of its almost daily use. In such a changing sector and in which technological changes are vital, being up to date is not an option. Is an imperious necessity.

This mix of experience, practice and academic knowledge from the hands of the leading finance professionals, place the Instituto de Estudios Bursátiles in a privileged position.

3.) The wide academic offer, it is worth mentioning the possibility of studying for a university degree. The degree itself plus the master’s degree in the period of 4 years with the professional practices included, the normal period of degree plus master’s degree is superior in the great majority of the cases.

The Master, a key piece in the relevance of this university are its postgraduate training, supported by awards and recognitions, its Master training like: MBA, Master in Financial Markets, Master in MMFF and Portfolio Management, Master in Markets and Investment Banking…

The extracurricular training, these are training courses and advanced courses that seek to provide complementary training to the relevant news of the markets or the changes in trends or major breakthroughs of new technologies.

Thus, an example would become the AI. Personally, these training courses remain essential.

Because here the change in the sector becomes reflected along with the knowledge of the teacher and from his perspective and with his experience he explains how this change can affect a sector so volatile and reactive to change.

I would also highlight that it is one of the few universities in our country that has a Bloomberg classroom, it has Bloomberg terminals for practice and to know its main functions.

The IEB, an educational institution of the first level endorsed by its professionalism, employability of its students and its level of training.

Becoming trained today. And knowing first hand what stands relevant in any sector, remains the key to success. Moreover information remains power and today more than ever. And if that information becomes reflected with a specific knowledge of the hand of great professionals.

The result ends up as a very well trained and prepared student for tomorrow.

Is Rutgers good?

Rebellion Research CEO posing with students at Rutgers University, after giving his lecture.

A Comprehensive Overview of Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey

Moreover, established in 1766, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, is one of the oldest and most prestigious higher education institutions in the United States.

The Digital Studies Center and Johnson Park at Rutgers University.

Originally chartered as Queen’s College, Rutgers has evolved over the centuries into a leading public research university, known for its tradition of academic excellence and its commitment to public service.

Rebellion Research CEO teaching at Rutgers University.

Rutgers is a significant contributor to the educational, cultural, and economic life of the state and the nation. Its prestige extends both nationally and internationally, thanks to its extensive range of programs, diverse student body, accomplished faculty, and notable alumni.

We asked one recent graduate who went on to study for a Master’s at UC Berkeley to reflect on their experience:

“Through its proximity, Rutgers is known for offering a lot of opportunities in the nearby metropolitan areas. What’s less well known are the many global connections and opportunities afforded by Rutgers.”

Well respected for its comprehensive offerings across various disciplines. Rutgers has particularly strong programs in Business, Engineering, Nursing, and English. Its School of Environmental and Biological Sciences is also highly regarded for its innovative research and engagement with contemporary environmental issues.

STEM!

Oil painting of Revolutionary War hero and philanthropist, Colonel Henry Rutgers (1745–1830), early benefactor and namesake of Rutgers University.

Henry Inman – New-York Historical Society https://emuseum.nyhistory.org/objects/20700/

In the realm of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics), Rutgers excels with a variety of strong programs. The School of Engineering offers undergraduate and graduate degrees in several disciplines, including Biomedical Engineering, Civil and Environmental Engineering, and Electrical and Computer Engineering.

The School of Arts and Sciences, on the other hand, hosts various STEM-related departments, such as Physics and Astronomy, Biological Sciences, Mathematics, and Computer Science.

The Rutgers College football team in 1882.

Furthermore, the cost of attending Rutgers varies depending on the specific school, degree level, and residency status. As a result of being a public institution, it offers lower tuition rates for New Jersey residents compared to out-of-state students. However, it provides a wide range of financial aid opportunities to assist students with their educational expenses.

Voorhees Mall, Rutgers University

The cost of living in New Jersey stands higher compared to the national average. As a result of largely becoming driven by housing costs.

However, the actual cost can vary significantly depending on the specific region of the state and the lifestyle of the individual. Nevertheless, with its proximity to major urban centers like New York City and Philadelphia, the cultural and professional opportunities available to Rutgers students are immense.

Rutgers enjoys a strong reputation as one of the leading public universities in the United States!

Senator Elizabeth Warren received her JD from Rutgers Law School on the Newark campus in 1976.

United States Senate – http://www.warren.senate.gov/?p=biography

It consistently ranks among the top universities in national and global rankings, reflecting its strength in teaching, research, and community engagement. Its faculty includes numerous distinguished scholars, and its research contributes significantly to advancements in various fields.

The admissions process at Rutgers is highly competitive!

Applicants need to submit their high school transcripts, SAT or ACT scores, and letters of recommendation. The university considers the rigor of high school coursework, grades, standardized test scores, extracurricular activities, and the personal essay in its admissions decisions. Certain competitive programs may have additional requirements or higher standards for admission.

Photograph of the Nielson Campus of Rutgers College. Viewed from Hamilton Street or in front of New Jersey Hall (Agricultural Experiment Station), circa 1919-1920. This section of campus is presently called Voorhees Mall on the College Avenue Campus of Rutgers. In addition, the State University of New Jersey in New Brunswick. Buildings (left to right):

New Jersey Hall (staircase only), Hertzog Hall and Suydam Hall (obscured by trees, New Brunswick Theological Seminary campus). Milledoler Hall, Miller Hall, and the Delta Upsilon fraternity house. Moreover, other information, this image from a book located on Google Books at: https://books.google.com/books?id=dVcZAAAAYAAJ.

Let’s hear from a recent graduate of Rutgers:

While I understand it isn’t easy to delve into details as the university is very varied, my two inputs are:

My personal experience with the university, and I have seen the same happening with fellow students, is that the organization is exceptionally compassionate towards students. They go above and beyond. Thus, to ensure that all our needs become met. Additionally, no constraints obstruct us from focussing solely on studies. All the different teams, be it legal, medical, counseling, or even pantry, are not just there for the sake of it but are responsive and helpful when it comes to any support that the students may need. They have thought of literally everything that the students may require and have made them available for the students. Maybe all the universities do this for their students, but I think it may still be worth applauding!

In conclusion, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, stands as a premier institution of higher learning. Lastly, its long history, comprehensive academic offerings, dedication to research, and robust community engagement make it a valuable choice for students from all walks of life. Moreover, its strong reputation, combined with the opportunities afforded by its location, solidifies its position as a leader in public higher education.

Rebellion Research CEO posing with students after giving a lecture at Rutgers University.

Lee Chapel and Museum located in Lexington, Virginia at Washington and Lee University. The chapel, built in 1867. General Robert E. Lee served as president from 1865 to 1870. Kept his office in the chapel and he chose it as his burial spot. http://lcweb2.loc.gov/pp/highsmhtml/highsmabt.html states that Highsmith has dedicated the photos in the archive to the public domain.

Yes, an excellent school! An excellent choice! Consistently among the 20 ranked liberal arts schools in the country!

Let’s take a look at the student experience via the eyes of an anonymous student who was kind enough to share his/her experience with us!

My Experience Studying at Washington and Lee

George Washington, the institution’s first major benefactor.

This May, I completed my first year at Washington and Lee. I left campus and embarked on a 17-hour car ride home with a long road ahead of me. And ample time to reflect on all I had overcome, accomplished and new aspirations prompted by all the years brought.

Coming to W&L, I knew of a few familiar names and faces. However, I was the only girl from Fort Worth in my class. I didn’t have any friends from home with me. I underestimated how difficult the severity of unfamiliarity would be for me.

After all, growing up in a small town that emulated a bubble. Wells are not exactly the best launchpad in an environment where most people know you at the beginning. Only so far as your first and last name, if that. The difficulty of this transition during the first couple of months, coupled with my spiraling anxiety and depression. Ultimately became the lowest point I felt I had ever reached. I worried I was not strong enough to transition and succeed in college, both academically and socially. Seeing an end in sight became harder and harder, and everything felt uncertain.

Before this transition, I had so many goals I wanted to achieve collegiately, athletically, and even career-wise.

“Washington College at Lexington,” lithograph, by Henry Howe. Courtesy of the New York Public Library Digital Collection. Henry Howe – http://digitalgallery.nypl.org/nypldigital/id?54792

Alumnus Tom Wolfe, Class of 1951. Legendary American writer of ‘The Right Stuff’, ‘Electric Kool Aid Acid Test’, ‘Bonfire of the Vanities’ and many more. White House Photo by Susan Sterner. – http://www.whitehouse.gov/firstlady/initiatives/wh-salute.html

However, now, the drive to create those goals has vanquished. By the inability to complete a task as simple as getting out of bed or eating a meal!

I had never felt so scared or unlike myself. I felt the only thing I could depend on was the hope that time would bring certainty and familiarity into my life, and even that felt uncertain.

Needless to say, the culmination of these feelings posed a fierce competitor to my academic focus. I struggled to stay on top of my work and felt it was impossible to put forth the level of focus and effort that had earned me a spot at W&L in the first place. Each time I put this in perspective. I felt overwhelmed with frustration, aware of the many excellent academic opportunities I had right at my fingertips. But I did not know how to overcome the mental guard in the way.

As time went on, I overcame these hardships. I frequently met with a therapist and academic coaches. With their help and my gradual adaptation to the rigorous collegiate lifestyle, I grew into myself again, into the student and person meant to be at W&L.

Moreover, with each day, my grades, focus, and depth of engagement and involvement all correlated in a positive direction!

As a result, I could see my goals through a clear lens instead of finding myself clouded from negativity.

I fostered several strong rapports with my professors and developed great friendships. I walked away from my first year with a heightened understanding of my potential as not just a student at Washington and Lee but also as an individual with an entirely new perspective.

Ruins of Liberty Hall, grounds of Washington & Lee University, Lexington, Virginia. From the Carol M. Highsmith Collection, Prints and Photographs Division, Library of Congress, Washington, D. C. Donated to the Library by Carol M. Highsmith.

Engineering hall of Washington and Lee university.

President’s House, begun in 1868 as a residence for Robert E. Lee and his wife. Carol M. Highsmith – http://memory.loc.gov/pnp/pplot/13600/13600/01181v.jpg

Phillips Exeter Academy | Exeter

How to Get Into Phillips Exeter Academy – Test Innovators

Phillips Exeter Academy – Acceptance Rate, Tuition, Ranking, and More – collegegazette.com

Is the University of Tsukuba good? (rebellionresearch.com)

Most Selective Boarding Schools in America (businessinsider.com)

Is the University of Auckland good? (rebellionresearch.com)

Smith College | Knowledge. Generosity. Community.

Is Southeast University a good school? – Rebellion Research

2022-2023 Best Colleges | College Rankings and Data | US News Education

Compare Campus and Online Colleges,

Is South China University of Technology good? (rebellionresearch.com)

Universities & Career Schools | CompareTopSchools.com

Is Trinity College Dublin good? (rebellionresearch.com)

Is HEC Paris a good school? (rebellionresearch.com)

2023 College Rankings – Niche

Is Nankai a good university? (rebellionresearch.com)

Best Colleges 2023 | College Ranking List | The Princeton Review

Is Jilin University good? (rebellionresearch.com)

Is Hong Kong Polytechnic University good? (rebellionresearch.com)

Forbes America’s Top Colleges List 2022

Is the University of Cincinnati a good school? (rebellionresearch.com)

Is Northeastern University a good school? (rebellionresearch.com)

University of Massachusetts-Amherst – Tuition & Fees, Net Price (collegetuitioncompare.com)

Is the University of Reading good? (rebellionresearch.com)

Is Maastricht University good? (rebellionresearch.com)

https://www.topuniversities.com/

New York City Public Schools (nyc.gov)

EduCanada

Miami a good school? (rebellionresearch.com)

UCF a good school? (rebellionresearch.com)

Top 10 Universities In The World (rebellionresearch.com)

University of Genoa a good school? (rebellionresearch.com)

Colorado State University a good school? (rebellionresearch.com)

M