History, Affiliations and Rankings

The École normale supérieure - PSL (French articulation otherwise called ENS, Normale sup', Ulm or ENS Paris) is a grande école inParis, France. It is one of the constituent individuals from Paris Sciences et Lettres University (PSL). Initially imagined during the French Revolution the school was established in 1794 to give homogeneous preparation for secondary teachers in France yet it later shut down. The school was hence restored by Napoleon I as pension at typical from 1808 to 1822, preceding being reproduced in 1826 and taking the name of École normale in 1830. Whenever organizations for essential instructors preparing called écoles normales were made in 1845, the word supérieure (meaning upper) was added to shape the present name. It has since formed a foundation that has turned into a stage for French understudies to seek after vocations in government and the scholarly community. The École normale supérieure is likewise a foundation of PSL Research University, an association of a few advanced education organizations, all situated in Paris, which targets accomplishing collaboration and creating collaborations between its part establishments to advance French examination abroad also, the École normale supérieure coordinates in Atomium Culture, the primary extremely durable stage for European greatness that unites a portion of Europe's driving colleges, papers, and businesses. The school is an individual from the Conference of University Presidents and the Conference of Grandes Écoles. ENS Ranked #36 in the country ranking, #36 in UniPage World University Ranking, #23 in QS World University Rankings, #72 in ARWU Academic Ranking.

Infrastructure, Campuses, and Courses

The students have access to the university’s library. Sports facilities can be a bonus for some students applying to ENS - Paris. The École normale supérieure offers its students the opportunity to live and study at the very heart of Paris. Its historical building is true to be found in the Quartier Latin (Latin Quarter). This ancient building is well-known for its courtyard, called the Cour aux Ernest, and is adorned with busts of French thinkers, researchers, and scientists who left their mark on history. The two other campuses of the ENS are the Jourdan campus (near the Parc Montsouris) and the Montrouge campus (in a town next to Paris). With their modern and convenient installations, they also offer students comfortable places of living and study, close to the center of the capital. ENS has around 8 departments, which are the Department of Science, Department of Geography, Department of Economics, Department of History and Theory of the Arts, Department of Philosophy, Department of Literature and Languages, Department of Geography and Territories, Department of Social Sciences and Antiquity Sciences.

Accomplishments and Alumni

Teaching, initial courses or exploration classes are dealt with by a few educator analysts who present and remember understudies for their accomplishments. One of the supposed Grand Schools in France, which are not a piece of the authority state-funded college framework, École Normale Supérieure (ENS) is viewed as one of the main advanced education foundations in Paris and is very much respected globally. The alumni of École Normale Supérieure include quite a few people from various disciplines. Some very famous people who had their background in Mathematics and Physics are the Founder of Galois Theory and Group Theory Evariste Galois, Mathematician Augustin Cournot and Andre Weil, Professor of Algebraic Topology Henri Cartan and Elie Cartan, Mathematicians Laurent Schwartz, Jean-Pierre Serre, Rene Thom, Alain Connes, Jean-Christophe Yoccoz, Pierre-Louis Lions, Laurent Lafforgue, Wendelin Werner, Cedric Villani, and Ngo Bao Chau.

Student Diversity and Visiting Companies