Huysmans by G. Barlangue

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Eric Lane at Dedalus for agreeing to take on this project.

THE EDITOR

Brendan King is a freelance writer, reviewer and translator with a special interest in late nineteenth-century French fiction. His Ph.D. was on the life and work of J.-K. Huysmans.

He has translated La-Bas, Parisian Sketches, Marthe, Against Nature, Stranded, The Cathedral and The Vatard Sisters by J.-K. Huysmans for Dedalus.

He has also edited The Life of J.-K. Huysmans by Robert Baldick for Dedalus.

He lives in Paris.

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Huysmans by G. Barlangue

Huysmans’ birthplace, showing his mother at the window of her room

(From a drawing by Charles Jouas)

Huysmans in 1856

(Fonds Lambert)

Huysmans in 1881

(From a photograph by Clément Lagriffe)

No. 10 Rue Boris Vildé, Fontenay-aux-Roses

(From a photograph by the present author)

The Château de Lourps

(Fonds Lambert)

The Maison Notre-Dame c. 1900

(Fonds Lambert)

No. 31 Rue Saint-Placide, showing the memorial plaque affixed in 1927

(From a photograph by the present author)

The ex-Abbé Joseph-Antoine Boullan

(From Jules Bois Le Satanisme et la magie)

The Abbé Arthur Mugnier

(From a photograph by Jean Roubier)

Notre-Dame d’Igny in 1903, showing the cross pond

(From a photograph by M. Émile Nugues, Fonds Lambert)

Huysmans in 1903

(Fonds Lambert)

CONTENTS

Title

Acknowledgements

The Editor

List of illustrations

Foreword

Author’s original preface

PART ONE

1. The Boy

2. The Student

3. The Soldier

4. The Débutant

5. The Disciple

6. The Journalist

7. The Pessimist

8. The Art-Critic

PART TWO

1. The Decadent

2. The Countryman

3. The Friend

4. The Mentor

5. The Occultist

6. The Magician

7. The Convert

8. The Penitent

PART THREE

1. The Neophyte

2. The Proselyte

3. The Retreatant

4. The Symbologist

5. The Oblate

6. The Hagiographer

7. The Pilgrim

8. The Martyr

Conclusion

Bibliography

Copyright

FOREWORD

To those already familiar with the work of the French novelist J.-K. Huysmans (1848–1907) Robert Baldick requires little in the way of introduction. Following the publication of his acclaimed biography in 1955, Baldick’s name has become as well-known in Huysmansian circles as that of Lucien Descaves, Huysmans’ literary executor and the editor of the 23-volume edition of his complete works, Pierre Lambert, the bibliophile and scholar who amassed the largest collection of Huysmans-related material in private hands, and Pierre Cogny, the critic whose editorial hand guided so many previously unpublished letters and manuscripts into print. Despite the biography’s relatively small distribution – it was published in only one English hardback edition in 1955, and in two French paperback editions in 1958 and 1975 – The Life of J.-K. Huysmans has become the standard work of reference on its subject in both England and France, and its continuing value to Huysmans scholars is testified to by the fact that it is still regularly cited in academic journals and works of literary criticism.

Robert Baldick was born in Huddersfield in 1927, to an English father and a French mother. He studied Modern Languages at Oxford, where he received first class honours and went on to pursue his post-graduate research under the flam-boyant figure of Dr. Enid Starkie, who had already made her name with celebrated studies of Rimbaud and Baudelaire. It was Starkie who advised him to turn his attention to Huysmans and in his doctoral thesis, which he completed in 1952 at the age of 27, he thanked his tutor for her advice and encouragement, which he said had been of inestimable value to him.

In the course of writing his thesis, The Novels of J.-K. Huysmans: A study of the author’s craft and the development of his thought, Baldick spent an invaluable period researching in Paris, where he met another key figure who was to have an even greater influence on his subsequent life and work, Pierre Lambert, a soft-spoken, delicate man who collected rare books with the same passion he devoted to his extensive butterfly collection. As Richard Griffiths later wrote in an obituary notice for the The Times, Baldick became ‘a kind of adopted son to Lambert and his wife, with whom he remained on the closest of terms for the rest of his life’. Lambert had been a collector of Huysmansiana for many years and he generously opened up his extensive archive of letters, cuttings and manuscripts, the majority of which were unpublished at the time, to the young scholar, who quoted exhaustively from them in his thesis and subsequent biography. Lambert later bequeathed this collection to the French state on his death in 1969, and it now forms the basis of the Fonds Lambert at the Bibliothèque de l’Arsenal in Paris, the largest holding of primary and secondary source material on Huysmans in the world.

After completing his studies, Baldick became a joint lecturer at Pembroke and University Colleges, and began work on adapting his doctoral thesis into a full-length biography. When it was published in 1955, Enid Starkie summed up the work of her former student with the words: ‘He has produced the authorative biography which supercedes all previous ones, and which is the soundest, fullest and most scholarly in any language’. Despite such praise, and despite the enthusiastic reception the book received among dedicated Huysmans scholars in England and France, the biography never achieved the sales its critical acclaim warranted. Although Huysmans had always had his adherents, usually partisans of one particular ‘phase’ of his writings, whether Naturalist, Decadent or Catholic, he had never been a popular or fashionable literary figure. In France he tended to be overshadowed by the giants of nineteenth-century French literature, by Zola and Flaubert, and by Hugo, Balzac and Baudelaire, while in England he fared even worse: translations of his work were not easy to get hold of, for the most part available only in limited editions printed by small, idiosyncratic presses, or in baudlerised versions that left much to be desired in terms of accuracy and style. Even Baldick’s own translations of Huysmans’ Marthe and Downstream in the early 1950s made little impact, having appeared under the notoriously erratic imprint of the Fortune Press. It was only with the publication of Baldick’s ground-breaking translation of Against Nature for Penguin Classics in 1959 that Huysmans started to be taken seriously in England, both in academic circles and among a wider reading public.

In 1958 Baldick was made a Fellow of Pembroke College, and he quickly gained a reputation as a stimulating and enthusiastic tutor. Over the next decade he divided his time between teaching, writing, and translating: he published a series of vibrant studies of nineteenth-century literary life, most notably Pages from the Goncourt Journal (1960), The First Bohemian: the Life of Henry Murger (1961), and The Life and Times of Frederic Lemaître (1962), and a string of impressive translations including Flaubert’s Sentimental Education, Sartre’s Nausea and Restif de la Bretonne’s Monsieur Nicolas. He was appointed editor of the Oxford Library of French Classics in 1962, and was joint editor of Penguin Classics from 1964 until his death in 1972.

Despite the impressive scope of his work in other fields – his book The Siege of Paris (1965) is one of the best accounts of that turbulent period in French history – The Life of J.-K. Huysmans is arguably Baldick’s most substantial and influential work. It has had a huge impact on the posthumous reputation of its subject, having been instrumental in changing the perception of Huysmans as a writer, and re-establishing his position as a significant cultural figure in the literature of the late nineteenth-century. Of course Baldick’s biographical method is not the only way to present the life of the acerbic, contradictory and often controversial writer that Huysmans was, and there are those who might question his recourse to Huysmans’ fiction to supply gaps in the autobiographical record. Nevertheless, fifty years after its publication, no one on either side of the Channel has yet produced a work that matches the Life in terms of scope, accuracy, scholarly judgement and readability. It is to be hoped that this revised edition of The Life of J.-K. Huysmans will introduce a whole new generation of students to the great contribution Robert Baldick made to the study of French literature in general and Huysmans in particular.

Note on the text

In reprinting a book which was written so long ago but which has become a classic in its own right, I was mindful of the difficulties of treading a path between faithful adherence to the original text and the need to produce a work that took new research into account and was therefore relevant to present-day scholars. For the most part, the text of this revised edition remains that of the original, though a handful of literal errors that somehow escaped Baldick’s rigorously critical eye have been silently corrected, and some of the textual revisions Baldick made for the French edition of 1958 have been incorporated. Instances in the text where Baldick’s conclusions or statements have been invalidated or challenged by new findings are dealt with in the notes at the back of the book.

PREFACE

MANY years ago, when I first became interested in Huysmans, I discovered to my surprise that no reliable, fully documented biography of the novelist had then been published; and what was true then is still true at the time of writing. The reason for this is very simple. In his will Huysmans directed that his correspondence and private papers should remain unpublished; and although his executor, Lucien Descaves, was well aware that this ban could not be enforced indefinitely, he did his utmost to prevent the piecemeal and prejudicial publication of his friend’s letters for as long as possible. For nearly forty-three years, in fact, he threatened erring authors, journalists, and marchands d’autographes with sanctions ranging from legal action and professional opprobrium to personal vilification; and it was only on his death, in September 1949, that the publication of Huysmans’ correspondence and the writing of a fully documented Life became practical possibilities. There have, of course, been one or two attempts to recount Huysmans’ life without the aid of his letters and diaries, but on the whole it has been agreed that Lucien Descaves spoke well when, at the General Assembly of the Société J.-K. Huysmans on 6 June 1934, he declared: ‘I am convinced that the story of the author of En Route can be written only when the greater part of his correspondence, which was copious, has been collected and published…’

It is my belief that the time has now come for the Life envisaged by Lucien Descaves to be published. The first of the two conditions which he mentioned in 1934 has been fulfilled, for most of Huysmans’ letters and papers are now safely preserved in public and private collections. As for the second condition, although only a small part of the correspondence has so far been made public, I have been given access to most of the known collections of unpublished Huysmansiana, and have consulted nearly all the novelist’s extant letters and diaries, as well as all the published works and articles on and around Huysmans listed by his bibliographers. I have also been given valuable information and advice by people who knew Huysmans personally, and I now wish to record my gratitude to them and to the many others who have helped me to write this biography.

To my friend and colleague Dr. Enid Starkie, who first suggested that I should undertake this work, and whose advice and encouragement have been of inestimable value, I owe a great debt of gratitude.

I gladly express my thanks to the Provost and Fellows of the Queen’s College, Oxford, for a generous grant in aid of my research; to the Académie Goncourt for permission to consult the Huysmans-Goncourt correspondence; and to the Librarians and staffs of the Bodleian Library, the Taylor Library, the Bibliothèque Nationale, and the Bibliothèque Sainte-Geneviève for the courtesy extended to me. My thanks are also due to M. Robert Ricatte, who communicated to me certain unpublished extracts from the Journal of Edmond de Goncourt, and to the Right Reverend Abbess of Sainte-Scolastique de Dourgne, the Provincial of the Dominican Order in Great Britain, Mme Paul Valéry, and MM. Alfred Dupont, Emmanuel Fabius, Pierre Jammes, Henri Jouvin, and Louis Massignon, whose collections of Huysmans documents I have consulted or quoted. To the following I am indebted for information, assistance, and advice: Me Maurice Garçon of the Académie francaise, the late Dom Basset, Mme Andrée Bemelmans, Dr. Pierre Cogny, Dr. Joseph Daoust, M. Félix Fabre, Me Jean Jacquinot, Dr. Cornélie Kruize, M. Gabriel-Ursin Langé, M. Henry Lefai, M. Roger Lhombreaud, Mlle Alice Mamelsdorf, Mr. Alan Raitt, M. René Rancœur, Professor Jean Seznec, M. André Thérive, Dr. Helen Trudgian, and M. Pierre Waldner.

I am deeply grateful to Mme Myriam Harry, Mlle Antonine Meunier, M. René Dumesnil, Professor Louis Massignon, and the late Jérôme Tharaud, who have recalled for me their personal memories of Joris-Karl Huysmans.

My greatest debt of gratitude, a debt I cannot hope adequately to repay, is to my friend M. Pierre Lambert, who has most generously placed at my disposal his immense collection of Huysmansiana and his unrivalled knowledge of Huysmans’ life and work. To him, as also to my parents and to my wife, this work is gratefully and affectionately dedicated.

R. B.

OXFORD

January 1955

PART ONE

1. THE BOY

THE ironical fate which sometimes governs our entrances and exits ordained that the first recorded mention of the subject of this biography – a writer whose life was nothing if not unhappy – should be made in a farcical document calculated to provide amusement.¹ This document was drawn up one evening by a young clerk called Jules Badin, at a dinner-party given by his sister Malvina in her little Paris flat, and it concerned the child she was expecting in three months’ time. The gist of it was that if Malvina gave birth to a girl, Jules undertook to buy his friend Mme Constance Marchand a baba glacé at the famous Lesage pâtisserie in the Rue Montorgueil; but that if the child were a boy, Mme Marchand would provide the baba, while Jules would treat friends and relations to a round of drinks ‘in celebration of the ardently desired birth of a nephew’. After this solemn covenant had been signed and witnessed, Jules entered in the date: 24 November 1847.

He won his wager. A boy, known to posterity as Joris-Karl Huysmans, was born at seven in the morning of 5 February 1848, at No. 11 Rue Suger. It is not known what part of the house his parents were then occupying, but it is thought to have been the third-floor flat overlooking the street: this is the only flat at No. 11 which boasts shutters on the court side, and tradition has it that it was Malvina Huysmans who arranged for these to be fitted. The house itself was often called the Maison Turgot, for it had at one time been the property of Michel-Jacques Turgot, Marquis de Sousmont and brother of Louis XVI’s famous minister. In the century which has elapsed since Huysmans’ birth, it has seen two revolutions – the first in that same month of February 1848 – and one heroic insurrection, yet it has altered only very slightly. The street having been renumbered, it is now No. 9; and its distinguishing feature – a pair of green outer doors studded with enormous nails – has disappeared. But in spite of the hubbub in the nearby Boulevards Saint-Germain and Saint-Michel, the Rue Suger is still the pleasant and tranquil backwater it was over a hundred years ago.

The child’s father, Victor-Godfried-Jan Huysmans, was born in the Dutch town of Breda in 1815, and settled in Paris when a young man. Entering into partnership with a printer called Janson, he was soon earning a fair living as a lithographer and miniaturist. In June 1845 he proposed to a young French schoolmistress, Élisabeth-Malvina Badin, and they were married five months later. Of Godfried’s character we know very little, but he appears to have been a meticulous man: there is still in existence a notebook into which he entered an account of every farthing spent on his honeymoon. As for his talents, they were not remarkable, and it is possible that he became an artist as much in deference to family tradition as from any sense of vocation. For it was undeniably a powerful tradition, and a long-established one. Towards the end of the sixteenth century a Michael Huysmans had a studio in Antwerp; his great-grandson Jacob won the approval of Charles II and painted portraits of Izaak Walton and the Duchess of Richmond; while Jacob’s brother Cornelius produced studies of peasant life which are still to be seen in the Louvre. More recently, Godfried Huysmans’ elder brother Constant had succeeded their father as Director of the important Breda Academy of Art.² Godfried’s son was to be a great art-critic and a painter in words.

The boy’s mother, Malvina Badin, was born at Vaugirard, near Paris, in 1826. When she married she was a slim, pretty brunette, and an accomplished musician. The only other member of her family with any pretensions to artistic talent was her grandfather, Antoine-François Gérard, a Prix de Rome sculptor who has left his mark on the Arc de Triomphe of the Carrousel and the pedestal of the Vendôme Column.³ Her other male relations were all civil servants. Her father, Louis Badin, was an official at the Ministry of the Interior; so was her brother Jules. Malvina’s son was to be a discontented but conscientious pen-pusher.

On 6 February the child was baptized at the parish church of Saint-Séverin and given the names Charles-Marie-Georges. Godfried Huysmans took out French naturalization papers two months after the birth of his son, but the boy was to pride himself on his Dutch ancestry and to adopt what he thought to be the Dutch form of two of his names: Joris (or Jorris)-Karl. In an autobiographical sketch⁴ he calls himself ‘an inexplicable amalgam of a Parisian aesthete and a Dutch painter’; and his unusual nom de plume was at once a tribute to his forebears and an atonement for Godfried’s desertion of his native land.

He retained few memories of the apartment-house in the Rue Suger, for his parents left it when he was very young and moved to No. 38 Rue Saint-Sulpice. Here a daily routine was established, which was scrupulously followed for several years. In the morning Georges stayed at home with his mother; in the afternoon, like hundreds of other children, he was taken to play in the Luxembourg Gardens. The little girls he met there were poor company, for they flaunted embroidered drawers and turned up tiny noses at children who were not immaculately dressed – and Georges’ clothes rarely won their approval. But with the boys he enjoyed many a rough-and-tumble on the sandy paths, ravaged the tidy flower-beds, and feasted on waffles and sticks of sugar-candy. In the evening he was generally allowed to watch his father as Godfried toiled at minute illustrations for prayer-books and missals; but if he cried, his mother would banish him to the kitchen, where the housemaid sat spelling out a Book of Dreams by candlelight.⁵

Summer brought a little variety to the monotonous pattern of his childhood, for then Godfried and Malvina would take him to stay with his Uncle Constant at Tilburg, or with his grandparents at Ginnikin, near Brussels. He saw very little of his grandfather, who was blind and bed-ridden, but his grandmother made a great fuss of him and taught him a few simple Dutch prayers.⁶ From time to time he accompanied Malvina to outlying convents in which various aunts and cousins were immured, and these visits made a deep impression on the child’s mind. He never forgot how his diminutive Aunt Maria used to tease him when he was taken to the Turnhout beguinage, or how the serious demeanour of other kinswomen so intimidated him that he hid in the folds of his mother’s skirts and trembled as each nun implanted a cold kiss upon his forehead.⁷ Indeed, memories of these afternoons spent in waxed convent parlours and dank presbytery orchards were often to be evoked in after-years, when Huysmans himself was drawn to the idea of monastic life.

Huysman’s birthplace, showing his mother at the window of her room.

Huysmans in 1856.

In the meantime Godfried was finding it difficult to obtain commissions for his work, and his health was deteriorating. Malvina soon grew irritable under the strain of caring for an invalid husband and a young son, with the result that the couple frequently quarrelled. After a few severe scoldings Georges learned to play quietly by himself, out of earshot, and occasionally his behaviour earned him a little insipid praise. Thus when, in May 1856, his father drew a pencil-portrait of the sickly eight-year-old boy, ⁸ Malvina added the verse:

Georges s’est bien conduit à table,

Il a mangé fort décemment,

S’est amusé sans être diable,

Enfin, s’est montré charmant.⁹

A month later came catastrophe – for on 24 June 1856 Godfried Huysmans died. There can be no doubt that his son was deeply affected. He never mentioned his parents in his correspondence or in his works, but all his life he treasured three oil-paintings by his father: a self-portrait, a portrait of Malvina, and a copy of Francisco de Zurbaran’s The Monk. And in his last illness he had the Zurbaran hung in his bedroom, where The Monk watched him die, as it had watched his father.¹⁰

Malvina’s grief was less poignant; besides, she was pre-occupied with the problem of supporting herself and her son. Soon after Godfried’s death she obtained employment in a large department-store, and she took Georges to live with her parents at No. 11 Rue de Sèvres. In the nineteenth century this was not the busy, commercialized thoroughfare it is today, but a long quiet street in a quarter steeped in religious tradition and calm. In nearly all the adjoining streets one could hear at times the singing of plainchant, and the Rue de Sèvres itself was bordered almost exclusively by convents and bric-àbrac shops. No. 11 had been a Premonstratensian monastery until 1790, when the monks were expelled and when the adjacent Carrefour de la Croix-Rouge became known for a time as the Carrefour du Bonnet-Rouge; after the Revolution the priory chapel had been demolished and the monks’ cells converted into a number of large flats.¹¹ In De Tout, Huysmans recalls the immense, high-ceilinged rooms on the first floor where he spent an icy childhood, the corridors ‘wide enough to accommodate a cavalry charge’, and the staircases ‘up which a regiment could have marched with perfect ease’. Here, in fact, he renewed the experience of monastic quiet – and monastic discomfort – which he had first obtained during his visits to Dutch and Belgian convents.

The move to the Rue de Sèvres, and the excitement of exploring a new home, blunted the edge of the boy’s sorrow, and soon he stopped brooding over his father’s death. However, what happiness he may have enjoyed that summer in the company of Malvina, his grandparents, and his Uncle Jules, did not last long. As winter drew on, he noticed that his mother often went out in the evenings, and that at other times a young man would call at the flat to pay his respects. Then, early in 1857, he was told that the young man was coming to live with them – as his stepfather and Malvina’s husband.

About this person we know only that he was thirty-four years of age, Protestant by religion, and Og by name. Since Godfried Huysmans had not been a particularly fervent Catholic, it is improbable that his son was unduly offended by M. Og’s religious conviction, and the man’s name may have fascinated him by its very ugliness. But the boy had felt great affection for his father, and Malvina’s speedy remarriage seemed to him a betrayal, M. Og a usurper. This situation has not, of course, escaped the attention of the psychoanalysts, and in recent years there have been several attempts to explain Huysmans’ entire life and works in terms of a mother-fixation, one eminent authority even asserting that the novelist’s choice of a bureaucratic career and his occasional holidays in the Château de Lourps were symptomatic of a persistent nostalgia for the womb.¹² Although we may safely discount most of these Freudian fantasies, there can be no doubt that the boy Georges was outraged when his mother married again, and embittered when she later neglected him in favour of Juliette and Blanche, her two daughters by this second marriage. The revenge which he took on Malvina and her husband was unspectacular but none the less significant: he virtually banished them from the pages of his autobiographical novels. Thus M. Og is not represented in Huysmans’ works at all, unless perhaps it be in the satirical portrait of M. Désableau in En Ménage. As for the mothers portrayed in Huysmans’ novels, they are permitted to put in only brief appearances; and with one exception – the silent, dropsical monster in Les Sœurs Vatard – they are summarily disposed of in the first chapter. For only in later life, through his devotion to the Mother of Christ, did Huysmans come to know that sense of security and tenderness which was so conspicuously lacking in his childhood and youth.

Whatever psychological effect Malvina’s remarriage had upon her son, it undoubtedly brought her certain material benefits, in the form of M. Og’s savings. In May 1858 these were invested in a book-bindery owned by one Auguste Guilleminot, and for many years the Ogs derived a small but steady income from this business. The workshop itself could scarcely have been more conveniently placed, for it was installed on the ground floor of No. 11 Rue de Sèvres, in what had once been the monks’ refectory.¹³ Georges was allowed inside only when it was empty, and he often lay awake at night, listening to the thudding of the presses and the raucous singing of the women, and wondering what sort of people these were who worked for his stepfather and old M. Guilleminot. Twenty years later he was to describe them, and the bindery, in Les Sœurs Vatard.

Although he continued to be starved of affection at home, he came to prefer life there to the wretched existence he led at school. He had begun his studies in the autumn of 1856 at the Institution Hortus, a pensionnat established at No. 94 (now No. 102) Rue du Bac, and was finding it an unpleasant experience. The very appearance of the school, with its two bare playgrounds separated by a wooden railing, its drooping acacias whose flowers the pupils used to eat, and its huge clock solemnly mounted on the latrines, was depressing enough; but the food and the discipline inflicted on its inmates were even more distasteful.¹⁴ The boys’ diet consisted of ‘fatty mutton and watery beans on Monday, veal and chalky cheese on Tuesday, carrots in brown sauce and nauseating sorrel on Thursday, and for the rest of the week unseasoned macaroni, lumpy pea-soup, and potatoes fried in black fat’. Discipline was the special responsibility of the shifty-eyed, scrofulous ushers, all of whom were habitual drunkards, bullied their young charges without mercy, and lived only for the time they could spend in the nearest bar. The boys, for their part, lived only for Sunday morning, when they were released from this soul-destroying captivity and could pass a few hours at home. Even there, however, the dread thought of returning in the evening haunted them all day; and Huysmans has told how after the housemaid, impatient to join some admirer of the moment, had hurried him back to school, he would cry himself to sleep in the bleak, icy dormitory. ‘To think’, he wrote, many years later, ‘that there are some people who claim that their schooldays were the happiest in their lives! That anyone can say such a thing passes my comprehension. However unhappy I might be, I would rather die than live that barrack-life over again, suffering the tyranny of fists bigger than mine and the petty spite of the ushers!’

He was no happier at the Lycée Saint-Louis, which he entered with a bursary in 1862, for here too the ushers regarded the pale, delicate boy as a pre-ordained victim for bullying. In his memories of the years he spent at this school, four figures stood out with nightmare precision. The first was an usher called Bourdat, ‘with a threadbare suit that was known in every low bar in Paris, a mangy old hat, a slimy moustache, a pimply skin, and eyes that positively oozed lechery. He used to kiss the younger boys, rifle our pocket-money, confiscate our cigarettes to smoke himself, sell the books he borrowed from us, get as drunk as a lord, and then force us to pay him 2 francs each if we didn’t want a gating. He was a remarkable specimen.’ There was also a foulmouthed old woman who screamed abuse at the boys whenever they passed her stall near Saint-Sulpice; and ‘Pichi’, a Rue de Grenelle shopkeeper whose nickname roused him to apoplectic fury. Last and most horrifying of all, there was the man who sold soup from a canteen outside the school gates, ‘a cunning, lying brute with a prodigious belly, the head of a calf and the arms of a Hercules’. He was forever showing the boys a book containing lurid pictures of men who were supposedly ravaged by syphilis. ‘You see this drawing, lad?’ he would say. ‘Well, you’ll look like that one day, if you don’t take care.’ And with a parting cuff on the ears, he would fix the terrifying pictures deep in their minds.

Although the school records reveal that Georges worked well and showed more than average intelligence, the masters gave no encouragement to the ‘bursary boy’, but instead wreaked their spite on him. At the Institution Hortus he had found some consolation in the company of his schoolmates, but the rich young bourgeois of the Lycée Saint-Louis shunned him on account of his patched and faded clothes. The agony of his isolation is faithfully reflected in André Jayant’s bitter commentary on his schooldays, in En Ménage:

My adolescence was one of poverty and humiliation. With a widowed mother, reduced boarding fees and a bursary at school, I didn’t dare complain when the meat was bad, or when I found cockroaches floating in my wine. I knew that when the servant took the plates up to the master and whispered the names of the boys he was going to serve, my plate would inevitably come back to me heaped with dirty scraps of food, lumps of fat and bones. I knew too that at the end of any particularly inedible meal, I should almost certainly be called on to say grace! On the other hand, the masters treated me generously as regards punishments: when the others were given 100 lines, I always had to write 500. If I was first in the form I got no compliments, but I was certain of black looks if I was third, and harsh words if I was eleventh. My boots were patched and nailed, my Sunday suit worn and shiny, my waistcoats cut down from an uncle’s cast-offs; and on holidays the richer boys left me at the school gates because, unlike them, I didn’t sport a blue tie and a stand-up collar. Nor for that matter did I slaver on a Manilla cigar, as they did: I never rose higher than a penny cheroot. When I look back upon my youth, in fact, all that I can see is a lamentable, unbroken succession of insults and misfortunes…

For four years he patiently endured these trials; then, one day in 1865, he refused to return to the hated lycée, or to risk similar hardship and humiliation at any other school. His mother scolded and entreated, but Georges stood his ground with all the determination a seventeen-year-old can muster, and it was finally decided that he should receive private tuition from one of the masters at the Lycée Saint-Louis, a M. Delzons. On 7 March 1866¹⁵ he obtained his Baccalaureate.

Notes

In these notes reference to works and articles listed in the Bibliography is made by the surname of the author and, if two or more studies by that author are listed, the appropriate roman numeral. In preparing his biography, Robert Baldick relied heavily on Pierre Lambert’s extensive collection of Huysmansiana, much of which was unpublished at the time and which subsequently formed the basis of the Fonds Lambert, now held at the Bibliothèque de l’Arsenal in Paris. As much of the material from the Lambert collection cited in the 1955 edition has now been published, references in the notes have been updated wherever possible to reflect more recent and more accessible published sources. New or supplementary notes not in Baldick’s original edition are marked [BK]. Although Baldick never had the opportunity to revise the English edition of his biography, he did make some revisions to the text and notes of the French edition, La Vie de J.-K. Huysmans, translated by Marcel Thomas (Denoël, 1958), and these have been incorporated in the present edition, as have Pierre Lambert’s own list of corrections which can be found in the Bibliothèque de l’Arsenal’s copy of the French edition. [BK]

1 Céard et Caldain, 25 Apr. 1908; Cogny, ix, p. 66.

2 Trudgian, pp. 15–16.

3 ‘J.-K. Huysmans’, En marge, p. 52. See also H. Lefai, Bulletin, No. 24, 1952, pp. 234–9.

4 ‘J.-K. Huysmans’, En marge, p. 56. Huysmans published a slightly tongue-in-cheek account of himself and his work in Léon Vanier’s series Les Hommes d’Aujourd’hui, (‘J.-K. Huysmans’, No. 263, Vanier, n.d. [1885]). Although written by Huysmans, it was published under the pseudonym ‘A. Meunier’, the name of his long-term mistress. [BK]

5 En Ménage, chap. iii; Croquis parisiens, ‘Ballade en prose de la chandelle des six’; Bulletin, No. 23, 1951, p. 135.

6 In an interview he gave on 2 May 1904 to Gil Blas, Huysmans remarked that his ‘was not a pious childhood. I learned to stutter through a few Dutch prayers my grandmother taught me, but very badly even then.’ (Seillan, p. 418). [BK]

7 En Route, chap. ii; Vanwelkenhuyzen, i, p. 45.

8 Céard et Caldain, 25 Apr. 1908; Cogny, ix, p. 67. The portrait is dated 1856 and not 1855, as stated by Céard.

9 ‘At dinner Georges was well-behaved/And ate a bit of food./He messed around but not a lot/All in all, he’s very good.’ [BK]

10 Céard et Caldain, 25 Apr. 1908; Cogny, ix, p. 63.

11 Grolleau et Garnier, p. 41.

12 C. Baudouin, Psyché, May 1950. See also H.-M. Gallot, L’Évolution Psychiâtrique, No. exceptionnel, 1948.

13 G. Garnier, Revue Européenne, Oct. 1930.

14 These details and the following quotations are taken from En Ménage, chap. iii.

15 Not on 7 May 1866, as stated by Laver. See Céard et Caldain, 25 Apr. 1908; Cogny, ix, p. 71.

2. THE STUDENT

AT a family dinner held to celebrate Huysmans’ success in the Baccalaureate examination, the question of his future career was discussed, and it was proposed that he should study law at the University.¹ The thought of paying his stepson’s expenses doubtless perturbed M. Og, but his wife and her relations were ready with an acceptable solution to the problem: they urged that Georges should follow the Badin tradition and apply for a post in one of the Ministries, pursuing his law studies in his spare time.

This proposal met with general approval and was rapidly implemented. Huysmans wrote to the Minister of the Interior, asking for admission to the Civil Service, promising to perform his duties zealously and efficiently, and mentioning that an uncle, a grandfather, and a great-grandfather of his had all been fonctionnaires. The Minister, impressed by this bureaucratic pedigree, granted his application, and on 1 April 1866 Huysmans began work as an employé de sixième classe, at an annual salary of 1,500 francs.² Under the supervision of a M. Durangel, he busied himself throughout the summer with the welfare of children, beggars, and lunatics. In the autumn, having become sufficiently conversant with office routine, he enrolled in the Faculties of Law and Letters of the University of Paris, and entered upon a strange double-life as civil servant and student.

Huysmans was always extremely reticent about his student days, and the only trustworthy sources of information about this period of his life are his early autobiographical works, and records of his conversations with Henry Céard and Maurice Talmeyr. One fact, however, instantly emerges: the young Huysmans spent very little time over his law-books. ‘The Code’, he wrote some years later,³ ‘appeared to have been carelessly drawn up simply to allow certain people to quibble endlessly over each and every word; and it still seems to me that a simple sentence cannot reasonably admit of so many different interpretations.’ But if his studies bored him, he found delightful compensation in the life and laughter of the new Boul’ Mich’. Every evening he could be seen in some café in the Latin Quarter, talking excitedly over a bock with fellow students and their girls; and these discussions would continue into the small hours in his friends’ rooms. In fact, Huysmans was a typical young Parisian student in all but one significant respect: feeling nothing but repugnance for politics, he played no part in the revolutionary societies which abounded on the Left Bank during the last years of the Second Empire. On the other hand, his friends found him a ready listener when they talked of contemporary poets and novelists; and he soon transferred his affections from La Fontaine – whose Contes he had read in secret at school – to George Sand and Heinrich Heine.⁴ Even more enthralling than the works of these writers was Henri Murger’s Scènes de la vie de Bohème, a book which the Latin Quarter had adopted as its Bible and which fired the imagination of generations of young students. Baron Haussmann’s grandiose plans had drastically altered the face of Paris, and her spirit was constantly changing; but to Huysmans and his friends the Left Bank was still the carefree, romantic Bohemia of Murger’s book – and every girl a potential Mimi.

Huysmans’ own intimate relations with the opposite sex had begun at the age of sixteen, while he was still at school. One evening, armed with, a bottle of eau-de-Cologne, he had ventured down an alley off the Boulevard Bonne-Nouvelle and timidly accosted a middle-aged prostitute. This woman had promptly relieved the boy of his money and his precious eau-de-Cologne, but taking pity on his tender years, she had made some pretence of passion while initiating him in the sexual rites.⁵ Even so, the experience had disillusioned him, and many months passed before he was tempted to pursue his researches farther and pay his first visit to a brothel. This too proved disappointing, for here the women treated their customers with ill-concealed indifference, and the tawdry glamour of the place – the gilt and plush furnishings, and the sickening scent of amber and patchouli – filled Huysmans with disgust. He could scarcely foresee that one day he would rank among the habitués of this and other brothels – among the unhappy men ‘who came here to forget persistent anxieties, lasting grudges, inexhaustible sorrows; who, so to speak, after cutting their lips sipping heady wines from muslin glasses, now chose to drink trashy beer from coarse public-house tankards…’⁶

In the meantime, Huysmans was not satisfied with his achievements or his Bohemian reputation; the final distinctive cachet was lacking. It was not lacking for long. In 1867 he took a soubrette as his mistress.

The story of this conquest is also the story of the young man’s début as a writer, and of the death of a little theatre. With some other students, Huysmans went one night to Bobino, alias the Théâtre du Luxembourg, a ramshackle playhouse in the Rue Madame which in the fifty years of its existence had staged everything from tightrope-walking to tragedy. It had at this time descended to a revue called Cocher, à Bobino! which was having a rough passage when Huysmans first saw it. As he later explained, in his novel Marthe, ‘Bobino was unlike the theatres of Montparnasse, Grenelle and the other old suburbs in that its clientèle was not made up of working-men intent on hearing a piece through to the end; it was patronized rather by students and artists – the noisiest and wildest of God’s creatures. They didn’t come to this hideous, purple-papered shack to listen in spellbound silence to heavy melodramas or light revues: they came to shout and laugh and interrupt – in short, to have a good time.’ Certainly they enjoyed themselves at the expense of the unfortunate company of Cocher, à Bobino! – but their catcalls turned to enthusiastic applause on the appearance of one singer, a lovely red-haired girl. ‘Her figure’, writes Huysmans,⁷ ‘was tightly encased in a pearl-embroidered costume of exquisite pink – that pale, almost faded pink of Levantine silk – and with her magnificent scarlet mane, her full, moist red lips, she was utterly enchanting, irresistibly seductive!’ As soon as he saw her come on to the tiny gas-lit stage, young Georges Huysmans fell in love.

During the days that followed, he tried again and again to attract the attention of this popular artiste, leaving flowers, letters, and poems for her at the Bobino stage-door. Perhaps he even sent her the strange sonnet which he later published in Marthe:

Un fifre qui piaule et sifle d’un ton sec,

Un basson qui nasille, un vieux qui s’époumonne

A cracher ses chicots dans le cou d’un trombone,

Un violon qui tinte ainsi qu’un vieux rebec,

Un flageolet poussif dont on suce le bec,

Un piston grincheux, la grosse caisse qui tonne,

Tel est, avec un chef pansu comme une tonne,

Scrofuleux, laid enfin à tenir en échec

La femme la plus apte aux amoureuses lices,

L’orchestre du théâtre. – Et c’est là cependant

Que toi, mon seul amour, toi, mes seuls délices,

Tu brames tous les soirs d’infâmes ritournelles

Et que, la bouche en cœur, l’œil clos, le bras pendant,

Tu souris aux voyous, ô la Reine des belles!⁸

If all his declarations of love were couched in this style, then it is small wonder that they all failed to elicit a reply. Nothing daunted, however, Huysmans looked for some other means of approaching and courting the girl, and he finally hit upon a less conventional plan: by posing as a journalist in search of copy, he would try to gain entrance to the Bobino green-room. As it happens, he had some small justification for describing himself as a journalist, for he had written an article on contemporary landscape-painters which appeared on 25 November 1867 in La Revue Mensuelle. This was a very modest periodical which had begun publication in January 1866 and was fated to die an early death; its offices were in a fifth-floor attic in the Rue de la Sourdière, a street close to the church of Saint-Roch, and its editor was a kindly old gentleman called Le Hir, of whom Huysmans later remembered only that he wore a skull-cap and carpet-slippers. Though not a memorable or important figure in the world of journalism, M. Le Hir merits our respect as a discerning judge of new talent, since in his brief introduction to Huysmans’ first article he described him as ‘a young critic who appears to us to lack neither verve nor perception’. He was doubtless surprised that his budding art-critic should offer to write a notice of Bobino’s latest and last revue – an entertainment called La Vogue parisienne, with words and music by Oswald and Lemonnier – but he agreed to this suggestion. And that night a little comedy was enacted behind the scenes at Bobino, which was later described by Huysmans in this passage from Marthe:

The company were in a vile temper, as they expected to be given another rowdy reception by the audience; and the director, who because of the shortage of funds also acted as stage-manager, was pacing feverishly up and down the stage, waiting for the curtain to go up. Suddenly someone slapped him on the back, and he turned to find himself confronted by a young man who shook him by the hand and coolly asked:

‘How are you keeping?’

‘But … but quite well. And you?’

‘Oh, very nicely, thank you. But now let’s get things straight. You don’t know me from Adam, and I don’t know you either. Well, I’m a journalist and I intend so write a marvellous article on your theatre.’

‘I’m very pleased to hear it – delighted, in fact. But what paper do you write for?’

‘The Monthly Review.’

‘Don’t know it. When does it come out?’

‘Generally every month.’

‘I see … Won’t you take a seat?’

‘Thank you very much, but not just now.’

And he disappeared into the green-room, where the actors and actresses were chattering away to each other…

Within a week Huysmans was a familiar figure backstage, having won the director’s confidence, the company’s friendship, and the little soubrette’s affection. Somewhat to the surprise of the Bobino players, who soon discovered the real object of his visits, the ‘marvellous article’ which he had promised them was actually written and published. It appeared in the last issue of La Revue Mensuelle, on Christmas Day 1867, and contrived to mention almost everyone in the company; but it was scarcely calculated to retrieve the dwindling fortunes of either periodical or theatre. It read as follows:

The Théâtre du Luxembourg is now presenting its last revue: La Vogue parisienne. This piece is not perfect, but the verve and zest of the actors are winning applause for it. The part of Routine is taken by Villot and that of Vogue by Mlle Katybulle; both players acquit themselves very well. Mlles Henriette, Melcy and d’Hauteloup contribute in no small measure to the revue’s success, but the best performance is that given by M. Ours; it is to be regretted that his part is so small. Mention must also be made of Mme Bartholy, M. Saincenis, Abel and Ducros. To sum up, this is an amusing revue and we wish it every success.

(Georges H…)

We do not know, and indeed we may never know, which of the actresses mentioned in this notice was Huysmans’ first love. We know, however, that for his initial venture into journalism he received payment – of a sort. One evening, finding that he had scarcely enough money for a meal, Huysmans appealed to Le Hir for help. Unluckily for him, the old gentleman was in the same straits and had nothing to offer but some sample bottles of liqueur provided by an advertiser. These Husysmans stuffed into his overcoat and hawked round the wineshops in the Rue Saint-Honoré, but the shopkeepers took him for a thief and refused to buy. So in the end he went home, drank the liqueurs – and was literally intoxicated by his first author’s fee.¹⁰

La Revue Mensuelle having ceased publication in December 1867, Huysmans went no more to the dark, narrow Rue de la Sourdière. Strangely enough, Anna Meunier, who was later to be Huysmans’ mistress for many years, was for a time employed in a clothing factory in this very street; and it is just possible that he met her one day when he was leaving Le Hir’s office. In an article published over thirty years ago, M. Francis Baumal stated his belief that Huysmans and Anna lived together before the Franco-Prussian War, in a garret in the Rue du Dragon; but he produced no evidence to substantiate this assertion.¹¹ Huysmans had certainly left the Rue de Sèvres flat by 1867, but his only serious liaison in the pre-war years would seem to have been with the Bobino singer, and it is unlikely that when they parted he had either the money or the inclination to take another mistress.

By dint of a few weeks’ concentrated work, Huysmans had passed his first law examination in August 1867.¹² Any pleasure M. Jules Og might have felt at this success was short-lived, for he died on 8 September. Perhaps this was as well: his stepson was to give little thought in the future to his studies. As he later confessed in Sac au dos, he spent the money for his second-year fees on a girl ‘who would assure me from time to time that she loved me’.

This girl, the soubrette from Bobino, found him an exacting lover. The crude satisfactions of the brothel were beginning to bore him, and he longed now for ‘sensual pleasures seasoned with perverse looks and strange garments’. He would have liked, he writes, ‘to embrace a woman dressed as a rich circus artiste, under a wintry, yellow-grey, snow-laden sky, in a room hung with Japanese silks, while some half-starved beggar emptied the belly of his barrel-organ of the sad waltzes it contained’.¹³ He expected his mistress to put on blue eye-shadow and rouge, black silk corsets and flounced skirts. A woman, he thought, who came from a world of magic and make-believe, the world of the stage and the sawdust-ring, should surely answer some of these requirements.

It goes without saying that the girl who came home with him one night from Bobino understood none of his extravagant fancies. And the next morning, she looked as pathetically ugly in bed as the other women he had known; she dressed in the same way too, sitting on the edge of the bed and buttoning her boots with a hairpin; she made the same inane, infuriating remarks. Yet there were compensations. If she was not the faery, other-worldly creature he had desired, she still brought him a little unsolicited tenderness – she ‘would assure me from time to time that she loved me…’

They lived together. For a while, Huysmans tasted the joys of a modest but happy home life; when he came back from the Ministry in the evening, he found the oil lamp burning steadily, the table laid for dinner, and a pretty woman sitting in the arm-chair by the fire. This was not, it is true, the dream he had cherished of passionate love in an exotic setting, but it was the realization of another dream – one of domestic comfort and quiet, born in part of his ardent admiration for Dutch interiors.

It did not last for long. First, the closing down of Bobino and the dismissal of the company brought about a serious reduction in the young couple’s joint income. And then, a short time afterwards, Huysmans discovered that his mistress was some months pregnant by another man.

In the train of this major catastrophe came a host of the trivial irritations which were to plague Huysmans all his life and provide material for so many of his works: the chair that was always out of place, the skirts draped over his coat, the persistent smell of food, the washday puddles and steam, and the ironing-board that for ever straddled his desk. To make matters worse, the girl found the novelty of keeping house soon wore off, and instead of preparing dinner herself, she took to buying ready-cooked meals from the local shops. After dinner, she would pull off her clothes, throw them into an untidy heap, and tumble wearily into bed – leaving her lover to clear the table and grumbling at him if he stayed up reading his books. He noticed now that she had grown slovenly in her personal habits, careless of her appearance, and indifferent to his love-making. ‘The actress and the mistress’, he complained,¹⁴ ‘had disappeared. Only the maid-of-all-work remained…’

The baby, a little girl, was born towards the end of the winter. From the account given in Marthe and in Huysmans’ conversations with Céard,¹⁵ it appears that the child’s arrival was premature, having been brought on by an accidental fall. Late one night, the girl felt the first pains of labour and begged her lover to go and fetch the local midwife. As soon as this good woman arrived, she commented on the fact that there was no fire in the room, and the girl, fearing that she would ask to be paid in advance if she suspected how poor they were, asked Huysmans to look for the key to the coal-cellar, which she said was either in her dress-pocket or on the mantelpiece. By this time he was so bewildered that he actually began looking for the non-existent key, when suddenly his mistress fell back on the bed and gave birth to the child. After washing the baby and wrapping it in swaddling-clothes, the kindly midwife left without demanding payment from the young couple, whose penniless condition had not, of course, escaped her notice.

The night that followed was one of indescribable misery. Huysmans sat huddled in an arm-chair with the baby in his arms, while the wind rattled the windows and scattered the ashes of the long-dead fire around the room. His mistress lay groaning on the bed; he himself was so cold that he could only fumble helplessly with the baby’s swaddling-clothes when these came undone; and finally, overcome by a sudden attack of nausea, he was violently sick.

As may readily be imagined, the infant was not particularly welcome to its mother, and in its foster-father it implanted a lifelong detestation of the very young. To those who exalted the joys of parenthood he would henceforth counter with the bitter observation that ‘once a child’s born, it means perpetual sleepless nights and endless worry. One day the brat bawls because it’s cutting a tooth, another day because it isn’t; and the whole room stinks of sour milk and piddle …’¹⁶ Even the day’s work at the Ministry he now considered a pleasure compared to evenings with a tired woman in a cold, cheerless room – and nights made hideous by the wailing of another man’s child. If he still possessed a copy of Henri Murger’s Vie de Bohème, he must surely have burnt it now. For this may have been Bohemia, but it was not very romantic and it was certainly not carefree.

How long this wretched state of affairs lasted we cannot tell; nor do we know the fate of either mother or child. Perhaps the woman died; perhaps, like the heroine of Marthe, she went into one of ‘the slaughterhouses of love, where desire is slain at a single stroke’. In any event, the unhappy liaison eventually came to an end, and the young man’s finances and spirits slowly recovered. In this, his first love-affair, he had lost a good deal of money and a few illusions, and he accordingly considered himself a man of the world. He was wondering where to look for new experiences, when the choice was made for him.