Home Court (dam of Coup de Grace) is kin-bred First Rose (Storm Cat’s female line) x Nothirdchance (dam of Hail to Reason) x Irish Jay (the significant bottom female line ancestor).

First Rose leads to Storm Cat, who is widespread, and to Goldkeeper, Winter Romance, Royal Academy, and others.

Hail to Reason is very widespread; he might be interesting combined with Buckpasser, who is close kin to his dam Nothirdchance. There are many, including Al Mufti (Captain Al), Albert Hall, Jay Peg, Judpot, etc. Jet Master carries a double of Hail to Reason, while his damsire Rollins is by Damascus out of a Hail to Reason mare. Jet Master is by Rakeen, whose damsire Halo (by Hail to Reason) is very close kin to Call The Queen in the female line of Coup de Grace.

Kin-links involving Damascus, Buckpasser and Queen Empress lead to Imperial Dilemma, Complete Warrior, Roberto, and the female line of Al Mufti (by Roberto). Captain Al is by Al Mufti out of a Complete Warrior mare.

Tapit’s sire Pulpit is by AP Indy (his dam half sister to Al Mufti). Pulpit leads to Tale Of The Cat (by Storm Cat), with the dams of the pair being half sisters. Their half brother Lecture (Seeking The Gold) is close kin to Tapit. Lecture and his sisters have Round Table’s full sister Monarchy as their grandam. Also from this female line are sires Johannesburg (by Hennessy, son of Storm Cat) and Robellino (by Roberto).

Suitable Lines

SUITABLE LINES for Coup de Grace could include

descendants of First Rose, notably Storm Cat, Goldkeeper, Winter Romance, Royal Academy (Tamburlaine, Curved Ball), Lizard Island, Overlord, etc.;

descendants of Nothirdchance, notably Hail To Reason (very widespread), in combination with Buckpasser and/or Damascus, as in Al Mufti (Captain Al, Victory Moon), Albert Hall, Jay Peg, Judpot, etc.;

other combinations involving Damascus or Buckpasser, as in Complete Warrior (Captain Al), Imperial Dilemma, Jet Master, Rollins, Halo, etc;

descendants of the mare Knight’s Daughter, through son Round Table and daughter Monarchy, leading to Lecture (!), Tale Of The Cat, Hennessy (Johannesburg), Robellino, etc.;

descendants of the Missy Baba female line, incl AP Indy, Al Mufti (Captain Al), Plugged Nickle, Sportsworld, Mambo in Seattle, Duke Of Marmalade, etc.

(posted 2016)