Much like not seeing the forest for the trees, sometimes we don’t see the horse for the pedigrees.

Seldom has that seemed more significant than with the 1989 Horse of the Year Sunday Silence. The tall, dark, handsome son of leading sire Halo was not on anyone’s list of “must-have” yearlings when he went to the sales at Keeneland in July 1987.

The future classic winner had been foaled and raised at Arthur Hancock’s Stone Farm in Bourbon County, Ky. He was a son of the farm’s banner stallion Halo — one of the three best stallion sons of leading sire Hail to Reason. A champion juvenile colt, Hail to Reason had risen to the top of the stallion ranks through the 1960s and ‘70s as a result of the toughness and classic quality of his offspring, including Preakness winner Personality.

Hail to Reason had a lot of high-class sons on the racetrack, including English Derby winner Roberto. The latter went on to become a stallion of high international significance. He had classic stock and top juveniles, as well as rugged older horses of high caliber.

In addition to Personality, Hail to Reason’s best sons included Kentucky Derby winner Proud Clarion, Belmont Stakes winner Hail to All, and Travers winner Bold Reason, also third in the Kentucky Derby and Belmont Stakes.

So Halo had to be pretty special to rank among such company among the sons of Hail to Reason.

Indeed, both as a striking individual and as a force at stud, he was an animal of the first rank. A near-black horse with a stripe down his face, Halo was a high-priced sales yearling, then progressed during his racing career to be a major racehorse, especially as turf performer as an older horse.

The leading stud farms were not greatly interested in Halo as a stallion prospect, however, and after a cancelled sale to the UK, because Halo was a cribber, E.P. Taylor had the good fortune to secure Halo and send him to stud in Maryland at his expanding annex of Windfields Farm located there in the 1970s.

From the first, Halo was an unqualified success at stud. Like big raindrops ringing against a tin roof, the good Halos started pouring down. The first crop included champion Glorious Song, and a few years later, her full brother Devil’s Bag became an unbeaten champion 2-year-old colt and made a lot of people believe he was the best racehorse in a long time… at least for a short time.

In between, Halo sired Kentucky Derby winner Sunny’s Halo, and the acclaim for Halo climbed higher and higher.

Tom Tatham’s Oak Cliff Thoroughbreds made an offer to purchase Halo from Windfields, succeeded in that high-dollar endeavor, and moved the dark horse from Maryland to Stone Farm in Kentucky.

There, Halo sired Sunday Silence for Oak Cliff. The colt went through the July sale unprotected and was bought in by Hancock, who later commented that he thought he had just thrown away $17,000 when Tatham said he didn’t want the colt back.

Three years later, Hancock ended up having to sell Sunday Silence because the tax law “reforms” had worked their magic on the horse business and several other business sectors, and nobody wanted to buy into horses, especially ones that had to be held a long time like stallions and mares.

Sent to stand in Japan at Shadai by the visionary Zenya Yoshida, Sunday Silence became a legend in his new home, setting records for quality and quantity of success.

But at the time he was set to go to stud, not many breeders in this country could see the horse for the pedigree, which in Sunday Silence’s case was considered to be weak on the bottom half.

The problem with that line of thought was that the horse had clearly gotten all the good traits that were available, as he had shown on the racetrack, and he then went on to transmit them with exceptional regularity to his offspring.

The effect of their quality and consistency is still felt in Japan.

This year’s Japan Cup winner is Shonan Pandora, winner of Japan’s Group 1 Shuka Sho last year. To date, she has earned $4.8 million. The second dam of the Japan Cup winner is a full sister to Japanese champion 2-year-old and champion sprinter Soccer Boy. That full sister also produced international G1 winner Stay Gold, by Sunday Silence.

Shonan Pandora is one of 71 stakes winners by Sunday Silence’s son Deep Impact. That stallion is the best of Sunday Silence’s many sons who went to stud, but even if Deep Impact were subtracted from Sunday Silence’s record, there would be a herd of good and important sires by the Kentucky Derby and Preakness winner.

Deep Impact also sired Satono Lupin, winner of the G3 Keihan Hai on the same day as the Japan Cup, and Sunday Silence’s son Suzuka Mambo sired Sambista, winner of the Champions Cup (Japan Cup Dirt).

In America, the best son of Sunday Silence available to breeders is top-rated miler Hat Trick, and he had G3 winner Dressed in Hermes, winner of the Cecil B. DeMille Stakes at Del Mar on Nov 29. The 2-year-old gelding is from the first crop after European high-weight Dabirsim drew attention to Hat Trick with G1 successes as part of that stallion’s first-crop racers.

Although one of several US 2-year-old colts will win the Breeders’ Cup Juvenile and likely be named champion of his division, there is no great uncertainty among the juvenile colts overseas. Air Force Blue (by War Front) is the top of the tree in England and Ireland after three consecutive G1 victories, the most recent being the Dubai Dewhurst Stakes on Oct. 10 at Newmarket.

The dark bay colt was a dominating force at Newmarket, and his trainer Aidan O’Brien noted that Air Force Blue has “pace, size and scope,” and the colt’s athleticism and love of racing “make him exceptional and very exciting. He has sprinting speed, but also size and range, and is very genuine.”

Air Force Blue will get some rest and be kept ticking over through the winter. His primary goals for 2016 are the Guineas and other mile events at the top level, but there is reason to hope that he might be able to stretch out as he matures through the season and perhaps challenge at 10 furlongs later in the year.

The primary reasons for those hopes are the colt’s grandsires, Danzig and Maria’s Mon. The great son of Northern Dancer sired racers with a vast range of distance aptitudes, from sprinters to 12-furlong classic winners, including Belmont Stakes winner Danzig Connection.

Maria’s Mon, a champion juvenile, also is one of the few sires to get more than one Kentucky Derby winner, with Super Saver and Monarchos to his lasting credit.

Bred in Kentucky by Stone Farm, Air Force Blue is by neighboring Claiborne Farm’s super sire War Front (Danzig) out of the Maria’s Mon mare Chatham. The dam was bred by W.T. Young’s Overbrook Farm and sold in that famous farm’s dispersal at the 2009 Keeneland November sale. Arthur Hancock picked the mare up for $190,000, in foal to Arch, and almost immediately began making money with her.

Hancock said, “I bought her because she is a pretty mare. Nice, refined, feminine mare. She has some speed, but we almost didn’t get her. I was going to quit at $150,000 but for some reason, I just kept on trying. I suppose you should follow your intuition, your gut feeling, but that was my last bid. I guess Bill Young was looking out for me.”

The foal Chatham was carrying went through the Stone Farm consignment at Keeneland September in 2011 for $475,000. The Arch colt was an outstanding young prospect, and he sold to John McCormack Bloodstock on behalf of Yasushi Kubota. Named Schon Meer, the colt is a winner in Japan.

Including that colt, Stone Farm has sold four yearlings out of Chatham over the last five years for $1.9 million. Mr. Young would be proud.

Not the least of the reasons for that would be that this family is one that Young nurtured at Overbrook for generations and that brought him considerable reward and enjoyment.

Young got into this family with the stakes-winning Secretariat mare Cinegita at about the same time that he acquired another stakes-winning Secretariat mare by the name of Terlingua. The latter produced Storm Cat and propelled Overbrook into the stratosphere among international owners and breeders.

Cinegita produced stakes winner Storm Star by the Northern Dancer stallion Storm Bird, who is also the sire of Storm Cat. Storm Star produced two stakes winners, and her unbeaten full sister Starlet Storm produced champion Flanders (Breeders’ Cup Juvenile Fillies).

Starlet Storm is the third dam of Air Force Blue and his siblings. The second dam is Circle of Gold (Seeking the Gold), an unraced full sister to Flanders, and Chatham is her dam’s best racer.

Now Chatham has produced a heavyweight racer, although the mare also has a pair of six-figure earners (Schon Meer and Bugle). The latter is a 3-year-old full sister to Air Force Blue that Barry Berkelhammer bought from the Stone Farm consignment at the 2013 Keeneland September sale for $400,000 for the racing stable of Joe Sutton.

Bugle has two victories and four seconds from eight starts and is currently recuperating at Stone Farm, where her prospects for returning to racing are considered bright, Hancock said.

The 2015 yearling out of Chatham was by Lemon Drop Kid and sold for $535,000 to Shadai. Hancock said, “You have to breed ‘em right, raise ‘em right, break ‘em right, and get ‘em into the right hands. And I’m glad my friend Terry Yoshida got him. I think that colt is going to be a good one.”

Shadai has done well with its purchases from Hancock, most notably the purchase of Horse of the Year Sunday Silence, who became the greatest sire in Japanese breeding history.

In looking back at the family of Air Force Blue, Hancock recalled his friend Bill Young and that “he was one of the handful of breeders who agreed to take a share in Sunday Silence when I was trying to syndicate him, and I really tried to get him syndicated.”

Instead, Sunday Silence went to Shadai, and 30 years later, Overbrook’s Chatham went to Stone. The great karmic cycle of racing luck and breeding wisdom sent another one to Shadai last month, with all the potential to start a new legacy in racing and breeding.