Nelly Sachs receives the Nobel Peace Prize for literature in 1966

Nelly Sachs is celebrated in today's Google Doodle, as many people may have opened the search engine today to a picture of a typewriter.

Ms Sachs was a World-famous playwright, who had started out life growing up in the fashionable area of Berlin.

At an early age, she developed an interet in dance and poetry, studying both before later fleeing the city after war was declared.

The poet fled with her family in 1940, and later settled in Sweden where she developed her skills.

Nelly Sachs was born Leonie Nelly Sachs, in Berlin on December 10 1891 to Georg William and Margarete Sachs.

Her father died in 1930, and she fled with her mother to Sweden in 1940.

After her move to Sweden, she settled in Stockholm, where she served as a writer and translator.

Already in her 40's when she settled in her new home, it would be over two decades later until she would recieve recognition for her works.

Ms Sachs' experience in Germany as a Jewish woman and the suffering of her people was vastly responsible for informing much of her work.

She gained fame late on in life, when she was nearly fifty years old.

Her first compilation of poems was launched in her book In den Wohnungen des Todes (In the Houses of Death).

The volume was widely celebrated for the unique depiction of suffering, especially among the Jewish people.

Invalid email

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. Read our Privacy Policy

Ms Sachs later went on to win a Nobel Prize for her work, sweeping the honour in 1966.

Nelly Sachs had to share the coveted Nobel Prize in Literature with Shumel Yosef Agnon, a pivotal figure in modern Hebrew fiction.

Both were nominated for their contributions to Jewish literature.

Mr Agnon won the award "for his profoundly characteristic narrative art with motifs from the life of the Jewish people."

Nelly Sachs was nominated "for her outstanding lyrical and dramatic writing, which interprets Israel's destiny with touching strength."

Ms Sachs felt her works wre representative of the Jewish people as a whole, while Mr Agnon was mainly representing the state of Israel.

She was noted saying: "I represent the tragedy of the Jewish people."

Nelly Sachs died in 1970 at the age of 79, and her possessions were donated to the National Library of Sweden.