When the stunning news reached New York that George Gershwin had died after undergoing surgery for a brain tumor, the novelist John O’Hara (BUtterfield 8) responded: “I don’t have to believe it if I don’t want to.” I felt that way this morning with the news that Elizabeth Taylor had died in Los Angeles, at the age of 79. Most people are surprised that Dame Elizabeth was only 79; she had been famous not just nearly all of her life but all of our lives. Elizabeth Taylor the woman is gone, but Elizabeth Taylor the movie star—the cultural icon, the lioness in winter—will live on, as long as we worship the gods and goddess delivered to us, dazzling and ten feet high, on movie screens around the world.

As movie stars go, Dame Elizabeth was the gold standard. She was always a creature of paradoxes: possessed of exquisite beauty, she loved to curse like a longshoreman. She lived her life out loud and in public, yet she ensured her four children and ten grandchildren a private life, which they enjoy to this day. Raised in relative luxury by an art dealer and an actress, she loved the company of working men and women, made friends with the crews of all her films, and embraced Richard Burton’s Welsh coal mining family. She was comfortable with vulgarity. She ate and drank to her heart’s content. Her lust for life informed everything she did, and everything she did was outsized: her eight marriages (two of them to Burton, the love of her life); her six decades’ worth of films; her two Academy awards; her astonishing jewels, including the 33.19-carat Krupp diamond and the 69.42-carat Taylor-Burton Diamond. The English called her “The Wife of Bath.” She was made a Dame of the Realm in 2003. She knew how to be a movie star and, in truth, her stardom and her fabled personal life eclipsed her real gifts as an actress—gifts that most dazzled in A Place in the Sun, Cat on a Hot Tin Roof, Suddenly Last Summer, Butterfield 8, Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?, and The Taming of the Shrew. She taught the theatrically trained Burton how to act for the camera: he praised her quality of stillness, and learned from it. But off-stage, and in the third act of her life—when Richard was gone, when her marriages to John Warner and Larry Fortensky were over, when her late-career forays into acting on film, onstage, and in television ended—she was anything but still.

Some might say her third act was her greatest, and her most fearless. Like Maggie the Cat, she seemed to have nine lives, as she survived a brain tumor, a broken back, the scoliosis she’d had since birth, hip replacements, and heart surgery. In the early 1990s, she took on the daunting cause of raising awareness of and finding a cure for AIDS, by founding the Elizabeth Taylor AIDS Fund—at a time when mainstream America was still recoiling from the disease, and from gay America. She once famously got into bed with a person suffering from AIDS—which was still thought to be as communicable as the plague—to show the world that sufferers were not pariahs and shouldn’t be treated as such. She was implacably loyal to her closest friends, and stood by the benighted Michael Jackson throughout his ordeals—another child star whose childhood had been bartered away from him, as Elizabeth’s had been.

In her lifetime, she made and spent millions. In Cleopatra, she was the first actress to earn $1 million (plus overages! plus royalties from the use of TODD-AO Technicolor, developed by her third husband, Mike Todd!). Though critics, and Elizabeth herself, did not like her performance in the film, it’s almost impossible to think of Cleopatra without envisioning Elizabeth, with her black-scarab eyeliner, asp-headed headdress, and piercing, violet-hued eyes. She still owns that role. At one point, the movies she made with Richard Burton in the 1960s accounted for 2/3 of all the profits made in Hollywood. Yet she made more money and became known to a new generation through her perfumes, White Diamonds and Passion.

In her third act she became a corporation and a brand as recognizable around the world as Coca-Cola. The value of her brand kept rising, as did the price of Andy Warhol’s famous silkscreen of her. Her many friends and associates in The House of Taylor basked in her generosity, her bawdy humor, her big heart, which finally gave out on March 23, after a long stay in Cedars-Sinai in Los Angeles. It will be interesting in the coming days to see if her wish to be buried in Celigny, Switzerland, beside Richard Burton, her fifth and sixth husband, will be fulfilled. Though she always maintained her love for her third husband, Mike Todd, it was with Richard that she had a life, both private and professional, as they made 11 films together, including the great Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? Indeed, he was the great passion of her life. The last star of the last century has gone out. Here is what she once said she wanted on her headstone; “Here lies Elizabeth. She lived!”—a fitting tribute. After all, there is nothing like a Dame.

RELATED:

• “A Love Too Big to Last” by Sam Kashner and Nancy Schoenberger (July 2010)

• Photos: Elizabeth Taylor’s Timeless Beauty