Joaquin Phoenix (formerly Leaf Phoenix) is an actor, music video director, producer, singer, and campaigner most known for his work as an artist. He has one Grammy Award, one Golden Globe Award, three Academy Award nominations, and one British Academy Film Award nomination.

Joaquin Phoenix: Profile summary

Joaquin Phoenix: Biography & Early Life

Joaquin Phoenix was born in the year 1974 to parents – John Lee Bottom and Arlyn belonging to the U.S. continental. His birthplace was inside the Río Piedras region of San Juan, situated in Puerto Rico. Actually, he is known to be a third out of five children of his parents. All his siblings have too acted.

This actor to has a half-sister Jodean belonging to the prior relationship of his father. His father, from Fontana, situated in California, was a failed Catholic of English, French Huguenot, and German origin, whereas his mother abandoned her family during the year 1968 and relocated to California, afterwards meeting the father of Phoenix while hitching.

It is found that he and his siblings were finally found out by one of the famous children’s agents of Hollywood named Iris Burton, who offered all the five kids work of acting, primarily doing commercials as well as television show based appearances.

The actor worked to found himself as a child actor prior to confirming to leave acting briefly and visit Mexico as well as South America along with his father.

Joaquin Phoenix: Age, Height, and Weight

Being born on 28 October 1974, Joaquin Phoenix is 46 years old as of today’s date 25th January 2021. His height is 1.73 m tall, and his weight is 72 kg.

Joaquin Phoenix: Career

Joaquin Phoenix started off his career by landing initial acting jobs doing guest appearances on a total of two TV shows accompanied by his brother named River within Seven Brides for Seven Brothers and Backwards: The Riddle of Dyslexia.

The actor too appeared in one episode termed “We’re Off to Kill the Wizard” in Murder, She Wrote along with his sister named Summer.

During the year 2000, he co-starred in a total of three movies. This actor has created his initial collaboration along with the director named James Gray inside The Yards. Moreover, he too featured in a science fiction thriller entitled Signs in the year 2002.

During the year 2004, he has paired with Shyamalan one more time, performing the role of a love-struck agriculturalist inside The Village.

Apart from his career in acting, the actor has even volunteered in directing music-based videos and also producing television shows and films. Moreover, he has too recorded one album, a soundtrack dedicated to Walk The Line.

This actor is renowned as a champion of some charitable organizations, like Amnesty International as well as the Peace Alliance.

Joaquin Phoenix: Personal Life- Dating, Girlfriends, Wife, Kids

Joaquin Phoenix had quite a colourful dating life. For three years, from 1995 to 1998, Joaquin dated Liv Tyler, who was a co-star in Inventing the Abbotts. However, later on in 2001, he went on to date Topaz Page–Green, who is a model. This relationship did not seem to work out eighter, and the two broke ties in the year 2005.

Lately, he has been in a relationship with Rooney Mara. This started in the year 2016. The association has been going quite strong, and the couple 2019 even confirmed their engagement. Soon Phoenix and Mara announced that they would be expecting a child, and in May 2020, their son River was born. They named the child after his late brother River.

Phoenix had been struggling with alcoholism for quite a while and felt the need to do something about it. He hence checked himself into rehab in the year 2005.

Joaquin Phoenix: Net worth

Starting out working for small-time advertisements and television shows, Joaquin has come a long way. He is now worth a massive $60 million as of 2022. An enormous amount of his wealth comes from his shows, directions, and acting.