A collaborative trio bringing together producers Sabre, Stray and Halogenix, Ivy Lab are one of the projects pushing drum’n’bass forwards in 2017.

Debuting on Critical Music back in 2012 with the track Oblique, the group have since emerged as leading architects of the halftime movement, an experimental crossbreeding of drum’n’bass with more far-flung genres such as hip-hop and footwork. Their 2015 double LP 20/20 Volume One laid out a dizzying set of potential future routes – now they follow some of those up with the equally broad and investigative Peninsula EP, which drops on Critical in March.

Hear the title track below, exclusively on Red Bull UK – then scroll down to read an interview with Ivy Lab’s Sabre.

So tell us a bit about Peninsula... It has a kind of eastern feel, particularly the vocal sample - where is that from?

The vocal sample is lifted from a "soundtrack-for-TV" library music LP. The kind of thing that gets used for quick-fix audio in documentaries. There’s a couple of other Arabian-inspired motifs and instruments in the track, so the title hints a little towards the palette.

This is the lead track from a new EP - is it all of a kind with Peninsula, or are you exploring a number of sounds?

There’s a continuity in as much as its all dancefloor-conscious baseline hip-hop/halftime operating in the 85bpm territory. But under that larger classification falls five quite different tracks. Peninsula juxtaposes robotics with ancient instrumentation. Magikess is a rave tinged boom-bap number. Thirsty harnesses a club-hip hop aesthetic. Eyes Down borrows a gloomy trip-hop formula. And the Forex VIP is very much a DnB inspired 'talking-baseline’ track.

What do you feel Ivy Lab's relationship is to drum'n'bass now? You're clearly part of the scene, but your music also stands apart. Is the "halftime" sound further evolving?

The original definition of halftime is starting to be re-written, it feels. It’s gone from being a fairly prescriptive production slogan to a much more flexible umbrella term used to tether a network of sibling genres to each other. For us, halftime is simply the meeting of percussive ideas found in hip-hop, with the sonic canvas of underground bass music. Whereas 80bpm used to be the mid-point tempo, music as slow as 60 or 65 BPM can now effectively meet this classification as far as we’re concerned.

What other plans do you have in 2017?

All goes to plan, we wanna drop our debut LP later in the year – or at least build a healthy cache of demos. People think 20/20 Volume 1 was our debut, but we saw that more as a beat-tape that happened to make it onto vinyl.

Ivy Lab will join the bill at 15 Years Of Critical Sound at London’s Electric Brixton on Mach 3. Buy tickets.

Check out more great premieres, stories and videos at RedBull.com/Music