During the summer, the sound of music has been heard everywhere on the Peninsula. There was something for everyone — pop, rock, classical music and jazz festivals. Also, the price was right: many concerts and performances were free in intimate settings with close proximity to the performers.

Music@Menlo Chamber Music Festival’s ninth season, “Through Brahms,” showcased his lifetime portfolio of magnificent music.

Executive Director Edward Sweeney said the July 22-Aug. 13 chamber music extravaganza set new attendance records.

The festival harmonizes beautiful music interpreted by world-class musicians and next-generation artists with engaged audiences and generous sponsors with home-stay hospitality, fun social events and technical innovation.

This year, an iPad app was added for schedules, program notes and listening to audio notes.

On July 30, following the Brahms’s “Veiled Symphonies” concert, Trine Sorensen and Michael Jacobson continued the tradition of hospitality with a post-concert supper in their Palo Alto home.

Guests included musicians, sponsors and in-home hosts. Kathleen Henschel, Shruta Baueba of US Bank, Eileen Birnbaum, Melanie and Ron Wilinsky congratulated festival founders Wu Han and David Finckel, along with cellist Eric Kim, flutist Sooyun Kim, pianist Alessio Bax, pianist Lucille Chung and violinists Jesus Reina and Anna Margrethe Nilsen (who are engaged).

For the International Program Artists’ Prelude Performance, Wu Han and David Finckel selected Allegro moderato and Andante D.968 by Franz Schubert, with pianists Moritz Winkelmann (he played the bass) and Christopher Schmitt (he played the treble).

Part of the challenge is learning to play together. In the technical detail category, the person on the left always uses the pedal. In practice sessions Wu Han graphically says that playing four hands piano is like “brushing someone’s teeth.”

In keeping with presenting the next generation of artists, the unusual Octet in E-flat major, op. 20 by Felix Mendelssohn showcased all eight string players. It also presented his youthful musical brilliance: Mendelssohn was only 16 when he wrote this composition. Violinist Jesus Reina informed the audience that Mendelssohn made the strings sound like an orchestra and that the melody in the third movement, the scherzo, foreshadowed the later “Midsummer’s Night Dream.”

Preparation for presenting an ensemble piece such as the Octet is intense. It required the musicians to practice six hours each day with four coaching sessions as an ensemble and four sessions on their own with a senior musician coach.

“These three weeks shaped our artistic views by being exposed to a crowd of senior musician role models, and it has been exciting to see outstanding festival directors Wu Han and David Finckel bring their artistic vision into action,” Winkelmann said.

Wu Han’s on-stage remark summed up the festival, “We have been submerged in Brahms for three weeks — what a joy!”

Jazz on Main

The final Monday night concert series, Jazz on Main, in Redwood City attracted a record crowd of 350 people for a fond farewell. A trio of iconic Bay Area horn players — five-time Grammy nominee Wayne Wallace on trombone, John Worley on trumpet and flugelhorn and Kristen Strom on saxophone — received a standing ovation for their Aug. 15 “Three Horns, No Limits” program.

Described by Worley as a reunion, the trio was backed up by Murray Low on keyboards, John Shiflett on bass and Jason Lewis on drums; they all played together on Worley’s CD “Worlview.”

Friends and performers, together and with their individual bands, they also are composers and educators (they have taught at Stanford Jazz Workshop).

They played a variety of straight-ahead jazz pieces. There were Wallace’s arrangements plus original compositions by Strom, “Eyes on You,” and Wallace, “El Otro Lado” (“The Other Side”).

Strom says she is known for playing music from the heart. She said all of them explore the heart of the piece and add their own voice. Worley says he likes to interpret good music. Wallace likes to be associated with Latin jazz. He writes many original compositions.

The third year of Jazz on Main ended on a high note. These three artists have been an integral part of this jazz showcase since its inception.

The informal venue, with open seating and restaurants across from the stage, gave the jazz fans their chance to meet the musicians and purchase their CDs.