Audio narrative

125 Peninsula Dr is listed for sale at $ 1,495,000. The Residential Single Family property has 4 bedrooms, 3 Full Bathrooms, 3493 square feet and was built in 2020. The lot size is 21780 Square feet. ##BR##Price is Down, Lake Level is UP, Now 73% Full! Motivated Sellers! Exceptional Lake Front Home in the Exclusive Gated Community of The Peninsula on Lake Buchanan. Better than new, built in 2020 with strong attention to detail by Casa Sereno Homes, high end finishes and remarkable functionality. This custom home boasts incredible curb appeal, the white stucco facade and dark metal roof is beautiful in contrast to the big blue sky and sparkling water. Double divided light front doors open into what can only be described as stunning! Wide open entry with a view straight out to the patio and lake. Fabulous Open Floorplan features a chefs kitchen with Bosch appliances, Induction cook top and telescoping range hood. Kitchen, Dining, Living is all open concept and though contemporary, feels warm and inviting. Electric Fireplace offers ambiance and heat when you need it. Owners suite with spa inspired bathroom, free standing tub, walk in shower, double vanities, 2 walk in closets, statement light fixture and WC with a bidet. The right wing of the home features an office, a gym/flex room (or 4th BR), an additional ensuite - primary or guest quarters large enough for a living area and bedroom, would work perfectly for multi gen living. Remote Controlled interior and exterior window blinds and shades. There are a total of 4 bedrooms and 3 full baths. Recessed Lighting, Ceiling Fans, Smart Features, Green built home, Full Security System, wonderful storage spaces, dream laundry room and a fabulous pantry. 642 sq. ft. of covered terrace feels like additional living space. When the lake is at a normal level the water comes up to the line of vegetation just past the sand. 3 Car attached Side entry garage is 796 sq. ft, it’s amazing. Keyless entry, full house water filtration and water softener. Enjoy the convenience of having a boat slip in The Peninsula’s private marina and proximity to shopping, dining, local wineries. Just 1 hour from Austin!

Price is Down, Lake Level is UP, Now 73% Full! Motivated Sellers! Exceptional Lake Front Home in the Exclusive Gated Community of The Peninsula on Lake Buchanan. Better than new, built in 2020 with strong attention to detail by Casa Sereno Homes, high end finishes and remarkable functionality. This custom home boasts incredible curb appeal, the white stucco facade and dark metal roof is beautiful in contrast to the big blue sky and sparkling water. Double divided light front doors open into what can only be described as stunning! Wide open entry with a view straight out to the patio and lake. Fabulous Open Floorplan features a chefs kitchen with Bosch appliances, Induction cook top and telescoping range hood. Kitchen, Dining, Living is all open concept and though contemporary, feels warm and inviting. Electric Fireplace offers ambiance and heat when you need it. Owners suite with spa inspired bathroom, free standing tub, walk in shower, double vanities, 2 walk in closets, statement light fixture & WC with a bidet. The right wing of the home features an office, a gym/flex room (or 4th BR), an additional ensuite - primary or guest quarters large enough for a living area and bedroom, would work perfectly for multi gen living. Remote Controlled interior and exterior window blinds & shades. There are a total of 4 bedrooms and 3 full baths. Recessed Lighting, Ceiling Fans, Smart Features, Green built home, Full Security System, wonderful storage spaces, dream laundry room and a fabulous pantry. 642 sq. ft. of covered terrace feels like additional living space. When the lake is at a normal level the water comes up to the line of vegetation just past the sand. 3 Car attached Side entry garage is 796 sq. ft, it's amazing. Keyless entry, full house water filtration and water softener. Enjoy the convenience of having a boat slip in The Peninsula's private marina & proximity to shopping, dining, local wineries. Just 1 hour from Austin!