This is your top guide to Apple sales and statistics for 2024.

As one of the most valuable and well-known companies in the entire world, Apple’s performance in the marketplace is always worth examining.

So, how has Apple become so popular?

In this blog, we’ll take a close look at the company’s past and present sales figures and a variety of other statistics that provide great insights into Apple’s business and its place in the tech industry. Also, we’ll cover everything from the latest iPhone sales numbers to the growing revenue generated by Apple’s services division.

Let’s get started.

About Apple company history

Apple, as a company, has a long history of success.

Here’s the timeline:

1 April 1976, Los Altos, California, is the birthplace of the Apple Computer Company. Founded by three friends: Steve Jobs, Steve Wozniak, and Ronald Wayne

4 July 1976, they launched their first product – Apple I

16 April 1977 Apple II (one of the world’s first home computers) was launched

In 1983 Apple became a real threat to IBM

24 January 1984, the first mass-market personal computer is launched – the Macintosh

1 April 1991, Apple introduced the PowerBook, replacing the Macintosh

15 August 1998, the introduction of the iMac, which sold around 800k units in its first five months

2001 introduction of the iPod

1 May 2002, Apple presented the slogan ‘Think Different’

In 2003 Apple announced iTunes Music Store

On 9 January 2007, Apple introduced the iPhone

3 April 2010 release of iPad

Steve Jobs passed away on 5 October 2011, at the age of 56

Tim Cook took the place of CEO in 2011

In September 2014, Apple announced Apple Watch

19 December 2016 Apple realized the original AirPods

1 November Apple TV is launched

2020-present: Apple keeps rocking with 5G and Apple silicon

5 interesting facts about Apple company (editor’s pick)

The company was founded by Jobs in his parent’s garage in 1976

On 13 April 1976, 12 days after the co-foundation, Ronald Wayne sold his share of the company to Jobs and Wozniak for 800 USD

In August 1997, Apple was a few weeks away from total bankruptcy

The first Apple logo featured Sir Isaac Newton below the apple tree

Apple sold the Gold Apple Watch (with 18-karat gold alloys) for 17,000 USD

How does Apple make money?

Apple is a technology giant known for its innovative products and services, such as:

iPhones

AirPods

Apple Watches

Macs

iPads

They’re enhancing existing products and services and expanding their offerings’ range through research and development (R&D).

Here’s the graph of how much money Apple invested in R&D (2007 – 2022).

So, how does Apple make money?

Their primary strategy for their ongoing success is creating visually stunning products with top-notch features through R&D.

Recently, Apple has made significant advancements in artificial intelligence (more coming soon).

Overall, Apple’s success can be attributed to a combination of:

strong brand

innovative products

strong marketing

Apple annual revenue

How does Apple generate revenue?

Apple’s growth over the years can be attributed to its constant stream of revolutionary products.

Apple generated 394.33 billion USD in 2022, making it one of the highest-grossing companies in the world.

Apple revenue trends show an increase in sales year after year.

The data shows that Apple’s annual revenue has quadrupled in the last decade.

Apple revenue growth

In the Q3 of 2022, Apple’s revenue increased by 90,146 billion USD.

That represents an increase of 8.14%.

Below we show how much the profit increased compared to the previous year since 2020.

It’s also amazing how much money Apple makes per day!

157,290,411 USD profit per day, which is 1,820.49 USD per second.

Apple revenue by country

The Americas – North and South America are Apple’s largest market, bringing in lots of sales.

The revenue there is primarily due to Apple’s strong performance in their home market, the United States.

To be clear, Europe and China are two other major markets for Apple.

In fact, the US is Apple’s #1 market.

Interesting info: Apple’s revenue tends to be the highest before Christmas (October to December), especially during the holiday season.

How many people use Apple products?

Apple has set up a significant global presence, with millions of people worldwide using their products.

The company has seen massive growth in their customer base, and as of 2022, they have over 1.65 billion active devices in use.

This number continues to rise as more and more people switch to Apple.

Where are Apple products made?

In fact, most Apple products are made in China. However, Apple has manufacturing facilities and assembly lines in other countries, such as:

United States,

Ireland,

Brazil.

Some components used in Apple products are also sourced from other countries, such as:

Japan,

South Korea,

Taiwan.

The most advanced processor chips are made there.

A Closer Look at Apple products

Apple continues to innovate and stay ahead of the curve to keep its dominant position in the market with their products.

Some of the products everyone knows:

iPhones: a line of fancy smartphones with great features that include the latest models, such as the iPhone 14, iPhone 14 Pro, and iPhone 14 Pro Max.

iPads: a line of tablets, such as the iPad Pro, and older models.

Macs: a line of personal computers that include desktop and laptop models, such as the Mac Pro and MacBook Air.

Apple Watches: a line of smartwatches that connect with iPhones and other Apple devices that can track fitness, display notifications, and make phone calls.

AirPods: a line of wireless earbuds that can connect to iPhones and other devices.

What’s cool is the company is constantly introducing new user-friendly products and updating them.

In the following, let’s see what is happening with Apple’s sales of iPads and Macs.

Apple iPad sales

Apple iPad sales were down slightly in 2022.

Anyways, the iPad accounted for nearly 8% of the revenue.

This is Apple’s revenue generated from iPad sales from 2012 to 2022.

Finding: iPads are still popular, but not that much.

You may have noticed iPads being used in businesses as point-of-sales systems and replacing paper copies. Maybe this is a new target market for Apple.

Also, iPads might be more appropriate for kids to keep them busy on streaming platforms, such as Netflix or with games, instead of iPhones.

But for us adults, it’s a smartphone era, right?

Apple Mac sales

Year 1998 was the year when Apple Mac was introduced and launched.

It quickly become a bestseller with +800,00 units sold in the same year.

One of the most defining feature of Macs is their operating system – macOS, which gives them a recognizable distinction in the marketplace and is sought out by users, especially in the tech, media, and design world.

Let’s look at how much revenue Apple has generated from Mac sales.

iPhones – all you need to know!

Apple iPhones have revolutionized how we see the telecommunications and overall technology industry.

Here’s the timeline from the first iPhone released in 2007.

How many people use iPhones?

More than 1.8 billion people use Apple devices all around the globe, with over 1 billion of those being iPhones.

Here are better-detailed stats:

Demographics of iPhone users

The demographics of iPhone users are changing year by year.

Here are some of the latest demographics:

Females make up 51% of iPhone users, while males make up the remaining 49%

The 16–34 age group has the highest usage of iPhones

35% of iPhone users also own an Apple Watch

The average income of iPhone users in the US is 85,000 USD

How much of Apple’s revenue comes from iPhone?

Apple makes most of its revenue from iPhone sales.

The numbers show how iPhone sales revenue is exponentially growing.

iPhone users in US

iPhones are most popular in the US, which is most likely due to their success as a product and marketing, not just because Apple is also an American company.

Today, there are more than 130 million iPhone users in the US.

In 10 years, the number of iPhone users in America has doubled.

Market share of smartphones in US

Apple is the most used smartphone brand in America.

In fact, the iPhone is also the most sold and desired phone in the US.

iPhone market share in Europe

What about iPhone sales in Europe?

In Europe, Samsung holds the largest market share at 32.96%.

27% of Europeans use iOS, which also means that 27% of devices are iPhones.

Followed by Apple at 30.96% and Huawei at 15.65%.

Everything points to the fact that Apple is getting closer to Samsung.

Even in Europe.

Now let’s look at Apple’s services!

Apple offers a variety of services to its customers.

These are just a few examples of the services that Apple offers:

Apple Music: a subscription-based music streaming service that offers access to millions of songs and albums.

Apple TV+: a subscription-based streaming service that offers access to original television shows and movies.

iCloud: a cloud storage and data synchronization service that lets users store and access their documents, photos, and other data across all their devices.

Apple Card: a credit card that can be used for purchases and offers Apple users rewards and benefits.

Here is Apple’s revenue generated from services by quarter:

Apple competitors

Why is Apple one of the top companies in the world?

Of the top 20 technology companies in 2022 according to their brand value, Apple was ranked as the most valuable technology company worldwide with a brand value of 947.06 billion USD.

These are Apple’s top competitors:

Google ranked second with a brand value of 766.78 billion USD, while Microsoft ranked third with a brand value of 611.46 billion USD.

Here’s the list of the most valuable technology companies:

Apple car?

Do you think Apple plans to manufacture an electric car similar to Tesla? Considering the significant Tesla sales success, everything is possible…

Many believe that Apple has been secretly working on one for many years now.

Here is a thought: What about if Apple buys Elon’s stake in Tesla?

Since electric car sales keep increasing year by year, it’s more likely that Apple will launch its products without buying Tesla.

This way, Apple would be present in the innovative automotive industry.

It’s almost inevitable!

Number of Apple employees

How many people work at Apple?

The number of Apple’s full-time employees in 2022 was 164,000.

Apple employs more than 160,000 people worldwide, with a diverse workforce regardless of gender, skin color, or religion. They make a point of being an inclusive workplace.

This graph shows the total number of Apple employees as of the end of each financial year for the company (2005 – 2022).

Apple stock 2022

Over the past decade, Apple has seen incredible growth in its stock price.

We show the figure of what happened to the stock in 2022.

Apple is the first company to reach a market capitalization of one trillion dollars.

This huge success has also earned Apple the title of the most valuable brand worldwide in 2022.

Conclusion

That’s all for our extended Apple sales and statistics.

Hopefully, you found the data you were looking for!

Apple will likely continue to be a top in the future, as they have a strong brand and a loyal customer base.

So, what’s your opinion? Can the brand keep continuing its leading global position?

Also, is there anything else you would like for us to expand on? Let us know in the comment section below.