In Today’s world, every 8 out of 10 people knows Apple. Apple Inc. (formerly Apple Computer, Inc.) is an American multinational corporation and technology company headquartered in Cupertino, California, in Silicon Valley.

It designs, develops, and sells consumer electronics, computer software, and online services. Devices include the iPhone, iPad, Mac, Apple Watch, Vision Pro, and Apple TV; operating systems include iOS, iPadOS, and macOS; and software applications and services include iTunes, iCloud, Apple Music, and Apple TV+.

In this article, we will discuss the List of top companies owned by Apple Inc.

List of Companies in the Apple Inc. Highlights

Check the highlights of the List Companies in the Apple Inc. in the table given below:

List of Companies in the Apple Inc. Highlights

Company Name

Apple Inc.

Founder

Steve Jobs

Steve Wozniak

Ronald Wayne

Founded in Year

April 1, 1976

Headquartered

1 Apple Park Way, Cupertino, California

Total Acquisition

128

Net Worth

$2.62 trillion

Largest Shareholder of Apple Inc.

Vanguard Group

Numbers of Countries (Operates)

23

Recent Acquisition

Canadian artificial intelligence startup DarwinAI

Apple Inc History

Apple Inc., the company that made personal computing a worldwide phenomenon, was founded in 1976 in a garage place belonging to Jobs’s parents in San Francisco’s suburb – Los Altos, CA by Steve Jobs & Steve Wozniak.

In the initial days, Apple’s venture with computer hardware. It was started by Steve Wozniak, who designed the Apple I. In the following three years, Apple passed through a exponential growth and made their clients identified with them by the Apple II and Macintosh PCs that became very popular among companies and private consumers.

Nevertheless as in the 1990s the Apple Inc. market share is number one in the world and the company together with the newly appointed CEO was forced to resign in order to save the Apple’s share and return to the profit.

This was the moment when Steve Jobs left the company and in 1997 he came back to the Apple as its CEO. Jobs introduced a historical change by Apple in his leadership term. The company created the iMac, iPod, iPhone, and iPad that were marked as the best selling devices in this industry. Respect for design and belief in innovation and user experience made the company one of the best technology companies in the world to value, with a huge influence.

Apple’s upward trend took a new turn when its co-founder and CEO, Steve Jobs, passed away in 2011. Tim Cook took the position and continued the success of the company that led to beating the record of the first U.S. publicly traded company to surpass a $2 trillion market capitalization in 2020. Till 2024, Apple is still a giant of the tech industry that exhibits its distinctly acknowledged ecosystem of tightly integrated hardware, software and services, and consumer trend forecasting skills.

Apple Inc Business List

Here are the list of Apple Inc. Business provided below.

Mac

iPhone

iPad

Airpods

Apple Watch

Apple TV

Home Pod

Vision Pro

Beats Headphones

App Store

Apple News app

AppleCare+

iCloud+

Apple Card

Apple Pay

Apple Books

Apple Fitness+

Apple Music

Apple News+

Apple TV+

iTunes Store etc.

Top Companies Owned by Apple Inc.

Find the list of Top Companies Owned by Apple Inc. in the table given below:

Company Name

Aquision Date

Price

Founded by

Founder & CEO

Beats Electronics

2014

$3 billion

2006

Dr. Dre and record company

Intel Smartphone Modem Business

2019

$1 billion

1968

Intel Corporation

Dialog Semiconductor

2018

$600 Million

1985

Jalal Bagherli

Anobit Technologies

2011

$500 Million

2006

Prof. Ehud Weinstein, Ariel Maislos, and Dr. Ofir Shalvi

Texture

2018

$485 Million

Shazam

2017

$400 Million

1999

Chris Barton, Philip Inghelbrecht, and Dhiraj Mukherjee

NeXT

1996

$400 Million

1864

Hepworth Joseph

PrimeSense

2016

$360 Million

2005

Aviad Maizels, CTO Alexander Shpunt, Dima Rais, Ophir Sharon, and Tamir Berliner

AuthenTec

2012

$356 Million

1998

F Scott Moody

PA Semi

2008

$278 Million

2003

Daniel W. Dobberpuhl

Conclusion

What started out as a business in a garage, Apple Inc. has developed itself to not only one of the most valuable but one of the most powerful technology companies in the world today. Consistently growing by acquisition of small companies and startups has given Apple the edge as a market leader in the consumer electronics, software and services sectors because of broader offering of products and capabilities that are more sophisticated. Apple has designed a wide range of hardware from the iPhone to the iPad, the Mac, and the App Store, Apple Music, and Apple TV+ to have them all well integrated for users of the world. Apple’s focus on the innovation, design, and the user experience has been a critical course for the firm to keep its iconic brand and remain one of the most renowned companies in tech industry.

List of Companies in the Apple Inc FAQs

How many companies does Apple have?

Apple has 128 registered companies.

Which company tie up with Apple in India?

Foxconn, Pegatron, and Wistron have tied up with Apple in India.

How does being a part of Apple Inc benefit the companies in its portfolio?

Companies in the Apple Inc ecosystem benefit from access to Apple’s vast resources, technology, and global reach, which can help accelerate their growth and success.

How does Apple Inc support the growth and development of its subsidiary companies?

Apple Inc provides financial support, resources, and guidance to help its subsidiary companies thrive and reach their full potential within the Apple ecosystem.