Angels on Your Side by best-selling children's author Marty Machowski helps fearful children by reassuring them with biblical stories about God's army of angels complete with 3D imagery.

When children are scared by a storm, afraid of the dark, or wake up from a bad dream, how can you remind them of God's protection and love? When a storm keeps Logan up one night at Grandpa's house, Grandpa comforts him with stories about angels in the Bible who are ever at the Lord's command. When an incredibly powerful angel is on your side, there's no reason to be scared or worried!

Logan's Grandpa teaches him that not only are angels real, but God uses his mighty warriors to guard him. Logan learns that God's angels are an invincible army fighting on our behalf in the strength of the Lord. Young readers will learn along with Logan that angels are watching over us and are always on our side.

Uses 3D illustrations by Rommel Ruiz to depict the spiritual realm.

Two sets of 3D glasses come with each book.

Will become a favorite bedtime story, helping children ages 4–7 remember the best way to combat our fears is to take them to God.

AUTHOR

Marty Machowski is a Family Life Pastor at Covenant Fellowship Church in Glen Mills, PA, where he has served on the pastoral staff for over thirty years. He is the author of a number of family devotionals, curricula (including the Gospel Story for Kids), children's books, and parenting titles. His latest releases include Darkest Night Brightest Day, The Light Before Christmas, The Treasure, and Angels on Your Side. He and his wife, Lois, have six children and several grandchildren, and reside in West Chester, PA.

ILLUSTRATOR

Rommel Ruiz was born and raised in the Dominican Republic and moved to sunny Southern California to pursue his passion for creative expression and storytelling. An accomplished designer and illustrator, he incorporates influences from theater, film, animation, and mid-century design. His work includes animated visuals for Cartoon Network and the award-winning Luther documentary, as well as illustrations for books including Golly's Folly, The Gospel in Color, Why Do We Say Good Night, Angels on Your Side, and more. He is also the cofounder and art director of Patrol. He and his wife, Anny, live with their two joyful girls in Vancouver, WA.

"A sweet little book, uniquely illustrated. This is one parents will return to again and again and one that children will want to hear over and over. I especially appreciate how Marty moves the story from angels to Jesus and his cross and resurrection."

Donald S. Whitney, Professor of Biblical Spirituality and Associate Dean, The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, Louisville, KY; author of Spiritual Disciplines for the Christian Life, Praying the Bible, and Family Worship

"Marty's talent for exceptional storytelling never ceases to amaze me. Angels on Your Side will usher into the hearts of fearful children a calm reassurance of God's protection. A must-read for every child who struggles with fear and anxiety."

Ginger Hubbard, Author of Sam and the Sticky Situation: A Children's Book About Whining and Chloe and the Closet of Secrets: A Children's Book about Lying; cohost, Parenting with Ginger Hubbard podcast

"Angels on Your Side is more than just a great book to read to an anxious child during a thunderstorm—it's a celebration of God's sovereign care for his people through angels, ending with a powerful presentation of the gospel. Add in 3D glasses and bold illustrations, and this book is bound to be a hit with kids."

Kate Hox, Author of Who Is Jesus? 40 Pictures to Share with Your Family

"We all want our children to know the 'breadth and length and height and depth' of God's love for them. Angels On Your Side: When You're Feeling Scared makes the scope of God's care and protection come alive in all its dimensions! This latest children's book by best-selling author Marty Machowski paints a theology of angels using the brilliant 3D designs of master illustrator Rommel Ruiz. Dazzle your kids with the gospel truth and the beauty of God's protecting love."

Champ Thornton, Author of The Radical Book for Kids, The Serpent Slayer and the Scroll of Riddles,and Why Do We Say Good Night?

"'I'll have to see it to believe it.' That's the philosophy of so many in our world. But the Bible reminds us that much of the real world God created is beyond our sight. Though invisible to us, God's messengers relay prayers to his throne, ministering spirits guard young children, and great battles are fought with evil dragons thrown down in defeat. In Angels on Your Side, Marty Machowski and Rommel Ruiz use clear prose, engaging illustrations, and 3D glasses (!!) to introduce children to God's sovereignty, his providential care, and the spiritual realm where God's army is invisibly but powerfully deployed. What a fun and important book!"

Jared Kennedy, Editor, The Gospel Coalition; author of The Beginner's Gospel Story Bible and Keeping Your Children's Ministry on Mission