Nikolai Gogol (ニコライ・ゴーゴリ,, Nikorai Gōgori?, Russian: Никола́й Го́голь) is a former member of the Decay of the Angel. His ability is named The Overcoat.

Appearance

Gogol has white layered, sharp hair swept to the left side of his face. However, as short as it seems, he also has a long braid of hair that often rests on his right shoulder. A scar is slit vertically down his left eye. Compared to his left eye, his right eye appears vacant, bearing no highlights in it.[2]

Over his right eye appears to be a card-styled mask or eye patch. Gogol's attire is just as eccentric as his personality and closely resembles that of a circus ringmaster. He wears a mostly black jacket, the right side being solid black, black-and-white striped trousers, a shirt with a ruffled, round collar akin to a loose elaborate turtleneck, and dark gloves. He completes the outfit with a top hat with a diamond pattern.

He once disguised himself as a police officer[4][1] and Tonan's secretary.[2]

Personality

Gogol is sadistic and loves to speak in great theatrics. One of his main traits is his tendency to pose questions (oftentimes rhetorical threats) as "quizzes". He is also skilled in disguises, deceiving Tonan as his secretary.[1] Whilst fighting Atsushi Nakajima, Gogol depicts great joy in fighting and tormenting him, going as far as to capture Atsushi's leg in his coat and leaving it in a separate space on the floor.[2]

Gogol hints that his eccentric persona may or may not be real. The side of him feeling no remorse in murdering others is just as real as the side that feels guilt, well aware of how wrong and cruel his actions are. He claims to want to soar as freely as birds do. Nonetheless, both sides appear evident. However, even if he does feel guilt, he acts as if he bears no hard feelings towards Fyodor Dostoevsky, whom he nicknames "Dostoy".

Ability

Main article: The Overcoat

Gogol's ability, The Overcoat (外 (がい)套 (とう),, Gaitō?, Russian: Шинель, Shinel), allows him to use his coat to manipulate spaces and what comes out of them. That is, it acts largely like a portal, capable of relocating objects, as well as a 'pocket dimension' where he is able to store objects. He can use this to make his hand and gun appear in a space completely unrelated to him or drop a pillar through a portal before holding it there and opening the other end at a later point in time. The ability works on living things as well. He uses it to 'sever' Atsushi's leg from his body, trapping it on the floor. However, Atsushi is still able to move his leg and recieves pain signals from it. The Overcoat's range is upwards of 30 meters.[3][2]

The Overcoat (外 (がい)套 (とう),, Gaitō?) Manga Debut: Chapter 57 Anime Debut: Episode 42 Ability: Spatial Manipulation

Skills

Disguise: Gogol is capable of disguising himself enough for other people not to notice it. This can be seen when Gogol disguised himself as a police officer in order to approach the car Mushitarō Oguri was in without raising alert or suspicion.[4] He also disguised as Tonan's secretary for a half a year.[2]

Background

He joined the Decay of the Angel to fulfill of what he always wanted - to feel freedom, and not being bound by gravity.[2]

Battles