Dear Friends in Christ,

In a speech in 1864 by Benjamin Disraeli on Darwin’s theory that man was descended from apes, Disraeli said, “The question is this: Is man an ape or an angel? Now I am on the side of the angels.” Being “on the side of the angels” now refers in popular culture to being good, perhaps too good, a naïve boy scout or goody-two- shoes, and it is usually wielded by people who are not on their side to ridicule those who are. The fact is we have

angels on our side, whether we appreciate them or not, and we also have fallen angels who are anything but on our side.

You can’t truly be on the side of a fallen angel; as Our Lord says, those who are against him scatter (see Matthew 12:30 and Luke 11:23). People who aren’t “on the side of the angels” aren‘t really on anyone’s side; as Mary sings in the Magnificat, the Lord “has scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts” (Luke 1:51). Their interests may align from time to time, but when their interests conflict they’re on nobody’s side but their own.

Fallen angels aside, we should not only be glad to be on the side of the angels, but that the angels are on our side too. This week we celebrate Saints Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael, as well as the guardian angels who watch over us. We each have a guardian angel, and so do parishes, groups, countries, and any grouping of human beings who need spiritual aid.

I was once asked by some cousins at a family dinner whether I believed in angels:

“Of course,” I replied, “I believe everyone has a guardian angel.”

“Do you believe they’re here right now?”

“Of course.”

“And what are they doing?”

“Well…guarding.” It seemed pretty obvious to me what they were doing.

Have you ever spoken with your guardian angel? Your angel is with you 24/7. Many people are oblivious to the fact that they have one at all. This week is the perfect opportunity to pray the prayer to your guardian angel, “Angel sent by God to guide me, be my light and walk beside me, be my guardian and protect me, on the paths of life direct me. Amen.” Don’t forget to thank your guardian angel too. You’re a full time job.

May God bless you with an angelic week.

Father Nikola Derpich, L.C.