AB Private Credit Investors (AB-PCI) is a private corporate-credit investing platform at AB offering direct lending capabilities to middle-market companies across industry sectors. AB-PCI focuses on directly sourced, privately negotiated investments in the primary-issue market while selectively pursuing opportunities in the distributed and secondary loan markets on a relative-value basis.

AB Fixed Income, the firm’s business unit dedicated to investing in bonds of all types, delivers a wide range of investment services to clients around the world. The unit manages assets for a broad spectrum of clients, including retail investors, high-net-worth individuals and major institutions. Our investment strategies are actively managed across the risk/return continuum, including interest rates and currencies, investment-grade and high-yield credit, emerging markets, securitized debt, and municipal bonds.

AB Equities manages assets for a wide variety of institutional, high-net-worth and retail clients. In addition to value and growth equities, we offer specialized portfolios including thematic, low-volatility and quantitative strategies. Our active, high-conviction equity strategies leverage differentiated research; they span geographies, capitalization ranges and investment styles.

The Private Alternatives team invests directly across a wide array of private asset classes, including private credit, private equity funds and private equity co-investments, commercial real estate, and real assets. Interns typically spend time on our Private Alternatives Business Development team.

Our Data Science team develops leading-edge asset-allocation research and frameworks, portfolio-construction tools and data-science techniques to enhance AB’s advice and client strategies, and designs new capabilities to meet client needs. Its responsibilities include serving as a centralized strategic asset-allocation research function and a data-science center of excellence.

AB Multi-Asset & Hedge Fund Solutions actively manages a wide array of asset-allocation services for global institutions, high-net-worth individuals and retail mutual fund investors. Using macro and quantitative research insights to develop innovative investment products and drive investment decisions, Multi-Asset Solutions oversees a range of investment services that are seeing strong growth with great potential.

Our Technology and Operations business units offer internships for rising juniors and rotational and direct-hire opportunities for graduating college seniors. We embrace innovation and technology to keep our clients and our firm at the leading edge. We offer many career paths for diverse thinkers in the technology community.

The Software Development position offers a vast range of financial platforms and products across our business. Projects include:

Developing a system to identify trading opportunities

Implementing new quantitative models that enhance the portfolio- management process

The Infrastructure Engineering position supports the networks and systems that our employees rely on. Projects include:

Developing and implementing information-security protocols

Conducting research to enhance data-loss protection and antivirus systems

The Investment Operations team includes functions ranging from trading, pricing and risk reporting to account administration and client reporting. Projects include:

Streamlining trade communications and workflows between trading and operations

Overhauling the security reference master system of Bloomberg data

The Business Analysis team acts as the liaison between technology and business in designing solutions. Projects include:

Applying statistical and machine-learning techniques to predict future sales and stock prices

Developing an automated tool to onboard new hedge funds

The Portfolio-Management Group supports portfolio-management teams; acts as the contact point with Trading, Operations and Sales; builds portfolios; and monitors asset exposures and allocations.

Our Corporate business units offer internships as well as rotational or direct placement opportunities for new graduates, enabling them to develop interests, expand skill sets and build invaluable relationships.

The Legal and Compliance Department is responsible for ensuring compliance with all legal and regulatory requirements to which we’re subject, protecting the firm from regulatory and reputational risk across the globe, and strengthening the firm’s culture of compliance. This is accomplished through collaborative partnership with the business units we support with thoughtful and timely advice. In addition, the department conducts global monitoring and training activities that detect, address and mitigate regulatory and reputational risk. The advice, coupled with monitoring and training activities, provides the framework to support the firm’s business strategy and objectives while maintaining a high standard for integrity.

Corporate Finance is responsible for providing credit and capital to meet the firm’s business needs. The group also functions as the primary point of contact for the maintenance of and adherence to AllianceBernstein L.P. and its subsidiaries’ and affiliates’ internal policies and procedures. Corporate Finance maintains a high degree of internal controls and seeks ways to improve services provided to its internal clients.

The People Department helps build the firm’s culture, drive its success and create a competitive advantage in the market. The People team supports AB’s business strategy by partnering across businesses and regions to align people initiatives with our strategic priorities to achieve the greatest impact. We understand that superior business performance is directly linked to investing in people; creating a diverse, inclusive and high-performance work environment; supporting personal and professional growth through learning and career-development opportunities; competitive and meaningful benefits and a wellness approach centered on the whole person; and building and sustaining a work environment where everyone’s feedback is valued and where both individual and team contributions are rewarded.