We Provide Foundation & Concrete Repair in Red Deer, AB

Foundation problems often start slow, but even the smallest of cracks can turn into a major problem given enough time. We offer proven solutions to help Red Deer homeowners remedy their foundation and concrete problems. Whether you have issues with your home’s foundation or a concrete slab in the backyard, our goal is to provide an expert fix and deliver you the peace of mind you're looking for. When you need to get it done right the first time, there's only one number to call.

For an inspection and cost estimate in Red Deer, AB, contact your local Foundation Supportworks contractor today.

Structural & Concrete Repair Services offered in Red Deer:

Foundation Settlement Repair

Foundation Crack Repair

Bowing Wall Repair

Sagging Floor Repair

Uneven Concrete Leveling

Concrete Crack Repair

Structural & Foundation Repair in Red Deer

Foundation problems can display a variety of symptoms throughout your home. Some of the signs of foundation failure are obvious, such as foundation cracks, but there are other symptoms of stress on your foundation that aren't immediately noticeable. If you identify any of the issues listed below in your home, it’s best to have your foundation inspected by a Red Deer foundation repair professional as soon as possible.

Foundation Problem Signs:

Cracked Brick/Stucco - Stair-step cracks in exterior foundation walls.

Bowing Walls - Concrete wall leaning in at the top.

Shearing Walls - Inward movement of the bottom of the block wall.

Ceiling Gaps - Space between the ceiling and the interior wall.

Sagging Floors - Sloping floors or gap between the floor and the interior wall.

Chimney Separation - Chimney separating from the house.

What Causes Foundation Issues in Red Deer, AB

Foundation problems can be caused by a variety of environmental factors, many of which are related to precipitation, soil type and density, and temperature fluctuations. In Red Deer, while rainfall only totals a moderate 53 centimeters each year, annual snowfall can exceed 105 centimeters through the winter. Couple the precipitation with central Alberta’s frigid winter temperatures, and the spring thaw can present a great deal of pressure for your home’s foundation.

When soils moisten, freeze, and then thaw, the movement of water in the soil surrounding your home’s foundation can cause hydrostatic pressure (the weight of water on top of itself). The “fill-in” soil (the dirt that was excavated when initially digging out your foundation) is often of a different density than the soil that surrounds it, allowing for different drainage rates around your foundation. If the soil around the fill-in doesn’t drain as well, and the fill-in becomes saturated during the thaw, the weight of water contained in the fill-in will put significant pressure on your basement’s foundation and footings, leading to structural decay over time.

Concrete Repair in Red Deer

Concrete is susceptible to many of the same environmental factors that impact the integrity of your foundation. Outdoor concrete slabs have to contend with changing temperatures, rain and snow, changing soil levels and more, though the added factors of being outdoors year-round and exposure to the elements at the ground-level makes the life of a concrete slab or sidewalk even tougher.

The good news is most concrete can be permanently leveled and repaired without having to replace it. We offer a proven Concrete Protection System to help Red Deer homeowners quickly restore the concrete around their homes.

Concrete Solutions:

Lift and level concrete slabs

Seal concrete cracks and joints

Seal concrete surfaces to protect against pitting, flaking, and staining

Resurface concrete to restore its look and function

Why More Red Deer Homeowners Choose Us: