Thank you to all who supported The Adventure Boutique Foundation. With your help we were able to donate £15,000 to start the rebuild of school accommodation for a very special residential school for heaing impaired children called Shree Bhairabi School, Nuwakot in Nepal.

The AB Foundation also bought an autoclave for Masanga Hospital, Sierra Leone, to help sterilise their surgical equipment as they've had an increase in surgical operations and are unable to sterilise their equipment.

In 2024 we are continuing to raise funds for the rebuild of the school accommodation in Nepal. We are doing the following events to help raise money:

Charity Bake Off event with former winner of Great British Bake Off at a company in Birmingham

Yorkshire 3 Peaks Challenge

Trekking challenge to Langtang region of Nepal

Nepal

Disaster Recovery

The AB Foundation was involved in disaster recovery operations to support the families of those affected by the 2015 earthquake in Nepal while working on expeditions. We are also working towards rebuilding the homes of families who still suffer the effects of the earthquake. Dr Raj Joshi, the founder of the AB Foundation, has personally helped with emergency relief efforts after the disaster. He started supporting Nepali families after their fathers and husbands had perished in the disaster.

Sierra Leone

Masanga Hospital

This is a rural hospital centrally located in the Northern Province of Sierra Leone; a country which has one of the highest maternal and infant mortality rates in the world. They also have large, demanding medical and surgical needs, which are currently unmet. Sierra Leone has also one of the worst nursing staffing levels in the world (approx. 1 nurse per 1000 people).

After the Ebola outbreak in 2014, many nursing students had to drop out of college because they couldn’t afford the fees after the deaths of close family members. The AB Foundation strives to contribute financially in order to sustain operations in the hospital, and satisfy these urgent needs and eventually help fulfil the hospital’s vision, to become a sustainable, educational, medical institution.

India

Karigiri Leprosy Hospital

Leprosy affects hundreds of thousands of people every year. India is one of the countries which is most affected by this crippling disease. Karigiri Leprosy Hospital in south-east India specialises in the treatment of leprosy and its complications, conducting state-of-the-art research to further understand the disease, as well as treating a variety of other medical and surgical conditions. This institute also provides training to health personnel of all levels in the management of leprosy. The AB Foundation helps to fund vital supplies and medical equipment, and provides grants to help maintain the hospital and support the patients and their families.