Guided by the belief that every life has equal value, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation works to help all people lead healthy, productive lives. In developing countries, it focuses on improving people's health and giving them the chance to lift themselves out of hunger and extreme poverty. In the United States, it seeks to ensure that all people—especially those with the fewest resources—have access to the opportunities they need to succeed in school and life. Based in Seattle, Washington, the foundation is led by CEO Mark Suzman, under the direction of co-chairs Bill Gates and Melinda French Gates and the board of trustees.

Grantmaking areas

Gender Equality

Global Development Program

Global Growth & Opportunity Program

Global Health Program

Global Policy & Advocacy

United States Program

We also have a small Charitable Sector Support initiative.

Locations

Headquarters – Seattle, Washington

Washington, DC Office – Washington, DC

India Office – Delhi, India

China Office – Beijing, China

Europe and Middle East Offices – London, United Kingdom and Berlin, Germany

Africa Offices - Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; Abuja, Nigeria; and Johannesburg, South Africa

Leadership

Co-chairs and Board of Trustees

Bill Gates, Co-chair

Melinda French Gates, Co-chair

Mark Suzman, Board Member

Ashish Dhawan, Board Member

Dr. Helene D. Gayle, Board Member

Strive Masiyiwa, Board Member

Minouche Shafik, Board Member

Tom Tierney, Board Member

Executive Leadership

Mark Suzman, Chief Executive Officer

Carolyn Ainslie, Chief Financial Officer

Lauren W. Bright, Chief Legal Officer

Susan Byrnes, Chief Communications Officer

June Yoshinari Davis, Chief Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Officer

Chris Elias, President, Global Development

Gargee Ghosh, President, Global Policy & Advocacy

Allan C. Golston, President, United States Program

Trevor Mundel, President, Global Health

Shana Tarbell, Chief Operating Officer

Rodger Voorhies, President, Global Growth & Opportunity

Ankur Vora, Chief Strategy Officer

Sonia Vora, Chief Human Resources Officer

Anita Zaidi, President, Gender Equality

Division Leadership

Gender Equality Division Leadership

Global Development Division Leadership

Global Growth & Opportunity Division Leadership

Global Health Division Leadership

Global Policy & Advocacy Division Leadership

United States Program Leadership

Communications Division Leadership

Foundation Strategy Office Division Leadership

Operations Division Leadership

Foundation facts (1)

Current number of foundation employees: 2,026

Total grant payments since inception (through Q4 2023): $77.6 billion (2)

Total 2023 Charitable Support: $7.7 billion (3)

Total 2022 Charitable Support: $7.0 billion (3)

Bill Gates and Melinda French Gates total giving to the foundation from inception through 2023: $59.5 billion

Warren Buffett total giving to the foundation from 2006 through 2023: $39.3 billion

Foundation Trust Endowment as of December 31, 2023: $75.2 billion

(1) As of December 31, 2023. Financial figures are rounded to the nearest hundred million. 2023 figures are unaudited.

(2) Includes grant payments made by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and previous foundations of the Gates family (William H. Gates Foundation, Gates Library Foundation, and Gates Learning Foundation) from 1994 onward.

(3) Includes operational expenditures, grant payments and direct charitable contracts, but not program related investments.

Geographic Reach

In 2023 the foundation funded grantees in 48 states and the District of Columbia. Internationally, we funded work in 135 countries.