JOE Jonas became one of the world's most famous teenagers as one-third of the Jonas Brothers, an award-winning boyband.

Now, the former Disney star is all grown up and has continued to build a successful career in the entertainment industry.

Who is Joe Jonas?

Joe Jonas was born on August 15, 1989, in Casa Grande, Arizona.

The 34-year-old became famous as part of the pop rock band the Jonas Brothers in 2005 alongside his siblings, Nick and Kevin Jonas, on the Disney Channel.

The brothers grew up in Wyckoff, New Jersey. They garnered worldwide fame after starring in the musical film, Camp Rock, in 2008 and its sequel, Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam, in 2010.

The trio even appeared on Miley Cyrus' show, Hannah Montana.

During this time, they released their debut album in 2007 and proceeded to break records with their world tours. They sold over 17million albums worldwide.

However, due to creative differences, the Jonas Brothers eventually parted ways in 2013 — but to the joy of many fans, reunited six years later in 2019.

Since their reunion, the boys have been very open about their bitter split that was initiated by Nick — admitting that they needed to "heal and grow" before they could get back together.

It seems they have been going from strength to strength ever since.

The brothers saw their comeback hit, Sucker, top the charts around the world and embarked on a 2020 UK tour.

They have also released Chasing Happiness — a tell-all documentary that dives into the truths behind the band's rise to fame, split, and eventual reunion.

Joe pursued a solo career and released his album, Fastlife, in 2011, but it had little success compared to his work with his brothers.

In 2015, Joe formed DNCE, and their single, Cake By The Ocean, went on to become one of the biggest hits of the year with 1billion streams worldwide.

The summer track earned them a spot on the Top 10 of the Billboard Hot 100, and the group later won the Best New Artist title at 2016's MTV Video Music Awards.

Speaking about the song in the summer 2018 issue of Glass Magazine, Joe said: "You learn, you take and you give. We’re just trying to show our love, our art to you and we hope we can get some love back in return too."

He added: "As songwriters, we pride ourselves on being able to tell a story and you still want to relate to people who are not necessarily going through what I’m going through."

DNCE consisted of four members, including Joe, bassist and keyboardist Cole Whittle, guitarist JinJoo, and drummer Jack Lawless.

In February 2022, Joe announced that the band would be reuniting after a four-year hiatus.

He revealed to Rolling Stone that Cole would not be returning at that time and said he supports the bassist.

The Jonas Brothers have also made quite the comeback since their reunion.

They began their world tour — called The Tour — at Yankee Stadium in the Bronx, New York, on August 12, 2023.

Who are his brothers?

30-year-old Nick was born in Dallas, Texas, on September 16, 1992.

The singer is married to Hollywood actress Priyanka Chopra.

The couple wed in December 2018 and welcomed their daughter, Malti Marie Chopra Jonas, via surrogate on January 15, 2022, per People.

Kevin, 35, was born on November 5, 1987, in Teaneck, New Jersey.

He tied the knot with jewelry company founder Danielle Jonas in December 2009.

The couple shares two kids, including nine-year-old Alena and six-year-old Valentina.

When did Joe Jonas and Sophie Turner get married?

Joe and the Game of Thrones actress Sophie Turner got hitched by an Elvis impersonator in a secret Las Vegas wedding following their appearance at the Billboard Music Awards in May 2019.

Stars including Priyanka, DJ Diplo, and singer Khalid attended the nuptials.

The pair announced their engagement in 2017 by sharing identical photos of the Sansa Stark actress, showing off her ring on their social media accounts.

Joe's read: "She said yes," while Sophie wrote: "I said yes."

They have since welcomed two children together, including their three-year-old daughter Willa and a one-year-old daughter whose name they have yet to share with the public.

On September 5, 2023, TMZ reported that Joe filed for divorce and that the singer is requesting joint custody of their two daughters.

"Sources with direct knowledge" told the outlet that they have a prenup.