Sophie Turner and Joe Jonas are all set to get married. Again. That's how celebs roll, okay? They elope to Vegas and have an almost-secret wedding with just a bunch of close people around. And then they have a lavish one, where everyone's invited, paparazzi are all over it, and the wedding venue is super fancy!

SEE ALSO: Joe Jonas and Sophie Turner Just Got Married In a Surprise Vegas Wedding!

We saw Joe and Sophie welcoming their guests, which of course included family—Nick Jonas and Priyanka Chopra.

SEE ALSO: Priyanka Chopra Is In Paris For Sophie Turner’s Wedding Bash!

Speaking of wedding venues, #JoPhie (such a cute ship name, right?) have chosen one in the south of France as theirs.

Even in those grainy, blurry paparazzi photos, the French château looks stunning! Well, it isn't just any random hotel but an actual 18th century castle! And considering Sophie is pretty much the Queen in the North, and Joe is the king of many a fangirls' hearts, they're practically royalty enough to get hitched here.

The castle is, in fact, a 250-year-old property called Château de Tourreau and is located in Sarrians, a town in the south of France. Once upon a time, it was a private home which eventually came to converted into a luxury hotel. According to its official internet pages, the Château can host some 29 guests in its 16 bedroom.

The 17-acre grounds have iron gates guarding its entrance and a lush coverage of trees spread over it. There are gardens, orchards, streams and... wait for it... an 82-feet-long pool! If your pockets feel heavy enough for you to want to vacay here, a place that has been called one of the most exquisite private estates in Provence, then you can actually book the property on Airbnb as well.

It costs somewhere around $4,656 (approx. INR 321,380) and must be booked for a minimum of three nights.

The wedding is reportedly happening this weekend, with the pre-wedding festivities already beginning according to latest pap snaps. The Jonas fam was spotted dressed to the nines and piling into cars for the pre-wedding festivities.

SEE ALSO: Sophie Turner-Joe Jonas' French Wedding Festivities Begin! Priyanka Chopra, Nick Jonas Spotted

We'll keep our eyes peeled out for more photos!