He is happily engaged to Game Of Thrones actress Sophie Turner, who he's been dating since 2016.

But it seems Joe Jonas' taken status doesn't hinder the appeal for his female fans - something that The Voice contestant Lauren Greco proved in her blind audition on Sunday.

The 21-year-old, who has been an obsessive fan of Joe since she was nine, flirted unashamedly with him as they performed This Is Me, a duet he originally sang with Demi Lovato in their 2008 Disney film Camp Rock.

Lauren admitted in a pre-recorded segment that her friends used to call her Ms Jonas in school because of her adoration for the 28-year-old.

'I am a huge Joe Jonas fan. I have loved him since, like, the beginning of time. Like, everybody in primary school used to call me Mrs Jonas,' she gushed.

'He's gorgeous and he can sing. I mean, what more could you want, really? I remember the nights in my room that I would sing to all of my Joe Jonas posters, wishing and dreaming for an opportunity like this.'

She continued, giggling: 'He's the man that's taught me so much about music and about stage presence.

'If Joe Jonas turned his chair for me, I think that I'm just gonna go into full-blown cardiac arrest, heart beating, on the floor.'

The Adelaide native failed to impress the judges, however, with her rendition of Christina Aguilera's Ain't No Other Man.

Joe turned around and clocked Lauren's 'I love Joe Jonas' T-shirt and groaned sheepishly, saying: 'I'm sorry I didn't turn for you!'

He then asked: 'So, are you a fan of the Jonas Brothers?'

Lauren gushed: 'I am a huge Jonas Brothers fan, huge! I played Pin the Lips on the Jonas Brothers at my 13th birthday party! Like, I love you guys so much.'

Flashing her a mock-wistful smile, Joe joked: 'Ah, I remember that party.'

He continued: 'Were you a fan of Camp Rock and the movie? Do you know the Camp Rock duet with Demi?'

He then gestured at the two of them, suggesting they should sing it together - prompting Lauren to squeal and cover her face.

'Oh, my god, but I'm gonna forget the words!' she protested, giggling.

Joe shrugged and turned back, replying: 'Then I'll go back to my chair and turn around.'

Lauren ran after him and said 'No, no, no, no, no, no, no,' before standing in front of him and pausing.

'Oh, my god,' she gushed, before going in to hug Joe. 'This is actually... Can you pinch me? Pinch me. Just pinch... Oh, my god!' she said.

She squealed with delight as Joe obliged and gave Lauren's arm a small pinch. The pair then took to the stage to perform This Is Me.

Joe put on a playful performance, holding Lauren's hand and singing straight to her - with the pair hugging at the end.

He then walked her off the stage and gave her a final hug, telling an emotional Lauren to 'keep at it' and that she's got a good voice.

Joe popped the question to Sophie Turner, 22, last October after a year of dating.

The pair announced their good news on Instagram and In the image she showed off a stunning diamond engagement ring with the caption, 'I said yes.'