What a difference a couple of years makes. Just ask the Jonas Brothers. When they starred in the Disney Channel's made-for-TV movie "Camp Rock" in 2008, Kevin, Joe and Nick were a power-pop band on the rise.

Now they're big-time -- and they're starring in "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam."

Don't expect them just to pick up where they left off in the first movie, though.

"It all happens a year later," said Kevin, 22, when asked about the sequel during a teleconference in May.

"For us, a lot can happen in a year. . . . We've been able to grow and we've been able to have different experiences."

Sorry, kids -- you'll have to wait until Friday, Sept. 3, for the premiere of "Camp Rock 2." In the meantime, the good news is that the JoBros are on tour with co-star Demi Lovato and several other "Camp Rock 2" cast members, including Alyson Stoner and Matthew "Mdot" Finley.

"The important thing to remember is that it's still a Jonas Brothers tour," said Nick, 17.

"It's great that we're going to have some of our friends from 'Camp Rock' with us, but we'll be playing a lot of Jonas Brothers songs.

PREVIEW

Jonas Brothers

When: 7 p.m. Tuesday, Aug. 31.

Opener: Demi Lovato.

Where: The Q, East Sixth Street and Huron Road, Cleveland.

Tickets: $32-$ at the box office, or charge by phone, 1-888-894-9424.

"This set list has not been easy at all. It's been really difficult to try to figure out what songs we're going to do from our albums, what songs we're going to do from 'Camp Rock' and what songs we're going to do from [our] TV show. There's a lot of projects that we have to take into consideration."

Don't count on a new JoBros studio album until next year, although the group appears on the new "Camp Rock 2" and "Jonas L.A." soundtracks, both of which came out this summer.

"Jonas L.A.," their Disney Channel series, is essentially a 21st century update of "The Monkees," revamped for the grandchildren of Monkees fans.

"Acting is something that I'm really interested in doing more of, and maybe doing feature films," said Joe, 21. "I think that would be exciting."

Perhaps it's best if they keep their career options open. On the pop-music scene, another fresh face with a trendy haircut is always breathing down your neck, ready to take your place.

Did someone say "Justin Bieber"?

"It's definitely something we think about," Nick said.

"With all of the other young people who are coming up, we wish the best for them. And Justin Bieber in particular -- we've had the opportunity to meet him a couple of times and speak with him.

"He's entering into a whole new world and really being thrown into it all, and we hope the best for him. I think he's doing a great job so far.

"The main thing for us is feeling comfortable in our own skin and moving at our own pace when it comes to our music and our career."