The Jonas brothers may be known for many things—making tween girls cry-shriek over the Disney Channel hit Camp Rock, envisioning what the world would be like in the year 3000, and oh, churning out hits, both as a family-based boy band and on their own—but it turns out, they're every bit as obsessed with food as they are musically inclined.

The family, which is chronicling the opening of their restaurant, Nellie's Southern Kitchen, in a new Food Network show (Jonas Restaurant: Family Style, airing Monday, Dec. 26 at 7 p.m. EST), talked to Delish about some of their favorite holiday traditions, and food was the centerpiece of just about all of them. One holiday memory, however, wasn't quite so pleasant.

Before Kevin, Nick and Joe became The Jonas Brothers, touring the world year-round, the family would go full Bubba Gump at Christmastime, cooking shrimp scampi, shrimp creole and shrimp cocktail, their mother, Denise Jonas, recalled.

"Kevin [Sr., my husband,] and the boys would start in the afternoon peeling and cleaning pounds and pounds of shrimp," she explained. "One year, Joe's hands blew up. We thought for years that he was allergic to shrimp."

Though it's unclear what caused the DNCE singer's hands to swell up, the family recently learned he isn't actually allergic to shellfish, which means he can go back to enjoying those family recipes once again. These days, though, all three sons stick to making the hors d'oeuvres, specializing in cheese platters and olive trays.

That isn't the only food on hand around the holidays. On Christmas Day, there's just about every type of cuisine you could imagine: tamales in the morning, followed by ham and lasagna at dinner, and pies and cookies for dessert.

There's also one Jonas family must-have you can try at their new restaurant in Belmont, North Carolina, which has been described as a "true Southern country wonderland." It's called Sweet Caroline, made with sweet potatoes, caramelized pecans and brown sugar.

"It's a wonderful dish," Denise wrote via email.

Jonas fans—and serious Southern food lovers—guess that means you're in for a road trip.