Welcome to camp rock 2024

We want to extend a big welcome to all new and returning Camp Rock Ministries Families! The start of your child’s summer camp session at Camp Rock is right around the corner, and we hope you are getting as excited as we are. This summer will be filled will fun, faith and friendships.

Our theme verse for this summer, Colossians 2:6-7, says this: "As you therefore have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in Him, ROOTED and BUILT UP in Him and established in the faith, as you have been taught, abounding in it with thanksgiving." We encourage you to share this verse with your campers and pray for this upcoming summer as we prepare to teach kids what it means to be ROOTED and BUILT UP. Our plan is to walk through the entire book of Colossians with our week-long campers. Life and hope are in Christ. We sink our roots into His all-sufficiency while He grows our faith, builds our lives, and our faith thrives, overflowing with gratitude!

You may have a few questions as you begin to prepare for your week of camp, and we hope to answer a few of those with the information listed below. Please feel free to reach out with any additional questions by emailing office@camprock.net or calling our office at 308-262-1685.

Intermediate Camp 1

June 10-14

Intermediate Camp 2

July 15-19

Drop Off

Please register your camper at Notz Chapel between 10:00am & 11:00am on Monday. Notz Chapel is the large, white, metal building on the west side of our property. Please look for the welcome flags at the base of the driveway, located on Highway 88. To keep lines small and the registration process moving quickly, we request that you register according to your last name and the schedule listed below. (If you are dropping off another child with a last name in a different section, choose either option.) These times also spread the load out and will create less long lines. We will only have the walk-in option this year.

• A-H 10:00-10:20

• I-P 10:20-10:40

• Q-Z 10:40-11:00

Pick Up

We invite you to attend our final program, beginning at 3:30pm on Friday. This is a great way to end our week together as we celebrate with a brief time of worship and show a video highlighting all the fun your camper had while here. The program begins at promptly at 3:30pm, and final dismissal will be at 4:00 pm.

What To Bring

Please refer to our packing list for all you need to bring to camp. In addition to these items, campers are encouraged to bring items related to our theme meals for the week. Our dining hall is transformed with a theme a few times a week where campers and staff come dressed for the fun. This has been a highlight for many years, and we find the more campers get into it, the more fun we have! Prizes for the best dressed!!!

Your themes for this session are:

• 50s Diner (Going back in time to the classic diner! Poodle skirts, White T-Shirts and rolled up jeans for this night.)

• Take Me Out To The Ball Game (Time to play ball! We will have a fun stadium experience so dress in your best baseball/softball outfit.)

•Glow Party (Pack apparel that will glow under black lights... this will happen after Neon Night, so many things can double up here.)

Medical Forms & Medications

Please complete your child’s medical forms before heading to camp. You can complete the form online by logging back into your CampWise account. (Many of you have already completed this step during the registration process.) A completed medical form is required to participate in camp. All medications need to be turned in at drop-off. We prefer they are in their original bottles with their original labels. Our Health & Safety Coordinator will check them in, make sure all questions are answered, and will diligently distribute the medications at the proper times.

Store Cards

Store cards are used to purchase items at our camp store throughout the week and eliminates the need for campers to carry cash. You can place any amount on the store card that you would like (an average amount for a full week of camp is $15). You can prepay by logging onto your Active Network account or pay during registration. Any money remaining on the card at the end of the week will go to an offering for camp scholarships. The camp store will open during check-in and check-out as well as various times during the camp week. Store money will be able to be used in our brand new coffee shop here at CRM, Redington Coffee Co. We are also trying a new digital point of sale system as we try to eliminate the need for paper cards and slower times finding them.

Allergies/Special dietary needs

We take all food allergies/restrictions very seriously and believe that having the most information possible from parents is the key to keeping your child safe, happy, and well-fed. All allergies and other special dietary needs must be communicated to the camp at least one week before your camper’s arrival. We can easily accommodate gluten, nut, and dairy-free diets. However, if your child has additional needs, we may ask that you help in providing food for them. Please make sure your allergy form is completely updated in your Active Network account. Feel free to contact Pam DeVos (Food Service Manager) at office@camprock.net . with any questions or additional requests.

Cell Phone Policy