Camp Rock and Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam will forever be beloved Disney Channel Original Movies. They introduced the world to the gem that is Demi Lovato and brought about her wonderful friendships with Joe Jonas and Nick Jonas, so you know, we’re eternally grateful. Two DCOMs simply weren’t enough for fans, though. What ever happened to Shane and Mitchie’s love story? Is Connect 3 still going strong as a band? Did Camp Rock stay open after almost not having enough campers to continue? So. Many. Questions.

Well, in a new interview, Joe has spoken about a possible Camp Rock 3 movie and he basically confirmed the OG squad would be down for another one.

“If it made sense, sure. For all of us — Demi, Nick, it would be funny to do a spin on it. Do the graduating days, make it kinda dark… We’ve joked around about the idea a couple times,” Joe said.

OK, let us just process the fact that Joe, Demi, and Nick talk about Camp Rock when they’re hanging out.

Joe did say in the past that he was slightly embarrassed by his dance moves, singing voice and overall look in both classic DCOMs, but clearly, he wouldn’t mind revisiting this era.

It’s not the first time he’s teased fans about a possible reboot either. Just last month, he shared a stunning selfie along with Demi and simply wrote, “CR3?” in the caption.

That photo nearly sent everyone into a total freak out because Joe and Demi not only look amazing together, but it really gave a glimpse into what a new CR movie could look like. Since the main stars are all grown up now, it would be interesting to see how exactly their “darker” take on the movie would be, but we have a feeling they wouldn’t mind breaking out the guitars for a “Gotta Find You/This Is Me” performance again, since they performed it a few times together. The new and improved music that would come out of this musical would be nothing short of legendary too. OK, Joe, you’ve got our vote so time to get this movie going.

What do you think about this? Would you want to see another Camp Rock movie? Tell us in the comments section below!