Emmanuel Jerger, 95, of Moorhead, MN died at his home under the care of Sanford Hospice.

Funeral services will be 1:00 PM, Saturday, November 7, 2020 at Our Redeemer Lutheran Church in Moorhead, MN with Rev. Sam Pitsch officiating. Burial will follow in Trinity Lutheran Cemetery, Sabin, MN.

Visitation will be from 5-8 PM on Friday, November 6, 2020 at Dobmeier Funeral Home in Barnesville, MN. Visitation will continue for one hour prior to the funeral service at the church.

Emmanuel Gene was born on June 1, 1925 to Jacob and Amelia (Krug) Jerger in Eaton, CO. In 1940, his family moved to the Barnesville area where he attended country school in Atherton Township. He began a life long career of farming, taking over the family farm with his brother Walter following his dad’s death in 1950. They had a dairy and grain farm. They moved to Moorhead in 2001.

He was united in marriage to Glenis Lemke on March 9, 1947 at Trinity Lutheran Church in Sabin, MN. To this union 10 children were born. He enjoyed wood working, welding, fixing equipment, and gardening. He had a strong faith throughout his life and was a member at Our Redeemer Lutheran Church in Moorhead. Emmanuel’s love of his family was first and foremost. He had a knack to tell a story and share his heritage. For many years, they attended the German’s from Russia convention all over the USA.

He is survived by his wife Glenis, Moorhead, nine children: Robert (Terry) Jerger, Fargo, ND; Dennis (Julie) Jerger, Barnesville, MN; Gary (Bev) Jerger, Moorhead, MN; Kaylene (Dennis) Motschenbacher, Barnesville, MN; Karen (Steve) Chambers, Forest Lake, MN; Kevin (Theresa) Jerger, Barnesville, MN; Carol (Randy) Erickson, Lake Park, MN; James (Kim) Jerger, West Fargo, ND; Lori (Blaine) Ress, West Fargo, ND; 23 grandchildren, and 45 great grandchildren, He is also survived by many nieces, nephews, other relatives, and friends.

Emmanuel was preceded in death by his son Kenneth Jerger, his parents, six sisters: Kay McCoy, Rose Davis, Ruth Creese, Martha Robinson, Carol Denby, and Bertha Krieden, and four brothers: Paul, Jacob, Alex, and Walter.

Online memories and condolences can be shared at www.DobmeierFuneralHome.com In lieu of flowers memorials are preferred to Our Redeemer Lutheran Church.