Emmanuel Jerger, 95, of Moorhead, MN died at his home under the care of Sanford Hospice.

Funeral services will be 1:00 PM, Friday, November 6, 2020, at Our Redeemer Lutheran Church in Moorhead, MN with Rev. Sam Pitsch officiating. Burial will follow in Trinity Lutheran Cemetery, Sabin, MN.

Visitation will be from 5-8 PM on Thursday, November 5, 2020, at Dobmeier Funeral Home in Barnesville, MN. Visitation will continue for one hour prior to the funeral service at the church.

Emmanuel Gene was born on June 1, 1925, to Jacob and Amelia (Krug) Jerger in Eaton, CO. In 1940, his family moved to the Barnesville area where he attended country school in Atherton Township. He began a lifelong career of farming. After their father's death in 1950, Emmanuel and his brother Walter took over the family farm, raising and milking dairy cattle and farming grain.

He was united in marriage to Glenis Lemke on March 9, 1947, at Trinity Lutheran Church in Sabin, MN. To this union 10 children were born. He enjoyed wood working, welding, fixing equipment, and gardening. Emmanuel and Glenis moved to Moorhead in 2001. He had a strong faith throughout his life and was a member at Our Redeemer Lutheran Church in Moorhead. Emmanuel's love of his family was first and foremost. He had a knack to tell a story and share his heritage. For many years, they attended the German's from Russia convention all over the USA.

He is survived by his wife Glenis, Moorhead; nine children: Robert (Terry) Jerger, Fargo, ND; Dennis (Julie) Jerger, Barnesville, MN; Gary (Bev) Jerger, Moorhead, MN; Kaylene (Dennis) Motschenbacher, Barnesville, MN; Karen (Steve) Chambers, Forest Lake, MN; Kevin (Theresa) Jerger, Barnesville, MN; Carol (Randy) Erickson, Lake Park, MN; James (Kim) Jerger, West Fargo, ND; and Lori (Blaine) Ress, West Fargo, ND; 23 grandchildren, and 45 great grandchildren. He is also survived by many nieces, nephews, other relatives, and friends.

Emmanuel was preceded in death by his parents; son Kenneth Jerger; nine sisters: Kay McCoy, Rose Davis, Ruth Creese, Martha Robinson, Carol Denby, and Bertha Krieden, Emma Jerger, Lydia Jerger, and Martha Jerger; and five brothers: Jacob (age 1), Paul, Jacob (age 26), Alex, and Walter.