Pitsch, Dorothy M.

Dorothy M. Pitsch, 77, of Appleton, passed away peacefully of complications from Parkinson’s Disease on Friday, April 6, 2007. We sadly said good-bye so she could join her beloved husband Joe in heaven. Dorothy was born May 12, 1929, in Cleveland, WI, to Henry and Gertrude (Buchberger) Matthias. She graduated from Sheboygan High School in 1947. On November 26, 1949, she was united in marriage to Joseph J. Pitsch at St. Wendel Catholic Church in Cleveland, WI. They lived in Cleveland, WI, Sycamore, IL, and Appleton, WI, where she loved, raised, and nurtured her ten children, twenty-six grandchildren, and seven great grandchildren. Dorothy will be deeply missed by her children: Barbara Malueg, Kimberly, WI; John (Jeannie) Pitsch, Marshfield, WI; Michael Pitsch, Somer, WI; Deb (Jack) Lalko, Appleton, WI; Andy (Nancy) Pitsch, Sterling, IL; Sandra Malone, Racine, WI; Alan (Kathy) Pitsch, Burnsville, MN; Laura Dalma, Madison, WI; Sara Van Heuklon, Appleton, WI; Maria (Jerry) Last, St. Peter, WI. Grandma Dorothy was sent to heaven with hugs from her grandchildren: Marsha (Chris) Kasper; Mary (Scott) Lichtenwalner; Erin Pitsch; Dr. Trevor (Amanda) Pitsch; Stephen Koontz; Ian Kennedy; Alexandra Pitsch; Michelle Schefe; Megan (J.T.) Campbell; Dr. Cory (Scott) Kleinmann; Abby Lalko; Ethan (Amy) Pitsch; Victoria (Andy) Nuetzel; Jennifer (Nathan) Lienau; Whitney Pitsch; Donell Malone; Angela Malone; Ryan Pitsch; Sofia and Camille Dalma; Cristian Manneh; Lauren and Conner Van Heuklon; Sheena, Eva, and Amelia Last. Great-Grandma Pitsch also took kisses from her great grandchildren: Madeline and Owen Kasper; Jessica and Kyla Lichtenwalner; Rylan Leonhardt; and Zane Taylor. Dorothy is survived by her sisters Gloria (Donald) Hopf and Evelyn Kraft, her brothers Bart (Betty), and Willard (Alice) Matthias. She is further survived by her sisters-in-law: Marian (Fritz) Hertel, Irene Davis, Ruby Kaminsky, Carolyn (Ignatius) Gorenc and brother-in-law Elroy Biederwolf. She was preceded in death by her husband, Joseph and her brothers Elroy Matthias and Merlin Matthias. Also preceding her in death are her sisters-in-law Jeanette Matthias, Sadie Matthias, and Delores Biederwolf; her brothers-in-law Ralph Pitsch, Richard Davis, and Bob O’Brien; and great-grandchild, Joshua Lichtenwalner. The Mass of Christian burial will be celebrated at 11:00 am on Thursday, April 12, 2007, at St. Bernard Catholic Church, 1617 West Pine Street, Appleton with Rev. Dennis Ryan officiating. Family and friends may call at the funeral home on Wednesday, April, 11, from 4-8 pm, and again at the church on Thursday, from 10-11 am. A prayer service will be held at the funeral home on Wednesday at 7:00 pm. The interment will be held at St. Mary Catholic Cemetery, Appleton.

The family wishes to express their heartfelt gratitude to her kind neighbors, her care givers, Mary, Angie, and Buya, the staff at Century Oaks in Darboy, and Affinity Hospice Services.

“I have loved and been loved, all the rest is background music”. Dorothy

Memorial gifts may be directed to: The National Parkinson Foundation, 1501 N.W. 9th Avenue/ Bob Hope Road, Miami, FL 331366-1494, 1-800-327-4545.