BOULDER, Colo., Oct. 9, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- Newton Running, an athletic shoe brand focused on making responsive shoes for outdoor and running enthusiasts, announced today that it will be supporting National Runner's Safety month with a focus on women's safety.

National Runner's Safety month starts in November but in light of the recent press coverage of women's issues, specifically women's safety, Newton Running decided to do something to help female athletes protect themselves while exercising. Starting on October 15, the shoe brand will be offering free personal alarm systems, provided by Sabre, with each purchase of women's running shoes. Newton Running will also be teaming up with Skirt Sports and Way of the Crane martial arts studio in Boulder, Colorado to provide a free self-defense class, taught by Sensei Melanie Murphy. Additionally, beginning mid-October, Newton Running will be posting safety tips from a partnering police department on staying safe while exercising on their social media platforms. These combined efforts are aimed at educating and protecting women so that they can continue participating in a sport they love with peace of mind.

"Women's safety has been a big topic in the news recently due to the increasing number of incidents involving female athletes. I just feel there is no better time than now to support a cause that affects so many people and brings awareness to such an important issue," says Jerry Lee, CEO of Newton Running. "As a husband, father and grandfather to some amazing women, this cause is near and dear to my heart."

About Newton Running

Newton Running creates performance shoes specifically for runners and outdoor recreationists. The brand, which is headquartered in Boulder, Colorado, was built and is operated by runners for runners and strives to help athletes improve their form and abilities. Newton Running is a purpose driven company with a commitment to social and environmental accountability. Learn more about Newton Running at www.NewtonRunning.com

SOURCE Newton Running

Related Links