Dear Izzy, Max, and Kate,

The leader among the new breed of running shoe companies is Newton Running. In fact, you could make the case that Newton ushered in recent movement among running companies to educate runners. And in the process, change the way we run.

Go for a run these days and you’ll notice the bright colors on everyone’s feet. Neons and “hot” colors abound. Yes, Newton started that too.

I’ve been curious about the Newton phenomenon for a long time. In fact, when I was in Boulder, CO last year Newton was having an educational seminar for their retailers in the hotel we stayed in. I’ll admit, I was more than a little jealous of the dozen’s of runners and triathletes walking and running around Boulder in brand new Newtons.

I was recently given the chance to try a pair of Newtons. I selected the Newton Motion.

Here’s how Newton describes their Motion:

Our Stability Performance Trainer is for runners wanting a daily training shoe that can also function brilliantly as a faster tempo-pace run or race shoe. More supportive and structured than our lightweight performance trainer line, the Motion is a great everyday trainer for runners who may like to turn up the speed now and again during tempo or fast-paced runs and intervals. The Motion has medial posting to offset pronation.

That sounded like a perfect match for my foot type and gait. The first thing I noticed when I opened the box was the “look”. That’s what made Newton famous to begin with, in my mind. The blue is eletric and when combined with the red laces – POW! These are serious super hero running shoes.

My first test in a new pair of shoes is always the “walk around the living room and deep knee bend test”. I have no idea what that test is supposed to tell me about how they’ll feel on a run, but I always do it anyway. The Motions feel great. I noticed immediately how light they are for a trainer (9.3 oz).

The second thing I noticed was the “trampoline effect” that Newton describes in their literature. The lugs on the bottoms of the shoes hit the ground first, causing you strike on your forefoot, rather than the heel. Heel striking has long been considered one of the primary causes of running injuries. Newton’s technology was the first to address the issue and come up with a solution.

The next morning I set out for a short run in the Motions. I pictured myself looking a lot like Craig Alexander in them. Maybe Craig on an easy day. Just a light “jog” around the block kind of day for Craig.

It only took a few steps to notice the difference. I was running in a more natural position than what I was used to. My forefoot was striking first, causing my entire body to stay in alignment.

I also noticed that my “easy” pace was much faster in the Newtons. My normal first mile pace is around 8:45. My first mile in the Newtons was 7:30. Not blazing, but a considerable jump in speed. I wasn’t working harder. Maybe I was just excited. But my honest assessment is that Newtons technology puts your body in the right position to run naturally – creating an easier running experience. I’m not a scientist though. Just a guy in a new pair of shoes.

I mentioned Newtons commitment to education earlier. Here’s how Newton suggests getting started.

At Newton’s suggestion I’ve taken it slow. It’s like making a new friend. You don’t want to be the person who calls and texts your brand new friend around the clock. That’s creepy. So, jumping right into a brand new style of running, no matter how tempting, isn’t smart either.

With fall setting in for most of the country, now is the perfect time for runners and triathletes to transition to the natural feel of Newton running.

As I’ve progressed in my Newton Motions I’ve noticed my body adjusting. I’ll be honest, the first few runs left me with slightly sore calves. That’s normal. Your natural running muscles and tendons have been weakened by traditional running shoes. Now that I’ve adjusted, I’m running pain free and FASTER.

I love you,

– Daddy

* I was given these shoes by Backbone Media for purposes of this review. However, my opinions are my own and I was under no obligation to provide a favorable review.