Some people might don't know who is Sodagreen. The name "Sodagreen" sounds like a drink or biscuits. In fact, Sodagreen( 蘇打綠) is a Taiwanese independent folk-rock-pop band that formed in year 2001. The band was originally named Soda (蘇打). The name "Soda" gives the feel of refreshing and moving bubbles. However, the members think that the band needed a name with three Chinese characters, therefore, the word green (綠) which green colour is one of the member, Greeny's favorite colour was adding into the name, thus the band's name formed.

Sodagreen in year 2007

June 2007 -- 18th Golden Melody Awards -- the Best Band Award

June 2007 -- 18th Golden Melody Awards -- the Best Melody Award for the song "Little Love Song"

June 2007 -- 18th Golden Melody Awards -- the album "Little Universe" nominated

June 2007 -- 18th Golden Melody Awards -- the Best Lyric song for the song "Little Love Song"

nominated

May 2008 -- 19th Golden Melody Awards -- the Best Band Award

2010 -- 21st Golden Melody Awards -- the Best Band Award nominated

2010 -- 21st Golden Melody Awards -- the Best Music Video for the song "Daylight"

2010 -- Hit Fm Taiwan's Hit Fm Annual Top 100 Singles Chart (Hit-Fm年度百首單曲) -- the

song "Once in a Lifetime" and "Sleepless" listed at number 29 and 84

Sodagreen is a six-member band that became hugely popular in Taiwan and much of the rest of Asia after they entered the Hohaiyan Gongliau Rock Festival in 2004 and walked away with the Grand Jury Award. The members are:

吴青峰(Greeny) - lead singer,

song and lyric composer

谢馨仪 (Claire) - bass

阿福(A-Fu) - Leader of the band, acoustic guitar

阿龚 (Zephyr) - keyboard, viola

小威(Wei) - drums, percussion

刘家凯(Kay) - electric guitar

All the members are wonderfully talented but it's really Greeny, the singer and songwriter, who has given the band it's distinctive sound. The songs from Sodagreen are mostly related to issue of the society and they wish their songs can influence the public so that the public will give more concerns to the unfortunate.

Music Video of

One of the reason that I love Sodagreen is their good relationship between members. The band formed for about 12 years and they seldom argue in those years. They treat each others like their own family members.

Many friends asked me why I love this band. The reason is simple. This is because they talent, simple, funny, and love music. They keep to improve themselves in scope of music and even their own education. Their songs make a lot of encouragement to me. That's why I love Sodagreen.

At last, I want to thanks Sodagreen for bring a lot of fun and good songs to us. I hope to hear your songs in 10 more years and even 20 years later. Love ya, Sodagreen.