Liberated Lives

Through themes of societal change and the power of the human spirit, Liberated Lives showcases stories of individuals transitioning from incarceration to reintegration. Highlighting resilience, transformation, and the journey toward redemption, each film offers a unique perspective on the lives of formerly incarcerated Americans, encouraging viewers to recognize their role in our democracy. By amplifying the voices of those often marginalized, these stories celebrate the bravery and contributions of individuals not only rebuilding their lives, but enriching the diverse narrative of America.

Follow us on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and TikTok and join the conversation using the hashtag #LiberatedLivesPBS. Subscribe to our YouTube channel for exclusive filmmaker interviews and extras.

Sign up for our newsletter for email updates on new film premieres, podcast episodes and upcoming events:

Collection Members

Article Mental Health & Incarceration: Filmmakers on Repairing the Broken Criminal Justice System

In April, WORLD premiered four documentaries to launch Liberated Lives, a collection bringing to the forefront unheard stories of people who have experienced incarceration firsthand or through a family member or friend. Within the four films (A Woman on the Outside, Commuted, What These Walls Won't Hold and Hundreds of Thousands), mental health emerges as a theme; this common thread shows how devastating the carceral system is on the mental health and well-being of everyone impacted by incarceration. Five of the makers share how their films add to the mental health conversation.

Episode A Woman on the Outside

A story of Kristal Bush's fight against the impact of mass incarceration in Philadelphia.

Preview Commuted

After Danielle Metz’s commutation, she gets a rare chance to regain her life and family.

Episode What These Walls Won't Hold

A filmmaker chronicles his journey beyond walls after being incarcerated at San Quentin.

Episode Hundreds of Thousands

A family acts to rectify a systemic wrong after a mentally ill loved one's incarceration.

Article America ReFramed Acquires the Compelling Documentary 'A Woman on the Outside' to Open WORLD's 'Liberated Lives'

On March 28, A Woman on the Outside will premiere as part of the 12th season of WORLD's IDA Documentary Award-winning series America ReFramed to open our newest content theme, "Liberated Lives," an ongoing collection of films showcasing stories of individuals transitioning from incarceration to reintegration and the experiences of those who support them.

Episode In an Instant

Sometimes, fleeting moments define our existence.

Episode Turning Point

Life's journey is punctuated by defining times that call for courage and change.