Sunshine, vacations, family time and listening to great Christian music are a few of the highlights that make the summer of 2014 so memorable. Whether attending one of the many Christian music festivals around the country, listening to an Ipod during a jog, or just tuning into a favorite Christian radio station, there have been many inspirational songs filling the airways throughout the lazy days of summer this year. These songs, and the amazing artists that perform them, have encouraged, uplifted, and motivated many listeners these past few months to stay focused on the Lord and the hope of His calling. Looking back on the past few months, it is clear that certain sights, sounds, and experiences will undoubtedly be linked to the powerful lyrics and tunes of this past summer’s top 10 Christian songs. Some of these outstanding songs are as follows:

#10. "Open Up the Heavens” by Meredith Andrews from Worth It All

As a worship leader, Meredith Andrews’ song “Open Up the Heavens” is a cry to hear from the heart of our heavenly Father. All of her songs on the album seek to honor the Lord, but this song is one that she often leads in worship to open up the service at Harvest Bible Chapel in Chicago. It is an invitation for God to have His way and show His glory throughout the service.

Favorite Lyrics:

You're the reason we're here

You're the reason we're singing

Open up the heavens, we wanna see You

Open up the floodgates, a mighty river

Flowing from Your heart and filling every part of our praise

# 9. “He Knows My Name” by Francesca Battistelli from If We’re Honest

“Artist of the Year” Dove Award and Grammy winner, Francesca Battistelli, is one of Christian music’s best-selling new artists after releasing her third album If We’re Honest. Her single “He Knows My Name” was co-written with Seth Mosley and Mia Fieldes, and according to Battistelli, “it’s an anthem…God calls us by name. His words for us are chosen, free, forgiven, beautiful, wanted, loved.”

Favorite Lyrics:

He calls me chosen, free, forgiven, wanted, child of the King,

His forever, held in treasure

I am loved

I don't need my name in lights

I'm famous in my Father's eyes…

#8. "Overwhelmed” by Big Daddy Weave from Love Come to Life

This well-known Christian band is excited about being on the road again this year with their new album, Love Come to Life. They believe that all of their songs, including “Overwhelmed,” point to something so much bigger than themselves and their goal is to bring glory to God. Throughout their 12 years as a band, they have continuingly written music to reflect the passion and energy synonymous with their other albums.

Favorite Lyrics:

You are Glorious, God you are the most Glorious

I delight myself in You

In the Glory of Your Presence

I'm overwhelmed, I'm overwhelmed by You

And God I run into Your arms

Unashamed because of mercy

I'm overwhelmed, I'm overwhelmed by You

#7. “We Believe” by Newsboys from Restart

Restart is the Newsboys third album since they were joined by former DC Talk vocalist Michael Tait, and their song, “We Believe,” is quickly climbing the charts. Tait explains that, “this song is a testament and a definite creed for what we as Christians believe; our hope and eternal salvation!”

Favorite Lyrics:

So, let our faith be more than anthems

Greater than the songs we sing

And in our weakness and temptations

We believe, We believe!

#6. “Glorious Unfolding” by Steven Curtis Chapman from The Glorious Unfolding

As the most awarded Christian performing artist today, Chapman’s newest album The Glorious Unfolding is the culmination of seven years of life experiences and challenges wrapped up into a creative and faith-building project. He shares that he wants his music to be an upbeat celebration while still expressing an honest message of God’s faithfulness.

Favorite Lyrics:

Of this glorious unfolding

We will watch and see and we will be amazed

If we just keep on believing the story is so far from over

And hold on to every promise God has made to us

We’ll see the glorious unfolding

#5. “All the People Said” by Matt Maher from All the People Said Amen

Matt Maher’s newest album All the People Said Amen is like the artist himself, as it is very autobiographical and compelling. His music draws in the listener with a humble and authentic appeal. Maher himself describes his songs as a collage that seem chaotic at a distance but a closer look points to the fact that all are God’s work of art.

Favorite Lyrics:

If you're rich or poor, well it don't matter

Weak or strong, we know love is what we're after

We're all broken, but we're all in this together

God knows we stumble and fall

And He so loved the world, He sent His son to save us all

And all the people said, “Amen,” whoa oh…

#4. “Multiplied” by NeedtoBreathe from Rivers in the Wasteland

NeedtoBreathe is a contemporary Christian band consisting of two brothers, Bear and Bo Rinehart, and Seth Bolt—all from South Carolina. The songs from this latest album reflect a deep yearning for the Lord, but their song “Multiply” is a heartfelt cry and a prayer calling out to God to multiply their offerings of praise to Him.

Favorite Lyrics:

God of mercy, sweet love of mine

I have surrendered to Your design

May this offering stretch across the skies

And these Hallelujahs be multiplied

#3. “Thrive” by Casting Crowns from Thrive

Loosely based on Psalm 1, this summer hit is a joy-filled song that reminds listeners that God has big plans for everyone, and that He wants His people not only to survive but to thrive. Mark Hall, the frontman for Casting Crowns, has been a youth pastor for over 20 years, and he explains that this song came out of their student ministry. This song, along with all of the other ones on the album, continually challenges each believer to evaluate their relationship with the Lord and with others.

Favorite Lyrics:

Just to know You and to make You known

We lift Your name on High

Shine like the sun made darkness run and hide

We know we were made for so much more

Than ordinary lives

It's time for us to more than just survive

We were made to thrive

Joy unspeakable, faith unsinkable,

Love unstoppable, anything is possible.

#2. “Greater” by MercyMe from Welcome to the New

Even though they have been around since 1994, and have earned four gold albums and a platinum disk through the years, MercyMe has done it again with their new song “Greater” from their most recent album Welcome to the New. According to Bart Millard, lead singer for the group, this new song best reflects “the grace message of joy.”

Favorite Lyrics:

Bring your doubts, bring your fears

Bring your hurt, bring your tears

There’ll be no condemnation here

You are holy, righteous and redeemed.

#1. “Fix My Eyes” by For KING & COUNTRY from Run Wild. Live Free. Love Strong.

Australian brothers, Joel and Luke, the duo that comprises For KING & COUNTRY, have seen this song top the charts for six weeks in a row, and the music on their second album is touching hearts and impacting lives around the world. Winners of the New Artist of the Year at the 2013 GMA Dove Awards, their lyrics are very personal, and yet their powerful rhythms and instrumentation surprise the listener each time.

Favorite Lyrics:

Love like I'm not scared

Give when it's not fair

Live life for another

Take time for a brother

Fight for the weak ones

Speak out for freedom

Find faith in the battle

Stand tall but above it all

Fix my eyes on You

While playing at the beach or working hard this summer, Christian music always seems to make time more enjoyable and uplifting. This year’s top Christian artists and songs are no exception, as they have sought the Lord for lyrics and music that come straight from His heart. Their own lives reflect the joys and struggles that everyone faces on a daily basis, so their music connects with each listener’s experiences as well. For some, the past few months have included difficulties and troubles, but these songs propelled them forward in spite of the challenging times. The godly lyrics and anointed melodies of the top 10 Christian songs of this past summer have inspired and encouraged all listeners and from now on will always be associated with the summer of 2014!

Written by Karla Hawkins

God has been good to me over the years, and I have so much to be grateful for to Him. First of all, I feel blessed to be the pastor’s wife of a thriving church in northern Michigan and the mother of four amazing grown children. It is also very rewarding to be a Christian author, editor and translator for the Kingdom of God. Growing up as the daughter of missionaries in Santiago, Chile, doing vocational mission work in Sicily, Italy while my husband was in the US Navy, and traveling all around the United States, has instilled in me a strong love for God and His people around the world. Some of my favorite pastimes include supporting my children’s contemporary Christian band ONLY9AM, singing on the worship team at church, traveling, and connecting with family and friends via social media. My favorite song this summer has been “You Make Me Brave” by Amanda Cook from Bethel Church, as God has been stretching my faith and walk with Him in new ways recently. When I am not working, I love spending time with my family and especially with my precious three-year-old grandson.