LLTM: Is there a special meaning or backstory to the band name “Octalux”?

Brandon: We tell people it’s Latin for orgasm, it’s not, but people buy it haha. Actually the name came about because one of my favorite Lexington bands was “Supafuzz” and I wanted something cool like that, so me and a friend were drinking one night trying to come up with names and “Octalux” was written on a piece of paper, I don’t know which one of us named it, it doesn’t sound anything like I wanted, but we went with it and it’s to late to change it now haha.

LLTM: What song would you recommend a newbie to listen to you, to get a feel of what Octalux is all about?

Brandon: Hmm, “Ashtray Face” or “Chromosome” or “Emo Song” those are pretty good, but in all honesty, Octalux is all about self belief, defining what you will and won’t do, no matter the obstacles, you only fail when you quit, so we never quit. We’re all about empowering people to do for themselves with their lives what they want to do. We never say anything about level of difficulty or time frame for achieving dreams, don’t look at the clock and don’t get caught looking at the height of the mountain.

LLTM: For sound comparison, who would you compare yourself to you and why?

Brandon: We’re an all original high energy rock band, all of us love all kinds of different music. Brent is all about 90’s rock, Tony is all about great guitar playing and Chase and I are card carrying members of the KISS Army! I grew up listening to my dads old country albums, so when I learned to sing and play, it was all Hank Williams Sr. and Johnny Cash as well as Barry Manilow and John Denver and tons of rock! All the greats!!

LLTM: If you could walk in the shoes of anyone for 24 hours, who would it be and why?

Brandon: Nobody, because no one could be a better me than me, and I couldn’t do justice to someone else’s life because each of us is made with special talents and gifts, that makes us “us” and I wouldn’t have access to anyone else’s past experiences that have shaped them into who they are today. I hope that counts as an answer. But just for fun I guess Paul Stanley, playing a KISS show in all his glory would be fun!

LLTM: If you had to give up one thing for one month, to perform with anyone for one hour, what would you give up and who would you perform with?

Brandon: TV or sex, both are fun, but can be a major distraction and as for who? Probably Marc Hutner of the 90’s band Sugartooth, their 1st album has always been a major go to for me, the lyrics, guitar tones, feel, and everything, that’s who I’d perform with!

LLTM: If you could relate to any cartoon character, who would it be and why?

Brandon: Me personally, I’d say Daffy Duck, his sarcasm is a lot like mine. As a group I’d say we’re like “Super Friends”, we all bring something different to the table and we’re out to save the rock n roll world!!

LLTM: If you had a one person audience, who will it be and why?

Brandon: James Hetfield or my dad, Hetfield for all the inspiration and my dad, who’s passed away, never got to see me perform and he gave up his dreams of performing when he and mom had my older brother.

LLTM: What is one thing on your bucket list, you get to have completed?

Brandon: To write the perfect song, to own a Ibanez Iceman w/o something horrible happening within months of me getting it. I’ve had 3 and bad juju followed me each time I got one, I refuse haha.

LLTM: Has the writing and recording process began for new album or EP?

Brandon: We kicked off our return to the rock world in late ’15, started the “Atomic” run of shows in early ’16 and between interviews, shows and all the business side and a ton of personal issues for each of us on the aide, we managed to write an album and a 1/2 worth of new material, so the writing is all but finished, save a few lyrics and melodies, we started recording “Noize in the Blood” in August and things are going quite well so far, we’re trying something new as it’s an interactive recording process where we take anyone who’s following us in social media and give them snippets of the actual recording process, behind the scenes footage, pics, ect and we put different things in different platforms so there’s always something new people can find.

LLTM: Any touring plans for the remainder of 2017?

Brandon: No, we’re playing some shows with friends, the Outlands Rock Fest w/ Tantric, Smile Empty Soul and then some promo stuff. We’re pretty open about opportunities so if something comes along we may, but if not, we’re just going to focus on “Noize in the Blood” and worry about melting faces in 2018!!

For more info on Octalux from music, touring info or Merch…

http://www.facebook.com/octalux.rock

PEACE, LOVE AND MUSIC