Octalux is a high energy rock band encompassing and embracing all eras of beautiful rocknroll.

Delivering impassioned songs and dynamic performances; they aim to save rock n roll and take as many as they can along for the ride that wanna go. They stand for truth, justice and universally relatable viewpoints to all and they hold themselves to a high standard and push themselves to be the absolute best for their fans and for themselves! Check out DoomsDay Cupid below!

So how has your latest album/EP gone so far with fans then?

Hurley- the EP “Noize in the Blood” isn’t out yet, we’re releasing it very soon though. The recording process was a complete blast, we purposefully wanted to record differently than we had in the past, so we went in with the goal of if after the first to third take of a song, if it wasn’t clicking we’d move on to another tune and we set out to finish the songs one at a time in one session, so we all knew we had to be on top of our game when we walked in. Brent picked the first track we did and it turned out wonderfully so we had him pick out all of them when we went back in. Chase set the tempos for the most part and we fiddled around with a few at different speeds to see where we liked it best and Tony was worked like a mule, we wanted his best, he wanted his best and we kept pushing him and he kept pushing us, We all did some back ups and used some different instruments and all ideas were given a fair shot before they were tossed away for better ones

Tell us something about the release no one knows?

Hurley- we’ve all had to deal with things in our private lives in more than usual way, some were of a serious nature I won’t get into some were time consuming, frustrating etc, but somehow we pulled it all together and I personally think the music and each other pulled us all through to the finish line

If you could work with any band on a new song, who would it be and why?

Hurley- for me it would be KISS because Paul Stanley is a huge influence of mine and he knows how to make a great rock song!

How has your latest single been received?

Hurley- so much more than we expected, once we released “Doomsday Cupid” all our social media and private contacts blew up, Stephen Patek (the director) did a great job putting it all together and our friend The Madd Drummer (university of Kentucky band member) made an appearance in it as well. We’ve gotten compliments from strangers and friends and business associates, it’s really been nice to have our work being appreciated and enjoyed by others!

Can you tell us about the meaning behind the track?

Hurley- I could, but as a writer, I want the listener to derive their own meaning out of it. Find out what it means to them. I know what it means to me, but I don’t want to slant their interpretation. In general I write about believing in yourself and universal experiences such as love and betrayal and achieving goals

What tours do you have coming up, and what can you tell us about them?

Hurley- we’re looking into that at the moment and the finances and routing etc.

Have to get back to you on that haha

What venue are you most looking forward to playing the most, and why?

Hurley- I’d love to play in the Roman Coliseum, have to look into that possibility and set that up

What else can we expect from you in 2018?

Hurley- the physical and digital release of “Noize in the Blood”, shows, the Roman Coliseum gig, is going back into the studio for another ep or full album. We’re also supposed to be in a movie in the fall and then we’ll have to get around to making Paul’ Stanley’s dream come true of writing and recording with us!