Today’s band are a new one to us, as it should be – always nice to have something original to check out! Answering the questions on behalf of Octalux is guitarist / vocalist Hurley…

Simple things first – where are you guys from?

We’re based out of Lexington, KY.

How did you meet?

Shows and the internet. Chase and I knew of Tony through shows and other bands and Tony knew us. We heard that this guy named Brent was looking to be in a band and Chase and I snatched him up, then we added Tony and just let the magic flow from there. It’s really been the best of all worlds because we get along like brothers and have mutual respect for where the others are coming from in terms of ideas.

How long have you been playing as a band?

Octalux started as a project of mine in ‘99 and then I hooked up with Chase. Things got serious in ‘05. It feels like forever!

Before you get sick of being asked… where does the band name come from?

A friend of mine and I were drinking and were trying to come up with something original and catchy, woke up the next morning and “Octalux” was written on a piece of paper, moral of the story is drinking doesn’t make for catchy band names!

What are your influences?

For me it’s anywhere from KISS to Hank Williams Sr. to Barry Manilow.

Describe your music. What makes you unique?

We’re an amalgamation of all types of rock from all eras. Whatever we listen to drops its influence in our way of thinking and approach. We individually bring any given idea we each come up with. So what might start out as a grunge type song might end up a 70s style Aerosmith song, or a ballad might turn into a My Chemical Romance style song and so forth.

Do you have any particular lyrical themes?

I write all the lyrics. I write poetry and short stories and I’m a big fan of painting an ambiguous landscape so the listener can fill in the meaning of it with their own interpretation. I use my faith and fandom of certain bands or certain songs for the imagery especially when I’m stuck because there are universal things that a lot of people (or all people) can relate to.

What’s your live show like? How many shows have you played?

Our live shows are just energy. We don’t feel the need to blow you away with precision but we choose to play with passion and since the audience is there for a good time, we think we should be as well. All our shows are a once in a lifetime events for us, so whatever happen happens. If someone hits a wrong note or chord we’re ok with it and whoever makes the goof works hard to correct it. Plus we’re very good at reading each other. If something went way wrong we could get back on track in short order.

As far as how many shows… that’s probably a question we can’t answer because we go through periods where we’ve played a ton and then we’ve gone through periods where we make time for us to have lives outside the band.

What’s the wildest thing you’ve seen or done at a live show?

Seen would be two ladies pleasuring themselves while we played although I don’t know if they even realized we were playing, they were so into it!

Done would be me falling through a hole in a floor and keeping the song going while being stunned at what was going on.

What kit do you use / guitars do you play / etc.?

I’m pretty basic, I use a Vox combo an EVH distortion pedal and wah and I usually play a Washburn PS600 or a Washburn Priestess.

What are your plans for 2018?

We’re releasing our new EP Noize in the Blood soon, and just dropped the first single “Doomsday Cupid” from it. Then promo and shows and seeing where it takes us. Check out the video below!

If you were second on a three-band bill, which band would you love to be supporting and which band would you choose to open for you? A chance to plug someone you’ve toured with, or a mate’s band we’ve not heard of before!

To open for us? Hmmm, that would be Alice in Chains and then us and then KISS, at least for me.

Octalux: facebook | bandcamp