Rainswept hills, flocks of grazing sheep, hayricks and dank cottages form the picturesque backdrop of "On the Black Hill," but this is no happy bucolic scene. The story of the Jones family, for 80 years farmers on the Welsh-English border, has such a dark psychological undercurrent that in contemporary terms they seem the ultimate dysfunctional family.

But the film, which opens today at the Bleecker Street Cinema, is deliberately traditional and backward-looking. Like the 1982 Bruce Chatwin novel, on which it is based, the movie could never have existed without Thomas Hardy. These are Hardyesque country people rooted to a natural world that is less than benevolent. They are bound to one another in relationships that are part emotional necessity, part torture. Sheepshearing is the least of their problems.

In 1895, Mary Latimer, a minister's daughter played by Gemma Jones, marries a proud, rough-mannered farmer named Amos Jones (Bob Peck). There is no question that passion as well as desperation figures into Mary's choice, and no surprise for viewers when Amos starts smashing dishes on the floor and criticizing the way his wife folds napkins as "very posh."

These characters are trapped, partly by their own choices, partly by the literary conventions the story follows slavishly. But Miss Jones makes Mary's growing unhappiness affecting. As she grows to old age, her nose reddens and her face becomes gaunt, yet her eyes have an infinite capacity for disappointment. She lavishes attention on their twin sons, Benjamin and Lewis, while Amos dotes on their daughter, Rebecca.

With an unhurried pace and episodic manner, the story stops at crucial stages in the twins' lives. They are separated briefly, first by Lewis's work at a neighboring farm and later by Benjamin's service in the army. At those times, when one is hurt, the other literally bleeds. The family believes they cannot survive apart, but it is really Benjamin who cannot live without his brother. When Lewis, well into manhood, takes up with a woman for the first time, Benjamin is murderously angry. Mike and Robert Gwilym, real-life brothers seven years apart in age, deftly create Benjamin's hypersensitive nature and Lewis's frustrated resignation to bachelorhood.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.