The ex-girlfriend of EastEnders actor Steve McFadden is struggling to cope following their break-up three weeks ago.

Dr Rachel Sidwell, mother of his four-month-old daughter Amelie Tinkerbell, was arrested last week after allegedly damaging a parked moped outside McFadden's north London home.

Friends of the 42-year-old say they are concerned for her well-being as she adapts to looking after their daughter alone.

Strain: A tired and drawn Rachel Sidwell carries her daughter Amelie Tinkerbell into her north London home

Sidwell's arrest comes after a rocky year for the married mother - who left her surgeon husband Dr James Green last year after meeting McFadden on the school run.

But their romance quickly soured following the arrival of Amelie on June 29.

Sidwell moved out of their home in Highgate, north London last month and is now living back with her husband and their three children.

Pictured on Wednesday outside the family home in nearby Finchley, the mother-of-four looked drawn and tired as she cradled her baby daughter.

A friend of Sidwell told the Daily Mirror: 'Rachel's doing the best she can in the circumstances but gave up her life to be with Steve.

'She chose to leave her husband and children and give up a contented and fulfilling life.

The way they were: A pregnant Rachel Sidwell with Steve McFadden at his co-star Samantha Janus's wedding in May

'It was a case of love at first sight when she met Steve. But it all turned sour very quickly.

'Rachel is a different person now. She was warm, curvy and bubbly. Now she's shedding pounds every day.

'She cries all day and feels lost and unloved. It's tragic to see her so sad.'

McFadden, 50, who plays hardman Phil Mitchell on EastEnders, was said to be out at the time of the alleged incident on October 1 but his son Matt, 23, dialled 999.

Police dashed to McFadden’s home but there was no one left at the scene.

They later interviewed him when he returned to his house after being called by his son.

A Met Police spokesman said: 'We can confirm police were called to a disturbance at Highgate at 9pm on Thursday 1st October.

'A woman in her early 40s was arrested on suspicion of criminal damage after attending a north London police station by appointment the following day. Inquiries continue.'

The lovers had posed for a magazine spread after the birth of their daughter.

McFadden - who has a son with childhood sweetheart Sue Marshall and two other daughters with ex-girlfriend Angela Bostock - said at the time: 'This is a very exciting time for me.'