Eastenders mainstay Steve McFadden has thrilled and terrorised viewers of the iconic soap since he debuted as Phil Mitchell in the 90s.

The actor made a name for himself on the popular soap as one half of the Mitchell brothers duo Phil and Grant.

Despite causing havoc in the fictional East London borough of Walford, Steve has spent his years raising his family of five. From his turbulent love life to his fondness for singing and his radio debut, here is everything you need to know about the Eastenders icon almost three decades on from his arrival in Albert Square.

Where is Steve from and how old is he?

Steve McFadden was born in Maida Vale, in Westminster, London to parents Robert and Barbara Mallet Reid.

His parents separated soon after he was born, and his mother later married a man called John McFadden. Steve took his surname from his stepfather.

He is 62 years old, and was born on the 20th March 1959, making him a Pisces.

Does he have a family?

Steve is an only child himself, and has no siblings.

However, he does have five children of his own, and is a doting father. He usually keeps his family life under wraps and away from the public eye.

His son Matt McFadden's mother is childhood sweetheart Sue Marshall, and his son is believed to be in his mid thirties.

Angela Bostock is the mother of his daughters Teona and Mollie Jane.

Rachel Sidwell gave birth to his daughter Amelie Tinkerbell on 29 June 2009. The couple split two months after Amelie's birth, after a brief relationship.

He became a father again at the age of 57, his fifth child, with girlfriend Karen Cairns. Their daughter Frankie was born in June 2016.

In an interview with the Guardian it was reported that Steve is "determined" to be a good dad to all of his children.

Is he in a relationship?

Steve is currently in a relationship with long-term girlfriend Karen Cairns.

Steve prefers to keep his love life out of the public eye, and the couple have rarely made public appearances together.

He also dated co-star Lucy Benjamin for four years, with their high-profile relationship ending in 2003.

How did his career begin?

Steve studied acting at the RADA in the UK, and in 1987 he made his acting debut playing a small role in the 1988 television film The Firm .

He joined EastEnders at the beginning of 1990, at the same time as Ross Kemp, who played Phil's younger brother Grant Mitchell. He was reportedly really nervous to take up the role.

Phil and Grant seemed to style themselves on gangsters Ronnie and Reggie Kray, who previously ruled Albert Square with an iron fist.

Barbara Windsor played the brother's mother, Peggy.

He has had many stand out moments in his career, including winning the Outstanding Achievement accolade at the British Soap Awards in 2016.

His iconic character is currently embroiled in a shocking storyline, as he is hunted by police for Vincent Hubbard’s murder.

What is his Net Worth?

The English actor allegedly has a net worth of £2.5 million after his thirty years of service to the Eastenders soap, as well as his highly successful on stage career.

Does he have any hobbies?

Steve has a number of interests outside of Albert Square.

He is known to be an avid fan of the seaside, and spends his free time fishing or sailing in Falmouth, Cornwall. He has a boat in the area, and describes it as his second home.

The star is also has some hidden singing talents, which he debuts each year as he takes time away from Eastenders to perform in the Pantomime.

He also took a moment to perform Cheap Thrills by Sia while on Capital FM Birmingham, to the delights of listeners.

The actor also cycles frequently - an excellent and healthy way of keeping fit, and is a massive fan and supporter of Manchester United Football Club.