Steve McFadden is the EastEnders actor best known for his starring role as Phil Mitchell.

The 62-year-old first appeared on the soap in 1990, and since, then has made quite the impression on the British public as Walford's loveable rogue. On-screen, he has had an expansive relationship history dating the likes of Kathy Beale, Kat Slater and Sharon Watts.

In his personal life, Steve has had his fair share of romantic entanglements, including dating a co-star and fathering five children.

READ MORE: What happened to Lisa Shaw who famously shot Phil Mitchell and the actress who went out with him in real life

The actor dated Lucy Benjamin in 1999 and the pair stayed together until 2003.

Lucy played Lisa Fowler in the show and the pair dated on the soap.

She has made recurring appearances on the show even after the couple split.

Speaking on Loose Women in 2017 about working together, Lucy said: "It was more about the history between Lisa and Phil and there is so much water under the bridge with those two people."

"You just resort back to their storylines and the things they have gone through as characters. We didn't have to think about me and Steve and the old days.

"There is so much stuff between Lisa and Phil. It was easy to play that. It was strange really, but lovely to be working with Steve, Tish and Natalie Cassidy again.

"It was just like being with mates. They have been doing fabulous work and I knew that they would look after me and have my back upon my return."

Steve also has five children, one of whom was born when the actor was 57-years-old. With girlfriend Karen Cairns, Steve had his daughter in June 2016 who they named Frankie.

His older son is called Matthew and was born to his previous girlfriend, Sue Marshall. He also had another daughter, Amelie Tinkerbell in June 2009 with Rachel Sidwell.

Steve's younger two daughters, Teona and Mollie Jane, are mothered by ex-partner Angela Bostock.

Steve McFadden currently still stars as Phil Mitchell on BBC's EastEnders.

Want more news? Sign up for MyLondon's FREE newsletters here.