Steve McFadden is probably best known for his long starring role as Phil Mitchell on the soap EastEnders. He first made an appearance on EastEnders in 1990 and has since made a strong impression on the British public with his hot headed character.

Throughout the years on the soap, Phil Mitchell has had an expansive relationship history dating the likes of Kathy Beale, Kat Slater and Sharon Watts. Additionally, Steve has had his fair share of romantic entanglements off-screen, including dating a co-star and fathering five children.

Steve and Lucy began dating in 1999 and stayed together until their split in 2003. Lucy played Lisa Fowler in the show and their characters also dated on the soap Speaking on Loose Women in 2017, Lucy said: "It was more about the history between Lisa and Phil and there is so much water under the bridge with those two people." reports MyLondon

READ MORE: Eastenders' Adam Woodyatt 'in talks with producers to return' to soap amid Danny Dyer exit

"You just resort back to their storylines and the things they have gone through as characters. We didn't have to think about me and Steve and the old days.

"There is so much stuff between Lisa and Phil. It was easy to play that. It was strange really, but lovely to be working with Steve, Tish and Natalie Cassidy again. It was just like being with mates. They have been doing fabulous work and I knew that they would look after me and have my back upon my return."

Steve also has five children, one of whom was born when the actor was 57-years-old. With girlfriend Karen Cairns, Steve had his daughter in June 2016 who they named Frankie. His older son is called Matthew and was born to his previous girlfriend, Sue Marshall. He also had another daughter, Amelie Tinkerbell in June 2009 with Rachel Sidwell.

Steve's younger two daughters, Teona and Mollie Jane, are mothered by ex-partner Angela Bostock. Steve McFadden currently still stars as Phil Mitchell on BBC's EastEnders.

Sign up for our newsletters.