Few filmmakers are as generous toward actors as Alan Rudolph. That's why they flock to be in his films, even though the chances of a box office hit are next to nil. Like his actor-friendly mentor, Robert Altman, Mr. Rudolph is a maverick who has always gone his own way, strewing behind him a filmography (now 17 movies), the bulk of which might be described as ambitious failures.

''Trixie,'' this director's latest experiment in combining genres, tantalizingly (and accurately) bills itself as a ''screwball film noir.'' But with its off-kilter mixture of menace and cornball humor attached to a sketchy, sluggishly paced story whose holes are left gaping, it is unlikely to break the pattern.

The sad thing is that there is enough to admire about ''Trixie'' to make you wish it were much, much better, but not enough for the movie to be called even a qualified success. Still, ''Trixie'' is a comeback of sorts; it isn't half as frustrating as the surreal sludge Mr. Rudolph left behind last year with his impenetrable film adaptation of Kurt Vonnegut's ''Breakfast of Champions.''

''Trixie'' is above all a showcase for Emily Watson, who appears in almost every scene as the title character, a saucer-eyed, virginal amateur sleuth from Chicago (Ms. Watson lays on an extra-thick Midwestern accent) investigating a murder in a lakeside casino resort somewhere in the Far West. If Trixie is a much less meaty part than Ms. Watson's roles in ''Breaking the Waves'' and ''Hilary and Jackie,'' it still allows her ample space for flexing her talent, starting with that accent. And underneath the character's wary, prudish exterior lurks an erotic spark waiting to ignite.

With her carefully exaggerated accent, this squeaky-clean character often seems like a first cousin of Frances McDormand's intrepid, unfailingly polite police investigator in ''Fargo,'' the far superior Coen brothers film to which ''Trixie'' bears a sometimes uncomfortable resemblance. In much the same way that the Coens fetishized their heroine's squareness to throw us off balance by gently mocking her decency, Ms. Watson's Trixie is given to naively spouting slogans using the wrong words. ''You've got to grab the bull by the tail and look it in the eye,'' she blurts. Or ''That's the truth, the hole in the truth and nothing but the truth.''

Giving the character one or two goofy malapropisms might have been a refreshing touch. But the screenplay (written by Mr. Rudolph from a story he concocted with John Binder) makes the mistake of basing much of its humor on Trixie's continual verbal stumbling, and the joke is quickly beaten to death.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.