I produce commercial, top 40 sounding pop music, taking influence from electropop, hyperpop, rock, hip hop and R&B and offer producing, mixing and remixing services. My biggest achievement so far is producing 2 EPs for RuPaul's Drag Race UK Season 4 contestant Le Fil, with whom I created an array of songs of different genres on a strict deadline.

I have won a Grammy Award (mixer - Kylie Minogue) and worked with some of the biggest names in pop and dance music, delivering 100s of productions, mixes and remixes to the world's best-known record labels. I'd love to work with your vision and ideas, bringing my experience to your music, songs and recordings.

Music producer, remixer, songwriter & mix engineer with close to 20 years of experience in House, EDM, Indie Rock & Pop. I've collectively generated more than 100 million plays across Spotify, Youtube & Apple Music and have scored ad spots for Spotify, Heron Preston & The New York Times. Labels: Thrive, Nervous, Glassnote, Kitsuné & Vision One

I'm here to realize YOUR vision and make incredible music together! I'm a NYC based Producer, Mixer, DJ, Writer, who has worked with award winning artists, major labels, TV shows, and indie artists around the world. I specialize in Pop and Dance music, but have worked on thousands of songs across all genres. Get in touch with me and let's work!

Multi-platinum producer and Grammy Awards voting member. I’m signed to Sony Music Publishing (U, S,) and I’m specialized in producing and mixing (Stereo and Dolby Atmos) Pop and Hip Hop music. I’ll work on your music to make it sound like a hit, getting your voice to stand out as great as a true star.

I have been producing and recording artists for over 10 years. I have worked with artist such as ASAP Ferg, PNB Rock, Designer Ashanti, Bouyce Avenue, Solange, Boys II Men and many more.

I've produced for artists such as Kid Cudi, Phoebe Bridgers, MGK, Anderson Paak, Big Sean etc. I am a RIAA Certified Multi Platinum Producer whose work has been multiple times on Billboard Top Charts, and I've recently won the TV show “The Cut” by Redull! I would love to help improve your music and take it to the next level

I’m credited on Diamond, Multi-Platinum, and Grammy winning records for OneRepublic, Taylor Swift, Ariana Grande, Maroon 5, The Fray. I'm a Pop, Top-40, and Electro-Pop Producer/Songwriter who can bring out the best in your music.

I'm a UK-based producer and mixing engineer with over 2.5 million streams of my productions. I hold a BA (UNMB), Master's (Oxford) and, PhD (Surrey) in music, am a multi-instrumentalist, and specialize in pop, electronic, indie, and rock.

Looking for dark, moody productions à la FKA Twigs, Lana & Sevdaliza? Need a mix? I'm your guy. I produce, mix, write toplines, lyrics, orchestral arrangements, so I can easily help create a whole record from the bottom up. Formerly signed to Sony ATV publishing, Atlantic & Universal Records. Former live Ableton playback tech for Mike Shinoda.

Hi! I'm Turnipz, an artist and music producer from México who specializes in Electronic Pop and Synth Pop. I studied music production and audio technology in one of the best universities in México, and have been producing music for almost 7 years now. I love connecting and experimenting with music, and hope we can make something cool together.

Your best choice when it comes to music production, composition, mix and master if you're an aspiring artist who would love to be known on Spotify, Apple Music, etc. Songs that I produced/composed got into editorial playlists like "New Music Friday Philippines", "Fresh Finds Philippines", "Pinoy Indie Mix", "Kalye Hip-Hop" and "Chillax Sa Gabi".

Passionate about creating captivating musical experiences? Look no further. I am a dedicated audio engineer offering bespoke audio mixing and mastering services tailored to the modern Pop, Hip Hop, and EDM genres. I am committed to delivering exceptional results, ensuring that your music shines with clarity, depth, and impact.

Your music needs strong character to stand out from the crowd. I love to turn something good into something special - I want the hairs to stand up on the back of your neck when you hear your track back! I have many years experience of production, mixing, writing and collaboration that I can bring to the party.

Ethereal style music producer - I've produced all my own songs and I'm looking to help out others in their pursuit of a beginning music career!

Hi, I am a music producer with over 10 years of experience in the music making. I mostly work with indie artists on different genres ( POP, R&B, Rock..) I help artists develop their musical ideas, record, produce, mix and master their songs. I am a communication guy, and very aware of the emotional effect of writing and producing a song :)

Caleb Miller is an up-and-coming producer from Colorado known for his unique ability to write and build stories within his work. His first (and favorite) instrument to play was drums and he began as a live and session drummer at only 15 before he began to write and produce his own music.

With 15+ years of experience in music production and mixing / mastering, I will help you arrange your songs, add production if necessary, mix and master your tracks.

Let's bring out the best of your work! I like to work with you on a personal level, to get the best out of every production. My goal is to make something YOU are proud of. I love working on music and together we will elevate your song to the next level. Excited to work together!

Hyperpop progenitor and commercial music producer with a specialization in modern and underground subgenres ranging from Hyperpop, Bass House, K-pop, and Outrun. From start to finish, we can work on a song from a bare bones idea all the way up to a complete release in any electronic genre of your desire!

I'm a Music Producer specialized on Pop, Indie, EDM, Rock and Latin Urban Pop . I'm a session Drummer and multi instrumentalist with more than 7 years of experience on recording studio.

TreeHaus Recording is a full service recording studio, from tracking to production to mixing and more. We provide our clients with an inspiring space full of "big-name studio" gear without breaking the budget. The studio also accommodates freelance engineers, producers, and mixers. Our clients include acts such as Toto, Evanescence, Meghan Trainor

“The most important thing to me is how it makes you feel when it’s coming out the speakers.” I’m a Producer, Mixer and Songwriter from New Zealand now living in Nashville. I’ve had the pleasure of producing Billboard Charting albums and songs, and had my music used in spots for UbiSoft, ESPN, NBA, MLB, Jeep and others.

Professional producer and songwriter. I'm currently signed with PA74 Publishing and a member of PRS for Music in the UK. My music has appeared on BBC 6 Music and Hungary’s national Petőfi TV and has been released on Crossborder Records, Handheld Records and Soundtrip amongst others.

Music Producer with a great experience in Electro, Pop, Folk, Orchestral, and much more! I just want to deliver professional work, give you a modern sound, and build a great relationship!!!

Everyone will tell you "I'm your guy", but for real: I'm your guy ;) (well at least I hope so), if you are looking for a fresh and modern sound for your music or if you are looking for an innovative sounddesign for your film oder video. --- I'm new to this SoundBetter thing so let me know if you're missing some informations.

I have been producing for the last 5 years and have over 1 million listens on Soundcloud, and 350k listens on Spotify with my previous project.

I'm an Army Veteran, Producer, Engineer, and Songwriter in Downtown Los Angeles, CA. Need help with your Rock, Pop, Hip-Hop, or Cinematic track, I've been producing since 7 years and will work day and night to make your song a hit.

I look for the essence of the song and add or subtract as needed. I write, record, arrange, and produce for Lake South (electro-pop, indie pop), Wellington Sea Shanty Society and a bunch of other acts.

Monowhales, Loviet, CW Network, CBC and CTV. Projects have over 300,000 streams and millions of views on network TV. Specializing in taking indie artists to the next level of songwriting and production with over 15 years of experience

I’ve produced for brands like L’Oréal and Toyota, written toplines for Kontor Records and worked with countless artists from around the world. The songs I’ve worked on range from electronic pop, hip-hop to rock and have gained over 2 million streams on Spotify alone. I also have a solo alt-pop artist project under my own name “Dave Nellessen“.

Jr Stit loves to work with people around the world. This gives him the ability to share the diversity and talents of not just himself but other upcoming artists to the rest of the world.

I beat Pharrell to write & produce the theme song for Netflix's Chelsea Handler show. Since then, I opened my own studio & produce / mix other artists, as well as write TV/Film music for clients like Gatorade, MTV, Kardashians, Amazon, YouTube, Revlon, Pfizer etc. PS. I'm also a badass keyboardist if you need that.

I have earned many international awards at the John Lennon Songwriting Contest. I have had many first-place winnings at former Indabamusic with remixes for recording artists. I have released as Dimitrios Bitzenis more than two thousand tracks in most music genres. I run freesongs music a music background service for shops and businesses.

Here to help you make your project amazing! I've released on labels including bitbird, Next Wave / Ultra Music, & Moving Castle. I've been producing for 13 years & songwriting for 16. Bachelor of Music from NYU & Master of Music from Goldsmiths, University of London. I specialize in pop, experimental, & electronic music, but open to all genres.

I specialize in developing artists and helping them finish ideas they've already started. I've worked with numerous Pop, Electronic, R&B, Hip-Hop, and Rock artists to flesh out their unique sound and complete their songs.

Female Producer, Artist, Singer, Songwriter & Beatmaker. Versed in multiple genres like Pop, HipHop, Indie / Singer-Songwriter, Rock, DnB, and more. My specialties lie in vocal arrangements, electronic production, dark soundscapes, punchy beats and anything pop. So if that sounds like you, hit me up!

Have you just written some amazing toplines and need an EDM / Pop instrumental to match the vibe and take the song to the next level? I'm your producer.

Hi I'm Brandon. I'm a songwriter, music producer and mixing engineer. I produce and release music under the name Pets Like Pets and I also love to collaborate with other producers, vocalists and songwriters. Let's make something awesome together!

Hello, my name is Youceff, and making music is my passion. I produce, compose, and record as YUS. You can find most of my music on major streaming services, just look up Talisman or El Yunque, and you should find it. I work out of my home studio in Downtown Los Angeles, and have experience working with just about every genre.

Versatile trained songwriter, music producer, and mixing engineer. Recent graduate from Belmont University. Over 1.5M streams on current cowritten released works (total). 87.8 K streams from Demos on current Soundcloud releases (total). Hungry for collaboration, working on new projects, and creative flow!

Fresh, avant-garde takes on electronic and pop production, alongside expressive and polished mixing are among Austin's fortes. Artist and producer at Jynjo, Austin has garnered close to 6 million listeners on Spotify and 22 million views on YouTube.

30% DISCOUNT FOR NEW CLIENTS. Innovative electronic music producer, songwriter and mix engineer that brings projects to the next level. Detail oriented with over 20 years of experience producing for electronic, pop and indie projects that unite audiences worldwide through cutting edge sound.

I started in music at an early age, being classically trained in France and later studied jazz in the US. I believe that combining this background with my passion for audio engineering, electronic sounds and years of experience as a performer in LA gives me a uniquely wide perspective on music.

I produce songs I believe in and pitch for sync opportunities. Music Supervision is a big part of what I do, Searching for songs for clients like FX Networks, Warner Bros., Universal, Netflix and others. My production will level up your artistry making the track not only sync-ready but ready for expanding your fan base.

Graduate of LA music production/business school, Icon Collective, Kelly Romo does it all from solo releases, official remixes, and tailored production. Kelly Romo is proficient in music production, songwriting, & vocal recording and processing with a unique and identifiable style that adjusts to the sound and desires of the artists she works with.

I’ve produced for 10 years & a touring artist for 6. Over 200 million streams on my own music all produced, mixed & mastered by me and my partner. Official remixes were done for Katy Perry, The Chainsmokers, Louis the Child & more.