It’s been a whirlwind year for Trixie Mattel. Not only did the queen take the crown on RuPaul’s Drag Race All Stars 3, but she dropped her second album, One Stone (which topped the Heatseekers Albums chart) and sat down for an interview with Larry King.

Instead of resting on her laurels, the queen is looking to the future and prepping her next album. Ahead of her appearance at RuPaul’s DragCon NYC (Sept. 28-30), the queen talked to Billboard about her upcoming “electro-folk” album, her erotic Eminem fantasy and her advice to the queens of All Stars 4: “If you don’t win today, just survive to win tomorrow. That is how I did it.”

How are you? It’s been a while!

Yeah, since maybe the Haters’ Roast?

Yeah. Or maybe since One Stone hit No. 1 on the Heatseekers Chart?

That was wild.

Are we getting any more music videos from One Stone?

I have moved on from the One Stone. But I’m working on material for the next album right now. We’re shooting the new music video pretty soon and, actually, around DragCon, I’m carving out time to be in the studio recording the new single for the next album. Girl, you know how music is — it’s coming down the pipe so far in advance. I wrote “Moving Parts” from One Stone, like, what, two years ago?

That’s amazing. So is this new record going to be a club-ready, EDM moment?

Actually, there is a bit of a genre shift. You’re gonna die. It’s gonna be a little bit more, like, electro-folk. There will be mandolin and a keytar. It’s been a happier year for me, so imagine folk music being played through a Dance Dance Revolution machine. That’s what I’m hoping for.

Wow. So kind of like, Kacey Musgraves’ “High Horse,” maybe?

Yeah yeah yeah yeah! Like honky-tonk, but more Devo.

Has your inevitable collab with Kacey happened yet?

Oh my god, wouldn’t that be amazing, honestly. I mean, she is so gorgeous, she makes you want to have black hair. That’s how pretty she is. But, of course, it’s not the hair that makes her pretty. It’s her features and voice and personality, you know.

Have you two talked yet?

No, it’s almost like she’s really famous, and not just a T-shirt peddling cross-dresser.

You know what’s funny? I’m such a country fan of hers that even with her genre sort of shift, from her newest album, “Slow Burn” was my favorite ’cause I think her ballads are so good. Her voice and her songwriting is honestly so good.

Totally. I know you’re not a pop culture junkie, but have you heard about Eminem using a homophobic slur on his latest album?

Um, I want Eminem to come to my house, break into my bedroom, and tear my clothes off and call me a homophobic slur. There’s a David LaChapelle picture of him, jerking off with the dynamite. I mean, I still think about that.

Ha! Unrelated, but have you seen this talk about the idea of Disney casting a drag queen as Ursula for the live action Little Mermaid? The character was inspired by Divine, so fans (and Billboard) are hoping they cast a drag queen.

Oh, they’re doing a live-action one? I think, honestly, knowing Hollywood, they’ll cast some straight guy and put him in drag, and everyone will talk about how brave he is. You’re gonna get John Goodman, put him in a lace front, and be like, “Wow! You really are brave!” Drag queens doing drag is not brave, but straight people pretending to be gay is incredibly brave.

Oh god, could you imagine? So DragCon is right around the corner. Do you have any recommendations for performances or panels to check out?

In LA, I kicked off DragCon with a performance on the main stage, and now in NYC, you can catch Aquaria performing, who’s gonna do probably something like I did but very entertaining with a small waist and a prettier face — so just like better. So go to that.

And if I could pick a panel to go to, there’s one called Judge Judies. It’s Michelle, Carson and Ross talking about what it’s like to judge Drag Race. As somebody who’s competed three times, I would like to get their minds. If you’re a fan of the show, don’t you want to hear about their process of what it’s like to have to judge us? That’s interesting to me.

I’m curious, All Stars 4 was announced: is there a queen you’d like to see in the cast?

Of course. Tammie Brown, over and over again. I want Tammie on the cast. I want Tammie judging. I want Tammie as a guest judge. She’s the choreographer. She’s everything to me. The ideal Drag Race season is Tammie on every role.

I would watch the shit out of that. I was so happy when she did our Spillin’ the Tea roundtable — her and Jasmine Masters. They’re so brilliant.

Oh my god, Jasmine is eeeverything. She’s so magnetic. So fun. She needs air-conditioning and some bottled water and the permission to smoke weed, and she will keep you entertained for hours.

She’s somebody who just likes drag. She likes entertaining, she likes talking to people, she’s nice. She’s always smiling and she always has the cutest little Patti LaBelle wig on with the most giant, over-the-top jewelry. She’s fucking funny!

Do you have any advice to girls that are competing on All Stars 4?

Well, let me just say, slow and steady wins the race. Drag Race is no longer cumulative. If you don’t win today, just survive to win tomorrow. That is how I did it.

It’s not about impressing the judges, it’s about impressing each other, because at the end of the day, the judges are not the ones pulling the lipstick.

Do you think they’re gonna change it up for next season, or do you think they should leave it?

I think they should leave it. I like it as-is. I mean, who better to judge who should win than queens who were behind-the-scenes, in the workroom. They’ve seen everything. That’s a very informed group, that’s a very informed jury. Judges only see us on the runway. They don’t see the humanity and all that backstage. They don’t see how people deal with stress, and how people are in rehearsals. Stuff like that — that matters, you know?