Metta World Peace Biography

Ronald Artest, Jr. also known as Metta World Peace is a professional basketball player who was regarded as one of the league’s premier defenders. In his teen years, World Peace played on the same AAU team with future NBA players Lamar Odom and Elton Brand. World Peace attended St. John’s University from 1997-1999 where he led the Red Storm to the Elite Eight of the NCAA Division I Tournament, but fell to Ohio State. The Chicago Bulls selected World Peace in the 1st round as the 16th overall pick in the 1999 NBA Draft. During his rookie year, World Peace was named to the NBA All-Rookie Second Team. He spent two and a half years with the Bulls before being traded to the Indiana Pacers in 2002. During the 2003-04 season, World Peace made the 2004 NBA All-Star Game and he was named the Defensive Player of the Year. World Peace has also played for the Sacramento Kings, Houston Rockets, Los Angeles Lakers, New York Knicks and Sichuan Blue Whales. In 2010, World Peace and the Lakers were the NBA Champions.

Book Metta World Peace for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Metta World Peace for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Metta World Peace. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Metta World Peace, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Metta World Peace's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Metta World Peace, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Metta World Peace for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Metta World Peace for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Metta World Peace for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Metta World Peace’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Metta World Peace for your Virtual Meeting