Metta World Peace, a.k.a Ron Artest, joined a local Houston radio station on Monday to discuss a typical day in the off-season, his thoughts on LeBron James’ play in the Finals so far and Dwight Howard’s impending free-agency.

—- See Dwight Howard through the years in photos! —-

When asked about Dwight Howard’s plans this off-season, World Peace quickly dismissed any possibilities of Howard going to Houston:

“Well, he’s not going to Houston. I’ll tell you that.”

The Houston Rockets are one of the rumored teams Dwight Howard is interested in as they enough cap room to sign him and a young core centered around James Harden, Chandler Parsons and Omer Asik. Regardless of what the Rockets have to offer, World Peace remained confident with his response and further explained his reasoning the only way Ron Artest knew how to:

“The bulls that you bullfight…those things that you tie those things to the bulls that make them go crazy? I got two of those things tied to Dwight Howard’s t——–, so he can’t move.”

It shouldn’t come as a surprise that World Peace would somehow connect Howard’s free agency to bullfighting. During Game 4 of the NBA Finals, Ron Artest decided to have some fun creating some new acronyms for some players and comparing the Miami Heat and San Antonio Spurs to burgers on Twitter.

After stringing together another memorable quote to add to his collection, Artest was finally at peace and discussed what his plans are to keep Howard in a Lakers uniform:

“Well you know what? I’m not going to try and convince him but definitely, I enjoy him. No question about it. He’s a great person. Whoever receives Dwight Howard… they are going to enjoy their time with him. Hopefully, it’s the Lakers”

Despite all the negativity surrounding Dwight Howard in his first season as a Laker, it is nice to hear a teammate so complimentary of the All-Star center. While there is a lot of uncertainty surrounding Ron Artest’s future as a Laker, he has been extremely loyal to the organization and hopeful that Howard will still be his teammate this upcoming season.

—————————————————————————————————————–