Intel Corporation and Cisco Systems announced an expansion of their existing

alliance to deliver new capabilities that enhance the reliability of wireless

LANs and deliver higher-quality services. It allows enterprises to use computers

and the network as a combined defense against security threats.

The two companies have jointly produced a new set of features, called

Business Class Wireless Suite, designed for companies using Cisco's Unified

Wireless Architecture and Intel Centrino mobile technology. The Suite includes:

Optimal access point (AP) selection technology to enable Intel Centrino mobile

technology-based clients to scan for the best AP for faster, more reliable and

efficient roaming within a business wireless LAN. It also has Enhanced Voice

over IP (VoIP) quality of service (QoS) technology to improve the audio clarity

and enable reliable voice communications for laptops.

The suite provides an enhanced set of capabilities that makes wireless LANs

more robust for the enterprise, supporting enhanced roaming and business

applications such as VoIP. It reinforces the previous efforts between Intel

and Cisco with regard to the development of the Cisco Compatible Extensions (CCX)

program for wireless LAN client interoperability. These features will be

available from Cisco and Intel in the first quarter of 2006.

Intel will join the Network Admission Control (NAC) program, an industry

effort led by Cisco to help customers identify, prevent, and adapt to security

threats, and Cisco will join the Intel Active Management Technology (AMT)

program. Intel AMT is part of Intel's Digital Office initiative, providing

capabilities to make new levels of IT manageability possible.

With Cisco NAC interoperating with Intel AMT, enterprises will be better

able to defend against security threats, helping to maintain user and business

productivity and reduce the cost of security attacks and improve system

remediation. Customers can expect Cisco NAC and Intel AMT to be compatible in

the fourth quarter of this year.

"Our expanded strategic alliance with Intel on security and wireless

demonstrates our commitment to deliver unified solutions that drive higher

levels of usability, performance and security for our customers," said

Charles Giancarlo, Chief Development Officer at Cisco Systems. "Security

continues to be a major concern for organizations, and with Intel representing

the first silicon manufacturer to join the NAC industry effort, client devices

can continue to be treated as trusted elements on the network."

"Businesses increasingly rely on computing and network infrastructure

to improve the way they interact and conduct their business," said Sean

Maloney, Executive VP and GM of the Intel Mobility Group. "Our continued

collaboration with Cisco combines our two companies' strengths in computing

and networking to drive the convergence of these technologies and enable new,

innovative uses of technology. As the first networking company to join the

Intel AMT program, Cisco brings an important perspective on the role of the

network in securing and managing IT assets."