By Corynne Cirilli. Photos by: Getty Images.

Aretha Franklin may have left her humble Memphis, Tennessee, roots when she was barely two years old, but the city is nevertheless desperate to save its small connection to the “Queen of Soul.". In 1942, Franklin was born in the tiny wooden home, but her family left Memphis about two years later. Now, the Memphis mayor’s office is trying to save the dilapidated structure, left vacant for years, to preserve it as a landmark. A group from the mayor's office is seeking funding sources to to assist in the preservation and future use of the historic home.

Franklin isn’t the only star whose childhood home hasn’t been deemed landmark-worthy. Plenty of stars homes, living and deceased, have not received official landmark status. Below, we visit the places where some of the most famous faces in Hollywood grew up — and the hometowns that should consider following in Memphis’s footsteps.

MADONNA

These days, Madonna’s permanent residences are in London and New York—but the pop star grew up in flyover country. Madonna Louise Ciccone lived in a two-story brick Colonial in Rochester Hills, Michigan (about thirty minutes outside Detroit) with her parents and seven siblings until she was 18. Her father and stepmother moved out in July 2001, selling the home for $270,000, but in 2008 the home burned down, reportedly due to arson. It later sold partial state for $91,700 in 2012. The property still attracts hordes of tourists to this day, despite the home not being in its original condition.

FARRAH FAWCETT

Famous for her feathered blond hair and a starring role on “Charlie’s Angels,” Farrah Fawcett got her start in Texas. Before heading to Hollywood, Fawcettlived with her parents (her father was an oil man) in this 4-bedroom, 3-bathroom house in Corpus Christi, Texas. After her 2009 death, the actress’s childhood home was remodeled with new paint, tile, carpeting, lighting and bathroom fixtures before being listed for $215,000.

More: Step Inside 37 Celebrity Dining Rooms

MARLON BRANDO

This five-bedroom, four-bathroom frame house in Omaha, Nebraska, is where legendary actor Marlon Brando grew up with his father (a pesticide and chemical feed manufacturer) mother, and two older sisters. (Fun fact: After winning an Oscar in 1973, Brando returned to the house and shocked the new owners by asking for a tour.) Public records show the 4,119-square-foot home was built in 1900 and while it has been updated and now includes a pool, it’s yet to be landmarked.

MICHAEL JACKSON

The Jackson family’s Gary, Indiana, residence was The King of Pop’s first home. And while the house has long been part of the history of Michael and the Jackson Five’s rise from poverty to International fame, the tiny 672 square foot two-bedroom, one-bath house (which housed 11 people) has never been made a historic landmark. The property is reportedly still owned by the family.

JANIS JOPLIN

Oh lord won’t you buy me … a music legend’s childhood home? In the 1940s and 1950s, Janis Joplin grew up in this Port Arthur, Texas, house. She even carved her first name into the floor of the garage in the 1,450-square-foot, five-bedroom residence. Though the homeowners did contact the Museum of the Gulf Coast about acquiring the house, the museum declined. It went on the market last year for $500,000.

More: Matthew McConaughey Keeps His Customized Airstream Trailer in Malibu

KURT COBAIN

In one of the rare cases of preserved childhood homes, Nirvana lead singer Kurt Cobain’s Aberdeen, Washington home is pretty much in the same condition as when he lived there. From the flowered wallpaper and shag carpeting to the linoleum floors and yellow Formica kitchen counters, the grunge icon’s mother Wendy O’Connor didn’t remodel after the musician died in 1994. Many hope the home does eventually become a tribute museum as thousands visit the nearby Kurt Cobain Memorial Park annually.

BARACK OBAMA

Other than the four years he spent living in Indonesia between 1967 and 1971, President Barack Obama was raised primarily in Honolulu, Hawaii. Though he and his family lived in multiple houses there, Obama’s first boyhood home was a pale yellow bungalow on Kalaniana'ole Highway in Makiki. The current owners bought the house without ever knowing the 44th president of the United States lived there, and, though it’s not a historical site, they say many people come by to photograph the residence.

JENNIFER LOPEZ

She started out as "Jenny From the Block" but musician and actress Jennifer Lopez went on to be one of the most famous names in Hollywood. The block where she started out was Blackrock Avenue in the Bronx, New Y ork in a five-bedroom three-bathroom townhouse in the Castlerock neighborhood. Her family sold the house in 1999 — the year “If You Had My Love” was released and hit the Billboard Hot 100. Though the fireworks set the home ablaze in 2003, it was eventually fixed and resold.

More: Kourtney Kardashian's Tips for Designing the Ultimate Kids' Rooms

This story originally appeared on Architectural Digest.

More from Architectural Digest:

126 Stunning Celebrity Homes

Inside Jennifer Aniston's Gorgeous Beverly Hills Home

Ellen DeGeneres' Amazing California Estate

Sarah Jessica Parker's Epic West Village Townhouse

Inside Khloe and Kourtney Kardashian's California Dream Homes