Efforts to preserve and renovate Aretha Franklin's Memphis birthplace are heating up in the wake of the Queen of Soul's death, with the home's current owner saying she will be in court Tuesday to make sure her interests are protected.

Vera Lee House for about 30 years has owned the dilapidated 1920s clapboard cottage where Franklin was born. She said through a spokeswoman Monday that her and her family's interests will not be overlooked as plans for making the house a shrine to Franklin's legacy move forward.

More: Efforts to preserve Aretha Franklin's childhood Memphis home has been ongoing saga

More: Memphis soul veterans mourn Aretha Franklin, recall her musical connections to the city

"They want to turn this into a Graceland, which is fine, but we want to make sure that, whatever goes down, Mrs. House has a better life as a result of that," said Patricia Rogers, a community leader speaking on House's behalf.

Rogers and members of House's family are expected to attend an Environmental Court hearing set for 10:30 a.m. Tuesday. The hearing was already scheduled prior to Franklin's Aug. 16 death in Detroit.

Environmental Court has been overseeing efforts to preserve the South Memphis property at 406 Lucy Ave. since 2012, when it was declared a public nuisance because of rotting floors and a collapsing roof. Retired Judge Larry Potter saved it from the wrecking ball amid competing plans for how to honor Franklin.

Franklin's connection to the house was slim — she was born there on March 25, 1942, but her family moved to Detroit when she was 2 years old. Franklin did in later years, however, become involved in efforts to preserve the home.

Rogers said House — who at one point submitted a plan to make the home the headquarters of WLRM-AM 1380, a small blues and soul radio station — wants the home to remain in its current location regardless of how it is used. House also would like to see Lucy Avenue renamed Aretha Franklin Avenue.

Other proposals have floated the idea of moving the home, perhaps closer to the Stax Museum in Soulsville, and making it a tourist attraction there.

Judge Potter put the property into receivership and named Jeffrey Higgs of South Memphis Renewal Community Corp. the receiver.

Higgs could not immediately be reached Monday about Rogers' comment, but he said following Franklin's death that those seeking to restore the home are "in a pretty good position to move forward."

He said untangling ownership issues was among the problems that have slowed plans for the home's future, but that grant money has been secured and a plan is in place that he cannot yet discuss.

The only visible signs of progress at the house so far are a fence that was erected to secure the property and a historical marker noting the home's significance.

One issue House, who now lives the next street over from Lucy on Simpson Avenue, faces in preserving her interest in the property is paying property taxes. Rogers said just under $1,200 is owed, and a fundraising effort is afoot to raise the money. Rogers said she will bring some of the money to court Tuesday and ask for time to raise the remainder.

Mildred House, one of 12 children Vera House raised at the Lucy Avenue home, said her family is eager to see Franklin's Memphis heritage preserved as long as her family's voice is part of the process.

"We think it'll be good for Memphis, Tennessee," House said. "But it's also ours. We think this can be part of something great."

Added Rogers, "Everybody has their own agenda. This is going to be a long process, but we just want to make sure these folks (the House family) are respected."