MEMPHIS, TN (WMC) - She sang about respect, and she earned it.

Aretha Franklin died Thursday after several days on hospice care.

Franklin was born in Memphis, Tennessee, on March 25, 1942.

She lived in a cottage home on Lucy Avenue, a home now recognized by the city as a historic landmark.

Moments after her death was announced, fans flocked to her childhood home to leave flowers and words of love on the building's exterior.

"Just devastated. Just devastated, but I've been trying to prepare myself for it because I knew this day would come," Anthony Prather said.

"I don't know; it's like a part of Memphis is dying. I don't know; I just felt moved," Erica Qualy said.

August 16 is a day of mourning in Memphis--and for music fans around the world. In addition to now being the date Aretha Franklin died, it's also the day Elvis Presley died.

"Two of the greatest people died on this day is tragic. It really stinks, but like we remember them by playing their music everyday and their greatest hits," Erica Stephenson said.

Elvis fans were already in the Bluff City remembering the King of Rock 'n' Roll. Music experts said August 16 will go down as a bittersweet day for the city.

"Every year as it rolls around--we get through celebrating Memphis in May and we get through celebrating Live at the Garden--August 16 is always going to roll around. It's always going to be a bittersweet day for Memphis, Tennessee, because we lost two of the greatest musicians that might have ever walked the Earth," Memphis Rock and Soul Museum Executive Director John Doyle said.

Unlike Elvis, Franklin spent just a few years in the Bluff City. Her father, a Baptist preacher, moved the family to Detroit shortly after she was born.

Her musical talents encompassed not only a powerhouse voice; she was also a gifted pianist.

By age 14, she recorded some of her earliest music in church.

"Her music has a lot of roots in gospel, so it really gets to your core being and when she plays the piano, it's phenomenal," Boo Mitchell said.

Mitchell, Royal Studios' co-owner, has fond memories of his father Willie Mitchell's time with Franklin.

"My dad and my Uncle James and I think the rest of the Memphis Horns would go to most of her shows and do sessions for her," Mitchell said. "She sent my dad something for his wedding anniversary and I can't remember what it was but she signed the card to the maestro."

Franklin later visited New York and signed with Columbia Records.

Her 1967 cover version of Otis Redding's "Respect," written in Memphis at Stax Record Company, helped catapult her to fame.

"And now it's number five on the Rolling Stones' Top 500 Songs of All Time," Tim Sampson, communications director at Stax Museum of American Soul Music, said.

"Next door at the Stax Music Academy, the kids learn a lot of Aretha Franklin's music, and when they do, you can tell that they feel very honored to be performing music by somebody like Aretha Franklin," Sampson said.

Franklin won a Grammy for her cover of Sam and Dave's Hold On, I'm Comin', which was written by David Porter and Issac Hayes.

"I was a friend and just a huge fan as well," Porter said. "There's certainly a spirit in this community--because of Memphis as a community--that's grounded in music credibility to have had the wonderful gift of the life of Aretha Franklin born in this city."

Franklin's dominance on the charts earned her the title "Queen of Soul."

"She just had that special something in her voice that was like velvet, but it also had all that soul in it," Sampson said.

In 1987, she was the first woman to be inducted in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.

In 2003, she was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom.

"Everybody could relate to Aretha Franklin because when she'd sing, 'you make me feel like a natural woman,' you believed her," Sampson said. "She had a way of connecting with people that few artists ever possessed."

In 2008, The Queen of Soul returned home to perform by the Mississippi River for Memphis In May.

"We chased after her for--I bet, the 20 years that I've been here; you know the first 10 years--before finally we were able to secure a performance with her," Memphis In May CEO Jim Holt said.

Franklin's Beale Street Music Festival performance happened Sunday, May 4, 2008. Then-Mayor Willie Herenton declared the day Aretha Franklin Day.

"She had a great crowd that night. I think we had Michael McDonald open up for her with the Doobie Brothers, and she just really, really wowed the crowd," Holt said. "She was excited about playing Memphis. She had not played in Memphis--even though she was born here--very frequently, and it was a special night."

Franklin was actually asked to headline the 2018 BSMF, but she declined due to a prior commitment. She ended up canceling that prior commitment due to health reasons.

President Barack Obama invited Franklin to sing at his inauguration in 2009. She performed My Country 'Tis of Thee.

With 18 Grammy awards, Franklin is one of the most celebrated singers and musicians of all time.

"There will always be awesome singers, but there will only be one Aretha Franklin," Mitchell said.

Aretha Franklin was 76 years old.

The Memphis community has began to share their condolences on her passing.

"Aretha Franklin taught to world what R-E-S-P-E-C-T meant and what it was like to feel like a 'natural woman.' From her humble origins -- born at 406 Lucy Street in Memphis -- to her consistent place atop the Billboard charts, Aretha Franklin was truly the 'Queen of Soul.' What a voice and what a passion she brought to her songs. Detroit, Memphis and the whole world has lost a very bright star." -- Congressman Steve Cohen

The National Museum of African American Music in Nashville also shared a statement on her passing:

"The Queen of Soul" was born in Memphis, steeped in the gospel tradition of her father's church, and made an indelible impression on American popular music with songs like "Respect" and "You Make Me Feel Like A Natural Woman." Her powerful voice and skillful songwriting made Aretha Franklin one of the top-selling artists of all time and earned her 18 Grammy awards, along with a Presidential Medal of Freedom, several honorary degrees, an array of lifetime achievement awards and a place in the hearts of all Americans.

Franklin's influence on subsequent generations of musicians is too pervasive to sum up in a few words; but perhaps President Barack Obama described it best when he said that her music "captures the fullness of the American experience, the bottom as well as the top, the good and the bad, and the possibility of synthesis, reconciliation, transcendence."

Aretha Franklin was a true genius of American music. We hope that her journey is a peaceful one. While we look forward to celebrating her at the National Museum of African American Music, she will be sorely missed.

Copyright 2018 WMC Action News 5. All rights reserved.