Aretha Franklin bio, age, death, career, net worth, family & more-Former American singer and pianist, Aretha Louise Franklin was born on March 25, 1942.

Franklin was born in Memphis, Tennessee in the United States of America to Barbara Sigers and Clarence LaVaughn Franklin. She shares the same parents with her five siblings; Erma, Carolyn, Carl Ellan, Rev. Cecil and Vaughn Franklin.

READ ALSO: Aretha Franklin Net Worth: How Much Is Aretha Franklin Worth?

She went to public school in Detroit as well, spending her first year at Northern High School before quitting her sophomore year.

Before Aretha was ten, on March 7, 1952, her mother passed away from a heart attack. At the Franklin home, a number of people, including Mahalia Jackson and Aretha’s grandmother Rachel, took turns looking after the kids. Aretha developed her ear for the piano at this time.

Aretha Franklin nationality

Franklin was born in Memphis, Tennessee in the United States of America. She was an American.

Aretha Franklin death

On August 16, 2018, Franklin reportedly died at her home in Riverfront Towers, Detroit after she was reported to be gravely ill on August 13, 2018. She died at the age of 76.

On August 19, a memorial service was held at New Bethel Baptist Church. The public lying-in-repose service was held at the Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History, where thousands of people paid their respects.

Aretha Franklin age

Franklin was born on March 25, 192 and she died on August 16, 2018, hence she was 76 years of age at the time of her death.

Aretha Franklin net worth

Franklin had a net worth estimated to be about $80 million.

Aretha Franklin height and weight

Franklin stood at a height of 5 ft. 5 inches and weighed 79kg.

Aretha Franklin education

Franklin attended the Northern High School.

Aretha Franklin career

Franklin’s gospel singing garnered attention while she was a little kid at the New Bethel Baptist Church in Detroit, Michigan, where her father, C. L. Franklin, served as a preacher.

She joined Columbia Records as a recording artist when she was 18 years old. Franklin’s career did not take off right away, but after signing with Atlantic Records in 1966, she began to get praise and experience financial success.

Franklin rose above her musical contemporaries thanks to the success of songs like “I Never Loved a Man (The Way I Love You),” “Respect,” “(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Woman,” “Chain of Fools,” “Think,” and “I Say a Little Prayer.”

Before running into issues with the record label, Franklin continued to release critically praised albums like I Never Loved a Man the Way I Love You (1967), Lady Soul (1968), Spirit in the Dark (1970), Young, Gifted and Black (1972), Amazing Grace (1972), and Sparkle (1976).

In 1979, Franklin parted ways with Atlantic and joined Arista Records. Before recording the popular albums Jump to It (1982), Who’s Zoomin’ Who? (1985), and Aretha (1986) on the Arista label, the singer made an appearance in the 1980 movie The Blues Brothers.

With the Lauryn Hill-produced song “A Rose Is Still a Rose” in 1998, Franklin made a comeback to the Top 40. She then issued an album of the same name.

Franklin has 112 singles that reached the US Billboard charts, including 73 Hot 100 entries, 17 top ten pop singles, 100 R&B entries, and 20 R&B hits that reached number one.

Besides the songs mentioned above, the singer’s other well-known hits include “Ain’t No Way,” “Call Me,” “Don’t Play That Song (You Lied”),” “Spanish Harlem,” “Rock Steady,” “Day Dreaming,” “Until You Come Back to Me (That’s What I’m Gonna Do”),” “Something He Can Feel,” “Jump to It,” “Freeway of Love,” “Who’s Zoomin’ Who,” and “

Franklin received 44 nominations, however, she only received 18 Grammy Awards, including the first eight for Best Female R&B Vocal Performance (1968–75), the Grammy Awards Living Legend title, and the Lifetime Achievement Award.

Franklin won a lot of awards during the course of her career. She received both the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the National Medal of Arts.

She was the first female musician to be admitted to the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame in 1987. Additionally, she was admitted into the Gospel Music Hall of Fame in 2012 and the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2005.

The songwriter received a posthumous special commendation from the Pulitzer Prize jury in 2019 “for her indelible contribution to American music and culture for more than five decades”. Franklin received her induction into the National Women’s Hall of Fame in 2020.

Aretha Franklin family and siblings

Franklin was born to Barbara Sigers and Clarence LaVaughn Franklin. She shares the same parents with her five siblings; Erma, Carolyn, Carl Ellan, Rev. Cecil and Vaughn Franklin.

Aretha Franklin husband

Franklin was married twice in her life but was reportedly single at the time of her death.

Aretha Franklin children

Franklin had four sons; Kecalf Cunningham, Clarence Franklin, Edward Franklin and Teddy Richards.

Aretha Franklin religion

Franklin was a Christian.

Aretha Franklin social media

Source: www.Ghgossip.com

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7qLTGqKqsoaBjsLC5jpqpnqyYlnqnvsCnoqWhnmKvqrvGq5ipoKlk