Murata Manufacturing Co., Ltd. (OTCMKTS:MRAAY - Get Free Report)'s stock price dropped 0.6% during trading on Tuesday . The stock traded as low as $9.00 and last traded at $9.30. Approximately 490,990 shares were traded during mid-day trading, an increase of 66% from the average daily volume of 295,733 shares. The stock had previously closed at $9.36.

Murata Manufacturing Stock Down 0.6 %

The stock has a market cap of $35.14 billion, a PE ratio of 28.18 and a beta of 0.86. The firm has a fifty day moving average of $10.53 and a 200 day moving average of $9.89.

Murata Manufacturing (OTCMKTS:MRAAY - Get Free Report) last issued its quarterly earnings data on Tuesday, July 30th. The company reported $0.11 earnings per share (EPS) for the quarter, topping the consensus estimate of $0.10 by $0.01. The company had revenue of $2.71 billion for the quarter, compared to analyst estimates of $2.63 billion. Murata Manufacturing had a return on equity of 7.63% and a net margin of 11.62%. On average, equities research analysts forecast that Murata Manufacturing Co., Ltd. will post 0.52 EPS for the current fiscal year.

Murata Manufacturing Company Profile

(Get Free Report)

Murata Manufacturing Co, Ltd. designs, manufactures, and sells ceramic-based passive electronic components and solutions in Japan and internationally. It operates through Components, Devices and Modules, and Others segments. The company offers capacitors, inductors, noise suppression products/EMI suppression filters/ESD protection devices, resistors, thermistors, sensors, timing devices, quartz devices, sound components, power products, batteries, micro mechatronics, RFID product, baluns, couplers, filters, phase shifters, RF switches, front-end modules, SAW components, connectors, antennas, connectivity modules, wireless connectivity platforms, ionizers/active oxygen modules, and transformers.

Recommended Stories

Five stocks we like better than Murata Manufacturing

Investing In Preferred Stock vs. Common Stock

Uber's Earnings Beat: Rideshare and Delivery Surge

3 Small Caps With Big Return Potential

Hims & Hers Reports Stellar Quarter: Stock Set for a Rally

How to Choose Top Rated Stocks

Cloudflare Stock Flares Up on Solid EPS Beat and Raised Guidance

This instant news alert was generated by narrative science technology and financial data from MarketBeat in order to provide readers with the fastest and most accurate reporting. This story was reviewed by MarketBeat's editorial team prior to publication. Please send any questions or comments about this story to contact@marketbeat.com.

Should you invest $1,000 in Murata Manufacturing right now?

Before you consider Murata Manufacturing, you'll want to hear this.

MarketBeat keeps track of Wall Street's top-rated and best performing research analysts and the stocks they recommend to their clients on a daily basis. MarketBeat has identified the five stocks that top analysts are quietly whispering to their clients to buy now before the broader market catches on... and Murata Manufacturing wasn't on the list.

While Murata Manufacturing currently has a "Hold" rating among analysts, top-rated analysts believe these five stocks are better buys.