description

(Fig. 7 E, F)

description

Shell: Small to medium-sized (<60 mm); typically, orange-brown with irregular maculations on subsutural band. Whorl outline flattened or gently convex. Subsutural band lightly ribbed or flattened, separated from lower portion of whorl by narrow groove or row of punctations. Axial and spiral sculpture of about equal strength, producing cancellate sculpture below subsutural band. Anatomy: Proboscis, radula, venom gland and accessory proboscis structure absent; salivary glands present or absent.

description

Zoobank registration: urn: lsid: zoobank. org: act: 3565 DB 17 - E 4 EF- 478 B- 8757 - 3 A 682 BB 8 F 6 CF

diagnosis

Diagnosis: Diagnostic nucleotide combinations in Table 10.

discussion

Definition: Includes all species included in clade E 5 A of Modica et al. (2019) and those that show a combination of conchological, anatomical and distribution characteristics closely comparable with Maculauger pseudopertusus or any genetically proven member of the clade.

discussion

Included species: Maculauger alveolatus (Hinds, 1844) 1 n. comb.; M. campbelli (R. D. Burch, 1965) 1 n. comb.; M. castigatus (A. H. Cooke, 1885) 1 n. comb.; M. cinctella (Deshayes, 1859) 3 n. comb.; M. minipulcher (Bozzetti, 2008) 1 n. comb.; M. pseudopertusus (Bratcher & Cernohorsky, 1985) 1 n. comb.; M. sudchiniensis n. sp. Malcolm, Terryn & Fedosov 1 n. sp.

discussion

Remarks: The new genus Maculauger comprises several species, formerly placed in Hastulopsis, that can be differentiated from similar species in Myurella by the equal prominence of spiral and axial spiral elements, producing a fine cancellate sculpture. Hastulopsis species have very weak sculpture and are found in the Indian Ocean or Japan. Some species of Maculauger, such as M. campbelli, are conchologically very close to Profunditerebra orientalis — a case where only anatomical and molecular characters can ensure correct identification (see Remarks on Profunditerebra).

distribution

Distribution: Indo-Pacific; subtidal and bathyal depths to about 600 m.

etymology

Etymology: The name combines ‘ macula’ (Latin: spot, blotch), referring to the commonly maculated subsutural band in the species of the genus, with ‘ auger’, the English epithet for Terebridae (‘ auger shells’). Gender masculine.

type_taxon

Type species: Terebra pseudopertusa Bratcher & Cernohorsky, 1985.