Year: 1995

Director: John Carpenter

Starring: Christopher Reeve, Kirstie Alley, Linda Kozlowski

For the second week in a row, I’m taking a look at a 1990s remake of a 1960 horror film. However, today’s movie is a lot more obscure than Psycho (albeit most films are), instead enjoying status as a cult classic. Directed by Wolf Rilla and based on The Midwich Cuckoos, Village of the Damned is a charming little black-and-white horror that leaves a lot to the imagination.

One day, all of the residents of a small English village are knocked out cold, and anyone who tries to enter the town has the same happen. A few hours later, they all wake up, but not long after, it’s discovered that every woman of age has become pregnant. The embryos grow faster than normal, and when the children are born, they are clearly not normal. Not only do they learn faster than an average child, they also have a collective hive mind. The scariest part is that they can even read minds and control others’ minds. It could easily have been a cheesy b-movie premise, but it chooses instead to focus on Gordon Zellaby (George Sanders) in both his relationship as a father to one of the children, and his meetings with the government about the children, who eventually are revealed to be aliens.

Between the unfolding mystery of what exactly the children are, the performances of Sanders and Michael Gwynn (as his brother-in-law), and the gorgeous black-and-white cinematography, it’s a wonderful little movie.

Ever since the success of 1978’s Invasion of the Body Snatchers (a fantastic remake), Hollywood was looking for a way to remake Village of the Damned. It didn’t happen until 1995, but the choice of John Carpenter makes a lot of sense. Who better than Carpenter, the guy who brought us Michael Myers invading Haddonfield in Halloween, to bring us a story about a small town being infested with evil?

The setting is shifted from England to a coastal California town, and like in the original, we get the close-knit feel of the town right away.

I wish we could have gotten a little bit more, but it’s an everybody-knows-everyone kind of place with some gorgeous scenery shots. In addition, the fact that the remake was made in 1995 allows the surprise pregnancies to be dealt with in more detail. In the original, they’re basically just a plot point, but here we at least have the potential to see the effect this could have on a small community like Midwich.

Christopher Reeve plays Dr. Alan Chaffee (because no one’s buying Gordon Zellaby as an American name), the kindly town doctor.

Reeve was obviously a great actor, and he works with what he’s given here, but sadly it’s very little. Besides a few actors, it just feels like no one’s heart was really in this. Comments from Carpenter at the time seem positive on the surface, but make it clear this was pretty much just a contractual obligation (which he confirmed later). Reeve does fine, but he never lives up to the performance of George Sanders in the original, because there’s nothing to work around.

The other actors are a real mixed bag. The best performance comes from Linda Kozlowski as Jill McGowan, a happily married woman who is widowed at the beginning of the film, raising her new son David alone.

Each of the children is supposed to be born with a partner, but since David’s is stillborn, he understands grief, while the others do not. Jill believes (correctly) that he is more human than the others, and is insistent on raising him as a normal child. Neither film ever goes all-in on the nature vs. nurture debate as much as they could, but this one at least does some interesting things with Jill and David. Unfortunately, what is gained through Jill’s character is lost in the protagonist. In the original, Gordon Zellaby hoped his son could be a normal child, but there’s none of that with Reeve’s character here. Instead, his daughter is basically the villainous leader of the kids. I kind of wonder what could have happened if Reeve’s and Kozlowski’s characters were married instead.

Kirstie Alley plays Dr. Susan Verner, the stand-in for the various government employees in the original. Alley doesn’t bring much to the role, but again, she doesn’t have much to do except relay exposition. I don’t know, she seems miscast, but it’s not entirely her fault.

There’s also Mark Hamill as the town reverend, and he feels like he’s out of a different movie entirely. He’s very dramatic and serious, and it’s not a bad performance, but it kind of clashes with the others. He may be out of a different movie, but frankly I’d rather watch that one.

Ultimately, one thing about the film that just doesn’t work is the children themselves. In the original, there was something clearly off about these very pale, blonde children that stood out against the black-and-white cinematography.

Their hair was slightly off, and their voices were a bit robotic, sort of like aliens trying to imitate human life (which is exactly what they are). In color it just doesn’t work.

The wigs (or hairstyles, but I doubt it) look ridiculously fake, and the eyes glow different colors which is silly.

Let’s compare a scene of the children “killing” someone in the original with the same scene in the remake. In the original film, a motorist almost hits one of the children who walks out into the road, but he hits the brakes in time.

He gets out to apologize, and is unsettled when the children just stare, one with glowing eyes. Almost immediately, he crashes the car into a brick wall and dies.

It’s a chilling scene, but it’s a subtle one. It’s definitely a precursor to The Omen, where the deaths could have a natural explanation or could be caused by creepy children. As both movies go on, it’s clear the children are to blame, and we the audience are pretty sure by this point into Damned that they are, but the townspeople don’t know. Of course a motorist who almost kills a child with his car could be rattled enough to get in a wreck almost immediately.

In the remake, one of the girls goes out of her way to step in front of this Orson Welles lookalike.

The children’s eyes all glow, and he is clearly in a trance when he gets back into his truck. He drives off the road and right into an oil tank which just happened to be sitting right there! How convenient.

You know, just being more over-the-top and ridiculous doesn’t make it scarier. It just makes it edge even closer to the comedic, and in this film’s climax, it crosses the line so far into the comedic that it’s not even funny… or it is… I don’t know. We’ll get back to that.

Since the horror doesn’t work at all, how about the drama? This one does go out of its way to make Alan more tragic, as the children (including his own “daughter”) kill his wife (Karen Kahn). It should be a heart-wrenching moment, and yet the execution (no pun intended) is horrible. First, they get her to boil her hand in hot water, and she goes to the hospital. Fine, no problem. Then, they get her to go outside and commit suicide by… looking down at some rocks and stepping slightly out of frame.

Her husband runs outside shouting her name, but after this, his grief is barely touched on again. There’s a scene between Alan and David at a cemetery where they bond over grief, but that’s it! Why was this included at all? Were the scenes of her jumping and her husband grieving cut for time? Why would you cut the protagonist’s character arc for time? Cut something else. Trust me, there’s plenty to work with. Did nobody want to make this movie?

The expanded supporting cast only leads to more ridiculous, over-the-top deaths. The town reverend tries to pick off the children from a distance, but they make him turn the gun on himself. The creepy school janitor (a cliche that felt old even in 1995) goes as far as jumping off a roof and impaling himself with own broom.

Again, going more over-the-top doesn’t inherently make it more scary. The deaths just get more ridiculous as it goes on, as the reverend’s wife, who has taken to leading an angry mob, self-immolates. In another death that is grotesque merely for the sake of it, Dr. Verner is forced to stab herself open.

Like in the original, Dr. Chaffee agrees to educate the children himself. Ultimately, he decides to plant a bomb in his suitcase to destroy them, but he knows he can only do it with an empty, unreadable mind. However, as he is preparing for this, the police arrive in town.

Look, this remake of Village of the Damned has very little to offer, so let’s be thankful it does give us one of the most hilarious sequences ever in a horror movie. Two policemen show up, but the children walk out and cause the one to shoot the other. Then, a parade of police cars (and a helicopter!) roll in, and the remaining officer starts firing on them!

The children start controlling different officers, and it turns into hilarious chaos. Cars start running over officers, the helicopter falls out the sky, the sheriff shows up, and then the army shows up. A bus of convicts rolls by, and everyone just starts shooting at it. It’s comedic gold, and I really wish Carpenter had just gone all out and put “Yakety Sax” over it. I mean, he had to know this was funny.

Dr. Chaffee’s plan succeeds, and the children are destroyed, save for David, who is clearly more human than the rest. Jill leaves town with him, driving away from the wreckage into a new life.

He just blinks over and over, signifying that the signature death glare of the children is now gone. Despite everything else in the movie, I like this final moment. If the movie had been more focused on these two, it could at least have been an effective drama.

Let’s see how it compares to the original, beyond just saying “terribly.”

CAST

There are good actors in this. They don’t get a chance to really show it, except for Kozlowsky now and then, but they are there.

STORY

This is really the problem. No one is really committed to telling a good story. The deaths are absurd, the characters are poorly sketched, and even though the creators claimed they wanted to make it more about an alien invasion, all we see is an alien skeleton. Riveting.

EXPERIENCE

I do like the feel of the town, so there’s that, and it’s a John Carpenter movie, so the music does an alright job. It just doesn’t have that creepy vibe the original did

FINAL THOUGHTS

This is what happens when you suck all the life out a good story. It’s pretty clear that no one cared about making an interesting movie here. Just watch the original again.

MATCH-UP HOME