We have 3 Exchange boxes in our DAG (Each with 2 live and 4 passive mailbox DBs) and want to look at shifting to 2 Exchange boxes running 3 live and 3 DB copies and the 3rd box running ONLY passive mailbox copies for backup purposes. I need to figure out how much load each box is currently under - all 3 run all Exchange services - so I can tell if pulling out 1 of the DAG members from processing user requests will cause serious performance issues. We have them on PRTG, but I wanted to hear your ideas on how best to evaluate them. Are there specific PRTG sensors you’d use or MS perfmon gauges?

Thanks in advance!

You haven’t provided any details of the usage.

How many mailboxes, cached or non cached profiles, mailbox sizes or database sizes, do you archive or not?

We have 2 MBX servers, ~6000 mailboxes/rooms/resources and about 3000 users, no issues.

It also depends on your server spec, disk RAID level and spindle count, any mobile devices or OWA, is OWA proxied or directly NATted.

A larger ram allocation and cached mailboxes being used will reduce the load massively.

Oh and fYI, 85% of our users are VDI and used non-cached mode.

As Rod-IT said, you should provide more details about your environment for us. For example, what is your exchange version?

A tool called Exchange Load Generator 2013, which allows you to test how a server running Exchange 2013 responds to e-mail loads. Download link: Exchange Load Generator 2013

Another tool called Microsoft Exchange Server Jetstress 2013 Tool, which allows you to verify the performance and stability of the disk subsystem. Download link: Microsoft Exchange Server Jetstress 2013 Tool

For more details: Tools for Performance and Scalability Evaluation

In addition, If you need pull out 1 of the DAG members from processing user requests, you can follow the steps mentioned in the article .

I would say 2 boxes would be fine.

If I read correctly you are only using 2 drives mirrored, which would mean low IO anyway, so you would reduce IO, however do note both 2008 and 2010 Exchange need to be upgraded.

If this is your plan, build two new servers, migrate people over and if you need a third, it’s no trouble to make one.

Exchange is IO and ram intensive, but your workload doesn’t sound much different from ours.

To know for sure though you would have to get stats from the box

IO usage, network, CPU and ram usage - but if you are saying your exchange servers run on only 2 disks mirrored and you dont see any major negative impacts, then moving from 4 hosts to two, on new hardware (obviously upgrading the OS and Ex versions), then a minimum of RAID10 with at least 4 disks should be comparable, however, throw 4 x SSDs in RAID and you should be better specced…

Again, if you are using caching, this reduce the load massively.

Thanks Rod, we’ll soon virtualize the lot inside a new VxRail system, but for the next few months we’re trying to (greatly) simplify our Exchange backups and were contemplating shifting all of the current traffic and load to just 2 of our 3 servers so that the 3rd member of the DAG could hold only passive copies of the mailbox DBs for a MUCH quicker backup and easier offsite replications. To date we have Veeam backing up all 3 DAG members entire machines, OS and Database hard drives and all.