Kino Lorber Studio Classics continues their support of physical media with the release of “No Way Out” on 4K Ultra HD for the very first time. This terrific edition features a new HDR/ Dolby Vision master, taken from a 4K scan of the original 35mm camera negative. Skillfully directed by Roger Donaldson, “No Way Out” is a suspense-soaked political thriller that’s based on Kenneth Fearing’s 1946 novel “The Big Clock”. The film features an extraordinary cast including Kevin Costner who delivers a star-making performance.

This 4K Ultra HD edition of “No Way Out” also includes the film on Blu-ray and is available to purchase right now. See below for a full synopsis and release information including special features.

About the Film:

Year: 1987

Runtime: 114 Minutes

Director: Roger Donaldson

Screenwriter: Robert Garland

Cast: Kevin Costner, Gene Hackman, Sean Young, Will Patton, Howard Duff, Iman, George Dzundza, Jason Bernard, Fred Thompson, David Paymer, Michael Shillo, Robert Kerman

Rating: R

Charged with high-voltage tension and suspense, the electrifying thriller “No Way Out” is a tightly wound tale of intrigue set in the political whirl of Washington and the inner corridors of the Pentagon. In this ’80s box-office smash, Kevin Costner (“The Untouchables”, “Revenge”) stars as naval hero Lieutenant Commander Tom Farrell, the new CIA liaison for Defense Secretary David Brice, a high-ranking master of political maneuvers played by the dynamic Gene Hackman (“The Package”, “Narrow Margin”). Sexy Sean Young (“Blade Runner”) is a gorgeous party girl who plays politics herself as Brice’s mistress and Farrell’s secret lover. And Will Patton (“Desperately Seeking Susan”) is the Secretary’s ruthless aide, architect of a cover-up scheme that protects his boss, but entraps Farrell, putting his life in danger.

With its serpentine plot twists, narrow escapes and true-to-life Pentagon setting, “No Way Out” is the harrowing story of an innocent man caught in a complex web of romance and murder, power and corruption. Stylishly directed by Roger Donaldson (The Bounty, Species) from Kenneth Fearing’s classic noir novel, The Big Clock. The stellar supporting cast includes Howard Duff (“Shakedown”), George Dzundza (“Basic Instinct”) and Fred Thompson (“Die Hard 2”).

Special Features:

Bonus Content for “No Way Out” includes:

DISC 1 (4KUHD):

Brand NEW HDR/Dolby Vision Master – From a 4K Scan of the 35mm Original Camera Negative

NEW Audio Commentary by Filmmaker/Historian Steve Mitchell and Writer/Actor Richard Brewer

Audio Commentary by Director Roger Donaldson

5.1 Surround and Lossless 2.0 Audio

Triple-Layered UHD100 Disc

Optional English Subtitles

DISC 2 (BLU-RAY):