Section 0 GENERAL ISSN ASSIGNMENT POLICIES

The International Standard Serial Number (ISSN) was developed in the early 1970’s by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in order to meet the need for a brief, unique and unambiguous identification code for serial publications. Sole responsibility for controlling the assignment of ISSN was allocated by the resulting standard, ISO 3297, to the ISDS[3]

International Centre – since 1993 known as the International Centre of the ISSN Network. The ISSN Network consists of the International Centre and National Centres established in those countries which have acceded to the Statutes of the ISSN Network.

The successful operation of the ISSN Network depends on the uniform application of common rules and standards for the registration of continuing resources and for the preparation of ISSN records for integration into the ISSN Register. In developing these rules, care has been taken to ensure so far as possible compatibility and harmonization with international standards such as the International Standard Bibliographic Description (ISBD, Consolidated edition) and the practices of other International systems such as the Anglo-America Cataloguing Rules (AACR, 2nd edition) and RDA: Resource Description and Access.

0.1 Definitions

For the purpose of the ISSN Network, the following definitions of bibliographic resource, continuing resource, serial, ongoing integrating resource, ISSN, ISSN-L and key title apply:

Bibliographic resource: An expression or manifestation of a work or an item that forms the basis for bibliographic description. A bibliographic resource may be in any medium or combination of media and may be tangible or intangible.

Continuing resource: A publication, in any medium, that is issued over time with no predetermined conclusion and made available to the public.

Editorial note 1: Such a publication is usually issued in successive or integrating issues which generally have numerical and/or chronological designation

Editorial note 2: Continuing resources include serials such as newspapers, periodicals, journals, magazines, etc., and ongoing integrating resources such as loose-leaf publications that are continually updated and Web sites that are continually updated.

Serial: A continuing resource issued in a succession of discrete issues or parts, usually bearing numbering, that has no predetermined conclusion.

e.g.: Journals, magazines, electronic journals, ongoing directories, annual reports, newspapers, monographic series, and also those journals, magazines and newsletters of limited duration that otherwise bear all the characteristics of serials (e.g., newsletter of an event).

Ongoing integrating resource: A continuing resource that is added to or changed by means of updates that do not remain discrete and are integrated into the whole. Ongoing integrating resources have no predetermined conclusion.

e.g.: Databases, Web sites and loose-leafs that are updated over time with no predetermined conclusion.

ISSN (International Standard Serial Number): An eight digit number, including a check digit and preceded by the alphabetic prefix ISSN, assigned to a continuing resource by the ISSN Network.

ISSN-L (Linking ISSN): ISSN designated by the ISSN Network to enable collocation or linking among the different medium versions of a continuing resource.

Key title: The unique name for a continuing resource, established by the ISSN Network and inseparably linked with its ISSN.

Editorial note: The key title can be the same as the title of the resource; or, in order to achieve uniqueness, it can be constructed by the addition of identifying and/or qualifying elements such as name of issuing body, place of publication, edition statement, etc.

The use of these definitions is associated with the application of the following model which was developed as part of the revision of AACR2, Chapter 12.

The above definitions and other definitions are listed in Anne 1: Glossary.

0.2 Scope of ISSN

Each ISSN is a unique identifier for a specific continuing resource in a defined medium. Continuing resources are bibliographic resources issued over time with no predetermined conclusion, they include serials and ongoing integrating resources.

All continuing resources, whether past, present, or to be produced in the foreseeable future, whatever the medium of production, are eligible for ISSN assignment.

Also eligible for ISSN assignment are those bibliographic resources issued in successive issues or parts which bear numbering and that also bear other characteristics of a serial (e.g. frequency in the title), but whose duration is limited (e.g. the newsletter of an event)[4].

Eligibility does not necessarily mean ISSN assignment in practice. Section 0.3 below provides criteria for determining whether or not a continuing resource shall be ISSN assigned in accordance with the current policy of the ISSN Network.

0.3 Criteria for ISSN assignment

0.3.1 Serials

Serials are continuing resources issued in a succession of discrete issues or parts, usually bearing numbering, that have no predetermined conclusion.

ISSN are assigned to the entire population of serials. However, National Centres can decide to exclude ephemeral serials or serials of purely local interest from systematic ISSN assignment (see Section 0.7).

0.3.2 Ongoing integrating resources

Ongoing integrating resources are resources that are updated over time and with no predetermined

conclusion, for which the updates are integrated into the resources and do not remain discrete.

ISSN are assigned to ongoing integrating resources which fulfill all the inclusion and exclusion criteria listed hereafter. National Centres can decide to exclude ephemeral ongoing integrating resources or ongoing integrating resources of purely local interest from systematic ISSN assignment (see Section 0.7).

Meeting only one of the criteria is not sufficient for ISSN assignment. These criteria apply to all the categories of ongoing integrating resources, whether print or electronic: databases, websites, wikis, print loose-leaf services, etc. Although blogs are considered to be serials, these same criteria should be applied to blogs.

Editorial note: If a part of an ongoing integrating resource (part of website, for instance) is eligible for ISSN assignment, e.g., a newsletter that is part of the website is assigned an ISSN, this does not mean necessarily that the whole website is eligible for ISSN assignment.

0.3.2.1 Inclusion criteria

1. There is editorial content (i.e., the resource mostly consists of written, textual content, and there is evidence of editorial or journalistic treatment);

2. There is identified editorial responsibility (i.e., a statement indicating the name of the

publisher / producer, and at least the country of publication). Generally, editorial responsibility will consist of more than one individual;

3. There is a consistent title (i.e., a title which remains consistent when the resource is updated) and the title is prominently visible on the resource;

4. There is a valid URL (i.e., a URL leading to the actual resource);

5. The resource has subject-related content or has identified subject-related audience.

0.3.2.2 Exclusion criteria

1. Personal resources (personal web sites and web pages, online diaries);

2. Resources focusing on a company, a product, an institution or organization (advertising and promotional web sites, commercial web sites, product information web sites, company and institutional web sites, web sites of organizations);

3. Web sites consisting only of links;

4. Ephemeral resources (i.e., resources known to be ephemeral).

0.4 Relationship between an ISSN, an ISSN-L, a key title and a continuing resource

Only one ISSN is assigned to a continuing resource in a defined medium. This ISSN is permanently linked to the key title, a standardized form of title derived from information appearing on the continuing resource. A key title is unique to a particular continuing resource. Titles which would otherwise not be unique are made unique by the addition of qualifying elements. In cases where the title changes sufficiently to warrant creating a new key title, a new ISSN is assigned. In cases where the medium of the continuing resource changes, a new ISSN and a new key title are assigned as well (see Section 2.3).

ISSN-L, the linking ISSN, provides for collocation or linking among the different medium versions of the same continuing resource. The same ISSN-L is associated with one or more ISSN that have been assigned to a continuing resource issued in different media (see Section 3).

0.5 Allocation and use of blocks of ISSN

The International Centre is responsible for the allocation of blocks of ISSN to National Centres. Each Centre receives limited blocks of numbers. In using blocks of ISSN, National Centres adhere to the following procedures:

Report all ISSN assigned by their centre to the ISSN Register;

Use ISSN within their assigned block consecutively and use up one block completely before starting another block;

Ensure that ISSN assignments made in advance of publication or production of a continuing resource are recorded in the ISSN Register by determining if publication or production of the resource has occurred and creating the appropriate ISSN records (or updating existing Work records[5]).

0.6 ISSN assignment and responsibility issues

0.6.1 The place of publication as a criterion for determining the National Centre responsible for ISSN assignment

Each National Centre has sole responsibility for assigning ISSN to the continuing resources published in its country with the exception of resources issued by multinational publishers, resources published by international organizations and, in some cases, digital reproductions of ceased print serials (see Sections 0.6.2, 0.6.3 and 0.6.4).

The country of publication is determined by the first or most typographically prominent, or only, named place given on the resource.

For online resources, determining the country of publication is based on the place of the publisher of the resource not on the place of the distributor or server.

If the place and the country of publication are not given on the resource, information found in an external source can be used.

The International Centre assigns ISSN to continuing resources published in countries where no National Centre exists.

0.6.2 Assignment of ISSN to continuing resources issued by multinational publishers

Because some publishers have offices in more than one country, the actual country of publication of a continuing resource may be difficult to determine, or may vary. In order to avoid double assignments, one National Centre may assume responsibility for particular imprints or publishers irrespective of the place of publication. Such an arrangement can only be made with the agreement of the International Centre and the appropriate National Centre. The list of the agreements between ISSN Centres is published as Annex 5: List of the agreements for the ISSN assignments to continuing resources issued by multinational publishers.

0.6.3 Assignment of ISSN to continuing resources published by international organizations

The International Centre assigns ISSN to continuing resources published by those international organizations that are listed in the Yearbook of International Organizations, types A to F, including those organizations which are permanently established in one country, those which publish only within one country, and those which have no fixed place of publication. Continuing resources published by national commissions of international organizations and by representative offices of national administrations or services abroad (embassies, military or economic representative offices) are, however, assigned ISSN by the National Centre of the country of publication except in cases when a specialized centre exists. If the international organization is not listed in the Yearbook of International Organizations, the National Centre of the country where the organization is located is responsible for the ISSN assignment.

Editorial note: if the international organization is responsible for the intellectual content but does not publish the resource, this instruction is not relevant. In this case, only the location of the publisher is taken into account for determining the National Centre responsible for the ISSN assignment.

e.g.

Current sociology (Print) = ISSN 0011-3921

UNESCO and the International Sociological Association are responsible for the intellectual content but the journal is published by Sage. Consequently, this publication is not under the responsibility of the ISSN International Centre but under the responsibility of the ISSN Centre of the United Kingdom.

0.6.4 Assignment of ISSN to digital reproductions of ceased print serials

As a general policy, National Centres should assign an ISSN to both the digital reproductions and to the original print versions when the latter are not already identified.

Digital reproduction of a ceased print serial when the content is owned by a current publisher

If the content of a digitized version of a dead print serial is owned by a current publisher, the ISSN assignment should be made by the National Centre responsible for ISSN assignment to the resources of that publisher. This rule applies also:

when the digitized version is provided by an institution such as a library or an archives provider, different from the current publisher that owns the content;

when the digitized version is provided in parallel by a current publisher that owns the content and by an institution such as a library or an archives provider.

Digital reproduction of a ceased print serial when the content is not owned by a current publisher

If no current publisher owns the content, or if this determination cannot be made, the National Centre responsible for ISSN assignment is determined according to the location of the institution that is responsible for the digitized version (library or archives provider for instance) and not according to the location of the publisher of the original print version[6].

If digitized versions of a ceased print serial whose content is not owned by a current publisher are provided by several institutions located in distinct countries (libraries or archives providers for instance), the National Centre responsible for ISSN assignment is the Centre which has been first requested to do so by a library or an archives provider located in its country. The assigning Centre should liaise with other Centres that may have an interest in the resource (those Centres which have already assigned ISSN to other medium versions, in particular to the print version) to avoid the possibility of double assignments occurring.

If the original print version of the dead serial has not been already identified, the assigning Centre can also ask permission to assign ISSN to both the print and the digitized versions at the same time from the National Centre that would normally be responsible for the print version.

0.6.5 Publications whose different medium versions are under the responsibility of different National Centres

National Centres that want to assign an ISSN to a medium version of a continuing resource that has another medium version to which an ISSN has already been assigned by another National Centre shall contact that Centre, copying the International Centre, in order to:

Verify that the National Centre responsible for the medium version to which an ISSN has already been assigned agrees to a different National Centre having responsibility for the new medium version;

Request this National Centre to create the appropriate linking entry (776 in MARC 21, 452 in UNIMARC) in its bibliographic record.

0.6.6 Transfer of responsibility for ISSN records

When a continuing resource moves from one country to another, the ISSN record or the responsibility for a provisional ISSN assignment established by one National Centre has to be transferred to another Centre. Also, it sometimes happens that a provisional ISSN assignment is made by one Centre but the resource turns out to be published in another country. In all of these situations, transfer of responsibility for an ISSN assignment is necessary. In some cases the transfer is initiated by the country to which the resource has moved or which turns out to be responsible for a resource after publication. In all cases, the ISSN Centres involved shall follow, step by step, the procedure below:

The two National Centres involved reach an agreement regarding the transfer of responsibility;

The National Centres inform the International Centre, which changes the ISSN Centre code of the bibliographic record in the ISSN Register;

The new National Centre responsible for the publication creates and/or updates the record to reflect the changes (including the new country and new centre codes) and sends it to the International Centre in the usual manner[7].

0.7 ISSN registration

As their first priority National Centres systematically register new and current continuing resources (including continuing resources which have changed their titles). National Centres also register continuing resources in response to requests from users. Systematic retrospective registration is not required for ISSN Network purposes. National Centres may define their own policies in accordance with national requirements.

0.7.1 Comprehensive registration v.s. selective registration

The overall aim of the ISSN Network is to provide identification and bibliographic control of the world’s continuing resources population. For this reason, comprehensive registration, i.e., complete coverage of a country’s continuing resources, is a fundamental goal. It is recognized, however, that there may be continuing resources which, as a matter of local policy, may be given lower priority or even excluded as far as comprehensive coverage is concerned. For example, National Centres may, as a matter of local policy, exclude ephemeral continuing resources and continuing resources of purely local interest from comprehensive registration whether they are published in printed form or electronically (see Section 0.3), even if requested by a user.

Most categories of resources should always be assigned ISSN, provided that they are not ephemeral continuing resources or continuing resources of purely local interest excluded from comprehensive registration by a National Centre. These include: continuing resources for which a valid request has been received according to the criteria in Section 0.3; ceased resources that fit the general criteria for registration no matter how old; and resources with scholarly or research value regardless of whether retained in the hosting institution of the National Centre or not.

In cases where National Centres are uncertain how they should proceed in defining a policy on what resources they might exclude from registration, they should seek advice from the International Centre.

0.7.2 Registration on request

ISSN are assigned to continuing resources on request, regardless of the initial date of publication and status of the continuing resource (current, dead) as long as the National Centre is provided with all the necessary information and the resource falls within the definition of a continuing resource and meets the eligibility criteria adopted by the ISSN Network.

Registration is not made without visual proof of the existence of the continuing resource, that is, the user requesting the assignment is asked to supply an issue of the continuing resource, copies of the pages containing the bibliographic information necessary for registration, or access information for the online resource.

ISSN assignment in advance of publication (pre-publication)

When a publisher requests an ISSN for a continuing resource that is not yet published so that the ISSN may be printed on the first issue for instance, the publisher shall provide all the necessary information and documents together with the ISSN request. The registration of an ISSN assigned to a pre-publication is delayed until the National Centre receives a copy of the first issue or other acceptable proof of the existence of the continuing resource. Provisional registration in the form of work records is possible. Work records are provisional ISSN records based on pre-publication information. These records can be viewed only by the National Centres and not by subscribers of the ISSN Register as available at http://portal.issn.org.

Cancellation of publication

When a publication is cancelled before the appearance of the first issue, the ISSN that was assigned on a provisional basis is suppressed and cannot be re-assigned.

Circulation of requests

Requests from users in a given country are addressed to the National Centre of that country. The National Centre processes all requests concerning its own national continuing resources output, and forwards requests relating to continuing resources published by international organizations or multinational publishers, or to continuing resources published outside its country (see Section 0.6) to the appropriate Centre.

Time of response to requests

At the discretion of the National Centre, a request for assignment of an ISSN to an individual title is answered as quickly as possible, preferably within 10 business days after receipt of the request. Urgent requests may be communicated to the National Centre by telephone, fax or e-mail providing that the supporting documentation is available.

Requests concerning a limited number of continuing resources should be answered within two months. Requests which involve a large number of continuing resources are negotiated with the appropriate Centre. In cases where a National Centre is unable, or fails, to respond to a request within the prescribed time limits the International Centre assigns the ISSN and informs the National Centre of the assignment.

0.7.3 Input to the ISSN Register

Records are transmitted to the International Centre, preferably weekly or monthly, and by all electronic means: MARC records concatenated in MARC files may be transferred by e-mail or sent via FTP, or may be harvested by the International Centre through an OAI-PMH process. Records may also be entered in a specific Excel template provided by the International Centre, in case a National Centre does not have the technical facilities to produce a suitable electronic file of ISSN records, or to use the cataloguing client of the information system of the International Centre.

The bibliographic data elements are recorded according to the specifications of this Manual and MARC 21 and UNIMARC[8].

Records are also established directly in the ISSN Register by the International Centre and those National Centres which use the cataloguing client of the information system of the International Centre.

Records of continuing resources issued in non-roman alphabets or scripts are romanized by the National Centres before transmission to the International Centre (or before creation in the information system of the International Centre) in accordance with appropriate ISO standards, or other standards accepted by the ISSN Network. When such romanization is required, National Centres are highly recommended to record additionally the title proper, variant title, issuing body and publication information (name and location of the publisher) in original non-roman scripts in accordance with MARC 21 or UNIMARC instructions (see Section 24).

Once a record has been entered in the ISSN Register, National Centres endeavour to notify the International Centre of any changes which may occur after initial input. Amendments or replacements are transmitted to the International Centre in accordance with the procedures used for the initial transmission of the records.

Section 1 The ISSN RECORD

The process of continuing resource registration for the ISSN Network includes the assignment of ISSN and key title as well as the preparation of the accompanying ISSN bibliographic record. Because of its bibliographic data this ISSN record represents the authority record for continuing resource titles.

1.1 Content and functions

The ISSN record includes mandatory and optional data elements which serve different functions relating to:

unique identifier of the continuing resource (ISSN and key title);

additional information describing the continuing resource;

linking or collocating the different medium versions of the same continuing resource (ISSN-L);

linking the continuing resource to other continuing resources;

the content of the continuing resource (subject classification);

intellectual responsibility for the continuing resource (issuing body);

the use of the continuing resource (coverage by abstracting and indexing services);

the electronic address of the resource (URL, e-mail);

and coded elements, for example, the country code, frequency, language and physical medium codes.

A number of descriptive data elements included in the ISSN record are the same as those appearing in the bibliographic records of national bibliographic agencies following national cataloguing rules or international standard practices such as the ISBD, AACR2 and RDA. These include:

title proper;

issuing (corporate) body;

place of publication;

name of publisher;

date of publication;

linking elements relating to the bibliographic history of the continuing resource.

The ISSN record does not:

describe a particular issue of a continuing resource;

include other title information complementing the title proper of a continuing resource;

mention the terms of availability relating to a continuing resource.

The ISBD record can include a number of descriptive data elements which are optional or not found in the ISSN record. Some of these are:

extent of item, illustration statement, dimensions of item (such as 50 vol : ill.; 26 cm.);

availability and price (such as Free to members, Annual subscription £10)

Full ISSN records

With certain exceptions, records should be submitted in full form. The data elements required are listed in the Table of ISSN data elements (Section 1.2 below).

Short ISSN records

The mandatory data elements for the short records are shown in the Table of ISSN data elements (Section 1.2 below). Short records must only be used for publications which are considered by the ISSN National Centre to be of an ephemeral nature or of purely local interest. National Centres should be able to upgrade a short record to full status if requested to do so by another Centre or a user.

1.2 Table of ISSN data elements

This table lists the bibliographic data elements allowed in ISSN records in MARC 21 and UNIMARC formats (ISSN MARC is no longer maintained by the International Centre and ISSN MARC elements have been removed from the Manual).

All note fields are allowed in ISSN records (fields 5XX in MARC 21, 3XX in UNIMARC). They are all optional but National Centres are recommended to use four of them (“system details note”, “source of description note”, “reproduction note” and the “note on the coverage by abstracting and indexing services”) when necessary. Only these four notes are listed in the table. The National Centres are recommended to consult MARC 21 and UNIMARC documentation for further details about the other note fields. Notes may be recorded in the language of the National Centre.

Data elements Full record

M: mandatory

A: mandatory, if applicable

O: optional

Short record

M: mandatory

A: mandatory, if applicable

O: optional

MARC 21 UNIMARC Comments about the update of ISSN data* Tags Tags Date of record creation M M 008/00-05 100 Stable Publication status M M 008/06 100 Update Date 1 (Start date) M M 008/07-10 100 Stable Date 2 (End date) M M 008/11-14 100 Generally stable but is updated when a resource resumes publication and has not been published under another title in the interval Country of publication M M 008/15-17 and 044 102 Update Frequency M M 008/18 110 Update Type of publication M M 008/21 110 Update Form of original item A A 008/22 Stable Form of item M M 008/23 Stable Conference publication A A 008/29 110 Unlikely to change but may be updated Original alphabet or script of title M M 008/33 100 Stable Entry convention M M 008/34 N/A Stable Language of publication M M 008/35-37 and 041 if necessary 101 Update Modified record M M 008/38 N/A Stable Physical medium M M 007/00-01 106, 115, 124, 126, 130, 135 Stable ISSN M M 022 011 Stable ISSN-L M M 022 011 Stable ISSN Centre code M M 022 802 Update CODEN or other codes O O 030 040 Stable Universal Decimal Classification[9] M O 080 675 Unlikely to change but may be updated (change of subject matter) Dewey Decimal Classification[10] M O 082 676 Unlikely to change but may be updated (change of subject matter) Abbreviated key title A O 210 531 Stable Key title M M 222 530 Stable Title proper M M 245 200 Stable Variant title A O 246 510, 512, 513, 514, 515, 516, 517, 532 Addition Publication information M M 260 or 264 210 Addition Former frequency O O 321 326 Addition Dates of publication and/or sequential designation O O 362 207 Addition Content type O O 336 N/A Stable Media type O O 337 N/A Stable Carrier type O O 338 N/A Stable Coverage by abstracting and indexing services O O 510 321 Addition Reproduction note A A 533 325 Addition System details note O O 538 337 Addition Source of description note A A 588 303 Update Name of issuing body as on piece (uncontrolled name) A O 720 712 Addition Name of issuing body or conference as established by national cataloguing practice A O 710, 711 710, 711 Addition Original language entry A O 765 454 Stable Translation entry A O 767 453 Addition Main series entry A O 760 410 Addition Sub-series entry A O 762 411 Addition Other edition entry A O 775 451 Addition Additional physical form entry (other medium version) A O 776 452 Addition Supplement parent entry A O 772 422 Addition Issued with entry A O 777 423 Addition Preceding entry (former title) A O 780 430, 431, 432, 433, 434, 435, 436, 437 Stable Succeeding entry (successor title) A O 785 440, 441, 442, 443, 444, 445, 446, 447, 448 Stable Non-specific relationship entry (related title) A O 787 488 Addition Supplement/special issue entry A O 770 421 Addition Electronic location and access A O 856 856 Addition Alternate graphic representation 0 0 880 See the UNIMARC Manual, 2008 edition, Sections 3.11 and 3.13 Addition

*Stable:

The data are stable (i.e., the data are invariable). National Centres shall not remove or modify the data once they are added to the record.

Update: The data may vary (i.e., the data are variable). National Centres shall update the record by replacing the data when appropriate, to reflect the current or most recent state of the resource.

Addition: The data may vary (i.e., the data are variable). National Centres shall update the record by adding data reflecting the successive states of the resource.

1.3 Punctuation

The punctuation described in this Section is based on the MARC 21 bibliographic format.

Each bibliographic data element of the ISSN record has its prescribed punctuation. The equal sign (=), colon (:), semi-colon (;), parentheses (()), square brackets ([]) and the mark of omission (…) are preceded and followed by a space. The point (.) and comma (,) are only followed by a space. By “space” is meant a single space on a computer keyboard or an em space in printing.

In printing or in displays of the ISSN and key title, whether in that order or in the order key title and ISSN, the two data elements are separated by space equals space.

The slash (/) is not used in ISSN records except where it occurs naturally in a title, name of an issuing body or the imprint.

The colon (:) is used in ISSN records in the imprint field (260), and where it occurs naturally in a title, etc.

The semi-colon (;) is used to separate one place of publication from another in the imprint, and where it occurs naturally in a title, etc.

Square brackets ([ ]) are used:

i. to enclose uncertain, unknown or approximate information of place or date of publication or publisher in the imprint and,

ii. to enclose verbal representations of symbols occurring in titles which cannot be translated into machine-readable language, and,

iii to enclose information which is taken from other sources than the prescribed sources. Square brackets are not otherwise used in ISSN records, except where they occur naturally in a title, etc.

Parentheses are used to enclose qualifying information in key titles and abbreviated key titles. If they appear naturally at the end of the title they should be omitted or replaced by comma.

1.3.1 Punctuation of the key title

Point (.)

precedes a Section title or a Section designation and separates it from the common title;

separates the non-distinctive title of a supplement, an inset, a sub-series, or a sub-series designation from the title of the main publication or of the main series;

separates the place and date of publication and any other element in qualifying information.

Comma (,)

between various elements of a title, and separating a Section or sub-series title from a Section or sub-series designation.

Mark of omission (…)

indicates the omission of words or numbers within a title (not used at the beginning of a title, except when they occur naturally).

Square brackets ([])

enclose verbal representations of symbols occurring in titles which cannot be translated into machine-readable language.

Parentheses (())

enclose qualifying information.

1.3.2 Punctuation of titles proper

Point (.)

precedes a Section title or a Section designation and separates it from the common title;

separates the non-distinctive title of a supplement, an inset, a sub-series, or a sub-series designation from the title of the main publication or of the main series;

ends each title proper, even when another mark of punctuation is present, unless the last word in the field is an abbreviation, initial/letter, or data that ends with final punctuation.

Comma (,)

between various elements of a title, and separating a Section or sub-series title from a Section or sub-series designation.

Mark of omission (…)

indicates the omission of words or numbers within a title (not used at the beginning of a title, except when they occur naturally).

Square brackets ([])

enclose verbal representations of symbols occurring in titles which cannot be translated into machine-readable language.

1.3.3 Punctuation of variant titles

Point (.)

precedes a Section title or a Section designation and separates it from the common title;

separates the non-distinctive title of a supplement, an inset, a sub-series or a sub-series designation from the title or the main publication or of the main series;

separates the place and date of publication and any other element in qualifying information.

Comma (,)

between various elements of a title, and separating a Section or sub-series title from a Section or sub-series designation.

Mark of omission (…)

indicates the omission of words or numbers within a title (not used at the beginning of a title, except when they occur naturally).

Parentheses (())

enclose possible qualifying information.

Square brackets ([])

enclose verbal representations of symbols occurring in titles which cannot be translated into machine-readable language.

1.3.4 Punctuation of the abbreviated key title

Point (.)

at the end of all abbreviated words.

Comma (,)

replaces a point supplied by cataloguer in the key title.

Mark of omission (…)

present in the key title are not retained in the abbreviated key title.

Parentheses (())

enclose qualifying information.

1.3.5 Punctuation of the publishing information

Comma (,)

separates place names and qualifiers, for example, Boston, Mass;

separates hierarchical elements in publishers’ names.

Square brackets ([])

enclose uncertain, unknown or approximate information of place or date of publication or publisher;

enclose information taken from other source than the prescribed sources.

Hyphen (-)

between the start date and the end date of publication which differ from those given in field 008.

Semi-colon (;)

precedes the subsequent place(s) of publication.

Colon (:)

precedes the name(s) of publisher(s).

Comma (,)

precedes the date of publication.

Hyphen (-)

between the start date and the end date of publication generated from field 008.

1.3.6 Punctuation of linking entries

Point (.)

precedes a Section title or a Section designation and separates it from the common title;

separates the non-distinctive title of a supplement, an inset, a sub-series or a sub-series designation from the title of the main publication or of the main series;

separates the place and date of publication and any other element in qualifying information.

Comma (,)

between various elements of a title, and separating a Section or sub-series title from a Section or sub-series designation.

Mark of omission (…)

indicates the omission of words or numbers within a title (not used at the beginning of a title, except when they occur naturally).

Parentheses (())

enclose qualifying information.

1.4 Language, script and capitalization of ISSN records

All data elements in the ISSN records are registered in the language or languages in which they appear on the publication, except in field 710.

The data elements appearing in scripts other than roman are romanized for incorporation into the ISSN Register.

When such romanization is required, National Centres are highly recommended to record additionally the title proper, variant title, issuing body and publication information (name and location of the publisher) in original non-roman scripts in accordance with MARC 21 or UNIMARC instructions (see Section 24).

Diacritics in both roman and romanized scripts are retained.

Capitalization is determined by each National Centre according to national usage. In general, the first letter of the first word of each field should be a capital, except for coded fields. Other capitalization should follow the appropriate usage for the language(s) and/or script(s) used in the record. When more than one language and/or script appears in the record, each should be capitalized in accordance with the usage of that language and/or script even when this produces an inconsistent pattern of capitalization for the record as a whole.

1.5 Abbreviations and misprints

In exceptional cases the abridgement of certain data elements in the record is permitted (e.g. a title (key title or variant title including a date or number that varies from issue to issue). In such cases, the omission is indicated by marks of omission.

Certain abbreviations are prescribed for use in the imprint:

[S.l.] = sine loco (place of publication not known)

[s.n.] = sine nomine (name of publisher not known)

and are enclosed in square brackets.

For rules for the abbreviated key title, see Section 7.

Typographical and transcription errors in the presentation of the title on a continuing resource are corrected without indicating that a correction has been made.

1.6 Sources of information

1.6.1 Basis of the ISSN registration

Serials

The basis of the ISSN registration is the first issue or, lacking this, the earliest available issue. Generally prefer the first (or earliest) issue or part over a source associated with the whole serial or with a range of more than one issue or part.

Integrating resources

The basis of the ISSN registration is the current iteration of the integrating resource, except for the start date of publication.

1.6.2 Prescribed sources of information

The information used in the ISSN registration of a continuing resource is taken from certain sources of the issue, part or iteration used for registration in a prescribed order of preference.

For direct access electronic serials, the physical carrier or its labels should be used. In case of variation in fullness of information found in these sources, the source that provides the most complete information is to be preferred.

These prescribed sources of information are used particularly, in the order given below, for the establishment of the key title (see Section 4.1).

Printed resources

A. the title page (*);

B. the analytical title page, cover, caption, masthead, editorial pages,

colophon;

C. the other preliminaries and information to be found on the wrappers and

top and bottom of text pages (such as running title);

D. the rest of the issue: prefaces, forewords, table of contents, text,

appendices, etc.;

E. sources of reference from outside the issue and not associated with it

(e.g. bibliographies, publishers’ lists).

(*) When there is more than one title page, choose the title page which is in the language or script of the text, or the recto of two facing title pages, or the first of two or more title pages both or all of which are on the recto. In the case of tête-bêche (or tumble or flip-flop) publications, the choice of title pages is within the discretion of the National Centre establishing the key title. Give titles found on other title pages as variant titles (see Section 6).

Online resources

the title screen or title frame, home page;

the main menu;

the home page of the publisher or aggregator;

the metadata

Resources on CD-ROM, DVD and in other direct access electronic media

External sources:

the label permanently affixed;

the containers;

the documentation or other accompanying material (e.g. publisher’s letter)

Internal sources:

the title screen or title frame;

the main menu.

Section 2 ISSN

[MANDATORY]

The need for a brief, unique and unambiguous identification code for serial publications has been long recognized. The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) evolved such an identification code in its standard ISO 3297: Information and documentation – International standard serial number (ISSN). It recognized that the exchange of information about continuing resources between the computer systems of different organizations imposed the requirement for a standard code. As communication between the different organizations transcended national boundaries it was decided that an International code should be numeric, since no single alphabet would be used by the majority of producers and users of serials.

Careful and thorough investigation suggested that the ISSN should not attempt to incorporate any significance other than the unique identification of a serial title. It was decided that an eight-digit number (including one check digit) would be sufficient as the basis for numbering all serials.

As a consequence of spreading digital resources and of developments in cataloguing practice this code has been applicable for all continuing resources beginning from the 21st century (see Section 0.2).

2.1 Construction of ISSN

An ISSN consists of eight digits. These are the Arabic numerals 0 to 9, except that an upper case X can sometimes occur in the final position as a check digit. Since ISSN are likely to be used in the same context as codes designed for other purposes, such as the International Standard Book Number (ISBN) or local control numbers, a distinction must be preserved in the form of presentation when written or printed. An ISSN is, therefore, preceded by these letters, and appears as two groups of four digits, separated by a hyphen.

e.g.

ISSN 0317-8471

ISSN 1050-124X

The check digit is always located in the extreme right (low order) position, and is calculated on a modulus 11 basis using weights 8 to 2.

Calculating the check digit

The purpose of a check digit is to guard against errors caused by the incorrect transcription of an ISSN. The modulus 11 basis using the weighting factors 8 to 2 for calculating the check digit is one of the most efficient systems for detecting transcription errors.

The procedure for calculating the check digit, which may be carried out automatically in a computer, is as follows:

1.Take the first seven digits of the ISSN (the check digit is the eighth and last digit) 0 3 1 7 8 4 7 2.Take the weighting factors associated with each digit 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 3. Multiply each digit in turn by its weighting factor 0 21 6 35 32 12 14 4. Add these numbers together 0+21+6+35+32+12+14=120 5.Divide this sum by the modulus 11 120:11=10 remainder 10 6. Subtract the remainder from 11 11-10 1 7. Add the remainder, which is the check digit, to the extreme right (low order) position of the base number of the ISSN 0317-8471 If the remainder is 10, substitute an upper case X in the check digit position. If there is no remainder, put a zero in the check digit position

Editorial note: the check digit is an essential and inseparable part of the ISSN.

2.2 General rules for ISSN assignment

Only one ISSN is assigned to a continuing resource in a defined medium. This ISSN is permanently linked to a standardized form of title, called the key title, established by the National Centre at the time of registration.

In cases where the continuing resource undergoes a major change in title or other major changes as defined in Section 2.3, a new ISSN and a new key title shall be assigned.

When a distinct continuing resource exists within another continuing resource, whatever the form of presentation (e.g., an insert), each continuing resource shall receive its own individual key title and ISSN.

When a continuing resource is published in different media, with the same title or not, different ISSN and key titles shall be assigned to the different versions. Publications available simultaneously in several remote access versions (online versions) and publications printed on demand are exceptions treated as described in Section 2.2.3.

When the medium of the continuing resource changes, a new ISSN and a new key title shall be assigned (see Section 2.3).

2.2.1 Continuing resources published in different language editions

Continuing resources published in different language editions have a separate ISSN and key title assigned to each edition (see Section 4.1.2.6).

e.g.

Le courrier de l’Unesco (Imprimé) = ISSN 0304-3118

The Unesco courier (Print) = ISSN 0041-5278

Camera (Deutsche Ausg.) = ISSN 0008-2074

Camera (Ed. française) = ISSN 0373-9740

Camera (English ed.) = ISSN 0366-7073

2.2.2 Continuing resources published in different geographic editions

Continuing resources published in different geographic editions have a separate ISSN and key title assigned to each edition (see Section 4.1.2.7).

e.g.

Access West (Alberta ed.) = ISSN 1700-8646

Access West (British Columbia ed.) = ISSN 1700-8662

Access West (Saskatchewan ed.) = ISSN 1700-8751

Access West (Manitoba ed.) = ISSN 1700-8735

2.2.3 Continuing resources published in different media

Continuing resources published in different media (e.g., print serials, e-journals, CD-ROM) have a separate ISSN and key title assigned to each manifestation (see Section 4.1.2.9).

e.g.

Biological abstracts = ISSN 0006-3169

Biological abstracts on compact disk = ISSN 1058-4129

ISSN Compact = ISSN 1018-4783

ISSN Online = ISSN 1560-1560

A single ISSN is assigned to identify all online versions made available under the same title including: versions digitized from print, born digital versions, versions available simultaneously in different encoding formats such as PDF or HTML, and versions for mobile phones, e-readers etc[11]. For exceptions to this general rule, please see Section b) below.

a) The ISSN record describes one of the online versions only but the corresponding ISSN is used as a shared identifier for all the related online versions.

Base the bibliographic description on the online version which:

1) is published by the same publisher as the print version,

2) is the most complete online version.

Additionally, specify which version was used for creating the bibliographic description by recording a note (note field 588 in MARC 21 and 303 in UNIMARC) and provide the URL of the other versions.

Optionally, you may:

add a note specifying the mode(s) of access or the type(s) of device required (note field 538 in MARC 21 and 337 in UNIMARC, see Section 21),

and use subfield $q of field 856 (MARC 21 and UNIMARC) to note information about the format of the online resource (se Section 23).

e.g.

Publication available through different websites

022 0# $a 1955-2564

222 #0 $a Actes de la recherche en sciences sociales $b (En ligne)

588 ## $a Notice rédigée d’après : http://www.persee.fr/

856 40 $u http://www.persee.fr/web/revues/home/prescript/revue/arss

856 40 $u http://www.cairn.info/revue-actes-de-la-recherche-en-sciences-sociales.htm

856 40 $u http://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/000676306

e.g.

Publication available both online and through apps for iPad/iPhone

022 0# $a 1944-7353

222 #0 $a Journal of Digital Imaging $b (Online)

538 ## $a Mode of access: web and iPhone/iPad app

588 ## $a Description based on: http://link.springer.com/journal/10278

856 40 $u http://link.springer.com/journal/10278

856 40 $u https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/journal-of-digital-imaging/id584819898?mt=8

e.g.

Publication available both in HTML (online) and in AWZ formats (Kindle e-reader)

022 0# $a 2163-730X

222 #0 $a Flayrah $b (Online)

538 ## $a Mode of access: web, Kindle

856 40 $u http://www.flayrah.com/

$q HTML

856 40 $u http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B003G2Z7Q6?ie=UTF8&tag=flayrah

$q AZW

b) Exceptions

Assign separate ISSN:

to any of the online versions which belong to different conten types (spoken word vs text for example)

if the content of the online versions is sufficiently different to be considered as separate resources

e.g. two different ISSN have been assigned to the online daily edition of the newspaper Le Républicain lorrain [Le Républicain lorrain (En ligne) = ISSN 2262-4856] and to the website Le Républicain lorrain [Le Républicain lorrain (Site) = ISSN 2102-6793] because their content differs significantly. The website [Le Républicain lorrain (Site) = ISSN 2102-6793] is also available for mobile devices as indicated in the 538 note below.

022 1# $a 2102-6793 $l 2102-6793

222 #2 $a Le Républicain lorrain $b (Site)

538 ## $a Mode d’accès: web, terminaux mobiles

775 0# $t Le Républicain lorrain $x 0397-0639

77­5 0# $t Le Républicain lorrain (En ligne) $x 2262-4856

856 40 $u http://www.republicain-lorrain.fr/‎

022 1# $a 2262-4856 $l 0397-0639

222 #2 $a Le Républicain lorrain $b (En ligne)

776 0# $t Le Républicain lorrain $x 0397-0639

77­5 0# $t Le Républicain lorrain (site) $x 2102-6793

856 40 $u http://www.republicain-lorrain.fr/pdf/editions-numeriques

Editorial note: print on demand is not considered a separate medium version. The ISSN assigned to the online version is used for any print on demand issues.

2.2.4 Other editions

When a continuing resource is published in different editions such as International ed., monthly ed., etc., each edition has its own key title and ISSN (see Section 4.1.2.10).

e.g.

Forecasting your future = ISSN 0834-5074

Editorial note: Annual edition

Your daily cycle guide (Monthly ed.) = ISSN 0711-1231

Editorial note: Monthly edition

Banka (International ed.) = ISSN 1330-9781

Banka (Zagreb) = ISSN 0353-6335

Kurír (Reggeli kiad.) = ISSN 0865-9001

Kurír (Délutáni kiad.) = ISSN 0865-901X

Editorial note: Morning and afternoon editions

2.2.5 Cumulations

When a continuing resource is cumulated, for example a national bibliography, and the cumulations bear the same title as the initial issues, are in the same language, and do not change significantly in content, the cumulations have the same ISSN and key title as the initial issues. The addition of indexes to cumulations and the re-arrangement of the contents are not considered to be significant changes. When the title of a cumulation has additional words, such as “annual”, “cumulative edition”, etc., that may be considered as a variant title.

e.g.

Alberta electric industry. Annual statistics = ISSN 0706-1420

Editorial note: with a variant title Alberta electric industry. Cumulative annual statistics

(The annual publication has less frequent cumulations)

When the contents of cumulations are significantly different a new ISSN and key title are assigned.

e.g.

Magyar könyvészet (Budapest. 1961) = ISSN 0133-3496

Note: cumulation of Magyar nemzeti bibliográfia. Könyvek bibliográfiája = ISSN 0133-6843

2.2.6 Reproductions and reprints

Reproductions in a medium different from the medium of the original edition, including digital media, are eligible for ISSN assignment. Although eligible for ISSN assignment, reproductions in microform are generally not assigned separate ISSN. In these cases, the ISSN assigned to the original print version can be used for the reproduction.

e.g.

West-Quebec post = ISSN 0834-5805

Note: this ISSN is valid for the original edition and the reproduction on microform.

Reprints and reproductions in a medium identical to the medium of the original edition are not assigned separate ISSN. The ISSN assigned to the original version is valid for the reprint or the reproduction.

2.2.7 Loose-leafs

Some loose-leaf publications are serials and some are integrating resources:

If the publication has holes punched for insertion into a binder but is otherwise published in a succession of issues as any other serial, it should be treated as a serial;

If the publication is updated by replacement pages but is completely replaced on a regular basis by a new edition, annually for example, it can be treated as a serial;

If new material is to be added indefinitely by replacement pages, the publication is an integrating resource.

In the case of 2 or 3, assign an ISSN to the whole publication. This includes:

1. base binder,

2. updates,

3. and publication announcing updates (if specific to this publication).

2.2.8 Mergers and splits

2.2.8.1 Mergers

Assign a new ISSN and key title to a continuing resource which has been formed by the merging of two or more other continuing resources, unless the title of one of the merged continuing resources is kept as the title of the new publication, in which case the original key title and ISSN will remain valid. A new ISSN and key title are not assigned if there have been only minor changes in title as a result of the merger.

e.g.

Archivio di ottalmologia = ISSN 0004-0134

and

Rassegna italiana di ottalmologia = ISSN 0300-0672

merged to form

Archivio e rassegna italiana di ottalmologia = ISSN 0300-0109

Hoverfoil news = ISSN 0018-6767

absorbed

New transport technology = ISSN 0306-0543

remained as

Hoverfoil news = ISSN 0018-6767

2.2.8.2 Splits

Assign new ISSN and key titles to each of two or more titles which result from a split in a continuing resource, except in cases where the original title is kept by one of the new publications or where the original key title is still applicable.

e.g.

Library bulletin (Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation) = ISSN 0384-2444

Accession list. Periodical articles (Library. Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation) = ISSN 0384-2452

Succeeded: Accession list (Library. Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation) = ISSN 0384-2436

2.2.9 Sections, supplements, insets and sub-series

When a continuing resource:

(a) has regular supplements; or

(b) has another continuing resource inserted into it; or

(c) has sub-series; or

(d) when its titles consist of a common title and several dependent title designations and/or dependent titles;

then each of these continuing resources has its own ISSN and key title.

e.g.

Main continuing resource: Symbolae Osloenses = ISSN 0039-7679

Supplement: Symbolae Osloenses. Fasciculi suppletorii = ISSN 0332-561X

Main continuing resource: Art et poésie (Revue) = ISSN 0518-7648

Supplement: Horizons 21 (Bruay-en-Artois) = ISSN 0182-5976

Action transport = ISSN 0249-6143

Inset in: Transport public = ISSN 0249-5643

Sections: Analecta Vaticano-Belgica. Section A, Nonciature de Flandre = ISSN 0066-1414

Analecta Vaticano-Belgica. Section B, Nonciature de Cologne = ISSN 0066-1422

Analecta Vaticano-Belgica. Section C, Nonciature Bruxelles = ISSN 0066-1430

Main series: Cancer series (Nyíregyháza) = ISSN 0139-2867

Sub-series: Cancer mortality in the county Szabolcs-Szatmár-Bereg = ISSN 1216-6189

2.2.10 Resumption of titles

Resumption of publication under former title

When the title of a continuing resource is changed back to an earlier title after an interval of publication under another title, assign a new ISSN to the resumed title and distinguish the key title from the original by adding the new start date in parentheses.

e.g.

Revue d’immunologie = ISSN 0035-2454

Revue d’immunologie et de thérapie antimicrobienne = ISSN 0370-582X

Revue d’immunologie (1970) = ISSN 0397-9539

Resumption of publication under same title

When a continuing resource resumes publication, and it has not been published under another title in the interval, keep the ISSN and key title already assigned.

e.g.

Life (Chicago) = ISSN 0024-3019

Editorial note: published 1936-1972, resumed publication 1978

2.3 Changes in continuing resources requiring a new ISSN assignment

When the wording of a title, as it appears in the title source, is changed, a new ISSN and key title may be assigned depending on whether the change is a major or a minor one. Other changes in continuing resources, like the physical medium are also considered as major changes.

A major change will result in a new ISSN and key title being assigned, whereas a minor change will not. In all cases each Centre will decide, so far as the continuing resources within its jurisdiction are concerned, whether a change in a continuing resource necessitates the assignment of a new ISSN and key title.

In case of doubt a title change should be regarded as minor and be recorded as a variant title.

2.3.1 Major changes in title proper of continuing resources

For major changes in the title proper of a continuing resource, apply these instructions, as appropriate:

• Languages and scripts that divide text into words (see 2.3.1.1)

• Languages and scripts that do not divide text into words (se 2.3.1.2)

All the instructions below apply to the original forms of titles proper and not, when applicable, to the romanized forms.

A new ISSN and a new key title are required in cases of major changes in the title proper. The following are to be considered major changes, exceptions are listed in Section 2.4.1.

2.3.1.1 For languages and scripts that divide text into words

a) when the addition, deletion, change or reordering of any word occurs within the first five words (the first six words if the title begins with an article) of the title proper;

e.g.

La recherche aéronautique = ISSN 0370-3533

becomes

La recherche aérospatiale = ISSN 0034-1223

Tidsskrift for norsk sykepleieforskning = ISSN 0801-1923

becomes

Norsk tidsskrift for sykepleieforskning = ISSN 1501-4754

ICSU review = ISSN 0536-1338

becomes

ICSU review of world science = ISSN 0367-7338

Revue générale du caoutchouc = ISSN 0370-503X

becomes

Revue générale du caoutchouc et des plastiques = ISSN 0035-3175

becomes

Caoutchoucs & plastiques (Paris) = ISSN 1154-1105

b) When the addition, deletion or change of any word occurs after the first five words (the first six words if the title begins with an article) and changes the meaning of the title proper or indicates a different subject matter;

e.g.

Moving to San Francisco and the Bay Area = ISSN 0714-7295

Becomes

Moving to the San Francisco Bay Area and Greater Sacramento = ISSN 0828-4601

Rental market report, Barrie CA = ISSN 1207-1765

becomes

Rental market report, Barrie CA and Bracebridge, Collingwood CA, Gravenhurst, Huntsville, Midland CA, Orillia CA = ISSN 1207-1773

The best bed & breakfasts in the world = ISSN 1057-5472

becomes

The best bed & breakfasts in England, Scotland & Wales = ISSN 1054-4089

c) When a corporate body, named anywhere in the title proper, changes, unless the change belongs to one or more of the categories listed as minor changes.

e.g.

NFCR Cancer Research Association symposia = ISSN 0742-521X

becomes

Association for International Cancer Research symposia = ISSN 0887-8390

AECB staff annual report for … on the Canadian nuclear power industry = ISSN 1497-0406

becomes

CNSC staff annual report for … on the Canadian nuclear power industry = ISSN 1706-8037

Annual report of the Ontario Advisory Council on Multiculturalism = ISSN 0704-2655

becomes

Annual report (Ontario Advisory Council on Multiculturalism and Citizenship) = ISSN 0710-8990

2.3.1.2 For languages and scripts that do not divide text into words[12]

a) When an addition, deletion, change or reordering of any component[13] of the title proper changes the meaning of the title or indicates a different subject matter;

e.g.

林业机械 = = ISSN 1001-4462

becomes

林业机械与木工设备= = ISSN 2095-2953

b) When a corporate body, named anywhere in the title proper, changes, unless the change belongs to one or more of the categories listed as minor changes.

e.g.

北京市政法管理干部学院学报 = ISSN1008-7273

Becomes

北京政法职业学院学报 = ISSN1672-9285

2.3.2 Other major changes to continuing resources

A new ISSN and a new key title also are required in the following cases:

a) when the title proper is a generic term, and the issuing body used as qualifying information changes its name, except as indicated below (see Section 2.4.1) or the continuing resource is issued by a different body;

e.g.

Bulletin d’information (Compagnie financière de Suez) = ISSN 1153-4087

becomes

Bulletin d’information (Compagnie financière de Suez et de l’Union parisienne) = ISSN 0182-5348

Research paper (University of Alberta. Dept. of Economics) = ISSN 1204-5314

becomes

Research paper (University of Alberta. Institute for Public Economics) = ISSN 1485-0419

Varia (Universitets oldsaksamling) = ISSN 0333-1296

becomes

Varia (Universitetets kulturhistoriske museer. Oldsaksamlingen) = ISSN 1503-0806

b) when the edition statement changes and indicates a significant change to the scope or coverage of the continuing resource;

e.g.

ABC (Ed. especial aérea) = ISSN 1136-0194

becomes

ABC (Ed. internacional) = ISSN 1136-0232

Profiles of success (Burlington ed.) = ISSN 1707-0651

becomes

Profiles of success (Oakville-Burlington ed.) = ISSN 1707-066X

c) when the physical medium of the continuing resource changes (e.g. printed edition vs. online);

e.g.

Terminomètre (Paris) = ISSN 1012-4993

becomes

Terminometro (Ed. française. En ligne) = ISSN 1609-9931

d) when hitherto dependent titles become independent:

e.g.

Fauna Norvegica. Series B, Norwegian journal of entomology = ISSN 0332-7698

becomes

Norwegian journal of entomology (1999) = ISSN 1501-8415

e) when a continuing resource is cumulated, and the cumulations bear the same title as the initial issues and are in the same language and the contents of the cumulations are significantly different (e.g. when the contents of quarterly issues of an index are merged into a single alphabet for the annual issue);

e.g.

Új könyvek (Kumuláció) = ISSN 0209-8105

Cumulation of: Új könyvek = ISSN 0049-5069

Editorial note: contents of biweekly issues are re-arranged in subject groups and within them merged into a single alphabet.

f) when a continuing resource is formed by the merger of two or more other continuing resources;

e.g.

Archivio di ottalmologia = ISSN 0004-0134

and

Rassegna Italiana di ottalmologia = ISSN 0300-0672

merged to form

Archivio e rassegna Italiana di ottalmologia = ISSN 0300-0109

g) when two or more continuing resources are formed from the split of a continuing resource.

e.g.

Geografi i Bergen = ISSN 0801-5783

becomes

Geografi i Bergen. Serie A, Meddelelser fra Institutt for geografi-Bergen = ISSN 0806-671X

and

Geografi i Bergen. Serie B, Monografier fra Institutt for geografi-Bergen = ISSN 0806-6728

AAA world (Alaska, Hawaii ed.) = ISSN 1063-3863

becomes

Car & travel (Alaska ed.) = ISSN 1080-2215

and

Car & travel (Hawaii ed.) = ISSN 1080-2258

2.4 Changes in continuing resources not requiring a new ISSN assignment

2.4.1 Minor changes in title proper of continuing resources

A new ISSN and a key title are not assigned in cases of minor changes in the title proper. In general, if a minor change occurs in the title proper, the later title is given as variant title.

The following are to be considered minor changes:

a) The change is in the representation of a word or words (a component or components of the title for those languages and scripts that do not divide text into words);

Change in the form of the character

e.g.

會報

becomes

会報

One spelling vs. another

e.g.

Statistisk aarbog for kongeriget Norge

becomes

Statistisk årbok for kongeriket Norge

Labour history

becomes

Labor history

Abbreviated word or sign or symbol (e.g. “&”) vs. spelled-out form

e.g.

Accommodations and travel services

becomes

Accommodations & travel services

Ga. peach statistics

becomes

Georgia peach statistics

Arabic numeral vs. Roman numeral

e.g.

XXe siècle

becomes

20e siècle

Number or date vs. spelled-out form

e.g.

Four wheel fun

becomes

4 wheel fun

Hyphenated word vs. unhyphenated word

e.g.

Year-book of the …

becomes

Year book of the …

One-word compound vs. two-word compound, whether hyphenated or not

e.g.

Openhouse

becomes

Open house

b) The change involves an acronym or initialism vs. the full form;

e.g.

Research in technological adaptation

becomes

RITA

师大

becomes

师范大学

c) The change is in the inflexion of a word, for example from singular to plural form;

e.g.

Fishery report

becomes

Fisheries report

d) The change is the addition, deletion, or change of articles, prepositions, and conjunctions (or any ” function elements ” [14] for those languages which do not use these categories) anywhere in the title, provided that there is no significant change in the subject matter;

e.g.

Canadian music trades journal

becomes

Canadian music and trades journal

Fiscal survey of the states

becomes

The fiscal survey of states

e) The change involves the name of the same corporate body and elements of its hierarchy or their grammatical connection anywhere in the title (e.g. the addition, deletion, or rearrangement of the name of the corporate body or the substitution of a variant form, including an abbreviation);

e.g.

Bulletin (Société des amis de la Cathédrale de Strasbourg)

becomes

Bulletin de la Société des amis de la Cathédrale de Strasbourg

Society of Biblical Literature monograph series

becomes

Monograph series (Society of Biblical Literature)

Views (Goodridge Area Historical Society)

becomes

Views from the Goodridge Area Historical Society

becomes

Views from the GAHS

Berichte der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Mathematik und Datenverarbeitung

becomes

GMD-Berichte

f) the change is the addition, deletion, or change of punctuation, including initialisms and letters with separating punctuation vs. those without separating punctuation, anywhere in the title;

e.g.

GBB

becomes

G.B.B.

g) The change is in the order of titles when the title is given in more than one language on the chief source of information, provided that the title chosen as title proper still appears as a parallel title;

e.g.

South African medical journal

Parallel title: Suid Afrikaanse tydskrift vir geneeskunde

becomes

Suid Afrikaanse tydskrift vir geneeskunde

Parallel title: South African medical journal

h) The change is the addition, deletion, or change of words (or components of the title for those languages and scripts that do not divide text into words ) anywhere in the title that link the title to the numbering;

e.g.

Tin

becomes

Tin in …

i) Two or more titles proper are used on different issues of a continuing resource according to a regular pattern;

e.g.

Weekly labor market report

Last issue each month has title: Monthly labor market report

Minneapolis morning tribune

Sunday issues have title: Minneapolis Sunday tribune

Editorial note: Daily issues and Sunday issues have consecutive numbering.

Annual report (Medical Association of South Africa)

Reports for alternate years have title: Jaarverslag (Die Mediese Vereniging van Suid-Afrika)

j) The addition to, deletion from, or change in the order of words (or components of the title for those languages and scripts that do not divide text into words ) in a list anywhere in the title, provided that there is no significant change in the subject matter;

e.g.

Kartboken for Oslo, Bærum, Lørenskog, Nesodden, Oppegård og Ski

becomes

Kartboken for Oslo, Bærum, Asker, Lørenskog, Nesodden, Oppegård og Ski

k) The addition, deletion or re-arrangement anywhere in the title of words (or components of the title for those languages and scripts that do not divide text into words ) that indicate the type of continuing resource such as “magazine”, “journal”, “notebook”, or “newsletter”, or their equivalent in other languages;

e.g.

硏修實施槪況報告

becomes

硏修實施槪況報告集

Handel und Industrie

becomes

Revue Handel und Industrie

Magazin für Wassersport

becomes

Wassersport

Trade and industry

becomes

Trade and industry review

but not: Link magazine

becomes: Link journal

Editorial note: the change from one word indicating the type of resource to a different word indicating a type of resource is a major change if it occurs in the first five words of the title (see Section 2.3.1).

2.4.2 Other minor changes

A new ISSN and key title are not assigned. Nevertheless, changes are recorded as variant titles, in the following cases:

a) when the place of publication entered as qualifying information is changed;

e.g.

Key title: System (Linköping) = ISSN 0346-251X

Variant title: System (Oxford)

b) when a change in the edition statement entered as qualifying information does not convey a change in subject matter;

e.g.

Key title: SKW-Trostberg-Report (International ed.) = ISSN 0947-1928

Variant title: SKW-Trostberg-Report (English ed.)

Key title: Magyar hírlap (Budapesti kiad.) = ISSN 0133-1906

Variant title: Magyar hírlap (Fővárosi kiad.)

2.5 Cancellation of an ISSN and deletion of an ISSN record

Cancellation of an ISSN and deletion[15]

of an ISSN record are two different functions used for different reasons:

A cancellation of an ISSN has to be made when the same ISSN is assigned to more than one continuing resource, or when more than one ISSN is assigned to the same continuing resource. A cancellation of an ISSN is always made in favour of the valid ISSN, therefore a cancelled ISSN is always linked to one or more valid ISSN.

A deletion of an ISSN record has to be made when the described resource is not a continuing resource, or when the described resource has never been published. Therefore a deleted record will not be available in the ISSN Register.

2.5.1 Cancelling an ISSN assignment

One ISSN assigned to two or more continuing resources

Cancel a single ISSN incorrectly assigned to two or more continuing resources and assign a new ISSN and key title to each continuing resource.

e.g.

ISSN 0010-860X = Copper information

cancelled in favour of

ISSN 0302-7082 = Copper information. Architectural series

ISSN 0302-7090 = Copper information. Engineering series

ISSN 0075-7586 = Labour standards in Canada

cancelled in favour of

ISSN 0576-1123 = Labour standards in Canada

ISSN 0576-1131 = Normes du travail au Canada

ISSN 0042-434X = Vers demain

cancelled in favour of

ISSN 0317-848X = Vers demain (English ed.)

ISSN 0317-8471 = Vers demain (Ed. française)

More than one ISSN assigned to a single continuing resource

When two or more ISSN are incorrectly assigned to a single title, generally consider the lowest number valid and cancel the higher number or numbers.

In cases where the higher ISSN is already being printed on the publication, cancel the lower ISSN and keep the higher one.

Generally, in cases where one ISSN is already being printed on the publication, cancel the other ISSN and keep the printed one. Do not ask a publisher to change the ISSN of a continuing resource when the ISSN is printed correctly and the title has not changed.

e.g.

ISSN 0500-0270 = Astronomical phenomena

cancelled in favour of

ISSN 0083-2421 = Astronomical phenomena

Cancelled ISSN must not be re-assigned

When an ISSN incorrectly assigned has been cancelled it should not be re-assigned to another title. In this case the ISSN re-assignment is only made when the ISSN was, by mistake, cancelled. ISSN re-assignment information sheet must be completed and sent with the corresponding record (see Annex 9).

Recording of cancelled ISSN

Cancelled ISSN are reported in a specific subfield of the record for the corresponding valid ISSN (see Section 2.7).

2.5.2 Deleting an ISSN record

Delete an ISSN record when the described resource is not a continuing resource, or when the described resource has never been published. A deleted record will not be available in the ISSN Register.

The ISSN on the deleted records should not be re-assigned to another title. The ISSN may be re-used only if the ISSN record was, by mistake, deleted. The ISSN re-assignment information sheet must be completed and sent with the corresponding record (se Annex 9).

Recording of deletion

The deletion of an ISSN record is reported by using the specific deletion information sheet (see Annex 8).

The ISSN record deletion information sheet must be completed and sent with the corresponding record. The deleted ISSN should not appear in any other record, either in any subfield of an ISSN field or in any link field.

2.6 Display of ISSN on continuing resource issues or iterations

The ISSN shall be displayed on or in the first issue and on or in each subsequent issue or on each iteration of a continuing resource. Continuing resources issued with accompanying parts shall display the ISSN on or in each component part.

When a continuing resource bears an ISSN as well as another standard number, such as an ISBN for a volume of a series, the two numbers shall appear together and each number shall be identified by its own prefix: ISSN and ISBN or another appropriate prefix.

References to ISSN shall be included in promotional material and catalogues.

When more than one ISSN appears on a single publication in relation to different continuing resource titles, for example, the titles of a main series and its sub-series, each ISSN shall appear on the continuing resource and shall be distinguished by either adding the full or abbreviated title in parentheses after the relevant number or by printing the ISSN as close as possible to the relevant titles. When a continuing resource contains another continuing resource as an insert with a separate title page, the ISSN for the insert shall be printed on that title page, or in some other appropriate place on the insert.

When continuing resources are published in different media, and different ISSN and key titles are assigned (see Section 2.2.3), the related ISSN may also be displayed in the continuing resources, each with additional, distinguishing information, as follows:

e.g.

ISSN 1562-6865 (Online)

ISSN 1063-7710 (Print)

or:

Online edition: ISSN 1562-6865

Print edition: ISSN 1063-7710

2.6.1 Display of ISSN on printed continuing resource issues

The ISSN shall be printed in a prominent position on each printed continuing resource issue in the following order of preference: front cover, title page, caption, masthead, back cover, colophon or editorial pages.

On a periodical the ISSN shall be printed preferably in the top right-hand corner of the front cover, although it is appreciated that such a position may not always be convenient because of binding or design considerations. In the case of tête-bêche publications, the ISSN shall be printed on both covers (or title pages, captions, mastheads, colophons, editorial pages).

2.6.2 Display of ISSN on non-printed continuing resources issues

On continuing resources published in tangible non-print formats, the ISSN shall be displayed on all accessible eye-readable portions (e.g. container, label, fiche header).

On a continuing resource published on microfiche, the ISSN shall be entered in the identification area of the header of the microfiche and/or on the labels.

On a continuing resource published in electronic medium (online continuing resource, CD-ROM), the ISSN shall appear on the title screen, or failing it, on the main menu, and, if applicable, on any labels permanently affixed to the publication. If it is not possible to display the ISSN on the item or its label, the ISSN shall be displayed on the container.

On online continuing resources using metadata (e.g. Dublin Core), the ISSN shall be included in the element “Identifier” of the metadata.

2.7 Representation of the “ISSN” in bibliographic formats

2.7.1 MARC 21: field 022

The first indicator value shows whether the continuing resource title is of national or International interest or of local or ephemeral interest only.

Tag Indicators Subfield codes Data elements Mandatory Repeatable Comment 1 2 022 ISSN Yes No # No level specified 0 Continuing resource of International interest 1 Continuing resource not of International interest # Undefined $a ISSN Yes No $l ISSN-L Yes No See Section 3 $m Cancelled ISSN-L Yes if appl. Yes See Section 3 $y Incorrect ISSN No Yes An incorrect ISSN or an ISSN incorrectly associated with a continuing resource $z Cancelled ISSN Yes if appl. Yes See Section 2.5 $2 Centre code Yes No See Section 16.5

e.g.

ISSN 0022-5126

022 0# $a 0022-5126 $l 0022-5126 $2 _1

ISSN 0106-990X

022 0# $a 0106-990X $l 0106-990X $z 0900-7784 $2 _h

ISSN 0000-0019

022 1# $a 0000-0019 $l 0000-0019 $y 000-0019 $2 _1

2.7.2 UNIMARC: field 011

The first indicator value shows whether the continuing resource title is of national or International interest or of local or ephemeral interest only.

Tag Indicators Subfield codes Data elements Mandatory Repeatable Comment 1 2 011 ISSN Yes No # No level specified 0 Continuing resource of International or national interest 1 Continuing resource of local interest # Undefined $a ISSN Yes No $f ISSN-L Yes No See Section 3 $g Cancelled ISSN-L Yes if appl. Yes See Section 3 $y Cancelled ISSN Yes if appl. Yes See Section 2.5 $z Erroneous ISSN & ISSN-L No Yes See Section 3

e.g.

ISSN 0022-5126

011 0# $a 0022-5126 $f 0022-5126

ISSN 0106-990X

011 0# $a 0106-990X $f 0106-990X $y 0900-7784

ISSN 1038-0027

011 1# $a 1038-0027 $f 1038-0027

Section 3 ISSN-L

[MANDATORY]

The ISSN-L has been defined to meet the need for a collocation, or grouping mechanism that brings together the various medium versions of a continuing resource, and thus facilitates content management.

3.1 Designation of ISSN-L

The ISSN assigned to any medium version of a continuing resource and first entered into the ISSN Register is designated automatically by the information system of the International Centre to function as the ISSN-L. The designated ISSN-L applies to all other medium versions of that resource identified in the ISSN Register at that time or that may be entered into the ISSN Register in the future. An ISSN-L is designated for each continuing resource identified in the ISSN Register, even if the continuing resource is issued in only one medium. Only one ISSN-L is designated regardless of how many different medium versions of a continuing resource exist.

The ISSN-L can be also designated by ISSN National Centres in their local information system and reported to the International Centre. Those ISSN National Centres who wish to undertake this responsibility must inform the International Centre.

3.1.1 Use of fields 776 for the designation of ISSN-L

For resources that exist in more than one media version, the same ISSN-L is designated for all records that are linked by field 776 (Additional physical form entry). These records are treated as a group.

e.g.

ISSN-L 0021-8464

Printed version: The journal of adhesion (Print) = ISSN 0021-8464

Online version: The journal of adhesion (Online) = ISSN 1563-518X

CD-ROM version: The journal of adhesion (CD-ROM) = ISSN 1026-5414

ISSN-L 1818-5894

Printed version: Social policy highlight (Print) = ISSN 1818-5894

Online version: Social policy highlight (Online) = ISSN 1818-5940

For records that do not contain any field(s) 776 or that do not have a field 776 of another ISSN record pointing to them, designation of the ISSN-L is made by repeating the ISSN of the record(s) in the appropriate field for the ISSN-L.

e.g.

ISSN-L 1819-1371

Printed serial: Construction law International = ISSN 1819-1371

No other medium version

ISSN-L 1991-9336

Online serial: European journal of American studies = ISSN 1991-9336

No other medium version

Editorial note: The presence of 776 linking fields in the records is crucial for the consistent designation of ISSN-L. These 776 links should be present in the pertinent records when they are submitted to the ISSN Register. The physical medium versions do not have to be exactly the same, in content, layout or title, in order to be linked together using this field. However, they need to be equivalent in scope, e.g. do not link a record describing a resource that includes several titles in one medium to a record describing only one of these titles in another medium. Regular checks are also made at the ISSN International Centre to ensure that reciprocal and equivalent 776 linking is present in records.

3.2 Uniqueness of the ISSN-L

Only one ISSN-L is designated regardless of how many different medium versions of a continuing resource exist. A continuing resource is associated with only one ISSN-L.

e.g

Continuing resource in only one medium form:

ISSN-L 1748-7188

Online resource: Algorithms for molecular biology = ISSN 1748-7188

Continuing resources in two medium forms:

ISSN-L 0264-2875

Printed version: Dance research = ISSN 0264-2875

Online version: Dance research (Online) = ISSN 1750-0095

Continuing resources in three medium forms:

ISSN-L 1188-1534

Printed version: Plant varieties journal (Ottawa) = ISSN 1188-1534

Online version: Plant varieties journal (Ottawa. Online) = ISSN 1911-1479

CD-ROM version: Plant varieties journal (Ottawa. CD-ROM) = ISSN 1911-1460

3.3 ISSN-L and major changes

When a continuing resource to which an ISSN has been assigned undergoes a major change and is therefore assigned a new ISSN (se Section 2.3), the relevant ISSN-L is designated and recorded in the new metadata record that was created with the new ISSN assignment. A basic principle is the persistence of the ISSN-L when one or more titles to which that ISSN-L pertains are still current.

Title changes

In the most common case, i.e., when the titles of all medium versions undergo a major change at the same time, a new ISSN is assigned to each version in a defined medium and a new ISSN-L is designated. In this situation, no 776 tags will link the “new” ISSN records to the “old” ISSN records.

e.g

ISSN-L 0001-6772

Printed version: Acta Physiologica Scandinavica = ISSN 0001-6772

Online version: Acta Physiologica Scandinavica (Online) = ISSN 1365-201X

Title changes on all medium versions

Designation of the new ISSN-L

ISSN-L 1748-1708

Printed version: Acta Physiologica (Print) = ISSN 1748-1708

Online version: Acta Physiologica (Online) = ISSN 1748-1716

In the rarer cases where not all the medium versions undergo a major title change at the same time, the newly changed title or titles inherits the ISSN-L of the unchanged title or titles.

Fictitious examples:

ISSN-L 1234-567X

Printed version: Title ABC (Print) = ISSN 1234-567X

Online version: Title ABC (Online) = ISSN 5432-1234

Title changes on only one medium version

Same ISSN-L

Same ISSN-L 1234-567X

Printed version: Title ABCDEF (Print) = ISSN 2468-1012

Online version: Title ABC (Online) = ISSN 5432-1234

3.4 Representation of the “ISSN-L” in bibliographic formats

3.4.1 MARC 21: field 022

Tag Indicators Subfield codes Data elements Mandatory Repeatable Comment 1 2 022 ISSN Yes No # No level specified 0 Continuing resource of International interest 1 Continuing resource not of International interest # Undefined $a ISSN Yes No $l ISSN-L Yes No $m Cancelled ISSN-L Yes if appl. Yes $y Incorrect ISSN No Yes $z Cancelled ISSN Yes if appl. Yes $2 ISSN National Centre code Yes No

e.g.

321 ## $a Monthly $b Mar. 1972-Dec. 1980

3.4.2 UNIMARC: field 011

Tag Indicators Subfield codes Data elements Mandatory Repeatable Comment 1 2 011 ISSN Yes No # No level specified 0 Continuing resource of int. or national interest 1 Continuing resource of local interest # Undefined $a ISSN Yes No $f ISSN-L Yes No $g Cancelled ISSN-L Yes if appl. Yes $y Cancelled ISSN Yes if appl. Yes $z Erroneous ISSN & ISSN-L No Yes

Section 4 KEY TITLE

[MANDATORY]

The key title is inseparably linked to its ISSN, and like the ISSN it is unique to a particular continuing resource title.

Once a key title is recorded in the ISSN Register, this key title must not be modified, except in case of a cataloguing error.

The key title is established or authenticated by the ISSN National Centre responsible for the registration of the continuing resource, and is derived from the title information appearing on the title page or its equivalent of the print publication or from the most complete information on the non-print resource at the time of registration (see Section 1.6). Key titles which are otherwise identical are distinguished by addition of qualifying information to make them unique.

Titles in non-roman alphabets are romanized according to ISO standards, or other agreed-upon standards where ISO standards do not exist.

Typographical and transcription errors in the presentation of the title on the continuing resource are corrected without indicating that a correction has been made.

4.1 Establishment of the key title

The key title is the same title as the title proper, if this title is unique in the ISSN Register at the time of registration. If this title is not unique, the key title is the title proper to which a qualifying term is added such as name of issuing body, place and/or date of publication, edition statement or medium statement, in order to make the resulting key title unique.

To construct the key title, first the title proper is identified, according to the rules on title proper (see Section 5).

4.1.1 Initial articles in the key title

Initial articles are retained in the key titles, but ignored in filing (see Section 4.2 regarding non-filing indicators).

e.g.

A hét zeneműve = ISSN 0324-7678

Der deutsche Apotheker in Hessen = ISSN 0173-7589

Omit an initial article from the name of an issuing body used in a generic title construction unless it is required for linguistic reasons.

e.g.

Fact book (National Institute of General Medical Sciences) = ISSN 0197-646X

Not:

Fact book (The National Institute of General Medical Sciences)

4.1.2 Uniqueness of the key title

When the title proper of a continuing resource is unique in the ISSN Register, that title becomes the key title. If the title proper is not unique (i.e., it is exactly identical character for character, excluding spaces, punctuation and capitalization to an existing title in the ISSN Register or it is otherwise known that there is another continuing resource with an identical title), the key title must be made unique by the addition of one or more qualifying terms to the title proper.

Qualifying information (one or more qualifying terms) is always enclosed in parentheses unless the parentheses are system-supplied.

e.g.

Channel business = ISSN 1493-9088

Channel business (West Drayton) = ISSN 1472-0582

Canada yearbook = ISSN 0068-8142

Canada year book (CD-ROM) = ISSN 1204-2420

4.1.2.1 Choice of qualifying terms

Choose the most appropriate qualifying term(s) to distinguish two or more titles as indicated in the following instructions (4.1.2.2 to 4.1.2.10). In general, construct the key title in the most simple and brief way that will make it unique.

If more than one qualifying term is needed, generally give the terms in the following order: place or issuing body (for generic titles, see Section 4.1.2.2), date, edition statement, medium.

When more than one qualifying term is given, the subsequent term is preceded by a full stop and a space.

Give the qualifying information in the language of the title source, unless the language is a dead one, in which case it is given in the language of the country of publication.

4.1.2.2 Issuing body as a qualifying term for generic titles

Editorial note: Until publication of the ISSN Manual in 2003, the name of the issuing body associated with a generic title was added to the generic title and not recorded as qualifying term. The title and body name were separated by a space, a hyphen, and a space.

4.1.2.3 Title proper is a “generic title”

When the title proper is a “generic title” (i.e., the title consists solely of word(s) indicating the type of publication and/or the frequency, exclusive of articles, prepositions and conjunctions), such as bulletin, technical bulletin, journal, transaction, proceedings, newsletter, report, etc., or its equivalent in other languages, and the generic title is linguistically separated from and/or typographically distinguished from the name of the issuing body, use the issuing body as the qualifying term.

Note that the following titles proper are not considered generic titles:

a) the title includes a word or words which indicate specific subject content or coverage,

e.g.

Discussion papers in conservation = ISSN 0142-3649

Metric bulletin (Ottawa) = ISSN 0702-083X

Anuar. Economie = ISSN 1454-5454

b) the title includes an acronym or numbers

e.g.

101 newsletter = ISSN 0706-1765

O- + -P-Report = ISSN 0343-2076

c) the title consists of more than five words (exclusive of empty words, i.e., articles, conjunctions, prepositions, etc.)

e.g.

Report of the President and Vice-Chancellor to the Board of Governors and the Senate (London, Ont.) = ISSN 0707-0233

4.1.2.4 Form of the issuing body name

Use the issuing body name as a qualifying term in the form given on the title source.*

e.g.

Transactions (North Carolina Medical Society) = ISSN 0361-5537

Bulletin (Bach Society) = ISSN 0309-7021

Journal (North Western Society for Industrial Archeology and History) = ISSN 0141-643X

Editorial Note: Centres subject to the bibliographic agreements of the CONSER (Cooperative Online SERials) Program may transcribe the name of the issuing body in the form established by national cataloguing practice for use in headings and other access points.

When the name of the issuing body appears in more than one form on the title source choose the form which is given typographical prominence, or, if that does not apply, choose the briefest form (not an acronym or initialism) which adequately identifies the issuing body. Other forms of the issuing body name may be used to construct variant titles.

e.g.

Key title: Annual accounts (Welsh Water Authority) = ISSN 0142-0291

Variant title: Annual accounts (Awdurdod Dwr Cymru)

When the name of the issuing body does not appear on the title source, take the name of the issuing body from elsewhere in the piece. If more than one form appears in the piece choose the form which is given typographical prominence, or, if that does not apply, choose the briefest form (not an acronym or initialism) which adequately identifies the issuing body.

e.g.

Technical bulletin (Institute of Chartered Accountants in England) = ISSN 0143-9758

When more than one issuing body is named in the title source, choose as the name of the issuing body to be used as the qualifying term, the name which is typographically prominent, or if the names are given equal prominence, choose the name which appears first. Use the names of the other issuing bodies, as qualifying terms to construct variant titles.

e.g.

Key title: Joint report (British Columbia Ministry of Forests/Canadian Forestry Service) = ISSN 0821-8021

Variant title: Joint report (British Columbia Ministry of Lands, Parks and Housing/ Canadian Forestry Service)

The place of publication is used as a qualifying term to distinguish the same title proper of two or more continuing resources published in different places.

e.g.

Family (Alton) = ISSN 0260-1516

Family (Boca Raton) = ISSN 0272-992X

Add the place of publication, i.e. the name of the city, town, etc., if necessary, qualified by the state or other appropriate geographical unit separated from each other by a comma.

e.g.

AnalgesiaFile (San Antonio, Texas) = ISSN 1057-2260

When the place by itself is insufficient, add the place and date of first publication separated from each other by a point.

e.g.

Family herald (Montreal. 1859) = ISSN 0842-0262

Family herald (Montreal. 1956) = ISSN 0842-0300

Architecture (Paris. 1979) = ISSN 0220-7591

Architecture (Paris. 1888) = ISSN 0766-6292

When an earlier title is resumed after a different title has intervened, add the date alone.

4.1.2.6 Language edition statement

The language edition statement is generally used as a qualifying term to distinguish different language editions of a resource with the same title proper. When the edition statement does not appear on the title source, supply the qualifying term in the language of the content of the resource. The word “edition” and its equivalents in other languages is abbreviated according to the List of serial title word abbreviations. A multilingual list of language edition statements is given in the Annex 6.

e.g.

Agrindex (Ed. española) = ISSN 1010-3333

Agrindex (Ed. française) = ISSN 1010-3325

Agrindex (English ed.) = ISSN 1010-3317

4.1.2.7 Geographic edition statement

The geographic edition statement is used as a qualifying term to distinguish different geographic editions of a resource with the same title proper. When the edition statement does not appear on the title source, supply the qualifying term in the language of the title source. The word edition and its equivalents in other languages is abbreviated according to the Lis of serial title word abbreviations.

e.g.

Le Cep (Ed. Montagne) = ISSN 1141-1686

Le Cep (Ed. Plaine) = ISSN 1141-1694

Alberta Catholic directory (Calgary ed.) = ISSN 0316-4756

Alberta Catholic directory (Edmonton ed.) = ISSN 0316-4748

4.1.2.8 Medium edition statement

The medium edition statement is used as a qualifying term to distinguish different media editions of a resource with the same title proper. The word edition or its abbreviation ed. (or its equivalents in other languages) is not required in the qualifying term (if it is linguistically acceptable). A list of medium edition statements is given in the Annex 7.

e.g.

Ancient biomolecules (Online) = ISSN 1607-8411

Ancient biomolecules (Print) = ISSN 1358-6122

CMIbrief (Trykt utg.) = ISSN 0809-6732

CMIbrief (Online) = ISSN 0809-6740

4.1.2.9 Issuing body or publisher

The name of the issuing body is used as the qualifying term when the title proper is generic or when none of the above information is appropriate.

e.g.

Trait d’union (Ministère de la culture et de l’environnement) = ISSN 0220-2980

Trait d’union (Mutuelle complémentaire des retraités de l’AP) = ISSN 0336-9188

Economic bulletin (Institute of Grocery Distribution. Research Services) = ISSN 0261-8648

Economic bulletin (Economic Committee, Communist Party of GB) = ISSN 0309-7854

The name of a commercial publisher can be used to qualify a key title when nothing else will serve to distinguish identical titles

e.g

Marine science (Plenum) = ISSN 0160-273X

Marine science (Dekker) = ISSN 0362-1707

Note: Both serials have been published in New York since 1974.

4.1.2.10 Other bibliographic information

When issuing body, publisher, edition, place and/or date of publication do not adequately distinguish otherwise identical key titles other information, such as frequency, type of publication, etc., may be added as a qualifying term in the language of the title source.

e.g.

McCall’s = ISSN 0024-8908

McCall’s (Pattern book) = ISSN 0198-2478

Poligrafičeskaâ promyšlennost’ (Ekspress-informaciâ) = ISSN 0130-8238

Poligrafičeskaâ promyšlennost’ (Obzornaâ informaciâ) = ISSN 0134-9147

4.2 Representation of the “Key title” in bibliographic formats

4.2.1 MARC 21: field 222

Note on initial articles

The second indicator is used to indicate the number of characters (including spaces) to be disregarded in filing. The maximum number of characters (including spaces) which can be ignored in filing is nine.

Alternative method

The number of characters to be disregarded in filing can be also indicated by using the Bibliographic Control Set (ISO 6630) characters 08/08 and 08/09 which are represented by NSB and NSE.

Tag Indicators Subfield codes Data elements Mandatory Repeatable Comment 1 2 Full record Short record 222 Key title Yes Yes No Punctuation supplied by cataloguer (See Section 1.3.1) # Undefined 0-9 Number of nonfiling characters $a Key title Yes Yes No $b Qualifying information Yes if appl. Yes if appl. No Punctuation supplied by cataloguer (See Section 1.3.1) $6 Linkage No No No

e.g.

A hét zeneműve

222 #1 $a A hét zeneműve

Countryman (Bletchley)

222 #0 $a Countryman $b (Bletchley)

Archives européennes de sociologie

222 #0 $a Archives européennes de sociologie

La lettre V

222 #2 $a La lettre V

Fauna norvegica. Ser. B, Norwegian journal of entomology

222 #0 $a Fauna norvegica. Ser. B, Norwegian journal of entomology

Revue d’économie industrielle (En ligne)

222 #0 $a Revue d’économie industrielle $b (En ligne)

La Lettre (Artois entreprendre)

222 #2 $a La Lettre $b (Artois entreprendre)

Baiocana

222 #0 $a Baiocana

4.2.2 UNIMARC: field 530

Note on initial articles

The number of characters to be disregarded in filing is indicated by using the Bibliographic Control Set (ISO 6630) characters 08/08 and 08/09 which are represented by NSB and NSE.

Tag Indicators Subfield codes Data elements Mandatory Repeatable Comment 1 2 Full record Short record 530 Key title Yes Yes No Punctuation supplied by cataloguer (See Section 1.3.1) 0 Key title is the same as the title proper 1 Key title differs from the title proper # Not defined $a Key title Yes Yes No $b Qualifier Yes if appl. Yes if appl. No Punctuation supplied by cataloguer (See Section 1.3.1)

Section 5 Title Proper

[MANDATORY]

The following rules for the title proper are established in accordance with the rules of ISBD.

The title proper is the title of a continuing resource. Sources of information for the title proper are found in Section 1.6.

In ISSN records, the title proper has a dual function: it is recorded as a specific data element in the appropriate field and it also forms the basis for the establishment of the key title (se Section 4).

Examples of titles proper

Title proper of: Le Mondea newspaperCartactuala periodicalFarm & home almanaca yearbookWissenschaftliche Arbeiten

aus dem Burgenlanda journalKulturwissenschaftena sub-seriesAmazon.coman integrating resourcePatient teaching loose-leaf libraryan integrating resourceA century of lawmaking for

a new nationan integrating resourceWebdoan integrating resource

5.1 The title proper can take various forms

a) The title proper can consist solely of a generic term or terms.

e.g.

Journal

Textes et documents

b) The title proper can consist of the name of a person or corporate body when the title page bears no title other than that name.

e.g.

Syndicat national des fabricants de bronzes, luminaires, vitrines et

étalages, ferronnerie d’art et industries Annexes = ISSN 0222-1535

Fachhochschule Konstanz = ISSN 0343-6764

American Shakespea