Charlize Theron has revealed one of her favourite films and - despite starring in some of the world's greatest movies - it's not what you'd expect.

It's Elf.

Yep, the 2003 Christmas flick with Will Ferrell.

In a recent interview with Harper's Bazaar, she described it as 'f***ing perfect'.

The South African Oscar winner also revealed she now chooses her films with her kids in mind.

"The biggest driver for me was that it potentially could be something that my kids would enjoy," she said.

She also loves Quentin Tarantino's Kill Bill, telling the iconic fashion magazine that she's seen it 'probably 100 times' and described lead actor Uma Thurman as the 'OG'. This woman is speaking the TRUTH.

Theron also revealed that she is a sucker for reality show Real Housewives of Beverly Hills.

In fact, Theron said she rewatches it so often that even her kids have started ribbing her about it.

She said: "I always say to my kids, 'Just diversify a little bit' and my little one will go, 'Are you watching the Housewives again? And I go, 'Yes, I am. …We’ll watch a little [Italian film director Federico] Fellini later'."

The Bravo reality show has become a celebrity favourite, with Jennifer Lawrence and Jon Hamm also recently revealing it's high on their personal TV rotations.

There must be something in the water in Hollywood.

That being said, repeats of the Real Housewives of Beverly Hills are probably a better bet for 'binge, rinse, repeat' TV viewing because she isn't getting any more Elf anytime soon.

Will Ferrell revealed in 2021 that he turned down an absolute truckload of cash to make a second Elf movie.

Speaking to The Hollywood Reporter, he said: "I would have had to promote the movie from an honest place, which would've been, like, 'Oh no, it's not good. I just couldn't turn down that much money.' And I thought, 'Can I actually say those words? I don't think I can, so I guess I can't do the movie.'"

Fellow Elf star James Caan claimed in September 2020 that Ferrell and director Jon Favreau just didn't get along, which may have played a part in the film being dumped.

"The director and Will didn’t get along very well. So, Will wanted to do it, he didn’t want the director, and he had it in his contract, it was one of those things," Caan told an American radio show.

Poor Charlize.

We hope she drowned her sorrows in a Kill Bill marathon after that news.