Arkansas: Liam Hemsworth and John Malkovich star in trailer

Kill Bill Vol 3 is a sequel Quentin Tarantino has said he’d like to make on a number of occasions. The movie would follow the grown-up daughter of Copperhead who witnessed Uma Thurman’s Beatrix Kiddo murder her mother as a child in the opening of Kill Bill Vol 1. The Bride told little Nikki Bell that if she wanted to seek revenge one day, she’d be waiting.

Now Copperhead actress Vivica A Fox, who was promoting her new movie Arkansas, has revealed exclusively to Express.co.uk that she would “absolutely” love to feature in flashback scenes for a Kill Bill Vol 3.

And initially, she backed the child actress from Kill Bill Vol 1's opening to play her daughter again, but this time all grown-up.

The 55-year-old said: “I think they should go after the young girl who did it, Ambrosia Kelley.

“She’s beautiful, I hope she’s still acting.”

READ MORE: Once Upon A Time In Hollywood: THIS star had a ‘DISASTROUS audition’

But then Fox added: “If not, if I could have my dream daughter? Zendaya. She’s tall, she’s got those long legs; she would kick ass!”

The actress shot the incredible fight scene at the start of Kill Bill Vol 1 in just four days, after training for six months.

They destroyed a different part of the house every day and Fox did most of her stunts.

She said: “I pretty much did everything except for crashing into the glass table.”

Invalid email

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. Read our Privacy Policy

Kill Bill- Vol. 1 (2003) Official Trailer - Uma Thurman, Lucy Liu Action Movie HD

The Kill Bill star added: “I wanted to try, but they were like, absolutely not.”

In the end, her stunt double got cut so badly that she needed stitches.

Now Fox plays Her in new southern-fried crime thriller Arkansas opposite Liam Hemsworth.

The stars last acted together in Independence Day: Resurgence, in which she didn’t really have a chance to get to know him until this time around.

DON'T MISS...

James Bond: No Time To Die release date ‘set to be delayed AGAIN’ [BOND]

Avengers Endgame theory: Where Captain America’s new shield is from [THEORY]

Pirates of the Caribbean star backs Johnny Depp RETURN as Jack Sparrow [EXCLUSIVE]

She said: “On Arkansas we worked in this little boat house and so I got to spend a lot of time with him and laugh.

“It was an awesome experience for me and [director] Clark [Duke] kept us all in stitches.

“What I love about him is he was so flexible as a first time director, that if we had ideas and we wanted to do creative things as the character, then he allowed us to do that.

“He was a wonderful actor’s director.”

The synopsis of Arkansas reads: “Kyle (Liam Hemsworth) and Swin (Clark Duke) live by the orders of mysterious Arkansas-based drug kingpin, Frog (Vince Vaughn), who they’ve never met.

“Posing as junior park rangers by day, they operate as low-level drug traffickers by night, all under the watchful eye of Frog’s proxies (John Malkovich, Vivica A. Fox).

“Swin settles into his day job but, against orders, takes up a relationship with a local woman (Eden Brolin), while Kyle spends his nights trying to discover Frog’s identity.

“As they begin to grapple for control of the lucrative underworld operation, Swin and Kyle soon find themselves under Frog’s deadly crosshairs. Who will live to survive as the boss of Arkansas’ fierce drug trade?”

Arkansas is available on Digital Download July 13 & DVD July 20 from Lionsgate UK.