The Lawnmower Man Collector's Edition Blu-ray Review

Written by Robert Gold

Blu-ray released by Scream Factory

Directed by Brett Leonard

Written by Brett Leonard and Gimel Everett

1992, 108 minutes, Rated R

Blu-ray released on June 20th, 2017

Starring:

Jeff Fahey as Jobe Smith

Pierce Brosnan as Dr. Lawrence Angelo

Jenny Wright as Marnie Burke

Mark Bringelson as Timms

Geoffrey Lewis as Terry McKeen

Jeremy Slate as Father McKeen

Dean Norris as The Director

Austin O’Brien as Peter Parkette

Review:

Video and Audio:

Presented in the original 1.85:1 aspect ratio, the picture really pops with color. The computer-generated world is something gorgeous and the regular world scenes look fine too. Flesh tones appear natural throughout and there is plenty of small-object detail.

A DTS-HD MA 5.1 track gets the job done with plenty of activity during the virtual reality sequences. The DTS-HD MA 2.0 counterpart preserves the original stereo mix of the material and is also quite nice.

Optional English subtitles are included for anyone in need.

Special Features:

Disc 1 features the theatrical cut (108 minutes) with a mixture of supplements old and new.

A commentary with Brett Leonard and producer/ co-writer Gimel Everett is highly informative and full of good anecdotes. The track is entertaining and the participants are clearly fond of the project.

The all-new retrospective documentary Cyber-God (51 minutes) delivers an in-depth look back at the making of the film. Several participants from the cast and crew are on hand to share production stories, including Brett Leonard, actor Jeff Fahey and editor Alan Baumgarten. The piece covers a lot of ground on all stages of development of the project from concept through release and is well-paced.

A collection of deleted scenes (28 minutes) plays back-to-back without titles or clean-up. The material was later restored and included in the Director’s Cut.

A vintage EPK (5 minutes) includes behind-the-scenes footage and interviews with actors Pierce Brosnan and Jeff Fahey and director Leonard.

Edited animated sequences (4 minutes) provide a highlight reel of the early CGI sequences set to New Age music

Marketing for the film is spotlighted in the theatrical trailer and a TV spot. There is a noticeable gap in the audio removing Stephen King’s name from the narration at the beginning of the trailer.

Disc 2 offers the extended Director’s Cut (141 minutes) which runs an astounding 39 minutes longer than the theatrical counterpart. There are many changes throughout with the majority appearing in the opening act.

An extended commentary with Leonard and Everett is the same track found on the theatrical cut with additional comments appearing over the new material.

A gallery of concept art and design sketches (35 images) provides a look at artist renderings of the sets and virtual world.

A collection of behind-the-scenes production stills (87 images) offers a look at the cast and crew, but there is not a section dedicated to the poster art or marketing materials.

Storyboard comparisons (2 minutes) reveal an early glimpse at ideas for some of the virtual reality sequences.

An Easter egg promoting a giveaway for the film is on hand and I actually won a t-shirt from this contest back in 1992.