CLICK HERE FOR TICKETS

Join us for a special evening with Pat Green & special guest Walt Wilkins!

About Pat Green:

Pat Green has finally come full circle — and all the way back Home.

After rising through Texas’ college-town and dancehall scene years ago, Green earned himself major-label support in Nashville and became the poster child of Texas music for a whole generation of fans. His list of achievements includes over 2 million albums sold, three Grammy nominations and a sold out Houston Astrodome.

But after releasing six albums in eight years, sending singles like “Wave on Wave” and “Let Me” up the charts, touring with powerhouses like Kenny Chesney and Keith Urban and dealing with accusations of “selling out,” the meat grinder of mainstream stardom proved to be too much. He was spent.

“I felt so much pressure during the years I was with the big record labels to put out a record almost every year,” he explains. “There was a constant loop of having to be creative with new music, and that’s just not my style. I like it to happen when it happens.”

Now, after breaking the cycle for a three-year recharge, Green is back in his comfort zone and playing by his own rules again. His is new independent album Home is his first set of originals in several years, and directly speaks to the hardcore fans that have been with him since the beginning.

Mainstream country may have changed, but Green is back in his groove, back to loving and making music on his own terms and happier than ever. And that’s a recipe for a comeback of epic proportions.

“I think I’m having the best year of my life,” he says. “I feel happy and I feel smarter now. I look back and I wish I could go back in time and tell myself to slow down a little bit, but the truth is life is just enjoying the passing of time, as James Taylor says. There’s a lot of drama and there’s mistakes and you’ve gotta get through all of it to get to what you’re looking for.”

What he was looking for was right at Home all along.