Newcastle Falcons have announced the signing of Tim Cardall from Melbourne Rebels, ahead of the 2023/24 Gallagher Premiership season. Formerly of Wasps, Cardall had to vacate Coventry after the club’s withdrawal from the Premiership, along with Worcester Warriors back in October.

Cardall headed to Australia after Wasps’ collapse, and signed with the Melbourne Rebels for the 2023 Super Rugby season. The 26-year-old will be seeing out his commitments down under, before making the return to the Northern Hemisphere.

Cardall spent four seasons with Wasps, making over 50 caps for the club. He is delighted to be returning to the Premiership with Newcastle Falcons next season.

“Newcastle is a great city and it’s somewhere I’m really looking forward to moving to.” The Premiership Rugby website reported.

“I have played at Kingston Park a few times for a number of teams and I know it’s a hard place for an opposition to come, so I’m looking forward to being on the other side of that.

“As a club I was really impressed with how Dave Walder and the other coaches presented it to me. They are a team that play with a lot of physicality and have a very good set piece, and this is what excited me about moving to the Falcons.

“To have the opportunity to work with guys like Scott MacLeod as a line-out coach is something I’m also really looking forward to.”

Newcastle Falcons Head Coach Dave Walder is happy to have secured Cardall for next season. “Tim was performing well at Wasps prior to their problems at the start of the season, and we’re glad to have been able to add him to our squad.

“He’s got an outstanding attitude, he knows the Gallagher Premiership and we’ll be watching closely to see how he goes if he gets an opportunity for Melbourne Rebels during Super Rugby prior to joining us in pre-season.”

For now, Cardall is enjoying the opportunity to experience rugby in Australia.

“I’m loving my time in Melbourne so far, playing a different style of rugby and experiencing different cultures,” said Cardall.

“To be able to get the chance to come out and play some games in Super Rugby is something I’m really excited about, and I’m grateful for the opportunity the Rebels have given me after what happened with Wasps last year.

Cardall will be re-uniting with old friends and former teammates at Falcons. He discussed who in the Newcastle side he has previously played with.

“I also played with Kiran McDonald and Seb de Chaves at Wasps, and I know Adam Radwan from playing sevens. Being able to re-connect with those guys will be great, I’m also looking forward to meeting new team-mates and making new connections.”