ALBANY, Dec. 23 — When Stanley Steingut talks politics, he inevitably gets around to reminiscing about his father, Irwin Steingut, who was the last Democratic Speaker of the Assembly. “I was just thinking about my father,” Mr. Steingut told an interviewer who sat down beside him today in the richly furnished Assembly chamber. “I succeeded him in the Assembly after his death in 1952. That was just 30 years after he was first elected. Now I am becoming Speaker just 30 years after he held that post. Isn't that an interesting coincidence?”

With his father as his political tutor and guide, Mr. Steingut as a youngster met many of the state's leading Democrats.

He recalls swimming in the new pool at the Executive Mansion in Albany with Gov. Franklin D. Roosevelt and swimming again with Mr. Roosevelt at the White House.

Twenty‐six years ago, as a page boy at the State Constitutional Convention, he ran errands for the late Gov. Alfred E. Smith and the late Senator Robert F. Wagner. While studying state politics, he also was learning a great deal from his father about what goes on in political circles in their home bailiwick of Brooklyn.

The 44‐year‐old Assemblyman climbed steadily up the Brooklyn political ladder and became county leader over Mayor Wagner's fervent opposition in November, 1962. He was re‐elected this year despite a renewed effort by the Mayor to block him.

Mr. Steingut was one of those who opposed Mr. Wagner for renomination in the 1961 primary, and the Mayor has not forgotten it.

As Speaker, Mr. Steingut will have considerable patronage at his disposal, and he will be naming the chairmen of the Assembly committees.

He says he will use his new power to help build up the party upstate, where he received strong support in the race for Sneaker.

Another of Mr. Steingut's ambitions is to put through a legislative program “that will justify a continued Democratic majority in the Legislature.”

The Assemblyman was once known as “Red,” but the color of his hair is fading now and the hairline receding. He dresses conservatively and his suits are well cut.

He still likes to swim and he plays golf now and then but does not find enough time for either. During the last football season, he spent every Sunday watching either the Giants or the Jets.

Mr. Steingut was born in Brooklyn May 20, 1920. The middle initial “K” appeared on his birth certificate but he has never used it. He assumes that it stood for Kaufman, his mother's maiden name.

He attended Public School 161, the Peddie School at Hightstown, N. J., Horace Mann School, Union College at Schenectady, N. Y., and finally St. John's University Law School.

Mr. Steingut was a varsity third baseman at Union College. He was a senior at the time of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and left school tn join the Navy.

In the next four years, as a chief petty officer, he worked on Navy recreational and morale programs.

Admitted to the bar in 1949, he is a member of the firm of Halperin, Schivitz, Scholer & Steingut.

His wife, the former Madeline Fellerman, was waiting outside the meeting room last night. When the vote was over and the doors opened, she made her way through the crowd, threw her arms around her husband and kissed him repeatedly. It was hard to tell which was more delighted.

Their son, Robert, 19, is attending Union College; Ted, 15, is at the Friends School in Brooklyn, and their daughter, Ilene, 10, is at Berkeley Institute in Brooklyn.

The Steinguts live at 1298 President Street, Brooklyn, and have a summer home at Mahopac in Putnam. County.