Maneuvering began yesterday in the State Assembly to fill an unusual leadership vacuum in both parties.

Among the Democrats, the defeat of Stanley Steingut opens up the Speakership, which Mr. Steingut has held since 1975.

The current majority leader, Stanley Fink of Brooklyn, is widely regarded as the favorite to succeed Mr. Steingut, but if that happens, it would create a scramble for the post of majority leader, which the Speaker fills by appointment.

On the Republican side, the vacuum is even more stark. Since 1966, the Republican contingent has been dominated by Perry B. Duryea, the minority leader who was defeated in the governorship election Tuesday.

What the Future Holds

Whoever is named minority leader can expect to assume an important position in the party's hierarchy, especially since the other key Republican legislative leader, Senate Majority Leader Warren M. Anderson, is not expected to seek higher office.

In the elections, the Democrats suffered a net loss of two or three seats in the Assembly — one seat was still in doubt giving them at least 86 of that body's 150 members. In the Senate, Republicans retained control, losing only one seat, for a 35-to-25 edge over the Democrats.

Candidates for the Post

According to,a key legislator, the leading candidates for Mr. Fink's post are Arthur J. Kremer, a Long Island Assemblyman who is chairman of the Ways and Means Committee; Daniel B. Walsh of Franklinville, who now serves as the assistant majority leader; Alan Hevesi of Queens, the chairman of the Health Committee, who is regarded as one of the most forceful debaters on the Democratic side; Assemblyman Arthur Eve of Buffalo, the deputy majority leader; G. Oliver Koppell of the Bronx, the chairman of the Environmental Conservation Committee, and Melvin H. Miller of Brooklyn, the chairman of the Higher Educatiuon Committee.

Of these, Mr. Kremer, Mr. Walsh and Mr. Hevesi appear on almost everyone else's list of possible leaders, and Mr. Eve is also frequently mentioned.

Some Assemblymen say Mr. Koppell who has also considered running for the Bronx Borough Presidency, which Robert Abrams will vacate when he becomes Attorney General — hurt his chances by campaigning too actively immediately after Mr. Steingut lost his bid for the Democratic nomination in his district.

Mr. Miller's name is less widely mentioned, in part because he, like Mr. Fink, is from Brooklyn.

The top candidates for the Republican minority leadership are Dominick L. DiCarlo, the deputy minority leader and widely respected debater; John J. Flana1 gan of Long Island; James L. Emery of Livonia, who was the official head of Mr. Duryea's gubernatorial bid.

Also mentioned as a possible compromise candidate is Assemblyman Hyman M. Miller of Fayetteville.

In another move that could effect the composition of the leadership, aides to Governor Carey said yesterday they were attempting to persuade Michael J. DelGiudice, Mr. Steingut's top aide, to accept top post in the Carey admninistration.