A month before the formal announcement of his candidacy for re‐election, Governor Carey has most of the apparatus in place—his campaign inner circle, his headquarters and even his theme: that he has made “the tough decisions” on threatened municipal bankruptcies, budget cuts and the death penalty.

The Governor has also begun mending fences with Democratic politicians who feel he has ignored the party, and with lethnic groups, particularly Irish-Americans and Italian Americans who have been angered by his decisions on the death penalty and abortion, his abandonment of Mario M. Cuomo's mayoral canididac; last year and his blanket condem!nation of the Irish Republican Army as terrorists.

The man most likely to be his Republican opponent, Assemblyman Perry B. Duryea Jr., of Montauk, LI., has already signaled that he will emphasize crime heavily in his campaign, a topic, his aides believe, that will appeal to these generally moderate and even conservative ethnic groups.

David Garth, the media specialist, wif put the Carey campaign package toguther. Essentially, it will be three‐pronged effort.

The Governor and his secretary, Robert Morpr,ado, will work out of Mr. Carey's state offices in Albany and Manhattan—making heavy use of the advantages of incumbency.

Mr. Garth. the principal campaign strategist, will be operating out of his Fifth Avenue office, which served as in ‘effect the “think tank” for Mayor Koch's campaign last year and the Governor's in 1974. Both were successful come-fromlbehind efforts.

John J. Burns, the campaign manager , and former Democratic state chairman, will work out of the formal campaign headquarters at 2 West 45th Street, now largely unoccupied floor that is already serving as the base for Carey fundraising and will expand as the campaign develops.

The Governor's son Donald. a Fordham student, will serve as Mr. Burns's assistant. Mr. Burns has taken a leave from his part‐time. 520,000 lifetime post on the city's Board of Weter Supply.

Mr. Burns. a rue politicivn with few enemies—unlike the Governor, has altemiy started sonthing Dcmocratic politicians who feel the Governor has ignored them re will attempt to inspire and coordinate their efforts with the Liberal Party and labor and ethnic groups that will he working for the Governor's reelection,

The Garth-Morgado-Burns team will preside over a campaign that has already ;reached some major decisions, including the following:

The Governor kill he portrayed as a man who made, in the words of Mr. Garth, “the tough decisions” on the bank ruptcy threats to New York City, Yon- kers and the Urban Development Corpod ration as well as a “fiscal conservative’ who stabilized soaring state budget and welfare rolls. He will also be depicted as a man not afraid to make moral and conscience decisions on such emotional subjects as the death penalty. The “tough; decisions” motif was reminiscent of former Mayor Abraham D. Beanie's unsuccessful campaign theme last year.

Mr. Carey does not intend to get in‐; volved in possible primaries for either’ State Comptroller or Attorney General, although the Governor's top advisers would prefer to have Mr. Cuomo. the Secretary of State, on the state ticket to appeal to Italian‐Americans, the larg est ethnic group in the state.

The Governor is prepared to spend. at least $3.5 million—about $2 million’ less than in 1974 when he was a relative unknown. By the end of next month, he should have some $700,000 already collected after eliminating this month the 1974 campaign debt, which started at’ more than $2 million. Radio and television commercials will account for at least a third of the spending.

The Carey forces will attempt to box! Mr. Durvca into the right end of the po‐. litical spectrum, as Mr. Carey did with; then Gov. Malcolm Wilson in 1974. Mr. Carey's budget trimming and tax cutting will be a prime vehicle for attempting, to attract moderate voters.

The Carey campaign will remain in low, gear until September unless a virtually unknown Brooklyn Democrat, State Sena‐, for Jeremiah B. Bloom, makes good his threat to challenge the Governor's relomination in the September primary.

Senator Bloom, who was an original supporter of Mr. Carey four years ago, has been angry with Mr. Carey ever since he was passed over for Senate minority leader in favor of a then political maverick. State Senator Manfred Ohrenstcin of Manhattan.

A source of pressure on Senator Bloom could be his county leader, Meade H. Esposito, who has had problems himself with the Governor ever since he initially opposed him in 1974 in favor of Howard! J. Samuels.

Mr. Esposito is now a Carey fan, how‐’ ever, after what he described as a “peace’ cession” several months ago at a Manhattan restaurant that had been arranged by two Brooklyn Democrats, Harold L. Fisher, chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, and Stanley Steingut, the Assembly Speaker.

The campaign inner circle represents a subtantial change from 1974, when Mr. Burns was hacking Mr. Samuels and Mr. Morgado was an obscure state official. The key Ei,ures in that campaign were Mr. Garth, the late Alex Rose, the Liberal Party leader: Gerald Cummins. now chairman of the State Thruway Authority, and later. former Mayor Robert F. Wagner and the Bronx Democratic chairman. Patrick J. Cunningham.

Mr. Wagner, Mr. Cummins and the new iheral Party leader, Raymond B. Harding. will he part of an overall campaign brain trust this year.