Superbad was a lightning in a bottle hit from director Greg Mottola and writers Seth Rogan and Evan Goldberg.

Released in 2007, it brought together a cast of then-relatively unknown newcomers to tell a timeless coming-of-age tale.

Dealing with the dawning realisation that school was over and college looming, three friends plan one big blowout before they go their separate ways.

Its plot, which is spread across the course of one day (and deep into the night), is relatively simple and often absurd, but perfectly captures that awkward time in life between boy and adulthood.

Many of the actors involved have dedicated fanbases thanks to this cult-classic, with Judd Apatow even recently teasing a sequel-idea.

He said: “I always wanted them to do a sequel to Superbad. Everyone was like ‘Nah we don’t want to screw up Superbad by accidentally making a crappy second one.

“And I would always say the same thing: ‘Well that’s like saying don’t make the second episode of the of The Sopranos. Like, so why do you think we would screw up the second one?’”

Where are the cast of Superbad now?

Michael Cera

Michael Cera, 34, was the eyes of the audience in Superbad, with his instantly recognisable social anxiety in full force as Evan.

He had already found fame in Arrested Development as the similarly stunted George-Michael Bluth.

However, his career kicked into overdrive in 2007, as not only did he star in Superbad that year, but also in Juno alongside Elliot Page.

In 2010, he added another cult-classic to his resume, starring in Edgar Wright’s Scott Pilgrim vs The World.

Three years later, he made a hilarious cameo as himself in This Is the End, returning to work with Seth Rogan and Jonah Hill.

The hits and surprise appearances kept coming as he had roles in Twin Peaks: The Return and The Lego Batman Movie, both in 2017.

In 2022, he starred in Life & Beth with Amy Schumer, a show which spins the coming-of-age trope on its head following unexpected incident, Amy’s Beth tarts having flashbacks to her teen self and learns how she became who she is and who she wants to become.

He recently welcomed his first child into the world, though the actor kept it quiet at first.

Michael shares his child with his long-term girlfriend Nadine, with US Weekly reporting the two married in 2018.

Jonah Hill

In the role of Seth, Jonah Hill played the loud mouth to Michael’s timid Evan. His career took an unexpected turn when he made the switch from comedy to drama in 2011’s Moneyball.

The actor, 38, proved to everyone that he had range, though he has never left his comedy roots fully behind him.

In 2013, he co-starred with Leonardo DiCaprio in Martin Scorsese’s The Wolf of Wall Street, delivering a memorably chaotic performance.

Later, in 2018, he joined the Netflix limited series Maniac, playing the dangerously unhinged Owen Milgrim. His last major project was with the streaming service again, in Don’t Look Up.

Jonah is in a relationship with surfer girlfriend Sarah Brady, though recently shot down claims they were engaged back in 2020.

Christopher Mintz-Plasse

Christopher Mintz-Plasse, 33, was the third member of the Superbad trio, though his character of Fogell was always on the outside of the group.

The film was his film debut, though it wasn’t long before he got bigger roles. In 2010, he starred as Red Mist in Kick-Ass, with his character later renamed to The Motherf***er in the 2013 sequel.

That year, he also made an appearance in This is the End alongside his Superbad co-stars, playing himself like the rest.

He has remained largely in comedies, though as also moved into voice acting.

Christopher recently voiced various characters in When Nature Calls, though he is best known for voicing Fishlegs in the How to Train Your Dragon franchise.

He is in a long term relationship with Britt Bowman.

Where are the rest of the Superbad cast?

Emma Stone played Jules, the girl Seth pined after in Superbad.

Emma’s career has been one of the most successful since, playing Gwen Stacey in The Amazing Spider-Man films.

In 2017, the 33-year-old won the Oscar for Best Actress in La La Land and was later nominated for Best Supporting Actress in 2019’s The Favourite.

Meanwhile, Seth Rogan played Officer Michaels, one of the two cops that took Fogell on the joyride of his life.

The 40-year-old is now busy producing The Boys and its spin-off Gen V, though he continues to act in projects such as Pam & Tommy and the upcoming Super Mario Bros movie, voicing Donkey Kong.

Bill Hader played his partner, Officer Slater, though now the 44-year-old now primarily works in voice acting on projects such as Lightyear, Bob’s Burgers and MODOK.

Finally, Martha MacIsaac played Becca, Evan’s childhood crush.

The 58-year-old has been the voice of Patty in Family Guy since 2012, though her last major acting role was in 2018, What keeps You Alive.