Barack Obama is “a rock star,” Andrea Mitchell said back in 2004. “A rock star,” Matt Lauer said on “Today.” “A rock star,” George Clooney said at the Venice Film Festival.

Yes, but which rock star? He’s sexy yet middle-aged. Steven Tyler? He’s political. John Lennon? Or is he just a top-selling act that disappears after one huge year? Is Obama, in other words, Hootie?

No, as the exhilarating new documentary “U2 3D” makes clear, Barack Obama is Bono.

Both Bono and Obama are avowed internationalists who can talk to anyone. Obama has said he’s ready to sit down with Iran; more shockingly, Bono has reached out to Republicans. (Among the friends Bono cultivated in Washington are Jesse Helms, who invited him and Chris Tucker to his office once to discuss AIDS in Africa for what must have been one of the most awkward D.C. meetings since Richard Nixon made Elvis an honorary government agent.)

Both Bono and Obama, who were born a year apart, symbolize mixed heritage (Bono grew up with a protestant mother and a Catholic dad). Both have a special interest in Africa, which Bono has made his leading cause. Both wear the mantle of Martin Luther King, Jr., whom U2 saluted in “Pride (In the Name of Love).”

And yes, they’re both Irish: Obama’s great-great-great-grandfather on his mother’s side was reared in Moneygall, Ireland, which has claimed Obama as a favorite son. (Typical of the Irish, both are exiles: Bono and U2 shifted their publishing business to the Netherlands as a tax dodge.) When Obama revealed he had done “a little blow” in his book “Dreams From My Father,” he was as dismissive of its significance as a rock star, not hedging or begging for forgiveness like a politician.

The two keys to the Obono method are the overwhelming lack of audacity in their message (they believe in hope, peace, goodwill, love and being nice to your mom) combined with their uncanny skill at leaving people overjoyed, moved, even spiritually renewed by harshly negative talk.

In U2’s case, look at their 1991 hit “One.” It’s the emotional equivalent of an attack ad: “Did I disappoint you or leave a bad taste in your mouth?” “We hurt each other and we do it again,” “You gave me nothing, now it’s all I got.” Bono once said “One” was about feuding with his father, but it could be about anything. It has also been read as a song about a lovers’ breakup, German reunification, or AIDS.

In “U2 3D” this brutal number is presented as a world-peace anthem, complete with the title in different languages and we-are-all-together images on the video monitors, and the crowd sings along in rapture. As U2 drummer Larry Mullen Jr. put it, “One of the most valuable things about [Bono’s] lyrics is that you can adapt them to any particular situation.”

Obama’s foreign policy address is largely a series of attacks on President Bush (“saber-rattling,” “disastrous,” “prized bluster over common sense,” “posturing over pragmatism,” “fear of looking weak over the conviction to get things right”). His MLK Day speech took a Pat Buchanan-like view that there is a profound spiritual rot in the land. Obama castigated “this country” for its alleged “moral deficit,” “empathy deficit,” “breach in our compassion,” “profound institutional barriers,” “the insidious role that race still sometimes plays,” “traffic in lies or fear or hate,” and the “poison” in “our politics.” In between all these attacks, Obama calls for unity, and people practically light up their cell phones and sway along to the music of his automatic-weapons fire.

Being a part-time rock star, though, is trickier than being a full-time one. No one will fault Bono if he doesn’t make good on his stated goal of making poverty history. But Obama is not just singing a song. His promises to cut middle-class taxes while fixing the schools, global warming, trade deals and Social Security and delivering universal health care, energy independence, more job training, victory in Afghanistan and decent jobs for all – while also steering a “return to the path” of a balanced budget – make Bono look unambitious. Bono also looks increasingly like the practical one. He rounds up donations to pay for his ideas. How is Obama going to pay for his? With hope?

When he won the Iowa caucuses, Obama took the stage while U2’s “City of Blinding Lights” played on the sound system. “We are choosing hope over fear and sending a powerful message that change is coming for America,” Obama declared. If he had thought about it a little, he would have gone with “Beautiful Day,” a song for a campaign dedicated to gloomy uplift:

“You’re out of luck . . .

“The traffic’s stuck . . .

“You’re on the road, but you’ve got no destination

“You’re in the mud, in the maze of her imagination . . .

“It’s a beautiful day!