The Nobel Prize in Literature 1945

Gabriela Mistral

(Lucila Godoy y Alcayaga)

"for her lyric poetry which, inspired by powerful emotions, has made

Chile (1889--1957) her name a symbol of the idealistic aspirations of the entire Latin

American world"

Gabriela Mistral was the first Latin American woman to win a Nobel Prize in Literature. She was born in Vicuña in northern Chile

in 1889. Her parents were Petronila Alcayaga, a school teacher of Basque descent and Jeronimo Godoy Alcayaga Villanueva, a

vagabond poet and school teacher of Indian and Jewish ancestry. Mistral's birth name was Lucila Godoy Alcayaga. Lucila and her

older sister Emelina were raised in Montegrande by their mother after the father deserted them when Lucila was three years old.

At the age of nine, Lucila started attending school, but did so for only three years. At school she discovered her love of poetry and

started writing her own poems. She also assumed the name Gabriela Mistral. She continued her education at home with the help

of her sister who was a teacher and who encouraged Gabriela to become a teacher as well. At age sixteen she moved to La Cantera to take a job and fell in love with a young railway worker. The relationhip didn't last and two years later the young man committed suicide. The only item found in his posession was a postcard from Mistral. This affected her deeply and she wrote Sonetas de la Muerte (Sonnets of Death) to express her feelings.

In 1918, she was appointed director of a secondary school for girls located in rural Punta Arenas. The rough terrain of Punta

Arenas became an inspiration for a series of poems entitled Patagonian Landscapes. In 1922 Mistral accepted the invitation of

Jose Vasconcelos, the Mexican minister of education, to start educational programs for the poor in Mexico. She introduced mobile

libraries to rural areas to make access to literature easier for everyone. Later, she edited a book of poetry and prose entitled

Readings for Women. In addition, she traveled to other countries to study their methods of teaching. In 1923, Mistral was

awarded the title "Teacher of the Nation" by her own government.

In 1922, she published the first volume of her collected poems entitled Desolacion (Desolation). In it she expressed her feelings

toward pain and death. Ternura (Tenderness), published in 1925, was a collection of poetry for children which celebrated the joys

of birth and motherhood. Her later collections were Questions (1930) and Tala (1938). She also wrote fables and continued

publishing in periodicals. The dominant themes in her poetry were love, death, childhood, maternity, religion and the beauty of

nature and of her native land. She also had a burning desire for justice.