2. Elizabeth was the daughter of King Andrew II of Hungary and Gertrude of Merania

3. She was born in Hungary, possibly in the castle of Sárospatak (discussed below), on 7 July 1207.

4. According to a different tradition she was born in Pozsony, Hungary, (present- day Bratislava, Slovakia), where she lived in the Castle of Posonium until the age of four.

5. Elizabeth was brought to the court of the rulers of Thuringia in central Germany, to be betrothed to Louis IV, Landgrave of Thuringia

6. Her father, King Andrew II of Hungary, cousin of the Emperor of Germany, had promised her as wife to Louis, son of the Dukes of Thuringia, when she was only 11 years old.

7. In 1221, at the age of fourteen, Elizabeth married Louis; the same year he was enthroned as Landgrave. It was a happy marriage lived in love and integrating both Christian ascetics and human happiness.

8. In 1223, Franciscan friars arrived, and the teenage Elizabeth not only learned about the ideals of Francis of Assisi, but started to live them. Louis was not upset by his wife's charitable efforts, believing that the distribution of his wealth to the poor would bring eternal reward; In a lean year, Elizabeth spent all her treasure helping those in need. He came to feed 900 poor people every day in the castle

9. the young duchess confided to one of her servants and friend, "If I love a mortal creature so much," How should I love the immortal Lord, owner of my soul? "

10. The young Duchess, with her characteristic austerity, arousing the anger of her mother-in-law and sister-in-law by not wanting to go to the Church adorned with the precious necklaces of her rank: she said how could I when my King is crowned with thorns?

11. Her husband, tenderly in love with her, wanted to prove himself worthy of such a beautiful creature and took as his motto on his shield, three words that they expressed in a practical way the program of his public life: "Piety, Purity, Justice".

12. Elizabeth assumed control of affairs at home and distributed alms in all parts of their territory, even giving away state robes and ornaments to the poor

13. Elizabeth's life changed irrevocably on 11 September 1227 when Louis, en route to join the Sixth Crusade, died of a fever in Otranto, Italy, just a few weeks before the birth of her daughter Gertrude.

14. Isabel was on the point of despair, but she resigned herself and accepted God's will. She rejected several offers of marriage and decided to live in poverty and dedicate herself to the service of the poor and helpless.

15. After Louis' death, his brother, Henry Raspe, assumed the regency during the minority of Elizabeth's eldest child, Hermann (1222–1241). After bitter arguments over the disposal of her dowry — a conflict in which Konrad her spiritual diretor, was appointed as the official Defender of her case by Pope Gregory IX — Elizabeth left the court at Wartburg and moved to Marburg in Hesse

16. a conspiracy of nobles managed to expel her from the government on the grounds that she was wasting state money on the poor. Her husband's brother took power, forcing her to leave the castle and had to take refuge in a convent, where she took the habit of the third order of Saint Francis. She led a harsh and austere life there, caring for the poor.

17. Following her husband's death, Elizabeth made solemn vows to Konrad similar to those of a nun. These vows included celibacy, as well as complete obedience to Konrad as her confessor and spiritual director. Konrad's treatment of Elizabeth was very harsh.

18. Her pledge to celibacy proved a hindrance to her family's political ambitions. Elizabeth was more or less held hostage at Pottenstein, the castle of her uncle, Bishop Ekbert of Bamberg, in an effort to force her to remarry. Elizabeth, however, held fast to her vow

19. Some relatives welcomed her into their home, until the King of Hungary managed to get back the goods that belonged to him, and with them he built a large hospital for the poor, and helped many families in need.

20. Elizabeth built a hospital at Marburg for the poor and the sick with the money from her dowry, where she and her companions cared for them

21. She died young, very young, at the age of 24. - Her funeral was attended by Emperor Frederick II and such a large crowd made up of people from various countries and from all social classes. The Emperor Frederick II stated: "The venerable Elizabeth, so beloved of God, illuminated the darkness of this world as a bright star in the dark night. "

22. Elizabeth's second child Sophie of Thuringia (1224–1275) married Henry II, Duke of Brabant, and was the ancestress of the Landgraves of Hesse, since in the War of the Thuringian Succession she won Hesse for her son Heinrich I

23. Elizabeth's third child, Gertrude of Altenberg (1227–1297), was born several weeks after the death of her father; she became abbess of the monastery of Altenberg Abbey, Hesse near Wetzlar

24. "I affirm before God that I have rarely seen a woman of such intense activity, united to such a high life of prayer and contemplation." - testimony of her holiness by a priest

25. MIRACLES Elizabeth is perhaps best known for her miracle of the roses - she was taking bread to the poor in secret, but met her husband Ludwig on a hunting party, who, in order to quell suspicions of the gentry that she was stealing treasure from the castle, asked her to reveal what was hidden under her cloak. In that moment, her cloak fell open and a vision of white and red roses could be seen, which proved to Ludwig that God's protecting hand was at work

26. a lay brother had his arm shattered in an accident and was in bed in excruciating pain. Suddenly, in his room, he saw Isabel appear, - she smilingly told him: "I am going to glory…. Stretch your arm that it’s healed."

27. A Cistercian monk who suffered terrible pain to the heart and no doctor had been able to relieve him arrived at the saint's tomb. He knelt and prayed for a long time next to the saint's tomb, and he was cured of his pain and illness.

28. Once Elizabeth laid the leper Helias of Eisenach in the bed she shared with her husband. He arrived unexpectedly and discovered this. When he was going to scold her, he saw on her bed, not the leper but a beautiful crucifix. He recalled that Jesus considers what’s done to the poor as done to himself

29. The results of examinations of miracles associated with her tomb, was supplemented by a brief vita of the saint-to-be, and together with the testimony of Elizabeth's handmaidens and companions (bound in a booklet called the Libellus de dictis quatuor ancillarum s. Elizabeth confectus), proved sufficient reason for quick canonization. She was canonized by Pope Gregory IX on 24 May 1235

30. Elizabeth's shrine became one of the main German centers of pilgrimage of the 14th century and early 15th century. During the course of the 15th century, the popularity of the cult of St Elizabeth slowly faded, though to some extent this was mitigated by an aristocratic devotion to St Elizabeth, since through her daughter Sophia she was an ancestor of many leading aristocratic German families

31. The papal bull declaring her a saint is on display in the Schatzkammer of the Deutschordenskirche in Vienna

32. Her body was laid in a magnificent golden shrine in the Marburg church bearing her name

33. the Landgrave Philip I "the Magnanimous" of Hesse, a leader of the Protestant Reformation and one of the most important supporters of Martin Luther, raided the church in Marburg and demanded that the Teutonic Order hand over Elizabeth's bones, in order to disperse her relics and thus put an end to the already declining pilgrimages to Marburg.

34. Philip took away the crowned agate chalice in which her head rested, but returned it after being imprisoned by Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor

35. The reliquary chalice was subsequently plundered by Swedish troops during the Thirty Years' War and is now on display at The Swedish History Museum in Stockholm

36. Her relics are found in many places, at St Elizabeth’s convent in Vienna, at Carmelites of Brussels, at La Rooche-Guyon, in the electoral treasury of Hanover. Also at Santafé de Bogotá.

37. The Elisabethkirche is now a Protestant church, but has spaces set aside for Catholic worship. Marburg became a center of the Teutonic Order, which adopted St. Elizabeth as its secondary patroness. The Order remained in Marburg until its official dissolution by Napoleon in 1803

38. Elizabeth of Hungary is remembered in the Church of England with a Lesser Festival on 18 November

39. Elizabeth had a ceremony of consecration in which she adopted a Franciscan religious habit in her new way of life,

40. Upon her canonization she was declared the patron saint of the Third Order of St Francis, an honor she shares with St Louis IX of France

44. LIST OF PRESENTATIONS IN ENGLISH Revised 30-9-2021 Advent and Christmas – time of hope and peace All Souls Day Amoris Laetitia – ch 1 – In the Light of the Word Amoris Laetitia – ch 2 – The Experiences and Challenges of Families Amoris Laetitia – ch 3 - Looking to Jesus, the Vocation of the Family Amoris Laetitia – ch 4 - Love in Marriage Amoris Laetitia – ch 5 – Love made Fruitfuol Amoris Laetitia – ch 6 – Some Pastoral Perspectives Amoris Laetitia – ch 7 – Towards a better education of children Amoris Laetitia – ch 8 – Accompanying, discerning and integrating weaknwss Amoris Laetitia – ch 9 – The Spirituality of Marriage and the Family Beloved Amazon 1ª – A Social Dream Beloved Amazon 2 - A Cultural Dream Beloved Amazon 3 – An Ecological Dream Beloved Amazon 4 - An Ecclesiastical Dream Carnival Christ is Alive Familiaris Consortio (FC) 1 – Church and Family today Familiaris Consortio (FC) 2 - God’s plan for the family Familiaris Consortio (FC) 3 – 1 – family as a Community Familiaris Consortio (FC) 3 – 2 – serving life and education Familiaris Consortio (FC) 3 – 3 – mission of the family in society Familiaris Consortio (FC) 3 – 4 - Family in the Church Familiaris Consortio (FC) 4 Pastoral familiar Football in Spain Haurietis aquas – devotion to the Sacred Heart by Pius XII Holidays and Holy Days Holy Spirit Holy Week – drawings for children Holy Week – glmjpses of the last hours of JC Inauguration of President Donald Trump Juno explores Jupiter Laudato si 1 – care for the common home Laudato si 2 – Gospel of creation Laudato si 3 – Human roots of the ecological crisis Laudato si 4 – integral ecology Laudato si 5 – lines of approach and action Laudato si 6 – Education y Ecological Spirituality Love and Marriage 12,3,4,5,6,7,8,9 Lumen Fidei – ch 1,2,3,4 Martyrs of North America and Canada Medjugore Pilgrimage Misericordiae Vultus in English Mother Teresa of Calcuta – Saint Pope Franciss in Thailand Pope Francis in Japan Pope Francis in Sweden Pope Francis in Hungary, Slovaquia Pope Francis in America Pope Francis in the WYD in Poland 2016 Querida Amazonia Resurrection of Jesus Christ –according to the Gospels Russian Revolution and Communismo 3 civil war 1918.1921 Russian Revolution and Communism 1 Russian Revolution and Communismo 2 Saint Agatha, virgin and martyr Saint Albert the Great Saint Anthony of Padua Saint Francis of Assisi Saint Ignatius of Loyola Saint James, apostle Saint Joseph Saint Maria Goretti Saint Martin of Tours Saint Maximilian Kolbe Saint Mother Theresa of Calcutta Saint Jean Baptiste MarieaVianney, Curé of Ars Saint John of the Cross Saint Patrick and Ireland Saints Zachary and Elizabeth, parents of John Baptis Signs of hope Sunday – day of the Lord Thanksgiving – History and Customs The Body, the cult – (Eucharist) Valentine Vocation – mconnor@legionaries.org Way of the Cross – drawings for children For commentaries – email – mflynn@legionaries.org Fb – Martin M Flynn Donations to - BANCO - 03069 INTESA SANPAOLO SPA Name – EUR-CA-ASTI IBAN – IT61Q0306909606100000139493