There's a scene in this film where Chaplin is aggravating everyone in the lobby of a hotel. The scene cuts away to two other characters from the narrative. When we return to the lobby, Chaplin is wearing a woman's hat and the hotel clerk looks very cross with him. We do not see how Chaplin acquired the hat or what shenanigans led him to staring down the clerk in that hat, but we know his character enough to fill in the blanks and its one of the first hilarious comic-edits I've seen in film.

Chaplin continues to use comic pacing and performance techniques completely ahead of their time and it's a joy to watch him yield the directorial power he struggled to get after his Keystone cop days.

First time watch: February 2024

Source: DVD

Length: 1 Reel

2024 Challenge: Conquering Chaplin (an autobiographical adventure)

Conquering Chaplin Part One: The Keystone Films. 1914

Director/Cast/Premise

Caught in the Rain is the 1914 short silent film directed, written and starring Charlie Chaplin. With support from Mack Swain and Alice Davenport the plot sees a tipsey man causing havoc at a hotel.

Quick Thoughts Chaplin himself notes Caught in the Rain as his directional debut although some pages on Wikipedia lists otherwise.

From the autobiography it states "When I started directing my first picture, I was not as confident as I thought I would be; in fact, I had a slight attack of panic. But after (Mark) Sennett saw the first days work I was reassured. The picture was called Caught in the Rain. It was not a world beater but it was funny and quite a success."

Charlie Chaplin

After making some small strides forward with his previous film, Caught in a Cabaret, due to his good work with Mabel Normand, there was somewhat of a step back in quality again here. This is the first film that Chaplin officially directed, having previously also supposedly been the creative force behind Twenty Minutes of Love, but with that film having been credited to Joseph Maddern. For a directorial debut it's fine, but he definitely played it too safe, to the extent it is actually quite reminiscent in parts of one of his previous films from the same year, Mabel's Strange Predicament. I can imagine getting the two films mixed up in the future.

No. 14 in My Quest to Watch (or Rewatch, as the case may be) all of Charlie Chaplin's 82 Films! 🤩

Even though he is partially credited as director on Twenty Minutes of Love, this is the film Chaplin considers to be his real directorial debut.

This is a fun film featuring Chaplin as The Tramp, which after a hit or miss start to the character in his earlier appearances, has finally grown into the character we all know and love from his later, more famous work.