WILLIAM McKINLEY BIRTHDAY: The McKinley Birthplace Home and Research Center, 40 S. Main St., Niles, will celebrate the anniversary of the birth of William McKinley, the 25th president of the United States, who was born in Niles in 1843. The free event will be held from 2 to 4 p.m. Feb. 1. Tours will be given of the birthplace home, with refreshments served.

EVENT TO ADDRESS HUMAN TRAFFICKING: A free education and awareness event on the topic of human trafficking will be at 7 p.m. Monday at the Churchill United Methodist Church, 189 Churchill Hubbard Road, Liberty, coordinated by members of the church known as K(NO)w More Human Trafficking.

Speaker Captain Toby Meloro of the Liberty Police Department will discuss local issues, and the movie ”Chosen” will be shown. Refreshments will be served.

The mission of K(NO)w More Human Trafficking is to be involved in the fight to eliminate human trafficking of children by creating awareness in our community. The focus will be to educate the public on how to identify victims of labor and sex trafficking and define action steps towards the complete elimination of human trafficking.

For more information, call 330-759-0118.

TEA PLANNED: The Temple El Emeth Sisterhood is hosting the 68th annual Women’s Interfaith Tea at 1 p.m. Feb. 4 at the synagogue.

The tea is held annually and rotates between the various religions in the area. This year it is the Jewish community’s turn to host. Churches and synagogues from the Warren and Youngstown were invited.

The theme this year is “Fighting Poverty with Faith; Working Together to End Poverty.” Those attending are asked to bring a non perishable food item to donate to Second Harvest Food Bank.

ALLIANCE SETS MEETING: The Ohio Cultural Alliance will meet at 6 p.m. Feb. 3 at the Georgetown Center, 5945 South Ave., Boardman. Guest speaker Stephen Hanzely will address the theme “Old Traditions Lost and Retained – Hungarian.”

Those attending can bring non-perishable food items, which will be given to the Rescue Mission of Mahoning Valley. Reservations needed by Tuesday to OCS, Box 561, Canfield, OH 44406.

SCHOOL WEEK MARKED: The Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod’s annual National Lutheran Schools Week celebration, held this year today through Saturday. The week’s festivities may include special schoolwide activities, philanthropic events and an open house for the community. The theme for the 2014 observance is “Witness Always – Raising up Faithful Disciples.”

TODAY

Someplace Safe Inc., domestic violence agency, offers support groups for women, children and individual support services. 330-393-3003.

Sunday Night Our Gratitude Speaks, Narcotics Anonymous open speaker meeting. Sundays, 7 p.m. Serenity Place, 29 E. Broad St., Newton Falls.

Write to Recover, 10 a.m., Meridian Place, 1184 N. Meridian Road, Youngstown.

Master Discipleship Group, 6 p.m., Mahoning Valley Hope Center, Warren.

Gamblers Anonymous, a 12-Step fellowship of compulsive gamblers who want to recover from their gambling addictions, 7:30 p.m., Christ Church Presbyterian, 3425 Hopkins Road, Youngstown (Cornersburg). Call 330-505-5060.

Sunday Solutions, 2 p.m., Sahara Club II, 2345 Youngstown Road, Warren.

Our Gratitude Speaks, 7 p.m., Serenity Place, 21 E. Broad St., Newton Falls.

Keeping it Simple, 7 p.m., Sahara Club, 2345 Youngstown Road, Warren.

Regardless Of, 7 p.m., Christ Episcopal Church, 2627 Atlantic Ave., Warren.

Anyone with items for Seeing Eye should call 330-841-1738; e-mail news@tribtoday. com; mail or drop off information at the Tribune Chronicle.