Newspaper 20 Minuten · The 20 Minutes read in English

Zurich ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The most popular free advertising and information newspaper in Switzerland, distributed daily in the morning in major cities of the country in places with busy passenger traffic: public transport stops, train stations and airports, shopping and business centers, restaurants. It offers readers a brief overview of interesting news.

Newspaper Blick am Abend · The Evening Flash read in English

Zurich ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·Centre-left

The free evening intertainment Swiss newspaper, headquartered in Zurich, was created on the basis of the similar tabloid Heute. The content of the publication is mainly taken from other local newspapers, such as Blick. Sums up the day.

Newspaper Blick · The Flash read in English

Zurich ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·Yellow press ·Centre-left

The first newspaper in Switzerland with a characteristic sensational and entertaining content, a representative of the tabloid or so-called «yellow press». Owner of several newspaper circulation records in Switzerland. Published in German.

Newspaper Tages-Anzeiger · The Days Bulletin read in English

Zurich ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The first independent newspaper in Switzerland, it adheres to the center-left line. It is mostly a regional publication of the north of Switzerland, the district and city of Zurich. The newspaper has the largest number of subscribers in the country.

Newspaper Baslerstab · The Basel Paper read in English

Basel ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

Free German edition of the Commune and City of Basel, the most widely distributed and widely distributed free edition in the north-west of Switzerland. In 2014, it was reorganized into the new newspaper «BaZ Kompact», which is published 3 times a week.

Newspaper Berner Zeitung · The Bern Newspaper read in English

Bern ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The largest-circulation newspaper of the Swiss commune of Bern and the city of the same name, the third newspaper in Switzerland by the number of subscribers. It was formed in 1979 as a result of the merger of many local newspapers. Specializes in detailed reports. It is published in three regional editions for the municipalities of Stadt, Emmental and Langenthal.

Newspaper Neue Zürcher Zeitung · The New Zurich Newspaper read in English

Zurich ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The oldest newspaper in Switzerland and one of the oldest in the world, it is distinguished by a strict and concise style of presentation of material, deep analysis and disclosure of topics, adheres to the conservative standards and traditions laid down at its foundation.

Newspaper Luzerner Zeitung · The Lusern Newspaper read in English

Lucerne ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The Swiss regional newspaper of the canton of Lucerne, also published for the neighboring 4 cantons of Central Switzerland: Zug, Uri, Obwalden and Nidwalden. Each edition is published under its own title and content, and the Sunday edition is the same for all cantons.

Newspaper Die Südostschweiz · The South-East Switzerland read in English

Kur ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The regional newspaper of the south-eastern part of Switzerland is actually an association consisting of local low-budget publications, the composition of which is constantly changing. It is published in three versions with a general editorial office in the city of Chur.

Newspaper St. Galler Tagblatt · The Saint Gallen Bulletin read in English

St. Gallen ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The liberal and largest regional newspaper of Eastern Switzerland, published in German language, mainly distributed in the cities of St. Gallen, Gossau and Rorschach.

Newspaper Aargauer Zeitung · The Weekly read in English

Aargau ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

Daily newspaper of the Swiss canton of Aargau and the city of the same name. Currently, it is part of a large newspaper network covering the entire north-west of the country.

Newspaper Tribune de Genève · The Geneve Tribune read in English

Geneva ·French ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The leading daily information newspaper in French in the Swiss Lake Geneva region and the first French-language newspaper in Swiss history.

Newspaper 24 heures · The Twenty-Four Hours read in English

Lausanne ·French ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The second most popular daily newspaper in French-speaking Switzerland, as well as one of the world's oldest newspapers, the publication of which has not been interrupted since its foundation. The newspaper is most widely distributed in the canton of Vaud in the west of the country, published in 4 versions.

Newspaper Der Bund · The Union read in English

Bern ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

Swiss national, political and economic newspaper, representative of classical liberalism. The publication remained the leader in circulation among the Swiss press for most of the 19th and 20th centuries, and only in the 1980s began to give way to other publications.

Newspaper Zürichsee-Zeitung · The Zurich Lake Newspaper read in English

Stefan ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The regional Swiss edition of the city of Steffa in the canton of Zurich on Lake Zurich is published daily in three versions for the cities of Meilen, Obersee and Horgen.

Newspaper Basler Zeitung · The Basel Newspaper read in English

Basel ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The leading daily regional newspaper of the Swiss city of Basel and the municipality of the same name, also distributed in the nearest municipalities of Rien and Bettingen by subscription.

Newspaper Bilanz · The Balance read in English

Zurich ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·2 per week ·Business, finance, money ·None

Swiss business magazine in German, offers readers a detailed overview of the economic situation in Switzerland, introduces key players in the region's business sector, and publishes an annual list of the 300 richest Swiss people.

Newspaper Le Matin · The Morning read in English

Lausanne ·French ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The first independent French-language daily newspaper in Switzerland, the undisputed leader in its reach and readership in French-speaking Switzerland. Today it is published only on Sundays, and also in electronic form.

Newspaper Le Temps · The Times read in English

Lausanne ·French ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·Centre-right

Switzerland's only national newspaper in French, a representative of high-class journalism, is considered an independent publications, but recently adheres to the center-right line.

Newspaper Corriere del Ticino · The Ticino Informer read in English

Muzzano ·Italian ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

Swiss newspaper of the canton of Ticino in Italian, distributed in the south of the country in Italian Switzerland, it is the main regional newspaper for Lugano and Mendrisio and equally important for Bellinzona and Locarno. The newspaper has been known since the end of the XIX century.

Newspaper laRegione Ticino · The Regione Ticino read in English

Bellinzona ·Italian ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The newspaper of the Swiss region of Ticino, the so-called Italian Switzerland, is published in Italian and distributed mainly in Bellinzona and Locarno.

Newspaper Zürcher Oberländer · The Zurich Mountains read in English

Vetcicon ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

Daily independent regional newspaper of the Swiss municipality of Wetzikon in the canton of Zurich, located in the Hinwil district on the shore of Lake Pfeffikersee. Pfeffikon, Uster and Hinwil counties use the newspaper for official publications.

Newspaper L'Express · The Express read in English

Neuchatel ·French ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The Swiss Francophone newspaper of the city and canton of Neuchatel on the lake of the same name in the west of the country, the oldest French-language newspaper in the world, which is published to this day.

Newspaper Basellandschaftliche Zeitung · The Basel Newspaper read in English

Listal ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Daily ·General ·None

The regional Swiss newspaper of the Listal district and the city of the same name, the capital of the canton of Basel-Land, the second largest newspaper in this region after the Basler Zeitung.

Newspaper WOZ Die Wochenzeitung · The South-East Switzerland read in English

Zurich ·Deutch ·Newspaper ·Weekly ·General ·Centre-left

The Swiss Independent newspaper is an alternative to the classic German-language news publications, funded by a non-profit foundation that receives revenue exclusively from subscription sales, published by a self-governing cooperative, and a samizdat newspaper.

Magazine Bilan · The Balance read in English

Geneva ·French ·Magazine ·3 per month ·Business, finance, money ·None

Swiss Business Magazine, published in Geneva since 1989, offers readers an overview of the entire economic sector of the region. In fact, the magazine is a representative office of a similar German-language business magazine Bilanz.