Information about «Blick» media

Newspaper Name: Blick Newspaper name in English: The Flash Owner: Ringier Country / Region: Switzerland (Zurich) Language: Deutch Format type: Newspaper Category: Yellow press Political alignment: Centre-left Frequency: Daily Publication Years (print version): 1959 — now (64 years) ISSN: 1013-0667 Circulation: 214,000 (2015) Official Pages: Official Apps: Website: blick.ch [read with translation]

The first issue of the Swiss tabloid «Blick» was published on October 14, 1959 with a circulation of 48 thousand copies. The newspaper was filled with rumors, political scandals, provocative articles, exclusive materials, crime and other «sensitive» topics from everyday life in Switzerland, which reputable publications preferred to avoid. The name of this Zurich newspaper can be translated from German as «Glare», «Flash», «Reflection», «Lightning».

This was the first experience of publishing a typical tabloid press in Switzerland. It is not surprising that the newspaper was soon hit by a wave of criticism and indignation from dissatisfied readers, and there were even attempts to close the publication. Despite the difficulties, the popularity of «Blick» grew at an extraordinary pace, just a year later its daily circulation set the first record in Switzerland — 200 thousand copies. In the following years, the circulation only increased. In the 1980s, the newspaper used Bingo lottery cards to attract new readers. In the early 1990s, the popularity of «Blick» began to decline, however, in 1995, the newspaper's editorial board was able to set a new circulation record — more than 335 thousand copies.

Since 2008, an abridged version of this tabloid «Blick am Abend» has been published in Switzerland, and it is distributed in the evening as a free advertising and information newspaper.

Translate the latest edition of the Switzerland newspaper «Blick»

Latest issue of the «Blick» (The Flash) may be translated in English language now.

For request latest edition of this media, click «Translate» button in front of the selected translator.

Translation result will be opened in your browser on new window (or tab).

Select one of the translators below.

available 3 translators

⇓

Translate «Blick / The Flash / blick.ch» newspaper into English by Google Translate

Click on this button to begin translation of the media ⇒

Read «Blick / The Flash / blick.ch» newspaper online in English with translation by Yandex Translate

For request translation result click on this button ⇒

«Blick / The Flash / blick.ch» in English by Bing Translator

Click on button this for translate media ⇒

...

English version of «Blick / The Flash / blick.ch», latest issue from SysTran Translation Service

Translator currently not available x

English edition of «Blick / The Flash / blick.ch», fresh translation by PROMT Trans

Translator currently not available x