Majid Al Futtaim Leisure, Entertainment & Cinemas (MAF LEC), has been announced as the new distribution partner for Warner Bros. Pictures across the Middle East starting with The Suicide Squad on 05 August.

Warner Bros. Pictures Group is comprised of Warner Bros. Pictures, New Line Cinema, Warner Animation Group and DC-based film production. Warner Bros. partners with the world’s most inspiring storytellers to create extraordinary entertainment on every screen for the global audience. Warner Bros. Pictures Group has been at the forefront of the motion picture industry since its inception and continues to be a leading creative force, producing the broadest slate of films comprised of worldwide theatrical releases and films premiering exclusively on HBO Max.

Majid Al Futtaim Leisure, Entertainment & Cinemas operates 615 screens across eight markets in the Middle East and, in addition to being the region’s largest and most rapidly growing exhibitor, also operates a large regional film distribution business.

Ignace Lahoud, Chief Executive Officer of Majid Al Futtaim Leisure, Entertainment & Cinemas said, “Warner Bros. Pictures is one of the world’s leading film studios and Majid Al Futtaim is incredibly proud to be bringing Warner Bros.’ impressive slate of new theatrical releases to big screens across the Middle East. This is an exciting new chapter for us and underscores our commitment to provide movie lovers across the region with the ultimate entertainment experience and highly-anticipated movies from the world’s best storytellers. I have no doubt that the world-class pipeline of Warner Bros. films combined with our in-depth market knowledge and experience will drive long-term box-office growth.”

Warner Bros. Pictures’ “The Suicide Squad” releases in IMAX and other formats at VOX Cinemas and movie theatres across the Middle East on August 05. The superhero action adventure from writer/director James Gunn features a collection of the most degenerate delinquents in the DC lineup. The film stars an ensemble cast including Margot Robbie (“Birds of Prey”, “Bombshell”), Idris Elba (“Avengers: Infinity War”), John Cena (upcoming HBO Max series “Peacemaker”, “Bumblebee”), Joel Kinnaman (“Suicide Squad”), with Sylvester Stallone (the Rocky Rambo and Expendables franchises), and Viola Davis (“Ma Rainey’s Black Bottom”, “Suicide Squad”).

About Majid Al Futtaim

Founded in 1992, Majid Al Futtaim is the leading shopping mall, communities, retail and leisure pioneer across the Middle East, Africa and Asia.

A remarkable business success story, Majid Al Futtaim started from one man’s vision to transform the face of shopping, entertainment and leisure to ‘create great moments for everyone, every day’. It has since grown into one of the United Arab Emirates’ most respected and successful businesses spanning 17 international markets, employing more than 43,000 people, and obtaining the highest credit rating (BBB) among privately-held corporates in the region.

Majid Al Futtaim owns and operates 28 shopping malls, 13 hotels and four mixed-use communities, with further developments underway in the region. The shopping malls portfolio includes Mall of the Emirates, Mall of Egypt, City Centre malls, My City Centre neighbourhood centres, and five community malls which are in joint venture with the Government of Sharjah. The Company is the exclusive franchisee for Carrefour in over 30 markets across the Middle East, Africa and Asia, operating a portfolio of more than 375 outlets and an online store.

Majid Al Futtaim operates more than 500 VOX Cinemas screens as well as a portfolio of world-class leisure and entertainment experiences across the region including Ski Dubai, Ski Egypt, Dreamscape, Magic Planet, Little Explorers and iFLY Dubai. The Company is parent to a Fashion, Home and Specialty retail business representing international brands such as Abercrombie & Fitch, Hollister, AllSaints, lululemon athletica, Crate & Barrel, Maisons du Monde, LEGO and THAT, a Majid Al Futtaim fashion concept store and app. In addition, Majid Al Futtaim operates Enova, a facility and energy management company, through a joint venture operation with Veolia, a global leader in optimised environment resource management.