"Warner Bros." redirects here. For the film logo, see Warner Bros. Pictures.

Background

Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc. (commonly known as Warner Bros. and abbreviated as WB) is an American diversified multinational mass media and entertainment conglomerate headquartered at the Warner Bros. Studios complex in Burbank, California, and a subsidiary of Warner Bros. Discovery. Founded in 1923 by four brothers Harry, Albert (Abe), Sam, and Jack Warner, the company established itself as a leader in the American film industry before diversifying into animation, television, and video games, and is one of the "Big Five" major American film studios, as well as a member of the Motion Picture Association (MPA). The company is known for its film studio division, the Warner Bros. Pictures Group, which includes Warner Bros. Pictures, New Line Cinema, the Warner Animation Group, Castle Rock Entertainment and DC Studios. Among its other assets include the television production company Warner Bros. Television Studios; animation studios Warner Bros. Animation and Cartoon Network Studios; comic book publisher DC Comics; video game development and publishing arm Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment; and a 12.5% interest in broadcast television network The CW, which is co-owned with Nexstar Media Group and Paramount Global. Warner Bros. also operates various divisions specializing in publishing, merchandising, music, theater, and theme parks. Bugs Bunny, a cartoon character created as part of the Looney Tunes series, is the company's official mascot.

1st Logo (June 30, 1996)

Visuals: There is the iconic Looney Tunes red/black concentric circles, with "WARNER BROS." on the top and "Presents" on the bottom. The WB shield extremely zooms in to the point that it fills the screen, making the words explode out of the screen. Then the screen fades out to a 3D head, that being Marvin the Martian along side the Looney Tunes logo. At the end, Marvin's eyes glow, seguing into the short.

Technique: CGI.

Audio: A re-orchestrated version of the ending section of "Merrily We Roll Along" by Richard Stone, with the steel guitar slide lick extended by four seconds, and crumbling sounds when the text explode.

Availability: Only seen on Marvin the Martian in the 3rd Dimension, which was originally a theme park attraction. While the short is removed from its theme parks, it is available on the third disc of the Looney Tunes Platinum Collection: Volume 1 Blu-ray release.

2nd Logo (Early 2000s)

Visuals: Same as before, but the shield is smaller, the concentric circles are more detailed, and everything is in a box on a cyan background. No animation is present except for the camera zooming in to the shield.

Variant: At the end of the episode, this logo plays in reverse.

Technique: A zooming effect.

Audio: A distorted version of the starting section of "The Merry-Go-Round Broke Down" (the 1941-1945 arrangement variant).

Availability: Only appeared on the Marvin the Martian webseries that was produced with the now defunct Pulse 3D plug-in.

3rd Logo (July 5, 2010)

Visuals: There is a version of the Warner Bros. shield (without the banner) with "Warner Bros." on a tropical background while palm trees and 2 spotlights stand about. Then it collapses and the shield opens with filmstrips and with places, such as the Taj Mahal, Eiffel Tower, the Moai statue, Chinatown homes, the WB water tower, the Big Ben, and the Rio de Janeiro statue. It also segues into the clips such as The Big Bang Theory, The Matrix, and The Middle. At the end, it closes for said shield, which opens to Charlie Harper (from Two and a Half Men; played by Charlie Sheen). The shield closes and then shines. The "Warner Bros." name fly in to the shield.

Trivia: If one looks closely in the background, the water tower from Animaniacs can be seen.

Technique: CGI designed and animated by Jonathan Wimbush and Taka Ikari.

Audio: Sounds of eagles, earthquakes, the clips from said episode, and Charlie Sheen saying "You have hit the jackpot here?".

Availability: Only seen at the beginning and the end of the Warner Bros. LA screenings of 2010.

4th Logo (November 13, 2019-)

Visuals: There is a standard version of the Warner Bros. Pictures logo. Then it morphs/transforms into the same shield, redesigning the logo, the letters drawn and form into the 2019 shield.

Technique: Visual animation.

Audio: None.

Availability: Only seen on the Pentagram website as a case study.

5th Logo (August 16, 2020-May 1, 2022)

Visuals: Over a black background is the 2019 WB shield in yellow. It fades in and out.

Technique: A still, digital graphic.

Audio: The opening theme of the show.

Availability: Seen on Partisan; the Warner Bros. International Television Production logo appears at the end of each episode.

6th Logo (100th anniversary logo) (December 15, 2022-2024)

Visuals: The sequence starts with the water tower of the Warner Bros. studio lot at dusk, similar to the 2021 Warner Bros. Pictures logo, but it pans from it instead of passing through. It then fades to the golden edge of the WBD shield, as it cuts through another view of it and finally through a stylized gold "100", with the WBD shield beside the "1". The text "CELEBRATING EVERY STORY" fades on the "00".

Variants:

A textless version exists.

A short version also exists where the logo animates faster than usual.

On another video, the animation of the shield revealing isn't cut.

French, Portuguese, German and Japanese versions of the WB100: Share Every Story variant also exist on the company's respective YouTube channels with subtitles.

On a promo video released during the 95th Academy Awards, only the shield is seen, which zooms out very quickly, with the URL "WB100.COM" below, which shines.

On a video released on the day of the studio's centennial, previous Warner Bros. Pictures logos are seen through various iris-in transitions, starting with the 1935 logo and then with the 2021 logo being seen last, which then transitions to this logo. The screen then flashes and the logo turns brighter on a bokeh background with the iconic water tower to the right. The end result has "HAPPY ANNIVERSARY!" in front of the abstract "100". The logo is then wiped away from the left by a light.

A rare version exists which takes place on the Steven J. Ross Theater in the studio lot, where the "Warner Bros." script sign is being replaced by the WB100 logo above the theater and the marquee reads "CELEBRATING EVERY STORY".

Technique: CGI. The WB100: Share Every Story variants use live-action for the studio lot.

Audio: The opening/closing theme of the video.

Audio Variant: On WB100: Share Every Story, Morgan Freeman's voiceover is heard.

Availability: First seen on a video from the company called WB100: Share Every Story, which can be also seen on the centennial's website.