3-DAYS PRE-CONFERENCE TOUR (16-18 June)

Locations: Sweden – Region Värmland and Karlstad City

Departure Oslo: 16 June 11.00 am

Arrival Oslo: 18 June 17.00 pm

Price: NOK 6370 per pers. in a double room and NOK 7510 per pers. in sgl.rom (Meals incl)

Affiliated to the WCTE-organizing committee: The Paper Province (Platinum Sponsor), Visit Värmland –Nifa (Industry Association for Värmland Food Companies) – Karlstad Municipality – Region Värmland– Länsstyrelsen

We will visit regional wood manufacturers, wood innovation start-ups, sawmill, both traditional and contemporary wooden constructions and buildings, Swedish culture sites, museums, cosy traditional Swedish villages, Karlstad City Center and a taste of the Swedish cosine. On the tour 9 businesses and 6 tourist locations are featured.

ONE-DAY TOUR (23 June)

Wooden High Rise Buildings & Wooden Industry 2

Locations: Splitkon (Åmot), Spor X (Drammen) The Royal Cobalt Works factory (Modum)Departure from Oslo: 23 June 08.00 am

Arrival to Oslo: 23 June 18.00 pm

Price: NOK 1850,- (lunch incl)

Affiliated to the WCTE-organizing committee: Splitkon (Bronze Sponsor) Degree of Freedom (Silver Sponsor)

Combine this tour with the ONE-DAY TOUR: Norwegian Timber Bridges

The Wooden Industry Splitkon produces cross-laminated wood and delivers glulam adapted to Nordic conditions. With extensive experience in engineering and a focus on continuous innovation, we are a significant player in the modern wood industry. This is the largest cross-laminated wood plant in Norway.

SporX (2022) is an innovative, ten-storey all-timber office building with a restaurant and a bar on the ground floor. The project complies with the Passive house standard and the Energy class A, and is certified BREEAM-NOR Outstanding. Timber elements were used for all load-bearing structures above ground. Timber was chosen as a natural, sustainable, and readily available local material, and to minimise building loads in a riverside location with extremely poor ground conditions. The beam-to-column connections are timber-to-timber connections, and the two stabilizing cores are made of CLT and glulam.

We will have lunch at The Royal Cobalt Works factory. This factory has a long history and was established as early as 1776. For over 100 years, thousands of people worked to extract cobalt from the deep mines at Modum. This special metal was used to make cobalt blue paint – which in turn was supplied to the entire world’s porcelain and glass industry. In fact, between 1773 and 1893, Norwegian cobalt extraction accounted for as much as 80 % of the world’s production.

Norwegian Wooden Buildings from the Middle Ages to the 20th Century

Locations: Bygdøy, Oslo / Norsk Folkemuseum

Dates: 20. June 2023Departure bus from Oslo City center 18.00 pm

Arrival bus to Oslo City Center 22.30 pm

Price: NOK 1685,- (Meal incl)

Affiliated to the WCTE-organizing committee: Norsk Folkemuseum

Part of the lecture will discuss how the historic caretaking at the museum have resulted in both structural stress and new knowledge about several buildings. Another theme will be traditional knowledge of strength of wood compared with modern material testing. We will visit the Gol Stave Church and four other profane buildings.

Fully booked

STILL AVAILABLE: ONE-DAY TOUR Wooden High Rise Buildings & Wooden Industry 2

ONE-DAY TOUR (23 June)

Wooden High Rise Buildings & Wooden Industry 1

Locations: Vikingskipet (Hamar), Mjøstårnet (Brumunddal) Moelven Limtre (Moelv), Hunton (Gjøvik).

Departure Oslo City Center: 23 June 07.00 am

Return Oslo City Center: 23 June 19.00 pm

Price: NOK 1955,- per pers (lunch incl)

Affiliated to the WCTE-organizing committee: Moelven (Gold Sponsor), Hunton and Norwegian Wood Cluster

We will visit Moelven Limtre was established in 1959 and today has approx. 140 skilled employees, who works with glulam to the building materials trade, the construction industry and small and large projects. The company has project and engineering department and is a leader in Europe.

Hunton is one of the Nordic countries’ leading manufacturers of building materials based on wood and wood fiber. The building materials can be easily put together in systems for walls, floors and ceilings that make it easy to build future-oriented and solid.

Lunch at Mjøstårnet. Mjøstårnet is ratified as the world’s tallest all-timber building by the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat (CTBUH), as well as Guinness World Records. The tower has also received numerous awards and recognitions, such as the New York Design Awards, Norwegian Tech Awards and CTBUH’s Award of Excellence.

The concept for the distinctive design of the Olympic Hall (the ‘Viking Ship’) at Hamar (1992) is shaped like an upside-down Viking Ship, the arena showcases Norwegian architecture and building design using parallel open-webbed arches spanning up to 96m and with 4-metre struts. The keel is 260m long and the entire structure used around 2,000m3 of glulam.

Fully booked:

EVENING TOUR (20 June)

Field trip – Sustainable Forest Management

Dates: 20. June 2023

Locations: Oslomarka

Departure bus from Oslo City center 18.00 pm

Arrival bus to Oslo City Center 22.00 pm

Price: Free (Meal incl)

Affiliated to the WCTE-organizing committee: PEFC -The Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification (Silver Sponsor)

Oslo-marka is the name of the forested and hilly areas surrounding Oslo. Despite being a major recreational area for the population of Oslo, especially at weekends, the fauna of marka includes species such as lynx, wolf, beaver, moose and roe deer.

The field trip will showcase sustainable forest management and include presentations from top-academics. You will get first-hand experience of advanced forest operation and gain up-to-date knowledge on what is status of forest locally and globally and how timber could fight climate change.

(Cancelled) 3-DAYS POST-CONFERENCE TOUR (23-25 June)

Locations: Trondheim, Røros og LillehammerDeparture from Oslo: 23 June 07.00 am

Arrival to Oslo: 25 June 23.00 pm

Price: NOK 10.510 per pers. in a double room NOK 12.095 per pers. in sgl.rom (Meals incl)

Affiliated to the WCTE-organizing committee: Wood Works Cluster, NTNU (Host Organiser) and the Norwegian Wood Cluster.

The Post-conference tour of Trondheim, Røros and Lillehammer is designed to explore traditional and cutting-edge contemporary wooden architecture, mountain, along national park, fjords, valleys. Our delegates are cordially invited to drive along some of the official Norwegian Scenic Routes. 6 businesses and 4 tourist locations are featured.

Trondheim is known as the original Viking capital of Norway, and today, it’s a place where creativity and innovation are fused together to deliver great events, exciting places to explore and cutting-edge advancements that are globally acclaimed. Lillehammer has its own place in the heart of many sports enthusiasts, thanks to the 1994 Winter Olympics. The town has both traditional wooden buildings and large contemporary wooden constructions. The traditional mountain village of Røros is one of the oldest towns of wooden buildings in Europe and a UNESCO World Heritage site.

(Cancelled) 3-DAYS POST-CONFERENCE TOUR (23-25 June)

The tour to Wooden City Bergen

Locations: Bergen, Hønefoss, Gol, Geilo, Hardangervidda, Vøringsfossen, Eidfjord, Hardagerfjorden, Gudvangen, Flåm, Lærdalstunnelen,

Departure from Oslo: 23 June 07.00 am

Arrival to Oslo: 25 June 23.00 pm

Price: NOK 10.510 per pers. in a double room and NOK 12.095 per pers. in sgl.rom (Meals incl)

Affiliated to the WCTE-organizing committee: County Governor of Vestland, Degree of Freedom (WCTE-Silver sponsor) and LINK arkitektur and and the Norwegian Wood Cluster.

Our delegates are cordially invited to drive along some of the official Norwegian Scenic Routes, also called Norway in a nutshell. 8 businesses and 9 tourist locations are featured.

The World Heritage city of Bergen is surrounded by scenic fjord and mountains and has magnificent work of old timber architecture on the quayside, with its image reflected in the water. With an architectural heritage you won’t find anywhere else in the Nordics, the beauty and romance of Bergen stands un­paralleled and almost every street corner unveils a new treasure. Bergen’s has contemporary cutting-edge timber architecture, rooted both in the past and built for the future.