Programme

The final programme for FiNo 2020 is now available here, and the abstract booklet here.

The workshop

FiNo 2020 is hosted by the Department of Languages and Literature Studies at the University of South-Eastern Norway, campus Drammen (Street address: Papirbredden –kunnskapspark, Grønland 58, 3045 Drammen).

The workshop takes place on 21-22 February in room U5110. Once you are in the building, take one of the elevators in the lobby to the fifth floor, and then follow the FiNo 2020 signs.

We start at 9:10 on Friday and end at 14:50 on Saturday (see preliminary program). As usual, talks will be allotted 40 minutes: 30 for the presentation and 10 for questions. If you wish to use handouts, please bring your own. 25 copies should be sufficient. Posters should be mounted during the lunch break on Friday. You will be allotted a poster board with these dimensions: 120 cm wide x 180 cm high. We will provide push-pins, etc.

There are no registration fees. We will provide the coffee breaks and catered lunches for the participants during the two days. Please let us know if you have any dietary restrictions.

The conference dinner will be at 7 pm on Friday at Becks Brasserie & Bar Drammen, which is just around the corner from the conference venue. (Here you will pay for your own meal). We hope that you will all be able to join us. Confirmation and food preferences will be requested at a later point.

Practical info

Accommodation

The nearest hotel to the conference venue is Comfort Hotel Union Brygge, which is a 2-minute walk to the university campus, and that is why we recommend it. There are a few other hotel options in the center within walkable distance to campus, all in the same price range. There are also rooms for under NOK 600 a night available on Airbnb.

Getting to Drammen

Drammen is located 40 km southwest of Oslo, and most of you will probably be flying into Oslo Gardermoen Airport. From the airport, we recommend taking the Airport Express Train (Flytoget), for which you can buy tickets in advance here or on the spot. The trains run every 10 minutes, and the trip lasts about one hour. But make sure to jump on a train going all the way to Drammen. Every other train does.

Alternatively, you can use one of the local direct Vy trains to Drammen. These also run three times an hour, cost exactly the same, and take one hour. You can book tickets by following this link (Search: Oslo Lufthavn > Drammen). Unlike Flytoget, Vy tickets are not valid for any train, so you have to jump on the train you booked.

The bus costs approximately the same, but takes at least twice as long. Several options here.

There are also flights to Torp (Sandefjord) Airport, which is accessible by train/bus. And if you happen to be spending time in Oslo before or after the workshop, the best option is to take a Vy train to/from Drammen.

Getting to the conference venue

From the Drammen train station, it is a 10-minute walk to USN campus. When you get out of the station building, go right across the square, cross the street towards the Sparebank1 building, and continue past the bus station. Go through the pedestrian crossing and past the County building, the NRK building, and the Police Station. Once you have passed MENY (food store) on your left and Baker Klausen on the corner, you are in Papirbredden. The main entrance to Papirbredden is behind the huge factory barrel. Comfort Hotel is just 100 meters down the street. You may also follow this link.

If you are arriving by bus, it takes about 8 minutes to walk from the Drammen bus station to Papirbredden. For directions, follow this link.

For getting around Drammen and its surroundings, Brakar is the local bus company. Or you may want to use one of the (expensive) taxi services: 05060 or ElvebyenTaxi.

Sightseeing in Drammen

Drammen, known as “the river city”, is a pretty big city by Norwegian standards, and there is a variety of things to see and do. Major attractions include Bragernes Torg and Bragernes Kirke (the town square and neo-Gothic church), Drammens Museum, Spiralen (the famous spiral mountain tunnel), Ypsilon Bridge (cable-stayed pedestrian bridge over the Drammen river), Gulskogen Gård (manor house gardens with peacocks).

Organizers

Islam Youssef

Miguel Vazquez-Larruscain