G is for Dr Gro Harlem Brundtland- former Prime Minister of Norway (first woman), former Director General of the World Health Organisation, Deputy Chair of the Elders, medical doctor, mother.

Dr Gro Harlem Brundtland (image from The Elders: photo credit Thierry Boccon Girod)

Background

Gro Harlem Brundtland was born in 1939, in Oslo. Her father was a doctor and politician, and it seems that Gro followed in his footsteps. She studied medicine, graduating with a degree from the University of Oslo and a Masters of Public Health from Harvard.

She has been a member of the Norwegian Labour Movement since she enrolled in the children’s section at age seven. Once she had completed her studies, and after working for a number of years as a scientist and physician in the public health system, she took up the post as Norway’s Minister for Environmental Affairs (1974-1979) for Labour. In 1981 she led her party to victory and became both the first female prime minister of Norway, as well as the youngest ever appointed to the office (she was 41).

Dr Gro Harlem Brundtland

Gro held this post for more than ten years, winning 3 elections for the Labour Movement and is still referred to as the ‘mother of the nation’ by Norwegians.

Political career

So, already her achievements are enough to be celebrated- clearly she was a political powerhouse already. During her time as Prime Minister, Gro was approached to establish and chair the World Commission of Environment and Development (now often known as the Brundtland Commission). She made a global impact with this commission’s report ‘Our Common Future’, which was released in 1987. Now, internationally, governments were talking about sustainable development.

Dr Gro Harlem Brundtland

In 1998, Gro went on to lead the World Health Organisation as Director General, a post she held till 2003 and gained recognition for ‘successfully negotiating an agreement on tobacco control, increasing access to life-saving drugs, working towards polio eradication and promoting awareness of the links between poverty and disease.’ (from Gro Harlem Brundtland’s biography on The Elders)

Dr Gro Harlem Brundtland at the World Economic Forum 1989

In 2007 she joined The Elders, founded by the late great Nelson Mandela as ‘an independent group of global leaders who work together for peace and human rights’. She is the Deputy Chair of the group, alongside Kofi Annan (Chair). She is also a member of the United Nations Secretary-General’s High Level Panel on Global Sustainability (after serving as Special Envoy for United Nations Secretary-General on Climate Change 2007-2010), and serves on the Board of the United Nations Foundation.

Inspiration and lesson

Dr Gro Harlem Brundtland has championed health, environmental sustainability and gender equality throughout her career, and continues to do so through her work with The Elders and the UN. During her time as Prime Minister of Norway, she appointed women to nearly half of her cabinet posts, a proportion that has been embraced by both government and corporate boardrooms across Norway.

International delegation in the International Conference to Promote the Resolution of the Conflict in the Basque Country

Gro believes in basic human rights for all- access to health care, nutrition, education and equal opportunity regardless of gender or race. Recently she travelled from communities in Ethiopia to India, gathering experts and activists and lending support (as part of The Elders), to find ways to end child marriage.

Oh, and I forgot to mention- during what can only be described as an incredible career, Gro and her husband also raised four children. I am in awe.

The Elders, including the late and founding member, Nelson Mandela (image from The Elders)

‘The dual scourge of hunger and malnutrition will be truly vanquished not only when granaries are full, but also when people’s basic health needs are met and women are given their rightful role in societies.’ GHB

Find out more about Dr Gro Harlem Brundtland and her work here:

The Elders– Independent group of global leaders who work together for peace and human rights

The Guardian listed Dr Gro Harlem Brundtland as one of the top 100 women

Wikipedia’s article on her is here

Here’s another article from the extraordinary.org

Her husband (Arne Olav Brundtland) has apparently written a couple of books on her political career, which I couldn’t find; however Gro herself has written a memoir