Marcel Van Eeden

at Clint Roenisch Gallery

$1,800. Until April 10, 944 Queen St. W., Toronto; 416-516-8593.The 44 small, unvaryingly superb charcoal drawings by Dutch artist Marcel Van Eeden, now ribboned at eye-level around Toronto's Clint Roenisch Gallery, constitute Van Eeden's first exhibition in Canada. The drawings are remarkable in a number of ways, not the least of which is the sameness of their diversity or, if you like, the diversity of their sameness.

Here's what I mean by their sameness: all of the drawings are identical in size -- 19 by 28 centimetres. And all are framed in identical wooden frames. Van Eeden finishes one drawing each day, starting at the top left-hand corner and finishing at the lower right-hand corner. Sometimes he makes more than one drawing, but never less. That's been the rhythm of his production ever since he began his prodigious project.

And what is this prodigious project? That's where the diversity comes in. Van Eeden's magnum opusis called Encyclopedia of My Death. It's not as lugubrious as it sounds. In fact it seems both exhausting, in terms of the labour-intensiveness of it all, and exhilarating, in terms of its noble ambition.

What the artist has undertaken -- for years now -- is to try to draw everything. Everything that began at some rather vaguely chosen point in the mid-1920s, but which ended precisely at the year of his birth, 1965. Feeding upon illustrations in art books and travel books, and upon images from magazines, newspapers and films, Van Eeden draws and draws and draws -- usually with charcoal, but sometimes with coloured pencil (there are a number of red drawings in this show, including a lusciously rendered slab of fat-marbled meat). He never draws moments of meaningful autobiography. Rather, he draws what is, or, more accurately, what was, out there in the world. And it's never the big hits of history: no concentration camps, no moon shots. What he draws is what went on just as a matter of course. Inadvertent history. Mere syllables in the unspooling discourse of time.

In this exhibition, for example, there are exquisitely rendered burning buildings , car crashes , crowds in a theatre, people in pubs, plus entirely unlooked-for moments of graphic ephemera (a cartoon from The New Yorker showing a dizzy blonde saying to her tycoon bedmate, "And I can type 75 words per minute". ). Everything is grist for Van Eeden's mill. Van Eeden's graphic mission is so beautifully described by Dutch critic Cornel Bierens in the catalogue to an exhibition the artist had at the Hague (and, fittingly, in Santiago de Compostela) in 2003 that it is worth quoting at some length: "His work," writes Bierens, "is a slowly filling reservoir of fragments from his prehistory, a heroic attempt to stop the clock for as long as he is here, and by doing precisely this, to focus attention on his existence. Inevitably the day will come when the dam bursts and pent-up time rushes down with gigantic force and surges on its way. And it is all too clear when that day will be: in the year of the artist's death."

Branded

at Paul Petro Contemporary Art

$1,400 - $6,000. Closes today,

980 Queen St. W., Toronto;

416-979-7874

This smartly conceived exhibition features works by three Toronto-based artists, Catharine MacTavish, Janet Morton and Stephen Andrews. Whether or not their various practices are normally convergent -- and I'd say they are normally not -- the way Petro has contrived matters, the three artists address and amplify one another's meanings in ways that are both edifying and revelatory.

Certain themes run persuasively through the exhibition. The idea of skin, for example, or at least surface. Morton's wall-mounted aggregations of stapled-together bar codes (one of them in the shape of the United States) offer wry and disturbing incarnations of an entire culture blanketed by commodity. Catharine MacTavish's papery-white painting, Skin Deep, is painting-as-flaying, the picture's surface distressingly articulated by slashes and gashesand bloodstains (or at least graphic incidents that are blood-hued). Stephen Andrews's beautiful four-part Balloon employs his trademark method of frottaging his watercolour crayons through screens that break up the nominal fluidity of watercolour into soft pixels that, as in pointillism, gently but insinuatingly add up to images. In this case, it takes all four paintings to show a balloon's inexorable blow-up -- until the last picture plane is finally taken over entirely by the nubbly close-up surface of the balloon (what Petro cannily characterizes as "an even dispersion of pictorial elements"). It feels like the resolution of those sequential shots of a spacecraft settling onto the moon's surface. And it relates the micro-macro universe to an all-overness of perception that persuasively echoes what Morton's and MacTavish's surfaces echo and annotate as well. It's all very deft.

Daniela Pulido at Tatar Gallery

$500-$950. Until April 2,

183 Bathurst St., Suite 200,

Toronto; 416-360-3822

Off the Ground, an installation by Chilean-born, Toronto-based artist Daniela Pulido, is a vast, walk-in meditation upon the idea of travel, belonging and identity, carried on by means of both mapping and sculpture.

The sculptural component consists of 14 pairs of the artist's feet, cast in plaster and displayed on skyscraper-like towers of various sizes made of plaster-coated cardboard; cardboard seen by Pulido as a quintessentially urban material, used here to symbolize the division and the disaffection of the self from the environment ("a barrier", she writes, "that impedes the individual to connect with her/him self as well as to synchronize with the slower rhythm of nature shared by all living beings"). Backing these pedestrian towers is a huge hand-painted, wall-painted map, an elision of the three cities where she has lived: Santiago, San Francisco and Toronto.