Jazzy Joyce is more than just a DJ. She is a pioneer in the craft. Born and bred in the Bronx, she was exposed at a young age to the urban rap world almost immediately. Since the age of 12, Jazzy recognized her calling, and seized her opportunity to be able to study, hone and master the art of DJing. At a time when female DJ’s were almost nonexistent, she got her first turntables and vinyl and developed a skill that has made her a legendary, internationally known DJ. Jazzy won her 1st DJ award at the New Music Seminar in 1983 and within a year had recorded her 1st record as Quest vocalist on Globe and Whiz Kids hip hop classic, “Play That Beat”, an early Tommy Boy hit. Soon after, she signed on as DJ for Sweet Trio, a Whiz Kid produced act who’s hit single, “Non-Stop” prophetically predicted her ever expanding career.

In 1986, Jazzy Joyce teamed up with Sweet T and dropped the hit single, “Its My Beat” where she began to explore her production capabilities. And only four years after having won her first DJ battle, Jazzy stepped back up to battle at the “87 New Music Seminar” and for the first time battled against a male DJ. But since respect and credibility have never been a problem with Jazzy and despite the male domination in her chosen profession, she has always refused to let gender be her handicap In 1991, Jazzy rocked Japan as a part of the Christian Marclaus’ Experimental One Hundred Turntable Orchestra and between 1994 and 1995 we found her on the “Blowout Comb Tour” with Digable Planets, proving that she had attained the skills needed for longevity in the art of DJing. She was the first scratcher and mix master on MTV’s first game show, “Turn It Up” and was featured on the HBO Special “Russell Simmons presents, Bad Girls of Def Comedy Jam in 1994. Jazzy Joyce was awarded the 2003-2004 Mix Power Summit, East Coast DJ of the Year Award and was most recently named the first lady down with Funk Master Flex’s BIG DAWG PITTBULLS. And to no surprise, because of her longevity and sustainability in the male predominant field, BET’s Black Girl’s Rock awarded Jazzy and also named their DJ award the “Jazzy Joyce DJ Award”. And where over the past several years other female DJs have been awarded and recognized for their talents. A couple of years following Despite her admitted, shy disposition, Jazzy Joyce DJ’d clubs from New York to Tokyo, Amsterdam to Copenhagen, and just about every place in between. She has toured with some of rap and R&B’s best, such as M.C Lyte, Africa Bambataa, Rich Nice, and Nenah Cherry. She was also handpicked by Motown executives to DJ for the 30th Anniversary Motown Revue. And also, hosted “Sister’s for Hip-Hop” and “Soul Tour” for MTV 2, where she toured with India Arie, Mystic, and Jaguar Wright. She has also DJ’d guests such as Missy Elliot and Tweet at the Roseland Ballroom in NYC. From guest appearances, rap seminars, award shows, & panels, Jazzy has appeared regularly on BET’s Rap City, and a host of magazines, including: VIBE, The Source, and she can even be found in “Who Shot Ya ?” the history of hip-hop written by Ernie Panniciloi, “ A collection of 3 decades of hip-hop photos”. Aside from the clubs, tours, and television, this busy Boss Lady had a permanent home on Hot 97 along with CoCoa Chanelle, Angie Martinez and LaLa on the Friday night “Ladies Night” show from 1996-2006. She then moved on to “Last Call” from 2006-2011, ending her last 5 years at the station hosting her own radio show. Jazzy’s spins touched people from Connecticut down, deep into New Jersey. Recently she brought her radio experience to a whole new level broadcasting her own show from an online source at DaMatrix Studios Broadcasting Network (DSBN) which hosts the site with viewers from over 35 countries. Jazzy has created a path to follow for up & coming young women interested in breaking into the hip-hop world where she continues to be a predominant figure and maintains her credibility within her field.

VIDEOS: