Object Details

Photograph by

Harry Allen, American, born 1964

Subject of

Sweet Tee, American

DJ Jazzy Joyce, American

Hurby Azor, Haitian American, born 1965

Description

A black and white photograph of Sweet Tee & Jazzy Joyce at the home of Hurby Azor in Brooklyn, New York.

The two women are in pictured in the center of the image, sitting on a floral sofa. Sweet Tee is on the left. She has short curly hair and is wearing large earrings and several necklaces. She is wearing a white sweatshirt with a tiger face and tiger stripes, jeans, and black boots. Her hands are folded on her lap and her left leg is crossed on top of her right leg. She is leaning toward Jazzy Joyce, who sits next to her. Joyce has long straight hair and is wearing hoop earrings, several necklaces, a watch, bracelets, and rings. One of her necklaces reads [JOYCE]. She is wearing a dark long sleeve button down shirt and lighter pants. Her hands are folded on her lap and her right leg is bent while her left leg is stretched out. Behind the sofa is a wood paneled wall with several framed portraits. The women sit directly beneath a wedding portrait of a bride.

On the back is an [eyejammie.com] sticker with the text: [Title: Sweet Tee & Jazzy Joyce, Family Home of Hurby "The Luv Bug" Azor, Brooklyn / Photographer: Harry Allen].

Credit Line

Collection of the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture

Object number

2015.132.55

Restrictions & Rights

© Harry Allen

Permission required for use. Proper usage is the responsibility of the user.

Type

gelatin silver prints

portraits

Medium

silver and photographic gelatin on photographic paper

Dimensions

H x W (Sheet): 10 7/8 × 13 15/16 in. (27.7 × 35.4 cm)

H x W (Image): 8 9/16 × 12 7/8 in. (21.8 × 32.7 cm)

Place captured

Brooklyn, New York City, New York, United States, North and Central America

See more items in

National Museum of African American History and Culture Collection

Collection title

Eyejammie Hip-Hop Photography Collection

Classification

Photographs and Still Images

Title

Photograph of Sweet Tee & Jazzy Joyce

National Museum of African American History and Culture

Topic

African American

Domestic life

Fashion

Hip-hop (Music)

Musicians

Photography

Rappers (Musicians)

Record ID

nmaahc_2015.132.55

Metadata Usage (text)

CC0

GUID (Link to Original Record)

http://n2t.net/ark:/65665/fd5b11e4497-44ee-4ad2-a2bb-e206ce24fcbd