WINTER WEATHER ADVISORY is in effect for lake-effect snow accumulations of up 4 to 10 inches. Winds gusting as high as 35-40 mph for Western and Central Chippewa County through tomorrow morning. Blowing snow and low visibilities can make for hazardous travel.

Lake effect snow will kick up primarily across the Eastern U.P. where the highest impacts will be felt late Monday night through early Wednesday. Milder temperatures return late week with a few rain showers even possible next weekend.

TUE (DEC 12): Lake effect snow over the Eastern U.P. will kick up rolling in off of Lake Superior. It appears higher totals of perhaps 4-7" are possible for parts of Luce and Chippewa counties Tuesday through Wednesday afternoon. With lake effect snow there will be a large variability in snow totals over short distances. For Lower Michigan, some lake effect snow is also possible but not to the extent of the U.P. We could see an inch or two perhaps around the Gaylord area with lesser amounts elsewhere. Along/south of a Traverse City-Grayling line no snow is expected at all. Mostly cloudy away from the snow showers with daytime highs from 28-34F. Gusty NW winds with some gusts to 30+ mph.

WED (DEC 13): We should get a continuation of the snow showers from Tuesday into Wednesday morning in the Eastern Upper as well. There's a chance the edge of this snowfall could impact areas near Presque Isle County, but otherwise, the Northern Lower should avoid most of any snow on WED. The clouds should break and dissipate leading into THU. Highs will likely range from 28-37F. NW wind at 10-20 mph.

THU (DEC 14): A rare December almost fully sunny day for Northern Michigan Thursday with high pressure over the Ohio River Valley keeping it quiet and pleasant. A warm front will pass through quietly in the morning and it will be warmer with temperatures heading above normal for mid-December. Highs from 42-51F.

EXTENDED FORECAST: After Wednesday, we should build into a ridge and bring back warmer-than-average temperatures to the region that should remain for 3-4 days along with a couple of solid sunny days. A weak (ish) system will pass bringing some rain showers on Friday.

-Meteorologist Heather Bricca