THE GREAT MOUSE DETECTIVE

Directed By: Ron Clements, Burny Mattinson, Dave Michener, & John Musker

Produced By: Burny Mattinson

Based On: Eve Titus’ & Paul Galdone’s Basil of Baker Street series

Premiered On: July 2, 1986

Distribution By: Buena Vista Distribution

The Great Mouse Detective is yet another of the… I hesitate to say “forgotten” Disney Animated Films for while it certainly can and has been a favorite amongst die-hard fans, it’s not as renown as others of its generation for good or for ill. Well, that’s not entirely true. It has oftentimes been incorrectly cited as being the first film to integrate computer-generated imagery, in this film’s case that being the gears of the clock tower Big Ben, but that honor actually goes to its predecessor, The Black Cauldron. However, The Great Mouse Detective is more commonly recognized by animation historians as being the film to truly begin the Disney Renaissance.

Seeing as I went a wee bit… alright, a heck of a lot overboard with the previous film’s plot summary, I shall only do the bare necessities for this one. That and this is essentially a dramatic mystery, where’s the fun in spoiling the villainous plot? Our story begins with a mouse toymaker’s young daughter, a miss Olivia Flaversham, witnessing the kidnapping of her father by a bat with a peg leg…

… A bat with a peg leg… There’s a pirate joke here somewhere, I’m sure of it…

Anyway, Olivia is discovered by a Doctor David Q. Dawson, a recent returner to London after a tour of duty in Afghanistan… Alright, a pause here but is anyone else but me wondering how, precisely, animals such as mice are able/capable of doing what we humans do and yet we completely and utterly fail to notice? Back to the plot, Olivia confesses that she’s trying to find a Basil of Baker Street, a renowned mouse detective across all of England. Dawson brings Olivia to Basil and together, the three mice uncover the plot of Basil’s arch-nemesis, the Napoleon of Crime himself, the wicked, the vile…

Vincent Price!

… No, wait, sorry, Professor Padraic Ratigan who so happens to be voiced by Vincent Price.

While not wanting to spoil the villainous mastermind’s plot any, I will say that this film goes back and forth with how it presents itself. One minute we’re exploring a human toystore, complete with rather creepy if not outright disturbing looking toys on a grander scale to our intrepid heroes, and the next… Well, to put it bluntly, we’re at a tavern wherein Dawson not only ends up drugged/drunk but gets up on stage to join a group of can-can dancing mice.

There times, few and far between though they might be, that I can’t help but wonder how anyone could describe such a scene aloud and not earn a raised eyebrow or twelve from his audience. Props to the storyboard team for managing it either way.

Now, the one and only remaining bit of the plot that I’ll speak of without risking spoilers for of the mystery of Ratigan’s plans, is that Basil and Dawson get captured and placed in the most elaborate death trap device I’ve ever scene in an animated film. It is, quite literally, a Rube Goldberg machine, which is best described as a device that is designed to accomplish a simple goal through a vast variety of overcomplicated means.

… Alright, has anyone ever played the game Mouse Trap? To those of you who have played this board game, if only the construction and application of said mousetrap, that is what a Rube Goldberg machine is but for those who haven’t check out this music video.

Speaking of music, The Great Mouse Detective features all of two, technically three, songs in its entirety. The choice for which fits the film best is easily that of Ratigan’s crew, and the main rat himself, singing his praises in the song, “The World’s Greatest Criminal Mind.” It’s during this song and its brief but oh so disturbingly horrific interruption that we get a true gleam of Ratigan’s character and how far he’ll go to get what he wants.

As to the differences between the film and the novel series, I’m afraid that having not actually read them myself there’s not much I can say beyond the film’s plot being original in and of itself. The characters of Basil, Dawson, Ratigan, and even Basil’s housemaid are all based on the characters from the books with only an odd difference or two to distinct them. In Basil’s case for example, his violin playing in the book was so atrocious that he took to playing the flute instead while Ratigan was perhaps the most extreme difference in that he was not a rat like in the film but a mouse pretending to be one to further instill fear and respect in his goons.

Overall, I give The Great Mouse Detective five out of five stars. It’s a really great film with a lot of fun visuals and the mystery of Ratigan’s plans, while not the stuff of legends, is certainly going to keep the kids guessing up until the grand reveal and well after. Don’t get me wrong, it wasn’t necessarily a bad plan or even a stupid one but rather one that had me questioning whether the populace were actually mice or sheep.

Professor Padraic Ratigan II

Otherwise Known As: Napoleon of Crime (By Basil of Baker Street)

Premiered in: The Great Mouse Detective (1986)

Voiced By: Vincent Price

Let me make one thing perfectly clear from the start. Vincent Price voices Professor Ratigan. That alone gives him a bonus of unequaled proportions that overshoots most Disney Villains that preceded and followed him. More than that, Vincent Price even admitted that this was one of his favorite roles and if there’s one thing anyone should know, when a voice actor cares enough about his character to proclaim him, or her, as their favorite they put everything they’ve got to bring that character to life. Such is the case with Professor Padraic Ratigan II, the “Napoleon of Crime” in the mouse-dom world of The Great Mouse Detective.

Professor Ratigan is, essentially, Professor Moriarty though his name and story is based on the then popular book series that featured him and Basil of Baker Street. That being said, Professor Ratigan’s primary goal in the film is to become permanent king of the mousedom. Though I’m no historical buff, I simply cannot get why anyone assumes that by becoming king of anything that they would automatically be in charge of a complying populace. Look at the countless numbers of uprisings and rebellions in our world’s history let alone works of fiction like Star Wars. True the later was on a galactic scale but my point still stands. The best part of Professor Ratigan’s plan however is how he goes about doing it.

He kidnaps a highly skilled toymaker and forces him to make a robotic double of the Queen of Mousedom and uses it to declare himself its new ruler with such extravagance that I would honestly be surprised if Professor Ratigan doesn’t have a drop of royal blood in his veins. The villainous rat’s love for overly extravagant theatrics borderlines on the obscene at the best of times, especially with his “villainous” song that consists almost entirely of praises to him and his wicked genius. Ironically enough, though Basil’s frightening brilliance is a major force against him, I can’t help but believe that Professor Ratigan would have succeeded in his ploy if not for his incompetent minion Fidget, a bat with a peg leg, a crippled wing, and a big mouth.

Yeah… I’ve got nothing though I will say that in the “official” comic continuations, the little guy turns a new leaf and works for the toymaker’s daughter as an assistant detective.

So anyway, Professor Ratigan’s one major weakness, aside from incompetent minions, is his rather frail temper when it concerns one particular word associated with him. Should anyone ever dare to call him a rat, be they drunk as a skunk or sober as sober can possibly be, Professor Ratigan will not hesitate to see them dead in quite possibly the worse way possible. For you see, Professor Ratigan’s true “ace in the hole” is a tiny golden bell that, when rung, summons his topmost enforcer. A fat cat by name of Felicia whom, upon being directed towards the transgressor, proceeds to swallow them whole, much to the devilish delight of Professor Ratigan.

There’s kill, there’s overkill, and then there’s that.

One could argue that it is Professor Ratigan’s temper that does him in, particularly when Basil manages to escape Ratigan’s most ingenious means of ending the detective’s life via a mousetrap, a gun, a crossbow, an axe, and an anvil in that order. It is during the climatic chase scene through Big Ben, that we see Professor Ratigan change from a person of distinction to a deranged, feral monstrosity of a stenchus rodentus or as they’re more commonly called…

A sewer rat.