Two Bay Area environmental groups have purchased a scenic redwood property in the Santa Cruz Mountains with stunning ocean views and a noteworthy history: It was once the location of a movie shot by famed director Cecil B. DeMille and featuring silent film star Mary Pickford.

The Sempervirens Fund, based in Los Altos, and the Peninsula Open Space Trust, in Palo Alto, bought the 320-acre Filice Ranch, north of Davenport, for $3.85 million, in a deal that closed Thursday.

About two-thirds of the property is redwood forest, with the rest made up of wide meadows overlooking the Pacific Ocean in the distance, and several freshwater ponds. Under local zoning, the land could have been divided into up to eight luxury home sites.

“It’s a trophy property,” said Justin Garland, redwoods program manager for the Peninsula Open Space Trust. “It would have brought lots of interest, probably from over the hill in Silicon Valley.”

Instead, the landscape will be added to the San Vicente Redwoods preserve, an 8,532-acre parcel that the two groups, along with Save the Redwoods League, the Nature Conservancy and the Land Trust of Santa Cruz County, purchased in 2011 for $30 million from CEMEX, a cement company that operated the now shuttered cement plant at Davenport along Highway 1.

The conservation groups have drawn up a public access plan for the wider 8,532-acre San Vicente Redwoods property and are awaiting approval by Santa Cruz County officials. After that, it should take about a year to build eight miles of trails, Barth said, and open them to hikers, horse-riders and mountain bikers. Eventual plans call for another 30 miles of trails on the San Vicente property, most on existing farm roads and old logging roads.

“This is part of a bigger goal, to see a large conservation unit in the mountains there preserved,” said Sara Barth, executive director of the Sempervirens Fund. “It’s part of a larger vision to see a network of lands protected.”

Named for the Latin name for coast redwood, Sequoia Sempervirens, Barth’s organization was founded in 1900. Its founder, San Jose photographer Andrew P. Hill, led efforts to convince state lawmakers in 1902 to purchase the land near Boulder Creek that became Big Basin Redwoods State Park, California’s oldest state park.

The Filice Ranch was the location for a 1917 silent movie, A Romance of the Redwoods. Legendary director Cecil B. DeMille and silent film star Mary Pickford shot the film there, telling the story of a naive young woman who travels west to live with her uncle during the 1850s California Gold Rush, only to find that he was killed by Indians and his identity stolen by an outlaw named “Black” Brown.

The 8,532-acre San Vicente Redwoods preserve typically is the type of property that the California state parks department would have acquired in past generations. But as this news organization reported on Sunday, California has all but stopped acquiring state park lands and has not opened a new state park since 2009, the longest such stretch since the state parks department was established in 1927.

A policy began a decade ago in the Schwarzenegger administration during massive budget deficits to not acquire any new state parks if they required hiring rangers or maintenance workers was continued by Gov. Jerry Brown, and remains in effect today, even though the state now has a $21 million budget surplus.

The Filice Ranch, located between Davenport and Bonny Doon, was owned by the same family since the 1950s, and had been used as a cattle ranch and occasional timber operation. The family patriarch, John “Punky” Filice, a former commercial fisherman, owner of Lighthouse Liquors in Santa Cruz and long-time local, died in 2016. His wife, Jan Filice, decided to offer the property to the land conservation groups before putting it on the open market.

“There was a real risk that down the road it was going to be developed,” Barth said. “But the owner was very clear she loved the land’s natural resources and wanted to see them, and her family’s legacy, preserved.”