Ben Lomond is located on Highway 9 in the San Lorenzo Valley area of the Santa Cruz Mountains, where the San Lorenzo River and Love Creek meet.

History

Ben Lomond was originally called Pacific Mills from 1877 to 1887. It was named for the lumber company started by James P. Pierce. When Pierce applied to the Federal Government for a Post Office, the federal government was concerned about the name being alike to so many other towns. It was decided to re-name the town for the mountain it is on, Ben Lomond.

Ben is Celtic for Mountain. (Lomond is Celtic for beacon.) The mountain Ben Lomond in Santa Cruz County is named for the mountain in Scotland, northwest of Glasgow. To distinguish the town "Ben Lomond" from the mountain "Ben Lomond" The USGS maps and other maps have often used "Ben Lomond Mountain" for the mountain and "Ben Lomond" for the town.

In 1917 the movie A Romance of the Redwoods with Mary Pickford was filmed in Ben Lomond.

Community

Ben Lomond is just less than 1 square mile in area and has 873 homes (according to the 2000 census). Ben Lomond is located in the 11th California Senate District, and in the 27th California Assembly District. Federally, Ben Lomond is located in the 14th congressional district of California.

Community Organizations

Ben Lomond Business Association

Ben Lomond Community Library

Mountain Community Theater

Park Hall

San Lorenzo Valley Chamber of Commerce

Santa Cruz Mountains Art Center - Thomas Gallery

Senior Center Of San Lorenzo Valley

Valley Churches United

Volunteer Centers of Santa Cruz County

Spiritual Organizations

Ben Lomond Quaker Center

Saint Andrews Episcopal Church

Saints Peter & Paul Antiochian Orthodox Church

Geography

Ben Lomond Mountain

San Lorenzo Valley

Rivers & Creeks

Love Creek

San Lorenzo River

Businesses

General

Andersen Jewelry Design

Bay Federal Credit Union

Ben Lomond Liquors

Ben Lomond Market

Ben Lomond Mini Market & Liquor

Bucci, Inc.

Plant Works

Rooted Hydroponics & Organics

Santa Cruz Mountains Art Center - Thomas Gallery

Scarborough Lumber

Food & Drink

All American Hotdogs

Casa Nostra

Coffee Nine

Henflings

Spanky's

Tyrolean Inn

Hotels & Lodging

Fairview Manor

Howden Castle

Jaye's Timberlane Resort

Quality Inn & Suites Santa Cruz Mountains

Departed Businesses

Ciao Bella

Ciao Bella Act II

Parks

Ben Lomond County Park

Highlands County Park

Streets

Highway 9

Main Street

Riverside Avenue

Related Links