The Drowsy Chaperone is a parody of American musical comedy of the 1920s. The story concerns a middle-aged, asocial musical theatre fan. As he plays the record of his favorite musical, the (fictional) 1928 hit The Drowsy Chaperone, the show comes to life onstage as he wryly comments on the music, story, and actors.

The show, which first appeared on Broadway in 2006, won five Tony awards and seven Drama Desk awards. The book is by Bob Martin and Don McKellar with music and lyrics by Lisa Lambert and Greg Morrison. The show is produced at Lourdes courtesy of Music Theatre International.

The 50+ student cast, pit band, and crew are assisted by parent volunteers with stage and musical direction by Tom Lawrence and conducted by Paul Bellino.

In this their last Lourdes production, the seniors performing in this show share their thoughts.

Mackenzie Farrell: Janet Van De Graaff, Choreographer

“I have been dancing since I was three, and started choreographing sophomore year. Last year was my first Lourdes show. I am thrilled to be playing a leading role this year and love playing a character that incorporates all my interests and loves. She is strong, confident and good at many things and it appears without really trying. I am glad I could bring her to life and show all sides of her. This is a fun, happy show. Love the 1920’s style of music and it is fun to bring that era alive. I am very happy with how all the choreography went. We lost our last tech rehearsal because of snow so opening night was it. However, when there is an audience in front of you the excitement kicks in and you rise up.”

Kerry Fitzgerald: Kitty

“I have been involved in musical theater since elementary school which includes local community theater productions. Here at Lourdes, I have performed in Urinetown, Seussical, and Godspell. I love my character this year and enjoy playing her. She’s different and funny so it takes me out of my comfort zone. Comic relief in a comedy. Very fun for me.”

Brandon Hoolihan: Man in Chair

“My drama career really took off here at Lourdes and I have participated all four years. This is really my last performance for at least a while. I feel all the shows went really well and were a lot of laughs. Love this character, as he is very funny and cynical. This is definitely a nice way to end my Lourdes career. This is the largest role I have had so that makes it very special. Overall the show was really funny with lots of good singing parts. In addition, the choreography was excellent. Mackenzie did a great job!”

Maggie Roach: Mrs. Tottendale

“I have been in musical theatre since fifth grade and that includes local community theatre. I LOVE playing Mrs. Tottendale! Such a typecast. She is me! She is happy and enjoys life. Always looking for the happy in life. Loving it and making the most of every situation. This show is definitely one of my favorites. Similar to Urinetown, it has a great life message. I am so sad this part of my life is ending. This show makes me cry for that reason. Especially during Brandon’s monologue at the end.”

Sarah vonEgypt: The Drowsy Chaperone

“Great shows every night! I really enjoy playing Chaperone. She’s really fun. I enjoy it because she tries to be the center of attention and has a lot of fun animated moments. It’s a great part to end my Lourdes career. I have been performing since middle school in local community theater. My plan is to study musical theatre in college. Drama is my home here at Lourdes. The program has really grown and I am excited about its future. My favorite part of my role is my song, As We Stumble Along. It is the one moment when I can give it my all. Symbolically it is about how we can struggle through life and recover from temporary difficulties.”