Robert Redford is an American retired actor, director, producer, and businessman. He is the founder of the Sundance Film Festival. Redford began acting on television in the late 1950s, including an appearance on The Twilight Zone in 1962. He earned an Emmy nomination as Best Supporting Actor for his performance in The Voice of Charlie Pont. His greatest Broadway success was as the stuffy newlywed husband of co-star Elizabeth Ashley‘s character in Neil Simon‘s Barefoot in the Park.

Redford made his film debut in War Hunt. His role in Inside Daisy Clover won him a Golden Globe for the best new star. He starred alongside Paul Newman in Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, which was a huge success and made him a major star. He had a critical and box office hit with Jeremiah Johnson, and in 1973 he had the greatest hit of his career, the blockbuster crime caper The Sting, a re-union with Paul Newman, for which he was nominated for an Academy Award; that same year, he also starred opposite Barbra Streisand in The Way We Were. The popular and acclaimed All the President’s Men was a landmark film for Redford.

In the 1980s, Redford began his career as a director with Ordinary People, which was one of the most critically and publicly acclaimed films of the decade, winning four Oscars including Best Picture and the Academy Award for Best Director for Redford. He continued acting and starred in Brubaker, as well as playing the male lead in Out of Africa, which was an enormous box office success and won seven Oscars including Best Picture. He released his third film as a director, A River Runs Through It, in 1992.

He went on to receive Best Director and Best Picture nominations in 1995 for Quiz Show. He received a second Academy Award—for Lifetime Achievement—in 2002. In 2010, he was made a chevalier of the Légion d’Honneur. He has won BAFTA, Directors Guild of America, Golden Globe, and Screen Actors Guild awards.

In April 2014, Time magazine included Redford in their annual Time 100 as one of the “Most Influential People in the World“, declaring him the “Godfather of Indie Film“. In 2016, he was honored with a Presidential Medal of Freedom.

Redford made his screen debut in Tall Story in a minor role. The film’s stars were Anthony Perkins, Jane Fonda (her debut), and Ray Walston. After his Broadway success, he was cast in larger feature roles in movies. In 1962 Redford got his second film role in War Hunt, and was soon after casting alongside screen legend Alec Guinness in the war comedy Situation Hopeless … But Not Serious, in which he played a soldier who spends years of his life hiding behind enemy lines. In Inside Daisy Clover, which won him a Golden Globe for best new star, he played a bisexual movie star who marries starlet Natalie Wood, and rejoined her along with Charles Bronson for Sydney Pollack‘s This Property Is Condemned again, as her lover, though this time in a film which achieved even greater success. The same year saw his first teaming (on equal footing) with Jane Fonda, in Arthur Penn‘s The Chase. This film marked the only time Redford would star with Marlon Brando. Fonda and Redford were paired again in the popular big-screen version of Barefoot in the Park and were again co-stars much later in Pollack’s The Electric Horseman, followed 38 years later with a Netflix feature, Our Souls at Night.

Sydney Pollack was an American film director, producer and actor. Pollack directed more than 20 films and 10 television shows, acted in over 30 movies or shows and produced over 44 films. His 1985 film Out of Africa won him Academy Awards for directing and producing. He was also nominated for Best Director Oscars for They Shoot Horses, Don’t They? and Tootsie in which he also appeared.

Some of his other best known works include Jeremiah Johnson, The Way We Were, Three Days of the Condor and Absence of Malice. His subsequent films included Havana, The Firm, The Interpreter, and he produced and acted in Michael Clayton.

Jeremiah Johnson is a 1972 American Revisionist Western film directed by Sydney Pollack and starring Robert Redford as the title character and Will Geer as “Bear Claw” Chris Lapp. It is said to have been based partly on the life of the legendary mountain man John Jeremiah Johnson, recounted in Raymond Thorp and Robert Bunker‘s book Crow Killer: The Saga of Liver-Eating Johnson and Vardis Fisher’s Mountain Man.

The script was by John Milius and Edward Anhalt; the film was shot at various locations in Redford’s adopted home state of Utah. It was entered into the 1972 Cannes Film Festival.