Former U.S. president Jimmy Carter has won the 2002 Nobel Peace Prize for his "decades of untiring effort" to find peaceful solutions for international conflicts.

Carter, 77, was lauded for his efforts to advance human rights, democracy, and economic and social development on "several continents."

The Norwegian Nobel Committee specifically noted Carter's "vital contribution" to the 1979 Camp David accord between Israel and Egypt. Carter, a Democrat, served in the White House from 1977 to 1981.

The former president has attempted to find solutions "through mediation and international co-operation based on international law, respect for human rights, and economic development," said the five-member committee.

The committee also noted this year was the 20th anniversary of the Carter Center, a non-profit organization set up by the former president to promote democracy.

"This honor serves as an inspiration not only to us but also to suffering people around the world and I accept it on their behalf," Carter said in a statement.

"I'm very humbled as well as proud," he later told a news conference in Alabama, holding back tears as he added a personal thanks to his wife Rosalynn.

Carter spoke about how his philosophy about "peace" has grown to include the need for shelter, food, good health care and economic opportunity and not just the struggle to end armed conflict.

"I hope this award reflects a universal acceptance and even embrace of this broad-based concept of human rights," Carter said.

The former president told reporters that he was stunned by the news that he had won. Carter said he got a telephone call just after 4 a.m., and thought it was someone playing a prank.

The prize, worth close to $1.6 million, is named after Swedish industrialist Alfred Nobel.

UN Secretary General Kofi Annan and the United Nations shared the award last year.

"It's great. He deserves it," Annan said Friday, when told that Carter had won the 2002 prize.

Was Iraq a factor?

In recent weeks, Carter has been critical of U.S. President George W. Bush's threats to launch a military strike against Iraq. He said it would be a "tragic mistake" for the United States to attack without the support of the United Nations.

The head of the Nobel committee, Gunnar Berge, said the decision to pick Carter "can and must also be seen as criticism of the line the current U.S. administration has taken on Iraq."

When asked if the choice should be viewed as a slap in the face to the White House, Berge told reporters: "Yes, the answer is an unconditional yes."

But in Norway, Berge's comments were challenged by another member of the committee, Inger-Marie Ytterhorn.

She said there is nothing in the Nobel citation that refers to Iraq or the White House. No one should infer the judges had anything in mind other than honouring Carter for his past work, according to Ytterhorn.

Carter made no comments about Iraq on Friday.