If a visitor to England asked you to drop them off somewhere convenient for watching Premier League football, you probably wouldn’t instinctively drive them to North Kilworth.

The Leicestershire village, with a population of about 600, can only offer a club at the 13th tier of the English football pyramid. As their Twitter bio explains succinctly: “League and Cup double 2016-17 and 2017-18. Been pretty shit ever since.”

But in another sense, North Kilworth is exactly the place to be, because it is the geographic midpoint of the Premier League for 2021-22. It’s about 10 miles north of Watford Gap, often quoted as the dividing line between north and south. It is about 21 miles south east of Lindley Hall Farm, which boasts an Ordnance Survey plaque declaring it the geographic centre of England. And it’s about 15 miles south of Leicester’s King Power Stadium, its closest Premier League ground.

Maybe the English top flight’s geographic midpoint is roughly where you’d expect it to be — but things haven’t always been like this.

The most northern-based Premier League season was 2008-09, featuring four north-east sides in Newcastle, Sunderland, Middlesbrough and Hull, with Bolton, Blackburn and Wigan also still knocking around in the north west. Then, the midpoint was close to Kedleston Hall, north of Derby and 50 miles more northerly than it is currently.

Since then, the geographic midpoint has, like the performance of our friends at North Kilworth FC, gone south.

Granted, 2021-22 isn’t quite the most southerly Premier League campaign. It’s moved about 10 miles north from 2018-19. But from a decade or so ago, there’s been a shift.

Southampton and Crystal Palace, who spent much of the first decade of this century outside the top flight, are now established regulars. Forward-thinking clubs like Brighton & Hove Albion, Brentford and Watford are here too.

Meanwhile, it’s notable that several north-west clubs who competed in the Premier League in recent memory have shown absolutely no sign of bouncing back. Blackburn and Bolton were both relegated in 2012, the former briefly dropped down to League One, the latter as far as League Two — something they share with Blackpool, relegated in 2011. Wigan have been relegated to the third tier three times since they won the FA Cup in 2013.

Going back further, Oldham were a Premier League outfit in the 1990s, but have spent the past two seasons near the bottom of League Two, trying to avoid becoming the first Premier League side to go out of the Football League altogether (Wimbledon FC notwithstanding). Looking beyond past Premier League participants, Bury and Macclesfield no longer exist.

But rather than simply looking back over the last 30 years, it’s worth looking back over the last 130 years. Football, in its league format, was essentially a game for the north.

The first 10 years of the FA Cup, which was first played in 1871, were dominated by southern sides — Wanderers, Royal Engineers, Old Etonians and Clapham Rovers. But they were left behind upon the formation of the Football League, and in the early days of the First Division, professional football was as typically northern as rugby league, a Yorkshire pudding as a starter, or being friendly to a stranger.

For the inaugural Football League campaign in 1888-89, the most southerly sides were West Bromwich Albion and Aston Villa. England’s first 28 professional clubs were from the north or the Midlands and it took until the 17th First Division campaign, in 1904-05, before a club from the south featured — Woolwich Arsenal.

For the next 100 years — and that length of time is crucial here — London clubs struggled to win the league. Arsenal, granted, won 13 titles during that period. But Chelsea managed only one, fewer than Derby County or Preston North End. Tottenham managed two, fewer than Huddersfield Town or Sheffield Wednesday. Portsmouth (1948-49 and 1949-50) and Ipswich Town (1961-62) were the only other southern clubs to win the league.

But winning the First Division was essentially the preserve of northern clubs, Midlands clubs and Arsenal (who, incidentally, moved from south to north London before their first title victory, as if inching up the country was necessary for success).

Football in England, like football across Europe, thrived in its industrial cities. Manchester, Liverpool and Newcastle were bigger football cities than London, just like Munich, Milan and Glasgow dominated rather than Berlin, Rome or Edinburgh. English football’s historical 3pm kick-off stems from the Factories Act of 1850. At this stage, workers were accustomed to 58-hour weeks, usually spread between Monday to Saturday. From 1850, it became illegal for factories to employ workers after 2pm on Saturday. Football at 3pm, then, was the perfect time. Off you clock, and off to the match.

Factories and football went hand in hand, best summarised by the works of LS Lowry, who repeatedly highlighted football spectating in his paintings, which otherwise depicted solemn figures gloomily traipsing off to the factories. Even after deindustrialisation, those northern strongholds still dominated the game. Football had become established as a working-class sport — in stark contrast to its status as a public school game in its formative years.

Having a local captive local audience was, for much of the 20th century, vital. It had two obvious benefits. First, a club derived the vast majority of its revenue from supporters coming through the gates. The concept of television revenue, or proceeds from merchandise, was alien. Ticket prices differed relatively little between clubs, and therefore it was a simple equation — the more fans you got through the turnstiles, the richer the club was.

An academic paper published last year, by J James Reade, head of economics at the University of Reading, not only demonstrated that clubs in the north contributed a particularly large percentage of supporters throughout the 20th century, it also suggested southern crowds were flakier and more likely to stay away if their side wasn’t performing well. “Supporters in Wales are the most ‘loyal’, followed by those in the East Midlands, Yorkshire and the north west,” it found. “Persistence is lowest in London, the east and south west of England.”

The second benefit of football being so popular in the north was the production of players. Merseyside, Greater Manchester and, perhaps most famously, the north east being classic footballing areas meant they punched above their weight even more. At a time when players were more likely to play for their local club, and foreign players were extremely rare, football’s popularity and success in the north became a self-perpetuating cycle.

That was in the 100 years after Arsenal became London’s first First Division club in 1904-05, however. A century afterwards, Chelsea won their second league title and their first since being bought by Roman Abramovich two years earlier.

This was the first English title won by a club under foreign ownership. There hasn’t been a title won by a club under English ownership since, courtesy of Chelsea (Russia), Manchester United and Liverpool (USA), Leicester (Thailand) and Manchester City (UAE).

Abramovich’s ownership of Chelsea fundamentally changed English football. There are a wide range of foreign owners, from those who have pumped money into their club to those who have taken money from it, but it’s clear that the situation is very different from the 20th century, when finances were basically about gate receipts and (relatively modest) player wages. Attendances are no longer the driving force behind the spending power of clubs and the likelihood they’ll be in the top flight.

You might suspect that London-based clubs are more likely to attract foreign billionaires — it’s difficult to imagine Abramovich going for Bolton over Chelsea. But that’s not the case at all. Seven current Premier League clubs can be considered to be owned primarily by British citizens — Brentford, Brighton, Crystal Palace, Newcastle, Norwich, Tottenham and West Ham.

Only one of these, Newcastle, can be considered northern (and even then, their owner is very conspicuously not). Burnley, Leeds and Wolverhampton might not be as fashionable as west London, but their owners are from America, Italy and China respectively. The northern clubs are now less likely to be owned by local lads; the days of Jack Walker, Phil Gartside and Dave Whelan seem long gone.

The rise of Brighton and Brentford is particularly interesting, as both have been fuelled by the wealth and business acumen of boyhood fans who acquired their fortunes through sports gambling. And multi-millionaires are, unsurprisingly, far more likely to live in the south. According to New World Wealth, a wealth research firm, London boasts 10 times more multi-millionaires (here, defined as people with more than $10 million) than any other city. If you only look at small towns, with a population of less than 30,000, the richest areas are all in Berkshire, Surrey, Oxfordshire or Buckinghamshire. Wealthy local benefactors are more likely to bankroll southern clubs.

Then, of course, there’s the issue of players from abroad — and while there are dozens of top-level footballers happily settled around the north west, London remains a huge pull. The Sunderland manager Roy Keane famously complained about the difficulty of attracting players to the north east: “There are players going to clubs in London simply because it is London,” he said.

Former Liverpool managing director Ian Ayre claimed the club missed out on Alexis Sanchez in 2014 for similar reasons. “That deal was done,” he claimed. “The only reason it didn’t go through was the player and his wife wanted to live in London, and we couldn’t move the club to London unfortunately.” London is also better connected to the rest of the world — if you’re moving from abroad, perhaps leaving family behind, it’s tempting to move somewhere convenient for a direct flight home.

Perhaps the greatest symbol of the south’s increasing dominance is the slew of new stadia in the south. Around the turn of the century, after the Taylor Report meant all-seater stadiums were mandatory, new grounds were built up and down the country, from Southampton to Sunderland, via Derby, Leicester and Bolton, among others.

But in recent years, significant stadium builds have all been in the south. The five newest grounds in the Premier League are those at Arsenal (2006), Brighton (2011), West Ham (2016), Tottenham (2019) and Brentford (2020). And although most football supporters would rather attend matches at historic grounds such as Molineux or Goodison Park, the economic benefits of a new ground are considerable.

Along with naming rights and, generally, a greater ability to use the ground for other activities throughout the week, the rise in match-day revenue is considerable. Tottenham’s was the highest in the Premier League in 2019-20. Brighton’s was higher than Everton’s, despite a capacity of roughly 10,000 fewer. The initial outlay on a new ground, of course, is considerable. Everton have finally taken the plunge, but they’re largely the exception to the rule.

Attending football these days, of course, has also become a relatively pricey pastime. A decade of austerity has hit poorer areas disproportionately, and the economic impact of the pandemic has done the same. The picture is obviously more complex than a direct north-south split in terms of wealth, but it’s not an entirely inaccurate simplification.

“I worry that the north of England will end up with only a token presence in the Premier League,” said Gary Neville six years ago, lamenting the poor form of northern sides. Subsequent years haven’t proven him wrong. Neville is, himself, a prominent investor in a northern football club, Salford City. But there aren’t many Nevilles around, and there aren’t many Salfords around — at least, not in the north.

We are currently living through curious times and London is, for once, uncertain of its place in the country. With fewer people needing to be within commuting distance of central London five times a week, demand has risen for properties in the home counties and further afield. People have embraced their newfound freedom and realised they want extra space and fresh air. This might have a longer-lasting effect and spread London’s wealth across a larger area.

Whether that extends as far as the north of England, though, remains to be seen, and whether it has any noticeable impact upon football is even less certain. English football used to buck the trend of southern dominance. Now, like almost everything else, it simply reflects it.

(Top photos: Getty Images; design: Sam Richardson)