Following Burnley and Sheffield United’s relegation, and Leeds United’s loss to Southampton in the playoff final, the 2024/25 Premier League season will have just five teams from the North of England.

That’s the fewest representatives from the North since the league’s rebranding in 1992.

The 2024/25 season will feature four clubs from the North-West of England and just one club, Newcastle United, from the North-East and Yorkshire.

In contrast, there are seven clubs from London and four from the South and South-East of England, including East Anglia.

The remaining four clubs are from the Midlands.

In previous Premier League seasons, there have only been two occasions, in 2022/23 and in 2015/16, with fewer than seven clubs from the North, defined as starting from South Yorkshire, Cheshire and Greater Manchester.

In 2008/09, there were eleven Northern clubs in the Premier League, including four from Greater Manchester alone, with both Wigan Athletic and Bolton Wanderers in the top-flight, along with three teams from the North-East.

In contrast, the eleven sides from the South next season is the most in Premier League history.

Since 2022/23, there have been seven London clubs in the Premier League, which is the most in the 20-team Premier League era. Ipswich and Southampton’s promotion meanwhile increased the number of teams from the rest of the South for next season.

The number of Northern teams will likely increase again by 2025/26 as Everton are the only team from the North likely to be in a relegation battle, while Burnley, Leeds United and Middlesbrough are among the favorites for promotion from the EFL Championship.

But the overall shift of the Premier League from north to south is a wider trend than just this season alone.

The industrial towns and cities of the North and Midlands are English soccer’s traditional strongholds, with all twelve of the founding members of the Football League being from the Midlands or North-West. Almost every surviving professional soccer club in England that can trace its roots back to earlier than 1880 is also either from the North or the Midlands.

This traditional dominance continued in the early years of the Premier League, with the league having more Northern representatives than teams from the South in most seasons up until 2012/13. Since then though, there has only been one season, 2015/16, with more Northern teams than Southern teams, and this year, there are more than twice as many teams from the South as from the North.

Part of this shift could be due to the increased importance of broadcasting revenue and decrease in importance of ticket revenue in teams’ finances. Northern teams make up ten of the top twenty English sides when it comes to all-time attendances, with five teams from the Midlands and five from the South. In the past season, 13 teams from the North had average attendances of more than 20,000, compared to 11 teams from the South and nine from the Midlands.

The creation of the Premier League saw clubs earn more from broadcast deals, but these deals really started to skyrocket after 2010.

Clubs in the south, and particularly in London, can also earn more money per fan, through both ticket prices and other spending. Fulham, West Ham United, Brighton And Hove Albion, Crystal Palace and Bournemouth all had more expensive top-tier season tickets last season than Everton.

Clubs in London can also find it easier to bring in revenue through other streams such as concerts or other sporting fixtures. Tottenham Hotspur have hosted American Football games recently and Fulham have also regularly hosted international matches.

While there will likely be more than five Northern teams in the Premier League in upcoming seasons, the huge gap in income between the top flight and the Championship means those clubs currently locked out of the Premier League will find it harder and harder to get a foothold back in the top tier of English soccer.

This means it’s unlikely the Premier League will see ten or more teams from the North in the next few seasons.