USA is one of the most popular cable channels around for a reason. They offer the right mix of sports coverage, original programming, and daytime syndicated shows. And cord cutters don’t need to miss out. We explain everything below.

In a hurry? If you just want to cut to the chase, these services are our favorites for NBCUniversal channels:

One constant over USA Network’s long history is its ability to adapt. Yet it has somehow managed to avoid the total identity crises that outlets like the Paramount Network have suffered.

Launched in 1977 as the Madison Square Garden Sports Network, it was one of the first national sports cable stations. It relaunched three years later as USA Network. Over the eighties and nineties, it broadened its programming beyond sports.

Sign Up for a Free Fubo Trial

This move included experimenting with a mix of reruns, big box-office movies, and original programming. But they wouldn’t strike original series gold until 2002 with the debut of Monk, which would run eight seasons.

These days USA, along with TBS, TNT, and FX, is one of four cable channels that air both reruns of network TV series and theatrically released movies. They also air a handful of scripted dramas, a half-dozen original reality shows, and WWE Raw.

But you don’t have to hold onto your cable subscription to find out what’s next for the Chrisleys.

How to Watch USA Network Live Without Cable

USA Network and its sister station Syfy are owned by NBCUniversal, which (besides NBC) also owns Bravo and Oxygen, among others, as well as the streaming service Peacock. If you like watching USA, you will probably also like TNT, TBS, truTV, Paramount Network, FX, and AMC.

Unlike NBC and other broadcast networks, USA is a pay channel. You can’t just pick it up free with an antenna. Once a mainstay of basic cable, you can now stream USA over the internet for less than your cable bill, without any of the commitments or contracts cable or satellite companies require.

Read on to find out which live TV streaming services carry USA.

Streaming Services with USA Network

The only general streaming services without USA are the lower-cost ones that skip all the NBCUniversal channels like Philo. But don’t worry, you still have plenty of options to watch Betty and Dan Broderick’s relationship unravel to its deadly denouement.

Check out these four streaming services to see which is right for you.

Fubo

While Fubo (formerly FuboTV) was created originally as a sports service, it has grown to be one of the best overall streaming services around. It offers over 130 channels focused on sports, entertainment, family, and excellent coverage of local network affiliates.

It also offers USA, Syfy, Bravo, Oxygen, AMC, FX, and Paramount Network — all for $79.99/mo.

All Fubo plans include unlimited cloud DVR storage and streaming on up to 10 devices at once. On the downside, Fubo doesn’t have any WarnerMedia or A&E channels, which means no TBS, TNT, or truTV. However, USA has the TV rights to a lot of Warner movies, including all the Harry Potter-verse flicks.

Our Fubo review features all the details.

Sign Up for a Free Fubo Trial

Sling TV

Sling Blue is your best choice for NBCUniversal channels and drama series. For $40.00/mo, you get USA, AMC, Bravo, FX, NBC, Fox, Syfy, TBS, TNT, and truTV, plus over 30 more channels, streamable on up to 3 devices at the same time. You also get 50 hours of cloud DVR storage.

Sling also allows you to customize your plan with “Extras” — add-ons of 5-15 channels for $6/mo extra ($11 for sports). Oxygen is part of the Lifestyle Extra, and Paramount Network is in the Entertainment Extra, or you could instead get both along with the Kids and News Extras in the 4 Extras Deal for just $13/mo in addition to the base plan.

See our Sling TV review for all your options. For specific sports guides, see also:

Tour de France

US Open

Ryder Cup

Save 50% on Sling TV Now

DIRECTV STREAM

DIRECTV STREAM (formerly AT&T TV) has over 75+ channels in its base plan, the $79.99/mo Entertainment package. It includes USA, Syfy, Bravo, AMC, FX, Paramount Network, and the Turner trio (TBS, TNT, truTV). If Oxygen is a must-have channel, you can go up to the $119.99/mo Ultimate package.

All plans come with at least unlimited cloud DVR (as long ap you sing up online), streaming on unlimited household devices and mobile, all the networks (including NBC). And, if you upgrade to the 2nd level Choice package for $108.99/mo, you also get access to their full selection of regional sports networks.

See our DIRECTV STREAM review for more details.

Get DIRECTV STREAM Free for 5 Days

Hulu + Live TV

Hulu is known for its on-demand streaming library. Hulu + Live TV adds 85+ live TV channels on top of this for $76.99/mo. Its channel line offers a broad selection of sports, entertainment, local, and family — including USA, NBC, Bravo, Syfy, Oxygen, FX, Paramount, TBS, TNT, and truTV.

And did we mention that it also comes with Disney+ and ESPN+?

Hulu does not, however, have AMC, so you’d have to get your The Walking Dead fix elsewhere.

Hulu allows you to watch on up to 2 screens at a time and comes with unlimited cloud DVR (9 month storage). Read our thorough Hulu + Live TV review for more.

Try Hulu + Live TV for 3 Days Free!

Other Ways to Stream USA Network

None of those strike your fancy? That’s ok — we’ve got some more ways to watch USA.

YouTube TV: Similar to Hulu + Live TV, it includes 100+ channels for $72.99/mo with USA Network, all your NBCUniversal faves, and all your local stations.

Peacock: NBCUniversal’s on-demand streaming service, includes content from USA, Bravo, Syfy, E!, Oxygen, among others. After a free trial, you can pay a low fee to remove commercials, or a slightly higher one to unlock more content.

On-demand: Some USA Network series, such as Dirty John (both seasons) and The Sinner are available on-demand through services like Netflix.

USA App: Although you need a streaming service login, this widely available app allows you to watch USA live and on-demand.

Devices and TVs for USA

You can watch USA on a large number of devices and smart TVs with the streaming services we’ve highlighted. All of them allow you to stream on these devices:

Amazon Fire TV

Android TV

Android mobile devices

Apple TV

Google Chromecast

iOS devices (iPhone, iPad, iPod)

Roku

Samsung Smart TVs

Web browsers.

Except for DIRECTV STREAM, all the services support LG, and Vizio. They also support the Xbox One gaming system. Fubo supports Hisense TVs.

Hulu + Live TV supports the PlayStation and Nintendo Switch gaming systems. And Sling TV supports the Oculus.

Other devices are supported. See our streaming service reviews for the complete list for each.

Today’s USA Schedule

See our USA Network Schedule page for all the details of what’s playing today.

Wrapping Up

If you love USA’s mix of dramedy and unscripted reality, you don’t have to stay with your cable company to keep watching your favorite characters.

Just sign up for one of the services discussed in this article, and you can wave goodbye to your cable bill without missing new episodes of Chucky.

The top streaming service to watch USA is Fubo. Fubo allows you to try out its service with a free trial.

Sign Up for a Free Fubo Trial

FAQs

What kind of shows can I watch on USA Network?

Though it’s still the home of WWE Raw and NXT and other sporting events, USA has come a long way from its sports network roots. Cable’s “#1 Entertainment Network” follows basically the same format as most of the other general entertainment pay channels like FX, TNT, and Paramount Network: original scripted and unscripted shows, plus a few movies and some comfort-food reruns.

Original series on USA include:

Mr. Robot

The Biggest Loser

Chrisley Knows Best

Chucky

Dirty John

Growing Up Chrisley

Miz & Mrs

The Rev

She’s The Boss

The Sinner

Straight Up Steve Austin

Temptation Island.

Current syndicated series:

Chicago PD

Law & Order: Special Victims Unit

NCIS

NCIS: Los Angeles.

Recently featured movies:

Bride of Chucky

Child’s Play 2

Child’s Play 3

Curse of Chucky

Cult of Chucky

Fantastic Beasts (both movies)

Harry Potter (all 8 movies)

John Wick (all 3 movies)

Scream 4

Seed of Chucky.

Who owns USA Network?

Short answer: NBCUniversal, which is owned by Comcast. If you want the whole story though, we’ll have to go back to 1977 New York, when UA-Columbia Cablevision and the Madison Square Garden Corporation launched the Madison Square Garden Sports Network under the leadership of CEO Kay Koplovitz. The channel’s name was changed to USA Network in 1980.

Here’s where it gets complicated. In 1981, Time Inc bought UA-Columbia’s share of the network, MSG Corp’s owner transferred its share to sister-subsidiary Paramount Pictures, and MCA Inc acquired a third. All three were under a non-compete clause that precluded owning any other basic cable channels. In 1987, Time sold its portion to try to buy CNN (they didn’t get it), leaving MCA and Paramount each with 50%.

In 1994, ownership got shaken up again when Paramount was sold to Viacom. In 1995, Seagram (yes, the liquor company) bought MCA. In 1996, Viacom launched TV Land and promptly got sued by MCA for violating the non-compete clause. MCA won, so Viacom sold its share to Seagram. In 1998, Seagram sold most of USA and sister-channel Sci-Fi to one Barry Diller, who at the time also owned the Home Shopping Network, forming USA Networks.

In 2001, USA Networks sold USA Network and the Sci-Fi Channel, among other assets, to Vivendi Universal, and became part of the Universal Television Group. In 2003, General Electric and Vivendi glommed their American TV and film assets together into NBCUniversal. Finally, in 2011, Comcast acquired most of NBCUniversal from GE and got the rest of it in 2013.