Birthdate: March 20, 1980

Birthplace: Seattle, Washington

With his fancy plays and clutch shooting, this Knick is one of the NBA's most exciting players. We've got the goods on Jamal!

Jamal Crawford - Childhood

Jamal Crawford grew up in Seattle where he was raised by his mother. He started playing basketball at the age of three and was a natural at the sport from day one. When Jamal was 14, he moved to the tough neighborhood of South Central Los Angeles to live with his father. Because of all the gangs, he feared going to school and didn't even play basketball. He returned to Seattle for his last two years of high school. He starred at Rainier Beach High School, where he was named to the Parade All American Team in 1999. After that, he signed with the University of Michigan Wolverines where he was the team's leading scorer.

Jamal Crawford - NBA Career

Despite playing just 17 games with the Wolverines, he left for the NBA after just one year. He was picked seventh overall in the 2000 NBA Draft to the Chicago Bulls - where he played for four years. Jamal's best year came in his final season with Chicago where he averaged 17.3 points per game and even scored 50 points in a game against the Toronto Raptors. He signed a $50 million free agent contract with the New York Knicks in the summer of 2004. In four years with New York, he has averaged 17.2 points and 4.1 assists per game. On January 26, 2007, Jamal scored a career high 52 points against the Miami Heat.

Jamal Crawford - Show Stopper

Jamal has become a fan favorite at Madison Square Garden because of his exciting play. He can do all the fancy dribbling and passing and he can score in bunches. On any given night Jamal can score 30 or more points per game. He is also a clutch player - Jamal has won dozens of games for the Knicks on last second shots.

Jamal Crawford - Did U Know?

Jamal Crawford is 6'5" tall and weighs 200 pounds.

Jamal Crawford is the proud father of a 9-year-old son Eric.

Jamal Crawford wears #11 on his Knicks' uniform. He wore #1 at Michigan and with the Bulls.

Jamal Crawford says if he wasn't playing basketball, he would be an architect.

Jamal Crawford is very charitable with his time and money. His foundation helps underpriviledged kids. In October 2007, Jamal donated $75,000 to renovate a library at a New York City elementary school.

Jamal Crawford is good friends with rapper Jay-Z. He even endorses Jay-Z's Reebok basketball shoe.

Jamal Crawford Says...

"To see all your favorite celebrities and your family in the stands and 20,000 people in unison at one time going crazy when you make a shot, there's not a feeling like it. I live for that. I think ever since I was a kid I'd count down five, four, three, two, one but now there’s a chance to do it on a bigger stage."

Related Stories: