2019 Football Roster

Choose a Player:

11 Chance Cook

Position DB

Ht./Wt. 6-0 / 210

Class Redshirt Junior

Hometown Canadian, Texas

High School Canadian

Previous School Oklahoma State

Bio

Related

Stats

Biography

2019 (Redshirt Junior)

Played in all 12 games with three starts ... Logged 42 total tackles, including 17 solo takedowns, on the year ... Recorded one pass breakup ... Carded a career-high 12 total tackles (six solo) at Central Michigan (10/12) ... Eight total tackles and his lone pass breakup of the season in the Battle of I-10 win over UTEP (11/23).

2018 (Junior)

Redshirt season.

2017 (Sophomore at Oklahoma State)

Appeared in every game and started in the secondary against Kansas State ... Served as a game captain against South Alabama and Kansas State ... Recorded eight tackles, seven of which were solo stops ... His seven tackles on kickoffs were good for third on the team ... First-Team Academic All-Big 12 selection ... Honored by the coaches with Oklahoma State's outstanding walk-on award.

2016 (Freshman at Oklahoma State)

Played in 12 games ... Recorded four total tackles, including a career-high two at Iowa State ... Had one tackle for loss against Southeastern Louisiana ... Was a leader of Oklahoma State's kickoff coverage unit, and his work factored into OSU leading the Big 12 and ranking 19th nationally in kickoff coverage at 18.3 yards per return ... Helped the Cowboys lead the nation in opponent starting field position.

High School

Played for head coach Chris Keotting at Canadian HS ... An all-district selection all four years of his high school football career ... Named all-state as a junior and senior and district MVP as a senior ... Part of two state championship teams ... Played a big role playing both ways as a senior, totaling 223 carries for 2,122 yards and 32 touchdowns on 9.5 yards per carry, completing two pass attempts for 98 yards and two touchdowns, making 86 total tackles with three interceptions and two PAT blocks on defense and returning three kickoffs, 19 punts and three interceptions for a total of 584 yards and two touchdowns ... Also competed for the track and field team, winning a state championship as part of the 4x400-meter relay team with a split of 48.5 seconds and finishing as state runner-up in the 300-meter intermediate hurdles ... Named to the academic all-district team all four years.

Personal

Son of Ron Cook and Adrienne Beltran ... Has an older sister, Danielle ... Father ran track at New Mexico ... Majoring in range science.

Related Content

There is no related content available.

Related Headlines

Related Press Clips

Related Videos

Related Photos

Statistics

Season Statistics

Season Statistics

No statistics available for this season.

Career Statistics

There are no statistics available for this player.