Thirty years ago, Georges Pompidou adopted two sons, one named Jacques Chirac and the other Edouard Balladur.

A big, bluff man from la France profonde, the deep France, Pompidou was first prime minister and then, after Charles de Gaulle, the second president of the Fifth French Republic.

He favored both his sons, taught them, used them, came to depend on them, left them his political legacy.

Chirac was the political operator.

"Chirac is extraordinary," Pompidou is quoted as saying. "If I said, "That tree gives too much shade,' he would have it down by the next morning."

Extraordinary and extraordinarily effective, Chirac. In politics, he had the reputation of being able to accomplish almost anything.

Balladur was the office man, efficient, able to produce reliable reports on any subject, able to do anything asked of him, a model civil servant with an aversion to the petty politics he saw around him.

"They're frightful," he said once. "Where have our great men of state gone?"

Together these three, Pompidou as prime minister, using both Chirac and Balladur for separate tasks, defused the student revolt of 1968 when President de Gaulle, for once, seemed stunned and incapable.

For that, de Gaulle seemed never to have forgiven Pompidou, who after six years as prime minister was thanked profusely and then fired a few weeks later. Balladur went with him. With Pompidou's agreement, Chirac remained in the Cabinet of his successor as prime minister _ and faithfully reported back every evening.

When de Gaulle lost a referendum the next year and quit in a huff, Pompidou stepped forward and was elected. Balladur became his chef de cabinet at the Elysee presidential palace.

When Pompidou died in 1972, Balladur went into business. Chirac went on to become prime minister for a time in the government of Pompidou's successor, President Valery Giscard d'Estaing, where he stayed for two years before resigning in anger and frustration, claiming Giscard would not let him do his job.

End of Act I.

Chirac formed a new party to anchor his own power, the Rally for the Republic, claiming to be the political heir of Gaullism.

In 1977, he became mayor of Paris, occupying the huge ornate edifice, more like a palace than a town hall, on the right bank of the Seine.

Balladur, meanwhile, had become a company president in an important electrical industrial group, one of the largest in France. Their paths never crossed again until the end of the 1970s.

After a disastrous showing by RPR in the 1979 European elections, Chirac cleaned house and began courting a reluctant Balladur to be his chief adviser. Balladur finally succumbed and, despite his doubts, helped Chirac make his first run for the presidency in 1981.

In the first of two electoral rounds, Chirac came in third behind the incumbent Giscard and Socialist Francois Mitterrand, and was thus eliminated. Mitterrand went on to win the runoff.

Chirac and Balladur began preparing for the next time, and in the legislative elections of 1986, Chirac's RPR won over Mitterrand's Socialists.

Mitterrand was forced to call upon Chirac to become prime minister. At Balladur's urging, Chirac accepted, thus initiating the first "cohabitation" of political rivals in the Fifth French Republic's two highest offices of state.

As Chirac's lieutenant, Balladur became one of the next highest, as minister of finance with control of nearly everything else.

In the infighting that followed, however, Chirac was outmaneuvered by Mitterrand. The members of his own Cabinet fell to quarreling; again Chirac quit as prime minister. In the presidential elections of 1988, Mitterrand beat him soundly.

End of Act II.

It may have been then that the serpent crept into their relations. Some believe that it was then Balladur concluded that Chirac was a man of the past without the stuff to be president.

Nevertheless, when they recovered from 1988, he and Chirac began to plan for the future together. Their plan was that when the chance came, Balladur would be prime minister to make the unpopular decisions while Chirac held himself in reserve to run for the presidency in 1995.

Twice in the course of 1990, Balladur said categorically that the man who became prime minister should not then try to run for the presidency.

"I will not be a presidential candidate in 1995," Balladur said on nationwide television in October 1990.

While that was the last time he said it, in Chirac's eyes it had become a pact between them.

In every way he could, Balladur sought the prime ministership, a job he could get only if Chirac didn't want it. Burned twice before in the job, Chirac did not.

But he was warned.

"If Edouard succeeds as prime minister, he will win, not you," Charles Pasqua told Chirac. "If Edouard fails, he will pull you into the grave with him."

Pasqua's warning was one of many. In reply, Chirac insisted the warners were wrong about Balladur; he and Balladur had an understanding.

Their chance came in 1993 when Chirac led a right-wing coalition to a landslide victory over the incumbent Socialists, 484 to 70.

And when Mitterrand called Balladur to be prime minister in a second "cohabitation," Balladur stepped out of Chirac's shadow to become his own man. Chirac saw his political team drift away one by one to become Balladur's ministers.

This was still according to plan. What wasn't planned was that there was no end to Balladur's honeymoon with the French public. Never had a prime minister run up a score of approval, 60 percent or more, in the opinion polls.

And as Chirac trailed, Balladur began to be talked about as a real presidential candidate.

A vicious circle of misunderstanding was born. Chirac found himself replaced in the limelight and out in the cold. When Chirac failed to come to Balladur's defense against critics during the monetary crisis later in the year, Balladur was angered.

"Jacques and I are now quits," Balladur proclaimed.

The famous "pact?" As relations worsened, Balladur claimed there was none. As prime minister, he said, he had fulfilled his promise to bring about economic recovery and wanted to continue as president. Things had changed.

Even before Balladur formally announced his candidacy in January, the two men were openly running hard against each other.

Politics being jobs, France reverberated with the sound of wagons being unhitched from Chirac's train and joining Balladur's. They included those of many deputies from the party Chirac founded and some of his key lieutenants.

As often before, those whom the gods of politics would destroy, they first make overconfident.

Two of Balladur's ministers then had to resign under investigation for corruption. As interior minister, Pasqua was caught in what amounted to illegal wire tapping; Balladur defended him. Pasqua dredged up old spy charges against the United States. Balladur had to tone him down.

A funny thing happened. For two years, Chirac had been crisscrossing France, shaking hands, listening to grievances, kissing babies. Suddenly in February, just when he was counted out, he began to lead the public opinion polls.

People listened to Chirac's message that France needed fundamental change to make the fight against 12 percent unemployment its first priority. He had a promise for everyone.

Maybe too late, Balladur began campaigning just as furiously. But last weekend, in the last opinion poll allowed to be published before Sunday's voting, Chirac had 25 to 26 percent, Socialist candidate Lionel Jospin around 20 and Balladur was down in the teens.

Only the two top vote-getters Sunday will be able to run in the May 7 second round of elections for the presidency. Balladur could be out.

But 30 percent of France's nearly 40-million eligible voters had not made up their minds.

The falling out of these two "friends of 30 years" has stolen attention in what otherwise might have been a dull and serious campaign debate on the issues.

Six other candidates are in the race, ranging from the far right to the Trotskyite far left. None have a real chance of winning. But what they may decide is whether Chirac faces Jospin or Balladur in the second round.

If it is Jospin, the issues may take first place in the campaign. If it is Balladur, personalities may triumph.

In these final days of the campaign, he is stumping France with last-minute charges that Chirac's demagoguery threatens the stability of the franc _ a charge Chirac laid himself open to by criticizing the president of the Bank of France.

Act III will end on Sunday when the voters decide. Act IV will follow.