in 0 0 0 0 0 Journal Friday, April 27, 1984 Obituaries- Jazz pianist and band leader, William 'Count' Basie, 79, dies A look at Basie's page 42 HOLLYWOOD, Fla. (AP) Basie, whose bright, simple piano style brought him international fame in the "swing" era of jazz, died in his sleep early Thursday of cancer, a disease his doctors never told him he had. He was 79. "It's a great loss. I hate to even think about it," jazz musician Lionel Hampton said .

Basie was "one of the true greats of music. He had his own particular style It was one of the greatest styles you could "He'll be remembered as long as there is a world," said anist Dave Brubeck. loved composer all over the world and all the jazz musicians had tremendous respect for him and he'll never leave us." "He was the best. He was a cool said Anita 0'Day, who with Basie's orchestra in the 1940s. "Everything he played was always the right little riff in the right little place." Basie, who began his career in the 1920s as a $3-a-night piano player, was hospitalized for treatment of a severe ulcer, but doctors soon learned he had pancreatic cancer, said Dr .

Leo Schildhaus. he known or been aware that he had cancer he had such a fear of it he would have given up hope of living. Anyone that might have seen him in Hollywood would know that he did not look as though he had a Aaron Woodward, Basie's adopted son, said at a news conference. Basie was admitted to Doctors' Hospital Feb. 4 with jaundice, Schildhaus said .

He said that condition was relieved but Basie "had another upset." a bleeding ulcer. Basie was Genevieve RED HOOK Genevieve E. Nelson, 88. of Linden Avenue Extension, died Thursday at the Skilled Nursing Facility of Northern Dutchess Hospital. Mrs .

Nelson was a lifelong resident of Red Hook. She was born Sept. 13, 1895, in Milan, the daughter of Homer and Luella Friday Wildey. She was married Jan. 28 .

1922, to Clayton C. Nelson, who died June 16, 1961. cAn Donald Nelson, died in Journal file William "Count" Basie died Thursday of cancer, a disease doctors never told him he had. released from the hospital Feb. 14, then was readmitted March 27, Schildhaus said .

"The family was with him to the end," the doctor added. He had performed at the Hollywood Palladium in California March 19, his last public performance before he decided to return to the hospital. He had also given a private pertor jazz formance singer in Los Ella Angeles Fitzgerald. for a tribute number of people came to see him at the Palladium, including his longtime friends Quincy Jones, Joe Williams Scatman Crothers," said Woodward. "'Those individuals and the audience that heard him play on E .

Nelson 1971. Mrs. Nelson is survived by two grandsons, Donald Nelson and David Nelson, both of Red Hook; and several nieces, nephews and cousins. Services will be today at 2 p.m. at .

the E.C. Hand Funeral Home, 30 S. Broadway, Red Hook, with the Rev. David Young officiating. Burial will be Paul's Lutheran Cemetery, Red Hook .

Memorial donations may be made to charity. Lillian Doscher Lillian Lillian Doscher, 76, of the City of Poughkeepsie, died Wednesday at Vassar Brothers Hospital. Mrs. Doscher had been a Dutchess County resident since 1929. She was a member of the First Evangelical Lutheran Church in the City of Poughkeepsie .

She was. born July 21, 1907. in Brooklyn, the daughter of George and Lillian Palmay Braitling. She was married to Alfred A. Doscher, who died i in 1954 .

Mrs. Doscher is survived by two sons. Alfred Doscher and Bruce Doscher, both of Poughkeepsie; three brothers, Joseph Braitling of Long Island, George Braitling and William Braitling, both of Florida; and six grandchildren. Calling hours will be Sunday from 7 to 9 p.m. at the McCornac Funeral Home, 11 N .

Clinton City of Poughkeepsie. Services will be Monday at 11 a.m. at the funeral home with the Rev. Helmut Dietrich officiating. Burial will be in Union Cemetery, Hyde Park .

Gordon Wright POUGHQUAG Gordon Wright, majority leader of the Dutchess County Legislature, died Wednesday at Vassar Brothers Hospital. Mr. Wright, 43, of Route 55 in Poughquag, had been a lifelong of the area. He was also a teacher at the Arlington Middle School. Wright was a member of the Arlington Teachers Association, the Republican Club and Town of Beekman Recreation Board .

He was a graduate of Pawling High School and the State Univeristy of New York at Brockport. He was born Sept. 6, 1940, in Pawling. the son of the late Robert B. Wright and Edna Wilcox Wright of Ormond Beach, Fla .

He was married Aug. 11, 1974, in Peekskill to Concetta DiCasoli, who survives. Proust's housekeeper, PARIS (AP) Celeste Albaret, the secretary, housekeeper and nurse of French novelist Marcel Proust for the last nine years of his life, has died at age 92, her family announced Thursday. Mrs. Albaret, who was mentioned by name in Proust's autobiographi- Make your morning merrier! Check the great buys today's Journal Classified or 454 VHS MOVIES RCA VIDEO DISCS THE VIDEO STOP The largest RCA video disc rental library in the area with almost 1000 disc titles in stock Extensive children's library V.H S .

and video disc machine rentals Adult adult films not openly displayed ROUTE 55 Mile East of Noxon LaGrange HOURS: 010 AM-8 PM Closed Sundays 473-2202 Giuseppe Trocino Mark Morgan VERO BEACH, Fla. Mark Mor- He was born June 10, 1911, in Giuseppe Trocino, 72, a former resident of Poughkeepsie, died April 20 at his home in Petilia Policastro, Catanzaro, Italy. Mr. Trocino moved to Italy seven years ago after his retirement as a construction worker with Local 1000 in Poughkeepsie. Mr .

Trocino was born Feb. 11, 1912, in Petilia Policastro. He was married to the former Guila Giordano, who supvives. He was a member of Mount Carmel Church, Poughkeepsie. In addition to his wife, survivors include five daughters, Ida Pace and Elivra Ruzzi, both of Italy; Julia Lattero of New Jersey, Lola Casiero of Highland and Pina DelForno of Florida; four sons, Salvatore Trocino of Wappingers Falls and Frank Trocino, Peter Trocino and Victor Trocino, all of Poughkeepsie; one sister and one brother, both in Italy: 21 grandchildren, two great-grandchildren, several nieces and nephews .

Funeral services were held in Italy April 21. A memorial Mass will be held at 12:15 p.m. Sunday at St. Augustine's Church, Highland. Termites can invade your home and wruck it, without a sound or sign ABALENE the PEST CONTROL Good Guys today for a true termite inspection 223-5105 BEACON 831-3930 NIGHTS HOLIDAYS 471-7700 gan, who retired from IBM in 1975, died April 17 at his home in Vero Beach .

Mr. Morgan maintained a summer home in Poughkeepsie. He was a former chairman and president of the Mid-Hudson chapter of the Adirondack Mountain Club. He received his master's degree in electrical engineering from the Superior Institute of Technology in Milan, Italy. He also wrote several articles for engineering magazines .

Mr. Morgan is survived by his Dorothy Morgan of Vero Beach; one son, Kenneth Morgan of New York; one daughter, Cheryl-Anne Neal of Wilmette, one brother, Carlo Morgan of Parma, Italy; and two grandchildren. Burial was private. Memorial donations may be made to charity. I Am Wearing a Powerful Hearing Aid with NOTHING in Either Ear! JOSEPH K .

BUCKLEY SPECIAL DISCOUNT Wed. Thousands who suffered from hearing loss are amazed and delighted to discover that, at last, they too can hear again with almost unbelievable clarity, yet without any embarrassment. This is now possible, thanks to a remarkable patented invention which has NO receiver buttons in the ear NO dangling cords NO headbands and NO earmolds. A bone conduction method makes correction of hearing loss as easy as putting on a pair of attractive glasses. You owe it to yourself to discover all the facts about this hearing development that I HEAR with, FREE of cost or obligation .

Call TODAY for an appointment by a N. Y. State Registered Hearing Aid Dispenser. Joseph K. Buckley 897-9563 HUDSON VALLEY HEARING AID CENTER 114 Main Street .

Fishkill HERE WE GO SUNDAY GRAND OPENING SUNDAY P.M. 11-3 POOL PACKAGE SALE PACKAGE MINUS HEAD See Bonus SPARCO EZ WALL WESTROCK'S SKIMMER MANUAL COMPARE NO BACKWASH EXTRAS HANDLE with Patio available Deck purchase BONUS FILTER 000 JET.AIR HYDROTHERAPY of these any of FILTER TEST plus MEDIA SPARCO 6" FRESNO Wide ribbed, hot ROUND dipped galvanized top ledge Massive box upright Posi-lock frame wall construction Brown wood grain ALL 20 POOLS GAUGE 18'x48" $699 $869 $974; VIRGIN LINERS! $1029 All prices include family accessory package 21'x48" WANT FRESNO OVAL 6" wide ribbed, hot dipped galvanized top ledge Massive box upright Posi-lock frame construction 20 VINYL 12'x24" $1189 ALL POOLS Brown wood grain wall LINERS! $1289 ML $929 All prices include 1 family accessory package 12'x18" WAN AZURE WOOD ALL ALUMINUM ROUND ALL 20 VINYL 6" Massive wide all aluminum aluminum uprights top ledge POOLS Blue wood grain aluminum wall LINERS! 15'x24'x48" 12'x18'x48" $1469 $1099 ALL 21'x48" 15x48" 12'x24'x48" $1129 $1419 $799 ALUMINUM $879 18'x48" 24'x48" $1259 All prices include family accessory package Complete with Two Ladders purchase of any Pool and Accessory BONUS 3 Reg. with 4'x6' $204 Patio Ladder Now Only Deck $99 INCLUDED IN ALL OUR POOL PACKAGES HOURS: Thurs. Fri. til 8 Sat .

til 5:30, Sun. 11-3 swim spa westrock MEMBER VISA Card hot tub Mile North of Five Corners chemicals Route 32, New Windsor Neely Street, Middletown Next to Foti Florist, Across from Lloyd's NATIONAL AUTHORIZED 343-2992 SPA POOL DEALER 565-5777 343-3055 INSTITUTE Milan, Italy. that day helped to make his most recent time here (at the hospital) very special. They will never know what they did to make him happy." Basie, born William Basie in Red Bank, N.J... embarked on his career as a piano player in a Chinese restaurant on the New Jersey coast, and went on through a series of appearances in theaters, speakeasies, hotels and nightclubs across the country .

Flags were flown at half-staff throughout Red Bank on Thursday. wrote "One 'Jumpin' at the Woodside," "Don't You Miss Your Baby," and "I Left My Baby." And he perfected the Basie sound blasting brass ensembles, simple riffs and rousing solos all held together by his piano, playing background transitions and brief solos. In 1957 the band became the first American group to play a royal command performance for the queen of England. The band also played at President John F. Kennedy's inaugural ball .

In 1981, Basie was honored along with Cary Grant, Helen Hayes and other stars as a recipient of the Kennedy Center honors for achievement in the performing arts. The Black Music Association honored Basie in 1982 with a gala at Radio City Music Hall in New York. Lena Horne, Stevie Wonder, Joe Williams, Oscar Peterson and Quincy Jones were among the stars who paid tribute. Basie made his home in the Bahamas with his wife Catherine, a dancer with the Whitman Sisters whom he married in 1942. Mrs .

Basie died in 1983. Basie's body was to be flown to New York for services Monday. Murray J. Smith HYDE PARK Murray J. Smith, 66, who retired in 1978 after 34 years as a toolmaker for the former Shatz Federal Bearings Co .

in the City of Poughkeepsie, died Wednesday at St. Francis Hospital after a long illness. Mr. Smith had been a Hyde Park resident for 27 years. He previously lived in Poughkeepsie .

He was a member of Regina Coeli Church, 2 Harvey Hyde Park. served in the U.S. Army during World War II. He was born Dec. 3, 1917, in Bridgeport, the son of Philip and Hazel White Smith .

He was married Sept. 15, 1940, in Poughkeepsie to Florence M. Riley, who survives. In addition to his wife, Mr. Smith is survived by one daughter, Donna Stoughton of Hyde Park; two sons, Murray V .

Smith of Muskego, and Dr. T. Michael Smith of Austin, Texas; nine grandchildren, one great two nieces and two nephews. Calling hours will be tonight from 7 to 9 at Sweet's Funeral Home, Route 9, Hyde Park, with prayers at 8 p.m.' A Mass of the Christian Burial will be offered Saturday at 10 a.m. at Regina Coeli Church, Hyde Park .

Burial will be in Union Cemetery, Hyde Park. Memorial donations may be made to the Columbia Branch of the American Lung Association, 246 Church Poughkeepsie. In addition to his wife and mother, Mr. Wright is survived by two daughters, Lauren Wright and Meghan Wright, both of Poughquag: and one brother, Ronald G. Wright of Nanuet (Rockland County) .

Calling hours will be tonight from 7 to 9 and Saturday from 2 to 4 and 7 to 9 p.m. at the Horn Thomes Funeral Home, 83 E. Main Pawling. Members of the Dutchess County Legislature will attend services tonight at 7. Services will be Sunday at 2 p.m .

at the United Methodist Church of Pawling, 4 Dutcher Pawling, with the Rev. Richard Guice officiating. Burial will be in Beekman Cemetery, Poughquag. Donations may be made to the Gordon Wright memorial scholarship fund, in care of Key Bank, Route 55, Poughquag, N.Y. 12570 .

Celeste Albaret dies cal work Temps (Time Rediscovered), died Wednesday of emphysema at her home. Born to a peasant family in the mountains of central France, she met Proust in 1913 after marrying the writer's chauffeur. She quickly began helping organize his work, taking his dictation, reading it back to him and assembling it for publication. Later, Mrs. Albaret nursed Proust through repeated spells of ill health until his death in 1922 at age 51, Most of the manuscripts she typed and assembled are preserved in France's National Library .

Daniel J. Daly RHINEBECK Daniel J. Daly, who retired from Consolidated on Corp. in New York City, died Wednesday at Northern Dutchess Hospital where he had been a patient for five weeks. Mr .

Daly, 85, had been a resident of Rhinebeck for 29 years. He was a member of the Good Shepherd Church, 3 Mulberry Rhinebeck. Mr. Daly was a former member of the Hillside Fire Department. He was born Jan .

5, 1899, in New York City, the son of James F. and Annie Waldmann Daly. Mr. Daly is survived by one sister, Anne O'Rourke of Rhinebeck; and two nieces, Patricia Daly of Rhinebeck and Susan Hartman of Harrisburg. Pa .

Calling hours will be today from 2 to 4 and 7 to 9 p.m. at the William E. White Funeral Home, 91 E. Market Rhinebeck, with prayers at 8 p.m. Services will be Saturday at 9:30 a.m .

from the funeral home. A Mass of the Christian Burial will follow at 10 a.m. at the Good Shepherd Church, Rhinebeck. Burial will be in Gate of Heaven Cemetery, Hawthorne (Westchester County). PRICEO PLUNGE Starting As Low As $887 Completely Installed Call for FREE Video Pools SWIMMING Shop-At-Home POOL OPENING Service SERVICING Rt 376 N.Y (at the creek) FULL FINANCING AVAILABLE Sat Mon -Fri .

Sun. 9-8 10-5 Kind .