"You Belong to Me" has area premiere at film festival

In Fort Myers, the name is most often associated with an abandoned building just east of the railroad tracks that long divided the city into black and white worlds: McCollum Hall.

Once a prime stop on the chitlin' circuit, the still-handsome shell once hosted the likes of Count Basie and B.B. King in a then-segregated city, as well as serving as a commerce center - a place where you could buy a suit or a life insurance policy, which bore the name of community leader Clifford "Buck" McCollum, who built it in 1938. Its $500,000 restoration is set to begin soon.

But in 1952, the name McCollum gained another kind of fame after Buck's sister-in-law, Ruby shot and killed a white doctor and senator elect in Live Oak, a nearly unprecedented act that rocked the Jim Crow South. An independent documentary exploring what led the wealthy 42-year-old mother to pull the trigger, "You Belong to Me" has its Southwest Florida premiere Friday at the Fort Myers Film Festival.

The details that emerged at trial were as shocking as the crime itself, says producer Jude Hagin: a long-term sexual relationship between the town's beloved doctor and the wife of an insurance man who also ran the local bolita gambling racket.

Could such a relationship, in the days when the Klan ran entire counties, have been consensual? Most of the academics and historians interviewed in the film doubt it, but as Hagin points out, "We'll never truly know what happened."

A 1954 article that ran in Ebony magazine reported, "At the trial the lawyers felt helpless. They tried only to disprove pre-meditation in the hope of escaping the death penalty. They maintained that Ruby 'had no idea of killing the doctor when she went to the office.' Ruby was the only defense witness, and she was a poor one. She sat listlessly, forlornly, in the witness chair, a broken little woman whose feet wouldn't touch the floor.

She was allowed to state that "more than a doctor-patient relationship" existed between her and Doctor Adams; that they had had sexual relations at her home and in his office for several years; that her youngest child, Loretta, was his; that she had been pregnant by him at the time of the murder. The defense was not allowed to present the child to the court."

McCollum testified, "I was just so worried, I had to either yield or maybe die, I suppose that was what would happen." Though she was convicted and sentenced to death, she avoided the death penalty after a judge declared her insane. She died in 1972 without her side of the story ever having been told.

Part of the reason is that the judge at McCollum's trial forbade reporters from talking to her - even acclaimed writers Zora Neale Hurston and William Bradford Huie.

The day after the shooting, McCollum's husband, Sam, died of an apparent heart attack, though rumors have long circulated that he committed suicide.

One thing about which Hagin is certain: The killing of Dr. Clifford Leroy Adams' was a seminal moment. "Ruby put whites on notice that maybe blacks weren't going to stand for this any more," she said. "Yet the price she paid was that her children grew up without their mother. Or their father."

IF YOU GO

• What : Screening of "You Belong to Me"

• When: 11 a.m. tomorrow

• Where: Sidney & Berne Davis Art Center, 2301 1st St., Fort Myers

• Cost: $10 at the door or online: vendini.com