Alright! Here is a perspective from a non-Tamil, non-Telugu, North Indian.

As far as I am concerned, Telugu cinema is easily one of the worst film industries anywhere in the world. If one is lucky, one would probably get to see couple of watchable Telugu films every year (I am not exaggerating even a little).

Whatever problems Tamil cinema may have, there is no competition between the two industries. Infact between the two industries, there is only one which is making films in any real and that is assuredly not Telugu. To not see the HUGE difference between the two is to deliberately miss the obvious.

No film industry has done more disservice to Masala cinema than Telugu. Because of Telugu cinema people now believe Masala cinema= fun and games + outrageousness of all kind. Sadly a good masala cinema is anything but this (even in Telugu something like Okkadu is certainly way more than this glib and empty definition).

Very honestly, the only reason I can see of watching 99% of Telugu cinema is the “cultural” ones (and there might be a historical reason as well) other than of course entertainment (but also entertainment of the most banal, most senseless kind). Otherwise, the way I look at it, the industry does great disservice to its state.

It says something about Telugu cinema when one of Mrinal Sen’s weakest film (Oka Oori Katha) is one of the best Telugu films ever made. This was Sen’s gift to Telugu cinema and the clearly the industry and its audience didn’t/doesn’t deserve that gift.

But whatever is the state of Telugu cinema, it is still much better the state of its contemporary audience. Sound harsh and provocative, right?! But have a look at the some reactions of some of the Telugu folks which border on the asinine (and I don’t get it…that “cousin” comment was clearly made in jest so why are people reacting to it as if a Tamilian is putting down the cinema of the neighbouring state).

Does Telugu cinema have talented people? Sure. But is this answer useful in any real sense? Not really, because I am sure every film industry has some talent.

I consider Baahubali to be one of the summits of modern Indian cinema. I think it is better than a number of widely praised festival films of Bollywood. I also think that it is one of the greatest Masala films ever made. Finally, I believe that it is a better revisionist Masala film (btw, notice how the minute one uses “revisionist western” in a discussion, you are taken seriously. When you use the very same terminology for a Masala film, people accuse of glass-onioning. Again I disagree that Western is inherently a stronger genre than Masala) than a number of revisitionist contemporary Wuxia efforts made in China and Hk (I think it does more for its genre than Wong Kar Wai’s films did for Wuxia). And needless to say, I find it superior to quite a few widely praised Hollywood blockbusters (in other words, I think it is a much stronger film than Logan. I thinks its reading of Masala is much stronger than Logan’s reading of a superhero film)

But Baahubali (or something like Eega or Okkadu or even Yamadonga..incidentally in the right film, I find Mahesh Babu one of the most compulsively watchable stars anywhere in the world) is a one-off effort. Most of Telugu cinema is not like this at all.

The finest Telugu director (by quite some margin) IMO is B Narsing Rao (followed by RGV- though of course his best work is in Hindi- and Viswanath. Even in the case of latter, his biggest contribution to Indian cinema might be giving Kamal some of his finest moments as an actor in Sagara Sangamam). Infact Narsing Rao is the only one whose films are important in a formal sense. For his films, I don’t have to have attach the “for Telugu cinema” qualifier. I haven’t seen enough of Balu Mahendra’s work to make any real assessment, but otherwise I can safely that Narsing Rao’s formal strength exceeds every Tamil filmmkaer of that period (barring Rathanam probably..though even here I am not sure…in the sense that I don’t know if any Rathanam film before Iruvar is necessarily stronger than Narsing Rao’s Daasi, or Rangula Kala or Matti Manushulu..what a great title btw, “Mud People”. The great A K Bir did some of his best work for his films). But yes, this guy is a true great (infact, quite a few Hindi art filmmakers could have learnt from him). But his work remains little known in his own state (I haven’t come across a single valuabale critical analysis of his work, it would be nice if someone could point me towards any such existing work done on his cinema).

My favourite Telugu films in no particular order (from the little I have seen)-

Maa Bhoomi- Goutam Ghose- One of the finest Indian poltical films (and a rare art film which was a true blue hit). Of course, it is a telling statement that a Bengali director made this. Narsing Rao wrote this one.

Rangula Kala- Narsing Rao- My favourite film from the director. A leftist reading of Pyasa in many ways, but without the propoganda associated with some films. And has some of the most beautiful images present in a Telugu film.

Matti Manushulu: The director at the peak of his craft. What could have been an exercise in mere miserabilism ends up beingmuch more than than. Has a very fine Archana performance. Also I adore the title.

Daasi- Considered as Narsing Rao’s best work. I don’t know about that, but for someone who is not familiar with most of NTR and ANR’s work, Archana’s magnificent performance here is the best I have seen by a Telugu actor in pure acting terms (though I was thinking of Somyajulu in Shankarabharanam as well).

Shankarabharanam- I respect Viswanath for integrating classical music in a popular format. An example of intelligent mainstream cinema (though I am hesitant to call it middle cinema).

Sagara Sangamam- A true blue great mainstream film. And an outstanding Kamal performance. Probably the Kamal performance which is most attuned to even the smallest notes in the script (and film).

Vanaja: A rare fine festival film made in Telugu.

Baahubali and Eega: Both take masala cinema seriously and then do something new with it.

Shiva: In terms of pure rawness and energy, no RGV film (including Rakthacharithra) comes close to it. And Nagarjuna comes up with a star performance for the ages. There are a number of other Telugu films by the director which I like, notably Kshana Kshanam and Raathri, but no Telugu work of his is even in the same ball-park. A seminal Telugu film if there ever was one.

Geethanjali: Nagarjuna in a Rathnam film, ’nuff said! Though of course of one of the director’s lesser films.

Okkadu: Mahesh Babu’s finest moment on screen. And that rare contemporary Masala film where the city/town (in which the film is set) becomes irreplaceable.

Arjun: A film I love to bits. Possibly Mahesh’s best film outside of Okkadu.

Athadu and Khaleja: Two other Mahesh films I love. The former has one nicely choreographed action scene. The latter film is quite underrated, certainly has a better narrative than most Telugu masala works.

Show: Neelakanta’s film is terribly pretentious (with actors hamming like there is no tomorrow) for the first thirty minutes or so, but if you can can attune yourself to the film’s wavelength, there is great pleasure to be had. The film makes best use of the director’s weird sensibilities. Possibly the most experimental Telugu film of this millenium.

Grahanam: Much of the film’s power seems to come from Chalam’s story (on which the film is based). But I was gripped from the first scene (there are some nice performances across the board). And a rare Telugu film which has some respect for the formal elements of cinema. Indraganti’s best work.

Ashta Chamma: A telugu film based on an Oscar Wilde story…this should have been a trainwreck, but surprisingly, it isn’t. A charming little trifle with smarts. And who can resist a film which is in so much love with the Prince!

Nandanavanam 120 Km:This is not a good film by any means, but is a curio-item which I couldn’t stop watching. Neelakantha at his weirdest and a thriller which refuses to conform to any known cinematic style. I wish the director wouldn’t have settled for such a tame ending though.

Pelli Choppulu- An excellent Telugu film, and a film worth revisting. Also better than most Tamil romcoms.

Anand and Godavari: The minute you start comparing these films to Hrishikesh Mukherjee’s works, you start insulting the master and also end up doing great disservice to the films themselves. But on their own, the two Kammula films are the best examples of contemporary Telugu cinema. Made with a certain sensibility (and having the kind of low key performances you would never quite see in the films of the state) which even modern Tamil cinema could make use of (also some nice music and having a strong female lead). That being said, I have a feeling that Kammula’s best work is behind him.

Golconda High School: One of the most understated Indian sports film I have seen. And Sumanth turns in an equally understated performance (I wish the industry made better use of his talents).

Hari Villu: A minor work from Narsing Rao in some ways (and easily the director’s most unever work). But also a children film like no other. I am in hurry to call this a good film, but there is something about it which refuses to leave me. It had many of the same problems (and strengths) as Adoor’s recent Pinneyum. Incidentally, a good complemetary film to this film would be Khargosh (and probably Umesh Kulkarni’s masterpiece “Vihir”).

Balupu: This is an odd choice. Ravi Teja is possibly the most annoying actor to have graced the screen, but for some weird reasons, I found him quite watchable here. As an example of nonsensical masala, you could do lot worse than this.

Prasthanam: An extremely engaging and very well written gangster-underworld film. Infact, one of the best Telugu films I have seen. Hope a lot more people check this one out. The director’s debut Vennela is also pretty decent.

Chantabbai: I have’t seen most of Chiranjeevi’s “acting” performances, but he is quite good here. A nicely made (and played) comic thriller with a fantastic opening credit sequence.