Three60 spends 10 minutes with Mike Brewer, TV presenter

Mike Brewer is a well-known presenter of television motoring programs, as well as a journalist, producer, campaigner and motoring enthusiast.

Mike currently presents Discovery’s Wheeler Dealers with best mate Edd China. The program is broadcast in 217 territories with a global audience of over 100 million and Mike spends six months of the year filming in the USA.

We hear you embarked on a TV career by chance when you answered a friend’s telephone at work and found yourself talking to a television producer. What would you have been doing today if you hadn’t taken that call?

I’d be at the helm of Mike Brewer Motors, working with my great team.

You’ve bought and restored so many vehicles. What was your absolute favourite to date that you would have liked to have kept for yourself?

The 1967 Mustang Fastback and the Amphicar… both incredible fun.

You’re widely regarded as the man in the know when it comes to buying used cars. What are your top three tips when buying a used vehicle?

1. Never buy a car unless you do a data check first.

2. If you have no mechanical knowledge then pay someone who does to look at the car.

3. Never let your heart rule your head. Buy a car for the purpose you aim to use it.

If you were buying a second-hand vehicle for your 17-year-old – what would you recommend?

Seat Ibiza 1.2, VW brand with great safety and simple car to drive.

You currently spend six months of the year in America filming Wheeler Dealers USA. What do you like most about driving in America?

It’s big… so lots to see… and buy!

What do you like least about driving in America?

People don’t use their turn signals on the freeways making it like a computer game.

What do you see as the major differences in driving culture between the UK and the USA?

Manners. In the UK we are more likely to let people out at a junction; in the States you have to just go for it.

On Wheeler Dealers you’re responsible for hunting down the vehicles while Edd China fixes them up. What would happen if you traded places?

We’d be broke… Edd couldn’t buy a pair of socks without getting it wrong.

What do you think is the best safety feature developed by vehicle manufacturers in recent years?

After the seat belt… the airbag.

If you were buying a new car for yourself today with an unlimited budget – what would you choose?

Ford’s stunning new GT.