Celebrated Name:Mike BrewerReal Name/Full Name:Mike BrewerGender:MaleAge:59 years oldBirth Date:28 August 1964Birth Place:Lambeth, London, EnglandNationality:BritishHeight:1.82 mWeight:86 kgSexual Orientation:StraightMarital Status:MarriedWife/Spouse (Name):Michelle Brewer (m. 1992)Children/Kids (Son and Daughter):Yes (Chloe Brewer)Dating/Girlfriend (Name):N/AIs Mike Brewer Gay?:NoProfession:Television Presenter, Car traderSalary:N/ANet Worth in 2024:$2 millionLast Updated:July 2024

Mike Brewer is a British car dealer, restorer and he is also the host motoring television shows. His father’s name is Roger Wilks. Mike brewer is the best known to the whole world from being the host on the discovery channel and as motor car sales-man, in shows such as “Wheeler Dealers” and “driver.” He is more famous among teenagers because discovery’s major audience is between 10 to 20 years.

Maybe you know about Mike Brewer very well, but do you know how old and tall is he and what is his net worth in 2024? If you do not know, we have prepared this article about details of Mike Brewer’s short biography-wiki, career, professional life, personal life, today’s net worth, age, height, weight, and more facts. Well, if you’re ready, let’s start.

Early Life & Biography

Mike was born in Lambeth, London, in 1964, to Doreen Fitzgerald and Roger Wilks. Father Roger Wilks was heavily involved in vehicle customizing and owner of The Pinball Wizard, which is part of Ford Popular. These helped him to discover his passion for cars and motoring. He had done many TV shows like Driven, Deals on Wheels, pulling power, etc. Edd China china is a motor expert and TV presenter.

Personal Life

In 1992, Mike Brewer was married to Michelle, and they currently live in Mollington, Oxfordshire, England. Roger Wilks was His father, and Doreen Fitzgerald was his mother. He has one 23-year-old daughter, and Her name is Chloe Brewer. Chloe Brewer is graduated. Mike has many advanced licenses like a racing license and a world speed license, which gives him the freedom to compete in any world speed events.

Age, Height, and Weight

Being born on 28 August 1964, Mike Brewer is 59 years old as of today’s date 20th July 2024. He is 1.82 m tall, and his weight is 86 kg.

Career

His chopper took enemy ground fire, injuring the pilot in the head, forcing a landing. Mike Brewer was in the series named “Revved Up,” in which vehicles are modified. He worked as a presenter in Deals wheels in 1997-2001, In Pulling power in 1997-2002, in Driven in 1999, in trader in 2009. He is now presenter of Wheeler Dealers in the Discovery channel since 2003. Mike Brewer started his career as a car trader.

That business turned out to be very successful for him. He is also a presenter of many shows on television. His famous shows include Pulling Power, Deals on Wheels, Driven on Channel 4. Mike also appeared in a famous show called Remote Madness. In this show, people with different types of remote-controlled mini cars, boats, planes, and helicopters compete with each other in a multi challenge race.

This show became very successful. This show was organized by Discovery Channel, and Mike Brewer was hired by them.

In 2012 mike started his own company called Mike Brewer Motors. He is one of the most successful car dealers in the industry.

Awards & Achievements

Mike Brewer is a very successful Businessman. He has received many awards in his life. As a car dealer, he earns a lot of money. He has also earned a great name and fame in his career. He was presented in many shows, which turned out to be very successful. Many big companies hire him for different programs and pay him a good amount of money in return. Mike Brewer has many sources of income. His company Mike Brewer Motors is one of the best sources of income for him, which generates a huge amount of money.

Net Worth & Salary of Mike brewer in 2024

As of July 2024, Mike brewer’s net worth is $2 million. He has earned such great fortune from world-famous TV shows and car trades. He even earns a significant amount of his revenue from the small interviews and hostings. Many big companies hire him for their programs, and they pay him a lot of money. His company Mike Brewers Motors is very successful and generates a good amount of money.

Mike brewer is the British TV presenter, former car dealer, journalist, talk show host. He is among the top leaders’ businessman who has made millions of dollars. He had done many world-famous Shows. He has a unique place in his fan’s heart and follows him. Over these years, he has worked hard to spread his talent all over the world through his TV shows. Thus he has proved himself to be a great celebrity personality.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7uLHApauhsaCav7S7zaxlnKedZLqqt8Rmmaudp5q%2FbrrErWSwp6KptW5%2Bj2tnZmpgZ35w