Tomorrow, and Tomorrow, and Tomorrow,

by Gabrielle Zevin

Knopf Publishing Group

7/5/2022

416 pages

Literary fiction

Goodreads

I enjoyed The Storied Life of A. J. Fikry a lot. And as Tomorrow, and Tomorrow, and Tomorrow is about video games (a theme I appreciate a lot in novels, like in Ready Player One for instance), it sounded promising and I requested it for review.

But there are not too many authors I can order on repeat, as I need to remind myself once more, as this fiction didn’t work for me. And really, The Storied Life of A. J. Fikry and this one don’t feel like they were written by the same author.

I know, you must be screaming at me, as apparently so many of you loved it.

At first, I liked the two main characters Sam and Sadie, two smart kids with lots of issues, and how they met originally.

Maybe I focused too much on the words “video games design” in the synopsis. It is indeed the place where they meet at a deeper level. But I was expecting more plots about these games.

Instead, I found boring text explaining each of the various games.

The real focus is the relationships between Sam, Sadie, their friend Marx, and others. Yes, it’s about love and friendship and connections, themes that don’t really grab me totally in literature, if there’s not much more around.

Some elements I really didn’t like at all, like all the details on passages with Dov and his taste for S&M. I found their relationship really sick and full of negative energy.

Then there’s a lesbian couple, totally unnecessary here. I have no issue with lesbian couples in literature, but here it felt like the author decided to insert one in her story to make it more marketable. It didn’t work with the rest of the book.

There’s also a lot of drugs.

I did enjoy all the references to Miyazaki and other Japanese artists, as well as the description of K-town in L.A.

But the book as a whole was too long (416 pages – The Storied Life of A. J. Fikry has only 260), with a boring plot. Things get finally starting in about the last quarter of the book.

VERDICT: The story had potential, but I found the book too long and boring. My big disappointment for 2022.

In full compliance with FTC Guidelines, I received this ebook free of charge through Netgalley, for review. I was in no way compensated for this post as a reviewer, and the thoughts are my own.