Onsite Gallery, OCAD University

Pictured (left to right): Wendy Coburn, Untitled, undated, photograph. Courtesy of the Estate of Wendy Coburn and Paul Petro Contemporary Art, Toronto. Wendy Coburn, Ideas Take Time (Dr Westford Coburn Professor of Art History), 2002, photograph. Courtesy of the Estate of Wendy Coburn and Paul Petro Contemporary Art, Toronto. Photo by Polina Teif.

Fable for Tomorrow Wendy Coburn Book Launch

Saturday, April 13, 2 p.m. to 4 p.m.

Onsite Gallery, Toronto

Register Here

Join us at Onsite Gallery as we launch our inaugural published book, Fable for Tomorrow Wendy Coburn on Saturday, April 13, from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m.

This captivating full-color, hardcover, 96-page catalogue beautifully captures Wendy Coburn’s 2022 exhibition, ensuring her lasting legacy in Canadian art history. Featuring essays by Andrea Fatona, Caroline Seck Langill, Rebecca Garrett, and b.h. Yael, alongside texts from Jess Dobkin and Lisa Deanne Smith, this book is a testament to Coburn’s profound impact as an artist, educator, and activist.

Wendy Coburn, Fable for Tomorrow, 2008, bisque-fired clay, 7” x 7” x 5.5” each. Courtesy of the Estate of Wendy Coburn and Paul Petro Contemporary Art, Toronto.

Designed by Lisa Kiss Design, Fable for Tomorrow Wendy Coburn marks the first comprehensive survey of Coburn’s remarkable body of work. Spanning four decades, the 2022 exhibition titled Fable for Tomorrow: A Survey of Works by Wendy Corbun showcased her diverse artworks in sculpture, installation, photography, and video, which invited viewers to contemplate the intricate interplay between gender, sexuality, material culture, and human-animal relations.

Register Here

Wendy Coburn, Untitled (buck), 2007, bronze. Gift of the Coburn Family to the Hart House Collection, 2020. Courtesy of the Art Museum at the University of Toronto. Photo by Polina Teif.

We acknowledge the support of this catalogue from the Canada Council for the Arts

Onsite Gallery is generously supported by The Delaney Family.

About Onsite Gallery

www.ocadu.ca/onsite

Onsite Gallery, OCAD University’s flagship professional gallery, presents contemporary, Indigenous, and public art and design to advance knowledge creation and stimulate local and international conversations on the urgent issues of our time.

Gallery Hours

Wednesday: 12 to 7 p.m.

Thursday to Saturday: 12 to 5 p.m.

Gallery admission and all events are free.

Onsite Gallery is an accessible venue with all-gender, single-user washrooms.

» Detailed accessibility information found here

About OCAD University (OCAD U)

OCAD University (www.ocadu.ca) is Canada’s university of the imagination. Founded in 1876, the university is dedicated to art, design and digital media education, practice and research and to knowledge and invention across a wide range of disciplines.

Contact Information:

Susan Jama

Programs & Community Coordinator, Onsite Gallery

susanjama@ocadu.ca