If anyone ever complains - and they often do - that today's theatre bores them, I ask them if they've seen the work of Robert Lepage. Over the past 20 years, this courteous and soft-spoken Canadian, born in Quebec in 1957, has created nothing less than a revolution in the possibilities of what a stage, a play and an actor can be and do.

He has directed several productions of other people's work (including Shakespeare), but his originality lies in work that he devises collaboratively. Sometimes these take the form of one-man shows, among them Needles and Opium (about drug addiction), Elsinore (a fantasia on Hamlet), The Far Side of the Moon (reflections on space travel) and now The Andersen Project (about Hans Christian Andersen),- which he performs himself. Others are long multi-part epics which explore the inner and outer journeys which have taken so many people in our migratory era from one society or culture to another - Tectonic Plates, The Dragon's Trilogy and Seven Streams of the River Ota.

Recently he devised for Cirque du Soleil a show called Ka - a $165 million spectacular described by one critic as "the most grandiose piece of live theatre ever undertaken", which has become one of the hottest tickets in Las Vegas since it opened there in January.

His shows are distinguished not only by their warm humanity and intricate narrative interweavings, but also by their unique use of technology, ranging from old-style theatrical trickery to the latest digital wizardry.

Lepage's theatre breaks down the boundaries between text and image, screen and stage, the live and the recorded. Hugely influential, yet beyond imitation, his shows tour widely and incessantly, and all of them contain that most vital of theatrical ingredients - surprise. Even when seen for a second or third time, they are never quite what one expects. So don't tell me you're bored by theatre if you haven't experienced the genius of Robert Lepage.

This consummate theatrical sorcerer - engagingly otherworldly in appearance, owing to his total alopecia - is back in London, working his directorial magic at Covent Garden on Lorin Maazel's new operatic adaptation of 1984. Initially, it seems an oddly gloomy and static piece to engage Lepage's interest: much of his work has been openly and optimistically internationalist in spirit and setting, in total contrast to the bleak totalitarian dystopia of Big Brother and Newspeak.

But Lepage has long been fascinated by Orwell. At the beginning of his career, he staged Animal Farm using masks and puppets, and he finds that 1984 speaks to his "dark and claustrophobic streak", last indulged in Le Polygraphe, a play and film based on his own Kafkaesque experience of being mistakenly identified as prime suspect in a murder hunt.

For the staging of the new opera, he is exploring the idea of surveillance: visual sources for the production include plans for Jeremy Bentham's model prison, the Panopticon, as well as the ubiquitous closed-circuit monitors and miniature cameras that police today's public spaces.

"In the post-9/11 world, as we all know, this phenomenon has become ever more dominant and intrusive," he says. "Recently I heard a story of someone in Canada who was arrested after he'd mentioned to a friend on his cellphone that he'd seen his son bomb in the school play.

"Even the Royal Opera House seems infected by Newspeak. I got into a lift here the other day, and when we reached the fifth floor, a recorded voice announced that we were at 'Stage, plus five'!" But Lepage promises something more subtle than the usual bleeping and flashing technological nightmare. The stage won't be full of flickering video screens - "that's become a bit of a cliché". What engages him more is the idea of "transparency - not in the glasnost sense of the word, but as it relates to the invisible eye, the lenses which we can't see, the walls which aren't really there at all".

Anyone who saw Lepage's recent show The Far Side of the Moon will know with what breathtaking ingenuity he can create this sort of illusion, conjuring wonders out of mirrors and tricks of the light. Yet he also believes that in many respects 1984 will emerge as an old-fashioned romantic opera, "full of big emotions and strong dramatic situations, underpinning a tragedy of people whose fates are in the hands of higher, god-like powers. Most new operas I get to hear have good music in them, but the story-telling is at fault, and that's why they don't engage the audience. Opera isn't happy with the please-pass-the-butter side of life, it's much better at the big things, and 1984 certainly has plenty of those." (The libretto, intriguingly, is the result of an unlikely collaboration between the poet JD McClatchy and Thomas Meehan, book writer for the musicals Annie, The Producers and Hairspray.)

Over the past few months Lepage has been researching and developing the production on the basis of sketches, tapes, conversations and workshops, mostly held in La Caserne, his Quebec headquarters, where the show has also been constructed. The project which has evolved is in effect a package which the Royal Opera is renting from a company created by Maazel and Lepage called Big Brother Productions. For the première presentation next month, Covent Garden will be engaging and paying the singers and providing chorus and orchestra. But the staging, if it is at all successful, will then move to other venues round the world, under the aegis of Big Brother Productions. This is the first time what might be called the Andrew Lloyd Webber self-producing model has been applied to the opera business, and it could prove revolutionary.

For Lepage, the set-up is particularly exciting because it allows him to maintain a degree of creative control over every performance that would have been impossible if the Royal Opera House had simply hired him in. "This is important to me, because I long to do more music-based work, but not in the standard way."

He has staged relatively little opera to date (a superb double bill of Bartók's Bluebeard's Castle and Schoenberg's Erwartung was the sensation of the 1992 Edinburgh Festival), but this isn't because of any antipathy to it - on the contrary, he believes opera to be the "mother of us all, the ultimate meeting-place for the arts, and it's a great shame that it's been waylaid and turned into a form of mundane corporate entertainment, because it should be at the forefront of theatre".

Lepage's desire to keep control shouldn't suggest anything freaky. He is the least dictatorial of directors. "I never say to anyone 'do this, do that' - it's simply not my style. Perhaps director is the wrong word anyway, because it implies a degree of power which I don't think I have. The writer is the real director, and the performers have the power on stage. I think of myself more as what the French call a sourcier - a water diviner. The question in rehearsal is: where are we going and how do we get there together?

Lepage maintains a relentless schedule. Aside from 1984, he is sporadically performing his latest one-man show The Andersen Project - it visits the Barbican next February - and keeping an eye on Ka in Las Vegas. Meanwhile, four older Lepage productions are touring the world - one of them, The Dragon's Trilogy, is also due at the Barbican Centre. This dispersal poses Lepage a huge challenge in terms of quality control, and he spends a lot of his time checking out shows and settling them into their destinations.

Fortunately, he loves travel. "I do some of my best creative thinking in transit," he says. "My first ambition in life was to be a geography teacher, and wherever I am, I can feel stimulated and fascinated. I don't need isolation in order to think - rather the opposite. And I'm not one of those people - much as I admire them - like Peter Brook or Deborah Warner who want to focus on only one show at a time. I enjoy juggling four or five different projects in the air, and finding connections and disconnections between them."

The only aspect of Lepage's oeuvre that hasn't yet been fully welcomed is his cinema, which has been respectfully branded as art-house. He's hoping this might change with his fourth full-length feature, a film of The Far Side of the Moon (not yet scheduled for release), which he considers a breakthrough.

"I don't feel I have quite cracked film yet, but while we were editing The Far Side and suddenly started shifting reels around, I began to feel I was finding the flexibility I haven't had before."

He is fascinated by the possibilities of digital technology, by the Japanese animators such as Miyazaki, and by Tarantino. "I know everyone thinks he's very passé now, but his language is so wonderfully free-form -- in Kill Bill, he can make an image be what he wants it to be, when it wants to be, segueing from naturalism to fantasy and back again. It's that sort of imaginative fluidity that I'm striving after."