DREW Sidora joined the Real Housewives of Atlanta during Season 13 and has since become a fan favorite.

Prior to reality television, she made a name for herself as an actress.

Who is Drew Sidora?

Drew Sidora is an actress and singer who was born on May 1, 1985, in Chicago, Illinois.

She is arguably best known for her role as Chantel in the Disney Channel Original Series That's So Raven and as Lucy Avila in the film Step Up.

She has also been seen in White Chicks, Never Die Alone, Wild Hogs, White People Money, and The Preacher's Son.

Outside of the entertainment industry, Sidora is known as the founder of DREAMMAKERS, an organization that helps young girls express themselves creatively.

What is Drew Sidora's net worth?

Due to Sidora's successful career, she has been able to amass a fortune.

Her net worth is estimated at $1.5million, according to Celebrity Net Worth.

This estimate comes from her various TV and movie roles, as well as her role on RHOA.

Her annual salary from Bravo is reported to be an estimated $300,000.

Is Drew Sidora married?

In 2014, she married Ralph Pittman, a public speaker, author, and musician who has worked as a consultant and IT advisor to Fortune 500 companies for the past 15 years, according to Forbes.

On February 27, 2023, Pittman filed for divorce from Sidora after nine years of marriage.

The divorce petition stated: "There is no chance or hope of reconciliation."

Sidora and her estranged husband welcomed two kids together, a son named Machai and a daughter named Aniya.

She is also the mother of her eldest son, Josiah Jordan, whom she welcomed during a previous relationship.

How can I watch Real Housewives of Atlanta?

Season 15 of Real Housewives of Atlanta premieres on Sunday, May 7, 2023, at 8pm ET on Bravo.

Per Bravo's website, "The fabulous ladies of 'The Real Housewives of Atlanta,' are trying their best to get to a healing space."

The outlet continues: "However, with friendships on the brink, accusations causing a fuss, and divorce news that’s all too much, will these women be able to channel positive vibes?"