Michael Douglas is getting some support from his kids.

On Wednesday, July 10, the actor, 79, made a rare red carpet appearance with his daughter Carys, 21, and son Dylan, 23, as they attended a screening of his new documentary America’s Burning in New York City.

The trio posed for photos on the red carpet at the DGA Theater, with Carys and Dylan matching in white, while Michael looked smart in a blue shirt, navy blue suit jacket and dark gray pants.

Carys sported a white blazer and white satin skirt, while Dylan wore a crisp white shirt and a matching textured blazer and pants.

Michael shares the siblings with his actress wife Catherine Zeta-Jones. The Wall Street star is also dad to son Cameron, 45, whom he shares with his ex-wife Diandra Luker.

Back in May, Michael shared a snap of himself on vacation with Catherine, 54, Carys and Dylan to mark Mother’s Day.

“Happy #MothersDay to you all, and especially you darling! You deserve it and we all love you so much @catherinezetajones ❤️,” Michael captioned the photo.

Ahead of Michael’s appearance at the America’s Burning screening, the couple attended the British Grand Prix in England on Sunday, July 7, with Wednesday star Catherine sharing a selfie of the duo at Silverstone Circuit.

The PEOPLE Puzzler crossword is here! How quickly can you solve it? Play now!

America’s Burning had its world premiere at the Tribeca Film Festival in June. The political documentary is narrated by Douglas, who is also an executive producer along with Barry Levinson.

Per a synopsis on the documentary’s website, “America’s Burning draws on an amazing collection of thinkers and strategists, from James Carville and Amy Chua to Ian Bremmer and Leon Panetta, as New York Times best-selling author David Smick guides the viewer on a journey to discover the reasons for today’s hate and division — and rising risk of civil war.”

Never miss a story — sign up for PEOPLE's free daily newsletter to stay up-to-date on the best of what PEOPLE has to offer​​, from celebrity news to compelling human interest stories.

“I’m so fortunate to have been able to work closely with Michael Douglas and Barry Levinson on this film,” Smick said, per Deadline. “We share a very deep concern for what kind of country we are leaving our children and their children. We look forward to bringing this film and its message to people all over the country.”

America's Burning is in movie theaters from July 12.