''One Day in September'' was broadcast on HBO earlier this year. Following are excerpts from Ron Wertheimer's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 11. The film opens today at the Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, South Village.

The world became both smaller and bleaker on Sept. 5, 1972. That day an international television audience watched a real-life drama unfold in real time as a group of Palestinian terrorists murdered two Israeli Olympians at the Summer Games in Munich, holding nine more as hostages. Those old enough will surely remember that the episode ended more horribly than it began. After a chaotic gunfight at a German air base, all the Israelis, five of their eight captors and a German police officer were dead.

Reliving those events with chilling immediacy is the grim accomplishment of ''One Day in September,'' winner of this year's Oscar for best documentary feature. The film, produced by Arthur Cohn and John Battsek and directed by Kevin Macdonald, is clearly the product of determination, effort and no small quantity of anger. It deals sympathetically with the Israelis, while it treats the Palestinians with a cool journalistic objectivity. It saves its simmering rage for the West German authorities, who emerge, if not as the documentary's villains, then certainly as its tragically inept fools.

The film begins with two people whose memories form its backbone. One is Ankie Spitzer, the widow of Andre Spitzer, the Israeli fencing coach, who was killed at the air base. She remembers her husband as a man who ''tried to channel aggression into respect for your opponent.'' The other is Jamal al-Gashey, the only surviving member of the group of hostage takers, who says that once he joined the militant Black September group, ''I wasn't just a wretched refugee but a revolutionary.''

Using a conventional blend of new interviews and archival film and videotape, ''One Day in September'' recalls the optimism of the 1972 games, which the Germans hoped would eclipse the memory of the Nazis' 1936 Olympics in Berlin.

That optimism was a casualty, too, once eight armed Palestinians managed to evade the lax Olympic Village security and gain access to the apartment complex where the Israelis were staying. The stated goal of the raid was to trade the hostages for more than 200 prisoners held by Israel and other countries, a demand that was immediately rejected.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.