Jerry Julius “Fatty” Hudson, age 76 of Cherryville, passed away Saturday, July 20, 2024, at Caromont Regional Medical Center. He was born May 21, 1948, in Lincoln County to the late Darrell Reece “Pete” and Betty Jean “Bootie” Van Dyke Hudson. Fatty was a graduate of Cherryville High School and UNC Charlotte. He served in the Vietnam War and earned a Purple Heart and Bronze Star Medal of Valor in the United States Army. Jerry was also an active member of Cherryville American Legion Post #100 and was involved with Legion Baseball for over 45 years. He currently served as the Area IV Baseball Commissioner and was recently inducted into the NC American Legion Hall of Fame. Fatty was also the former booking agent for NCHSAA. Jerry served as a former City Councilmen for the City of Cherryville. He was the owner of Fatty's Men Shop for over 20 years, then worked at C. Grier Beam Truck Musuem, and was a former Sales Rep for Western Associates. He loved sitting in the sun, golfing, going to baseball games, and spending time with his beloved family. There was no one Fatty ever met that didn’t call him friend.

In addition to his parents, he was preceded in death by his infant daughter, April Lynn Hudson; and brother, Hugh Hudson.

Survivors include his wife of 54 years, Linda Lansing Hudson; son, Lance Hudson and wife, Stayce; daughter, Chance Foutz and husband, Kevin; grandchildren, Alec Hudson, Landon Hudson (Tanner Heafner), Marley Foutz, and Harper Foutz; great grandchildren, Ann Leigh Hudson and Asher Hudson; brother, Rick Hudson; sister, Cindy Jackson (Todd); sisters-in-law, Judy Martin and Brenda Bridges; and his Cherryville American Legion and Ladies Auxiliary Family.

The family will receive friends Thursday, July 25, 2024, from 5:00 to 7:00 PM at Carpenter-Porter Funeral Home.

Funeral Services will be held Friday, July 26, 2024, at 11:00 AM at First Presbyterian Church with Rev. Dr. Bill Lowe officiating. Burial will follow at City Memorial Cemetery with Military Honors conducted by American Legion Post #100 Honor Guard.

Memorials may be made to American Legion Post #100, 215 N. Pink St. Cherryville, NC 28021.

Condolences may be made to www.carpenterporter.com