Oando PLC Denies Owning A Petroleum Blending Plant Abroad ...... An oil blending plant has no refining capability but can be used to blend re-refined oil (a used motor oil that has been treated to remove dirt, fuel, and water) with additives to create finished lubricant products. Oando PLC has denied allegations on social and digital media that it owns a blending plant in Malta. The energy company also denied importing dirty fuel into Nigeria through a Maltese company, Raz Hansir Oil Terminal Limited. A statement by the company secretary, Ayotola Jagun, said the allegations levelled against Oando of being a shareholder and its principals of being board members of Raz Hansir Oil Terminal Limited, a company that operates an oil storage and blending facility responsible for importing adulterated petroleum products into Nigeria, were unfounded. “We wish to refute such claims and attest that neither Oando PLC nor its Executives have ever held shares, investments, or interests in the fictitious Maltese company. “As part of a comprehensive investigation into the basis of the false claims, we conducted a search of the Malta Business Registry, the official repository for all registered entities past and current within the country. Our search yielded no results for a company bearing that name. Subsequent due diligence efforts similarly failed to uncover any record of the company’s existence. Earlier, the Group Chief Executive Officer of the NNPC, Mele Kyari, said he does not own a blending plant outside Nigeria. Kyari stated that he had been inundated with calls from family members and friends, asking if he truly owned a blending plant in Malta. Dangote has been speaking up following allegations by the Chief Executive of the Nigerian Midstream and Downstream Petroleum Regulatory Authority, Farouk Ahmed, that the diesel produced by the Dangote refinery had higher sulphur content than imported ones; a claim Dangote described as an attempt to demarket his refinery. Ahmed also said the country would continue to import fuel to stop the Dangote monopoly. WHAT DO YOU THINK? ....... #oilandgasindustry LINKS YOU MIGHT LIKE ( OPTIONAL TO CLICK) 1. For Enqiries Or Business Deals, Connect With Me On 08136125128 WhatsApp wa.me/2348136125128 2. Visit My Blog For More News : www.edesononlinenews.com 3. I Register Business Names, Limited Liability Company, NGO, Social Clubs, etc At Corporate Affairs Commission. I Do Nationwide Newspaper Publication. 08136125128. 4. I Design Websites, Blogs & Graphics.I Also Teach Website Design At Ikotun Lagos State. I Publish Apps On Google PlayStore. 5. Know More About My Products And Services On My Company Website: www.edesoninfotech.com.ng 6. Connect With Me On LinkedIn : https://lnkd.in/gEC32Fin 7. Join My Freelance Website & Make Money https://lnkd.in/dydEaCNT .... ...

Oando PLC Denies Owning A Petroleum Blending Plant Abroad ...... An oil blending plant has no refining capability but can be used to blend re-refined oil (a used motor oil that has been treated to remove dirt, fuel, and water) with additives to create finished lubricant products. Oando PLC has denied allegations on social and digital media that it owns a blending plant in Malta. The energy company also denied importing dirty fuel into Nigeria through a Maltese company, Raz Hansir Oil Terminal Limited. A statement by the company secretary, Ayotola Jagun, said the allegations levelled against Oando of being a shareholder and its principals of being board members of Raz Hansir Oil Terminal Limited, a company that operates an oil storage and blending facility responsible for importing adulterated petroleum products into Nigeria, were unfounded. “We wish to refute such claims and attest that neither Oando PLC nor its Executives have ever held shares, investments, or interests in the fictitious Maltese company. “As part of a comprehensive investigation into the basis of the false claims, we conducted a search of the Malta Business Registry, the official repository for all registered entities past and current within the country. Our search yielded no results for a company bearing that name. Subsequent due diligence efforts similarly failed to uncover any record of the company’s existence. Earlier, the Group Chief Executive Officer of the NNPC, Mele Kyari, said he does not own a blending plant outside Nigeria. Kyari stated that he had been inundated with calls from family members and friends, asking if he truly owned a blending plant in Malta. Dangote has been speaking up following allegations by the Chief Executive of the Nigerian Midstream and Downstream Petroleum Regulatory Authority, Farouk Ahmed, that the diesel produced by the Dangote refinery had higher sulphur content than imported ones; a claim Dangote described as an attempt to demarket his refinery. Ahmed also said the country would continue to import fuel to stop the Dangote monopoly. WHAT DO YOU THINK? ....... #oilandgasindustry LINKS YOU MIGHT LIKE ( OPTIONAL TO CLICK) 1. For Enqiries Or Business Deals, Connect With Me On 08136125128 WhatsApp wa.me/2348136125128 2. Visit My Blog For More News : www.edesononlinenews.com 3. I Register Business Names, Limited Liability Company, NGO, Social Clubs, etc At Corporate Affairs Commission. I Do Nationwide Newspaper Publication. 08136125128. 4. I Design Websites, Blogs & Graphics.I Also Teach Website Design At Ikotun Lagos State. I Publish Apps On Google PlayStore. 5. Know More About My Products And Services On My Company Website: www.edesoninfotech.com.ng 6. Connect With Me On LinkedIn : https://lnkd.in/dAEbQxfK 7. Join My Freelance Website & Make Money https://lnkd.in/dQHGZmTJ .... ...