Nicosia is Cyprus’s capital and its largest city. It is Europe’s last divided capital, with Turkish Cypriots living on the north side and Greek Cypriots living on the south side.

Nicosia has been continuously occupied for over 4,500 years and has been Cyprus's capital for over 1,000 years. It has a turbulent political history, and the Franks, Venetians, Ottomans, and British have occupied the city.

During ancient times, Nicosia was a city-state called Ledra. Nicosia was controlled by the Byzantines from 330 to 1191, Lusignan kings from 1192 to 1489, and the Venetians from 1489 to 1571. Ottoman Turks ruled from 1571 to 1879, and the British ruled from 1879 to 1960.

Turks took control of Nicosia’s northern part in 1974. Today, there is a Green Line, also called the Ceasefire Line, across Nicosia. This line separates the Turkish side of Nicosia from the Greek side.

On this tour, you will explore the Greek Old Town south of the Green Line.

One of Nicosia’s most distinctive features is its medieval Venetian walls and protective moat, built in 1567. Visitors can see the wall’s eleven bastions and three gates. The Famagusta Gate is one of the most impressive gates and is Nicosia’s main city gate.

When the Ottoman Turks ruled the city, they transformed traditional churches into mosques. Visit the Omeriye Mosque to see one such conversion. Legend tells that Ottoman Turks also tried to convert the historic Famagusta Church into a mosque but were unsuccessful. Today’s visitors can admire Famagusta Church’s beautiful architecture and interior artworks.

Nicosia features many unique shopping areas. Laiki Geitonia is one of Nicosia’s most charming shopping areas. Visitors can stroll the winding, cobbled streets, watch artists work, and try traditional Cypriot treats. On Ledra Street, visitors can find a mix of shops as well as the border between the Greek and Turkish sides.

Ledra Street is also home to the Shacolas Tower Museum & Observatory, which offers fabulous city views. The Leventis Municipal Museum’s exhibits explore Nicosia’s history. History enthusiasts can also explore the Byzantine Museum, which is located in the Archbishop’s Palace. For a more modern Nicosia experience, visit the re-designed Liberty Square.

Join us and explore the most notable sights in Nicosia's the Greek Old Town by taking this self-guided walking tour.