Nicosia - Capital of Cyprus

The capital of the Republic of Cyprus is located in the centre of the island and is an ideal place to live and study. The many offshore companies and embassies give the city a cosmopolitan air. Since Nicosia is home to people of many different nationalities, English is spoken everywhere.

The ubiquitous trees and colourful shrubs, the sunny days and warm evenings provide a natural setting for outdoor cafes, pubs and eating-places.

Reminders of leisurely days of the past are the attractive brownstone bungalows with their colourful verandas and the ongoing restoration of old buildings adds to the city’s charm. In contrast to quiet, leafy, residential streets is the bustling downtown centre with shops of an international standard. There are always concerts, exhibitions and films and there is no shortage of museums and art galleries.

Cyprus is well known for its rich cultural history since it is located in the northeast Mediterranean, where Europe, Asia and Africa meet. Ancient Greeks, Romans, Egyptians and Crusaders are just some of the cultures that have left their traces on the island, and millions of visitors arrive every year to see this archaeological legacy.

In recent years, Cyprus has established itself as a regional centre of Higher Education, attracting an international student body. The island has everything to make a student’s life attractive. Students value the sunny climate, friendly people and Mediterranean lifestyle. Cyprus has the reputation of being virtually crime-free, and many students regard this as an important factor in making the island their choice. One more reason for that is the fact that Cyprus is a full member of the European Union as from May 1st, 2004.

The telecommunication system on the island is excellent, as are air links to other countries. This has attracted a large shipping and offshore business community. With almost three million tourists visiting the island annually, Cyprus has a well-developed and sophisticated tourist industry; its hotels are second to none, making it the ideal location for Hotel and Tourism studies.

Studying in Cyprus, one is not confined to a polluted, crowded city. Pleasant accommodation is easy to find, and with their long tradition of hospitality, Cypriots are warm and friendly people long accustomed to living and working with people of various nationalities.

Being close to the mainland and surrounded by countries, which formed the cradle of European civilization, Cyprus offers the opportunity of short trips - to see the Egyptian pyramids or the Holy Land, for example. Additionally, Cyprus offers an almost unlimited supply of archaeological sites, monasteries and Byzantine churches to explore.

Nicosia, of courses is not just about culture and history; it also offers an extensive range of cafeterias, restaurants and nightlife. (links included).

At weekends, the mountains with their attractive villages are close at hand. The sea, beaches and fish taverns are not very far away; both quiet spots for those who prefer them, as well as the busy resorts with their sea sports, nightlife and visitors from many countries.

Add to this, safe streets in a city where crime is almost non-existent and it is clear why more and more overseas students are finding Nicosia to be the ideal city to study in.

​

​

​