Derby council’s leader Nadine Peatfield has named a new female-majority cabinet that may be a first for the city.

The Labour councillor, appointed after Baggy Shanker was ousted over the Sinfin waste plant dispute, named her new top team at a full meeting of Derby City Council on Wednesday.

The reshuffle comes after councillors Baggy Shanker and John Whitby were elected as Labour MPs for Derby South and Derbyshire Dales respectively at the General Election.

Councillor Peatfield told the meeting: “On gut instinct, I believe this may be Derby City Council’s first-ever predominantly female cabinet.”

She added: “It is a matter of pride and achievement to stand here as only the second-ever woman leader of Derby City Council.

“It is my intention to lead by example, affording respect to my fellow councillors.

“I look forward to continuing focused on stability, responsible leadership and delivery. Let’s get to work.”

As well as leading the council, the Local Democracy Reporting Service said Councillor Peatfield’s brief also includes the city centre, regeneration, culture and tourism and economic growth.

Councillor Kathy Kozlowski takes over from Councillor Shanker in the role of cabinet member of governance and finance, while Councillor Sarah Chambers has been appointed cabinet member for cost of living, equality and communities.

Councillor Paul Hezelgrave becomes Derby City Council’s third deputy leader within a month and will take over from Councillor Whitby as cabinet member for children and young people.

Councillor Ndukwe Onuoha becomes cabinet member for Streetpride.

Councillors Shiraz Khan, Hardyal Dhindsa, Alison Martin and Carmel Swan remain on the cabinet.

Derby’s Conservative group criticised Cllr Peatfield’s appointees for their inexperience.

Councillor Jonathan Smale said: “This shows a massive lack of judgement in not drawing on the breadth of knowledge from more experienced members of their group.”

Follow BBC Derby on Facebook, on X, or on Instagram. Send your story ideas to eastmidsnews@bbc.co.uk or via WhatsApp on 0808 100 2210.