The City of Derby operates under a mayor-council-manager form of government, which combines the strong leadership of elected officials with the managerial experience of a professional city manager.

The Mayor and City Council comprise the Governing Body. These elected officials are political leaders for the Derby community, and the Governing Body sets the policy for the City organization.

The City Council meets on the 2nd and 4th Tuesdays of the month at 6:30 p.m. at Derby City Hall, 611 Mulberry Rd.

The Council meeting for June 11, 2024 has been canceled and replaced with a second Budget Workshop.

The Council meeting for December 24, 2024 has been canceled due to the Christmas Eve holiday.

In order to best accommodate space in the Council Room members of the public desiring to speak during Public Forum are asked to please submit a request to the City Clerk by noon on the day of the City Council meeting. City Clerk Lynn Ciarleglio may be reached via email at cityclerk@derbyweb.com or phone at 316-788-3132. If you prefer, you can send your comments to the City Clerk by noon on the day of the meeting, and those comments will be read aloud at the meeting.

Questions or comments on agenda items may be submitted to your elected officials directly by e-mail or phone before the meeting or to the City Clerk.

Wards

City Council members are elected by ward. Wards cover a specific geographic area of the city. The City of Derby has with two City Council members elected from each ward. View the Ward Map.

Mayor: Mark Staats

Ward I

Mike Neel

Kristi TruittWard II

Elizabeth Stanton

Wayne Molt, Jr.Ward III

Rick Coleman

Nick Engle (Council President 2024)Ward IV

Chris Unkel

Jenny Webster

The principal job of the City Council is to establish the general policies under which the city operates. City Council members are the democratic "voice of the people" and exercise the public’s will by concentrating on issues that are responsive to the needs and the wants of residents.

Responsibilities

The City Council accomplishes this by: