Derby City Council leader Nadine Peatfield has announced her new predominantly female cabinet. The Labour councillor spoke of her excitement as she unveiled her team to lead the city during a full council meeting on Wednesday evening (July 17).

Councillor Peatfield’s cabinet reshuffle has been forced to a certain extent following Councillor Baggy Shanker’s and Councillor John Whitby’s Labour victories in this month’s General Election. The two councillors are now MPs for Derby South and Derbyshire Dales respectively and are no longer on the council’s cabinet team – but are still serving as city councillors.

Cllr Peatfield was elected following a dramatic meeting which saw Cllr Shanker controversially removed as city council leader over the Sinfin waste plant dispute. Her other roles will be to continue to lead on the city centre, regeneration, culture and tourism and economic growth.

Join us on WhatsApp to get the latest news straight to your phone

Councillor Alison Martin will remain as health and adult care cabinet member. Councillor Carmel Swan will continue leading climate change, transport and sustainability.

And there are some new female faces too. Chaddesden West councillor Kathy Kozlowski – first elected last year – takes over from Cllr Shanker in the role of cabinet member of governance and finance. Sinfin councillor Sarah Chambers – also first elected last year – has been appointed cabinet member for cost of living, equality and communities.

Councillor Paul Hezelgrave becomes Derby City Council’s third deputy leader within a month and will take over from Cllr Whitby as cabinet member for children, young people and skills. Councillor Shiraz Khan stays in his office leading housing, strategic planning and regulatory services.

Councillor Hardyal Dhindsa takes on a new role as cabinet member for “digital and organisational transformation” while his last job as cabinet member for Streetpride goes to Mackworth and New Zealand councillor Ndukwe Onuoha, who will also lead on leisure and public safety.

Councillor Peatfield said: “It is a matter of pride and achievement to stand here as only the second-ever woman leader of Derby City Council. It is my intention to lead by example, affording respect to my fellow councillors.

“While the manner of stepping into this role was a turbulent one to say the least, it is my mission to provide stability and continuity for the council, its workforce and the city. On gut instinct, I believe this may be Derby City Council’s first-ever predominantly female cabinet.

“I reiterate I do look forward to continuing our administration unimpeded and focused on stability, responsible leadership and delivery. Let’s get to work.”

But Derby’s Conservative group has criticised Cllr Peatfield’s appointments. A statement issued following the meeting by Conservative councillor Jonathan Smale suggested the leader has gone with inexperience and not chosen more experienced names.

The statement said: “The Conservative group is not surprised to see Cllr Peatfield elect such an inexperienced cabinet in her reshuffle. This shows a massive lack of judgment in not drawing on the breadth of knowledge from more experienced members of their group.

“With the vast wealth of knowledge between councillors Martin Repton, Sara Bolton and Martin Rawson, whom we have a great deal of respect for, it’s clear to us there is deep division in the Labour group.”