The leader of Derby City Council could be removed as leader after opposition parties issued a motion of no confidence.

An extraordinary council meeting will take place on Tuesday 18 June at which Derby leader Baggy Shanker (Lab), who is also standing to become the city's MP, will face a vote of no confidence.

The motion which was moved by Steve Hassell (Con) and seconded by Alan Graves (Reform) said that Cllr Shanker’s "conduct and actions" regarding the Sinfin Waste Treatment Plant had “fallen below that expected of the leader of the council”.

Derby and Derbyshire CC issued a statement last month confirming that plans to fix and operate the Sinfin waste facility were "on hold".

The two councils are now in a formal dispute about the plant.

In January Derbyshire issued an invoice to Derby for £93.9m + VAT to recover its share of the costs of the project, which Derby disputed and subsequently led to the city council triggering a notice of dispute - which included the county's refusal to formally include regular reviews of project progress against the business case to fix and operate the facility.

The motion added that Cllr Shanker’s actions have resulted "in potentially placing the authority in a financially dangerous position".

It said: "The significance of this position is such that a majority of Derby City councillors now have lost confidence in the leader’s ability and motives to resolve this issue without further detrimental impact to finances, services and council employees."

If Cllr Shanker is removed as leader, his successor will be elected at the meeting or at a subsequent meeting.

A vote will also be taken to determine whether press and public are excluded from the debate on the motion where it is likely that "commercially and legally sensitive information may be disclosed".

If a resolution to exclude the press and public is carried, the meeting will return to public session prior to a vote being taken on whether Cllr Shanker remains as leader.

Labour has 23 seats on the council, the Conservatives are the next largest party with 15, Reform has six, whilst the Liberal Democrats have four and there are three Independents.