Derby City Council has a new leader following one of the most dramatic council meetings the city has seen in recent years. Labour councillor Nadine Peatfield is now in the hot seat, replacing Councillor Baggy Shanker who was ousted from his position at an extraordinary meeting on Tuesday night (June 18).

Opposition councillors got their way in the end to remove Cllr Shanker after the Conservative mayor Ged Potter’s casting vote forced a change in leadership. The council has today announced that Cllr Shanker will serve as deputy leader and “continue in his role as cabinet member for governance and finance”.

But a new era for the Labour-led council has begun with Councillor Peatfield, who was elected unopposed at the end of the three-hour-long meeting, now in charge of running a council facing many pressures. We've had a look at what will be in Cllr Peatfield’s new in tray and some of the challenges she will face over the coming months.

Sinfin Waste Plant

One of the biggest issues facing the city. The saga of the Sinfin Waste Plant continues to dominate the news agenda for all the wrong reasons. The plant and its controversies led to Cllr Shanker’s downfall as leader. Calls for transparency over the site’s costs and future all came too late for the Labour group. Cllr Peatfield will want to ensure the site and its problems don’t lead to her exit too.

With the future of the site on hold and a serious dispute over a Derbyshire County Council invoice for £93.9million not yet resolved - it is hard to say at this stage how things will develop. But whatever happenings will no doubt determine how successful Cllr Peatfield’s leadership will be.

Read our latest opinion piece on the Sinfin Waste Plant here

Should the council be made to pay the staggering £93million bill, then there is no doubt Cllr Peatfield will face big challenges over the council’s finances. Questions are up in the air over whether it could bankrupt the council. If so then that will give the Labour administration serious problems. The bill could impact the services the council runs and residents could end up paying the price.

A new leader, yes, but the same problems are not gone.

Derby city centre

Cllr Peatfield’s reign promises to be an exciting one as far as the city centre is concerned. Next year should see the opening of a new Market Hall, the completion of the new Becketwell Performance Arena and a project taking shape to regenerate the Market Place.

Cllr Peatfield as Deputy Leader has been tasked with managing city centre improvements and its current state is one of the big talking points among people in the city. While there are exciting developments to come, so are big challenges - not yet resolved.

Problems such as anti-social behaviour continue to make the headlines and whether or not the city centre is safe for visitors. Only last week Derbyshire police issued a dispersal order due to increasing reports of begging and anti-social behaviour. The council says a new task force has been set up to tackle the issues facing the city centre - the new leader will certainly face scrutiny if people’s safety is not addressed.

Labour’s minority leadership

Since taking power last year, Labour has been running a minority leadership at Derby City Council. With that brings the challenge of whether the group can be effective enough to lead. As Councillor Shanker found on Tuesday night, he did not have the numbers on his side to keep him in power.

Councillor Peatfield will be hoping her actions and her leadership style can in the long term lead to some cross-party support. As was witnessed this week, currently the opposition councillors are not shy of forming together and calling for the ‘sack’ button to be pressed when they want to. The number of opposition councillors outweighs the ruling Labour group.

Cost of living and poverty

Cllr Peatfield saw at close hand the difficulties vulnerable people in Derby were facing when she attended a poverty summit last year. Many in the city will tell her that residents in the city are struggling and using food banks. Inflation levels may have eased nationally but the cost of living is still a big problem in several areas of the city where deprivation is so high. Arboretum is one of the poorest wards in the whole country. Data says almost 40 per cent of children in Derby are living in poverty,

Earlier this year concerns were raised when it was revealed there were doubts about the future of a vital Government-led cash pot given to councils to help people struggling to pay their bills and put food on the table. A cost of living protest is planned in Derby next week. If the crucial Household Support Fund ceases to exist - Cllr Peatfield will have to find the answers on how people can seek help and must forge close relationships with the voluntary sector.

Grass cutting and the state of roads

Rightly or wrongly, the ruling Labour group in Derby have been criticised for the long grass seen on Derby’s verges and parks in recent weeks. Articles about the matter have been read by thousands of residents for whom many argue the long grass makes the city look unattractive. This problem will not go away if it is not resolved early on in Cllr Peatfield’s leadership. If resolved quickly she may well find the grass may be greener in political terms.

As well as the grass, potholes and the state of Derby’s roads have been questioned. Several roads in communities have been resurfaced in recent times but there are still questions being asked, with Pentagon Island recently being branded “ridiculous”. Other councils are facing similar problems, it must be said, but highways will play a big role in Cllr Peatfield’s leadershi