Council leader replaced after losing confidence vote

The leader of Derby City Council has been replaced after a motion of no confidence was passed.

The motion was tabled by opposition councillors at the Labour-run authority into Baggy Shanker earlier this month.

Mr Shanker - who is also the party's candidate for the Derby South constituency in the upcoming general election - had described the move as "a desperate act of political opportunism".

His place as the leader of the council has been taken by his deputy councillor Nadine Peatfield at the meeting on Tuesday.

The emergency meeting, which lasted nearly three-and-a-half hours, was tabled after the no confidence motion was received on 4 June.

Steve Hassall, the Conservative group leader, tabled the motion, and called on Mr Shanker to resign from his post.

The motion was seconded by Alan Graves, from Reform UK.

Speaking at the meeting, Mr Hassall said the move had been made "to avert potential financial disaster" at the council, citing concerns over the costs of a new waste treatment facility at the centre of a dispute with Derbyshire County Council.

"We haven't brought this motion lightly," he said.

Mr Shanker however accused the opposition parties of acting with the general election in mind, describing it as "pure political opportunism".

He said he had followed advice from council officers regarding a disputed invoice from the county council, adding: "I never have and never will shy away from making difficult decisions."

'Political purposes'

With a vote to back the motion split, mayor Ged Potter used his casting vote to decide in favour of the motion.

An amendment tabled by Ms Peatfield that sought to create "a cross-party group to review the decision-making process regarding the Sinfin waste plant" and return findings before the council's next meeting on 17 July had previously been defeated, with Mr Potter again casting a deciding vote.

Speaking after the meeting, Mr Shanker said he was disappointed to lose the role of leader, but wished Ms Peatfield success in the role.

He also strongly criticised the actions of opposition councillors.

"It's just obvious for me that this coalition of chaos has just abused council processes for their political purposes," he said.

"This was just about removing me as leader prior to the general election in Derby South."

More on this story