Mollösund is a small locality and former fishing village on the south-westernmost tip of the island of Orust. This is one of the oldest fishing villages in Sweden, even though fishing has been replaced by tourism as the main occupation for its around 200 inhabitants.

A Short History of Mollösund

Mollösund’s history stretches through the centuries all the way back to the 16th century. We’re talking about the time before the province of Bohuslän became a part of Sweden and the area still belonged to Norway. It was a fishing village that was heavily dependent on the fishing of herring. This meant that the life of its inhabitants was easy during the long periods when the huge stims of herring wandered close to the shores. The periods of prospering were followed by periods of starvation and poverty when the fishing declined.

The village had grown to around 500 inhabitants during the herring period in the mid-18th century. In addition, the herring period at the end of the 19th century meant that Mollösund had grown even more. The number of inhabitants had at the beginning of the 20th century reached 1000. As a result, the fishing village had become one of the largest in Sweden before the new decline in fishing. Fishing of herring on a commercial basis ended during the 1970s. Today there are just a few fishermen left in Mollösund.

Things to Do and See

Some of the activities here include walking around the marina or enjoying an ice cream or a lunch next to the water. In other words, enjoying a vacation. The marina is the heart of Mollösund with its many restaurants and cafés.

Mollösund Light House

On a cliff overlooking the sea of Skagerak is a small lighthouse. It is one of four landmarks in the small village. The lighthouse was built in 1930 and replaced a previous wooden construction.

Mollösund’s Lady

On top of the mountain Klockeberget, right next to the church there is a lady watching out over the sea of Skagerak. She is looking out for the return of her beloved, the fisherman. Where she stands the rock offers a view out over a large part of Mollösund and out over the island of Mollön and the sea. But it is the lady, Gumman, that is one of the four landmarks.

Mollösund Church

The third landmark is the church. It was completed in 1866 and had then replaced an older wooden church that had been here before.

Mollösund Windmill

The windmill is the last one of the four main landmarks in Mollösund. It dates back to the 19th century and was used to ground both grain and fish bones. It was in operation until 1931. Actually, it moved in 1901, and on its old location is still a millstone left.

Mollösund Local Heritage Museum

The local heritage museum is in an old fisherman’s home from the end of the 18th century. The museum exhibits objects, photos, and stories from the areas past, much oriented around fishing and navigation.

Katteviksbadet

Katteviksbadet is the local beach and swimming location. There are several cliffs, but also manmade amenities such as jumping towers.

How to Get to Mollösund

Flights: There are domestic and international routes to and from Göteborg Landvetter Airport (GOT), which is 110 kilometers away.

Car: Mollösund is next to small countryside roads in the south-western part of the island of Orust.

Bus: Local and regional buses from Västtrafik connect Mollösund with the surrounding region.

The driving distance from 5 major Swedish cities, according to Google Maps:

Stockholm – 493 kilometers (5h 46min)

Gothenburg – 88 kilometers (1h 19min)

Malmö – 361 kilometers (3h 49min)

Linköping – 359 kilometers (3h 54min)

Kiruna – 1600 kilometers (18h 7min)