Mollosund Map — Satellite Images of Mollosund

original name: Mollösund

geographical location: Orust Kommun, Goteborgs och Bohus Lan, Sweden, Europe

geographical coordinates: 58° 4' 0" North, 11° 28' 0" East

detailed map of Mollosund and near places

Welcome to the Mollosund google satellite map! This place is situated in Orust Kommun, Goteborgs och Bohus Lan, Sweden, its geographical coordinates are 58° 4' 0" North, 11° 28' 0" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Mollösund. See Mollosund photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Mollosund in Sweden. Mollosund hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Mollosund or add new placemark for Mollosund.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Mollosund hotel reservations

Book hotel in Mollosund online and save money

Mollosund hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in Sweden »

Mollosund hotels – sortable list of all Mollosund hotels »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Mollosund hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Mollosund, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Mollosund, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Mollosund hotels map

The location of each Mollosund hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Mollosund hotel map is available where all hotels in Mollosund are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Mollosund hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Mollosund hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Mollosund hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Mollosund hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Mollosund

Hotell Mollösunds Wärdshus (at Kyrkvägen 9 in Mollosund)

Björholmens Marina **** (in Ang, distanced approximately 3.5 km)

Nösundsgården (in Nosund, distanced approximately 4.8 km)

Sjögården Spa & Konferens *** (in Ellos, distanced approximately 12 km)

Salt & Sill *** (in Kladesholmen, distanced approximately 14 km)

Lekanders Bär & Boende (in Akervik, distanced approximately 14 km)

A Seaview Villa Orust (in Varekil, distanced approximately 15 km)

more Mollosund hotels »

Mollosund car rental

Compare Mollosund car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Mollosund rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Mollosund car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Mollosund — we will do it for you!

Car hire Mollosund and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Mollosund the city centre. Compare Mollosund car rental offers by various suppliers.

Stenungsund car rental (distanced approximately 21 km)

Uddevalla car rental (distanced approximately 37 km)

Gothenburg - Airport City car rental (distanced approximately 40 km)

Gothenburg - Jaegerdorffplatsen car rental (distanced approximately 50 km)

Gothenburg - Stampgatan car rental (distanced approximately 50 km)

more offers and Mollosund car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Mollosund

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Mollosund »

Overview of flights to and from Sweden »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Mollosund. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Mollosund and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Mollosund are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Goteborg Save Airport (distanced approximately 40 km) – airport hotels

Trollhattan Airport (distanced approximately 59 km) – airport hotels

Satenas Airport (distanced approximately 83 km) – airport hotels

Herrljunga Airport (distanced approximately 96 km) – airport hotels

Rada Airport (distanced approximately 100 km) – airport hotels

Mollosund 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Mollosund in Sweden

You can also dive right into Mollosund on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Mollosund 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Mollosund, Sweden in Google Earth »

Get more out of Mollosund map

Add placemark to Mollosund

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Mollosund map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Mollosund google map link options

link to us:

small Mollosund google map image link

medium Mollosund google map image link

large Mollosund google map image link