WASHINGTON (CBSDC) - What happens when just a complete nubb disrupts the sports universe by slamming an elite college basketball statistician in the throes of March Madness?

Everyone reading this can draw the inevitable conclusion.

But let me try to chronicle this saga by simplifying some details to make it more reader-friendly.

Welcome. Enjoy your front row seat to the Big Time Network.

The story begins with Matt Valdez, the type of lowly producer who’s content with excreting gaseous matter into the air, then sharing a laugh with himself as he sits in his own filth.

Then there’s Ken Pomeroy, a fancy stats guru whose work has been embraced by the best of the college ranks: names like Jim Larranaga and Brad Stevens (turn on a television anywhere right now) come to mind.

We’ll set the scene in the Junkies studio.

It’s early in the week; everyone is scrambling to masterwork their brackets in time for the NCAA tournament. March Madness. A gambler’s dream and worst nightmare.

Related: Seth Davis Upset Picks

A simple ‘Did you hear Lavar & Dukes had Ken Pom on as a guest?’ is thrown out.

It’s followed up by a ‘Valdez, why haven’t you booked him?’

This is a mystery that from the surface appears innocent enough, but when you start to dig a little deeper, a tale riddled with corruption and deceit begins to unfold.

Enter plot point 1 as told on the Junkies of 106.7 The Fan:

Valdez: I said ‘well, our listeners aren’t going to want to hear 15 minutes on pace of play.’

EB: Yea, but that’s not what you said yesterday on the show.

Cakes: I think you’re sugarcoating it a little bit.

JP: Let’s get Ken Pom’s take based on what you said, via Lavar and Dukes. We have the audio right?

EB: No no, but you need to preface it for people who are tuning in by what Valdez actually said. He said ‘Trust me, he’s not very good.’

Lurch: No, he said he was Dull.

Valdez: I said he was Dry. I didn’t say DULL, I said DRY.

Cakes: Dry implies kind of dull.

http://cbswashington.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/ken-pom-war-part-1.mp3

Take it from someone who’s been called dry on countless occasions. It’s a more polite way of saying ‘not entertaining.’

Valdez: Well it’s a very dry subject that he’s an expert on.

Let’s listen to Chad Dukes expertly stoke the fire with Ken Pomeroy on Lavar & Dukes Wednesday:

http://cbswashington.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/ken-pow-war-part-2.mp3

Key Ken Pom takeaways:

“Yea you know, Matt Valdez is pretty much dead to me at this point.”

“I’m actually a pretty huge fan of the Junkies. I grew up in the D.C. area and so I listen to them frequently and I know Matt’s a big fan of mine (Big Time). But yesterday he said I was like dry, and a terrible interview or something like that. I think that’s pretty close to the exact quote.”

“I think I’ve said all I need to say. Extremely disappointed to hear what he had to say yesterday.”

“Like I said, I’ve listened to the Junkies from their start in the late 90’s and still listen to them to this day. So you can imagine when you hear your name thrown around negatively by your idols, it’s tough to take.”

Wow. What were the odds Matt Valdez would talk smack on-air and it would actually get back to Ken Pom?!

You see, what Valdez ‘slept on’ was the very same thing that has given him a career: the power of the Junks. He foolishly neglected to take into account that this renowned guru could be a Junkies listener.

Cakes: In a billion years, Valdes never thought that Ken Pomeroy was a Junkies P1 out in Utah, listening to the show forever!

EB: What you need to do Matt, is you need to apologize. You need to apologize to Ken.

Now watch him grovel.

Valdez: I’ll apologize on air. I’m very sorry.

EB: Will you say that you were wrong?

Valdez: I was wrong.

EB: He’s excellent on air in fact.

Valdez: Excellent. Very good. Very talented.

Oh, it’s disgusting.

EB: He’s ten times better than you on the radio!

The last person who should ever be getting into a war of words is Valdez. It’s no secret, the kid’s no linguist.

But what happened when Ken Pom discovered he’d been chastised publicly by the producer of a show he adores could be described as a rightful tongue-lashing; a pointed counter-attack.

And the shameful apology that followed was just embarrassing. A man boyishly cowering in the corner as he realized he’d been caught railing against his hero.

What Valdez needs to realize is, when it comes to bashing someone you deeply admire, you either go all-in or refrain from doing so altogether. You either honor your appreciation for the person by completely burying them – because you care and want them to be aware of their deficiencies – or you watch yourself become the villain.

There is no in-between.

Related: Richard Sherman vs. Skip Bayless

The scraps of Valdez’ dignity shall serve as a constant reminder not to bite the hand that feeds.

Oh, did I forget to mention Ken Pomeroy came on the Junkies the next day to confront Matt?

Enjoy.

http://cbswashington.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/12kenpominterview.mp3

Follow Ken Pom on Twitter. Take a shot at Matt here.

Also visit KenPom.com for all your college basketball statistical needs.

P.S. Hats off to the producers and on-air talent who masterfully made this happen. It really was impressive how it developed into a war stretched across multiple radio shows, strung out for multiple days.

LANHAM, Md. (CBSDC) - John “Cakes” Auville has a problem that’s been growing on him. And after weeks of laughing it off, tensions among his coworkers began to boil over, and the time finally came for him to face the music.

Basically, he’s had disgusting sores on his face for weeks and he finally sought professional help to determine the cause.

“They came up with the diagnosis,” Cakes told the Junkies on 106.7 The Fan. “What did you guys bet? Any bets?”

“I thought it was what you had in the past,” JP said. “I can never remember the name of it. What was it?”

“Perioral Dermatitis?” Cakes answered. “Not what I’m afflicted with.”

Wait for it.

“Staph Infection. Staph Infection on the face.”

Cakes was just as befuddled by the diagnosis as everyone around him, and anyone who happened to hear the big reveal on the air Tuesday morning.

Cakes: Apparently I have very sensitive skin and I have the immunity system of a mosquito. I didn’t know this: staph lives in your nose.

JP: Jason right now has staph infection? I right now have staph infection?

Cakes: All of you are walking around with it. It’s just a matter of whether it manifests itself on your face.

Valdez: Twenty-five percent of people carry Staph in their nose and mouth.

So one out of the four Junks, as Cakes processed the information. Actually, to expand on the Web MD fear-mongering Valdez regurgitated: “about 25% of people normally carry staph in the nose, mouth, genitals or anal area.”

Sleep on that one.

But Larry Bishop, disgusted by the leper he was perched across from in the studio, came through with a decisive look into the future.

Larry: Obviously you’ve got the medicine inside of you and its working, but it looks like the sores are so pronounced that it may take a good couple weeks for it to all clear up.

Cakes: I mean I have a follow-up in ten days.

Larry: So I don’t think you can shave for a couple of weeks.

Cakes: Beard-A-Thon 2013, it’s on baby! Because by the time this whole nonsense is over, hopefully – knock on wood – the Capitals will be in the playoffs.

Monster playoff beard. Epic.

Let’s hope between now and then, Cakes gets this infection taken care of, so it doesn’t become the WJFK Staff infection.

Follow Cakes on Twitter.

YOU MAY ALSO ENJOY:

Solving the Age-Old Question: What’s On Cakes’ Face?

EB Has A Problem … It’s Time We Intervene

Panty Perverts Caught in Arlington, Va. and Lanham, Md.

LANHAM, Md. (CBSDC) - Eric Bickel is a fascinating human being. He really is.

During Friday’s show, he chose to unburden himself of something that had been bothering him for some time; something rather peculiar in nature.

It seems he’s had this recurring dream, which involves him losing his uhhhh … his junk.

“I have to be delicate obviously, but it has to do with my junk,” Bickel told the rest of the Junkies. “And for some reason I have this dream over and over and over that I can actually detach it from my body; that I can just like, pop it off almost. And then it turns into like PLAY-DOH.””

Listen to him as he explains his weird junk dream:

(2:31) EB Explains His Plah-Doh Junk

Junkies - 106.7 The Fan

Although critical at first, Lurch did offer high value to the conversation by naming situations where it would be beneficial to detach your junk.

“You’re playing hoops or whatever, or when I was playing softball with the old guys,” Lurch offered. “Yea, you would detach it and put it in your bag and then just put it back on.”

The Junkies have a male-dominated audience, so unfortunately for the female minority, this next exercise will be an act of futility, but imagine if you could just remove it.

First of all, would you do it?

Secondly, where/when would you remove it? Are there some places where it’s required? Others where it’s just a common courtesy?

Would it be like taking off your shoes when you walk into someone’s home? Is it customary for every home to have it’s equivalent to the coat-hanger?

Maybe there’s like a drawer everyone keeps by their front door. When male visitors come by, they just drop it in the drawer as they step inside. “Please take your junk off when you come inside.”

I know I’ve heard of a ‘junk drawer’ before, but I never would have thought …

You’re dining at a fancy restaurant … “Excuse me, do you have some place I can store my junk?”

Lock Lurch would remove his as soon as he got home every night.

I don’t know. The whole ‘thing’ sounds preposterous, but it does make for a fascinating imagination session.

Hats off to you EB, for having such an interesting brain.

Brings a whole new perspective to Sports Junkies.

Show pictures of your detached junk to EB here.

(18:57) EB's Junk Dream

The Junkies - 106.7 The Fan

WASHINGTON (CBSDC) – Along with grasping to fill the giant size-seven shoes left by comedic genius John Auville this week, JP of the Junkies became obsessed with showing everyone his disgusting toes, talking about his disgusting toes, and tweeting about his disgusting toes on the show Tuesday.

*Warning to reader: NSFA (not safe for anyone)

The thing about talk radio is, it’s important to bring elements of your personal life onto the air to build a relationship with your audience.

Things you’re allowed to leave off range anywhere from personal details about your family, to in-depth coverage of your horrifying bloody toes. But really, when you have your own show, the sky’s the limit to what you choose to expose; even if it’s the gnarly details of your crusty, crackling foot fungus.

To give you an idea of how revolting this convo was, here’s one of the introductory lines.

“I have bloody toes.”

Let me rattle off some more thrilling quotes.

“I just have toenail fungus.”

“I cut off my whole nail except for like a nubb.”

“I shave off the whole nail except for the nubber.”

“It’s just a nubb.”

“I shaved ‘em down and I put it in an Epsom salt bath.”

“I’m nubbs.”

He didn’t actually say that last one, but he basically did. Sue me for all my zeros, lawyer man.

JP explained the condition as so debilitating, he’s forced to either wear shoes to the beach, or cover his Leatherface-looking digits from the harsh judgment of the world with layers of sand.

Now dig your nails into this snippet:

JP: I think EB has toenail fungus.

EB: Don’t throw me in your mix. This is your story.

JP: Alright, but don’t you have it?

EB: Why are you throwing my fungus in the mix?

JP: I’m just saying, it’s not that uncommon.

EB: I do, but use somebody else as an example.

Before you read on, there’s brutally graphic photos of JP’s toes coming. He should honestly have to work XXX into his Twitter handle if he’s going to be doing this.

I don’t know if it’s the sight of these pics or that I’ve been melting my face off in Dewey Beach for three days, but I’m sick to my stomach after writing this.

I seriously am.#notabit

Hey JP! You’re grossing everyone out!

JP Talks About His Gross Toes

The Junkies - 106.7 The Fan

Follow JP on Twitter, if you dare.

WASHINGTON (CBSDC) - You already know this, but there’s a guy named Yasiel Puig on the Dodgers tearing up the league.

Pronounced: [Poo-eeg].

What you probably don’t know (because the thought was expertly implanted in your brain) , you didn’t actually learn about Puig from his nightly SportsCenter Top 10 appearances, or the Dodgers frequent nationally televised games, or Twitter or even anything else.

You only know who he is because JP of the Junkies told you.

It doesn’t matter how many consecutive games he’s hit in, how outrageous his OPS is, or how many home runs he hit in the month of June. You wouldn’t have known the name Yasiel Puig without JP claiming him like 7 days ago.

Don’t believe me? Then how do you explain this conversation from the show, like 4 or 5 whole days ago?

JP Discovered Puig

The Junkies - 106.7 The Fan

JP: “Just the fact that I mentioned how good he was before any of you guys were onto him, like you put me as this big Yasiel Puig fan.”

Lurch: “Hold on. Hold on.”

Cakes: “Did you watch SportsCenter?”

Lurch: “Are you claiming you knew who Puig was before me?”

JP: “On this show.”

Lurch: “Really? Is that why I already had him on my fantasy team when you brought him up?”

Valdez: “JP’s like the advanced scout for the Junkies.”

Very funny Cakes. I’m sure SportsCenter was onto Puig before Hey F’ing JPedia…before July 3rd.

How to Pronounce Puig

The Junkies - 106.7 The Fan

Grow up, and respect the divine source of knowledge sitting across from you.

People are so disrespectful these days, honestly.

You think it’s easy to speak so aimlessly you drain rooms of their tissue resources everywhere you go? So unwarranted everyone around you has Hoover flags hanging from their ears?

Only a rare talent can draw blood from a stone with nothing but the sound of his voice. And you know what else, it takes one to know one, and identifying a ballplayer’s talent just 33 games into his career is called intuition.

So to answer your question, yes Jason Bishop. That IS why you had Puig on your fantasy team before JP brought him up.

Related: Davey Johnson Wouldn’t Give Puig All-Star Nod

JP Says Puig Will Save Baseball

The Junkies - 106.7 The Fan

WASHINGTON (CBSDC) - Some of the best sports talk radio segments in morning drive are those which extend beyond what the latest notable person thinks about the Redskins’ name change debate, or why an MLB manager wants to slit his wrists – basically, topics that have nothing to do with sports.

That’s where the Junkies come in, and why on this day, Jason Bishop is king (and really always has been within the confines of Ashburn).

You see, Lurchy is now 43-years-old, has consistently expressed signs of being in the throes of a midlife crisis, like when he inexplicably grew out his hair, and now has two kids on the verge of adolescence, and then high school, and his wife has braces.

We all struggle to find the meaning of life, and sometimes it helps in our ongoing pursuit to regain the bliss of our youth, to find little things to keep our minds off the short, fleeting amount of time we have left between now and the end of days.

Fortunately, the Junks have a diehard fanbase that’s loyal and cares enough, to assist in answering these little life questions on a daily basis.

So let’s explore what prompted Jason Bishop’s latest cry for help Tuesday morning: “What will make my life happy?”

JP: “The major revelation is, you are seriously considering adding to the Bishop family…”

Lurch: “My wife and I have been thinking about it for the last few months. Not getting any younger. I’m certainly not getting any younger. Life is short. Valdez, Drab, I think it’s time … to get a dog.”

Lurch: “My wife and I have been talking about getting a puppy here for the last few months. The kids have been begging for it and they’re spoiled little brats. But to see their eyes light up giving them a puppy I think would be priceless. So I think that now it’s just a matter of finding the right dog. Finding the perfect dog for the family, for the kids. Do I get a rescue? Do I get a puppy? Do I get a smaller dog? Do I get a bigger dog?”

Lurch: “I don’t want just suggestions on what type of dog to get, first of all, I want you to tell me if I should get a dog. Is the juice worth the squeeze? And then if you think it is, then you tell me what kind of dog to get. What will make my life happy?”

These are all great questions, questions which could drastically reduce the strain on those midlife concerns, or if nothing else, delay the inevitable. But now Jason needs your help. He outlined his demands in the segment below, and needs the help of the listener in the decision-making process.

Because after all, the Junkies lives wouldn’t be the same without their listeners.

Please help him answer the following questions, before he does something drastic, like purchasing a Ferrari or dumping his money into a pyramid scheme.

What kind of dog should Jason get?

What kind of dog will best help him forget that his body is quickly withering away, and that none of this really matters?

The Revelation - Lurch Wants a Dog

The Junkies - 106.7 The Fan

Revelation Part 2 - The Setbacks

The Junkies - 106.7 The Fan

NUBBSVILLE, Md. (CBSDC) - Tuesday’s show brought a startling development on the ‘Jason being depressed about everything’ front.

It’s been well-documented Lurch has reached the point in a man’s life in which he’s able to find sorrow in the little things.

Little things like his daughters getting older, his wife getting braces. He once even inexplicably grew out his hair.

A few months back, he asked on the show, “What will make my life happy?” before deciding that buying a dog would fill the bottomless void in his soul.

One of the aforementioned problems has brought him so much stress, it’s tipped the scales, and is now a serious, growing problem, about growth.

“I’m having a hard time with just noticing the development,” Jason said of his eldest daughter. “I’m having a hard time with it. And not that she is beyond her years.”

“What do you mean you’re having a hard time? You don’t like it?” EB said.

“I’m having a hard time coping with it,” Lurch said.

“Are we gonna do a therapy session right now?” EB said.

“He doesn’t like puberty,” Cakes said. “He’s not a fan.”

“So what are you suggesting?” EB said before JP began to sympathize with Jason, noting his own daughter’s “development.”

Lurch: Growing BREASTS is what I’m talking about!

LOL.

EB: Right, but why does it affect you really?

Lurch: I’m her dad! I’m noticing she’s not my little girl anymore. That’s my point. And I’m having a hard time coping with it.

EB: It doesn’t take them growing breasts to realize they’re getting older though. I mean I think about that every day.

Cakes: You won’t play Daughter by Pearl Jam (Cakes was desperately trying to divert the topic).

Lurch: That’s when it starts. When you notice their body developing, that’s when it really hits you. I’m just telling you, I’m having a hard time with it.

No matter what problems you are dealing with, we want to help you find a reason to keep living. By calling 1-800-273-TALK (8255) you’ll be connected to a skilled, trained counselor at a crisis center in your area, anytime 24/7.

JUNKIES POLL: Do All Brothers Know Mr. Marcus?

Lurch's Daughter is Growing Breasts

The Junkies - 106.7 The Fan

Lurch Doesn't Believe in Cars That Drive Themselves

The Junkies - 106.7 The Fan

WASHINGTON (CBSDC) - It’s almost cute — definitely hysterical — whenever Jason’s imagination begins running wild with the innocence of a child (who can’t read), for something that will likely be a reality in the not so distant future.

Four states have already passed legislation to legally welcome the future of autonomous cars, which have surpassed the production stage, and in some cases, already reached the roadways in testing.

Lurch, who can barely use a computer, doesn’t know how to type, can’t comprehend the relationship between the internet and WiFi (one being a product of the other), and to this day, still has yet to figure out how to upload songs to his iPod, does not agree with this accurate assessment.

“Hold on, now when you say they drive themselves,” Lurch, the donk, said when the topic was broached on the Junkies on Wednesday. “So you’re telling me that you can just start the car, and just take a nap, and it will get you from home to work?”

“Yea,” EB replied. “It drives you.”

“There’s no way they’re going to allow that thing,” Lurch argued with a great deal of ignorance on his side. “They’re not going to allow that thing on the roads.”

“I’m not inventing it, I’m telling you they’ve been working on it for years,” EB said.

“Alright, they might be working on it, but there’s no way,” Lurch said.

“They have models that can do it now in little tracks,” EB responded.

“I understand that, but there’s no way, state by state, they’re going to allow that on the roads,” Lurch said.

In May 2012, Nevada passed legislation for autonomous cars, quickly followed by Florida in July 2012. California passed similar legislation that September, then Michigan in 2013.

They’ve literally been allowing it state by state.

“Not in our lifetime,” Lurch concluded. “No way in our lifetime.”

He’s probably right.

Epic Lurch Story

The Junkies - 106.7 The Fan

WASHINGTON (CBDC) - If you missed parts or all of the Junkies on Thursday, it’s understandable — there’s like three feet of snow outside.

You can chalk it up to Snowchi Pax, or whatever they’re calling it, but you still missed an epic Lurch segment involving his wife, Theresa.

Yesterday, as Lurch explained, Lurch met up with a few of the guys from the Corner Club as snowfall first touched down, to imbibe and have a round on the golf simulator.

So after their round, obviously, they headed over to Bonefish for a subsequent round of drinks.

Lurch then had to drive his daughters to a softball workout.

Here’s when chaos inserts itself:

Snowchi notwithstanding, Theresa had plans for the whole family to meet up with the Kelleys (I don’t know who the Kelleys are either) for dinner afterward.

Lurch: So it’s 7:30 and the storm is gonna pummel us. And I start thinking about it, well, I gotta get up at like 3:30 — I’m not getting up at the standard 4:20 or whatever. So then I told my wife, I said, ‘I’m not gonna go to dinner, because I gotta go to sleep early, I gotta watch GW/VCU.’

EB: She can kind of understand that. Well, you threw in the GW/VCU.

Lurch: Well I didn’t tell her that, but I was thinking to myself, if I go to dinner, we’re not gonna start eating ’til 8, I’ll be there til 9, and I want to go to sleep relatively early.

So she cancels the dinner. She could have taken the girls, because the Kelleys have kids that they know, and I said, ‘Why can’t you just go to the Kelleys without me?’

She said, ‘No, I’m not gonna go because Jim’s gonna be there and it’s gonna be awkward, I’m not gonna have anyone to talk to.

I said, ‘What? What are you talking about? It’s not awkward, we’ve know them for years.

So she cancels the dinner, we go to Subway after the workout.

So we get back up into the house and she’s like, ‘the Kelleys are afraid to ask you to go anywhere because you’re such a D-bag.’

I said, ‘What?!’

JP: So she didn’t really call you that?

EB: No, she did.

Lurch: No, she goes, ‘You’re such a d-bag that the Kelleys are afraid to ask you to go out, and these are the reasons, because you always bail.’

So then she’s yelling at me in the bedroom, the kids are downstairs eating.

I was floored! I didn’t know where it came from! It was out of left field. She obviously wasn’t thinking about me, because she just takes it for granted that I could just go to bed at 11 o’clock. She wasn’t up cleaning off the car at 3:30. Right? That was ME. All she does is roll over and say, ‘Drive safe! [snooring sounds] Be careful! [more snoring sounds]‘

The issue went unresolved, with both of them going to bed in a huff, although, Lurch said later he planned to have a sit down with Theresa when he arrives back home.

Lurch: I might have to take a couple credit cards away today.

EB: That’s the hammer. WHAM!

Lurch: I can take the Nordstrom and The Gap away. See how she likes that. And if she really pushes me, Macy’s is going.

Reggie Calls In

The Junkies - 106.7 The Fan

LANHAM, Md. (CBSDC) – The Junkies received a very special call on Friday – they were joined by Reggie, former love interest to Peggy, Lurch’s mom, a guy who’s been mentioned countless times on the show through the years, oftentimes in jest.

Reggie is almost a thing of Junkies folklore, and anyone who’s been listening to the show for years knows exactly what I mean, so him calling in perhaps brings a shade of reality to someone who’s long felt more like a myth.

As Lurch explained, his mother met Reggie, a former secret service agent, when the two were working at the White House during the Reagan administration, although, the extent of their relationship was always a bit hazy.

Let’s see if his call served to clear any of the up:

“You had called the show a few years back, correct?” Lurch asked.

“Yea, you know what happened is, when you guys were talking about that way back then, somebody that I used to work with – even though you didn’t say the last name – they listened to it, they knew, and they called me.”

“Can you give these guys a little idea of what the friendship was like with my mom?” Lurch asked.

[Valdez giggling]

“You make a lot of friends when you work at the White House,” Reggie said. “You travel with the staff. You’re part of a team, so you get to know each other, and his mom was a wonderful lady. Great person.”

So no. Still just as hazy.

Reggie has a lot of high-profile friends apparently, and Lurch recounted one particular account when he and his mother flew out to Los Angeles to meet up with Reggie, and during their stay, Lurch was treated to accompany him to a visit to his friend’s house. His friend is Hall of Fame running back Marcus Allen.

Reggie also enlightened the Junks about his a trip he made long ago to the home of OJ Simpson, white Bronco in front and all.

And he even joaned a little, when asked to tell one memory he has of Jason.

“What was that movie, White Men Can’t Jump?” Reggie laughed before ending his call on a pleasant note. “[Jason] found the right profession, I think, and I’m really proud of him. You’re doing a great job, buddy, so just keep doing what you’re doing and give your mom my best.”

All in all, Reggie’s phone call was a delightful surprise, and a segment to which serious Junks fans with truly enjoy listening.

[Also Lurch dropped a bombshell about his wife on the show yesterday — read about/listen to that here]

Listen to the segment in the audio clip above.

Lurch Wants to Wrap it Up

The Junkies - 106.7 The Fan

WASHINGTON (CBSDC) - The buzz from March Madness is in the air. It’s palpable. Electric.

As of this writing, cube-dwellers across this fine land — the backbone of our hardworking nation — are lining up outside their bosses’ offices with unexpected wooziness — It may be a stomach virus. I hear that’s going around. I wouldn’t want to get the entire office sick — to flee their nine-to-fives for the bar stool sanctuaries.

Not even the Sports Junkies — who spend four hours a day deeply immersed in sports talk radio — are immune to its seductive lure.

“Can’t Wait! C’mon let’s wrap it up so I can get on the roaaaaad,” Lurch said, full of enthusiasm for life, two seconds into the 56th minute of the 4th hour of the show.

“Looks like he shaved,” JP said of Lurch, almost as if seeing him for the first time that morning, or being forced to examine him through a new lens when faced with a level of excitement so uncharacteristic of Lurch in the last hour of the show.

“He shaves pretty much every day,” EB indulged.

And then, sensing the potential for these once harmless beard comments to trickle on for another twenty unforgivable seconds, Lurch flips the switch, initiating a violent tone shift, and signaling the end of a shared moment.

“Can we wrap it up?” he says sternly, as the March Madness theme music falls off a cliff, mysteriously mimicking that shift in tone.

“Yea,” JP obliged.

“Cause I need to get on the road,” Lurch said.

“Alright, we’re out of here, Grant and Danny are up next from Public Bar,” JP wrapped it up.

I reached 106.7 The Fan program director Chris Kinard for comment on Lurch’s bizarre, abrupt mood swing.

“I think that’s perfectly reasonable. He put in a very tough 4 hours and 10 minutes of work today,” Kinard told me exclusively, three hours into what figures to be his fourth 14-hour work day this week.

“It’s perfectly reasonable for him to want to get on the road to go watch TV as quickly as possible, and be away from his family all day … today, all day tomorrow, all day Saturday and all day Sunday,” he said. “So I sympathize with him.”

WASHINGTON (CBSDC) - Perhaps being ‘worried’ about it isn’t the proper phrasing, but Lurch is certainly ‘aware’ he’s becoming the crazy, screaming dad who ruins his children’s softball games for all other parents and kids (his included) in attendance, he admitted Monday.

We all know this guy. We all hate this guy.

He’s the parent who recalls his own shortcomings as a player, while watching his kids play sports, and lives vicariously through them with the aggression of someone who knows ‘too much’ about the game to let apathy slide by the wayside.

This guy sucks the fun out of the game, every time, and has parents across the diamond muttering under their breath for him to ‘shut up’ but wont’ say it to his face because, like most parents, they’ve put their confrontational ‘shut up or I’ll make you shut up’ days far back in the rearview.

In reality, they end up talking to other parents as they’re walking to their cars in that ‘Can you believe that guy?’ kind of way, then passive-aggressively alert the ump before their next unfortunate encounter with screaming dad.

“I would love to just have a camera fixated on me at my daughter’s softball game, because I know I just make a fool of myself,” Lurch said.

Lurch: Look, she’s twelve-years-old. And all these kids are 11, 12, some of them are 13. But it just drives me batty, the mental mistakes. And I understand they’re 12, and they don’t get the repetitions that they should. Practice time has been cut because of the weather.

EB: They also don’t care that much.

Lurch: They don’t care like the parents do. But I know I’m the loudest parent. I know it. I know for a fact I am. I know the parents on the other side can hear me, because they’ve said stuff to me before.

JP: Does your wife ever say anything to you?

Lurch: My wife just kind of sits on the bleachers. She pulls the hat down. She doesn’t want to be 50 feet within earshot.

JP: Do you kids every scold you?

Lurch: They feel it. I know they feel it. Because when they make a mistake, I’m so loud on the field and I know they can hear it. All the players can hear; the coaches can hear it; the other parents can hear it. But I’m just so competitive. I have this drive, and I just want them to do well, and I want her to play well. And when there’s two outs and she’s on first, and there’s a popup to right-center field, and she’s waiting to see if it’s caught. There’s two outs. Right. I’m like ‘RUNNNNNN! WHAT ARE YOU DOING? THERE’S TWO OUTS!’

Lurch: And then she ends up on third, where she could have scored if she’s running. The parents are probably just looking at me like what are you doing.

Poor T.

She probably just lets it build and build for weeks on end, before consuming the proper dosage of wine to get up the nerve to call him a nine-letter word, and “the Kelleys are afraid to ask you to go out.”

Listen to the segment in the giant audio clip below.

”Lurch

”106.7

WASHINGTON (CBSDC) – Lurch has officially adopted the dog he fell in love with on the air, which he met last week when the Washington Animal Rescue League brought a few pups in need of a home into the Junkies studio, renaming the female Dutch Shepard ‘Luca.’

The news, first reported by WARL, has been confirmed by 106.7 The Fan.

Here are some quotes from Lurch on how he and his wife T came to the decision to ultimately adopt, rather than foster the dog on a trial basis.

“So we went down there, and of course the three dogs that they brought in on Wednesday, the last dog that we met was the Dutch Shepard,” Lurch explained.

“But there was something about the Dutch Shepard that I really liked,” he said. “I just like the coat. I like the temperament. I like the demeanor of the dog.”

Lurch, on bringing the dog home for the first time.

“Now look, when we brought the dog home on Friday, okay, it had an accident in the house,” he said. “And we knew that was gonna happen, right? That’s the one part that I’m kind of fearful of, is the bathroom training. The potty training.”

“I think she’s been really good over the last couple days. We got her Friday, she’s had one major mishap in the house. But we’re kind of freaking out. Every time she eats something or every time she drinks water, we take her out like five minutes later.”

“What was the major mishap?” EB would ask.

“She poo’d right there in the living room,” Lurch said. LOL.

“She’s peed a couple times on the carpet,” he later added.

“But you should see this dog eat,” Lurch would go on to say. “I mean, I don’t know how often they fed the dog at the rescue league. Drab, you’ll know. When we put food in this dog’s bowl, she inhales the food. She doesn’t even taste it.”

More on the dog sitch:

Drab: Hey, what was the girls’ reaction when you came through the door with it?

Lurch: Well, you know my youngest daughter, we had to kind of tell my youngest daughter that we’re just fostering the dog, that we didn’t officially adopt it.

JP [laughing]: They lied.

Lurch: Hey, you gotta do what you gotta do sometimes. It’s a white lie. It’s a Reggie White lie.

EB: So you have like the one kid that was upset about it?

Lurch: Yes. I told you, she didn’t want to become emotionally attached to a pet. Now, over the last couple days…

EB: She’s warming up to it?

Lurch: Yes, but she still thinks it’s just a foster, it’s not an adoption. But it’s really an adoption.

There’s one final note to Junkies listeners, from Lurch, the consummate angler.

“Hey, if you work at a pet store, text me.”

More Junkies Blog:

Donk: Move Harper to Third, Zimmerman to Left

WTF Is This Junkies Caller Trying to Say?

Junkies Joined In Studio by 2 LPGA Sillies

”Lurch

”106.7

WASHINGTON (CBSDC) – Less than a week as a new dog owner, and Lurch has already had a supreme bonding moment with his Dutch Shepard, Luca, who helped him thwart a home invasion inside his palatial Ashburn estate.

Luca, as Lurch explained, started barking late one night as the rest of the house laid their heads in peaceful slumber.

The Papa decided to head downstairs to see what was the matter, to find Luca in her crate barking loudly, at the sight of a house mouse squatting in her immediate field of view, seemingly taunting the captive animal.

Unfortunately, the devious little mouse scurried away at the initial sighting of the big, hulking Lurch Papa.

Fortunately, the mouse had a rebellious streak in it, and decided to dance too close to the sun one too many times.

“So that mouse is sitting, staring at Luca, flipping her the bird, taunting her, because the mouse is just chilling,” Lurch explained. “Whatever the mouse wants to do, nibbling on everything.”

“So, once the mouse saw me come downstairs, it scurried down the steps; it was gone, right? I took the dog out, she went pee. I put her back in, fine. 4 o’clock in the morning, dog’s barking again, alright? I’m thinking, ‘There’s no way that mouse came back up and is sitting right next to the cage.’ So I tip-toed down the stairs; that mouse is right back in the same spot.”

“Well, you’re gonna get a glue trap and put peanut butter on it, right next to the cage,” EB said.

“Right back in the same spot, Mr. Bickel, alright,” Lurch said. “But I crept on it, on the back side of it, because I don’t think that mice can see real well.”

“I don’t know,” Cakes said. “How would I know?”

“Well it’s nibbling on something, like on the leg of a table,” Lurch said.

“What you grab to smack it?” JP asked.

“So I grabbed a big Pittsburgh Steelers cup that my wife likes to use for her coffee,” Lurch said.

“Oh, you just pummeled her coffee cup,” EB said.

“And I crept up right behind the mouse. I can’t believe the mouse didn’t see me coming,” Lurch said. “And I wanted to put the cup over top of the mouse. The mouse kind of moved when I did it, so it kind of got caught on the edge of the cup, at the head. And it starts moving violently. The tail is wagging violently. And I kept it there, and I just put a big heavy table on top of it.”

“A table?” JP said, flummoxed.

“Well, yea, because the mouse, if I just let it go, the mouse is gonna get out,” Lurch said. “And if I just let the cup go, it was strong enough to move the cup. The cup wasn’t real heavy. So I had to put something heavy on the cup to keep it down, and I figured it was just gonna suffocate.

“Then I take the dog out to pee and poop, went back, the table falls over — the one I put on top of the cup — the table falls over.”

“Silly mouse trap you built!” Cakes joaned (joaning is bullying).

“Then the cup falls over, but you know what? That mouse was dead!” Lurch rejoiced. “Doneskie!”

“I think you got him from the initial contact from the cup,” JP said.

“Yea, you stunned him,” Flakes said.

“I think I did,” Lurch said. “But it was because Luca barked, that we stopped the home invasion of the mouse. That mouse is doneskie! Not sure if there are any more in the house, there might be, but that one’s cooked.”

“Luca’s a hero,” EB said.

“Luca is,” Lurch agreed. “Ashburn hero.”

Congrats to the Lurch Papa, for finding himself a reindeer-looking guard dog in Luca (or Luka, or, I don’t know).

Listen to the full story below.

More Junkies Blogs:

Caller Dumbly Suggest Switching Harper-Zimmerman

Junks Joined In Studio by LPGA Sillies

Lurch Officially Adopts the Dutch Shepard

”Luca

”106.7

WASHINGTON (CBSDC) – Surely by now you’ve heard there’s some controversy about town.

Look, I’m not here to take any official stance or anything, but rather solely here to report the news.

However, you’re likely to have an opinion. In fact, I’m sure you do.

The one certainty here, is whichever opinion you have, it’s probably impassioned to the point you’d either comment ‘this is inevitable, just get it over with’ or ‘OMG, please stop talking about it!’

Lurch is trying to decide whether or not he should have his dog, Luka, pee in his neighbor’s yard.

Lurch: They. Don’t. Care. About the yard. You should see the yard. Weeds everywhere, they never cut the grass.

Cakes: Does it get you bitter? That’s bordering your property, it’s gotta get you bitter.

JP: So wait a second. You have some sort of landlord that’s never ever been there, that just bought the house? Didn’t live there at all?

Lurch: The guy who lived there for a long time, that I knew – this guy Tim – was a really good guy, he moved. Sold it to this guy from Egypt who’s never been in the house, all he did was buy the house to rent out to people. And he rents to families, mostly Middle Eastern families, and this family from Syria, believe me, they don’t care about the yard. That’s what I’m gonna do. Luka has a new potty ground.

Cakes: They’re just happy they’re out of Syria.

JP: Will you at least do it kind like on the border? You’re not gonna go right to the middle of their yard, are you?

Lurch: Honestly, I don’t think they would care.

The Junks went on to throw out on impromptu poll, which was promptly cut short because there was like 10 seconds left in the show, which was promptly eaten up by a guy calling in with his ‘World Cup predictions.’

That’s where you come in.

Now that you’ve been given prior context, should Lurch allow his dog to pee in his neighbors’ yard?

”Lurch

”106.7

WASHINGTON (CBSDC) – It’s been awhile since the website has seen a substantial Lurch’s dog update (aside from him considering allowing the dog to pee in his neighbors’ yard), and in the last two weeks, there have been some startling developments.

First, about two weeks back, Valdez, citing a source close to the king, uncovered a bombshell about how Lurch plans to obtain a crate for Luka — the Dutch Shepherd he rescued from the Washington Animal Rescue League — which, if he goes through with it, may be the most unscrupulous act he’s committed to date.

Valdez: Alright, well you know how Jason just got Luka, his beautiful new dog? Well, what he’s doing is, he doesn’t want to pay for a dog crate, a brand new dog crate.

Lurch: Oh, jeeze. You just make stuff up.

Valdez: So he’s asking all of his boys if they’ll hook him for a dog crate.

EB: You’re kidding.

Valdez: It’s $80. It’s $80 a dog crate.

EB: Eighty dollars?!

Valdez: And the, I believe the quote is, ‘I don’t want to pay for that ess.’

”Lurch’s

”106.7

Short of begging for handouts, Lurch is also considering training his dog in the German language, which is pretty cool. As he explained last week, he had a trainer visit his home to experience first-hand what commanding a dog in German may be like.

“The guy came over to the house for ninety minutes,” Lurch said.

“And we talked, and I asked him a bunch of questions,” he said. “His dogs were actually in the car, and he brought his dogs out into my yard. And the one dog, it’s like a Belgian, I want to say Malamute, but that’s wrong — it’s Belgian Mal or Maul, or something like that; it looks like a shepherd — and that thing sat there, my dog’s going crazy on the leash, barking and trying to jump on it.

“That dog just sat there, looked up at his master, and then the master said something like ‘Walwoumph,’ and that thing got up, and went right into the truck. I mean he didn’t flinch, he just listened to him. He was just staring at his master. And I said, ‘If you can make my dog do that, I’m just gonna bow to you.’ “

You might be thinking: ‘Why would anyone want to train their dog in another language?

Well, as Lurch would explain, it’s actually a rather clever way of training your dog to be uniquely responsive to your commands, while avoiding confusing the dog when, say, at the dog park, when other dogs and their English-speaking dog owners are around, barking orders at each other, so to speak.

Fast-forward to the 7-minute mark for that story.

”Training

”106.7

Listen: JP/Bruce the Hugger ‘I Believe’ Chant Remix

BETHESDA, Md. (CBSDC) – There’s a lot to celebrate today: Team USA advancing to the World Cup’s knockout round, no new major Redskins name controversy stories, and the Quicken Loans National officially being underway at Congressional Country Club in Bethesda.

To the latter, it was major news when Tiger Woods announced he’d return to golf in time for his own tournament, and understandably so, became the biggest story heading into the tournament as a result.

Fortunately for Tiger, the Junkies had prime real estate for their live broadcast from Congressional, which afforded Lurch the opportunity to announce the play-by-play call of Tiger’s tee shot on the 10th hole.

As Lurch took his spot overlooking the 10th green, like the professional broadcaster he is, he naturally lowered his voice just above a whisper, as Tiger approached the tee.

It was actually hilarious how seamless he made the transition, like he’s been practicing while watching golf with the Corner Club, patiently awaiting his chance to play Jim Nantz.

“I can hear you now. I have to whisper, because I’m out here on the deck and I’m overlooking the green. Of course, you have to talk in golf speak, in golf tone here when you’re at the golf tournament, but we’re overlooking the tenth green here at Congressional. It’s playing 203 yards today, all downhill. About 185 of it is complete carry over the tee boxes and the pond, here, between the 10th and the 18th, here.

…

“Tiger Woods, of course, one of the most anticipated rounds of golf this year on the tour, wearing his black pants and his lime-green Nike shirt. Has not played since March 9, when he played at the WGC Cadillac Championship in Florida.”

“What are the wind conditions, Jason?” JP played along.

“Not much wind, JP,” Lurch replied. “I think it’s pretty still and steady; it’s a beautiful morning. It really is. Temperature probably in the mid to high 7os. And here’s Tiger Woods.

“Are we looking at a right-to-left situation?” JP asked.

“Probably,” Lurch said. “He has a five-iron in his hand, and here’s his shot: high ball flight, coming down — he likes it, he’s posing — and that is deep. That will be in the bunker. His first tee shot, competitive tee shot since March, and he is deep in the bunker. Gonna be a tough up-and-down, JP.”

Lurch would go on to describe Jordan Spieth’s tee shot, before throwing it back to JP in the studio.

Listen to Jason’s PxP, which begins roughly halfway through in the clip below. It’s funny, and almost mesmerizing, really, hearing the normally loud Papa lower his voice to a ‘golf tone.’

While I’m sure this opens me up to being called a ‘donk,’ one thing I’m not clear on, is how Tiger’s tee shot from the 10th hole could be his first ‘competitive tee shot since March.’

”Lurch

”106.7

UPDATE (Wednesday): In quite possibly the greatest possible turn of events in response to Lurch making fun of Kirk Cousins’ dog, Kirk Cousins has tweeted a picture of his dog, which turns out to have been a foster pet … of which Lurch was making fun …

Even better, people noticed the sick, twisted, awful, scruffy little irony …

WASHINGTON (CBSDC) – Jason ‘Lurch’ Bishop of the Sports Junkies was just letting his Dutch Shepherd run free at the Old Izaak Walton dog park in Leesburg, Va. last Friday, he says, when he was introduced to Kirk Cousins’ “awful little white, scruffy little oversized rat dog.”

This is the same Kirk Cousins who second-string quarterbacks for the Washington Redskins.

Bishop relayed the story of his unfortunate interaction with Cousins’ dog on 106.7 The Fan on Monday morning. (Listen to the audio below)

“So this guy walks in, and I can just tell he’ a stud,” Bishop set the scene. “He looks athletic – he’s limping a little bit, though – and I’m like, ‘You know what? He definitely plays for the ‘Skins.’ He’s got to. White guy, comes in with a hot chick.

“So he comes in with this hot chick and another guy, and they walk in, and I can just tell this guy’s a stud, so I was thinking, ‘Alright, maybe he’s like a DB or wide receiver, maybe just like camp fodder’; but then he’s wearing a Michigan State hat, and I’m like, ‘Hold on, that’s Kirk Cousins. 100 percent.’

“So he comes in with his – I think he’s recently married, Kirk Cousins – his wife’s pretty hot, by the way.

“Again, nobody picks a pig if you have your druthers,” EB chimed in. “If you’re a quarterback, no chance.”

“So they come in. They’ve got the little white, scruffy little oversized rat dog,” Lurch said.

“Maybe it’s a rescue dog,” Cakes reasoned. “C’mon, maybe he took pity on the poor dog.”

“Well, they should give it back,” Lurch insisted. “This dog was awful.”

“Kirk Cousins’ dog is awful?” EB asked.

“They bring it in. She carries it in, and they go and sit on this bench,” Lurch continued. “See, Luka likes to play. She’s 6-months-old, all she wants to do is play, and especially with younger dogs. She likes to go, just kind of, swat ‘em around, nip at ‘em.

“So Kirk and his wife bring their dog in, and they go sit on the bench,” Lurch said.

“Oh, he’s used to sitting on the bench!,” Cakes zinged.

“So my dog immediately attracted to their dog, and wants to play with their dog.

“Does said dog have a name?” Cakes asked.

“Don’t know what their dog’s name is,” Lurch said. “But that dog went nuts. I mean, you would have thought like a hyena was chasing it. It was barking and trying to bite my dog.”

“So Kirk Cousins’ dog is untrained?” EB asked. “Is that what you’re insinuating?”

“No, it’s just unsociable,” Lurch clarified. “So my dog kind of goes over to the bench, and they’re all sitting at the bench. My dog kind of goes under the bench, underneath Kirk Cousins’ legs. And I said, ‘Oh no, this is gonna be awkward.’ My dog clearly was not going to leave their dog alone. So I went in, and I went under Kirk’s legs, I grabbed my dog, picked her up and said, ‘Sorry.’ Walked away. Put her down, she went to play with another dog for about five minutes, she went right back to Kirk Cousins’ dog.

“And Kirk’s dog was going [vicious dog noises], trying to kill my dog. But my dog doesn’t realize the difference between playing and like an awkward response. So she goes back to his dog, right underneath Kirk’s legs. I go right back, and I go under his legs and said, ‘Sorry again.’ I grabbed my dog, and then all of a sudden his wife says, ‘Yea, sorry, my dog’s just unsociable. I’m just trying to get her used to other dogs.’ And meanwhile, the dog’s going [more vicious dog noises]. And she goes, ‘Sorry about that.’ I said, ‘Okay, that’s fine.’ And I basically had to put my dog on a leash until they left.”

“100 percent chance they left because my dog wouldn’t leave their dog alone,” Lurch concluded.

In fairness to Cousins, his wife, and their reportedly awful dog, it seems obvious to point out Lurch’s dog appeared to be the aggressor in this instance, provoking Cousins’ dog to act in such an “unsociable” manner.

Listen to the full story below.

”Kirk

”106.7

WASHINGTON — Longtime Junkies listeners sure know Lurch isn’t one to wait around, for even a minute, after the show.

Which makes it all the more thoughtful that, when he heard Niall Horan of One Direction was making an appearance at 1015 Half Street, he stuck around for over an hour after The Junkies’ broadcast to get a photo with one of his daughters’ favorite musicians.

VIDEO: Niall Horan Performs at DC Lottery Live

JP: Was there a buzz here? I was completely unaware.

Cakes: Oh, there was a buzz. There was a full-on buzz.

EB: The place was going nuts. He was supposed to be here at 10.

Lurch: There was a hundred 17-year-old girls standing outside.

Indeed, there were.

EB: Yeah, so Jason found out and you know Jason’s girls are like the president of the fan club. They’re like super obsessed. So all of a sudden, Jason was like locked in. He’s like, ‘I can’t go anywhere. I got to get a picture.’ So how long did you have to stick around? Because they were late, right?

Lurch: I don’t know. Valdez, how long was I here? 11 o’clock?

Valdez: Yeah, you were here around 11 o’clock.

EB: You had to stay an hour? So, hold on. At 10 o’clock, he left [the studio]. When I told him that, I’ve never seen the guy get out of his seat quicker, because he knew his girls would be happy, I guess. Did you actually stand in that hallway for an hour, or did you come in and sit down and wait?

Lurch: No, I sat out there for most of the hour, because a couple of the promotional people told me he was coming from Rockville from another station, and they kind of had an ETA on him, so I knew exactly — within a five-minute, 10-minute period — what time he was gonna be here. So, yeah, I was out there in that little interview room.

Cakes: The funny part about it is, if Jason ever checked his work email, he would have known that Niall was gonna be here, but he never checks his work email. I don’t do it either, but I check it more often than he does. So everybody in the building knew that he was gonna be here today, but Jason somehow found out. Somebody’s like, “Some dude from One Direction is in the building.” And Jason’s like, “Wha-what!”

Lurch: I actually kind of feel bad, because — and you’re right, I never check the work email — but if I had checked it, I definitely would have brought the girls down here, because that would have made their year.

Lurch: Apparently their security told Tim Yorro, our promotional guy, that there was no selfies, there was no pictures, no social media, nothing. Just leave him alone. And I said ‘F that.’ You only live once, my kids are gonna love it, and I just bum-rushed him when he came back from the bathroom.

…And my phone had died. My phone died. Shocker, because my phone always dies. And so, luckily, Awadd was there and Awadd had his phone, so he took the picture… But when I told my daughters, especially my oldest daughter, that he was here and then I sent the picture, this was her quote: “I literally hate my life.” She wanted to know what I said to him, what he was wearing, all that stuff.

Drab: The girls on the loading dock that were here yesterday definitely got whored (clarification: they did not literally get ‘whored’).

EB: Were there a bunch of girls outside?

Drab: Most girls were trying to get into the performance studio to watch it live, but the really ambitious girls wanted to see him pull in and hopefully get an autograph, or a picture, or a wave or anything. Well, this big superstar comes in in two SUVs all blacked-out, can’t see inside. Zooms right past the girls, right into the garage. They shut the door. The never saw him, whored ’em and they were out there for an hour.

In summation, Lurch is a good dad (and no teen girls were actually ‘whored’ at any point).

Follow @ChrisLingebach and @1067TheFan on Twitter

Lurch’s laughably bad gambling luck has filtered into his stock portfolio.

On Tuesday, he revealed his investment into Intercept Pharmaceuticals — which he bought in at $100 — has taken a precipitous dive, all the way down to a $61.23 valuation.

EB: [Listeners are] asking about your pharmaceutical company.

Lurch: $61.

Cakes: Blake Bortles Pharmaceuticals?

EB: What was it at, at one point?

Lurch: $118.

EB: And you’re still in?

Lurch: Well, what am I gonna do?

EB: Well, you don’t have an out? You don’t have like a target out, like a low?

Lurch: The target out is one dollar.

EB: Oh, really? I’ve done that bit before. I’ve done the bit where you go down with the ship. So hold on, what did you buy it at? You bought it at $118?

Lurch: No, no. I bought it at $100. It went up to $118. Remember, I was crowing every day?

Cakes: Hey, you know what? Everybody has losers in their portfolio. They just do.

Why the stock has plummeted is equally funny.

Lurch: When you make drugs that like damage your liver, you’re probably going to take a hit on your stock price.

JP: Why don’t you invest in what you know, like Tito’s?

Lurch: No, because I guarantee, Tito’s, someone would die from drinking Tito’s. And I would be caught with 100 shares of Tito’s and I would get crushed.

Lurch Papa, you’ll recall, made money in sports betting over the weekend fading himself.

Related: ‘I want to WIN ON THE PODCAST!’

Lurch: I’ve lost half. I’m done.

EB: So you’re just willing to lose it all?

Lurch: There’s a chance it might go back up. If it goes back up 20 percent, maybe I sell then. I’ve got no… luck with it.

Cakes: Your Andrew is terrible!

Lurch: My Andrew is awful.

EB: I would get out. Your Andrew is so bad. You’re the worst Andrew.

Lurch: I’m so bad. Why can’t I just get hooked!

I’ve theorized that, considering Lurch’s horrendous track record in sports gambling led to arguably his greatest blowup ever, he could be on track for another on-air meltdown with the right amount of continued bad luck.

It wouldn’t be the worst idea for listeners to start pestering Lurch about his record…

Lurch: So just to recap: Intercept Pharmaceuticals has dipped $57. Fifty-seven dollars in, essentially, a month. Bought it at $100. Went up to $118. Now it’s at $61.23. Because… a drug that they make, that is supposed to treat liver cancer, apparently hurts the liver.

Lurch suggested that Cakes contacts his own financial broker for advice about whether to buy into Intercept at a bargain rate.

“You know what? I’m having a face-to-face with him next week,” Cakes said. “I will ask him about Blake Bortles Pharmaceuticals during our lunch.”

“And you’re calling it Blake Bortles because it’s Intercept,” Lurch said.

“Yes,” Cakes confirmed with a laugh.

“Deshaun Watson Pharmaceuticals,” Lurch said.

Follow @ChrisLingebach and @1067TheFan on Twitter

Lurch returned serve on Chad Dukes in their ongoing exchange of verbal jabs.

Their dispute goes back years, dating back to the early days of 106.7 The Fan when Lurch, possibly drunk, called into Dukes’ show to share a piece of his mind, informing Dukes he didn’t think he was good on the radio.

In the years since, their rivalry comes and goes, with stretches of peace speckled between blowups. At times, conciliatory gestures are made to effort toward a new detente, like this one, before one of them inevitably takes a swipe and it all goes to hell again.

The audio above — from June 2017 — served as the most recent reset in their feud, triggered by Lurch telling Dukes he couldn’t use The Ball Cannon in their studio.

“I’ll punch him in his face,” Lurch said at one point. “What is he saying?”

Weeks ago, Dukes took an ever so subtle swipe on Twitter when Lurch was on vacation.

Here were are. It’s December. Tiger Woods is back and merriment abounds.

Actually, Dukes spent an entire segment Thursday naming things that are more interesting than Tiger Woods’ return to golf, a clear, sustained shot.

“I’ll start with I find Chris Russell talking about seeing his kids and working too much more interesting than Tiger Woods’ return to golf,” Dukes said.

“Look. I’m happy for Matt Valdez, and I’m happy for Eric Bickel, who somehow have turned this whole thing into, I don’t know, a biography about the two of them,” Dukes said. “But who gives a rat’s ass? You know what I find more interesting? That knot on the top of Blue Shorts’ head. Oh my God. That is so much more interesting.”

On the surface, this appears to be more of a shot at EB and Valdez, and looks to have nothing to do with Lurch whatsoever. On the contrary. Mocking their love of golf and Tiger Woods is the same topic which launched that last salvo in June. Something’s brewing.

Let’s check in with The Junkies the next morning.

EB: We should touch on Tiger a little bit. Tiger was really impressive yesterday in a lot of ways.

Lurch: Of course. We have to. Why are we not talking about Tiger?

EB: Well, because the Redskins are a bigger story. But, what Tiger did nationally is big.

JP: You would have been infuriated. We should actually… can you try and contact Chad Dukes? He did a whole bit of, he asked everybody on their show…

Lurch: If they cared about Tiger?

JP: What they cared about more than Tiger Woods.

Lurch: Well, I mean, Dukes isn’t a golf fan. I don’t care about guns, either.

And there it is.

Get your popcorn. Maybe you should tune into Dukes today (2-6:30 p.m.).

Follow @ChrisLingebach and @1067TheFan on Twitter

Jason Bishop is no longer a part-time resident of Ocean City, Maryland.

He’s only complained about the price of his condo for years, and the past few years, has stooped to soliciting listeners as tenants to offset the costs.

Bish was forced to go public with the news Thursday, when a caller asked if he could rent the condo this summer.

“I haven’t announced this. You guys already know the announcement,” Bish teased. “I’m going to announce this about the condo in Ocean City, on 92nd Street in Ocean City, Maryland.”

EB: Which you’ve repeatedly tried to rent on the show.

Bish: Right next to Bull on the Beach.

Valdez: That’s such a silly spot, by the Century One.

Bish: Right behind Layton’s Diner, a great diner down there, and right across the street from Liquid Assets, one of my favorite bars. Bish… no longer owns the condo in Ocean City.

“You sold out and you made a tidy profit, right?” JP inquired.

“Right,” Bish said, laughing under his breath. “I made a huge profit. Bish no longer owns the condo in Ocean City.”

EB: You’re joaning over there.

Bish: Well, you’ve been joaning for 10 years. I am out of the condo business.

EB: Do you feel relieved?

Bish: Yes, I do. It was a burden for a good — eh… — probably three to five years.

EB: Maybe 10 years.

Bish: Yeah, well, when the kids were younger, we enjoyed it a little bit more. Once they got into sports in high school, it was done. It’s a burden off my shoulders and I no longer own the condo with Thomas C. Mooney.

EB intuitively inquired about whether — as a former owner — Bish will still be able to use the property for personal use.

Bish: Uh, it’s a possibility. I don’t know.

EB: That’s what you should have negotiated. You should have negotiated that you have the ability to stay there two or three times. You know what I mean? That’s what you should have done.

Bish: The negotiation wasn’t great.

EB: Did you get bent over a little bit?

Bish: On paper, you probably wouldn’t like the negotiation. But I had to do it. This guy had to do it.

Cakes: Sometimes you’ve got to cut your losses.

Not even the power of The Junks could salvage another disastrous property investment for the papa.

Follow @ChrisLingebach and @1067TheFan on Twitter