Overview

Alexis Deveaux focuses her practice on business litigation, complex commercial litigation and professional liability defense. Whether litigating multimillion-dollar claims or pro bono cases, Alexis is dedicated to gaining a comprehensive understanding of clients’ needs and leveraging her interpersonal skills to persuasively advocate on their behalf.

Alexis simultaneously graduated with honors from Stetson University College of Law and College of Business with her Juris Doctor and Master of Business Administration degrees. She was an award-winning member of Stetson Law’s nationally ranked #1 Trial Team. Certified in Advocacy, Alexis was awarded the Victor O. Whele Book Award in Trial Advocacy and the American Law Institute CLE Scholarship and Leadership Award. Alexis served as a research assistant to the nationally respected American Bar Association Uniform Commercial Code Chair and Stetson University College of Law Professor, Candace Zierdt. Prior to joining Gunster, Alexis studied international trial advocacy at the University of Oxford in Oxford, England, international business and trade in southeast Asia at Vinh University in Vinh, Vietnam, and diplomatic relations of the United Nations at Prague University of Economics and Business in Prague, Czech Republic.

Alexis’s pro bono experience has spanned from the Florida Gulf to Washington, D.C., where she worked at the United States Court of Appeals for Veteran’s Claims under Chief Judge Robert N. Davis, assisting with national mass claim processing, class actions, and other administrative law matters. Alexis previously interned with the Middle District of Florida for the Honorable District Court Judge Virginia M. Covington, Honorable Bankruptcy Court Judge Catherine Peek McEwen, and Honorable Magistrate Judge Christopher P. Tuite. In addition, she held internships with the Department of Justice United States Attorney Office’s Tampa Appellate Division and with the Florida State Attorney’s Office for the Sixth Judicial Circuit.

Alexis strives to apply the same dedication and passion to clients as she does to family, civic and community engagements. Alexis was the inaugural fellow for the Alliance for Advocacy and Philanthropy of the Community Foundation of Tampa Bay, a preeminent nonprofit that pairs donors and regional nonprofits. Currently, Alexis serves on the board of directors for Champion’s for Children, a long-standing Tampa-based nonprofit dedicated to ending child abuse and neglect, in addition to a variety of Hillsborough County Bar Association Committees.

Alexis is a member of the firm’s Women’s Leadership Forum. Her insights can be found in various legal publications.