1. City Life Washington, DC, Today 12 City Calendar 15 Culture 17 Identity 17 Lifestyle 19 Fashion 19 Food 20 Sports 21 Media 21 Language 22 Education 23 Economy & Costs 23 Government & Politics 23 Environment 24 The Land 24 Green DC 24 Urban Planning & Development 25

2. and residents are known for speaking their minds. Politics take the forefront in much City Life cocktail party chatter, especially in the months leading up to the presidential election. These are exciting times for Washington, DC. The nation as a whole is experiencing a period of restlessness and an overall dissatisfaction with the current administration. The continuing death toll in Iraq, trouble in the Middle East and the ongoing terrorist threat since September 11, 2001 is forcing Americans to question their needs and who can meet City Life WASHINGTON, DC, TODAY them. At the micro level, these national questions also become DC’s questions, and Wash- ingtonians are fired up and talking about everything from George W Bush’s super low Washington, DC, has always served as the nation’s soapbox, but we’d argue it’s also the approval ratings in 2006 to immigration reform, the battle for the Supreme Court, whether nation’s soap opera (just substitute congressmen, the CIA and the Prez, interns, newspaper abortion should remain legal and is the federal government taking on too much of a Big WASHINGTON, DC, TODAY reporters and TV anchors for actors). The plot in DC changes daily, and like the national Brother role? But the biggest question of all seems to be: are the Democrats going to make deficit there’s no limit on what can and does happen. a comeback in ’08? And if so, is Hillary going to win? Chaotic, restless, international, diplomatic, enigmatic, power hungry, eccentric, philan- Here’s the deal. In DC, a good election fight is tantamount to kick ass make-up sex thropic, helpless, poor, ethnic, opinionated, gay – the adjectives describing Washington, and the whole mood of the city becomes amped in the months preceding a presidential DC, and its residents go on and on. But the place (like all good soap opera plotlines) just bid. After the November election there’s a bit of a lull as everyone waits for the lame duck isn’t that easily defined. president to actually leave. Come January it’s party time again. An inaugural ball is the DC Washington, DC, is a city where the egos are big and coolness is determined by how version of the Academy Awards, except Washingtonians would tell you it’s cooler (their close you are to POTUS (that would be the President of the United States for those not big party only happens once every four years, thank you very much). If you can score a familiar with the lingo). This is probably the only city in the world where Anderson seat to one of the balls, you can play out that whole childhood Cinderella/Prince Charming Cooper and the guys from CNN receive childhood fantasy. the same kind of puppy-dog adulation as DC experienced a flourish of a patriotic renaissance following the September 11 terror- the Jolie-Pitts. ist attacks. American flags flew in suburban yards and showed up on bumper stickers DC is a cacophony of sounds, a place LOWDOWN and car windows. Although the region has always been patriotic – DC is the birthplace of where hometown go-go music blaring from democracy, Maryland the home of the Star-Spangled Banner, Virginia has churned out the bum’s duct-taped boombox on a street Population 582,049 many US presidents – the events of September 11 saw a rekindling of an ‘I’m proud to be corner in shabby chic Adams-Morgan Time zone Eastern Standard Time (GMT minus five an American’ mentality deeper than party lines. Today evidence of this patriotism lingers, gets mixed with the seductive sizzle of an hours) but it’s slowly losing momentum as war deaths continue. These days there are as many Argentine tango resonating from a nearby 3-star room Around $150 antiwar slogans as I Support My Troops stickers on car bumpers. club, and is harmonized with an argu- Coffee $3 Although ethnically diverse, traditionally Washington, DC, is one of the most segre- ment between a Peruvian man and his gated cities in the country. However, on our last visit (after being away for a few years) we Irish–Puerto Rican girlfriend in rapid-fire Essential drink Martini ($10) noticed refreshing changes. Although some had always embraced the city’s global culture, Spanish. Metro fare $1.20 – $3.90 the phenomena has gone mainstream. White yuppies flood bars once almost exclusively DC is the smell of slow roasting pork, the domain of Black professionals, and everyone is feeling the beat of Africa, Asia and Latin engine exhaust and human sweat on a hot America. DC, it seems, just can’t get enough of salsa music, woven tapestries, Mediter- August night on slightly edgy 14th St in the Shaw. It’s a bar where a 20–something ranean meze and mint Mojitos. The immigrant community has risen to the occasion and mixed-race crowd is gathering for drinks and a chat about gentrification and whether or opened bistros, bodegas, spice shops, foreign bookstores and world-music clubs. not it’s bad or good. It is the struggling single mother in the housing project deep in the Washington, DC, is constantly reinventing itself, which isn’t always the best policy. heart of Anacostia, worrying about how to pay this month’s electricity bill, and whether Downtown – once a network of desolate streets and edgy clubs set in empty warehouses – her son will stay straight and finish high school or join the gang hustling China white on is the star of DC’s gentrification line, especially in the area just north of Chinatown near her front stoop. National Public Radio. Shaw – once crippled by racial tension and riots – is now a destina- Washington is also glamorous and fun. She is expensively decorated lounges and ex- tion for African heritage tours. Five years ago it was considered risky to own a townhouse clusive nightclubs in Dupont Circle, where the city’s young, hot and gay gather to discuss east of the capital, today the Capitol Hill neighborhood in Southeast is one of the city’s politics, progress and maybe a little sex over gourmet tapas and French champagne. She more popular. And Brookland – an Upper Northeast ’hood until recently unknown to is million-dollar brownstone homes in Georgetown, where the city’s wheelers and dealers many DC residents – is suddenly the city’s hottest real-estate market. Then there’s the broker power in their masterfully decorated dining rooms, while their couture-clad wives new baseball stadium being built in the heart of Southeast DC, along the Anacostia River, discuss Botox over Chianti across the hall. that will replace the current ballpark at RFK Stadium. The $600 million–plus park is set Over on Capitol Hill, she serves politics, not olives, with her happy-hour martinis. to open in April 2008. Home turf of the Hillies (folks who work on Capitol Hill), in this ’hood she is divey While most Washingtonians are thrilled at the prospect of being able, once again, to bars where staffers exchange business cards and flirtatious gestures. These (often) young root on a hometown team, the location of the Washington Nationals stadium is a lot more and (sometimes) naïve press secretaries and lobbyists, congressional aids, Senate staffers controversial (and a contentious point in the November 2006 mayoral election). Touted and interns hail from all across America, and bring with them a diverse pool of regional by some as a developmental savior of the neighborhood, it’s thought of by many others idiosyncrasies. No matter their background, they all seem united by a common dream of as just another victory for gentrification. doing something big and making the difference. Revitalization doesn’t come without a price. So while it means hip restaurants and clubs It seems that Washington is always immersed in some scandal or another, and Washing- along with valuable community services, renovation of buildings and influx of new resi- tonians can be gossip addicts – it can be as sexy as power (another problem when it comes dents, it also means increasing property values and rising rents. In a city where more than to local addictions…) The city also has a bit of a rebellious streak (it did knowingly elect a 20% of its residents live below the poverty line, this is a big deal. Although its purveyors’ man charged with possession of crack-cocaine, Marion Barry, back into the mayoral office) intentions may have been good, ultimately gentrification boils down to forcing out less 12 13

3. affluent, longtime residents who can no longer afford to stay. In DC, this conflict invari- ably comes down to race: well-to-do whites are scooping up property in places like Shaw CITY CALENDAR Washington’s calendar is jam-packed with NATIONAL CHERRY BLOSSOM FESTIVAL and Logan Circle, while poorer Blacks are being pushed further and further away. It’s a events, some of the highlights being the %202-728-1137; www.nationalcherryblossom bit of a vicious cycle, revitalization, especially in a city that already has a problem with Cherry Blossom Festival and the Smith- festival.org segregation. Banishing poorer, usually minority residents, to outer suburbs only creates a sonian Folklife Festival. The city also gets This two-week arts and culture fest cel- wider chasm between the classes. City Life City Life fired up for the nation’s birthday, celebrat- ebrates the blooming of DC’s cherry trees It’s not a problem with an easy solution. The neighborhoods really are looking terrific. ing Independence Day with free concerts and culminates in a parade extravaganza. In Downtown the streets are bursting with restaurants, theatres and galleries, capped by the huge convention center. Shaw is just a few years behind. Its development is unique, and fireworks. however: the ‘New U’ remembers its days as Black Broadway and is drawing on that his- On national holidays, banks, schools, CHERRY BLOSSOM 10-MILE RUN WASHINGTON, DC, TODAY government offices and some attractions CITY CALENDAR tory. (Okay, we’re going off on a bit of a tangent here, but we thought you would want %301-320-3350; www.cherryblossom.org to know: U St is hands down the hottest place to hear live music in DC today. It has long close; transportation runs on a Sunday Thousands of racers run around the Tidal been the site of cutting-edge rock venues like the 9:30 Club, p183, and Black Cat, p183. But schedule. For additional events information, Basin and along the Potomac for cash prizes now you can also hear jazz and the infectious local style, go-go, in the same historic clubs contact the Washington, DC Convention & Tourism (or just for fun). where Duke Ellington and Pearl Bailey played. DC’s music scene is about the rediscovery Co ( % 202-789-7000; www.washington and rebirth of its roots – blending blues and jazz and go-go with modern urban sounds .org). like hip-hop and house.) APRIL Meanwhile, Downtown and on the National Mall the federal government recently Weather goes from fine to fabulous (tem- completed its own revitalization program with the renovation and major reopenings of JANUARY peratures between 50°F and 66°F), making old museums (National Museum of American Art and National Portrait Gallery) and the Winter is mild, with temperatures usually April one of the loveliest months in DC. opening of new ones (National Museum of the American Indian). The sparkling, nearly in the 30s. Every four years (or eight if the Easter Sunday usually occurs in April. new National WWII Memorial glorifies national unity. US people are forgiving), it’s the ultimate social-political event in Washington, DC: WHITE HOUSE EASTER EGG ROLL Inauguration Day. www.whitehouse.gov/easter; 1600 Pennsylvania Ave INFAMOUS INLAWS, REBELLIOUS CHILDREN, EMBARRASSING SIBLINGS – On the Monday after Easter, kids aged three SHOCKING PRESIDENTIAL FAMILY CONFESSIONS FEBRUARY to six are invited to the South Lawn for stories, games and colorful characters For Black History Month the Smithsonian Washington media loves to dig up the dirt on the Commander-in-Chief’s kin, which the public eats up faster than George museums organize an incredible educa- (besides your typical politicians). W Bush can choke on a pretzel. Below are a few favorite gems. tional program. For more information call The Bush Twins – Poor George W, not only is he the laughing stock of the world, his daughters also have a rebel- %202-357-4574. SMITHSONIAN CRAFT SHOW lious streak. In May 2001, the then 19-year-old twins, Barbara and Jenna, were accused by police in Austin, TX, of %202-357-4000; www.si.edu/craftshow; 401 F St underage drinking at a Mexican restaurant. Police accused Barbara of being a minor in possession of alcohol and CHINESE NEW YEAR NW, National Building Museum funniest of all, Jenna was accused of trying to use a fake ID to buy booze (how she thought she could pull that Chinatown lights up with dancing and In mid-April, leading American potters, fur- kind of anonymity off is beyond us). Charges were dismissed after both girls did community service and paid fines, firecrackers. A giant dragon leads a niture makers, metalsmiths, glass, paper and and Barbara attended alcohol counseling. It wasn’t Jenna’s first run in with the law – she had previously been parade through the downtown streets. textile artists, and jewelry creators display charged with underage drinking. Drinking scandals seem to run in the family. Bush kept news of his own 1976 and sell their work. arrest for drunken driving in Maine under the radar until the story broke just days before the 2000 presidential election. Bush stopped drinking on his 40th birthday, in 1986. Bill Clinton’s Bro – President Clinton’s half-brother Roger was a convicted felon. In 1985, Roger spent time in MARCH SHAKESPEARE’S BIRTHDAY Spring arrives (temperatures range from %202-544-4600; www.folger.edu; 201 E Capitol St prison for selling cocaine. (But was pardoned by Bill in 2001). Bill Clinton kind of stole his half-brother’s thunder, 40°F to 55°F); prepare yourself for festival On April 23, the Folger Shakespeare Library & Thea- however, when his own marital indiscretions and fondness for Oval Office blowjobs became the scandal du jour and parade season. The Cherry Blossom tre (p87) celebrates the Bard’s birthday with and nearly cost him his job. Festival takes place in late March or early jugglers and jesters, music, song and dance. The Bush Seniors – Like father, like son. It is no wonder George W Bush is famous for his awkward phrases. He April. probably learned it from his parents. During the 1984 presidential campaign, sharp-tongued Barbara Bush famously called democratic vice presidential nominee Geraldine Ferraro a word that ‘rhymes with rich.’ Her husband upped FILMFEST DC ST PATRICK’S DAY %202-724-6578; www.filmfestdc.org the ante – in the 1988 presidential race, a microphone picked up George HW Bush describing his half-Mexican %202-637-2474; www.dcstpatsparade.com Shown at venues around the city, this festi- grandchildren (by son Jeb and daughter-in-law, Columbia) to President Reagan as ‘the little brown ones.’ On March 17, DC’s Irish and wannabes The Reagan Kids – All four of President Ronald Reagan’s kids liked to publicly disagree and openly feud with their val features cutting-edge films by national whoop it up at a parade down Constitu- and international directors. It is held over 10 father. Michael criticized his stepmother’s (Nancy Reagan’s) parenting. Maureen opposed her father on gun control tion Ave. and abortion. Ron dropped out of Yale, joined the Joffrey Ballet and danced in his underwear on Saturday Night days at the end of the month. Live. No one could top Patti, however, who posed nude for Playboy, and who wrote a memoir, The Way I See It, that portrayed both her parents in a negative light. SMITHSONIAN KITE FESTIVAL Boozy Billy Carter – Billy Carter, brother of President Jimmy Carter, was known as a troublemaker in 1970s’ %202-357-2700; www.kitefestival.org MAY Washington. A colorful southern fellow with a penchant for beer drinking, the guy liked the beverage so much he On the last Saturday of March, the skies May in DC is truly delightful: temperatures created his own label – Billy Beer. It flopped. near the Washington Monument come range from 60°F to 75°F, and tourist season alive with colors. swings into high gear. Memorial Day, the 14 15

4. non-barrister types, attracts about 4000 PUBLIC HOLIDAYS runners each year and has raised more FIVE QUIRKY DC EXPERIENCES than $3.7 million. It is held in early June. New Year’s Day January 1 When you’re tired of looking at stoic monuments or relic-stuffed museums, then check out the other side of DC. The city Martin Luther King Jr Day 3rd Monday in January is a gold mine for things from the slightly offbeat to the downright bizarre. SMITHSONIAN FOLKLIFE FESTIVAL Check out the Squished Penny Museum (%202-986-5644; www.squishedpenny.com; Northwest Washington; Presidents’ Day 3rd Monday in February City Life City Life %202-275-1119; www.folklife.si.edu admission by appointment only), which has an unusual collection of – you heard it – squished pennies, coins, and Memorial Day Last Monday in May For 10 days before Independence Day, this other ephemera from around the world. Exhibited in the owners’ living room, it gives new meaning to the term Independence Day July 4 extravaganza celebrates international and common cents. Labor Day 1st Monday in September US cultures on the Mall lawns in front of See the famous Exorcist Stairs (3600 Prospect St NW, Georgetown) from The Exorcist, which gave many people the Smithsonian Castle (p68). nightmares in the ’70s. The steps in the film are at the end of M Street in Georgetown, across from the Key Bridge. CULTURE CITY CALENDAR Columbus Day 2nd Monday in October Veterans Day November 11 The stuffed body of Owney, the unofficial postal mascot, rests behind glass at the National Postal Museum (%202-633-9849; cnr 1st & Massachusetts Ave NE). Adopted by the postal service in 1888, the dog ‘worked’ as a Thanksgiving 4th Thursday in November JULY & AUGUST mail carrier until 1897 when he died from a mysterious gunshot wound. Christmas December 25 Hot town summer in the city. Expect tem- Ever wonder what the world’s largest hairball looks like? Wishes do come true at the National Museum of peratures in the 80s and drippy, sweaty Health and Medicine (%202-782-2200; cnr 6900 Georgia Ave & Elder St NW; admission free; h10am- humidity. Congress shuts down and locals 5:30pm). There’s a fascinating, oddball display that includes pieces of Abraham Lincoln’s skull and a touchable last Monday of the month, honors the war retreat to the beach. human stomach. dead and marks the start of summer. In Anacostia on V St the world’s largest chair towers over Martin Luther King Dr; at 19ft of pure mahogany, no one INDEPENDENCE DAY is sure how it got there. GAY BLACK PRIDE July 4 commemorates the adoption of %202-667-8188 the Declaration of Independence in 1776. The nation’s largest annual Gay Black Pride Huge crowds gather on the National Mall MARINE CORPS MARATHON (read: prices drop). DC takes on a festive air celebration takes place on Memorial Day to watch fireworks, listen to free concerts leading up to Christmas. %703-784-2225; www.marinemarathon.com weekend and draws participants from and picnic in the sunshine. The Declaration Known as the people’s marathon, this popu- across the country. is read from the National Archives’ steps. lar road race starts and ends at the Iwo Jima KENNEDY CENTER HOLIDAY Memorial on the last Sunday in October. CELEBRATION ROLLING THUNDER RIDE FOR FREEDOM SEPTEMBER HIGH HEEL DRAG RACE %202-467-4600; www.kennedy-center.org During the month of December, the %908-369-5439; www.rollingthunder1.com Life returns to DC after Labor Day (the On October 31, Halloween is celebrated first Monday in September), the unoffi- Kennedy Center sponsors free music The Harley Davidson contingent of Viet- unofficially, including the fiercely competi- events and activities. nam vets commemorates Memorial Day cial end of summer. From mid-September tive High Heel Drag Race, when Dupont with a ride on the National Mall to draw to mid-October, cultural events occur in Circle’s highest heels and craziest cos- attention to the POWs and MIAs who were honor of Hispanic Heritage Month. tumes race down 17th St. NATIONAL CHRISTMAS TREE & left behind. MENORAH LIGHTING DC BLUES FESTIVAL On the second Thursday in December, the %301-926-1336; www.dcblues.org NOVEMBER & DECEMBER president does the honors on the Ellipse JUNE In late August or early September, the all- Holiday season swings into gear. Weather is (p76), the expansive park on the south Things heat up, as temperatures climb into volunteer DC Blues Society sponsors a free, chilly (40°F to 50°F) and tourism declines side of the White House. the 70s and 80s. Summer tourist season is day long festival of top local blues acts at in full swing – arrive early and be prepared Rock Creek Park’s Carter Barron Amphitheater to stand in line. (p192). CULTURE CAPITAL PRIDE %202-797-3510; www.capitalpride.org ADAMS MORGAN FESTIVAL IDENTITY www.adamsmorganday.org Washington is a city constantly in motion, its demographics changing with the four- DC’s version of the international gay pride DC’s biggest neighborhood festival takes or eight-year tides of presidential elections. Each new administration brings with holiday draws thousands of marchers to over 18th St NW on the weekend after it a new cast of characters from across the country. This leaves permanent Wash- the Mall; many bars and clubs host special Labor Day with live music, vendors and ingtonians – the lawyers, doctors, lobbyists, economists, newspaper reporters and rank- events. food stalls. and-file government workers who don’t move with each administration – stuck in a transitional, sometimes irritating (having to adjust to an influx of virgin Beltway drivers), LAWYERS HAVE HEART 10KM RACE situation for a few months. All in all DC is a company town, the company being the %703-914-3710-; www.runlhh.org OCTOBER federal government. About a third of DC workers are employed by the government, in Lawyers help the American Heart Associa- Autumn brings colorful leaves and won- either federal or city bureaucracies. tion raise money by running a 10km loop derful weather for outdoor activities. Look Beginning in the 1960s, when there were about 764,000 Washingtonians, the city popu- around Georgetown’s Washington Har- for temperatures ranging from 60°F to 70°F lation began to flow outward into the suburbs seeking to escape the capital’s increasing bour. The race, which is also popular with and clear blue skies. crime rates and failing infrastructure. Today, Washington is a relatively small city, with a 16 17

5. Since the 1970s, masses of Salvadorans and Jamaicans have transformed segments of AFRICAN AMERICAN WASHINGTON, DC DC into modern barrios. More recently, African and Asian immigrants have arrived in Washington has always been a ‘chocolate city’. lesser numbers. These ethnic groups do not mix particularly well – not with each other Even back in 1800, during the first session of Congress, it was a heavily African American town: slaves and free and not with pre-existing Black and White populations. Although it is no longer the Blacks composed 29% of the population. Free Blacks also took up residence in the port of Georgetown, priming the ‘murder capital’ of the country, homicide rates remain high, with a major crime spike in summer 2006. Many of these deaths are attributed to ethnic gang warfare, especially City Life City Life neighborhood for the emergence of a vibrant African American community that worked alongside and socialized with the city’s slaves. among Latino groups. In 1800 more than half of the nation’s 700,000 slaves lived in Maryland and Virginia. The capital of America’s slave Outside the African American community, DC is a secular town – the business of gov- trade at that time, Washington contained slave markets and holding pens. Slavers conducted a highly profitable business ernment doesn’t exactly lend itself to spiritual contemplation. However, the capital is also buying slaves locally and selling them to Southern plantations. an international town so most of the world’s faiths are represented, including an influential CULTURE CULTURE The city’s slave population declined throughout the 19th century, while the number of free Blacks migrating to the Jewish population, Muslims, Hindus, Mormons, Buddhists and Baha’is. city rose. One of the century’s most influential Black leaders was Frederick Douglass, born on a Maryland plantation DC is also a gay-friendly city, with the majority of gay and lesbians living in the classy, in 1818. He helped form the Underground Railroad and raised two regiments of Black soldiers to fight for the Union and envied, Dupont Circle neighborhood. DC has its own gay and lesbian newspaper, when the civil war broke out. After the war, Douglass went to Washington to lend his support to the 13th, 14th and the Blade, and it’s common to see same-sex couples holding hands walking down the 15th Constitutional Amendments, which abolished slavery, granted citizenship to former slaves and guaranteed citizens street. the right to vote. He later became US marshal for Washington and the US minister to Haiti (the country’s first Black ambassador). In 1867 the country’s first African American higher education facility, Howard University, was founded to educate LIFESTYLE Black residents; by this time, Blacks comprised nearly half the population. DC is a fun-loving town that knows how to party. Young, vibrant and cosmopolitan, the Washington’s seemingly post-war progressive attitude towards Blacks deteriorated in the early 20th century when air radiates an exotic sauciness, especially in summer when temperatures soar and college the city adopted racial segregation policies like the rest of the South. The ‘progressive’ Wilson administration reinforced interns – 70,000 plus – filter in for a taste of power. ‘Work hard, play hard’ seems to be the discrimination by refusing to hire Black federal employees and insisting on segregated government offices. In 1925, the motto of the young and restless. And when the sun sinks low over the Potomac, seemingly Ku Klux Klan marched on the Mall. straight-laced congressional aids, lobbyists and lawyers trade Capitol Hill deal brokering Nonetheless, Washington was a Black cultural capital in the early 20th century. Shaw and LeDroit Park, near for dingy bars and happy-hour Martinis (although the talk at the table can stay political Howard University, sheltered a lively Black-owned business district, and Black theater and music flourished along U well into the night), then shift into overdrive at one of DC’s many nightclubs. St NW, nurturing such great minds as Alain Locke and Langston Hughes. Southern Blacks continued to move to the The metropolitan DC area is the home of the nation’s political class, with the US politi- city in search of better economic opportunities. Between 1920 and 1930 Washington’s Black population jumped 20%. cal system retaining the spoils of office: thousands of politically appointed positions in the Citywide segregation eased somewhat with the New Deal (which brought new Black federal workers to the capital) civil service. Each change of administration means a turnover in these positions, bring- and WWII (which brought lots more). ing newcomers to town. Once out of office, these politicos tend to stick around, taking Later DC was a hub for the civil rights movement. Local Black churches provided gathering places and support temporary refuge at think tanks and policy institutes, working their contacts and biding networks for participants in the movement (just as they had served as stops on the Underground Railroad years before). their time until electoral fortunes change. The political class can often be observed in the When Martin Luther King was assassinated in 1968, the city exploded in protest and violence – a ‘revolution’ that DC early evening at their preferred Hill hangouts and downtown digs. is still recovering from. The federal government attracts one of the nation’s best-educated populations. Thirty- Today African Americans represent about 60% of the population, one of the highest percentages in the country. nine percent of the population has a bachelor’s degree (compared to 24% nationally) and While the city does have a healthy middle– to– upper class population of African Americans, 20% of its population falls almost 19% has an advanced degree – the highest rate in the country. Education translates below the poverty line and most of this segment is Black. To make things worse, poorer Blacks are being forced out of into purposefulness on the job. These people are serious about their work, whatever it may traditionally affordable housing in the rougher neighborhoods as government and private housing are razed to make be. Not as obsessed as a Wall Street banker (after all, federal employees and contractors way for gentrification (see p12). The racial and economic divide has defined city politics and social relations for decades. are not likely to be getting paid for more than 40 hours of work a week), but dedicated Sadly, White and Black Washingtonians do not often mix socially or professionally. These tensions are exacerbated by nonetheless. DC’s odd political situation. Congress (mostly White and conservative) controls the budget of DC (mostly Black and With a high population of foreign-born residents (more than 13%), international liberal), although most Congress members don’t even live in the city. influences are ubiquitous – from ethnic cuisine to world music and foreign films. Most Washingtonians recognize the vast cultural resources at their disposal, but are apt to not take regular advantage of them. Ask any local the last time they visited the Smithsonian population of about 582,049 people. But the metropolitan area, including the Virginia and and the answer will inevitably be when an out-of-town guest was visiting. Which means Maryland suburbs, is home to more than 6 million people. Three-quarters of metropolitan only that residents have their own thing going on, whether it be training for the Marine DC’s employed population now works in the suburbs. Even some of the bigger federal Corps Marathon (p17) or volunteering as a docent at the Octagon (p79), or singing in the agencies have gone suburban – as they grew, they simply ran out of DC real estate. St Augustine (p102) gospel choir. Quite recently, the outflow has slowed, as good economic times have enabled Wash- ington to revitalize downtown neighborhoods. While widely welcomed, this gentrification also increases racial tensions. Affluent, primarily White home buyers have moved into Downtown, Shaw and Adams-Morgan during recent years, pushing less affluent Black FASHION DC has long been a suit-and-tie kind of town, and visitors are often stunned by the number renters further east. of well-coiffed men and women (from young to old) packing into dark and dingy dives African Americans represent about 55% of the population, one of the highest percent- where the smell of smoke and grease is thick for happy-hour cocktails. It’s also a fashion- ages of Blacks in the country (see the boxed text on above). Other ethnic groups include able town, and just because the bar looks better suited to work boots and jeans, you’re likely growing numbers of Asians (2.7%) and Latinos (7.9%). Despite this diverse population, to see lots of Blahnik heels, Chanel suits and Louis Vuitton carryalls. For the minority DC is one of the most segregated cities in the country: the 39% of the population that is of Washingtonians who can afford it, fashion is an important component of life. Status white lives almost exclusively in Northwest DC. symbols like expensive cars and even more expensive mansions are the norm in the quiet, 18 19

6. seafood and more exotic fare done up for the modern American palette. Adams-Morgan, YOU KNOW YOU’RE FROM WASHINGTON, DC IF…. Dupont Circle and Georgetown have their fair share of swank restaurants, as well as hole-in-the-wall eateries hawking spicy falafel and cheesy pizza until all hours of the You say you live in DC when talking to outsiders, even though you really reside in Maryland or Virginia, because night. This is the best place outside of East Africa to sample Ethiopian cuisine. For a truly it’s easier… if someone from the metro area asks where you live, however, you always state the state (people authentic international eating experience, venture into Shaw or Mount Pleasant for roti actually living in the city consider themselves a different breed than suburbanites, rather snobby eh?). with the Jamaicans or pupusas (corn meal pastries stuffed with meat or cheese) with the City Life City Life You get excited when you see celebrities at restaurants, but your idea of a celebrity is Hillary Clinton, Donald Salvadorans. If you are coming from the Western United States or Texas, you will likely (Rumsfeld, not Trump), Condi or the ever-elusive Dick Cheney (take bonus bragging rights if you discover his be surprised by the lack of true Mexican restaurants – DC’s food is mostly from Central ‘secure, undisclosed location.’) and South America. Your idea of a good night on the town includes a knock-down-drag-out battle of the brains on whether Hillary will run (and win) in 2008. CULTURE CULTURE You wear a suit to happy hour and spend most of your time ‘networking’, ie trying to get the people you work for a meeting with the senator they work for. SPORTS America loves its football, and in DC that means the celebrated Washington Redskins. You think potholes the size of small elephants and exploding manhole covers are normal. In recent years, the ’Skins have not lived up to their glory days of the 1980s, when they You know the Pentagon is really in Virginia but don’t bother to correct anyone because it’s just too hard to explain. won two Super Bowls, but they still inspire face-painting, beer-guzzling fans and sell out You think it’s perfectly normal to have to take a different route due to terrorism-related road closures. You have the color-coded terror warning system memorized and flinch when F-15 fighter jets whiz by your house every game. at midnight. The DC National Basketball Association (NBA) team, the Washington Wizards, recently You know when three helicopters fly overhead the president is in the sky, if there’s only two it’s someone less generated a lot of publicity when Michael Jordan bought into the team’s ownership, then important. came out of retirement to play. He could not reverse the Wizards’ fortunes, however, and You know not to head to the grocery store when the local weatherman predicts even a flurry of snow because it he left DC under bad circumstances in 2003. The women’s (WNBA) and college (NCAA) will be packed with frantic residents stocking up on essentials for the ‘giant blizzard.’ The blizzard will inevitably basketball-league teams maintain loyal followings among their audiences (pre-teen girls turn out to be less than an inch of wet snow that will barely stick to the grass, let alone the pavement; however, and Georgetown students respectively), but neither the Mystic nor the Hoyas have had the next day all schools will be shut (or at least on a delay) and the city will be paralyzed. much success on the courts in recent years either. You know that sometimes when it rains a lot the entire federal government shuts down – DC has a tendency to The Washington Capitals – dubbed the Caps – are the National Hockey League (NHL) flood, one of the problems with building the capital of the free world on top a giant swamp. team that recently acquired Czech phenomenon Jaromir Jagr. DC United has enjoyed When tourists ask if Chevy Chase is named after the actor and you are able to answer, ‘No.’ modest major-league soccer success; sadly, the Women’s United Soccer League champion, You never call I-495 anything other than the Beltway and you would never be caught dead referring to National Washington Freedom, would not have the chance to defend their title, as the league folded Airport as Reagan National. for lack of funding in 2003. You always get lost on Dupont Circle. Baseball is in a renaissance in Washington, DC, right now. The city recently acquired You are pretty damn sure there has been construction and detours (and those giant potholes) on the same stretch its own major-league baseball team, the Washington Nationals – previously DC was stuck of pavement for a decade now and you’ve never seen anyone doing anything about it. rooting for the Baltimore-based Orioles. The city is in the process of constructing them a When you say you’re heading to the Mall you don’t mean you’re going shopping. new stadium in a controversial Southeast location (it’s another one of those gentrification You actually spend 45 minutes driving 3 miles down Wisconsin Ave to get to work and don’t think twice about it. packages DC seems so fond of this millennium). You flat out refuse to take your visiting friend to Adams-Morgan on a Saturday night because ‘parking is impossible.’ For information on obtaining tickets to all sports events, see p198. You know what POTUS means (President of the United States) and if you have a meeting with the man you’ll be the toast of the town (at least for a few hours). MEDIA The media in DC really means only one thing: the Washington Post. Widely read and elegant, old-money neighborhoods scattered throughout Northwest and the neighboring widely respected, the local daily is considered among the nation’s top newspapers. Its Virginia suburb McLean (quite a few Supreme Court Justices live on the same quiet street competitor, the Washington Times, is owned by the Unification Church and provides an in McLean, just spitting distance from the CIA, which is also in the neighborhood. We unsurprising, more conservative perspective. However, many are saying these days the Post suppose it’s a good choice if you’re looking for protection). Maryland’s ritziest zip code, seems more conservative than ever. The national newspaper USA Today is based across Potomac 20854, has houses so big they are nothing short of embarrassingly ostentatious. the Potomac in Arlington, VA. Several TV programs are also based in DC, including the For the fabulous and rich, anything goes fashion-wise as long as it shows up in next PBS News Hour with longtime host Jim Lehrer, CNN’s Larry King Live and all of the major season’s Vogue. For the fabulous and broke, vintage shops selling anything designer are networks’ Sunday morning news programs. hot. Most of Washington wears a suit to work. In the African American community, dress The Post, of course, is famed for its role in the uncovering of the Watergate scandal in ranges from haute couture to street wear, with baggy pants and expensive sneakers still the early 1970s. Budding reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein traced a break in dominating the male fashion trend. at the Watergate Hotel to the top ranks of the White House administration. Then editor While DC is a designer-conscious city, it doesn’t boast the same clusters of designer and local legend Ben Bradlee took a risk in supporting the investigation and publishing the shopping streets you would find in places like New York or San Francisco. You’ll have to stories. The discoveries eventually forced the resignation of President Richard Nixon. hit the malls to find your Louis Vuitton. Also based in DC is National Public Radio (NPR), the most respected commercial, non- profit free radio network in the nation. Popular shows include Morning Edition, All Things Considered and The Diane Rehm Show. NPR’s offices are in the heart of the Downtown FOOD redevelopment project. DC’s culinary choices match its population, ie they represent every state in the nation As the news capital of the free world (and home to thousands of reporters from all over and just about every country on the planet. Downtown DC, Capitol Hill and the White the US, not to mention the world), Washington media is dominated by the big boys; how- House area are packed with upscale venues catering to the capital-city jet set – steakhouses, ever, smaller independent voices, both digital and print, help energize the scene. For many 20 21

7. DC DECODER EDUCATION Washington is a major college town, home to private schools like Georgetown, George Beltway bandits Consultants who clean up on high-priced government contracts. Washington, American, Howard and Catholic universities, along with public universities like University of District of Columbia (UDC) and the massive University of Maryland Camp intern The city in summertime when young students flood in for stints on the Hill, federal agencies and in nearby College Park, MD. The presence of so many students infuses the city with a think tanks. City Life City Life diversified, youthful presence easily observed throughout the city. Each of the major Cave dweller Old-money Washingtonians, many of whom can trace their ancestry in the city back to pre–Civil schools is different – Georgetown is known for producing the nation’s future leaders, War days. especially in the realm of international relations and politics, Howard attracts the African DC, the District What locals call the place (never ‘Washington, DC’ – who has the time?). American cream-of-the-crop from around the country, while George Washington has a well-respected medical school. ECONOMY & COSTS CULTURE Eye St I St (to avoid confusion with 1st St). In 1999 the Clinton administration introduced legislation that allows Washington, GS Government service level; a professional caste system. The higher the number (eg GS-1 vs GS-15), the higher DC, residents to attend any public university (if admitted) in the United States at state the salary and prestige. tuition rates. Hill rat Lifer congressional staffers; named for the book Hill Rat by John Jackley. Langley Often synonymous with ‘CIA’; Langley, Virginia is that agency’s home. Potus Secret Service shorthand for President of the United States. ECONOMY & COSTS third-largest regional economy in the United States, The greater Washington area is the ‘Skins! Redskins (DC’s football team). Generally bellowed. with a gross regional product of nearly $246.8 billion in 2005. While the federal govern- ment is the main story in DC, thriving private-sector industries include information technology, bioscience, international business, professional services and tourism. The reporters, getting to report in DC is like getting to Mecca. Positions at bigger papers and federal government provides fuel for all of these industries. In the 1990s, the high-tech especially TV stations are coveted. As a result there are some very good reporters working industry in particular benefited from government spending, and sprouted up – seemingly for the smaller outlets, biding their time until they break the story of a lifetime and move overnight – in northern Virginia along the Dulles corridor. on to greener pastures, so it’s not unheard of for the little guy to grab the big scoop here. Washington, DC, is an expensive place The Drudge Report, an online publication, is a perfect example. They broke the Monica to live and to visit. Once in Washington, Lewinsky story in the late 1990s. the bulk of your travel expenses will be for Washington, DC, has some excellent sources of independent media. The City Paper (www. accommodation. Although fancy hotels in HOW MUCH? washingtoncitypaper.com) keeps an alternative but informed eye on local politics and Washington can cost as much as you are Bicycle rental (three hours) $20 trends. Another valuable source for local and national events is the DC Independent Media Center willing to pay, it is possible – taking advan- (www.dc.indymedia.org). Smaller rags filled with juicy Hill gossip include the Hill (www. tage of discounted web rates – to stay in a Cab fare Downtown from Ronald Reagan Washing- hillnews.com) and Roll Call (www.rollcall.com). central, four-star hotel for $150 to $200. ton National Airport $15 To get the scoop on Washington political gossip and humor head to Wonkette: The DC Gossip Midrange hotels run from $120 to $350, Cappuccino $4 (www.wonkette.com), which also has links to local blogs (Washingtonienne – see p42 – was while the hostels in DC cost around $30 outed here). You can also catch up on DC celebrity sightings – Sam Donaldson waiting for Concert ticket at the 9:30 Club $30 for a bed. Eating in DC is also not cheap. a cab, the Bush twins downing shots at an unhip bar. Don’t worry if you’ve never heard Three sit-down meals per day, including Guinness $6 of some of the names before, some of these folks are only famous in Washington – this is one at an upscale restaurant, will easily Movie ticket $9 a city where CNN anchors are kind of akin to rock stars. cost $80 per person. Forgoing drinks or If you’re looking for some mind-numbingly funny, but decidedly left-wing political One-bedroom apartment (one month) $1500 grabbing a meal at a less-expensive venue cartoon humor, check out www.markfiore.com. The artist, whose work has appeared trims that estimate to $50. At best, self- Parking garage (one hour) $6 in newspapers across the country (and who is a former staff cartoonist for the San Jose catering and cheap eats make it possible Washington Post 50c Mercury News), does hilarious, yet thought-provoking, weekly animated skits in which to eat for about $20 per day. many jokes are at George W Bush’s expense. Keep in mind that Washington offers many opportunities to save money. With free federal sites, museums, concerts and festivals, it’s entirely possible to find yourself fully LANGUAGE entertained – day and night – without paying a dime. The Smithsonian museums are always DC’s English is as varied as the city itself. You’ll hear plenty of accents and slang from New free, and galleries like the Phillips Collection and the Corcoran Gallery of Art have reduced York, the Midwest, Southern USA and California among the residents of this transient US entry or free admission on certain days of the week. Happy hours offer excellent value for city, as well as the urban dialect of its African American neighborhoods. Diplomatic and im- eating and drinking, and many upscale restaurants have fixed-plate and pre-theater menus migrant communities add pockets of multilingualism to the city – you’ll hear more Spanish that are good value. than English in Mount Pleasant and lots of Amharic in Adams-Morgan’s African restaurants; Vietnamese is the lingua franca in suburban Virginia’s ‘Little Saigon.’ Washington, DC, bureaucrats – who seem to spend their days crafting acronyms, abbrevia- tions and neologisms – make their own peculiar contributions to DC’s language. It is only GOVERNMENT & POLITICS would be exclusively administered by According to the Constitution, the nation’s capital in Washington that you will hear acroynym-laden constructions like, ‘If HR 3401 passes, everyone under GS-10 at HUD and HHS will be SOL’ and bureaucratic phraseologies like the US Congress. More than 200 hundred years later, Congress has yet to give up this ‘non-means-tested entitlement,’ ‘soft money’ and ‘what the meaning of is is.’ power. Despite the emergence of Washington, DC, as a major metropolitan center, it is an 22 23

8. anomalous political entity that functions more like a colony than a state. The grievance of chicory and trilliums) burst into a pale-pastel rainbow of blooms. Also native to the city, ‘taxation without representation,’ which sparked the American Revolution, remains unad- sometimes in near-virgin stands, are tulip poplars, red-and-white oaks, sycamore, elm, dressed for Washington residents. In fact, it has recently reappeared as a slogan on some willow, dogwood, beech, hickory and pine. DC license plates. The waterways and wetlands surrounding the city attract waterfowl and other feath- From the late 19th century, an appointed three-man commission managed city affairs ered friends. Hundreds of bald eagles and ospreys nest along the Potomac south of and residents were denied voting rights. The call for Home Rule was first heard early in Washington and along the Patuxent River to the east. Kenilworth Gardens, in Northeast City Life City Life the 20th century, but it was not until 1964 that DC residents voted in a presidential elec- DC, is thick with wading great blue herons, red-winged blackbirds and bitterns. In 2000, tion for the first time. In 1968, President Johnson replaced the commission system with Mayor Anthony Williams announced a major riverfront redevelopment and cleanup a mayor and city council. Finally, the Home Rule Act went into effect in 1974, granting effort that will, hopefully, spur revitalization of the Anacostia as a natural and recrea- limited autonomy, including the right to vote for mayor. tional resource. ENVIRONMENT ENVIRONMENT Washingtonians are still denied representation at the federal level, despite having a larger population than Wyoming. In the 1990s, the issue of DC statehood was advanced to redress this situation. The Clinton administration supported the initiative, which was voted down by the House of Representatives. Washington is an overwhelmingly Demo- URBAN PLANNING & DEVELOPMENT Since the 1970s, DC’s population has declined, as residents have moved up and out to cratic town and Republicans have little incentive to bring their votes into the political burgeoning suburbia (see Identity, p17). DC’s outlying areas are some of the fastest mix. growing in the nation; suburban sprawl and the accompanying automobile dependence In March 2000, a federal court panel ruled that Washingtonians have no legal right to a have resulted in traffic problems and air pollution. In recent years, the local government vote in Congress, dealing a severe setback to community leaders and home-rule activists. responded with innovative transportation solutions: expanding the Metrorail, adding Mayor Williams summed up the city’s disappointment: ‘Over the last 200 years, residents of and enforcing designated lanes for High Occupancy Vehicles (HOVs), and allowing the District of Columbia have fought in nine wars and paid billions of dollars in federal taxes. bicycles on trains and buses are all ways of encouraging commuters to leave their car Yet in our nation’s capital – the epicenter of democracy – we lack the most fundamental keys at home. right of all: the right to vote.’ Taxation remains a chronic source of tension for cash-strapped DC. Two-thirds of the income earned in DC is not taxable by DC because suburbanite earn it (and paid income tax in their home state, not DC). ON THE HORIZON The winds of change are blowing in America’s capital. Depending on your direction, the city is either at the height of a cultural renaissance or in the middle of some heavy-duty (and perhaps unnecessary) cosmetic surgery. In truth, ENVIRONMENT Washington is pumping copious quantities of cash into preserving its past while frantically building its future. History is in these days, and DC is crazy about museums. So far $1.5 billion has been spent renovating old and constructing new THE LAND museums and monuments. While some of the projects are purely about aesthetics, others are being conceived with duel DC stands at a pivotal place upon the fall line, the exact point where the coastal plain purposes – preserving the arts and sparking urban renewal. intersects with the higher, rockier piedmont plateau. Most of Downtown and Southeast New initiatives like the National’s stadium (at the intersection of Potomac Ave and 1st St SE) are purposely being DC lie on the delta formed by the joining of the Potomac River and its smaller tributary, constructed in poor neighborhoods in hopes of jump-starting depressed economies. City planners have no reason to the Anacostia River. The federal city was sited here precisely because of this geographic question this gentrification model; it’s worked here in the past. The construction of the MCI Center and consequent anomaly: it is the last navigable point on the Potomac, which city founders deemed im- revitalization of the Downtown is a textbook example. Those skeptical of gentrification’s benefits, however, worry portant for trade. Just north of here at Great Falls, the river tangles itself in a series of cliffs about trickle-down effects on local residents who will be unable to afford the sky-high rent that comes with living in and crags, impeding the progress of ships. an edgy-hot ’hood. In the city, the high ground defined by the fall line proved an attractive setting for the DC isn’t concentrating revitalization efforts solely on low-income areas. On Pennsylvania Ave, in a posh district now mansions of Washington’s wealthy residents – it runs through Georgetown and traces the dubbed the Penn Quarter, a six-story glass structure is going up. The new home of the privately funded Newseum (see course of Kalorama Rd. The southern, monumental part of Washington around the Mall is p95 for more), dedicated to the achievements of news people across the globe, this is one of the city’s multi-purpose coastal lowland smoothed out by the seasonal flooding of the Potomac and Anacostia Rivers. ventures set to open in 2007. The museum will only occupy about 40% of the 555,000-sq-foot building. The rest of To control flooding in the 19th century, developers created landfills like West Potomac the space will be turned into offices, shops and condominiums in an effort to spearhead neighborhood revival. The Park and dredged the Washington Channel. Washington, DC, is a small city with wide sidewalks and few highways, making it an $100-million National Children’s Museum (replacing the now closed Capital Children’s Museum) being constructed at ideal city for walking. L’Enfant Plaza is another such initiative. Set to open in 2009 it is being envisioned as a family-friendly attraction with exhibits and programs catering to young audiences from around the globe. On the aesthetic front, the Corcoran Gallery of Art is building a new wing. An undulating metal $120-million Frank GREEN DC Gehry designed creation. And funding has been approved for the Smithsonian Institution National Museum of African American History and Culture at a sight adjacent to the Washington Monument and across the street from the National Today Washington, DC, is a uniquely green city. Hundreds of acres of protected parks and wetlands make a good home for urban wildlife, including small woodland creatures Museum of American History. A timeframe for construction has not been confirmed, as the museum is currently in and aquatic animals like raccoons, turtles, salamanders, beavers, white-tailed deer, weasels, initial development and fundraising stages. When completed, the museum will house important documents, artifacts muskrats, foxes and opossums. Olmstead’s 2000-acre Rock Creek Park is a particularly and recordings that bring alive the vibrant cultural contributions African Americans have made to their country over the attractive habitat. Cardinals, pileated woodpeckers and wood thrushes also flit around last 400 years. On the Mall, one of DC’s most popular museums, the National Museum of American History (p67) is here. getting a multi-million dollar facelift and set to reopen in 2008, while the National Portrait Gallery (p96) just finished The mixed woodlands of DC parks are fetching in springtime, when forsythia, fruit its renovation and is looking gorgeous. trees – especially cherries and crab apples – and wildflowers (violets, bluebells, wild orchids, 24 25

9. The economic upswing in the 1990s sparked investment in Washington neighbor- hoods, especially Downtown. Projects such as the MCI Center (a huge arena that hosts major sporting events and big-name rock concerts) and the Convention Center are the backbone of the ongoing revitalization in the area. New additions like the National Museum of the American Indian and the National WWII Memorial promise to continue to draw visitors to the Mall. Since September 11, 2001, local government has placed more City Life importance on security concerns when developing public works projects. ENVIRONMENT © Lonely Planet Publications. To make it easier for you to use, access to this chapter is not digitally restricted. In return, we think it’s fair to ask you to use it for personal, non-commercial purposes only. In other words, please don’t upload this chapter to a peer-to-peer site, mass email it to everyone you know, or resell it. See the terms and conditions on our site for a longer way of saying the above - ‘Do the right thing with our content.’ 26