The season finale of Tell Me Lies just premiered this week and it was filled with juicy twists and shocking secrets that we will have to wait until the following season to have revealed. Starring Grace Van Patten and Jackson White, Tell Me Lies tells the story of Lucy (Van Patten) and her tumultuous relationship with Stephen (White) during the span of eight years, from 2007 to 2015. This season focused on how their relationship came to be, with the central conflict focusing on the mystery surrounding the death of Lucy’s roommate Macy (Lily McInerny) and those involved.

Aside from the many different dramatic events that have taken place throughout the season, the biggest role had to be the music, which directly impacted what happened on screen. In an interview with Decider, showrunner Meaghan Oppenheimer revealed that the placement of the song “Mr. Brightside” by the Killers was very important to the show.

“I had a very specific playlist I made while I was writing the pilot that I gave to everyone. I had originally put ‘Mr. Brightside’ in an earlier episode. And Hulu — and I was very bummed out at the time, but thank god they said this — they were like, ‘This song isn’t right for this moment. Let’s save it for a bigger emotional moment.’ And I was like, ‘OK fine.’ And I didn’t agree. And then when we were cutting the staircase scene, we initially had sadder music that just felt a bit silly and melodramatic. And I said to my editor Julie, ‘Will you just put on ‘Mr. Brightside’ to see what that sounds like? This is probably crazy.’ And she put it in and then we were silent after, and she was like, ‘I think that’s perfect?’ And I was like, ‘I think it’s perfect, too!’ And [the scene] completely changed.”

Indeed, the playlist in question is so perfect for this show because of the nostalgia it brings forth. Since the show focuses mostly on the years 2007 and 2008, much of the music is indie and alternative, with featured artists including Sufjan Stephens and the bands Arcade Fire, Florence + the Machine, The Black Keys, The Killers, Tune-Yards, and Death Cab For Cutie, among others. Unlike shows focused on the time period of today, Tell Me Lies seems to invoke a sentimentality for the age when music felt simpler and you could just buy a song on iTunes to download onto your iPod or computer. Each song induces the feeling of trying to find yourself, carefully curated for a college environment when you find yourself struggling to fit in and find your friends. At the same time, when a character like Stephen has a breakdown, a song by Radiohead or Arcade Fire feels perfectly placed in his anger or fear.

Want to know the full list of songs that were featured on Oppenheimer’s playlist for Tell Me Lies? Take a look below for the comprehensive playlist, as sourced from Vague Visages: