The Demolished Man is your typical police procedural, a tale of murder, deception, lust and...telepathy? Written by Alfred Bester and published in 1953, it’s one of the most lauded novels in science fiction history.

My first introduction to the works of Alfred Bester was with his third novel The Stars My Destination which I took a chance on after scouring the science fiction section of my local bookstore for classic sci-fi titles. Luckily it turned out to be a fantastically addictive and breathlessly paced, intergalactic revenge story and unexpectedly became one of my favourite books of all time.

I later discovered that Alfred Bester is a bona fide Science Fiction legend. He was made an SF Grand Master in 1987 (think the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame but for SF writers) rubbing shoulders with the likes of Isaac Asimov (Foundation), Robert Heinlein (Starship Troopers) and Arthur C. Clarke (Rendezvous with Rama) and his very first novel, The Demolished Man, won the inaugural Hugo Award, one of the most prestigious literary prizes for the Science Fiction and Fantasy genres.

Having enjoyed The Stars My Destination so much I was desperate to read The Demolished Man but had a backlog of other books to get through first (damn you, Asimov!). Finally though, after picking up a copy in The Strand Bookstore in NYC (a Mecca for book lovers), I've finished it. Did it live up to the hype? In short, yes, yes it did.

The story begins following Ben Reich, the charismatic, driven and above all ruthless owner of the intergalactic business empire known as Monarch. When we first meet the power hungry Reich he's suffering from traumatic nightmares about "the man with no face" and is simultaneously struggling to counter the success of his closest competitor Craye D'Courtney whose thriving business threatens to bury the Monarch company. The thought of being beaten by D'Courtney makes infuriates Reich yet he reaches out to his enemy, proposing a merger. The offer is flatly refused and in this moment Reich resolves to take drastic action...drastic action of the murderous variety.

Unfortunately for Reich, there's just one small problem with his plan. In the 24th Century many of Earth's inhabitants are latent telepaths called Espers, or more commonly peepers.

In society there are three classes of Espers, the lowest of which can only read immediate thoughts and tend to be employed as secretaries and administrators, the middle class can dig a little deeper and read the pre-conscious level; they're typically employed as lawyers and psychologists but the highest class of Esper can delve deep into the subconscious mind and as a result they command the most respected jobs in the upper echelons of the police force and government.

Since the police force is full of Espers and peeping is a talent that Reich does not possess, he needs all the help he can get. We soon learn that despite being governed by a strict code of conduct, the lure of money is enough even for an Esper to take a great risk, collaborate with a devious character such as Reich and help him carry out the unthinkable.

Later in the story Police Prefect Lincoln Powell, an Esper first class, is called to a party for the rich and powerful where one Craye D'Courtney has been brutally murdered. There is no murder weapon and the only witness, his daughter, has vanished. Despite the seemingly hopeless case, Powell begins an intense investigation in to an attendee at the party, Ben Reich, who he is certain is the killer but cannot prove it.

Much like an episode of Columbo, we know who the killer is from the start, we know their motivation and despite their reprehensible actions we actually grow to kind of like them. Unlike Columbo we're fully involved in the investigation through Powell and as such we know the moves that the police are going to make to try and trip the killer up and it's fascinating to follow how Reich is able to successfully duck and dive these traps and how with each subsequent duck and each successive dive he becomes more and more desperate up until the thrilling confrontation with "the man with no face".

Bester paints a wonderfully vivid and futuristic world full of flying cars, off-world colonies and telepathic socialites (with names like @tkins or Wyg&) communicating silently, frowning upon those who talk out loud. It's also quite charming in the typical way that old sci-fi often is, where they still use archaic technologies such as magnetic tape.

Where it also shows its age is in the female characters who can be strong, confident and independent one moment but the next they are swooning at the feet of the male protagonists. It's an outdated attitude but one that I hope most readers can look past and forgive as a product of its time. It doesn't form a big part of the story but does need to be acknowledged.

Ultimately though The Demolished Man is a story of how far a person will go to get what they want. It's a study on how devious a person can become in order to overcome odds that seem utterly insurmountable and how, even when all seems lost, they will continue to battle on and on until they face nothing but demolition. It also explores what can be hidden in the depths of our deepest, darkest subconscious and how those secrets can unwittingly drive us and cloud our judgement.

Overall it’s an engaging, enthralling and utterly encapsulating experience and an absolute must for lovers of classic science fiction. If you like a good crime or detective thriller then you might just get a kick out of it too. Highly recommended.

If you can't get a copy in your local bookstore or library then grab one here. Why not also try The Stars My Destination here?

Let me know your own thoughts on The Demolished Man and leave your own recommendations in the comments below.

Peace.

This article contains affiliate links which provide the writer with a small kick back when you make a purchase.