Go To Page 1

The demolished man Alfred Bester

The story revolves around a man named Ben Rich who awakens in a hydropathic bed with a shuddering heart and unfocused eyes, trying to simulate calmness.

25 Jun, 2024, 12:00 AM IST

YSRCP's central office in Tadepalli demolished; Jagan Mohan Reddy calls Naidu 'a dictator'

The YSR Congress Party's under-construction central office in Tadepalli, Guntur district, was demolished by municipal authorities on Saturday morning, despite a high court order to halt the activity. YSRCP President Y. S. Jagan Mohan Reddy condemned the demolition, attributing it to political vendetta by the TDP-led government. Officials claimed the construction was illegal, while Reddy vowed to fight against these actions and appealed to democratic forces to condemn the act.

22 Jun, 2024, 02:39 PM IST

Andhra Pradesh: CRDA demolishes YSRCP's central office in Tadepalli; Jagan calls Naidu 'dictator'

22 Jun, 2024, 10:20 AM IST

Tamil Nadu: Family trapped on first floor after landlord demolishes staircase

Tamil Nadu fire and rescue services were called to rescue a family trapped on the first floor of their home after their landlord demolished the staircase due to a dispute over rent payment. The landlord, Srinivasan, had already cut off the electricity, drinking water, and sewage lines to the property the previous week.

21 Jun, 2024, 12:00 PM IST

Unauthorised structures at Ex-AP CM Jagan's residence in Hyderabad demolished

According to a senior official of GHMC, the civic authorities removed the structures abutting the compound wall to carry out tiling work on the pavement in front of Jagan's residence. The structures were being used by security personnel, he said. An earthmover was used to remove the structures.

15 Jun, 2024, 05:16 PM IST

Pune car crash: Illegal portions of resort owned by accused juvenile's family razed in Mahabaleshwar

Two IT professionals hailing from Madhya Pradesh were killed when a Porsche allegedly driven by the juvenile in an inebriated condition hit their two-wheeler in Pune's Kalyani Nagar area on May 19. The accident hit national headlines due to efforts made to get the juvenile off the hook, resulting in the arrest of several persons, including his father and grandfather.

08 Jun, 2024, 04:32 PM IST

Porsche accident effect: Pune Municipality bulldozes two pubs in Koregaon

The Pune Municipal Corporation demolished two pubs, Waters and Orilla, in Koregaon Park for unauthorized expansions. This action is part of a city-wide crackdown on illegal structures in areas with many pubs and restaurants. The drive follows a fatal accident involving a minor served alcohol, prompting stricter enforcement of building and alcohol laws.

22 May, 2024, 05:35 PM IST

Gaza War Rafah update: IDF demolishes 100 Hamas sites; over 80 Hamas gunmen eliminated

18 May, 2024, 09:30 PM IST

Reports: North Korea continues with military expansion, Kim Jung Un demolishes own buildings for military installations

North Korea-centric news outlet 'NK Pro' has reported that the main residential buildings and auxiliary structures were most likely demolished between April 21 and April 25, 2924. Quoting an unnamed expert it also said the demolition could indicate Kim's plans to use the land for constructing military facilities.

08 May, 2024, 10:43 PM IST

Historic Hindu temple demolished in Pakistan for a commercial complex

Historical Hindu temple in Landi Kotal Bazaar, Khyber district, Pakistan, has been demolished for commercial complex construction. Conflicting statements from officials raise concerns about preservation efforts for non-Muslim sites of worship, emphasizing the need for proactive measures to protect such sites.

12 Apr, 2024, 08:59 PM IST

Taiwan earthquake: Nine killed, dozens still out of contact; workers start demolishing damaged buildings

04 Apr, 2024, 12:06 PM IST

Uttarakhand tunnel rescue hero's home demolished in Delhi; Declines DDA's temporary accommodation offer

Delhi Development Authority (DDA) offered temporary accommodation to Wakeel Hassan, a hero of the Silkyara tunnel rescue operation, after his house was demolished in a drive. Despite the offer, Hassan declined, insisting on a written assurance. He and his family spent the night on a footpath, supported by neighbors. The DDA stated that the demolition was part of planned development, but residents claim they were not given prior notice. The Silkyara tunnel rescue operation, which Hassan was part of, used rat-hole mining and gained recognition for its success.

29 Feb, 2024, 02:08 PM IST

'Rescued 41, in return got this': DDA demolishes house of rat-hole miner who saved 41 from collapsed Uttarkashi tunnel

The Delhi Development Authority (DDA) demolished the home of rat-hole miner Wakeel Hassan in Khajoori Khas village during a planned development drive. Several houses were demolished. His friend also claimed to have beaten up by the police.

29 Feb, 2024, 09:51 AM IST

Aurangzeb demolished Keshavdev Temple, Krishna Janmabhoomi site, to build mosque in Mathura, says ASI in RTI reply

The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) has disclosed historical records confirming the demolition of the Keshavdev temple in Mathura. The records state that a temple once stood on the site, which was later used for the construction of the Aurangzeb mosque. This confirmation has provided encouragement to those seeking the removal of the Shahi Idgah mosque from the site.

06 Feb, 2024, 12:13 PM IST

Gaza War Day 119: IDF demolishes Hamas rocket production site, seizes cash and intelligence docs

02 Feb, 2024, 09:34 PM IST

Tesla CEO Musk: Chinese EV firms will 'demolish' rivals without trade barriers

Elon Musk, Tesla CEO, warns that Chinese automakers, such as BYD, with their cheaper models, are a significant threat to global rivals in the EV market. Chinese car companies are highly competitive and have the potential for significant success outside of China, depending on trade barriers. Musk acknowledges that without trade barriers, Chinese automakers will demolish most other car companies worldwide.

25 Jan, 2024, 08:40 AM IST

DMK not against Ram temple; don't agree with shrine built after demolishing mosque: Udhayanidhi Stalin

Udhayanidhi Stalin said that his party does not oppose the construction of the Ram temple at Ayodhya but is against the shrine being built after the "demolition of a mosque." Udhayanidhi emphasised that the DMK, led by the late M Karunanidhi, has a stance that is not against any particular religion or faith. He pointed out that the party does not object to the establishment of a temple at the site but expresses disagreement with constructing it following the demolition of the Babri Masjid in 1992.

18 Jan, 2024, 04:02 PM IST

AAP alleges Delhi's slum clusters being demolished by BJP-led Centre, announces campaign against it

"The BJP seems bent on turning people homeless in this biting cold. Before elections, the BJP promises to provide homes to slum-dwellers and after the polls, it starts demolishing their accommodation," he said at a press conference. The demolitions were being carried out without paying any attention to rehabilitation of the affected people in violation of court rulings, he alleged.

13 Jan, 2024, 05:00 PM IST

Centre wants to demolish all slums in Delhi: AAP

The Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) accuses the BJP-led government of demolishing all slums in Delhi in an inhuman manner without rehabilitating affected dwellers. Delhi ministers Atishi and Saurabh Bharadwaj claim the Centre directed land-owning agencies to clear all slum clusters. In November, a slum cluster was demolished without government relocation offers.

12 Jan, 2024, 11:59 AM IST

History-sheeter Munua Yadav's house demolished in Uttar Pradesh's Kannauj

On December 25 last year, a police team had gone to Dharnidharpur Nagariya village of the Vishungarh police station area to arrest the history-sheeter when he along with his minor son had opened fire in which constable Sachin Rathi was shot dead.

04 Jan, 2024, 04:08 PM IST

IDF demolishes Hamas leader Yahya Sinwar's hideout and tunnel network in Northern Gaza

02 Jan, 2024, 02:02 PM IST

Bulldozers out in MP: 10 meat shops, homes of three accused demolished in Ujjain, Bhopal

Ten shops selling meat illegally in Ujjain and the Bhopal houses of three persons allegedly involved in the attack on a BJP functionary were bulldozed by the Madhya Pradesh administration, officials said on Friday. The action in Ujjain came after Chief Minister Mohan Yadav asked authorities to clamp down on selling of meat in the open, they added.

15 Dec, 2023, 08:01 PM IST

Villagers blame wrath of demolished Baukhnaag Devta for tunnel collapse in Uttarkashi

Villagers in Uttarkashi believe that the recent collapse of the Silkyara-Polgaon tunnel is a result of the wrath of the local deity Baukhnaag Devta. They claim that the removal of a temple dedicated to the deity before the tunnel construction angered the god. The villagers insist that the deity must be appeased for successful rescue efforts.

16 Nov, 2023, 03:28 PM IST