The release has been in the works for almost 12 months covering bug fixes and it includes a good number of new features/improvements.

You can get the executables from GitHub or even better via our official repositories for Debian, Ubuntu and Fedora (new).

All latest versions are supported (Bookworm, Mantic Minotaur, Fedora 39), as well as the upcoming ones (Trixie, Noble Numbat, Fedora 40).

Installation/update instructions, as well as even an easy one command way you find in the comprehensive instructions page, just select the way you would like to go for.

Added

New languages: Hebrew, Indonesian, Ukrainian

Event Services

Newly introduced Event Service configuration and consistent handling across all components

Suspend/Resume & Screen Locking support for MacOS

Allow to enable/disable suspend & lock on operating system events (#1633, #1632)

Scheduled events allowing to suspend,resume, etc. (#1088)

Configurable CEC event handling

LED-Devices

Philips Hue

APIv2 support, incl. full https security and certificate validation

Multi-Segment device support, e.g. Gradient light

Use Entertainment area device location for Hyperion layout in addition to manual locations

Option to layout by focussing on full- or only center of entertainment area

Wizard supports multiple Hue-Bridge discovery

Support of DIYHue specifics. DIYHue bridge's name must start with "DIYHue"

Backward compatibility for bridges not supporting APIv2 and/or Entertainment API

Note: The wizard will configure an APIv2 capable bridge always with Entertainment to ensure the best experience.

Nanoleaf

Wizard to generate user authorization token allowing users to configure the device via a single window

Generation of a default layout per device's configuration, including orientation

Lines support

Changed

Updated misleading error messages in case Hyperion is not able to support the suspend/lock feature (#1622)

Restart Serial Device, if write error occurred

ws281x - Update logic to identify is user is admin and disable device configuration if not (#1621)

Hide Hyperion from the Dock on macOS, as all features can be accessed from the menubar - Thanks @Rastafabisch

Fixed

Correctly display local language characters in log, e.g. Umlauts

Fixed that Audio Capture is enabled after reboot automatically (#1581)

Fixed that Audio Capture is not shown when there is no screen nor video grabber

Audio Capture settings are no longer ignored (#1630)

Fixed that the Matrix effect finds its image - Thanks @lsellens

MDNSBrower - Fixed, if timeout while resolving host occurs

Non image updates ignored blacklisted LEDs (#1634)

Fixed that Windows OsEvents failed in non-GUI mode (#1671)

Addressed serious (#1425) and some smaller memory leaks

LED-Devices

WLED

Fixed UI handling, if segment streaming is not supported

Nanoleaf

"Panel numbering sequence" was not configurable any longer

Number of panels increased during retries (#1643)

Removed

LED-Devices

Philips Hue

"Switch Off On Black" for APIv2, as the original bridge will switch off LEDs itself.

"Candy Gamma" for APIv2, as the bridge maps the RGB values best per device.

Nanoleaf

Removed "Start Position" in favour of the general Blacklist feature provided

Technical

Changed default build from Stretch to Buster

Support Qt 6.7, Update to Protobuf 25.1, Update mbedTLS to v3.4.0, Update flatbuffers to v23.5.26

Use C++17 standard as default

Added Pull Request (PR) installation script, allowing users to test development builds savely on Linux

Fixed missing include limits in QJsonSchemaChecker - Thanks @Portisch

Fixed dependencies for deb packages in Debian Bookworm (#1579) - Thanks @hg42, @Psirus

Fixed git version identification when run in docker and local code

Address cmake deprecation warnings, cmake 3.5 is required at minimum now

Address some build warnings

Removed UniqueConnections from Lambdas, as not supported

Hyperion's November release brings you some new features, removed IPv6 address related limitations, as well as fixing a couple of issues.

Hyperion packages can be installed now under Ubuntu (x64/armhf/arm64) and Debian (x64/armhf/arm64) (incl. Raspberry Pi OS) via our own APT server.

Details about the installation can be found in the installation.md and at apt.hyperion-project.org.

We strongly recommend doing an export of your configuration before migrating to the new version!

You cannot use the new version's configuration database with a previous version.

If you run multiple instances, you unfortunately need to export each individually.

Added

New LED-device type: Razor Chroma.

Note: Due to Chroma Razer API limitations, only one device can be configured.

APA102 - Support setting maximum brightness level (1-31)

New installation method (Drag'n Drop) for macOS.

hyperion-remote & standalone grabbers: IPv6 support

New languages: Danish & Hungarian

Changed

LED-Devices: Removed IPv6 limitations

Philips-Hue Wizard optimizations

JSON/Flatbuffer forwarder: Removed IPv6 limitations

Allow to import configurations from previous versions

Note: Existing configurations are migrated to new structures automatically

Fixed

Fixed API Subscription (e.g. as used by HomeAssistant) (#1351)

Fixed APA102 protocol aligning to the standard defined, removed Latch-Time as not required by APA102 protocol (#1352, #1132)

Fixed hyperion-remote when sending multiple Hex-Colors with "Set Color" option

UI: Fixed "Selected Hyperion instance isn't running" issue (#1357)

Fixed Database migration version handling

Fixed Python ModuleNotFoundError (#1109)

Technical

Added Qt6 support

Migrated to MBEDTSL 3

The release is primarily fixing issues introduced with alpha 10, but covering other findings too.

Thanks to everybody highlighting real problem areas, as well as to those proactively providing fixes for integration via pull requests.

Besides bug fixing, you will find some smaller enhancements which make everybody’s life easier.

The fact that WS281x devices must run under root caused many headaches before in getting them running.

We did not weaken security, but provide you with an easy to use script to switch the user-id of hyperion going forward. Furthermore, device configuration is blocked, if the environment does not allow it.

Added:

Script to change the user Hyperion is executed with.

To run Hyperion with root privileges (e.g. for WS281x) execute

sudo updateHyperionUser -u root

Gif effects can source Gifs via URLs in addition to local files as input

System info screen: Added used config path and "is run under root/admin"

LED-Device enhancements

WS281x: Ensure that a device cannot be configured via the UI when Hyperion is not run with root privileges

Nanoleaf: Support discovering additional Nanoleaf devices, e.g. Shapes

Nanoleaf: Ability to restore state when Hyperion stops streaming

Note: In case previous state was a dynamic/temporary effect, the state cannot be restored

Nanoleaf: New Feature: allow to overwrite brightness by Hyperion

Changed:

The Systemd/Upstart/System-V-Init service registers Hyperion under the name hyperion instead of hyperiond, as this has caused confusion among users in the past.

WLED and UDP-Raw: Limit maximum LEDs number to 490

WS281x: Update DMA default as per rpi_ws281x recommendation

Smoothing is paused when no input source is available (to save resources)

Disable LED update streaming, if LED updates are not required, Sync. Video-Streaming between Layout and Simulation

Load configuration of last instance used when loading the UI page, Streamline API requests to avoid unnecessary invocations (#1311)

BobLight: Priorities are not limited any longer. BobLight can feed Priorities [2-253], default is still 128 (#1269)

Amlogic grabber: Limit grabber to 30fps during discovery

Amlogic grabber: Continuous image feed even when paused (to not have LEDs switched off), plus no delay when pausing/unpausing

Fixed:

Fixed that Smoothing with "Continuous Updates" disabled does not provides LED updates (#1068, #1240)

Fixed Issue Blinking / flickering cursor with QT screen capture on Windows (#1328)

Fixed Colour effect priority is not deleted when Colorpicker is open (double click on delete is required)

Fixed reuse local SSDP address (#1324)

Exclude FB Grabber on Amlogic platform, as FB is included in Amlogic Grabber

Escape XSS payload to avoid execution (#1292)

Include libqt5sql5-sqlite packaging dependency

Fixed embedded Python location (#1109)

LED-Devices

Fixed Philips Hue wizard (#1276)

Fixed AtmoOrb wizard

Fixed that Lightpack device does not core when lack of permissions error (LIBUSB_ERROR_ACCESS)

Fixed Atmo/Karate LED count constraint handling

Fixed Hue, Disable LED general options (HW Led count & RGB Byte order) as calculated

Fixed SPI, Tpm2.Net - Memory issues

Fixed: Nanoleaf does not turn on

Fixed LED layout - Additional parameters for classic layout were not saved (#1314)

Fixed Network LED-Device UI: Trigger getProperties for the configured host, when no hosts were discovered

Removed:

Smoothing: Removed "Continuous Updates" flag as it is obsolete.

In case an LED-device requires continuous updates, use the LED-Device's "Rewrite Time" parameter.

The focus of this release is on user experience.

We tried as much as possible supporting you in getting valid setup done, as well as providing enough room for expert users to tweak configurations here and there.

The reworked dashboard provides you now with the ability to control individual components, jump to key configuration items, as well as to switch between LED instances easily.

The refined color coding in the user-interfaces, helps you to quickly identify instance specific and global configuration items.

Of course, the release brings new features (e.g. USB Capture on Windows), as well as minor enhancements and a good number of fixes.

Note:

IMPORTANT: Due to the rework of the grabbers, both screen- and video grabbers are disabled after the upgrade to the new version.

Please, re-enable the grabber of choice via the UI, validate the configuration and save the setup. The grabber should then restart.

Hyperion packages can now be installed under Ubuntu (x64) and Debian (amd64/armhf) (incl. Raspberry Pi OS) via our own APT server.

Details about the installation can be found in the installation.md and at apt.hyperion-project.org.

Find here more details on supported platforms and configuration sets

Added

The Dashboard is now a one-stop control element to control instances and link into configuration areas

LED Instance independent configuration objects (e.g. capturing hardware) are now separated out in the menu

New menu item "Sources" per LED instances configuration to enable/disable screen or usb grabber per instance

Grabbers

Windows Media Foundation USB grabber (incl. Media Foundation transform/Turbo-JPEG scaling)

Linux V4L2 Grabber now supports the following formats: NV12, YUV420

Image flipping ability in ImageResampler/Turbo-JPEG

UI: Simplified screens for non-expert usage, do only show elements relevant

Discover available Grabbers (incl. their capabilities for selection), not supported grabbers are not presented. Note: Screen capturing on Wayland is not supported (given the Wayland security architecture)

USB Grabber: New ability to configure hardware controls (brightness, contrast, saturation, hue), as well as populating defaults

Configuration item ranges are automatically adopted based on grabber capabilities,

Grabbers can only be saved with a valid configuration

Standalone grabbers: Added consistent options/capabilities for standalone grabbers, debug logging support

Screen grabbers: Allow to set capture frequency, size decimation and cropping across all grabber types

Screen grabber: QT-Grabber allows to capture individual displays or all displays in a multi-display setup

Display Signal Detection area in preview (expert users)

UI: Only show CEC detection, if supported by platform

LED-Devices

Select device from list of available devices (UI Optimization - Select device from list of available devices #1053) - Cololight, Nanoleaf, Serial Devices (e.g. Adalight), SPI-Device, Pi-Blaster

Get device properties for automatic configuration of number of LEDs and initial layout (WLED, Cololight, Nanoleaf)

Identify/Test device (WLED, Cololight, Nanoleaf, Adalight)

For selected devices a default layout configuration is created, if the user chooses "Overwrite" (WLED, Cololight, Nanoleaf, all serial devices, all spi device, pi-blaster)

Ensure Hardware LED count matches number of lights (Philips Hue, Yeelight, Atmo Orb)

User is presented a warning/error, if there is a mismatch between configured LED number and available hardware LEDs

Add udev support for Serial-Devices

Allow to get properties for Atmo and Karatedevices to limit LED numbers configurable

Philips Hue: Add basic support for the Play Gradient Lightstrip

WLED: Support of ["live" property] (Aircoookie/WLED#1308) (#1095)

WLED: Brightness overwrite control by configuration

WLED: Allow to disable WLED synchronization when streaming via hyperion

WLED: Support storing/restoring state (#1101)

Adalight: Fix LED Num for non analogue output in arduino firmware

Allow to blacklist LEDs in layout via UI

Live Video image to LedLayout preview (#1136)

Other

Effects: Support Custom Effect Templates in UI for custom effect creation and configuration

Effects: Custom effect separation in the systray menu

New languages - Portuguese (Std/Brazil) & Norwegian (Bokmål)

New Flags: Russia, Cameroon, Great Britain, England, Scotland

Provide cross compilation on x86_64 for developers using docker. This includes the ability to use local code, as well as build incrementally

Changed

Grabbers use now precise timings for better timing accuracy

Nanoleaf: Consider Nanoleaf-Shape Controllers

LED-Devices: Show HW-Ledcount in all setting levels

System Log Screen: Support to copy loglines, system info and status of the current instance to the clipboard (to share it for investigation)

Updated dependency rpi_ws281x to latest upstream

Fix High CPU load (RPI3B+) (#1013)

Fixed

Active grabbers are displayed correctly after updating the WebUI

Issue Crop values are checked against decimated resolution (#1160)

Framebuffer grabber is deactivated in case of error

Fix/no signal detection (#1087)

Fix that global settings were not correctly reflected across instances after updates in other non default instance (#1131,#1186,#1188)

Fix UI: Handle error scenario properly, when last instance number used does not exist any longer.

UI Allow to have password handled by Password-Manager (#1263)

Fixed effect freezing during startup

Effects were not started from tray (#1199)

Interrupt effect on timeout (#1013)

Fixed color and effect handling and duplicate priorities (#993,#1113,#1216)

Stop background effect, when it gets out of scope (to not use resources unnecessarily)

Custom Effect Templates (schemas) are now loaded

Effects: Uploaded images were not found executing custom image effects

"LED Test" effect description is in wrong order (#1229)

LED-Devices: Only consider Hardware LED count (#673)

LED-Devices: Correct total packet count in tpm2net implementation (#1127)

LED-Hue: Proper black in Entertainment mode if min brightness is set

LED-Hue: Minor fix of setColor command

Nanoleaf: Fixed behaviour, if external control mode cannot be set

System Log Screen: Fixed Auto-Scrolling, Update Look & Feel, Works across multiple Browser tabs/windows, as log stream is not stopped by a new UI

Rename Instance and Change Password: Modal did not close

Read-Only mode was not handled in the SysInfo function

WebSockets: Handling of fragmented frames fixed

Fixed libcec dependencies

General language and grammar updates