Kojak Integrated Biometrics Scanner Description

The 10-print roll scanner by Kojak is an Integrated Biometrics fingerprint scanner equipped with IB’s LES film technology that scans four flat prints and single finger rolls. The Kojak Integrated Biometric features an intuitive ergonomic with compact and lightweight design, making it suitable to be deployed in any working environment.

Scanning with the Kojak is seamlessly easy as a result of it being impervious to latent prints and can function with both wet and dry fingers without the need of adding lotion. Kojak Integrated Biometrics was designed to FAP 60 and FBI Appendix F Certified, hence it is environmentally friendly and consumes less energy. It can perform in direct sunlight with an easy-to-read LED graphic user interface.

Ergonomic Design:

Kojak integrated Biometrics fingerprint scanner is designed with an intuitive LED graphics user interface that makes it perform in direct sunlight and also with low power consumption. Kojak edges out other scanners in the market. Kojak is built with a durable housing with IP65 ingress protection that prevents the accidental spillage of liquid and does not let dust or dirt creep in.

Light Emitting Sensor Technology (LES):

Unlike other ten-print fingerprint scanners available in the market that uses TER (total internal reflection) with the aid of a prism to capture digit print of the finger which most time is affected by some factors like excess moisture, dirt and dryness. These types of traditional optical fingerprint scanners will struggle to capture detailed images. Integrated Biometrics by Kojak on the other hand uses patented light emitting sensor (LES) technology that delivers FAP 60 and FBI Appendix F certified fingerprint image in a compact and lightweight design. Light emitting sensors (LES) provide detailed image quality in both direct and indirect sunlight and are invulnerable to any finger conditions such as dryness, wetness, excess oil/lotion/grease, dust, chemical and water.

Anti-spoofing:

Worrying about cleaning any leftover or latent prints that might be present on the surface of the scanning area after each use may sometimes lead to incorrect capturing of fingerprint details. The Kojak Integrated Biometrics have the ability to omit latent prints of previous users on the scan surface making it easy to use with less cleaning and delivering a high volume of data accuracy and authentication in any situation.