Mardy Simpson Fish is an American former professional tennis player. He was a hardcourt specialist. He is one of several American tennis players who rose to prominence in the early 2000s.

Mardy Fish was born on December 9, 1981, in Edina, Minnesota, United States. His birth geographical coordinates are 44° 53’ 23” North latitude and 93° 20’ 60” West longitude, with an altitude of 281 meters above sea level. Mardy Fish is currently 42 years old.

Astrologically, Mardy Fish falls under the Sun sign of Sagittarius, with Pisces as his Ascendant, Taurus as his Moon sign, and Sagittarius as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Sagittarius Moon Taurus Mercury Sagittarius Venus Aquarius Mars Virgo Jupiter Scorpio Saturn Libra Uranus Sagittarius Neptune Sagittarius Pluto Libra Ceres Scorpio Chiron Taurus Eros Taurus Hygiea Leo Juno Sagittarius Pallas Libra Vesta Sagittarius Ascendant Pisces Black Moon Lilith Sagittarius Midheaven Sagittarius North Node Cancer South Node Capricorn Part of Fortune Leo Vertex Virgo

Sunin Sagittarius17° 35’ 34”

The Sun in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a natural leader. You are attracted to spiritual and philosophical subjects and […] Read more »

Moonin Taurus24° 39’ 5”

The Taurus Moon in the Natal Chart makes you sensual and reasonable. You are empathetic and can be rational and down to earth. You are […] Read more »

Mercuryin Sagittarius17° 6’ 58”

Mercury in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart indicates a gregarious and loving personality. You are idealistic and have a strong sense of conviction. You are […] Read more »

Venusin Aquarius0° 36’ 4”

Aquarius Venus in the Natal Chart makes you unusual and brilliant. You value people who inspire breakthroughs. You love epiphanies that help you understand the […] Read more »

Marsin Virgo26° 59’ 53”

Virgo Mars in the Natal Chart makes you nurturing and warm. You are protective and can be warm and generous. You can be down to […] Read more »

Jupiterin Scorpio2° 24’ 27”

Scorpio Jupiter in the Natal Chart relates to a generation born with the mission to expose hidden secrets and find empowerment and vision. You are […] Read more »

Saturnin Libra19° 55’ 46”

Yet, when you face challenges, you can be a staunch advocate for others. You have a feisty side and can be passionate about your mission. […] Read more »

Uranusin Sagittarius1° 26’ 8”

Uranus in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart is a generational placement, describing a broad cohort of people born within three years of each other. You […] Read more »

Neptunein Sagittarius24° 19’ 9”

Sagittarius Neptune in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation born to help society expand. You help others grow and push boundaries. […] Read more »

Plutoin Libra26° 11’ 18”

Pluto in Libra in the Natal Chart indicates a generation devoted to exposing corruption within the legal system. You help society transform how it creates […] Read more »

Ceresin Scorpio0° 18’ 20”

Ceres in Scorpio in the Natal Chart is an ideal generational placement for growth and perception. You are intense and can be obsessed with nurturing […] Read more »

Chironin Taurus19° 2’ 41”

Chiron in Taurus in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a nurturing healer. Your generation brings attention to financial and physical wellness. You […] Read more »

Erosin Taurus13° 6’ 7”

Eros in Taurus in the Natal Chart indicates you are passionate about your desire for luxury and physical pleasure. You are compassionate and can be […] Read more »

Hygieain Leo8° 1’ 13”

You are a pioneer who explores new health products and routines. You can be expressive and eager to lead others to improve their health. When […] Read more »

Junoin Sagittarius6° 28’ 28”

Juno in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart indicates an ideal placement for affection and desire. You bring abundance and love to your relationships and can […] Read more »

Pallasin Libra8° 39’ 39”

Pallas in Libra in the Natal Chart makes you more aware of patterns and cycles related to fairness. You seek balance and see the beauty […] Read more »

Vestain Sagittarius5° 53’ 38”

Vesta in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart brings passion and energy. You are excited about adventure and freedom. You can be loving and devoted to […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Third House Mercury Tenth House Venus Twelfth House Mars Seventh House Jupiter Eighth House Saturn Seventh House Uranus Ninth House Neptune Tenth House Pluto Eighth House Ceres Eighth House Chiron Second House Eros Second House Hygiea Sixth House Juno Ninth House Pallas Seventh House Vesta Ninth House Black Moon Lilith Ninth House North Node Fifth House South Node Eleventh House Part of Fortune Sixth House Vertex Seventh House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 21 major aspects, alongside 11 minor aspects, as well as 10 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Conjunct Mercury Moon Quincunx Neptune Venus Sextile Uranus Sun Sextile Saturn Moon Trine Mars Moon Quincunx Pluto Venus Square Jupiter Neptune Sextile Pluto Mercury Sextile Saturn Mars Square Neptune Venus Trine Mars Venus Square Pluto Mars Sextile Uranus Saturn Sextile Neptune Moon Quincunx Saturn Moon Trine Venus Jupiter Conjunct Pluto Saturn Conjunct Pluto Sun Conjunct Neptune Moon Opposite Uranus Mercury Conjunct Neptune

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Mardy Fish’s life journey.

Sun Conjunct Mercuryorb: 0°

Sun conjunct Mercury in the Natal Chart can make you bright, playful, and talkative. Your intellectual gifts are among your best characteristics. You can be […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Neptuneorb: 0°

When the Moon is quincunx Neptune in a Natal Chart, this can create a high level of intuition and even psychic energy, which leads to […] Read more »

Venus Sextile Uranusorb: 1°

Venus sextile Uranus in a chart typically indicates that a person is open-minded, artistic, and innovative. They are likely noticeably unique or different in some […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Saturnorb: 2°

The Sun sextile Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you sober and mature. Even as a child, you have uncanny wisdom and seem older than […] Read more »

Moon Trine Marsorb: 2°

What does the Moon trine Mars mean? In a Natal Chart, this can indicate a person has a charismatic, passionate, and ambitious personality. They are […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Plutoorb: 2°

Someone with the Moon quincunx Pluto in a Natal Chart will likely be secretive, emotionally intense, and self-destructive. They typically have inner thoughts and feelings […] Read more »

Mercury Sextile Saturnorb: 3°

What does Mercury sextile Saturn mean? When Mercury and Saturn are connected in this way, a person will likely have a more serious, organized, and […] Read more »

Mars Sextile Uranusorb: 4°

Mars sextile Uranus in a chart creates a lot of excitement! Anyone with this aspect in their chart may be adventurous and free-spirited. They are […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Saturnorb: 5°

If the Moon is quincunx Saturn in a Natal Chart, this typically indicates that a person may struggle to meet their emotional needs while fulfilling […] Read more »

Moon Trine Venusorb: 6°

When the Moon trines Venus in a Natal Chart, this can create an open, honest, and nurturing personality. Someone with this aspect in their chart […] Read more »

Jupiter Conjunct Plutoorb: 6°

Jupiter conjunct Pluto in a chart can create a lot of power and influence, but it isn’t always easy to deal with. There are many […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Plutoorb: 6°

Saturn conjunct Pluto in a Natal Chart typically indicates that a person has faced, or will face, some intense hardships. These might be experienced while […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Neptuneorb: 7°

The Sun conjunct Neptune makes you empathetic and transparent. You wear your heart on your sleeve and can be romantic and affectionate. You fall in […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Uranusorb: 7°

The Moon opposite Uranus in a Natal Chart can indicate a lot of instability in a person’s life. This instability will likely be centered around […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Neptuneorb: 7°

Mercury conjunct Neptune in a Natal Chart makes you intuitive and introspective. You keep your ideas to yourself and can use the arts and creative […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Moon Sextile North Node Moon Trine South Node Venus Square Ceres Jupiter Trine Ascendant Neptune Quincunx North Node Sun Conjunct Midheaven Sun Square Vertex Mercury Conjunct Midheaven Saturn Quincunx Chiron Uranus Square Ascendant Mercury Square Vertex

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Mardy Fish’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 1°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Sun Square Vertexorb: 1°

When the Sun squares the Vertex in a Natal Chart, you have unique insights into your fate. Yet your best advancements toward your purpose come […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Midheavenorb: 1°

Mercury conjunct Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and outgoing. Your career brings opportunities to express your creativity and intelligence. You are thoughtful […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Chiron Trine Vertex Pallas Sextile Black Moon Lilith Hygiea Sextile Pallas Hygiea Trine Black Moon Lilith Hygiea Conjunct Part of Fortune Juno Conjunct Vesta Pallas Sextile Part of Fortune Black Moon Lilith Trine Part of Fortune Ceres Trine Ascendant Hygiea Trine Juno

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Mardy Fish’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.