A SKELMERSDALE-based business which offers a software system to help petrol forecourt retailers to manage stocks has secured an investment from French company, Tokheim.

Fairbanks Environmental’s Bob Conlin and Steve Jones, who co-founded the business in 1996, have sold a 55% stake in the company to the Paris-based company for an undisclosed sum in a bid to increase their international footprint.

The firm’s software allows petrol forecourt retailers to manage their stocks and preventing wasteful fuel leaks at pumps and in storage tanks. The firm said that its technology can lead to savings of up to £15,000 per site each year as well as helping operators to comply with health and safety legislation. Its services are used by clients such as BP, Murco, Total, Tesco and the Co-operative Group. Last year, the firm generated sales of £3.6m and it employs 80 staff.

Following the investment by Paris-based Tokheim, the firm said that it would have greater access to overseas markets and to Tokheim’s customer base.

“We’re prestty successful in the UK market, but we don’t have an awful lot of overseas presence,” said Jones.

“We only have a one per cent share of the European market, although with that we’re probably still the market leader,” he added.

Tokheim was also an existing client of Fairbanks as it installs and manages the pumps. “The yardstick of success in the industry is how many stations your service, and they are servicing ten times the amount of stations that we are,” said Jones.

Mr Conlin and Mr Jones will continue to lead the business as joint managing directors and the firm is predicting sales for its current financial year to reach £5m.

Jones said that the deal would also see Tokheim retain its operational independence.

The firm was advised on the sale by by Baker Tilly Corporate Finance and law firm Mace & Jones. Jones said that it initially began working with Baker Tilly 18 months ago to find a suitable partner, but it had only been in talks with Tolkheim since April.

Ian Latham, partner at Baker Tilly Corporate Finance, said: “This deal, which clearly illustrates the increased international dimension of current M&A activity, represents an excellent investment for Tokheim, particularly as the wetstock management and onsite services within Europe are estimated to be worth in excess of £300m.

“Fairbanks has a market-leading position in the UK and Bob and Steve have been at the forefront in promoting/developing wet stock management services to the industry. The company now has the ability and platform to become a leading global business for these services.”