Partager :

Tokheim enters into an agreement with Dover related to the sale of its dispenser and system businesses

édité le 08/09/2015 - Plus de news de "TOKHEIM" - Voir la fiche entreprise de "TOKHEIM"

Tokheim announced that it has entered into an agreement with Dover Corporation, pursuant to which Dover has made a binding offer to acquire Tokheim’s Dispenser and System businesses. The Tokheim Sales and Service Divisions are not a part of this transaction and will become a stand-alone company remaining with its current owners. The transaction is subject to completion of information and consultation with certain of Tokheim’s employee representatives, certain regulatory filings and other customary conditions, and is expected to close in early 2016.

Headquartered in Paris, France, Tokheim is a global manufacturer of fuel dispensing and automation equipment, including a complete range of fuel dispensers and pumps, retail automation systems, payment terminals, media devices, as well as the leading Sales and Service organisation in the fuel retail industry. Tokheim’s majority shareholder is Motion Equity Partners, a European mid-market private equity firm.

Dover is a diversified global manufacturer delivering innovative equipment and components, specialty systems and support services through four major operating segments: Energy, Engineered Systems, Fluids, and Refrigeration & Food Equipment. The Tokheim Businesses would become part of OPW, a business unit within Dover’s Fluids segment, making it the premier global retail fueling systems provider, with unrivalled product breadth.

“We are excited about the strategic fit of Tokheim’s Dispenser and System businesses within Dover’s OPW business, as well as how a strong partnership with the merged entity will enhance the growth of our remaining Sales and Service businesses” said Baudouin de la Tour, CEO of Tokheim. “We strongly believe both our customers and employees will greatly benefit from this unique ability to provide full solutions on a global scale”.

“After years of sustained organic growth and geographical expansion, we found in Dover a great company to successfully pursue the global strategy of the Dispenser and System businesses” added Patrick Eisenchteter, Managing Partner of Motion Equity Partner.

About Tokheim

Tokheim is one of the world’s largest providers of fuel retailing solutions. Our breadth of offer aims to give you choice. This consists of four core elements: Dispensers, Systems & Payment, Service and Project Management. Tokheim products have been associated with exceptional quality for more than a century. Providing high quality solutions is embedded deep in the culture of our organisation. An experienced team of global product marketers and engineers continue the tradition of developing highly innovative, quality, equipment today and in preparation for tomorrow. At the heart of our business is our unrivalled service network. We have a direct presence and access to over 40,000 stations worldwide. This means we have access to a unique pool of real time, real life data that underpins everything we do. From new product developments to project management, after sales support and genuine service, our local presence, backed by the intelligence and security of our global operation allows Tokheim to position ourselves to be selected as your supplier of choice. Our local presence across more than thirty countries ensures we remain close to our customers at all times across the globe. We are there every step of the way from initial discussions, through to delivery and installation, after sales support and service in the future.

About Dover

Dover is a diversified global manufacturer with annual revenues in excess of $7 billion. We deliver innovative equipment and components, specialty systems and support services through four major operating segments: Energy, Engineered Systems, Fluids, and Refrigeration & Food Equipment. Dover combines global scale with operational agility to lead the markets we serve. Recognized for our entrepreneurial approach for 60 years, our team of over 26,000 employees takes an ownership mindset, collaborating with customers to redefine what’s possible. Headquartered in Downers Grove, Illinois, Dover trades on the New York Stock Exchange under “DOV.”

About Motion Equity Partners

Motion Equity Partners is a leading European private equity firm with €1.3 billion of assets under management. Its Fund I, raised in 2001, has been fully exited and delivered a first rate performance. Motion Equity Partners currently advises a second fund, raised in 2005 with a total equity value of €1.3 billion. It has a team of experienced private equity professionals in Paris and Milan focusing on mid-market buyouts (up to €300 million in value).

Origine : Communiqué TOKHEIM

Voir la fiche entreprise de "TOKHEIM"

Les dernières news de "TOKHEIM"

08/09/2015 - Tokheim enters into an agreement with Dover related to the sale of its dispenser and system businesses

Rechercher une news

française internationale

Les dernières news internationales

12/08 - VTTI completes acquisition of 50% of Dragon LNG (lue 353 fois)

12/08 - Shell invests in Phase 2 of Surat Gas Project in Australia (lue 474 fois)

11/08 - Offshore intervention and P&A contract in Brazil awarded to Halliburton (lue 771 fois)

09/08 - SBM Offshore awarded FSO contract for Woodside’s Trion development (lue 539 fois)

08/08 - PETRONAS' Exploration Yields Significant Successes in Malaysia and Abroad (lue 549 fois)

08/08 - CNOOC Limited Adds over 100 Billion Cubic Meters of Proved Gas In-place (lue 544 fois)

08/08 - SBM Offshore and Ocean-Power sign Partnership Agreement for Offshore Power Generation Concept with CO2 Capture and Storage (lue 506 fois)

08/08 - Saipem receives from RINA two important certifications for the methodology of qualification of the performances of subsea hydrogen pipelines (lue 516 fois)

08/08 - GFI LNG and Pilot LNG Form Joint Venture to Develop Salina Cruz LNG (lue 532 fois)

07/08 - NextDecade Executes EPC Contract with Bechtel for Train 4 at the Rio Grande LNG Facility (lue 398 fois)

>> Toute l'actualité internationale >> RSS