SOAPnet is reporting that Dan Gauthier is returning to One Life to Live in February, 2010, to his role as Kevin Buchanan. Gauthier previously played the role from 2003-2006.

Over the last three years, Gauthier has made several guest appearances on One Life. The actors was nominated for a Daytime Emmy as Outstanding Supporting Actor in A Drama Series in 2007. Obviously, Dan’s re-emergence to the Llanview canvas has much to do with the return of Gina Tognoni who played Kevin’s on-screen wife, Kelly Cramer.

Former General Hospital favorite and longtime fitness guru, Richard Simmons’s cause of death has been determined when his passing was ruled accidental.

Lenny Simmons, Richard’a brother, informed PEOPLE through a statement from a family rep, Tom Estey, the findings of the LA coroners report. Estey shared, “The Coroner informed Lenny that Richard’s death was accidental due to complications from recent falls and heart disease as a contributing factor. The toxicology report was negative other than medication Richard had been prescribed. The family wishes to thank everyone for their outpouring of love and support during this time of great loss.”

Simmons, appeared as himself on GH when he held exercise classes at the Campus Disco from 1979-1983, and them made a brief return to the GH Nurses’ Ball back in 2013. He was found dead at his home on July 13th by his longtime housekeeper, one day after celebrating his 76th birthday.

The LAPD originally reported there was no foul play in his death, but that more testing needing to be done to be conclusive. Previous reports indicated that Simmons had fallen inside his home on July 12, after feeling dizzy, and that he had informed his housekeeper that he would possibly seek medical attention the following day, if he felt unwell.

Richard’s brother, Lenny Simmons, shared how he wants the beloved pop fitness icon to be remembered, stating, “I want them to remember him for the genuine joy and love he brought to people’s lives. He truly cared about people. He called, wrote and emailed thousands of people throughout his career to offer help.”

Share your thoughts on the official cause of death of Richard Simmons, and if you will miss the beloved fitness guru and enjoyed his appearances on GH? Comment below.

It was 35 years ago on this day, August 20th, 1989, that Lyle and Erik Menendez shot and killed their parents Kitty and Jose Menendez in their home in Beverly Hills.

Now on August 20th, 2024, the highly-anticipated limited series Monsters season two from Ryan Murphy, unveils the premiere date for the story centering around the brothers and the murder case along with its first trailer.

General Hospital fans are extremely excited and intrigued for the upcoming series, and to see Nicholas Chavez (ex-Spencer Cassadine) in one of the leading roles as Lyle Menendez.

Monsters: The Lyle and Erik Menendez Story drops on Netflix beginning on September 19th. Chavez took to his Instagram account and posted the trailer accompanied by his words in the post, “So excited holy heck!”

September will be a busy month for Chavez fans as not only can he be seen on Monsters, but also as previously revealed, Nicholas is part of the cast of another Ryan Murphy series, Grotesquerie in which he plays Father Charlie. The horror drama will air on Wednesdays starting September 25 on FX and then the next day on Hulu.

Chavez finished his three-year run as GH’s Spencer Cassadine back at the beginning of 2024 when on-screen the character went overboard while trying to save the love of his life Trina (Tabyana Ali) and is presumed dead.

In ‘Monsters,’ the series delves into how the Menendez Brothers, who were aged 21 and 18 when they committed the crime. claimed they acted in self-defense, after years of physical and sexual abuse. However, the prosecution argued that their motive was greed and the desire to inherit their parents’ fortune. The trials lasted for months and the brothers were charged for their actions. They are currently at the R J Donovan Correctional Facility in San Diego, California.

Along with Chavez, the cast includes: Javier Bardem and Chloë Sevigny as parents Jose and Kitty Menendez, and Cooper Koch as Erik Menendez. The series also stars: Nathan Lane as Dominick Dunne, Ari Graynor as Leslie Abramson, Leslie Grossman as Judalon Smyth, Dallas Roberts as Dr. Jerome Oziel, Jason Butler Harner as Les Zoeller, Enrique Murciano as Carlos Baralt, Michael Gladis as Tim Rutten, Drew Powell as Detective Tom Linehan, Charlie Hall as Craig Cignarelli, Gil Ozeri as Dr. William Vicary, Jeff Perry as Peter Hoffman, Tessa Auberjonois as Dr. Laurel Oziel, Tanner Stine as Perry Berman, Larry Clarke as Brian Andersen, Jade Pettyjohn as Jamie Pisarcik, and Marlene Forte as Marta Cano.

You can check out the official trailer/date announcement for Monsters: The Lyle and Erik Menendez Story below.

Now let us know, if you are excited to finally see Nicholas Chavez in his starring role via the comment section.

On Monday, during a press conference held by Los Angeles County prosecutors, two of the four suspects in the death of Johnny Wactor (ex-Brando Corbin) have now been officially charged with the murder of the beloved General Hospital actor.

The charges were announced by L.A. County District Attorney George Gascón and interim police chief Dominic Choi. The suspects charged with Wactor’s murder are Robert Barceleau and Sergio Estrada, both 18.

The most serious charge is for Barceleau, who was charged with murder, including a special circumstance allegation of killing in the commission of a robbery, which could lead to a life-without-parole prison term. He was also charged with attempted robbery and grand theft, both with allegations he was armed with a firearm.

Estrada, was also charged with murder, but without the special circumstance allegation. He was also charged with attempted robbery and grand theft, both also allegedly while armed with a firearm. Estrada is also facing a life sentence.

The two other suspects were also formally charged, Leonel Gutierrez, also 18 was charged with attempted robbery and grand theft by embezzlement, both with allegations he was armed. Meanwhile, Frank Olano, 22, was charged with being an accessory after the fact to the killing, along with receiving stolen property and three counts of being a felon in possession of a firearm. Barceleau, Estrada and Gutierrez remain in custody in lieu of $2 million bail each, while Olano must post a $1 million bail.

Wactor was killed May 25 in the early morning hours in downtown Los Angeles after his shift as a bartender at the Level 8 bar/restaurant. He, and co-worker, Anita Joy were walking to their cars, when Wactor came upon the thieves trying to steal the catalytic converter from his vehicle and was shot in the chest and died in Joy’s arms.

Now that Johnny’s murderers have been charged, share your thoughts via the comment section below. But first, you can check out the press conference from Fox 11 Los Angeles.