This could be one of the most fucked up episodes of Brickleberry in quite some time. And it was glorious!

Spoilers Below

I have to say out the gate, that this was one of the most disgusting episodes of any show I have seen in a very long time. Think about it for a second. When an animated Yucko doing a dick windmill on a mini-golf course is considered tame, you know you’re in for some really fucked up television. Here’s the thing, though. Brickleberry, of course, is a pretty gross show. However, people who watch it already know it’s offensive, so it’s a win win for the show.

“In Da Club” is all about Woody’s quest to get into Hazelhurst Country Club, with Denzel getting in instead. The mistakes for Woody start right at the beginning, when he gets Denzel to chauffeur for him. Denzel rides that wave of racism to fuck over Woody. With that, he delivers the line of the night: “Hello, Fake Ass President. This topheavy motherfucker can’t talk right now. He’s busy taste testing three cracker’s assholes. Bye!”

Of course, this drives a wedge between Denzel and Steve, who finds new friends at the local lesbian bar. The lesbians take a big liking to Steva Longoria, but almost go on a PMS fueled angry lesbian rampage when their team are denied entry to the Founder’s Day Golf Tournament, because they’re still technically women. Steve tricks Denzel into getting the club to allow women to play for the first time.

Woody uses the tournament as a distraction to get inside and get the club sandwich he’s desired since he was homeless. He finds the recipe, and finds out what the secret ingredient is, and that’s Denzel. Steve overhears the white dudes talking about it, and tries to warn Denzel. Of course, Denzel doesn’t believe Steve. Steve goes to prove that he is telling the truth by telling the lesbians he’s really a man, and flashes them his small dick. The lesbians think it’s a clit, and don’t believe that Steve is a woman. Steve runs off and saves Denzel, only after inadvertent help from Malloy.

Malloy’s escapades dealing with his anal glands could have carried “In Da Club” on its own, yet it was relegated as the side story. During “in the Club,’ Malloy’s glands need to get expressed, which makes his ass grow to an exponential size. It gets to the point where Malloy’s ass is so big and gross, he’s stuck inside Woody’s house. Ethel ends up pushing so hard, that the entire park and the country club are covered in a mushroom cloud of shit and fish. It was fucking gross, but I couldn’t help but laugh my ass off.

There is one thing I found a little off, but it doesn’t detract too much from the experience of “In Da Club.” When I watch Brickleberry, I feel like Tosh’s voice-overs are disjointed from the rest of the cast. What I mean is, it feels like everyone else’s voice meshes together very well. However, either the audio producer just got lazy and pasted Tosh’s lines into the episode without equalizing his parts with the rest of the cast, or Tosh is so dynamic as a voice actor that he just commands the show whenever he’s on. My answer definitely isn’t the latter, no matter how funny Tosh is as Malloy. It’s a little disheartening that this hasn’t changed in three seasons.

Fortunately, that’s the only downside to Brickleberry. Brickleberry has used the formula that South Park pretty much created to great success. “In the Club” shows that Brickleberry can recreate the wheel. The gross out humor and the plot that comes together rather quickly make for a great series. “In the Club” is another addition to a long list of Brickleberry episodes.