Animated original comedy series Brickleberry ran for three seasons on Comedy Central and this writer feels that it didn’t get the credit, nor run that it deserved. The show follows a group of park rangers in the fictional Brickleberry National Park in Illinois. Created by Roger Black and Waco O’Guin, all past episodes of the crass and often hilariously violent cartoon is currently streaming on Hulu.

Daniel Tosh voiced one of the main characters, a talking bear cub named Malloy. Malloy and his adopted father Woody, former military man and the park’s head ranger, often go head-to-head over daily happenings, with Malloy usually ending up injuring Woody (who also frequently ends up naked and humiliated in tbe process). Malloy also likes to mess with Steve, another park ranger who adds the show’s humor.

Steve is really the only park ranger who actually tries to do his job, with the others usually just breaking his chops for it. His non-relationship with fellow ranger Ethel is also quite funny. The two had a a whole “will they or won’t they” dynamic (but more like they absolutely won’t). Ethel was actually originally voiced by It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia‘s Kaitlin Olson in Season 1.

The random Barack Obama and Connie dynamic is also a hilarious. Connie is a behemoth of a woman who is often making sexually suggestive comments to her uninterested coworkers. She has a secret love affair with a cartoon version of our former president, who is enamored by her thick thighs and curves. Of course the others laugh at her when she tries to tell them and the fling stays behind closed doors.

Lastly there’s Denzel. Denzel’s love for elderly women (of which the group dissaproves) often sees him entering into new romantic relationships with over-the-hill ladies. The series can often make his sexual conquests quite graphic, but in a really funny (yet also disturbing) way. Being the only African American member of the group, Denzel often provides humor in relation to race in addition to his sly sex jokes.

All in all, the reason why you should really stream Brickleberry if you haven’t yet is because it has one of the most dynamic mixes of characters that solidifies it as one of Comedy Central’s best cartoons to date. If you follow the show’s page on Facebook, the creators are quite active, so hopefully we get to see a future adaptation of the show sometime soon. Until then, you can check out all three seasons of the show, or read one of the recent spin-off comics that they did.

Michael is a music and television junkie keen on most things that are not a complete and total bore. You can follow him on Twitter — @Tweetskoor