Whether you have seen it or not, Brickleberry never got the wide-audience that it deserved. Not until now, at least. Brickleberry is now streaming on Netflix in its entirety- that’s right, all 3 seasons. Now that the wacky misadventures of our favorite dysfunctional rangers can be streamed anywhere with an internet connection, it deserves to be revived for more seasons.

1) The viewership ratings are at an all-time high.

When Brickleberry was a weekly airing that followed Tosh.0, many viewers changed the channel after Daniel Tosh finished with his once-a-week viral skewering. Little did they realize, they were missing out on a unique and original concept that surpassed Daniel’s one-liners on anyone stupid enough to post an online fail. Note, that Brickleberry still got pretty good ratings, but Comedy Central decided that apparently, they weren’t good enough. Not just confined to the national park, Brickleberry’s weekly plots ranged from a competition in “The Ranger Games” contests, to Steve getting Pregnant and going through with his baby delivery. So, Netflix viewers are just now realizing that this little ‘toon about forest rangers, is worth watching and goes above and beyond the simple forest-confined story lines.

2) Brickleberry predicted the future!

Bill Cosby’s allegations, while they were previously known on a smaller scale, were not big in the spotlight, until comedian Hannibal Buress called him out on the night of October 16, 2014. The official Brickleberry Facebook page posted a gag from the show, implying Bill Cosby had taken advantage of a younger woman, on December 16, 2014. While that is 2 months after Hannibal called him you, you’ve got to realize that due to the writing of the scripts and the animation, this gag was most likely created several months before December, before Hannibal brought light to the subject.

If that is not proof enough of Roger and Waco being magical fortune tellers who can see into the future, take the episode entitled “High Stakes” into account. It aired on November 11, 2014. Woody, the head of Brickleberry National Park, made the claim that Bruce Jenner was “either a very ugly man, or a very attractive woman.” Caitlyn Jenner reviled that she was transgender in April of 2015. Enough said.

3) The show makes fun of itself!

With television shows that take themselves way too serious, all the more common these days, it’s nice to be able to laugh at a show that doesn’t. As previously mentioned, Brickleberry didn’t have the best time slot after Tosh and with having very little reruns, the show was quite self-aware of that it may be cancelled on a dime. During season 2, episode 11, entitled “Trip to Mars,” again Woody looks directly at the camera, and in a very fourth wall breaking moment says, “Who am I kidding? 10:30 on a Tuesday night; nobody’s watching this sh*t!”

4) The voice acting is top-notch.

I should just have to say the name “Tom Kenny” and that’s all. But the list continues: Jerry Minor, Kaitlin Olson (for the 1st season), Natasha Leggero (seasons 2 and 3), David Herman (Michael Bolton from Office Space), and Daniel Tosh. And that’s only the main cast! Guest talent appears throughout the show such as John Dimaggio (Bender, Jake, Marcus Fenix) and Maurice LaMarche.

5) The creators obviously care about the fans and take time to respond to them.

I’m not hating on the Seth MacFarlanes and Matt Stone/Trey Parkers (I love South Park, American Dad, Family Guy, etc,) of the animation world, but I can say without a doubt that their fans don’t get a response rate as high as Waco O’Guin and Roger Black (you may know him as “Yucko The Clown”) responding to fans. It’s not uncommon to see a comment on a Brickleberry status with a response from them, or see a tweet favored to and/or responded to from the Brickleberry creators. That’s pretty rare nowadays.

6) The show evolved from season to season.

It not only improved in visual quality- the animation greatly improving from season 1 to 2, but the writing got progressively sharper and funnier. I’m not dissing the first season, because it holds a special place in my heart as the season that got me hooked, but unlike many shows that start off really strong, and then get weaker over time *cough cough Simpsons*, Brickleberry got exponentially funnier and wittier every additional year. My general reaction to season 1 episodes went as follows: “That was pretty good, but I feel as though it could be much better once the characters get more personalized.” Bam, season 2 came and had me saying “That’s what I’m talking about! Every character has their niche, and their interactions are comedy gold!” Season 3 was released and after the first episode I sat there thinking, “They’ve done the impossible! Season 3 is actually funnier than season 2. Knowing my luck with my favorite television shows, it’s probably going to get cancelled and that will make make me a sad panda.”

7) The fans want more!

Most importantly, the fans, the viewers who watch the show and get enjoyment out of it, want more. You can not go 25 minutes without refreshing the twitter live feed for the term “Brickleberry” without reading numerous tweets saying that Brickleberry is the funniest show they’ve ever seen, asking why such a brilliant show got cancelled in the first place, naming it as the epitome of adult animation, saying that now their lives have no meaning that the show is ended, etc..

Netflix prides themselves on being a “feedback-driven company” who aims “please their subscribers.” If indeed that is the case, purchase the rights for Brickleberry and continue the show for more seasons. It would fit in so well with the animated originals, F is for Family and BoJack Horseman. Netflix says that in the coming months, they will be adding numerous original shows; that’s great, have Brickleberry be one of them and everything will be right in the world. Come on Netflix: Renew Brickleberry and keep tons of subscribers who are on the fence about continuing the service with the soon to be price increase.

Author’s note: If you’d like to help bring Brickleberry back, you can do so by a few different methods: 1) I did some digging and found an article that lists Jane Wiseman as the “Senior Programming Executive” of Netflix and I found her Twitter (slightly creepy? yes, but I need BB back in my life!): First and foremost, twitting to her at @WisemanJane and expressing your need for more seasons will help. 2) Calling Netflix at 1-866-579-7172 and telling them to renew Brickleberry as an original series will help. 3) Live chatting with the customer service reps at help.netflix.com will also help. 4) Besides that, rating Brickleberry five stars on Netflix and telling your friends to watch it, won’t hurt either.