Story inspired by u/Dwarfer_Iceberg on reddit.com

~1996~​

November 5th, 1996 After months of campaigning, debates, and contests the 1996 Presidential election arrived. Four years prior Bill Clinton defeated a unpopular George H. W. Bush by a considerable margin. Although Clinton had been seen as a successful President with successes like the growing the economy, reducing unemployment, raised education funding, expanded healthcare, and gun safety measures; the Republicans still won back the Senate and House in 1994. Rocketing into the House Speaker's chair was Georgian Representative Newt Gingrich. Gingrich had been the leader of House Republicans for year but eventually ended the Democrats 4 decade control of the House in which would be remembered as the "Republican Revolution". The Contract with America was the centerpiece plan of the Republican Congress. And within 100 days of taking the Congress legislation like a balanced budget amendment, anti-crime package, child tax credit bill, job creation bills, and more. Although a lot of the bills passed in the House not so much in the Senate but Gingrich showed Americans that government could be pushed by popular will to make changes. Everything seemingly changed in November of 1995 when the government shutdown over the budget, in the end most Americans blamed the Republicans for the shutdown.

When 1996 came around many looked towards Presidential politics. Bill Clinton easily won renomination. For the Republicans many names were tossed around Dole, Kemp, Forbes, Buchanan, Alexander, but one name was surprising; Gingrich. Many Republicans looked up to Gingrich as he held the highest office in American owned by them, but could he actually win? Gingrich was able to pull support by talking at lengths about counter-terrorism, reducing drug use, balancing the budget, and reducing taxes for small businesses. Gingrich gained broad support from across the party and even secured a early endorsement from many House Republicans. The pinnacle of the campaign came when Gingrich outperformed Dole in the first Republican primary debates pointing to the Senate voting down several bills passed in the House especially the balanced budget amendment. In the end Gingrich surprisingly secured the nomination and his choice of runningmate was just as shocking. Sonny Bono had been known for decades from his time as a singer with his ex-wife Cher, but in 1994 he was elected to the House in California.

Gingrich v. Clinton was a compelling and interesting matchup. Speaker vs President, Georgia vs Arkansas, right vs wrong... who knows? But many didn't bet on a different outcome. Going into September Clinton was heavily favored especially after the Whitewater investigations had to that point found nothing incriminating, and Clinton's campaign pulled big crowds and donations. On the other side Gingrich appealed to like-minded Republicans and Democrats upset with Clinton and his allies. Gingrich pour big money into tv ads throughout the South and Midwest. Gingrich outmaneuvered Clinton on drugs pushing for more restricting on teens and children from accessing them, pushing for more protections in NAFTA, calling for expanded funding for the CIA and FBI in the wake of terrorist attacks, and co-opting some of Ross Perot's popular positions.

The 1996 Presidential Debates would've just been remembered as "traditional" or "boring". Clinton played it safe but more reserved in posture and energy compared to 1992. Gingrich was holding his own but was waiting his moments to strike. But when the moment came Gingrich didn't waste it. Seemingly out of nowhere Gingrich hit Clinton with a zinger about Vince Foster killing himself, the crowds surprisingly reacted with thunderous applause. As the moderator tries to quiet down the crowd the cameras cut to Bill Clinton's face red as a tomato and adjusting his collar. Gingrich stood across smugger than ever, he knew Clinton would never live this moment down. After the debates most Americans believed Clinton lost the edge and looked defeated. Bono didn't fair as better against Gore but no one paid much attention. When the final debates came everyone was taking Gingrich a lot more serious as his numbers rose especially in the South. Gingrich played it safe and no other zingers where said but Clinton again was put under pressure by questions of extramarital affairs, corruption, and incompetence.

Just two weeks before the election SNL was on and as a special guest Bono came on and sang a song alongside David Spade impersonating him. The choice of Spade was pretty good to as Spade was good friends with Chris Farley who had done Newt Gingrich impressions in the past. From there a lot of energy shifted towards Gingrich but could it be enough?

As election night progressed, many began to consider the seemingly impossible. Just after 11 P.M. Oregon was called for Gingrich putting him over 270 electoral votes. The major networks’ army of pundits were speechless when they called the election for Gingrich declaring him the next President. At Gingrich HQ in Atlanta Gingrich went out on stage with Bono following to speak to the big crowds cheering him on. "Tonight all American's made their voices heard and they've chosen to return to sensible, respectful, and conservative leadership in Washington!". "I will assure you all that on day one as I step into office I will uphold my duty and allegiance to keep American strong and free at home and abroad".

Bill Clinton waited until the following morning to make a speech although his campaign had already made a private call to Gingrich conceding the election. Clinton gave a short speech the next morning in Little Rock, Arkansas. In his speech Clinton thanked his supporters and congratulated Gingrich publicly. Clinton stood by his successes not conceding that he would leave the office worse than he had found it. Many in the media at this point where focusing more on Clinton's tenure than Gingrich's future, perhaps as a coping mechanism. Nevertheless in January a new president would take office and this one would have some very interesting paths to take.

November 15th, 1996 President-elect Gingrich visits the White House meeting with President Clinton. The media try their best at any moment to get a glimpse or photo of the two men meeting and talking. Inside the Oval Office the two men met and no one expected that between these two men and their history together that this meeting would be easy for both. Gingrich know so well for basking in Republican successes and Democratic defeats in the past looked humble and stoic. Clinton had already came to terms with the future and the present as he knew it. From here all he could think about was Arkansas and how nice it'd be to return to his people but a little sooner than expected. Later in the day as Gingrich went back to his office at the Capitol he was approached by hundreds of members of his caucus including members like John Boehner, Bob Livingston, Dennis Hastert, Tom DeLay, Robert Michel, John Kasich, and Deborah Pryce. Many speculated that the arrival of so many Republican Conference members seemed like a meeting to pick Gingrich's successor. The media was kept outside of the meeting as Gingrich didn't want them to capture what he would later describe as "a small party and a simple sendoff for myself".

November 20th, 1996 In a press conference held in Palm Springs, Vice President-elect Sonny Bono announced the first few names of the incoming Gingrich cabinet.

● Secretary of the Treasury Lawrence B. Lindsey

● Drug Czar John P. Waters

● Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney

● Deputy Secretary of Defense Tillie Fowler

● National Security Advisor Steve Hadley

● Secretary of Agriculture Anne Veneman

● Secretary of Veteran's Affairs Robin L. Higgins

● Counterterrorism Czar Dick Clarke

The media caught on early to how many women were going to serve in the Gingrich cabinet. With that Gingrich had also set out to get people who were somewhat unknown to the public but had worked well in their previous positions and fields. Dick Cheney being chosen to return to the Defense Department was seen as way to satisfy the stalwarts of the party more aligned with Bush or Reagan than Gingrich.

November 25th, 1996 The U.S. stock market, especially the Dow Jones Industrial Average, experiences a lull a contrast to previous months as a result of Gingrich's victory. Many speculate the lull due to Gingrich's positions on taxes, the budget, and job creation. The economy would return to a normal rise after December 7th, 1996.