Much of the attractiveness of Washington can be attributed to the hundreds of outdoor sculptures and monuments that adorn the parks, gardens, buildings, avenues, and cemeteries of the city. L’Enfant suggested the use of outdoor sculpture as a way to honour the new country’s heroes. The first outdoor sculpture situated in Washington was the Tripoli Memorial, commemorating the heroes of the Tripolitan War (1801–05). It stood first in the Navy Yard in Southeast Washington and was later moved to the Capitol grounds before being relocated to the Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland.

In the 1840s Congress commissioned the first statue of George Washington, a white marble Romanesque rendering of the first president. It was exhibited outside on the eastern front plaza of the Capitol for years before being placed in storage. In the 1960s the statue was given a permanent home in the National Museum of American History. An equestrian statue of Washington was also part of L’Enfant’s design for the city; it was to have been located at a crossing point west of the Capitol and south of the White House. In 1885, nearly 100 years after the plan was first promulgated, the Washington Monument, a 555-foot (169-metre) unadorned obelisk, much grander than the modest statue L’Enfant envisioned, was dedicated on the Mall, near the original site. Meanwhile, in 1860 an equestrian statue of George Washington had been placed in Washington Circle, northwest of the White House.

The Washington Monument and other memorials honouring U.S. presidents are some of the most-visited landmarks in Washington. The Lincoln Memorial lies west of the Washington Monument, on land reclaimed from the Potomac River at the far western end of the Mall’s Reflecting Pool. Designed in the Greek Revival style and modeled after the Parthenon in Athens, the monument often has been the site of civil rights gatherings, demonstrations, and speeches—perhaps most notably the “I Have a Dream” speech given by Martin Luther King, Jr., in 1963. The Jefferson Memorial is located south of the Mall on the southern rim of the Tidal Basin in East Potomac Park. Inside the white marble temple, which was inspired by the Pantheon in Rome, are inscribed quotes from Jefferson’s writings, including the Declaration of Independence and the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom. Another striking memorial is the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial, located on the southwestern edge of the Tidal Basin within a 7.5-acre (3-hectare) park. The memorial is divided into four outdoor chambers, one for each of Roosevelt’s presidential terms.

North of the Roosevelt Memorial, also on the western bank of the Tidal Basin, two towering mounds of pink granite (“The Mountain of Despair”) form the entrance to the Martin Luther King, Jr. National Memorial. Farther into the memorial’s plaza, emerging from a large granite slab (“The Stone of Hope”), a 30-foot (9-metre) sculpture of King looks across the Tidal Basin at the Jefferson Memorial. Inscribed on the stone are the words “Out of the mountain of despair, a stone of hope,” from King’s “I Have a Dream” speech.

Britannica Quiz

50 Capital Cities at Random Quiz

The Vietnam War Veterans Memorial, a chevron-shaped black granite wall north of the western end of the Reflecting Pool, lists more than 58,000 names of those who were killed or identified as missing during the Vietnam War. South of the western end of the Reflecting Pool is the Korean War Veterans Memorial, featuring 19 unpolished stainless-steel statues of soldiers. Their images are reflected in a black granite wall onto which have been etched images taken from more than 2,500 Korean War-era photographs. At the eastern end of the Reflecting Pool is the National World War II Memorial, an oval plaza with a large pool and fountains. It is bounded by two large pavilions, representing the Atlantic and the Pacific theatres of the war, and surrounded by 56 pillars (for each of the 48 states and the 8 territories that were part of the United States at the time of the war).

More equestrian statues have been erected in Washington than in any other city in the United States. The first of these, honouring Andrew Jackson, was erected in 1853 in Lafayette Square opposite the White House. The Jackson statue (cast from cannons captured during the War of 1812) was also the first bronze equestrian statue made in the United States, and it was so highly acclaimed that two replicas were cast and sent to New Orleans and Nashville. The statue’s designer, Clark Mills, immediately received a second commission from Congress, for the equestrian statue of George Washington that was dedicated at Washington Circle in 1860.

The four years of the American Civil War (1861–65) so profoundly affected the conscience of the country that more memorials in Washington are dedicated to it than to any other period in United States history. Nearly 40 works of outdoor sculpture honouring heroes of the Union (and one Confederate, Gen. Albert Pike, whose statue was erected in 1901 by Freemasons) dot the city, embellish buildings, and adorn parks and cemeteries. One prominent memorial dedicated in 1863, though it was planned years earlier, is the Statue of Freedom on top of the Capitol. The majority of Washington’s circles and squares were renamed for and display statues of Civil War heroes, including Adm. David Farragut and generals Ulysses S. Grant, Winfield Scott Hancock, John A. Logan, George B. McClellan, James B. McPherson, George G. Meade, John A. Rawlins, Winfield Scott, Philip H. Sheridan, William Tecumseh Sherman, and George H. Thomas. A fountain was dedicated to Samuel Francis du Pont, a Union naval officer, when his statue was removed in the early 20th century. A frieze that consists of six Civil War scenes depicting seamen, infantry, cavalry, artillerymen, and members of the Medical and Quartermaster Corps decorates the exterior of the Old Pension Building (now the National Building Museum) in Downtown Washington. Other Civil War memorials include the Peace Monument to commemorate naval deaths, located in the circle to the west of the Capitol; a monument to the Nuns of the Battlefield near St. Matthew’s Catholic Church; and the African American Civil War Memorial, near the U Street subway station. After the assassination of Abraham Lincoln, two outdoor statues were quickly erected to honour the slain president. The first stands in front of the old City Hall in Downtown Washington, and the second, on Capitol Hill in Lincoln Park, was paid for by donations solely from former slaves. (The more familiar Lincoln Memorial was not dedicated until 1922.)

Rock Creek Cemetery has some remarkable sculpture, perhaps the most striking being the Adams Memorial (1886–91), with a shrouded bronze figure designed by Augustus Saint-Gaudens and commissioned by historian Henry Adams (the great-grandson of John Adams), in memory of his wife, Marian. Saint-Gaudens called the sculpture The Mystery of the Hereafter, but it is often mistakenly called “Grief.” The same cemetery contains the Kauffmann Memorial by William Ordway Partridge, entitled A Garland of Memories, and the Ffoulke Memorial by Gutzon Borglum, entitled Rabboni.