New Jersey may be one of the smaller states in the USA, but it has several high-end tourist attractions. It offers national parks, places of unmatchable natural beauty, historical sites and regal museums. Keep some time to explore Jersey and you won’t be disappointed. 99 out of a 100 tourists prefer to visit the Atlantic Coast from New Jersey’s many harbour towns. With its miles of Atlantic Coast beaches, Jersey is a popular summer vacation spot. Here are 14 exciting places near New Jersey that are frequented by all tourists.

Top 14 Places near New Jersey

New Jersey is a place of historical importance and has many sites to prove it. It is one of the 13 original colonies of the United States of America and the site of many battles during the Revolutionary War. Not only are places near New Jersey favored by the locals, they are visited by New Yorkers and Pennsylvanians as well:

1. Atlantic City

Image Source

Atlantic City is a famous coastal town and popular for its Boardwalk which is four-mile-long boulevard. It has all the major attractions of the city. Head to Steel Pier, an amusement park styled along the lines of a carnival. It has rides for people of all ages, a huge observation wheel and swanky gondolas affording the city dwellers an amazing view of the coast. It is undoubtedly one of the first places to visit in New Jersey and Pennsylvania. Don’t forget to visit the Entrance to the Stars which has the collection of handprints of the moguls of the entertainment industry like Frank Sinatra. Absecon Lighthouse and Boardwalk Hall which hosts the Miss America finals are some of the other sites to see.

Must Read: 12 Most Luxurious Villas in USA For Your Next Family Vacation

Looking To Book An International Holiday?

Book memorable holidays on TravelTriangle with 650+ verified travel agents for 65+ domestic and international destinations.

2. Liberty State Park

Image Source

Liberty State Park overlooks the Upper New York Bay, Ellis Island and Liberty Island. It is spread across 1,212 acre with some of the most panoramic views like the 36-acre Communipaw Cove which is a tidal salt marsh. You will find some visit-worthy monuments and memorials including the Empty Sky which has the names of the 9/11 victims and the Liberation, a tribute to the victims of the Holocaust. You can also enjoy activities like kayaking, fishing, and cycling among others.

3. Thomas Edison National Historical Park

Image Source

This is a must visit for people who love all things science. It is the former home of New Jersey’s beloved son—Thomas Edison. You can take a close look at the laboratory where Edison worked; enjoy some vintage movies, walk through Glenmont—the opulent 29 roomed mansion of Edison. Take a walk around this iconic site and mull over how life would be so different had Edison did not have his Eureka moment!

Suggested Read: 10 Thrilling Water Parks In USA To Pamper That Child Within You

4. Old Victorian Cape May

Image Source

Cape May has many attractions to offer. In the days of glorious past, this resort town was so popular that not less than six American Presidents had their summer homes here. The same attractions pull the crowds even now; its beaches, the Cape May Point Lighthouse, and the magnificent Victorian-style homes. Do book a seat on the Yankee, a huge schooner which offers harbor tours, whale and dolphin sightings.

5. Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area

Image Source

Sprawled across 70,000 acres, the Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area lies on the border of Pennsylvania and New Jersey. This recreation area can be accessed from various places. Some of the highlights of the park include the Minisink Archaeological Site with the remnants of a 10,000-year-old village, kayaking, canoeing, fishing, swimming, and camping. It is one of the best places near New Jersey to visit in winter.

Suggested Read: 10 Best USA Hotels For A Relaxing American Vacation

6. Battleship New Jersey

Image Source

Battleship New Jersey is one of the most decorated vessels of the US Navy. To be found on the Delaware River, the mammoth of a ship is now a museum. You can be sure of an immersive experience in the presence of its many exhibits, artifacts connected to the ships involvement in WWII and even in the Middle East. You can participate in a guided tour and learn the secrets of this historic ship. If you can get your hands on the overnight package tour, don’t let that chance go by!

7. Cape May County Park and Zoo

Image Source

Offering free admission and fun activities, this Zoo is the perfect setting for a family outing. Activities on offer include biking, hiking, golfing, tennis and volleyball court and indoor games spots. To add to the fun, the park has many places equipped with grills and picnic tables. The zoo, which was officially inaugurated as the park’s wing has many native and exotic species of flora and fauna. You can find African lion, bald eagle, ring-tailed lemur, giraffe, and zebra, among other species.

Suggested Read: 10 Largest Zoos In The World Where You Can Spot The Rarest Fauna & Have Ultimate Fun!

Planning your holiday but confused about where to go? These travel stories help you find your best trip ever!

Real travel stories. Real stays. Handy tips to help you make the right choice.

8. Liberty Science Centre

Image Source

The Liberty Science Center can be found at the Liberty State Park. It is an interactive museum offering several captivating displays related to science and technology. Explore the night sky in the planetarium or watch the many movies, and laser shows. The museum also boasts of a 3D theater which screens movies on nature, science, and technological advancements. Interactive displays feature a pixel art wall and the Infinity Climber including educational presentations like lightning show, an encounter with animals.

9. The Adventure Aquarium

Image Source

This one is a family attraction on the Delaware River. The Adventure Aquarium in Camden is considered as one of USA’s best educational facilities based on marine life. The Aquarium has over 8,500 marine animals, like penguins, sea turtles, sharks, and stingrays. It is also the only aquarium in the world which houses hippos. You can not only observe the marine animals but also go “behind the scenes” to see sea turtles, African penguins, and encounters with stingrays and sharks. This place is a haven of knowledge for children and that is what makes it one of the best places near New Jersey for vacation with kids.

Suggested Read: Clubbing in Manhattan Or Bowling In Brooklyn: Enjoy The Exciting New York Nightlife

10. Princeton and the Battlefield State Park

Image Source

Princeton town is world renowned owing to its university and research institutes. It is also the place where Albert Einstein did his final work in the Institute for Advanced Study. Princeton, which is one of the most renowned places to visit in New Jersey and Pennsylvania,USA was inaugurated in 1756, and is spread across 1,600-acre grounds. It is a beautiful place to explore especially if you join the hour long tour programs run by its students. You must also take out time to see the historic Princeton Battlefield State Park. This iconic site is a 200-acre spot of the 1777 Battle of Princeton, which is remembered as the site of Washington’s triumph over the British. Other noteworthy places to visit would be Clarke House Museum a memorial dedicated to the fallen British and American soldiers and, the Ionic Colonnade.

11. Wildwood

Image Source

Located in Cape May County, Wildwood is a holiday town which bursts at its seams during the summer months. Holidaymakers can be seen filling up its streets, beaches, restaurants and amusement parks. The Doo Wop Preservation League Museum caters to the older visitors who want to relive the swinging 50s. Wildwood is a quaint little town with something for everyone. Cape May is a place worth visiting and make Wildwood as your base to look around.

12. Hoboken

Image Source

Hoboken is famous for its eateries and its brownstone buildings. Hoboken is located at the Hudson River and a favourite haunt of people who love to eat ethnic foods like Indian, Mexican, Italian or Chinese. The fun part is you can walk all the calories you packed during the lunch by walking across the city; you do not need public transport as the main attractions are within easy distance of each other. Pier C Park is frequently visited by children and the spectacular skyline of Manhattan is for the older visitors. You can also go to the Historical Museum if you feel up to it.

13. Ocean City

Image Source

Located in Cape May, Ocean City is a frequent haunt of people from surrounding areas. Its popularity attracts over a million people annually, the irony being that this resort town has a population of only 12, 000. Enjoy the amusement Park and roller coaster rides in the Broadwalk. Miles of spotless beaches, called some of the best in New Jersey is what pulls the tourists. New Yorkers, Pennsylvanians, and tourists from all over the world love to come to this Acapulco of North America.

14. Grounds for Sculpture

Image Source

If you are an art aficionado then you must straight away head toward Grounds for Sculpture which is a 42-acre sculpture park and museum in Hamilton town. In 1992, the Park was established as a place for appreciation for contemporary art. Mark it as one of the places near New Jersey to visit in winter. There are around 270 works by Seward Johnson apart from other national artists. The park is a verdant space filled with lush trees and flowering beds. You can go to the Jersey City Museum and Newark Museum to assuage your artistic thirst. The Newark Museum houses over 80 art galleries, displaying works of Native American and African artists.

Further Read: 15 New York Restaurants That Tell Why It Is The Culinary Capital Of The World

Why restrict yourself to new Jersey and its scenic delights, when you can visit places near New Jersey and enjoy your time at America to the fullest? Don’t forget to visit the aforementioned places on your next trip to USA. We promise that you’ll have the time of your life.

Frequently Asked Questions About Places Near New Jersey

What is New Jersey famous for?

New Jersey is mostly known for its stunning beaches, amazing food, diverse culture, and politics.

What cities are close to New Jersey?

Some of the most popular cities that are very close to New Jersey are New York, Newark, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Boston. All these cities are located within a range of 200 miles.

What’s the most popular attraction in New Jersey?

Some of the top attractions in New Jersey are: 1. Atlantic City Boardwalk 2. Ocean City 3. Cape May 4. Grounds for Sculpture 5. Adventure Aquarium

What is there to do in New Jersey at night?

A few of the most popular places to enjoy a New Jersey nightlife are: 1. Wet Willie’s Atlantic City 2. Firehouse Tavern 3. Carney’s 4. Boogie Nights 5. Jenkinson’s Boardwalk Bar And Grill

How far is Atlantic City from New Jersey?

Atlantic City is nearly about 110 km from New Jersey and can be reached in 1 hour 20 min via National Garden parkway.

What is there to do on a rainy day in New Jersey?

Don’t let the rain wash away your fun and adventure plans. Here is what you can do on a rainy day in New Jersey: 1. See some beautiful sea creatures at Jenkinson’s Aquarium or Adventure Aquarium. 2. Splash into an indoor swimming pool. 3. Get close to nature at World of Wings, Teaneck 4. Enjoy all kinds of art at The Art School At Old Church 5. Try some unique and delicious chocolates at The Chocolate Belles.

Is New Jersey safe for tourists?

Yes. New Jersey is safe for all kinds of tourists but it’s advisable that you always practice a little caution while traveling in a foreign land.

Which is the best time to visit New Jersey?

The autumn and springs months between April and July is the best time to visit New Jersey for cozy and comfortable weather.

Looking To Book A Holiday Package?

Book memorable holidays on TravelTriangle with 650+ verified travel agents for 65+ domestic and international destinations.