Charles Durning, the familiar-faced character actor who died Monday in Manhattan, developed a fondness for Duluth and once likened the city to the New York village where he was raised.

"Duluth has the look and the feel of my hometown," Durning said in an interview with the News Tribune in the mid-1980s. "And there's a purity about the people here. They say what they mean. In New York, you're cynical by the time you're 12."

Q. What could Durning, raised in Highland Falls, N.Y., possibly know about Duluth? A. More than the average visitor.

The actor spent several weeks living here in 1987 while filming "Far North," a movie starring Cloquet native Jessica Lange that was written and directed by her then-partner Sam Shepard. Durning spent that fall living with some cast and crew members at Fitger's Inn and visiting other local shops and restaurants in the complex in addition to filming at locations around town.

"Far North" is part drama-part comedy about a Minnesota farm family. Durning plays the father, who is laid up after getting tossed from the horse he hates. Lange plays his daughter, who has escaped her small-town upbringing, but returns home to help her father.

His big request: He wants her to shoot that horse.

Interviews with Durning during filming regularly include a positive blurb about the city. He told the St. Paul Pioneer Press at the time:

"The thing that amazes me most is that this is a town of 80,000 people and they have their own ballet company, their own symphonic orchestra, their own community theaters and some Broadway caliber plays coming through. It is unusual for a city of this size to have that kind of artistic element," he said, then added, "It's one of the best places I've ever filmed."

Durning died of natural causes in his home, his longtime friend and agent Judith Moss told the Associated Press.

Durning had already established himself as a theater, television and film actor when he set up shop in Duluth. He had earned Oscar nominations for his roles as the governor in "Best Little Whorehouse in Texas" and a Nazi officer in Mel Brooks' "To Be or Not to Be."

"Far North" didn't rank enough for a mention in the Associated Press's obituary for the actor.

The movie was almost universally panned. Roger Ebert gave it a single star and said:

"'Far North' is a disorganized, undisciplined, rambling, pointless exercise in undigested material, and you can't blame the actors, the technicians or the middle men. This movie fails at the level of writing and direction."

But before the movie received a national audience, locals seemed to fall for the personable Durning, who ate at Stephanie's on the Lake and Rocky Rococo Pizza -- both in the Fitger's complex.

The habits of Durning -- and others involved with the production -- were revealed in the News Tribune expose "Actors' quirks: Burnt bacon, fruit" which revealed personal preferences.

Durning, for instance, reportedly loved mineral water.

"We've got to make sure we get him enough mineral water every day," a maid told the News Tribune.

Durning was the maids' favorite cast member, the News Tribune reported, because:

"He has a good sense of humor and is fun to talk to, they said. And he gives fans autographed photos of himself."

At the time, Durning seemed to understand his role as an actor and to enjoy the spotlight. He told the News Tribune:

"I'm happy when I get recognized; I'm unhappy when I don't. You might wake up tomorrow and they might be saying 'Hey, waiter.' "