The Environmental Engineer

Importance & Duties

For the Sewer Contractor

An Environmental Engineer is a trained professional whose duties involve solving problems that are related to the environment. Some of his professional duties in Saudi Arabia include designing and implementing both municipal and industrial sewerage systems, doing quality checks on already set up wastewater and sewage systems plus performing extensive research on any contentious project. Also, private engineers assist their clients who are mainly sewer contractors on how to abide to the set up regulations.

As a sewer contractor you are entitled to perform different sewer constructions, which are at times sophisticated and require the knowledge of a trained professional in the field of sewerage. Some of the assignments that you can get include construction of culvert, drainage, installation of dry well, cleaning of the grease trap, pumping of septic, rehabilitation of sewers and pipeline and pumping services.

All these services are sophisticated and a sewer contractor who has little experience with them will have a hard time trying to implement them. Also, there are some designs that should be designed and involves varying different protocols that are set up by the different states' laws on sewerage. To achieve all the above, there is a need for a sewer contractor to hire an environmental engineer.

Considering the expertise that he can bring to your company, it will be prudent if you hired him/her. You might be concerned with the amount you will pay him at the end of each month, but this nothing compared to what he/she will bring to your company.

The benefits that you will receive if you hire such an engineer into your sewer company are diverse. These benefits include advising you on legal and financial factors that are related to environmental processes. He/she will also advise you on the best way to approach a sewerage problem with an aim of cutting costs of implanting it.

Hiring a private Environmental Eng. to design your sewerage system is expensive. However, if you have a resident engineer, the cost will be cut since he will do all the designing. There will be increased customer loyalty because the engineer will ensure the project is carried out with utmost professionalism by carrying out the quality check.