Initial Engagement

Following the engagement with our client, assessing the existing dehumidification system within the dry well, it was deemed the system was non-operational.

The end user’s standards were not consulted previously, therefore ATS had to come up with a solution in which constraints were already in place.

The existing system was housed within a small GRP kiosk and no additional civil penetrations could be made apart from the existing for the supply and exhaust that were positioned either side of the dry well.

Our Solution

From this we provided a mechanical supply system compromising of 2 no. inline axial fans in a duty/standby arrangement, a range of uPVC/GRP ductwork and 1 no. passive exhaust system.

This system aimed to remove potential H2S contaminates from the dry well, providing a safe working environment for operatives when assessing the lower levels.

Electrical Requirements

As well as being awarded the mechanical ventilation package we were also asked to provide the ventilation control panel along with the power and controls installation.

Following our recent engagement with the end user, we were able to provide our own inhouse built form 2 non-framework control panel, by providing the guarantee that our control panel would be designed and built-in accordance with framework specifications.

Installation

As we were responsible for developing the full ventilation solution, we were able to have a full understanding of the new system and how it operates This resulted in a smooth mechanical and electrical design sign off without issue or delay.

Upon design approval the team worked hard to ensure programme dates were met by building, FAT, and delivering the control panel to site within 5 working days.

In addition, due to the area being near to the coast this brought about the requirement for C4 protection. This can usually be overcome by utilising plastic equipment; however, this can result in a high price tag.

Solution

To manage client expectations and budget we were able to abet the solution of cladding the ventilation system instead thus provided the required C4 protection alongside keeping within budget.

In aid of our programme dates and ensure a superior installation process, the panel and equipment was assembled at our workshop as a modular package.

As the fans and instrumentation were local to the position of the control panel, we were able to pre-install, contain, wire, connect and test part of the installation before delivery to site.

We installed our custom-built isolators containing motor power connections, auxiliary early break contacts, heater, and thermistor controls along with flow monitoring instrument connections to the modular frame. We delivered this to site and bolted into position ready for final connection to the fan motors and instrumentation.

Result

This was a successfully completed project, on time and to a high standard, resulting in a well-ventilated environment in the dry well for personnel to complete any tasks, knowing that they are safe and protected by a high quality, high specification, tested and proven ventilation system.