Introduction

The purpose of the Dry Canyon Well project is to provide an additional water supply to Smithfield City. Smithfield City anticipates a 100% increase in population over the next 40 years. To accommodate the future demand, Smithfield City hired T&S Engineers to design a well. T&S Engineers designed the chlorination system, pump house, pipeline to a nearby storage tank, and gravel road to access the well.

Alternatives

Before choosing to design a new well for Smithfield city, several alternatives were considered as means to provide additional water. These alternatives, listed below, each approached the issue from a different direction. As such, each solution created its own challenges.

Alternative 1: Do Nothing

Does not solve the water shortage

Alternative 2: Build a New Water Treatment Facility

Plant is a major construction project

Treated water has a bad reputation

Alternative 3: Buy Water from an Adjacent City

Requires installing a long pipeline

Dependent on adjacent cities supply

Alternative 4: Expand the Existing Secondary Water System

Requires installation of vast amounts of pipe

Long term construction necessary for install

Alternative 5: Build a New Well

Dependent on source in usable location

Decision Matrix

Each alternative was analyzed qualitatively. These constraints are listed in the first table. Each criteria was selected with respect to Smithfield City’s needs. The table contains each alternative’s rank from one to five for each qualitative criteria.

Each alternative was also analyzed quantitatively. The second table displays the cost estimates and estimated completion time for each alternative.

Selected Alternative

After considering all of the alternatives, the team determined that the well alternative was the best option. Research showed that the well alternative was the least expensive alternative, and also the quickest solution, as all the other options would have taken more time to construct. Additionally, and perhaps most importantly, drilling a well in Dry Canyon is the most reliable option, since the other alternatives depend on cooperation from other municipalities and the economy and or needs of the other municipality could change in the future.

T&S Engineers contacted Logan City, a city near to Smithfield, regarding their well & chlorination facility located at 600 East and 700 North, Logan, UT. After visiting the well’s location and reviewing Logan City’s well-design, the team modeled the Dry Canyon well after Logan City’s design.