Mrs. Durban is a producer and development executive, performing artist, wife, mom, and business entrepreneur. She is CEO of Edgen Films, LLC and COO of Global 3 Media, LLC.

Born and raised in the South, at the age of 20, she would chase her dreams to Los Angeles, CA. There she attended Santa Monica College and Cal State Fullerton where she studied Theater Arts. She became a member of SAG in 2003 after a small role in The Girl Next Door (20th Century Fox / Directed by Luke Greenfield), and was very active in both the theater and independent film scene. In 2007, she traveled to China as part of the SMC Musical Theater Troupe/Cross Cultural Exchange Program. While in Los Angeles, Mrs. Durban honed both her creative and business skills. Starting at an entry level position in 2003, after 5 years working with Canvas Corporation, Mrs. Durban would work her way up to the companies VP of Operations and help shape the company’s growth from a small, local vending company to a national presence in the live venue, vending and concession Industry. Mrs. Durban would go on to meet husband and business partner, Justin R. Durban in 2007 and after the birth of their first son, the couple decided to relocate to Austin where they would raise their family and form their production company, Edgen Films, LLC with partner Leah Weinberger in 2010. Mrs. Durban’s experience in business development teamed with her creative talents would prove a very successful combination.

With Edgen Films, Mrs. Durban has been instrumental in developing and producing Award Winning Short Films such as MAHLEN, BITS& PIECES, RACK (2010 Doorpost Film Festival Finalist) and BREAKING THE CURSE. She would take these experiences in to Producing Feature length Films, Curse of Babylon (2011), BIGFOOT WARS (2013), and THE SHADOW PEOPLE (2014).

2014 started off with a BANG as Mrs. Durban joined forces with HEYMAN TALENT to help facilitate the creation of their new Crew Division out of Austin, TX. Not long after she would secure her company’s partnership in the formation of GLOBAL 3 MEDIA, a multi-media powerhouse with Brian T. Jaynes and C. Thomas Howell that handles Original Productions and Film Distribution. Mrs. Durban acts as the Companies COO.

With multiple films under her belt, the future is bright for Mrs. Durban. She continues to guide her companies’ growth and development, as well as, produce and promote the Arts. Mrs. Durban takes pride in being involved with high quality, exciting and inspiring Film Making.