Salamanca weather in January (Castile and Leon, Spain)

How's the weather trend in Salamanca as January approaches? Thinking about a visit? Explore this page for a full overview of the weather conditions this month.

Temperatures

In January, Salamanca tends to experience low temperatures and moderate rainfall. The month of January belongs to the winter season. Daytime temperatures hover around 10°C, while nights can cool down to about 1°C. January often features the most temperate temperatures compared to other months.

Precipitation

Salamanca in January usually receives moderate rainfall, averaging around 49 mm for the month. On average, there are about 15 days with rain during this month.

Average sunshine

With about 123 hours of sunshine, the area enjoys a nice balance of sun and clouds, creating a pleasant environment.

If you're looking for dry conditions and comfortable temperatures, January may not be the ideal month to visit Salamanca. May, June, July, August and September generally stand out with the best circumstances. While January and December tend to showcase less optimal conditions.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized Salamanca climate page with graphs.

Salamanca, monthly averages in January

Min Temperature 1°C

Max Temperature 10°C

Chance of Rain 48%

Precipitation 49 mm

Rainy days 15 days

Humidity 82%

Sunshine 123 hours

Percentage Sunshine

Where to go in Spain in January

Find out more about the weather in Spain and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

Wear a base layer in cold weather; this is the #1 thing you can do to increase your overall body temperature.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Swimming 5/10

Cycling 4/10

Walking 4/10

Camping 5/10

Outdoor sports 4/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in Salamanca.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to Spain? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in Spain. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.