Salamanca weather in January (Guanajuato, Mexico)

Will it be rainy or sunny in Salamanca this January? Check out our in-depth weather guide for this month.

Temperatures

For January, the weather in Salamanca is generally perfect, featuring high temperatures and low rainfall. Throughout the daytime, temperatures often hover around 26°C. However, as the sun sets and evening approaches, there's a noticeable cool-down. Temperatures gently drop to a more temperate 9°C. On average, it features the lowest temperatures of the year but it is still a warm month.

Precipitation

Salamanca in January usually receives low rainfall, averaging around 12 mm for the month. Climate statistics over the past 30 years suggest around 2 days of rain.

Average sunshine

The days are predominantly sunny, with an estimated total of around 235 hours of sunshine. These sun-filled days are perfect for spending time outside. Whether it's playing sports, visiting a park, or going for a bike ride.

If you favor pleasant temperatures and minimal rainfall, January is one of the better months to visit Salamanca. January, February, March, April, October, November and December typically offer the most agreeable circumstances. On the other hand, June tends to be characterized by conditions that may not be as optimal.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized Salamanca climate page with graphs.

Salamanca, monthly averages in January

Min Temperature 9°C

Max Temperature 26°C

Chance of Rain 7%

Precipitation 12 mm

Rainy days 2 days

Sunshine 235 hours *

Percentage Sunshine *

* Data from: Guanajuato City, Mexico (49 KM, 30 Miles).

Where to go in Mexico in January

Find out more about the weather in Mexico and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

It's going to be warm! Consider airy clothing, t-shirts, and other summer clothes. Shorts for men made of cotton or linen are good options for staying cool.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Swimming 10/10

Cycling 8/10

Walking 8/10

Barbeque 10/10

Camping 5/10

Outdoor sports 8/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in Salamanca.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to Mexico? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in Mexico. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.