Normal weather for Salamanca in January

It's cool in January in Salamanca with an average temperature of 10°C. Temperatures this month range from a low of 8°C to a high of 12°C. At night, you can expect temperatures between -2°C and 2°C.

In January, there is an average of 38 mm of precipitation, spread over 18 days days. Of the total precipitation, about 0,8 cm falls as snow in January. The wind speed is around 4 Bft, mostly coming from the South.

The UV index is a maximum of 4 this month. That's a moderate value on the intensity scale of 1 to 11. Unprotected skin can burn in about 30 minutes.

Check out the climate of Salamanca for all months and discover the best travel time

Salamanca in January

New York

Average Temperature

10°C 7°C

High Temp

12°C 9°C

Low Temp

8°C 5°C

Total Rainfall

38 mm 84 mm

Rainy Days

18 days 16 days

Total Snowfall

0,8 cm 1,5 cm

Snowy Days

2 days 1 day

Discover cheap trips to Salamanca

Daily Temperature in January in Salamanca

This chart shows the average daily high temperatures in January in Salamanca, measured in degrees Celsius. The bottom of the chart shows the days of January. Based on historical data, it shows the average daily temperatures for this month.

Daily Rainfall in January in Salamanca

This chart shows the average daily rainfall in January for Salamanca, measured in millimetres over the past years. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it’s snow or hail. The bottom of the chart shows the days of January. Based on historical data, this chart gives an idea of how much rain you can expect each day.

Daily Snowfall in January in Salamanca

This chart shows the average daily snowfall in January in Salamanca, measured in centimetres. The bottom of the chart shows the days of the month. The data is based on historical measurements and gives an idea of the average snowfall in January.

Daily UV Index in January in Salamanca

This chart shows the average daily UV index in January in Salamanca, with the UV index ranging from 0 to a maximum of 11. The bottom of the chart shows the days of the month. Based on historical data, this chart provides an idea of the daily UV radiation levels you can expect.

Temperature in January in Salamanca Over the Years

This chart shows the average temperature in January in Salamanca, measured in degrees Celsius, over the past years.

Total Rainfall in January in Salamanca Over the Years

This chart shows the average rainfall in January in Salamanca, measured in millimetres over the past years. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it’s snow or hail.

Snowfall in January in Salamanca per year

This chart shows the average snowfall in January in Salamanca, measured in centimetres, over the past years.