Salamanca weather in July (Castile and Leon, Spain)

What kind of weather does July bring to Salamanca? Find out what kind of weather to expect during this month.

Temperatures

The weather in Salamanca is usually perfect in July, featuring very high temperatures and low rainfall. During July, the summer season is in full swing. Expect temperatures to climb to 30°C during the day, with nighttime readings dropping to 15°C. On average, it is the warmest month of the year. So be prepared and pack summer clothes. Embrace the warmth, but always stay equipped with your summer essentials to make the most of this warm month.

Precipitation

Salamanca in July usually receives low rainfall, averaging around 13 mm for the month. As the driest month, you can expect little to no rain. This makes it perfect for outdoor events and activities. Enjoy the freedom from wet weather. Typically, you can expect about 6 days of rain this month.

Average sunshine

The days are predominantly sunny, with an estimated total of around 370 hours of sunshine. These sun-filled days are perfect for spending time outside. Whether it's playing sports, visiting a park, or going for a bike ride.

If you're a fan of comfortable temperatures and drier conditions, July is a great time to visit. May, June, July, August and September generally stand out with the best circumstances. While January and December tend to showcase less optimal conditions.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized Salamanca climate page with graphs.

Salamanca, monthly averages in July

Min Temperature 15°C

Max Temperature 30°C

Chance of Rain 20%

Precipitation 13 mm

Rainy days 6 days

Humidity 47%

Sunshine 370 hours

Percentage Sunshine

Where to go in Spain in July

Find out more about the weather in Spain and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

It's going to be warm! Consider airy clothing, t-shirts, and other summer clothes. Shorts for men made of cotton or linen are good options for staying cool.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Swimming 10/10

Cycling 8/10

Walking 8/10

Barbeque 10/10

Camping 10/10

Outdoor sports 8/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in Salamanca.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to Spain? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in Spain. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.