Overview

January is a good time to visit Salamanca. The weather is usually cold with a gentle breeze, with temperatures ranging from 33—48°F (0—9°C). There are plenty of events to check out and activities to try in Salamanca during this time. Some of our top recommendations: visit the Convento de San Esteban, take a day trip to the Arribes del Duero Natural Park, take a hot air balloon ride over the countryside, and more!

Salamanca has plenty to offer for visitors of all ages and interests. In this article, we tell you the top things to see and do for your January trip to Salamanca. Get inspired by the events, activities, attractions, and experiences unique to January. We’ll let you know where to explore events based on your interests, whether that’s food, culture, art, music, sport or others.

We’ll let you know everything you need to prepare for the weather in Salamanca in January. Learn about what to wear and pack for your trip, the average temperatures throughout January, temperature changes from morning to evening and much more.

Visiting Salamanca? See our Salamanca Trip Planner.

Weather in Salamanca in January

Temperatures on an average day in Salamanca in January

The average temperature in Salamanca in January for a typical day ranges from a high of 48°F (9°C) to a low of 33°F (0°C). Some would describe it as cold with a gentle breeze.

For comparison, the hottest month in Salamanca, July, has days with highs of 89°F (31°C) and lows of 58°F (14°C). The coldest month, February has days with highs of 50°F (10°C) and lows of 32°F (0°C). This graph shows how an average day looks like in Salamanca in January based on historical data.

Visiting Salamanca? See our Salamanca Trip Planner.

General weather summary

Cold with a gentle breeze

Feels like

23%

Chance of rain

0.072 in

Amount

14.3 mph

Wind speed

89%

Humidity

9.6 hrs

Daylight length

8:43 AM

Sunrise

6:18 PM

Sunset

40%

Cloud cover

Jacket

What to wear

What to wear in January

With an average high of 48°F (9°C) and a low of 33°F (0°C), it generally feels cold with a gentle breeze. With that in mind, most people would dress in something warm like a jacket