Leading Women

Ornella Barra, Chief Executive, Alliance Boots, is one of this month’s ‘Leading Women’

Wednesday 26 November at 1030 GMT/ 1130 CET and 1730 GMT/ 1830 CET

Saturday 29 November at 0630 GMT/ 0730 CET and 1930 GMT/ 2030 CET

Sunday 30 November at 1330 GMT/ 1430 CET

Duration: 15 minutes

‘Leading Women’ connects CNN’s audience to extraordinary women of our time. Each month, the programme meets two women at the top of their field, exploring their careers, lives and ideas.

In November:

Ornella Barra is the Chief Executive, Wholesale and Brands, of multinational pharmacy-led health and beauty group Alliance Boots, formed by the merger of the British high street group Boots, and retail pharmacy group Alliance UniChem. The Italian-born Monegasque businesswoman is a qualified pharmacist and started her career within the healthcare industry by managing a pharmacy, and then acquiring it. Responsible for strategy, management and international retail for Alliance healthcare, she has been married to Italian billionaire Stefano Pessina, Executive Chairman of Alliance Boots, for 30 years.

Alli Webb is the founder of Drybar, a Californian chain of hair salons that only offer blow-dries. A professional hair stylist, Webb had a career in public relations working with clients such as Faith Hill, Paul McCartney and Keith Urban, and spent several years working as a stylist under the late John Sahag in NYC. Webb started providing home blow-dries in 2008 under the name Straight-at-Home, but when her popularity quickly outgrew her small business, she expanded with Drybar.

cnn.com/leading-women/

@CNNIWomen

#CNNWomen

@TheDrybar

Inside the Middle East

‘Inside the Middle East’ looks back at the year 2014, including a behind-the-scenes look at how the show is made (credit: twitter.com/CNNIME)

Wednesday 3 December at 1030 GMT/ 1130 CET and 1730 GMT/ 1830 CET

Saturday 6 December at 0630 GMT/ 0730 CET and 1930 GMT/ 2030 CET

Sunday 7 December at 1330 GMT/ 1430 CET

Duration: 30 minutes

As the year draws to a close, ‘Inside the Middle East’ looks back at an incredible 12 months in the world of arts, culture, and lifestyle across the region, revisiting some of the show’s best stories and moments.

A particular highlight was a report on the tradition of couscous in North Africa. Couscous is more than a food in Algeria; it’s part of one’s cultural identity and a staple of Berber cuisine. In the past decade, machine-made couscous has become a trendy alternative to pasta in the United States and Europe. But Hakim Lahlou – one of the Algiers’ most famous restauranteurs – still makes it the old–fashioned way – by hand.

Earlier in the year, ‘Inside the Middle East’ got rare backstage access on the set of Million’s Poet, a UAE-based reality TV programme where contestants recite their own poetry. Million’s Poet is one of the most popular programs in the region. The programme explores the popularity of poetry in the Gulf, profiling one of the region’s most famous young poets Farah Chamma, a young Palestinian whose open-mic poetry has gone viral on the internet.

Also in the review of 2014, there’s a chance to see some of the best and funniest behind-the-scenes moments, including how the ‘Inside the Middle East’ producers and cameramen film the show while working in remote deserts, rainy monsoons, and even in the middle of a Dubai fountain.

@CNNMiddleEast

@CNNIME

#CNNIME

cnn.com/middle.east/

@cnnmiddleeast

Living Golf

‘Living Golf’ looks back at 2014, including a trip to Aberdeen, Scotland (pictured) to speak with Donald Trump

Thursday 4 December at 1030 GMT/ 1130 CET and 1730 GMT/ 1830 CET

Saturday 6 December at 0830 GMT/ 0930 CET and 2230 GMT/ 2330 CET

Sunday 7 December at 1730 GMT/ 1830 CET

Duration: 30 minutes

In 2014, ‘Living Golf’ has interviewed a grand total of over 50 pro golfers, 10 coaches, three historians and two Ryder Cup captains. It has also visited four continents, 40 courses, two gyms and one wind tunnel!

The final programme of the year looks back at the highlights of the past 12 months on the road, the big profiles, location reports, archive features, industry analysis and off the beaten track stories.

Locations revisited include: Rio de Janeiro in Brazil for an update on how the 2016 Olympic course is progressing with architect Gill Hanse; Dubai, for a look at how the country attracted golf to the Middle East by building a course in the desert; and Donald Trump in Scotland, to speak about his investment in the Turnberry Resort in Aberdeen.

The programme also looks back at the four majors of 2014, and the people met at these tournaments from Ben Crenshaw at the Masters, to the artist that paints the iconic US Open posters.

There’s another chance to see the many talents ‘Living Golf’ has met in 2014, including 10 year old future star Alexa Pano in Florida and 91 year old Argentine legend Roberto De Vicenzo as well as Rickie Fowler, Martin Kaymer, Sam Torrence, Curtis Strange and many more.

There’s also a look ahead to what the New Year might bring with a number of golf’s leading names, including Jack Nicklaus.

@CNNLivingGolf

@ShaneODonoghue

cnn.com/golf/

Make Create Innovate

Host Nick Glass, in the Bloodhound Technical Centre in Bristol

Thursday 4 December at 2100 GMT/2200 CET

‘Make, Create, Innovate’ airs within Quest Means Business

‘Make Create Innovate’ is a science and technology series that tells the stories behind the inventions and technological breakthroughs that are reshaping our world, profiling pioneers in the fields of health, space exploration, telecommunications, energy, manufacturing and many more.

This episode takes a look at the Bloodhound SSC car at the Bloodhound Technical Centre in Bristol, UK.

Part fighter-jet, part space-ship and part Formula One car, the Bloodhound car is part of man’s need for speed, a project to design a car capable of going more than 1000MPH.

‘Make Create Innovate’ speaks to pilot-turned-driver, Wing Commander Andy Green, about the project, and learns how the car plans to break the land-speed record. Host Nick Glass also learns how it is part of a plan to inspire the next generation of scientists and engineers using a mixture of ‘Top-Gun’ meets ‘Top Gear’.

cnn.com/make-create-innovate/