San Marino is one of the world’s smallest countries, enclaved in the middle of north-central Italy. Part of the Apennine Mountains, it is located near the Adriatic coast at Rimini. The capital, also called San Marino, sits on the slopes of Monte Titano and is known for its medieval walls and narrow cobblestone streets. The economy mainly relies on finance, industry, services and tourism. San Marino is one of the wealthiest countries in the world in terms of GDP per capita. The political situation is stable, and the security environment largely benign. Opportunistic criminal activity, including pick-pocketing and purse-snatching, is the most likely threat visitors can encounter. There is no particular threat from terrorism and no significant history of social unrest. Infrastructure is of good quality. Road conditions are good, although local driving habits may be erratic and rural and mountainous roads may have poor lighting.

There are no airports in San Marino, and usable airports are located in nearby Italian cities. There are no particular concerns over air travel into and within Italy.

Road conditions and driving standards are generally good.

There are no seaports in San Marino.

Utilities are generally dependable.

Cyber-threats are a growing concern.

San Marino is a unitary multi-party parliamentary directorial republic. The two Captains Regent are the heads of state for a term of six months. The State Congress, which consists of a maximum of 10 Secretaries, forms the government and exercises executive power. Although all the Secretaries of the Congress are officially equal, the Secretary of State for Foreign and Political Affairs is regarded as the acting Prime Minister. The unicameral parliament, or the Grand and General Council, exercises legislative power and elects the heads of state and Secretaries. General elections take place once every four years. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.

Coalitions featuring a cross-section of political parties are typically required to form the government. Government collapses are rare. State institutions are competent and effective and provide reliable services across the country.