Map of the Sounds of Tokyo. 2009. Directed by Isabel Coixet.

Isabel Coixet (Elisa & Marcela 2019, Paris, je t’aime 2006, and Elegy 2008) lends her feminine stylish skills to a dark neo-noir film centered in Tokyo. In fact, she chose locations in Tokyo that are unlikely to be seen in other films. In addition, in 2009 flash mobs were en vogue and kiss and anger flash mobs were displayed for intertextuality purposes. They form the sounds of Tokyo plus help tell the love and anger that permeates the film.

It is rare for a femme fatale that is the embodiment of an ice queen to fall in love with their target. But, in this case Ryu (Rinko Kikuchi) can’t help…

Film #1 of the 30 days 30 countries challenge- SPAIN

There is something kind of magnetic about Isabel Coixel's films. I see them once, feel slightly underwhelmed, but months and years later I feel like I need them back in my life. This is the third time I've seen Map of the Sounds of Tokyo and it still got an emotional reaction out of me. It starts out on a really bizarre note with a bunch of suited up Japanese men eating sushi off of naked women and you think you're in for something exciting and different, but the film only half delivers on that front. It's the rare and powerful moments of pure cinematic brilliance that keep this film…

This certainly looked a lot more interesting on paper. I haven't seen too many non-Japanese directors fare well in Tokyo (I can only think of Michael Arias), Isabel Coixet is no exception. For a film that refers specifically to the soundscapes of a city, the sound design is simply disappointing.

The plot revolves around David, a Spanish man who owns a wine shop in Tokyo. He comes into contact with Ryu, a solitary girl who lives two separate lives. While Coixet adds some thriller and crime elements, the film focuses on the peculiar relationship between Ryu and David, keeping it well within the drama niche.

Kikuchi is clearly the star of the film, but somewhat of an obvious choice. The…

A wealthy businessman hires an assassin to kill his daughter's boyfriend, who he blames for her committing suicide. Well, he gets his personal assistant to hire an assassin which he does without complaint.

When the assassin Ryu goes to scope out her target she instead becomes infatuated with the hairy-chested Spaniard she encounters, who alternates between flirting via wine descriptions and talking about his deceased girlfriend.

Its vision of Tokyo is one of people caught between moving onwards and lingering in familiar routines and places, neither of which are done with any purpose in mind.

Nighttime scenes of trains, cars and learner drivers taking the first steps on their own path to independent movement are scattered throughout. Those are contrasted…