Welcome to MojoPlays, and today, we’re taking a look at Every “Evil Dead” Game Ranked! With “Evil Dead Rise” upon us, we’re getting the itch to replay some of the games based on the franchise. Which “Evil Dead” game was your favorite? Did it make the list? Let us know down in the comments.

#8: “Evil Dead: The Mobile Game” (2011)

It isn’t uncommon for a licensed game to retell the story of the IP it's based on. Oftentimes, it leads to some tightly restricted and short games. And yet, that isn’t “Evil Dead: The Mobile Game’s” biggest crime. Heck, we aren’t even against the weird, chibi artstyle that turns Ash and his friends into little YooTooz. Nope, it was simply mundane gameplay. Thirty levels of mostly mindless wandering until something happens. What was the point of making this if there wasn’t going to be any effort into making an “Evil Dead” game interesting?

#7: “Evil Dead: Endless Nightmare” (2016)

To “Endless Nightmare’s” credit, it looks visually more impressive than “Evil Dead: The Mobile Game”, but that’s all it really has going for it. “Endless Nightmare” is dreadful. All you have is another shoddy FPS where all you do is go around and shoot Deadites as you try to escape the woods. Even by 2016 standards, there were dozens and dozens of mobile games we could point you towards. This mindless runner is not one of them, and it never will be.

#6: “Evil Dead: Hail to the King” (2000)

“Hail to the King” is on a weird plane of existence. It isn’t exactly an awful game when looking at it through the lens of a video game. No, it isn’t the most engaging survival horror you can play. It is very much a “Resident Evil” clone. But for all the other stuff it tries to do with its combat and controls, well, we start to wonder if it’d be better locked in the cellar with Cheryl. It’s alright so long as you don’t expect anything remotely grand to come out of your experience.

#5: “The Evil Dead” (1984)

It is rare that a game as ancient as “The Evil Dead” ever holds up about as well as it does. That isn’t to say you should go hunt down a copy and fork over whatever obscene amount of cash it calls for. For what it is, though, it’s kind of fun! Keep all barriers closed and off whatever comes inside! Just make sure you keep picking up weapons to keep the fight going as long as you can.

#4: “Army of Darkness: Defense” (2011)

Of the “Evil Dead” mobile games, this one was far, far better than the rest. As Ash, you’ll take on the undead army with your trusty chainsaw and boomstick. However, you’ll need to build units to fortify your castle and summon allies like Duke Henry to assist you in battle. Even with the weird perspective chosen for what is essentially a tower defense game, “Army of Darkness: Defense” was still excellent overall. It’s just a damn shame that it was removed from storefronts in 2018.

#3: “Evil Dead: The Game” (2022)

“Evil Dead: The Game” was the “Evil Dead” game we had spent DECADES waiting on, and when it arrived in 2022, there was only one word to describe it: “groovy”. Regardless of the clunky movement, it was incredibly fun fighting the undead alongside our friends or harassing them with enemies as the Kandarian Demon. The only reason it didn’t place higher is because of how quickly it devolved into broken builds that bullied Demon players. It doesn’t help that the fixes and rebalance were slower than most other online games.

#2: “Evil Dead: A Fistful of Boomstick” (2003)

We have to wonder what critics were smoking to give “A Fistful of Boomstick” such abysmal reviews back when it launched. A sequel to “Hail to the King”, “Fistful of Boomstick” managed to improve what its predecessor failed to accomplish. The controls were refined, the combat felt better, and it boasted an excellent cast to help carry an awesome narrative. Was repetition really that much of a hindrance to having a bloody good time with this simple hack-&-slasher? We beg to differ.

#1: “Evil Dead: Regeneration” (2005)

Say what you will about Sam; love him or hate him, he doesn’t affect how awesome of a game “Evil Dead: Regeneration” is. Take the narrative focus of “Hail to the King” and combine it with “Fistful of Boomstick’s” improvements, and you get an epic adventure to cap off Ash’s trilogy. And the best part? Ash comes with a rage mode that lets you go AWOL! Plus, you can perform finishing moves on certain enemies. It is an absolute bloodbath of a game, and it’s a game worthy of the “Evil Dead” name!