What are dead games?

Dead games are known as games that can’t hold up with the enough player count and due to that Developers for the game see no point releasing new content. But it does go both ways. Developers may ignore the player base opinion towards the game and avoid releasing new content to the game which lead to players leaving and a huge downfall to the games. Majority of games rely on player count and the community to keep it strong. Players are important because they are the one pushing the developers to release new content to the game every now and then, without enough players, there will be no reason for developers to release new content to the game. But to keep the player base Developers have to also release new contents. With no contents developers will be forced to shut the game down. Let’s talk about Team Fortress 2.

The not-so Dead Game: Team Fortress 2

Team Fortress 2 is a 2007 multiplayer first-person shooter game developed and published by Valve Corporation. This game have been running since 2007, can you believe it? The player count on this game in 2023 is ranked Top 10 in steam most played games, in number that is over 100,000 players. But funny enough Team Fortress 2 have not receive any major update ever since the Jungle Inferno update which is on the October 20th 2017. Does that make Team Fortress 2 a dead game? I’m going to say no, Team Fortress 2 developers might be lacking content for the game, but it’s still staying strong because of the community in the game and the content YouTubers release for the game. Let’s compare with a game that is really dead compared to Team Fortress 2.

The actual dead game?: HyperScape

Officially, on on April 28th 2022, Ubisoft announced that it would shut down its servers for HyperScape. In addition to being quicker than Apex Legends and having more clear building mechanisms than Fortnite, it also featured swappable abilities that let players modify their playstyle in-game. However, these skills were straightforward and simple to acquire, and despite the gameplay’s maniacally quick pace, it felt gratifying. Everyone was still learning in the beginning, so competition to see who could advance the most quickly day by day was constant. But one thing we have to remember is the originality of the game. Fortnite has it’s Building, Apex Legends have Movement. That’s what makes them special and Original. When you mention Movement, people will think of Apex Legends. When You mention building, everyone says Fortnite. It was never Hyperscape. Everything Hyperscape has, other developer does better. That is the main problem Hyperscape is facing, therefore slowing down its player count and eventually shutting down.

Some people say it was Ubisoft’s fault on the downfall of HyperScape, but the player count was never enough to keep the servers online. Streamers wasn’t sticking to the game for long even though they had partnership with the game because they didn’t find the game interesting to stick to. Yes, maybe Ubisoft takes part of the downfall for the lack of content. But I believe for Hyperscape, the originality takes the blame.

So what does this mean?: The Conclusion

Dead games aren’t always dead, it’s always depending on whether there is still a community in it. Team Fortress 2 have no update, but the community keeps the game alive. While, Hyperscape have no community, therefore the game shuts down.