I'm reading a new biography of Johnny Cash by the great rock music critic Robert Hilburn, and, as so often happens lately when I read histories and biographies, I'm noting the Iowa connections. It's uncanny, really, how often Iowa turns up in books where you'd least expect to find it.

In the case of Johnny Cash, the first connection emerged rather abruptly on Page 273. If you know anything about Cash's life, you know he was a drug addict in the 1960s. He popped pills to wind up and to wind down. This led, at times, to some dumb and dangerous behavior.

In the mid-’60s, during a tour stop in Waterloo, Cash almost died. As fellow performer Johnny Western reported: "There were times we'd find him when we thought he was dead, like the morning in Waterloo in 1965. . . . It was colder than hell. John had the window wide open in the hotel and he was passed out on top of the covers with just his boxers on . . . cold as ice. Marshall called the doctor, who gave him some shots and got him under some warm blankets. And you know what? He gets up and does the show that night. It was touch and go like that for years."

This, clearly, could have happened anywhere. Cash could have nearly frozen to death in Minnesota or Wisconsin, where he also performed regularly in the ’60s. But then I got to Page 293, where Hilburn reports that Cash's overdoses "had become so common that everyone in the touring party cited various times and places: Johnny Western mentioned Waterloo, June Carter named Des Moines . . ."

So, some other time during the mid-’60s Cash almost died in Des Moines? Unfortunately, Hilburn does not share June Carter's Des Moines tale, but clearly it was a memorable near-death episode. What was it about Iowa that made Johnny Cash go to such extremes?

I don't know. But I found a nifty website that offered one possible answer. The website, johnny-cash-infocenter.com, includes a nearly complete list of Cash's live performances from the mid-’50s to the mid-’90s. Scrolling through the list reveals that Cash performed in Iowa A LOT over his career.

His first Iowa show was in Cedar Rapids in 1956. This was among his first shows outside the South. A year later, he performed in Des Moines, Dubuque and Davenport. In 1958, he performed in Des Moines, Waterloo and Cedar Rapids. The list goes on. He performed in Iowa every year from 1956-69. He performed at the State Fair in 1960 and ’61, and he played the Surf Ballroom in Clear Lake in those same two years.

The point is, Cash was in Iowa many times during his pill-poppin' years, meaning the odds of a bad experience in Iowa were better than you might have thought.

Cash's Iowa appearances slowed down considerably in the ’70s and ’80s, but he still managed at least one show most years, including a performance at the Clay County Fair in Spencer in 1980. In the early ’90s, Cash even performed twice in Ames: 1990 at the Hilton Coliseum and 1993 at Farm Aid VI at Jack Trice Stadium.

So, that's what I have so far on Johnny Cash in Iowa. Maybe I'll write something soon about the Iowa connection to TV's Kukla, Fran and Ollie show.