IN 2003, country music lost one of its most beloved stars, Johnny Cash.

The legendary singer is one of the best-selling music artists of all time, having sold over 90 million records worldwide.

How did Johnny Cash die?

Johnny Cash died of complications from diabetes on September 12, 2003, four months after his wife.

Cash had been plagued with poor health and had undergone surgeries on his jaw, heart, and knees before the start of the 1990s.

He was known to have struggled with alcohol and drug abuse at several different stages of his life.

The singer was diagnosed with automatic neuropathy in 1997, a condition that can come with diabetes.

However, Cash had been inflicted with the condition long before it was correctly diagnosed.

Initially, his doctor misdiagnosed him with Shy-Drager syndrome.

How old was Johnny Cash when he died?

Cash was 71 years old at the time of his death.

He was buried alongside his wife, June, in Hendersonville Memory Gardens, where they had lived in Hendersonville, Tennessee.

His life and death will be retold in the CW documentary I Am Johnny Cash.

The film is the latest in a series of films by the network called I Am.

I Am Johnny Cash will air on May 4, 2024, at 8:00 p.m. ET

When did Johnny Cash's wife, June Carter, die?

On May 15, 2003, June Carter died of complications during a heart-valve replacement surgery, aged 73.

In a statement made after her death, Johnny said, “The spirit of June Carter overshadows me tonight with the love she had for me and the love I have for her.

“We connect somewhere between here and Heaven.

"She came down for a short visit, I guess, from Heaven to visit with me tonight to give me courage and inspiration like she always has.

“She's never been one for me except courage and inspiration. "I thank God for June Carter. I love her with all my heart.”

Johnny met June while on tour in the 1950s, and the two quickly became infatuated with each other.

By 1968, Cash proposed to her, and the couple married in March of that year, in Franklin, Kentucky.