What is one place I would recommend as a must stop in Nashville? It would definitely be The Johnny Cash Museum. Many people might think you would need to be fans to enjoy this museum, but this is for anyone. Brandon walked in not being as huge a fan, and by the time he walked out of the museum he was a fan of Johnny Cash and listening to his music.

Johnny Cash was most known for being a musician, but wasn’t just a musician. Johnny Cash was an author of several books. He was a humanitarian most well known for his work with prison reform and orphans. He was a military veteran. He was devout to his Christian faith. He was an actor appearing on many shows and movies. He was also really close to his fans, and made sure he always had a connection to them. He seemed like a people person who genuinely wanted to connect to others, and I think with his imperfect past it gave him an easy relate to element that soared his popularity.

The Johnny Cash Museum is a walk Johnny Cash’s life, and we found out a lot about Johnny Cash we had never knew nor considered. His career spanned through the 1950’s to the early 2000s before he died. This spanned transitions in all types of the way music was formatted to the audience. He lived through every stage of transition from records, cassettes, CDs, and MP3 players, and his music was released in every format. At the start of the tour you can stop in at the listening station.

Tickets costs $16 for adults. Tickets for seniors, military, and AAA members are discounted to $15, and youth 6-15 are $12. Children 5 and under enter free with adult admission. After purchasing your tickets you can enter the area where you begin with collections from when Johnny Cash was younger. This includes his army papers, FFA membership card, his dog tags, and a New Testament copy he owned in the 1950s. There are also drawings he did as well. The collection throughout the museum is intimate and personal as these things are.

The museum gets the most personal when it shares artifacts of Johnny Cash’s love for his wife June, and pieces from their home. The home they lived in was burned down after it was purchased, but the owner of the museum recovered some of the stone wall of the house and reconstructed it in the museum. Placed around the wall is furniture from their home. The old museum’s sign from his city, House of Cash, is also in the museum. I did grab a photo of a poem wrote after leaving her grave site on the day of her funeral. I felt it was so personal I didn’t upload it here though.

Many of his achievements are also throughout the museum. You can see a wall of his albums presented after they hit certain milestones. Johnny Cash’s clothes he wore at pivotal moments in his life are also displayed. The outfit he wore in his last video “Hurt”, a jumpsuit he had made for a prison visit, and others are throughout the museum.

You can also see a Grammy when you stop by. I think the only other place I know you can see a Grammy when stopping by is Third Man Records.

The most loved aspect of this museum is the interactive part of the experience. The museum is small, but with each space you walk in it has it’s own touch. Different songs play in certain areas. At what is considered the end of the exhibit “Hurt” is playing, and it does lead to the right effect for the museum goer. I left feeling emotion from here. There is also a section with Johnny Cash talking about the United States, and a section showing some of his history memorabilia he had like a letter of Abraham Lincoln’s. He was such a huge enthusiast there was also a photo of him at the sight of where Lincoln was shot.

You also have the chance to see Johnny Cash’s enjoyment of acting. He starred and voiced in many shows including Dr. Quinn Medicine Woman and The Simpsons. He had a part in older movies as well. You can watch clips from these movies and shows in a viewing room. We sat down to watch the entire bit. I highly recommend taking the fifteen minutes to watch.

There was also a variety of recording equipment on display. You can also see guitars signed by Johnny Cash, and a band he was involved in, The Highwaymen featuring, Willie Nelson, Waylon Jennings, and Kris Kristofferson. I could tell that the owner of the museum, Bill Miller, had a passion for conveying every bit of Johnny Cash’s life. He has been collecting his stuff since he was a kid. It was no shock to come and find they also knew each other when Johnny Cash was alive. I highly recommend the interview with him discussing more about the museum.

We also went when an exhibit, The Legends of Sun Records, was on display featuring the first record company Johnny Cash was apart of, Sun Record Company. It would feature exhibits from the other artists starting out with him, Elvis Presley, Roy Orbinson, Jerry Lee Lewis, and Carl Perkins.

I’ve got to say it was cool seeing some of Elvis’ stuff on display as well that day, especially things from the beginning of his career.

If in Nashville, Tennesee The Johnny Cash Museum is a must stop. It’s well worth the admission to not only see things from Cash, but also see a life that had a lot of impact on others. Not only is the exhibit a glimpse into history its also inspiring. For a small area you feel like you’ve gotten a huge glimpse into the life of Johnny Cash and the people he cared about.