ONE OF the best-known country singers of all time, Johnny Cash often sang about sorrow, moral tribulation, and redemption.

Before his death in 2003, he welcomed five children.

How many children does Johnny Cash have?

Johnny Cash was born on February 26, 1932, and died at the age of 71 on September 12, 2003.

While enjoying success in Nashville, Cash released 170 singles in a career spanning 1954 to 2003, including Ring Of Fire and I Walk The Line.

He had five children from two marriages - four daughters and a son.

Here's what we know about his talented kids.

Rosanne Cash

Rosanne Cash is the eldest daughter of Johnny and his first wife Vivian Liberto Cash Distin.

She was born on May 24, 1955, in Memphis, Tennessee.

Like her father, Rosanne also went into music and is now known as a singer-songwriter and author.

Her 1981 album Seven Year Ache reached No1 in the US Country Album chart, as did her 1985 release Rhythm & Romance.

She's also had numerous No1 hits on the Billboard Hot Country Charts, including Seven Year Ache.

Her cover of her father's song Tennessee Flat Top Box also topped the country chart.

She married country music singer-songwriter Rodney Crowell in 1979, and the couple have three daughters, Caitlin, Chelsea, and Carrie.

Rodney and Rosanne divorced in 1992 and she married for a second time, to musician John Leventhal.

Rosanne and John have one son, Jakob.

Kathy Cash

Kathy Cash is Johnny's second daughter with Vivian.

She was born on April 16, 1956, in Memphis.

Unlike her other siblings, Kathy has managed to stay out of the spotlight over the years and has kept her personal life out of the media.

However, she has made a few appearances over the years.

She was featured in the film What’s the Matter with Gerald?, which was written by her son, Dustin Tittle.

Kathy, who married Jimmy Tittle in 1982, is also the mother of Thomas Gabriel and Kacy Tittle.

In 2020, she appeared in My Darling Vivian, along with her sisters.

The documentary looked at the life of her mother who passed away in 2005.

Cindy Cash

Cindy Cash is Johnny and Vivian's third daughter.

She was born on July 29, 1959, and also followed in her father's footsteps.

Her parents divorced when she was nine years old, and she performed with her father and stepmother, June Carter.

Cindy is now known for her career as a singer, author, and antique dealer, but has stayed out of the spotlight over the years.

Cindy has been married three times and had a daughter, Jessica Dorraine Brock, with her first husband, Cris Brock.

Her second marriage to songwriter Marty Stuart lasted from 1983 until 1988, and she married Eddie Panetta in 2003.

Sadly he passed away in a motorbike crash in 2009.

Tara Cash

Tara Cash is Johnny's youngest daughter.

She was born on August 24, 1961, in Memphis five years before her parents divorced.

Tara grew up with her mother Vivian who remarried in 1968 to Dick Distin

She has appeared in documentaries about her famous dad.

Additionally, she was a wardrobe assistant on the 1989 movie Tennessee Nights and a costume designer on the TV film Nashville Beat.

Tara is married to Fred Schwoebel and has two children - Alex and Aran.

John Carter Cash

John Carter Cash is the only child of Johnny and June.

He was born on March 3, 1970, in Nashville, Tennessee, and quickly followed in his father's footsteps.

Like Johnny, John is also a country singer-songwriter as well as an established author and producer.

In 2005 he worked as an executive producer on the movie Walk The Line, based on his father's autobiographies.

John has been married three times and has five children.

Joseph is his son with Mary Mabry, while Anna and Jack were born to Laura Weber White.

John has two children with his wife Ana Cristina, whom he married in 2016.

They are daughter Grace June, born in September 2017, and son James Kristoffer, born in July 2021.

Was Johnny Cash married?

During his lifetime he was married twice.

He was first married to the late Italian-American homemaker and author Vivian Liberto.

She was the inspiration for the popular song, I Walk The Line. The former couple wed in 1954 but then divorced in 1966.

Two years later, he married five-time Grammy award-winner June Carter.

Johnny and June were married up until her death in May 2003.

What was Johnny Cash's cause of death?

Johnny made headlines on September 12, 2003, after it was announced that he had passed away at the age of 71.

His manager, Lou Robin, later revealed that he died after suffering complications of diabetes.