A painter picked to be the official artist for the Manchester Commonwealth Games has died at the age of 102.

Frances Lennon rose to fame after landing the role at the 2002 games and was known for her scenes of childhood and growing up in the north west.

She was awarded honorary Master of Arts degrees from both Salford University and Manchester Metropolitan University in 2007.

She received an MBE from Prince Charles the same year.

Frances passed away peacefully at the Little Sister of the Poor nursing home in Longsight.

Her artwork was often compared to LS Lowry, but she was initially unaware of his paintings.

Grandaughter Anne-Marie Royle said: “When she eventually saw his pictures she said, ‘I remember, that’s how it was’.

“She remembered the Matchstick Man and said it was exactly how Lowry did it.

“But she was more influenced by Charlie Chaplin, silent movies and Felix the Cat.”

Frances left Adelphi House School at 16 and worked as a draughtman’s assistant at the Metropolitan Vickers factory.

She had painted all her life, but it wasn’t until her seventies following the death of her husband Bill that her art work was published.

Frances was married to Bill - a fireman who she met in Stretford, who served during the Manchester Blitz and helped to save Shambles Square from the Luftwaffe.

Anne-Marie said: “She was always painting fairytales for children.

“But she got really recognised for her memories of Stretford.

“My grandad had suggested that she painted the characters of Stretford, but it wasn’t until after he died that her work was recognised.”

Her work was published in a variety of books and her works regularly sold for £20,000.

She sold one painting for £13,000, which was donated to the Kirsty Appeal run by Francis House in aid of Kirsty Howard who was born with a rare heart condition.

Anne-Marie said: “She was 102 and died peacefully.

"She raised lots of money for lots of local charities like Francis House.

“She did a lot for the local community.”

She added: “She was a wonderful lady, mother and grandmother.

“There were a lot of people who got a lot of joy from her artwork.”