Genre: Drama, War

Country: Argentina, Bolivia

Duration: 80 min.

Story: In 1934, Bolivia is at war with Paraguay. Liborio and Ticona and other Bolivian indigenous soldiers are lost in the hell of the Chaco, under the commandment of German Captain Kundt. They're looking for the Paraguayan enemy that they haven't seen for months, and that they will never find. They leave together in a search that will make them realize, progressively, the destiny they have been pushed into and the inevitable condition of a defeated troop. They're walking like shadows, wandering forever in the middle of dust and silence.

Genre: Drama, War

Country: China

Duration: 103 min.

Story: Based on real life events, the film is set in January 1949 and focuses around a group of soldiers involved in the final stages of the Battle of Pingjin

Style: captivating, tense, thrilling, realistic, suspenseful

Plot: fight, soldier, battles, military officer, military base, wartime life, military life, military, chinese civil war, group, communist propaganda

Place: china

Genre: Drama, War

Country: Denmark

Duration: 122 min.

Story: The true story of the Fiil's a family of innkeepers who during Nazi-Germany's occupation of Denmark took up arms against the German occupiers. But in the fight for freedom, some must die so that others may live.

Style: disturbing, emotional, realistic, captivating, tense ...

Plot: resistance fighter, nazi, world war two, freedom fighter, resistance, nazi occupation, sabotage, danger, heroes, fight, wartime, military life ...

Time: 1940s, 20th century

Place: denmark, germany, scandinavia

Genre: Drama, War

Country: USA

Duration: 102 min.

Story: Based on the popular World War I novel by author William March, director Robert Clem's COMPANY K follows a veteran of the first great conflict as he finishes a book about his wartime experiences and reflects on how a man's true character ...

Style: serious, psychological, captivating, disturbing, epic ...

Plot: world war one, veteran, soldier, wartime life, battles, state affairs, military, life is a bitch, politics, prison life, haunted by the past, military life ...

Time: 20th century, 1930s, year 1917

Place: france

Genre: Drama, War

Country: USA

Duration: 99 min.

Story: A searing portrait of war and prejudice, 'Only the Brave' takes you on a haunting journey into the hearts and minds of the forgotten heroes of WWII - the Japanese-American 100th/442nd.

Style: exciting, tense, captivating, suspenseful, independent film ...

Audience: boys' night

Plot: military, battles, soldier, survival, military life, society, daring rescue, danger, war, heroic mission, battle zone, world war ...

Time: 1940s, 20th century

Place: europe, usa, france, italy, hawaii

Genre: Drama, War

Country: Poland

Duration: 111 min.

Story: To be defeated and not be - a victory. This is the motto that life is guided by three young friends: Alek, Sophy and Rudy. Scouts, high school graduates high school in Warsaw drifting ambitious plans for the future broken through September 1939. ...

Style: realistic, captivating, serious, suspenseful, suspense ...

Plot: world war two, wartime life, against the odds, life is a bitch, daring rescue, danger, wartime, german occupation, resistance fighter, nazi occupation, resistance, prospector ...

Time: 20th century, 1940s

Place: poland, europe

Genre: Action, Drama, History, War

Country: China

Duration: 131 min.

Story: Directed by Shen Dong and starring Ray Lui, An Yixuan and Yuan Wenkang, Death and Glory in Changde recalls one of the most cruel and controversial battles during China's War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression (1937-45), Changde Battle, ...

Style: disturbing, captivating, tense

Plot: world war two, military, fight, battles, wartime life, soldier, combat, military life, war, army, warrior, battlefield ...

Genre: Drama, History, War

Country: Italy

Duration: 80 min.

Story: World War I, Italian north-eastern front after the 1917 bloody battles on the Altipiano. A group of soldiers face the difficulty of war in a story that unfolds in the space of one night. Events follow one after the other without any kind of pattern: ...

Style: atmospheric, serious, bleak, realistic, historical drama ...

Plot: world war one, soldier, military, danger, anti war, battle zone, military life, introspection, life is a bitch, great war, mountain, war ...

Time: 1910s, 20th century, year 1917

Place: italy

Genre: Action, Drama, War

Country: South Korea

Duration: 120 min.

Story: A civil war broke out in the 1950s between North and South Korea which changed the country forever. 71: Into the Fire centers on the struggles of 71 student soldiers who fought through the Korean War. Using real people and events based on the ...

Style: serious, realistic, rough, suspenseful, touching ...

Plot: war, korean war, military, battles, youth, military life, against the odds, leadership, danger, ambition, battle zone, patriotism ...

Time: 20th century, 1940s, 1950s

Place: north korea, asia, korea, south korea

Genre: Drama, History, War

Country: Mexico

Duration: 125 min.

Story: On May 5th, 1862, a few thousand Mexican soldiers put their lives on the line against the world's largest and most powerful army in one legendary battle for freedom and for Mexico.

Style: exciting, realistic, captivating, factual, epic ...

Plot: military, battles, liberation, against the odds, ambition, rivalry, soldier, war, danger, army, political intrigue, american history ...

Time: 19th century, 1860s

Place: mexico, america, latin america

Genre: Drama, War

Country: Germany, Russia, Ukraine

Duration: 97 min.

Story: A group of Russian soldiers are sent into Northern Germany at the tail-end of WWII, where they occupy a children's home in close proximity to a larger German unit. Against these odds, a friendship forms between a German orphan and a childless ...

Style: realistic, serious, captivating, suspense

Plot: holocaust, battles, world war two, military, love affair, military life, friendship, wartime life, basic training, hiding, wound, russian soldier ...

Time: 1940s, 20th century, year 1945

Place: ukraine, germany

Genre: Action, Drama, War

Country: UK

TV show

Story: During the First World War, British troops face the horrors of the Battle of Mons in 1914, internal strife in 1916 and innovative tank warfare in 1918.

Style: captivating, realistic, serious, suspenseful, costume drama ...

Plot: world war one, battles, military, soldier, war, battle zone, great war, british soldier, wartime, wartime life, military life, struggle for survival ...

Time: 1910s, 20th century

Place: europe

Genre: Drama, War

Country: USA, Israel

Duration: 89 min.

Story: Tells the story of two women seeking leads to their missing husbands after the end of the Yom Kippur War (1973). A relationship builds between them when each identified her husband in the same blurred image of a foreign newsreel.

Style: captivating, realistic, serious, gloomy, bleak ...

Plot: conflict, friends, destiny, military life, friendship, captivity, anti war, war, life is a bitch, danger, military, journalism ...

Time: 20th century, 80s

Genre: Drama, War

Country: USA

Duration: 95 min.

Story: Unfolding over the span of 36 hours in three separate wars – The American Civil War, World War I, and Iraq – FOXHOLE follows five soldiers confined in a foxhole as they grapple with morality, futility, and an increasingly volatile combat ...

Style: disturbing, suspense, tense, suspenseful, captivating

Plot: wartime life, battles, war, wartime, soldier, fight, military officer, iraq war, military, struggle for survival, civil war, multiple storylines ...

Genre: Drama, Romance, War

Country: Estonia, Finland

Duration: 95 min.

Story: Based on an acclaimed 1935 novel about the War of Liberation (1918-1920) that ensured Estonia's independence, the film tells about a group of young schoolboys heading to the front to fight the army of Soviet Russia.

Style: realistic, serious, captivating, period drama

Plot: anti communist, military, heroes, soldier, battles, war, independence, world war one, wartime, wartime life, war for independence, fighting the system ...

Time: 21st century

Place: estonia, russia, europe

Genre: Drama, War

Country: Japan

Duration: 128 min.

Story: In 1944, the American military lands on the shores of Saipan. Refusing to commit suicide with his superiors or be forced into camps for prisoners of war, Captain Oba Sakae leads a group of his men and other similarly minded local residents into the ...

Style: exciting, captivating, tense, disturbing, suspense

Plot: world war two, military, honor, world war, soldier, battles, japanese army, fight, commander, heroic mission, wartime life, wartime ...

Time: 1940s, year 1945, year 1944

Place: japan, pacific ocean, oceania

Genre: Drama, War

Country: Germany

Duration: 134 min.

Story: "Stalingrad" follows the progress of a German Platoon through the brutal fighting of the Battle of Stalingrad. After having half their number wiped out and after being placed under the command of a sadistic Captain, the Lieutenant of the ...

Style: realistic, serious, epic, gloomy, rough ...

Plot: world war two, war, battles, nazism, soldier, eastern front, military, holocaust, starvation, military life, survival, winter ...

Time: 1940s, 20th century, year 1942, year 1943

Place: russia, germany, europe, italy

Genre: Drama, War

Country: UK

Duration: 312 min.

TV show

Story: The lives and loves of the men of RAF Hornet Squadron who are transferred to France at the outbreak of World Wat II in September 1939. For the most part the men are competent fliers but there is little action in the first several months. The men ...

Style: costume drama, captivating, exciting, realistic, serious ...

Plot: world war two, aerial combats, battles, aviation, luftwaffe, world war, warplane, wartime, royal air force, friends, danger, heroes ...

Time: 1940s, 20th century

Place: europe

Genre: Drama, History, War

Country: Denmark

Duration: 93 min.

Story: In the early morning of April 9th 1940 the Danish army is alerted. The Germans have crossed the border; Denmark is at war against Europe's strongest army. In Southern Jutland Danish bicycle- and motorcycle companies are ordered out, to against ...

Style: serious, captivating, realistic, tense, suspense ...

Plot: world war two, nazi occupation, military, war, wehrmacht, soldier, battles, danger, against the odds, nazi, world war, friendship ...

Time: 20th century, 1940s, year 1940

Place: denmark, germany, europe

Genre: Drama, War

Country: Israel, France

Duration: 117 min.

Story: The film takes place in 1973 during the Yom Kippur War in which Egypt and Syria launched attacks in Sinai and the Golan Heights. The story is told from the perspective of Israeli soldiers. We are led by Weinraub and his friend Ruso on a day that ...

Style: tense, disturbing, realistic, serious, rough ...

Plot: rescue, soldier, military life, military, life is a bitch, danger, battle zone, realism, israeli, conflict, freedom, conservative ...

Time: 70s, 20th century, year 1973

Place: israel, middle east, palestine, iraq, syria ...

Genre: War, Drama

Country: Italy, West Germany, Yugoslavia

Duration: 90 min.

Story: A story of how World War II affected the lives of a German family and an American family, both of whom had sons and fathers fighting in the war.

Style: macaroni combat, exciting, rough, bleak, realistic ...

Plot: world war two, world war, battles, nazi, revolutionary war, struggle, revolution, combat, revolutionary, soldier, computers and web, military life ...

Time: 1940s, year 1978

Place: africa

Genre: Biography, Drama, War

Country: USA

Duration: 104 min.

Story: No one in high command believed that German forces would attack in the sub zero temperatures and near blizzard conditions. As the pre-dawn attack comes, with communications down Sgt. Smith is left with no choice but to make his way through enemy ...

Style: realistic, rough, serious, uplifting

Plot: world war two, military, soldier, historical event, against the odds, military life, danger, heroes, infantrymen, battle zone, small town, world war ...

Time: 1940s, 20th century

Place: germany, europe, astoria oregon

Genre: Drama, War

Country: Taiwan

TV show

Story: The drama tells the story of air force pilots and their families from 1945 to 1971. As the husbands embarked on patriotic missions to fight against the enemies, their families must content with horror of wars, mass emigration to distant land, and ...

Style: disturbing, captivating, suspense

Plot: air force, air battle, patriotism, air attack, social problems, showdown, struggle for survival, aerial combat, war, social injustice, wartime life, aviator ...

Time: 1950s, 20th century, 60s

Place: taiwan

Genre: Action, Drama, History, War

Country: Turkey

Duration: 101 min.

Story: April, 1915. First World War in Canakkale, Ottoman Empire. Two brothers leave their mountain village to fight on the front line. One is an experienced sniper fighting for Ottomans against the invasion, while his brother finds it much tougher to cope ...

Style: exciting, serious, stylized, realistic, epic ...

Plot: world war one, battles, military, great war, survival, violent content, siblings relations, battle zone, danger, family relations, soldier, heroic mission ...

Time: 1910s, 20th century, year 1915, middle ages

Place: gallipoli, turkey, ottoman empire

Genre: Biography, Drama, War

Country: USA

Duration: 90 min.

Story: Faith of My Fathers is based on the story of Lieutenant Commander John McCain's experiences as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam for five and a half years during the Vietnam War, interleaved with his memories of growing up in a heritage rich ...

Style: uplifting, captivating, disturbing, serious, suspense ...

Plot: vietnam war, prison, human spirit, survival, military, confined, captivity, patriotism, hopes, rebellion, danger, soldier ...

Time: 60s, 70s, 50s, 20th century, 1950s

Place: vietnam

Genre: Drama, War

Country: Japan

Duration: 87 min.

Story: In the final days of World War II, occupying Japanese forces in the Philippines face resistance from the local population and the American offensive. The dwindling Japanese soldiers attempt to survive through the horrors of war.

Style: psychological, tense, atmospheric, realistic, captivating ...

Plot: world war two, survival, japanese soldier, danger, military life, isolation, confined, escapades, rivalry, asian prostitute, anti war, humanity ...

Time: 20th century, 1940s

Place: the philippines