In 1966 tragedy struck when Claudette Orbison was killed in a motorcycle accident, with Roy riding just ahead of her when it happened. He found it difficult to write any more songs, but he kept touring. Two years later, a fire destroyed his house in Hendersonville, Tennessee, killing two of his three children. From that point on, he refused to attend funerals.

The albums came sporadically, but the tours were steady. In 1969, Orbison married a young German woman, Barbara Wellhonen, and the couple later had two children. But a 1977 reunion LP with Fred Foster was disappointing; so was a 1979 album on Elektra/Asylum Records, which he recorded shortly after he underwent triple-bypass heart surgery.

But pop music never forgot Roy Orbison: Linda Ronstadt, Van Halen and Don McLean had hits with his songs in the late Seventies and early Eighties, and in 1980 Orbison released “That Lovin’ You Feelin’ Again,” a Grammy-winning duet with Emmylou Harris. In 1985 there was Class of ’55, a reunion LP with Sun Records veterans Johnny Cash, Carl Perkins and Jerry Lee Lewis that contains a standout Orbison performance in the elegiac “Coming Home.” That song, like most of the songs he recorded in subsequent years, is suffused with a spiritual glow and full of intimations of mortality; the grandiose ballad “Wild Hearts,” from the movie Insignificance, is similarly unsettling, while “Life Fades Away,” from the Less Than Zero soundtrack, is simply a dying man’s missive.

At the same time, though, Orbison was preparing his comeback with the aid of fans director David Lynch (who used “In Dreams” to great effect in his film Blue Velvet), Bruce Springsteen (who inducted Orbison into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1987), T Bone Burnett (who handled the musical direction on the star-studded Cinemax concert Roy Orbison and Friends: A Black & White Night and produced the first two tracks for Mystery Girl) and Jeff Lynne (who wound up producing much of the album). In the end, a whole crew of admirers lent their support to Mystery Girl, which includes songs and productions from the likes of Tom Petty, Mike Campbell, Elvis Costello and Bono.

But at the end of his life, Orbison’s best-known collaboration was with Petty, Lynne, George Harrison and Bob Dylan, his partners in the Traveling Wilburys. Recorded quickly and cheaply by musicians who happened to be friends and colleagues, the album was presented, tongues firmly in cheeks, as if it were the work of brothers who had five different mothers but a single footloose father — and in an interview with the Wilburys, the other members were quite vocal about what a thrill it was to hear “Lefty Wilbury” sing. Lefty himself sat quietly as younger colleagues like Petty and Harrison spun outrageous tales of life as a Wilbury; then, just when it seemed the group’s elder statesman might be uncomfortable with the elaborate put-on, he softly tossed out a choice remark. “Some people said Daddy was a cad and a bounder.” he said, deadpan. “I remember him as a Baptist minister.”

Editor’s picks

With the success of the Wilburys, Roy Orbison seemed on his way to a complete comeback. He finished his own album in mid-November, watching with undisguised pleasure as the Wilburys LP headed for the Top Ten; then he headed to Europe for a couple of television appearances and some promotion. When Roy’s chores were finished, Barbara Orbison — who for the past year and a half had been her husband’s manager — remained in Germany to visit with her family. Roy returned to the United States, did a few more shows and then went to the house outside Nashville where his mother, Nadine, and his son Wesley live. There, he flew radio-controlled airplanes with his bus driver, all-around aide and friend, Benny Birchfield.

On the evening of December 6th, Orbison complained of chest pains. At about 11:00 p.m., he collapsed in the bathroom of his mother’s Hendersonville home. Paramedics rushed him to a nearby hospital, but by midnight Orbison had been declared dead of a massive heart attack.

In the three months before his death, the usually private but unfailingly polite Orbison had been generous with his time, inviting Rolling Stone to his recording and mixing sessions, his concerts, his comfortable, unostentatious house high in the hills overlooking the beach at Malibu. The final session took place over breakfast at a restaurant just down the beach from the pier where he’d once spoken to actor Martin Sheen about playing the lead in the movie version of the autobiography Orbison wanted to write. “I guess I’ll give the book a try now,” he said, finishing off his meal and smoking from a pack of Camels that he later left behind so that Barbara wouldn’t get upset.

And as he sat in the restaurant less than three weeks before his death, flushed with pride at the success of the Wilburys and the completion of what he knew was a strong new album, a happy and productive Roy Orbison said he didn’t have a clear picture of where he’d like to be in a year. “That’s like predicting the future of rock & roll in 1954 and ’55,” he said with a laugh. “I have faith that everything will unfold properly.”

It seems appropriate to start by talking about your voice. Did you know it was something special from the start?

I was on a flight with Dwight Yoakam to Nashville once, and he told me… I don’t know if I should repeat this, but he said, “I’ve always been in love with my voice.” And I could relate to that. Once I started singing, it was sort of a wonder. It was a great feeling, and it didn’t hurt anybody, and it made me feel good, and some people even said, “Roy, that’s nice.”

I’ve always been in love with my voice. It was fascinating, I liked the sound of it, I liked making it sing, making a voice ring, and I just kept doing it. And I think somewhere between the time of “Ooby Dooby” and “Only the Lonely” it kinda turned into a good voice. Though it was always nice to me [laughs].

It’s remarkable how little it’s changed.

Yeah, I sound basically the same. When I was making my older records, I had more control over my vibrato — now, if I don’t want to have the vibrato in the studio, I have to do a session earlier in the day, because by the evening it’ll be there whether I want it or not.

Related

It’s a gift, and a blessing, just to have a voice. And I’m proud that people do appreciate it, you know? It’s a long way from being overwhelmed because you don’t know whether you’re worthy, to realizing that if you have a gift, it should be precious to you and you should look after it and respect it.