Who was Roy Orbison?

Roy Orbison was an American singer and musician known for his dark and emotional ballads and rock classics.

He was known for his almost operatic style of singing, and had the nicknames 'the Caruso of Rock' and 'the Big O'.

He began singing in a rockabilly and country band in high school, and was signed by Sam Phillips of Sun Records in 1956.

However, he didn't find big success until his time with Monument Records from 1960 onwards.

In the 1980s, Orbison enjoyed a resurgence in popularity thanks to the success of several cover versions of his songs. In 1988, he co-founded the Traveling Wilburys, a supergroup with George Harrison, Bob Dylan, Tom Petty, and Jeff Lynne.

Orbison was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1987, the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame in the same year, and the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1989.

Rolling Stone placed him at number 37 on their list of the 'Greatest Artists of All Time', and number 13 on their list of the '100 Greatest Singers of All Time'.

When did Roy Orbison pass away?

In 1988, Orbison was enjoying a career resurgence, and was intending on writing an autobiography and hoped Martin Sheen would play him in a biopic.

In November 1988, his album Mystery Girl was completed, and the Traveling Wilburys' first album was a success.

He had told Johnny Cash that he was experiencing chest pains. He travelled to Europe to receive an award, and played a show in Antwerp.

A few days later, a manager at a club in Boston was worried about Orbison's health, but the singer completed his gig.

He performed at the Front Row Theater in Ohio, on December 4. He then returned home in Hendersonville to rest for a few days before flying to London to film two more videos.

On December 6, 1988, he flew model airplanes with his sons and had dinner at his mother's home. Later that day, he died of a heart attack, at the age of 52.

What happened to Roy Orbison's children?

Orbison's two eldest sons with Claudette - Roy DeWayne and Anthony King - tragically died as children due to a house fire at his home in Hendersonville, Tennessee, while he was playing in Bournemouth in the UK.

Wesley (born 1965), his youngest son with Claudette, was raised by Orbison's parents.

Orbison and Barbara had a son (Roy Kelton) in 1970 and a second (Alexander) in 1975.

Alex, also known as Orbi, is a drummer, writer, director, and film producer. He is also president of Still Working Music Group, a publishing company, and president and co-founder of Roy's Boys LLC, where he manages his father's legacy alongside his brothers.

Roy Orbison Jr is also a musician and record producer. He co-produced the album Roy Orbison: The Ultimate Collection.