TORONTO, July 24 /CNW/ – Pizza Pizza Royalty Income Fund (the “Fund”)

(TSX: PZA.UN) and Pizza Pizza Limited (“Pizza Pizza”) announced today that

Pizza Pizza has completed the previously-announced acquisition of Flying Pizza

73 Inc. and its affiliated companies (together, “Pizza 73”). In connection

with this transaction, the Fund has acquired the trademarks and other

intellectual property associated with Pizza 73 restaurant operations.

The acquisition of Pizza 73, a leading quick service restaurant (“QSR”)

pizza retailer, based in Edmonton, Alberta, allows Pizza Pizza, which is

marking its 40th year in the industry, to expand into Western Canada and

specifically the fast-growing Alberta market. Pizza Pizza, Ontario’s “number

one pizza”, operates 532 restaurant locations, predominantly in Ontario and

Quebec.

The Fund and Pizza Pizza acquired Pizza 73 for a combined purchase price

of $70.25 million. The Fund, through Pizza Pizza Royalty Limited Partnership

(the “Partnership”), acquired the trademarks and other intellectual property

of Pizza 73 for $54.04 million (the “Transaction”) and Pizza Pizza acquired

the operating business of Pizza 73 for $16.21 million. An additional

$3 million earnout will be paid to the Pizza 73 vendors by Pizza Pizza in July

2008, provided certain revenue and profitability targets are met. Pizza Pizza

will license the trademarks and other intellectual property associated with

Pizza 73 from the Partnership for a 9% royalty payment to the Fund on system

sales generated by the Pizza 73 restaurants in the royalty pool. The

Transaction is expected to be immediately 4.0% accretive to the Fund’s cash

available for distribution per fully diluted unit on a pro forma basis for the

52 weeks ended April 21, 2007.

Concurrent with the closing of the Transaction, the Partnership has

entered into a credit facility co-led by BMO Bank of Montreal and

Toronto-Dominion Bank to finance a portion of the purchase price payable in

the Transaction and to re-finance existing indebtedness. In addition, Michael

Overs, indirectly, and the Pizza 73 vendors have completed the

previously-announced acquisition of an aggregate of 766,392 Units on a private

placement basis, for total proceeds to the Fund of approximately $7.0 million.

As the Transaction between the Fund and Pizza Pizza was considered a

related party transaction under Ontario Securities Commission Rule 61-501 and

Autorité des marchés financiers Policy Q-27, a special meeting of the Fund’s

unitholders was held on July 20, 2007, at which certain matters related to the

Transaction were approved by more than 99% of the Fund units (“Units”)

represented in person or by proxy, including a majority of minority

unitholders.

In connection with the Transaction, on July 5, 2007 the Fund issued

2,600,000 subscription receipts, each representing the right to receive one

Unit of the Fund, for gross proceeds of $23.8 million. The proceeds of the

offering have been held in escrow pending today’s closing of the Transaction.

Upon release, the proceeds were applied to satisfy part of the purchase price

payable by the Partnership. The subscription receipts will be automatically

exchanged for Units effective at 5:00 p.m. (Toronto time) today (July 24), and

thereafter the former holders of the subscription receipts will be entitled as

unitholders to receive distributions from the Fund. The Units will be issued

to the former holders of subscription receipts through the facilities of CDS

Clearing and Depository Services Inc. (“CDS”) and CDS Book-Entry Only System

customer confirmations will be entered on July 26, 2007, the second business

day following the Transaction closing date.

ABOUT THE FUND

The Fund is a limited purpose, open-ended trust established under the

laws of Ontario to indirectly acquire the trademarks and trade names used by

Pizza Pizza in its Pizza Pizza and Pizza 73 branded restaurants. The

trademarks have been licensed to Pizza Pizza for 99 years, for which Pizza

Pizza pays the Fund a royalty equal to 6% of the system sales of its Pizza

Pizza restaurants in the royalty pool, and 9% of the system sales of its Pizza

73 restaurants in the royalty pool. As of January 1, 2007, there were 531

Pizza Pizza restaurants in the royalty pool, and the initial Pizza 73 royalty

pool includes 41 restaurants.

Since its initial public offering in 2005, the Fund has increased

distributions four times while maintaining a 5% same restaurant sales growth

at its Pizza Pizza restaurants. The last distribution increase was in January

2007 when monthly distributions were increased from $0.071 per unit to $0.073

per unit.

A key attribute of the Fund’s structure is the fact that it is a

“top-line” fund. Royalty income of the Fund is based on top-line system sales

of the royalty pool restaurants and is not determined by the profitability of

either Pizza Pizza or the Pizza Pizza and Pizza 73 restaurants in the royalty

pool. Given this structure, the success of the Fund depends primarily on the

ability of Pizza Pizza to maintain and increase system sales of the royalty

pool restaurants.

ABOUT PIZZA PIZZA LIMITED

Pizza Pizza Limited, a privately-held Canadian corporation, is one of

Canada’s most successful operators in the quick service restaurant industry

and is celebrating its 40th anniversary this year. Founded in 1967, Pizza

Pizza is guided by a mission to provide the “best food, made especially for

you” and a focus on quality ingredients, customer service, community

contribution and continual innovation, especially in offering health-conscious

menu choices.

ABOUT PIZZA 73

Founded in 1985, Pizza 73, with its recognizable phone numbers ending in

“7373”, currently has 48 restaurants in its system. Pizza 73 operates in the

take-out and delivery pizza QSR segment, principally in the province of

Alberta. Pizza 73 currently has four locations outside of Alberta; three in

Saskatchewan and one in British Columbia. Systems sales through its

centralized call centre and pizza73.com together accounted for approximately

95% of Pizza 73’s sales for the 52 weeks ended April 21, 2007. Pizza 73

restaurants are not franchised, but instead are owned and operated as

independent businesses. Each restaurant is a corporation equally owned by an

independent owner/operator and Pizza 73. Pizza 73 supports its independent

owner/operators with new restaurant openings, product development and supplier

arrangements and a centralized marketing program funded by contributions from

each restaurant equal to approximately 8% of annual sales. Trademarks and

other intellectual property used in the restaurant system are owned by Pizza

73. The Pizza 73 business also includes two commissaries and a call centre.

For the 52 weeks ended April 21, 2007, Pizza 73 had system sales of

$65.0 million. For the years ended July 22, 2006 and July 23, 2005, Pizza 73

had system sales of $52.8 million and $40.8 million, respectively.

NON-GAAP MEASURES

Certain financial information contained in this news release, including

references to cash available for distribution, are not standard measures under

Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) in Canada and may not be

comparable to similar measures presented by other entities. These measures are

considered to be important measures used by the investment community to assess

the source and sustainability of the Fund’s cash distributions and should be

used to supplement other performance measures prepared in accordance with GAAP

in Canada.

FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS

Certain statements in this press release may constitute “forward-looking”

statements which involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other

factors which may cause actual results, performance or achievements of the

Fund to be materially different from any future results, performance or

achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. When

used in this press release, such statements use such words as “may,” “will,”

“expect,” “anticipate,” “project,” “believe,” “plan” and other similar

terminology. The risks and uncertainties are detailed from time to time in

reports filed by the Fund with the securities regulatory authorities in all of

the provinces of Canada to which recipients of this press release are referred

for additional information concerning the Fund, its prospects and the risks

and uncertainties relating to the Fund and its prospects. New risk factors may

arise from time to time and it is not possible for management to predict all

of those risk factors or the extent to which any factor or combination of

factors may cause actual results, performance and achievements of the Fund to

be materially different from those contained in forward-looking statements.

Certain of risks and uncertainties that may arise in connection with the

acquisition of Pizza 73 include risks associated with (i) the integration of

the Pizza 73 business by Pizza Pizza; (ii) liabilities that may be assumed in

respect of the business and limitations on recourse in respect thereof, and

(iii) operating risks associated with the operation of Pizza 73 business in

its principal markets.

The forward-looking information contained in this press release is

current only as of the date of this press release. There should not be an

expectation that such information will in all circumstances be updated,

supplemented or revised whether as a result of new information, changing

circumstances, future events or otherwise.