Home:

News:

Pizza 73:

Pizza 73 opens first location in Prince Albert, fifth in Saskatchewan

December 04, 2017 // Franchising.com // PRINCE ALBERT, Sask. - Pizza 73 has opened its first location in Prince Albert located at 3300 - 2nd Avenue West, in the South side of town. This is the chain’s fifth location in Saskatchewan and 84th in total.

“We’re delighted to be expanding into the heart of Saskatchewan,” says Pat Finelli, Chief Marketing Officer for Pizza 73. “We’re looking forward to serving Prince Albertans our broad and diverse menu, especially our delicious pan pizza and golden crispy wings that we’re known for.”

Pizza 73 is a proudly Canadian brand with a long history of service and value to its customers. With its leadership position in Western Canada, Pizza 73 is committed to providing the right balance of flavour, value and choice at all store locations. Consumers in and around the Prince Albert area can expect the complete Pizza 73 menu which includes famously flavourful pizzas, golden crispy chicken wings, widely acclaimed wedgies as well as side options like jalapeno poppers, onion rings and curly fries. The brand also offers gluten-free pizzas and dairy-free cheese. Like all traditional Pizza 73 locations, the new Prince Albert restaurant prepares its dough in-house, made fresh daily, and offers delivery and pick up and a wide range of specials.

As a community-driven brand, Pizza 73 maintains strong ties with the local events scene, amateur and professional sports, charitable groups, schools and other community organizations. The brand is the official pizza of the Edmonton Oilers, Calgary Flames, WHL Saskatoon Blades, NLL Saskatoon Rush and Saskatoon Exhibition and has become a regular contributor to the local children’s hospital, Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital Foundation in Saskatoon, through the Pizza 73 Slices for Smiles program.

About Pizza 73

Established in 1985, Pizza 73 aims to satisfy every customer by providing excellent quality food and true value in a fast and friendly manner. The brand is a leader in the communities it serves and offers a broad range of menu items with 20 varieties of specialty pizzas, over 20 different toppings and three styles of crust (traditional pan, super pan and gluten-free), and an assortment of side dishes including chicken wings, boneless wings, wedgies, dipping sauces and salads. Visit www.pizza73.com for more information.

SOURCE Pizza 73

###