The new head office will be home base to their Distribution Centre, Customer Service, Call Centre and Administrative teams. Pizza 73 is hiring several key functions and is expected to staff approximately 100 employees by October 2018, approximately 20 per cent more than currently employed.

Pizza 73 is committed to sustainability and baked those values into the new facility via 100 per cent LED lighting, occupancy sensors, high efficient boilers, roof top units, and high efficient insulated roof and panels.

"Pizza 73's new headquarters is an important investment for today and tomorrow as we grow and innovate Pizza 73 and Western Canada," said Philip Goudreau, Senior Vice President, Operations & Development, Pizza 73. "It will help with efficiencies for our team and suppliers to allow us to enhance the customer experience."

"Pizza 73 is a proud Canadian brand with deep roots in Western Canada. We now employ over 1,800 people across Saskatchewan, Alberta, BC and Yukon between restaurant staff, delivery drivers, commissary, call centre, and administrative team members, and we're looking forward to continued growth," Goudreau stated.

Pizza 73 further tapped into the local talent by contracting Alberta-based Cormode and Dickson, along with Edmonton-based architectural firm, BR2. Construction began in early 2016 and officially opened in the summer of 2018.

The facility will service the leading Western Canadian pizza chain's locations throughout Saskatchewan, Alberta, British Columbia and Yukon. The facility is located at 13703, 164 Street NW, Edmonton.

About Pizza 73

Established in 1985, Pizza 73 aims to satisfy every customer by providing excellent quality food and true value in a fast and friendly manner. The company is a leader in the communities it serves and offers a broad range of menu items with 20 varieties of specialty pizzas, more than 20 different toppings, four styles of crust (traditional pan, super pan, thin crust and gluten-free), and an assortment fresh side dishes including chicken wings, boneless wings, wedgies, dipping sauces and salads. Visit www.pizza73.com for more information or follow the brand on Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram.

SOURCE Pizza 73