1. Chelsea Green Spring/Summer 2010

3. Cheesemonger Terra Madre 0 contents 4 6 contents Homes for a Changing Climate Building with Straw Bales, Revised Edition 25 26 Confronting Collapse 7 Earth Pilgrim 27 The Earth’s Best Story 8 The Handbook of Sustainability Literacy 28 The Biochar Debate 9 The New Food Garden 29 DIY U 0 10 Fruit, Berry and Nut Inventory, Fourth Edition 30 Presidency in Peril 12 The Living Landscape 31 Inquiries into the Nature of Slow Money 0 14 The Alternative Kitchen Garden 32 Up Tunket Road 15 Through the Eye of a Needle 33 The Gort Cloud 16 Birthrites 34 Chanterelle Dreams and Amanita Nightmares 17 The Woodland House 35 Poisoned for Profit 18 Earth User’s Guide to Permaculture 36 Living above the Store 19 The Systems Thinking Playbook 37 Adobe Homes for All Climates 20 City21 38 Bye Bye, Miss American Empire 21 Cuisine for Whole Health 39 The Farmstead Creamery Advisor 22 Asian Vegetables 40 Radical Homemakers 23 The People v. Bush 41 How to Make and Use Compost 24

4. Chelsea Green Food • Memoir March 2010 CHEESEMONGER A Life on the Wedge Gordon Edgar A politically charged walk through the world of artisan cheese. Witty and irreverent, informative and provocative, Cheesemonger: A Life on the Wedge is the highly readable story of Gordon Edgar’s unlikely career as a cheesemonger at San Francisco’s worker-owned Rainbow Grocery Cooperative. A former punk-rock political activist, Edgar bluffed his way into his cheese job knowing almost nothing, but quickly discovered a whole world of amazing artisan cheeses. There he developed a deep understanding and respect for the styles, producers, animals, and techniques that go into making great cheese. With a refreshingly unpretentious sensibility, Edgar intertwines his own life story with his ongoing love affair with cheese, and offers readers an unflinching, highly entertaining on-the- ground look at America’s growing cheese movement. From problem customers to animal rights, business ethics to taste epiphanies, this book offers something for everyone, including cheese profiles and recommendations for selecting the very best—not just the most expensive—cheeses from the United States and around the world and a look at the struggles dairy farmers face in their attempts to stay on and make their living from the land. • Pub Date March 2010 • $17.95 US, $21.95 CAN • Paper Edgar—a smart, progressive cheese man with an activist’s edge—enlightens and delights with • ISBN 9781603582377 his view of the world from behind the cheese counter and his appreciation for the skill and tra- • 6 x 9 • 256 pages dition that go into a good wedge of Morbier. • Food/Memoir Cheesemonger is the first book of its kind—a cheese memoir with attitude and information that • World English Rights will appeal to everyone from serious foodies to urban food activists. • Also Available as an e-book “Smart, compassionate, and fun to read, Cheesemonger took me by surprise! Who would expect the memoir of a cheese man to be so fascinating, playful, and refreshing? It’s great to hear a voice on food from the punk route, and Gordon Edgar brings a fresh and important perspective that we could all use for hand-made foods . . . and the people who buy them.” —Deborah Madison, author of Local Flavors: Cooking and Eating from America’s Farmers’ Markets and What We Eat When We Eat Alone Gordon Edgar is the cheesemonger for Rainbow Grocery Cooperative, San “If you think culture applies only to transforming milk into cheese, then read Francisco’s biggest independent gro- cery and the country’s largest retail this book! Gordon Edgar takes you on an irreverent journey through history, worker co-op. He has been a panelist punk music, lust, food politics, and daily challenges faced by small-scale and judge at numerous industry cheese farmers and co-op retailers. He simultaneously demystifies cheese while events, helps organize national and wrestling with the myths and contradictions of the global food system. He will regional worker–co-op conferences and make you laugh, cry, and debate him!” regional cheese conferences, and serves on the board for the California —Jeffrey Roberts, author of The Atlas of American Artisan Cheese Artisan Cheese Guild. He has written for HipMama.com, Clamor Magazine, and MaximumRocknRoll and blogs at gordonzola.livejournal.com and www.gordonzola.net. ChelseaGreen.com 4 802.295.6300

5. Chelsea Green Food • Memoir March 2010 From the book . . . The moment in which I learned the most took place in the walk-in cooler where I was doing my volunteer work. Most of my day was spent organizing cheese for the cheese competition. I was teamed with another cheese punk, the only other person I know with a cheese tattoo. Fate brought us together. Or at least the promise of cheaper out-of-pocket expenses. He’d been a cheese buyer longer than I had and referred to himself as a “cheesemonger.” “Tommy, how do you define ‘cheesemonger’?” I asked. During the course of the day we hashed out the definition and connotations. Obviously, cheesemonger was a title that meant “one who buys and sells cheese.” We both liked the history associated with the word “monger.” Fishmonger, warmonger, whoremonger, etc. Clearly it was a serious title, and one to be earned. Cheese lovers sometimes get confused and call themselves cheesemongers. I try to be understanding. After all, who wants to be called a “turophile?” It sounds like you have a fetish for molesting out-of-town visitors. Unfortunately, sometimes I’ve heard cheese workers use the title “cheesemonger” after they’ve been at the job for about five minutes. In doing so, they ignite in me a visceral distrust. Policing this definition cuts both ways, and I’m sure some folks would question how appropriate it was that I applied the term to myself. And while my new cheesepunk friend and I talked about the definition and what years of experience, gross sales, and ratio of factory-to-artisan cheese should be required, he had a few additional rules. “You can’t call yourself a cheesemonger unless you’ve killed a rat in the walk-in cooler, kicked a sales rep out of your store, and bled from a cheese wound,” Tommy declared. We argued about the rat qualification both on humane grounds and based on the fact that his urban store might have been in the food business for 100 years, but mine had just been a St. Vincent De Paul Thrift Store and Mack Truck showroom before recently becoming a grocery store. I had had no opportunity for that kind of vermin killing. That I had killed many defenseless animals in my hunting-oriented youth convinced Tommy to give me a pass on that qualification. My dad was right: Those freezing pre-dawn mornings spent up to my waist in ice-cold water putting out duck decoys really did pay off. I never saw Tommy again, but his words have guided me ever since. ChelseaGreen.com 5 802.295.6300

6. Chelsea Green Gardening • Agriculture March 2010 TERRA MADRE Forging a New Global Network of Sustainable Food Communities Carlo Petrini, Founder and President of Slow Food Foreword by Alice Waters Industrial agriculture took over the world. Now Terra Madre is taking it back. More than twenty years ago, when Italian Carlo Petrini learned that McDonald’s wanted to erect its golden arches next to the Spanish Steps in Rome, he developed an impassioned response: he helped found the Slow Food movement. Since then, Slow Food has become a worldwide phe- nomenon, inspiring the likes of Alice Waters and Michael Pollan. Now, it’s time to take the work of changing the way people grow, distribute, and consume food to a new level. On a global scale, as Petrini tells us in Terra Madre, we aren’t eating food. Food is eating us. Large-scale industrial agriculture has run rampant and penetrated every corner of the world. The price of food is fixed by the rules of the market, which have neither concern for quality nor respect for producers. People have been forced into standardized, unnatural diets, and aggressive, chemical-based agriculture is ravaging ecosystems from the Great Plains to the Kalahari. Food has been stripped of its meaning, reduced to a mere commodity, and its mass production is contribut- ing to injustice all over the world. • Pub Date March 2010 • $20.00 US, $25.00 CAN • Paper In Terra Madre, Petrini shows us a solution in the thousands of newly formed local alliances • ISBN 9781603582636 between food producers and food consumers. And he proposes expanding these alliances—con- • 51/2 x 71/2 • 208 pages necting regional food communities around the world to promote good, clean, and fair food. • Gardening/Agriculture The end goal is a world in which communities are entitled to food sovereignty—allowed to • North American Rights choose not only what they want to grow and eat, but also how they produce and distribute it. • Also Available as an e-book Terra Madre People presents the farmers, breeders, fishermen, cooks, stu- dents, and academics at the Terra Madre 2008 meeting who actively support local, sustainable food production and the preservation of taste and biodiversity. This colorful 16-minute video captures the Terra Madre gathering of world food communi- ties in Turin, Italy in October 2008 and features Carlo Petrini, born in the small north- interviews with Terra Madre delegates from all ern Italian town of Bra in 1949, is the over the world. The video also includes clips of founder and international president food producers and their projects in their native of the Slow Food movement, commit- • Pub Date March 2010 countries, as well as interviews with Chelsea ted to the promotion of “good, clean • $10.00 • DVD ISBN 9781603582780 Green authors Sandor Katz and Carlo Petrini. and fair food.” The author of several • $25.00 • Book/DVD set books, he contributes regularly to This DVD is the perfect complement to the Italian dailies and magazines on mat- ISBN 9781603582841 book and clearly illustrates what Terra Madre ters related to gastronomy and food • Runtime 16:06 minutes (the event and the network) is all about, politics. To write Terra Madre, he col- through the faces of the world’s farmers, fisher- men, and other food producers. laborated closely with Carlo Bogliotti, an editor of the Slowfood magazine and governor of the Slow Food Italy association. ChelseaGreen.com 6 802.295.6300

7. Chelsea Green Politics • Energy January 2010 CONFRONTING COLLAPSE ok that The Crisis of Energy and Money in a Post Peak Oil World The bo vie the mo A 25-Point Program for Action inspired SE Michael C. Ruppert COLLAP Foreword by Colin Campbell, Ph. D. The world is running short of energy – especially cheap, easy-to-find oil. Shortages, along with resulting price increases, threaten industrialized civilization, the global economy, and our entire way of life. In Confronting Collapse, author Michael P. Ruppert, a former LAPD narcotics officer turned investigative journalist, details the intricate connections between money and energy, including the ways in which oil shortages and price spikes triggered the economic crash that began in September 2008. Given the 96 percent correlation between economic growth and greenhouse gas emissions and the unliklihood of economic growth without a spike in energy use, Ruppert argues that we are not, in fact, on the verge of economic recovery, but on the verge of complete collapse. Ruppert’s truth is not merely inconvenient. It is utterly devastating. But there is still hope. Ruppert outlines a 25-point plan of action, including the creation of a • Pub Date January 2010 second strategic petroleum reserve for the use of state and local governments, the immediate • $15.00 US, $17.95 CAN • Paper implementation of a national Feed-in Tariff mandating that electric utilities pay 3 percent above • ISBN 9781603582643 market rates for all surplus electricity generated from renewable sources, a thorough assessment • 53/8 x 83/8 • 256 pages • Charts & graphs of soil conditions nationwide, and an emergency action plan for soil restoration and sustainable • Politics/Energy agriculture. • World Rights “Mike Ruppert has an unblemished track record for saying things that are incendiary, outrageous, shocking—and true. Our new president needs desperately to hear the uncomfortable message of this book about energy and the economy, and so do the rest of us.” —Richard Heinberg, Ph.D., author of The Party’s Over, Peak Everything, The Oil Depletion Protocol and senior fellow, Post Carbon Institute Michael C. Ruppert is a former Los “Mike Ruppert has been at the forefront of speaking and writing about the Angeles Police Department narcotics grim reality that the world's crude oil output is peaking or has already investigator turned investigative journal- peaked and will soon begin what could be swift declines over the next ist. He is the author of Crossing the Rubicon: The Decline of the American decade or two. The world needs to pay careful attention to the multiple risks Empire at the End of the Age of Oil, this event will usher in. Thanks to Ruppert's new book, readers around the and the founder of the online newsletter world will have access to his well written work.” From the Wilderness. He currently lives —Matthew R. Simmons, Chairman - Simmons & Company in Los Angeles. ChelseaGreen.com 7 802.295.6300

8. Chelsea Green Food • Memoir March 2010 THE EARTH’S BEST STORY A Bittersweet Tale of Twin Brothers Who Sparked an Organic Revolution Ron and Arnie Koss Changing the world isn’t easy, but it can be done. The Earth’s Best Story tells how Ron and Arnie Koss succeeded in creating the first nationally distributed organic foods company to sit next to its mainstream competition on supermarket shelves—a step that revolutionized and empowered the organic-foods movement as a whole— and benefited hundreds of farmers as well as the millions of babies whose very first foods have been organically grown, thanks to Earth’s Best. The Koss brothers, Ron and Arnie, had been sprout growers, broommakers, tool restorers, but- lers, and natural-foods clerks, yet raised millions of dollars to start the first organic baby food company in the United States. How unlikely was that? The Earth’s Best Story is a bittersweet tale about the founding of Earth’s Best Baby Foods twenty- five years ago. Told through the dual narrative of each brother, this is not a business tome, although it is rich in entrepreneurial lessons and know-how. Rather, it’s more like a “how to,” “how not to,” and “how they did it” memoir. It’s personal, it’s intense, it’s inspirational, and it’s full of reflections and tales of wonder and woe. • Pub Date March 2010 People of every imaginable background and station in life want to make a difference with their • $19.95 US, $24.95 CAN • Paperback lives. But how do you effectively do that? How does an idea successfully journey across the • ISBN 9781603582391 wastelands separating fantasy and reality? The Koss brothers take the reader on this journey. • 6 x 9 • 384 pages Theirs is a tale of idealism, naiveté, and possibility that reflects the quest to find a place in this • Food/Memoir world by somehow changing it for the better. • World Rights • Also Available as an e-book Ron and Arnie Koss founded Earth’s Best Baby Food in 1985. In addition to baby food, Ron Koss is a natural foods product innovator. During his long-term employ with the aio Food Group, Ron has secured patents for his work on complete meal supplement ice cream and has also introduced specialized complete meal supplements for people in health recovery situations. Presently, he is working on nutritional products for a global relief aid project. Ron enjoys working as a consultant for socially responsible enterprises and has a special interest in group dynamics, organizational development, and conflict resolution. He lives in Montpelier, Vermont, with his family. Arnie Koss honed his business skills by founding and operating a number of small entrepreneurial companies in Vermont. He was actively involved in the development of organic certification stan- photo: Randy Jay Braun dards, which eventually led to the Organic Foods Act of 1990. Arnie has served as a consultant to several prominent natural products companies and is presently the Managing Partner at aio Food Group, a Hawaii-based product development company that has created patented nutritional supplement products and also owns the Punalu'u Bakeshop and Visitor Center on the Big Island of Hawaii. He lives in Kula, Hawaii, with his family. ChelseaGreen.com 8 802.295.6300

9. Chelsea Green Nature • Environment March 2010 THE BIOCHAR DEBATE Charcoal’s Potential to Reverse Climate Change and Build Soil Fertility James Bruges Real hope for dealing with global warming while enhancing agricultural yields. The Biochar Debate is the first book to introduce both the promise and concerns surrounding biochar (fine-grained charcoal used as a soil supplement) to nonspecialists. Charcoal making is an ancient technology. Recent discoveries suggest it may have a surprising role to play in com- bating global warming. This is because creating and burying biochar removes carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Furthermore, adding biochar to soil can increase the yield of food crops and the ability of soil to retain moisture, reducing need for synthetic fertilizers and demands on scarce fresh-water supplies. While explaining the excitement of biochar proponents, Bruges also gives voice to critics who argue that opening biochar production and use to global carbon-credit trading schemes could have disastrous outcomes, especially for the world’s poorest people. The solution, Bruges explains, is to promote biochar through an alternative approach called the Carbon Maintenance Fee that avoids the dangers. This would establish positive incentives for businesses, farmers, and individuals to responsibly adopt biochar without threatening poor communities with displace- • Pub Date March 2010 ment by foreign investors seeking to profit through seizure of cheap land. • $14.95 US, $17.95 CAN • Paper The Biochar Debate covers the essential issues from experimental and scientific aspects of • ISBN 9781603582551 biochar in the context of global warming to fairness and efficiency in the global economy to • 51/2 x 81/2 • 128 pages • Color photos negotiations for the future of the Kyoto Protocol. • Nature/Environment • North American Rights • Also Available as an e-book “What we need is a charcoal maker on every farm so the farmer can turn his waste into carbon . . . We have to grow food, so why not help Gaia do the job of CO2 removal for us?” —James Lovelock, originator of Gaia theory “Bruges’ book is up to date and as comprehensive as any book could be at this extremely early stage of interest in the issue.” —Dennis Meadows, coauthor of Limits to Growth James Bruges worked as an architect in London, Sudan, and India until 1995 when he retired in order to write about “The Biochar Debate is an intelligent and even-handed look at the potential for economic and environmental issues. He both improving soil and addressing global warming offered by the decentral- is the author of Sustainability and the ized production and use of biochar. The potential pitfalls and unknowns are Bristol Urban Village Initiative, The Little clearly acknowledged—this is not another faddish silver bullet approach, but Earth Book, and The Big Earth Book, offers some real world examples and practical ideas that anyone can use.” and was a contributor to What About China? His work has also appeared in —Grace Gershuny, author of The Soul of Soil Resurgence, The Friend, and The Ecologist. He was raised in Kashmir until the age of twelve and now lives with his wife, Marion, in Bristol, England. ChelseaGreen.com 9 802.295.6300

10. Chelsea Green Current Events • Education April 2010 DIY U Edupunks, Edupreneurs, and the Coming Transformation of Higher Education Anya Kamenetz The case against college, and for education. The price of college tuition has increased more than any other major good or service for the last twenty years. Nine out of ten American high school seniors aspire to go to college, yet the United States has fallen from world leader to only the tenth most educated nation. Almost half of college students don’t graduate; those who do have unprecedented levels of federal and private student- loan debt, which constitutes a credit bubble similar to the mortgage crisis. The system particularly fails the first-generation, the low-income, and students of color who predominate in coming generations. What we need to know is changing more quickly than ever, and a rising tide of information threatens to swamp knowledge and wisdom. America can- not regain its economic and cultural leadership with an increasingly ignorant population. Our choice is clear: Radically change the way higher education is delivered, or resign ourselves to never having enough of it. The roots of the words “university” and “college” both mean community. In the age of constant connectedness and social media, it’s time for the monolithic, millennium-old, ivy-covered walls to undergo a phase change into something much lighter, more permeable, and fluid. The future lies in personal learning networks and paths, learning that blends experiential and • Pub Date April 2010 digital approaches, and free and open-source educational models. Increasingly, you will decide • $14.95 US, $17.95 CAN • Paper what, when, where, and with whom you want to learn, and you will learn by doing. The univer- • ISBN 9781603582346 sity is the cathedral of modernity and rationality, and with our whole civilization in crisis, we are • 53/8 x 83/8 • 208 pages poised on the brink of Reformation. • Current Events/Education • Also Available as an e-book Praise for Anya Kamenetz and her previous book, Generation Debt: “A huge talent.” —Stephen J. Dubner, coauthor, Freakonomics “Bold and thought-provoking.” —–Los Angeles Times photo: Jayd Gardina “Surprisingly balanced [and] dead-on.” —–The Cleveland Plain Dealer “Turning public policy into a page-turner isn’t easy, but Kamenetz has done just that. We all need to read this brilliant book.” —–Laurence J. Kotlikoff, coauthor, The Coming Generational Storm Anya Kamenetz is a staff writer for Fast “Anya Kamenetz brilliantly reveals the illogic and wasteful inequities of Company magazine. The Village Voice America's blind faith in higher education. Her book will be devastating for nominated her for a Pulitzer Prize for older people who still believe one more graduate degree is the road to per- contributions to the feature series Generation Debt, which became a book sonal success and a prosperous economy. Younger people will feel relief that in 2006. She has written for the New someone has finally told the truth about their predicament. Kamenetz offers York Times, appeared on CNN and a radically different way to think about the future and she gives young peo- National Public Radio, and been fea- ple a more rational and promising way to think about theirs.” tured as a “Yahoo Finance Expert.” A —–William Greider, author of Come Home, America: The Rise and Fall (and frequent speaker nationwide, Kamenetz blogs at Fastcompany.com, The Redeeming Promise) of Our Country, and National Affairs Correspondent Huffington Post, and for The Nation anyakamenetz.blogspot.com. She lives in Brooklyn with her husband. 10

11. Chelsea Green Current Events • Education April 2010 Q&A with Anya Kamenetz Who, really, are Edupunks and Edupreneurs, and are they on the fringe of education or really in the thick of it at well-respected, already-established universities? AK: There is a large establishment within higher education that wants to preserve the status quo at all cost, but a growing number understand the dire need for change. Among the folks who are alive to this need, there is an emerging dichotomy between those who see the need for change as an economic opportunity and those who see it as an opportunity to instantiate free, open, networked education. Edupunks are determined that knowledge and learning should be free and open. They want to smash the tradi- tional hierarchies of education and let learners control what, when, where, and how they learn. They’re commit- ted to open-source technology and open licensing of creative work. They believe in the power of networks and communities. Edupreneurs want to harness some of the same technologies to create new, for-profit business models that reshape or replace existing educational institutions. Everyone is madly trying to figure out models to make the brave new world of education sustainable and effi- cient. Both the edupunks and the edupreneurs have something important to contribute to this process, just as the Mozilla Foundation, the nonprofit that produces the open-source browser Firefox, can do its thing along- side Google, a public company. Advocates and innovators of all stripes are actively changing the system, from major universities, to governments and the UN, to venture-capital firms, to complete outsiders. How soon do you see the fall of traditional higher education, or at least their giving way to more technology-driven, open-source models? AK: These changes are underway. The higher-ed landscape will be virtually unrecognizable within ten years as more and more people discover alternatives to the tuition cost spiral, not to mention the time, space, and other limitations of the “old-school” models. What made you want to write about this, as the daughter of professors, and a Yale graduate? AK: As my background indicates, I’m a partisan of the traditional liberal arts and higher education as a whole. My concern is how the world can satisfy its growing thirst for knowledge—and how America, which has fallen behind, can catch up. ChelseaGreen.com 11 802.295.6300

12. Politics & Social Justice April A PRESIDENCY IN PERIL The Inside Story of Obama's Promise, Wall Street's Power, and the Struggle to Control our Economic Future Robert Kuttner A PRESIDENCY From the author of the New York Times IN PERIL best-seller, Obama’s Challenge When Barack Obama took office in January 2009, he had an unprecedented chance to do what no other recent president could: seize the nation’s financial reins from the corporate elite and return them to the American people. Progressives everywhere held out hope that their new leader would take advantage of the economic crisis he stepped into and enact bold policies that RY OF OBA MA ’S PRO MIS E, would evoke real financial reforms—putting Main Street in front of Wall Street, at last. THE INS IDE STO THE STR UGG LE ’S POW ER, AND WA LL STR EET TO CON TRO L OUR ECO NOM IC FUT URE But that, writes Robert Kuttner, is not the way things turned out. Instead, America’s best chance for radical financial reform turned into Wall Street’s greatest victory. Obama filled his administration with allies of financial elites who were more interested in business as usual than in transformative change. As a consequence, Main Street remained mired in deep recession. R ob e rt K u t t n e r New York Times Bestselling Author of Obama’s Challenge Instead of being the instrument of economic renewal, Obama became the target of economic frustration. • Pub Date April 2010 In this hard-hitting, incisive account, Kuttner shares his unique, insider view of how the • $25.00 US, $27.50 CAN • Hardcover Obama administration not only missed its moment to turn our economy around—but deep- • ISBN 9781603582704 ened Wall Street’s risky grip on America’s future. Carefully constructing a one-year history of the problem, the players, and the outcome, Kuttner gives readers an unparalleled account of the • 6 x 9 • 288 pages president’s first year. • Index • Politics/Economics More importantly, Kuttner shows how we could—with swift, decisive action—still enact real • World Rights reforms, and how Barack Obama could redeem his promise. This is a book not to be missed by anyone who wants to understand exactly how Wall Street won, and how Main Street can still fight back. Praise for Robert Kuttner and his previous book, Obama's Challenge: “Obama's Challenge is the fruit of Bob Kuttner's lifetime of engagé report- ing, analysis, and advocacy . . . it is riveting, brilliant, and persuasive. Kuttner, in concise chapters written with great vigor and clarity, shows what Robert Kuttner is the author of the the change could look like if Obama is bold enough to go for it and the gods New York Times best-seller Obama’s continue to smile on him.” —Hendrik Hertzberg, from his New Yorker blog Challenge: America’s Economic Crisis and the Power of a Transformative Presidency and sever- “Robert Kuttner has incisively captured the political moment, underscored al other books on politics and the by the deepening economic crisis. Lucidly and passionately, he lays out the economy. He is cofounder and coedi- hurdles facing an Obama presidency and challenges him to seize the tor of The American Prospect maga- moment and achieve greatness by redeeming the promise of America.” zine and a distinguished senior fel- —–Arianna Huffington, cofounder and editor-in-chief, The Huffington Post low at the progressive think tank Demos. He was a longtime columnist for BusinessWeek and continues to “[Kuttner's] thoughtful, hopeful and apprehensive book is a particularly write columns in the Boston Globe. A valuable guide to what the progressive left hopes to see in the Obama regular commentator on TV and presidency.” —–New York Times Sunday Book Review radio, Kuttner also blogs frequently on how America can harness capital- ism to serve a broad public interest. 12

13. Politics & Social Justice April From A Presidency in Peril Dare we still hope that Obama will yet deliver change we can believe in? The quiet desperation of millions of Americans is not being well articulated, much less remedied, by either party. But at the rate events are unfolding, the economic unease will increasingly be defined and articulated by the Republican right. The crucial question is whether Obama himself has been so totally captured by the financial elite that his path is now irreversible. It has become a cliché among pundits that the Democratic Party is hamstrung by interest groups. Commentators usually have in mind groups that are actually fairly weak politically––blacks, Hispanics, gays, feminists, schoolteachers, trade unionists. Politicians who propitiate these groups are accused of pan- dering. The fact that the most powerful interest group of them all, the financial industry, seldom makes the list, is testament to its quiet power. Princeton University political scientist Larry Bartels observes, “In the 1930s and 1940s, Democrats went as far as the South would let them go. Since the 1990s, they’ve gone as far as Wall Street will let them go.” That power structure needs to be dislodged before real reform can proceed. In principle, Obama is free to toss out his top aides and bring in a new team. Bill Clinton repeatedly shuf- fled his advisors. So did Lincoln. But, as we shall see, the threads that link Obama’s political aides to his Wall Street–dominated group of top economic advisers will not be easily sundered. The addiction of this administration to flows of Wall Street’s political money reinforces the impulse to go easy on the financial industry. Obama’s style is to delegate and to proceed with extreme caution. To shift course and lead a dif- ferent economic team with drastically different views and goals, Obama would have to grow immensely in office. It is, of course, too early for a definitive judgment. History reminds us that Lincoln, in mid-1862, was fac- ing a bleak military and political landscape. His peers considered him a failure. His greatness came later. John Kennedy, judged a year and a half into his term, looked like a pretty disappointing president, too. Often, wisdom ripens with experience––and Obama is nothing if not a learner. Sometimes, however, leaders fail to seize moments pregnant with possibility. Sometimes, to invert a much- loved verse of the poet Seamus Heaney, hope and history don’t rhyme. The British historian A.J.P Taylor, . referring to the revolutionary year 1848, when nationalist revolutions in central Europe seeking self-deter- mination and liberal democracy were all aborted, memorably characterized the events as a turning point of history on which history failed to turn. We will soon learn whether our own era is such a time. In Obama’s fateful first year, there was a road not taken, a possible road to radical financial reform, broad prosperity, and the mobilization of an appreciative citizenry. This book explains how the key decisions unfolded, the stakes, and the alternatives, as we look forward to the second half of Obama’s term. There is still time for him to redeem his presidency. But that time is fast running out. 13

14. Chelsea Green Sustainable Business April 2010 INQUIRIES INTO THE NATURE OF SLOW MONEY n Investing as if Food, Farms, and Fertility Mattered NEW i Woody Tasch Paper! Foreword by Carlo Petrini A call to bring money back down to earth. Could there ever be an alternative stock exchange dedicated to slow, small, and local? Could a million American families get their food from CSAs? What if you had to invest 50 percent of your assets within 50 miles of where you live? Such questions—at the heart of slow money—represent the first steps on our path to a new economy. Inquiries into the Nature of Slow Money presents an essential new strategy for investing in local food systems and introduces a group of fiduciary activists who are exploring what should come after industrial finance and industrial agriculture. Theirs is a vision for investing that puts soil fertility into return-on-investment calculations and serves people and place as much at it serves industry sectors and markets. Leading the charge is Woody Tasch—whose decades of work as a venture capitalist, foundation treasurer, and entrepreneur now shed new light on a truer, more beautiful, more prudent kind of fiduciary responsibility. He offers an alternative vision to the dusty old industrial concepts of the • Pub Date April 2010 nineteenth and twentieth centuries when dollars, and the businesses they financed, lost their • $15.95 US, $19.95 CAN • Paper connection to place; slow money, on the other hand, is firmly rooted in the new economic, • ISBN 9781603582544 social, and environmental realities of the 21st century. [Hardcover ISBN 9781603580069] • 51/2 x 71/2 • 240 pages Inquiries into the Nature of Slow Money is a call to action for designing capital markets built • Sustainable Business around not extraction and consumption but preservation and restoration. • World Rights (sold: Chinese, Italian, Is it a movement or is it an investment strategy? Yes. Korean, Japanese) • Also Available as an e-book “It goes along with Small Is Beautiful on my ‘books that matter’ shelf.” —Joan Dye Gussow, Professor Emeritus, Columbia University, and author, This Organic Life “The promise of Slow Money gives us all hope that the post-financial-meltdown economy will be much more grounded in local, community-based, mission-posi- tive enterprises.” —Rian Fried, President, Clean Yield Asset Management Woody Tasch is president of the newly formed NGO Slow Money and Chairman Emeritus of Investors’ Circle, “This book is an essential read for anyone who is concerned about the human a nonprofit network of angel investors, condition and our planet. Few have taken the idea of walking your talk this venture capitalists, foundations, and much to its essence: all the way to where money meets the earth, so that we family offices that, since 1992, has facilitated the flow of $130 million to can begin to build a truly healthy economy.” 200 early-stage companies and ven- —Mark Finser, Chair of the Board, RSF Social Finance ture funds dedicated to sustainability. He lives in northern New Mexico. For information about Slow Money please visit www.slowmoneyalliance.org. ChelseaGreen.com 14 802.295.6300

15. Chelsea Green Sustainable Living June 2010 UP TUNKET ROAD The Education of a Modern Homesteader Philip Ackerman-Leist Illustrations by Erin Ackerman-Leist Simple living has never been so complicated. Ever since Thoreau’s Walden, the image of the American homesteader has been of someone get- ting away from civilization, of forging an independent life in the country. Yet if this were ever true, what is the nature and reality of homesteading in the media-saturated, hyper-connected 21st century? For seven years Philip Ackerman-Leist and his wife, Erin, lived without electricity or running water in an old cabin in the beautiful but remote hills of western New England. Slowly forging their own farm and homestead, they took inspiration from their experiences among the mountain farmers of the Tirolean Alps and were guided by their Vermont neighbors, who taught them about what it truly means to live sustainably in the postmodern homestead—not only to survive, but to thrive in a fragmented landscape and a fractured economy. Up Tunket Road is the inspiring true story of a young couple who embraced the joys of simple living while also acknowledging its frustrations and complexities. Ackerman-Leist writes with humor about the inevitable foibles of setting up life off the grid—from hauling frozen laundry • Pub Date June 2010 uphill to getting locked in the henhouse by their ox. But he also weaves an instructive narrative • $17.95 US, $21.95 CAN • Paper that contemplates the future of simple living. His is not a how-to guide, but something much • ISBN 9781603580335 richer and more important—a tale of discovery that will resonate with readers who yearn for a • 6 x 9 • 272 pages • Illustrations better, more meaningful life, whether they live in the city, country, or somewhere in between. • Sustainable Living • World Rights • Also Available as an e-book Philip Ackerman-Leist and his wife, Erin, farmed in the South Tirol region of the Alps and North Carolina before beginning their twelve-year home- steading venture in Pawlet, Vermont. Ackerman-Leist is a professor at Green Mountain College, where he estab- lished the college farm and sustainable agriculture curriculum and is Director of the Green Mountain College Farm & Food Project. ChelseaGreen.com 15 802.295.6300

16. Chelsea Green Sustainable Business June 2010 THE GORT CLOUD NEW i n The Invisible Force Powering Today’s Most Visible Green Brands Paper! Richard Seireeni Exploring the networks that make or break green brands. “Green” has gone mainstream and, for many companies, caring for the environment is not just a philosophy, it’s a marketing strategy. So how does a company that’s genuinely committed to green principles differentiate itself from its greenwashing competitors? Brand expert Richard Seireeni interviewed more than thirty eco-capitalists from a broad range of industries—home improvement, transportation, household products, food and beverage, energy, real estate, finance, and fashion. The collective experiences of leaders like Gary Hirshberg of Stonyfield Farms, Jeffrey Hollender of Seventh Generation, and the grandsons of soapmaker Dr. Bronner provide a rich source of wisdom for green businesses getting off the ground or for any business aiming to improve its environmental performance. Seireeni shows how green entrepreneurs leveraged their brands by successfully navigating the “Gort Cloud”—a term coined by the author to describe the vast and largely invisible network of NGOs, trendspotters, advocacy groups, social networks, business alliances, certifying organizations, and other members of the green community that have the power to make or break new green brands. Integrating the Gort Cloud into brand development and marketing strategies is critical to the success • Pub Date June 2010 of any aspiring green brand. Creating a cause, building credibility, developing a simple and com- • $19.95 US, $24.95 CAN • Paper pelling message, identifying core customers and sales channels, deftly playing the green alternative • ISBN 9781603582520 media, and fending off second-to-market competitors are all required to build a green brand. [Hardcover ISBN 9781603580618] • 6 x 9 • 320 pages How these skills are put into practice will vary for each business, but Seireeni’s research points • Sustainable Business toward a set of shared characteristics and basic tenets that every business can use to build a credible and successful green brand. • World Rights • Also Available as an e-book “This is one of the best green marketing and branding books written lately, providing not only a clear view about the past and the present of the green economy, but also valuable lessons to its future.” —Eco-Libris “If you liked Blessed Unrest by Paul Hawken, you’ll love this too . . . We found it quite a clever read and very informative.” —–Celsias Richard Seireeni is a thirty-year veteran in brand consulting and marketing. He “A worthy contribution to the green marketing and Web 2.0 canon.” has been art director of Rolling Stone —–Timothy B. Hurst, Sustainablog magazine, creative director of Warner Bros. Records, and co-creative director of Enterprise IG, New York. He is founder of The Brand Architect Group in Los Angeles, with affiliated offices in Tokyo and Shanghai. He graduated from the Univ. of Washington School of Architecture and is a member of the U.S. Green Building Council. He lives in LA with his wife and two children. For more information, visit www.TheGortCloud.com. ChelseaGreen.com 16 802.295.6300

17. Chelsea Green Food May 2010 CHANTERELLE DREAMS AND AMANITA NIGHTMARES The Love, Lore, and Mystique of Mushrooms Greg Marley Dispatches from a Mycophile. Throughout history, people have had a complex and confusing relationship with mushrooms. Are fungi food or medicine, beneficial decomposers or deadly “toadstools” ready to kill anyone foolhardy enough to eat them? In fact, there is truth in all these statements. In Chanterelle Dreams and Amanita Nightmares, author Greg Marley reveals some of the wonders and myster- ies of mushrooms, and our conflicting human reactions to them. With tales from around the world, Marley, a seasoned mushroom expert, explains that some cul- tures are mycophilic (mushroom-loving), like those of Russia and Eastern Europe, while others are intensely mycophobic (mushroom-fearing), including the US. He shares stories from China, Japan, and Korea—where mushrooms are interwoven into the fabric of daily life as food, medicine, fable, and folklore—and from Slavic countries where whole families leave villages and cities during rainy periods of the late summer and fall and traipse into the forests for mushroom-collecting excursions. From the famous Amanita phalloides (aka “the Death Cap”), reputed killer of Emperor Claudius in the first century AD, to the beloved chanterelle (cantharellus cibarius) known by at least eighty-nine different common names in almost twenty-five languages, Chanterelle Dreams and Amanita • Pub Date May 2010 Nightmares explores the ways that mushrooms have shaped societies all over the globe. • $17.95 US, $21.95 CAN • Paper This fascinating and fresh look at mushrooms—their natural history, their uses and abuses, • ISBN 9781603582148 their pleasures and dangers—is a splendid introduction to both fungi themselves and to our • 6 x 9 • 272 pages • Illustrations human fascination with them. From useful descriptions of the most foolproof edible species to • Food revealing stories about hallucinogenic or poisonous, yet often beautiful, fungi, Marley’s long • World Rights and passionate experience will inform and inspire readers with the stories of these dark and • Also Available as an e-book mysterious denizens of our forest floor. Greg Marley has a passion for mush- rooms that dates to 1971, the year he left his native New Mexico and spent the summer in the verdant woods of central New York. Since then, he has become an avid student and teacher of mycolo- gy, as well as a mushroom identification consultant to the Northern New England Poison Control Center and owner of Mushrooms for Health, a company that provides education and products made with Maine medicinal mushrooms. Marley is the author of Mushrooms for Health: Medical Secrets of Northeastern Fungi. He lives and mushrooms in Rockland, Maine. ChelseaGreen.com 17 802.295.6300

18. Chelsea Green Health • Environment May 2010 POISONED FOR PROFIT How Toxins Are Making Our Children Chronically Ill Philip and Alice Shabecoff Why is one of every three American children sick? In a landmark investigation that’s been compared to Silent Spring, two veteran journalists defini- tively show how, why, and where industrial toxins are causing rates of birth defects, asthma, cancer, and other serious illnesses to soar in children. Philip and Alice Shabecoff reveal that the children of baby boomers—the first to be raised in a truly toxified world—are the first generation to be sicker and have shorter life expectancies than their parents. The culprits, they say, are the companies that profit from producing, using, and selling toxics. In piercing case histories, the authors bring readers to places like Dickson, Tennessee, where babies were born with cleft lips and palates after landfill chemicals seeped into the water, and Port Neches, Texas, where so many graduates of a high school near synthetic rubber and chemical plants contracted cancer that the school was nicknamed “Leukemia High.” And they ask a razor-sharp question: Just why are we letting corporations commit these crimes against our children, sabotage investigations and regulations, hire scientists to skew data on toxic impacts, and fend off government controls with powerful lobbying groups? • Pub Date May 2010 It’s time, they say, for families and the health and environmental communities to fight back, and • $17.95 US, $21.95 CAN • Paper their painstakingly researched book shows how people are taking action across the country—from • ISBN 9781603582568 pressuring politicians and investigating sickness clusters in their regions to ridding their own homes of countless toxic products like crib mattresses infused with dangerous flame retardants or teething • 6 x 9 • 368 pages rings steeped in harmful chemicals. • Health/Environment • Paperback Rights Powerful, unflinching, and eminently readable, Poisoned for Profit is a wake-up call that is bound to inspire talk and force change. Philip Shabecoff was the chief environmental correspondent for the New York Times for fourteen of the thirty-two years he worked there as a reporter. After leaving the Times, he founded and published Greenwire, an online daily digest of environmental news. He has appeared on Meet the Press, Face the Nation, Washington Week in Review, CNN News, C-Span, National Public Radio, and the BBC. For his environmental writing, Shabecoff was selected as one of the Global 500 by the United Nations Environment Programme. He received the James Madison Award from the American Library Association for leadership in expanding the public’s right to know. His previous books include A Fierce Green Fire: A History of the American Environmental Movement. Alice Shabecoff is a freelance journalist focusing on family and consumer topics. Her work has appeared in the New York Times, Washington Post, Christian “Brilliant. Every parent in America owes a debt of gratitude to Philip and Alice Science Monitor, and International Shabecoff. [Poisoned for Profit] should be high on the . . . President’s reading list.” Herald Tribune, among other publica- —Barry Commoner tions. She was executive director of the National Consumers League, the coun- try’s oldest consumer organization, and “Powerful reporting backing powerful conclusions—it will make those of us with executive director of the national non- kids shudder, but hopefully it will also make us get out of our chairs and profit Community Information Exchange. engage in the politics necessary to protect the future.” Her previous books include A Guide to —–Bill McKibben, author of Deep Economy and The End of Nature Careers in Community Development. ChelseaGreen.com 18 802.295.6300

19. Chelsea Green Sustainable Business June 2010 LIVING ABOVE THE STORE n Building a Business That Creates Value, Inspires Change, NEW i and Restores Land and Community Paper! Martin Melaver Foreword by Ray Anderson How a business can redefine, then find, success. The economic crash of late 2008 is just the latest evidence of the truth that many have known for so long: that too much of our modern economy is based on a house of cards. We need businesses that not only factor their impact on people and places into their equations for success but also strive to restore the communities and environments in which they operate. How can this be done? In Living above the Store, Martin Melaver provides a roadmap for creating such a business. He chal- lenges business owners and managers to move beyond business as usual and create real change. Living above the Store brings us into the story of Melaver, Inc., a third-generation, seventy-year-old family real-estate business, as it evolves toward becoming a thought and product leader in sustainable business practices. It is part business-management theory and part case study, showing readers where sustainable principles meet sustainable practices on a day-to-day basis. Living above the Store demonstrates how to: • Adopt a business model that provides for economic success while contributing to society and the environment • Pub Date June 2010 • Shape a business culture that is restorative to a workforce by helping employees realize • $19.95 US, $24.95 CAN • Paper their highest potential • ISBN 9781603582537 • Leverage an ethos within a business that “ripples outward” to foster restoration of both [Hardcover ISBN 9781603580854] land and community • 6 x 9 • 336 pages • 8-page color insert • Embrace a notion of limits to growth • Sustainable Business • Reframe ideas about competition, proprietary knowledge, and business success • World Rights Living above the Store is for readers who want to learn more about how a socially responsible business can first redefine, and then find, success. • Also Available as an e-book photo: Kim Thomson “Living above the Store breaks the mold on business writing.” —–Paul Hawken, author of The Ecology of Commerce “This is a heartwarming and inspiring story of how business ought to be conducted at the intersection of community, common sense, and caring.” —–David W. Orr, author of Design on the Edge and Paul Sears Distinguished Martin Melaver has been CEO of Melaver, Inc., since 1992. Never con- Professor of Environmental Studies and Politics at Oberlin College tent with the well-trod path, he has a PhD in literature from Harvard University and an MBA from Northwestern University’s Kellogg School of Management. He is actively involved with numerous community organizations in and around Savannah, Georgia. Melaver splits his time between Savannah and Tel Aviv, Israel. ChelseaGreen.com 19 802.295.6300

20. Chelsea Green Green Building August 2010 ADOBE HOMES FOR ALL CLIMATES Simple, Affordable, and Earthquake-resistant Natural Building Techniques Lisa Morey Schroder and Vince Ogletree New methods for an old art—modern adobe construction for buildings of all styles in all places. The lay-up of adobe bricks is an easy, forgiving way to achieve a solid masonry-wall system. Contrary to stereotypes, adobe is perfectly adaptable for use in cold, wet climates as well as hot and dry ones, and for areas prone to earthquakes. With its efficient use of energy, natural resources for construction, and minimal effort for long-term maintenance, it’s clear that the humble adobe brick is an ideal option for constructing eco-friendly structures throughout the world. The book is ideal both for first-time do-it-yourselfers and for experienced adobe builders seeking to improve their craft. Drawing on the experience of more than fifty major adobe projects since 1993, Adobe Homes for All Climates describes Adobe Building Systems’ patented reinforcement and scaf- folding systems, showing readers how to construct adobe homes more easily and safely, and with superior strength, durability, structural integrity, and aesthetic appeal, as compared to earthen homes of the past. • Pub Date August 2010 All aspects of adobe construction are covered, including making and laying adobe bricks, • $34.95 US, $43.50 CAN • Paper installing lintels and arches, conduits and pipes, doors and windows, top plates and bond- • ISBN 9781603582575 beams, ideal wall dimensions, adobe finishes, and other adobe construction components, such • 8 x 10 • 224 pages • Color photos as the inexpensive use of scaffolding. These methods will produce a premium product that will and black & white line drawings meet and often exceed inspection standards. • Green Building Equipped with this manual, you will be able to obtain a building permit, make adobe bricks • World Rights swiftly, and confidently lay them up. You will be able to beautifully finish your adobe walls with earth plasters creating stunning colors and outstanding light effects and create a beautiful, energy-efficient home that will last for generations to come. Lisa Morey Schroder has a Bachelor of Science in Construction Engineering and Management as well as a diploma in Architectural Design. She worked alongside Ogletree for five years before found- ing Adobe Building Systems, LLC. She has been involved in the design and planning stages of dozens of adobe homes and has years of hands-on experience in all aspects of adobe construction. Schroder lives with her husband and two children in Vancouver, British Columbia. Vince Ogletree founded Earth Building Consultants & Contractors, Ltd., in Auckland, New Zealand. Before his untimely death in 2005, he had twenty-three years of building experience including twelve years working with earthen and adobe methods. Vince dedicated himself to working on this manual in the last year of his life so that others could benefit from his knowledge and expertise in adobe building and share in his passion for earthen building and in his vision for environmentally conscious construction. ChelseaGreen.com 20 802.295.6300

21. Chelsea Green Politics • Social Justice July 2010 BYE BYE, MISS AMERICAN EMPIRE Neighborhood Patriots, Backcountry Rebels, and Their Underdog Crusades to Redraw America’s Political Map Bill Kauffman An offbeat tour through the increasingly disuniting states of America. It’s been almost a century and a half since a critical mass of Americans believed that secession was an American birthright. But breakaway movements large and small are rising up across the nation. From Vermont to Alaska, activists driven by all manner of motives want to form new states—and even new nations. So, just what’s happening out there? The American Empire is dying, says Bill Kauffman in this incisive, eye-opening investigation into modern-day secession—the next radical idea poised to enter mainstream discourse. And those rising up to topple that empire are a surprising mix of conserva- tives, liberals, regionalists, and independents who—from movement to movement—may share few political beliefs but who have one thing in common: a sense that our nation has grown too large, and too powerfully centralized, to stay true to its founding principles. Bye Bye, Miss American Empire traces the historical roots of the secessionist spirit, and introduces us • Pub Date July 2010 to the often radical, sometimes quixotic, and highly charged movements that want to decentralize • $17.95 US, $21.95 CAN • Paper and re-localize power. • ISBN 9781933392806 During the George W. Bush administration, frustrated liberals talked secession back to within • 6 x 9 • 320 pages hailing distance of the margins of national debate, a place it had not occupied since 1861. Now, • Politics/Social Justice secessionist voices on the left and right and everywhere in between are amplifying. Writes • World Rights Kauffman, “The noise is the sweet hum of revolution, of subjects learning how to be citizens, of people shaking off . . . their Wall Street and Pentagon overlords and taking charge of their lives • Also Available as an e-book once more.” Engaging, illuminating, even sometimes troubling, Bye Bye, Miss American Empire is a must-read for those taking the pulse of the nation. photo: Gretel Kauffman Praise for Bill Kauffman's Dispatches from the Muckdog Gazette: “A small masterpiece . . . Kauffman is a romantic reactionary, a writer with an odd, energetic optimism.” —Gore Vidal Bill Kauffman is the author of nine books, including Dispatches from the “There is myth and poetry in this refreshing look at a town . . . Kauffman is one Muckdog Gazette, which won the 2003 of the most original journalistic voices in America today.” national “Sense of Place” award from Writers & Books, and Look Homeward, —–Richmond Times-Dispatch America, which the American Library Association named one of the best “A sort of Our Town with attitude . . . Readers will laugh out loud.” books of 2006. He writes frequently for —–Publishers Weekly The Wall Street Journal and the American Conservative and lives in his native Genesee County, New York, with “Those born in a small town will know what he means and probably envy him his family. for having had the gumption to go back home.” —–The Wall Street Journal ChelseaGreen.com 21 802.295.6300

22. Chelsea Green Gardening • Agriculture July 2010 THE FARMSTEAD CREAMERY ADVISOR The Complete Guide to Building and Running a Small, Farm-Based Cheese Business Gianaclis Caldwell Essential reading for aspiring artisan cheesemakers and home dairy producers. There has never been a better time to be making and selling great cheese. People worldwide are con- suming more high-quality, handmade cheese than ever before. The number of artisan cheesemakers has doubled in recent years, and many of the industry’s newcomers are “farmstead” producers— those who work only with the milk of their own animals. Today, more than ever before, the people who choose to become farmer-cheesemakers need access to the knowledge of established cheese arti- sans who can help them build their dream. Few career choices lead to such extremes of labor, emotion, and monetary challenge. In The Farmstead Creamery Advisor, respected cheesemaker, instructor, and speaker Gianaclis Caldwell walks would-be producers through the many, and often confusing, steps and decisions they will face when considering a career in this burgeoning cottage industry. This book fills the gap that exists between the pasture and cheese plate. It goes far beyond issues of caring for livestock and basic cheesemaking, explaining business issues such as: • Pub Date July 2010 • Analyzing your suitability for the career • $29.95 US, $36.95 CAN • Paper • Designing and building the cheese facility • ISBN 9781603582216 • Sizing up the market • 7 x 10 • 250 pages • Full color throughout • Negotiating day-to-day obstacles • Gardening/Agriculture • Ensuring maximum safety and efficiency • World Rights Drawing from her own and other cheesemakers’ experiences, Caldwell brings to life the story of creating a successful cheesemaking business in a practical, organized manner. Absolutely essential for • Also Available as an e-book anyone interested in becoming a licensed artisan cheesemaker, The Farmstead Creamery Advisor will also appeal to the many small and hobby-farm owners who already have milking animals and who wish to improve their home dairy practices and facilities. photo: Gregory Redfern Gianaclis Caldwell, along with her hus- band, Vern, and their teenage daughter, Amelia, owns Pholia Farm situated in the verdant Rogue Valley of southern Oregon, where they make aged cheese from the milk of their Nigerian Dwarf goats. The twenty-three-acre, off-the-grid farm and forest has been in Caldwell’s family since the 1940s. Caldwell’s criti- cally acclaimed cheeses have been fea- tured in books, articles, and top-ten lists. She is a former nurse and mixed-media artist. ChelseaGreen.com 22 802.295.6300

23. Left to Write Press Sustainable Living April 2010 RADICAL HOMEMAKERS Reclaiming Domesticity from a Consumer Culture Shannon Hayes Essential reading on a lifestyle change that will be embraced by many in the years to come. Mother Nature has shown her hand. Faced with climate change, dwindling resources, and species extinctions, most Americans understand the fundamental steps necessary to solve our global crises—drive less, consume less, increase self-reliance, buy locally, eat locally, rebuild our local communities. In essence, the great work we face requires rekindling the home fires. Radical Homemakers is about men and women across the U.S. who focus on home and hearth as a political and ecological act, and who have centered their lives around family and commu- nity for personal fulfillment and cultural change. It explores what domesticity looks like in an era that has benefited from feminism, where domination and oppression are cast aside and where the choice to stay home is no longer equated with mind-numbing drudgery, economic insecurity, or relentless servitude. • Pub Date April 2010 Radical Homemakers nationwide speak about empowerment, transformation, happiness, and • $23.95 US, $29.95 CAN • Paper casting aside the pressures of a consumer culture to live in a world where money loses its power • ISBN 9780979439117 to relationships, independent thought, and creativity. If you ever considered quitting a job to • 6 x 9 • 352 pages plant tomatoes, read to a child, pursue creative work, can green beans and heal the planet, this • Sustainable Living is your book. Advance Praise for Radical Homemakers “The world is moving towards a tougher period, when the relative ease and luxury we’ve known will be tested. But that test can deepen our family and community lives, as Shannon Hayes shows, providing more of us—of both genders—become homemakers.” —Bill McKibben, author of Earth: Making a Life on a Tough New Planet and Deep Economy: The Wealth of Communities and the Durable Future Shannon Hayes is the host of grassfed- cooking.com and author of The Farmer “Brilliant, visionary, and practical. This is a mind-bending book that will and the Grill and The Grassfed Gourmet. forever change your view of human possibility and compel you to rethink She has written for numerous publica- tions, including the New York Times. She your life. My highest recommendation. ” holds a Ph.D. from Cornell University and —David Korten, author of Agenda for a New Economy and The Great works with her family on Sap Bush Turning and board chair of YES! magazine Hollow Farm in upstate New York. Learn more at radicalhomemakers.com “Breathtaking, scholarly, passionate and inspiring.” —Holly Hickman, Radical Homemaker, former Fox News Radio reporter •••Also by Shanon Hayes••• and creator of SustainableSuppers.com THE FARMER AND THE GRILL A Guide to Grilling, Barbecuing and Spit-Roasting Grassfed “Outside the boxes of both conservatives and liberals, this book is radical Meat . . . and for saving the thinking at its best. Read it and think.” —John De Graaf, coauthor of planet one bite at a time AFFLUENZA and director of Take Back Your Time Shannon Hayes $21.95 US • PB • 9780979439100 6 x 9 • 168 pages • B&W illustrations ChelseaGreen.com 23 802.295.6300