ATLANTA — The Atlanta Hawks today announced that Kyle Korver has been elevated to the position of assistant general manager. Korver joined the Hawks in July 2022 as director of player affairs & development.

“Kyle has brought a great perspective and voice to our group after seamlessly making the transition from playing to coaching to the front office,” said General Manager Landry Fields. “Moving forward, I’m excited to have him even more involved with the day-to-day management and direction of our basketball operations group. Kyle is a special person and teammate whose impact will continue to raise the level of our entire organization. He and his family have made Atlanta their home and we’re thrilled to have them as part of the Hawks family long term.”

“Having played in Atlanta for almost five years, I have a love for the city and the Hawks franchise. I’d like to thank Landry for this opportunity. I am grateful and excited to draw from my experiences playing and working in the NBA over the last 20 years to add to our front office,” Korver said.

Korver, who spent the 2021-22 season as a player development assistant with the Brooklyn Nets, played in 332 regular season games over four-and-a-half seasons (2012-17) with the Hawks, including an All-Star appearance in 2015. He was also the NBA’s Sportsmanship Award recipient in 2014-15.

Korver appeared in 1,232 career regular season games (and 145 playoff contests) in 17 seasons with Philadelphia, Utah, Chicago, Atlanta, Cleveland and Milwaukee. He ranks fifth in NBA history in three-pointers made (2,450) and seventh in career three-point percentage (.429), including the best single-season mark in league history (.536 in 2009-10 with the Jazz). Korver is the only player to ever lead the league in three-point percentage four times.

Selected 51st overall in the 2003 NBA Draft, Korver was the two-time Missouri Valley Conference Player of the Year as a collegian at Creighton. Korver, 41, was born in Paramount, Calif. before his family relocated to Pella, Iowa. He and his wife, Juliet, have three children.