Malta Integration

In Jan 1958, the 41 year old Prime Minister Dominic Mintoff proposed a resolution in the chamber of Malta's Legislative Assembly to the effect that representatives of the Maltese people in parliament were no longer bound by agreements and obligations towards the British Government.

The declaration, which was passed unanimously was provoked by the Admiralty's decision to lay off 40 workers at the Royal Naval Dockyard, which, together with a NATO HQ, constituted the chief source of employment in the island.

Mintoff complicated the integration negotiations with Britain by insisting that whatever became of the dockyard, the British had also to promise to raise economic standards within 12 years to the same levels enjoyed by Great Britain itself. This threatened break with Britain endangered the jobs of all the 13,000 workers at the dockyard.

Mintoff cabled the Colonial Secretary Lennox-Boyd proposing a truce and urged the British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan to intervene with the Admiralty to get the dockyard redundancies cancelled. Britain responded by reducing the layoff to 30 from 40 and by offering alternative jobs to all 30 discharged workers. Lennox-Boyd bluntly warned the Maltese leader that with this move he had recklessly put the whole integration plan in jeopardy.

In Mar 1958, further talks on integration were held in London. In April, Mintoff declared Britain's terms for integration impossible. He resigned and called a national day of protest. Riots broke out on 28 April 1958. The Government declared a state of emergency and placed troops on standby to support the civil police.

In 1958, the United Kingdom Government suspended the constitution for the third time in Maltese history and Maj-Gen (Retd) Sir Robert Laycock governed Malta under emergency powers with a non political advisory council, until the end of his term of office in 1959.

RAMC Diamond Jubilee

The diamond jubilee celebrations of the RAMC commenced on 22 June 1958 with a parade in the grounds of the David Bruce Military Hospital and a church service at St Oswald's celebrated by the Rev E A Cooke CF. The lessons were read by DDMS Col Philip John Richards.

The officers of the RAMC and RADC held their traditional cocktail party in the hospital grounds which made a picturesque setting against a background of oleanders and hibiscus in full bloom and coloured lights. The guest were greeted by the DDMS and Mrs R G Gray, wife of the commanding officer DBMH. The families had their usual day out on 24 June at Paradise Bay.