SEATTLE (AP) — Washington basketball coach Bob Bender is out after three consecutive losing seasons, a source close to the UW athletic department confirmed Tuesday night.

It was unknown whether Bender was being fired or was resigning, said the source, who spoke on condition of anonymity.

Asked to comment Tuesday night on reports that Bender would be replaced, Jim Daves, UW sports information director, would say only that an announcement concerning the basketball program was planned for Wednesday.

Bender, 44, had a 116-142 record in nine seasons coaching the Huskies, taking the team to the NCAA tournament in 1998 and '99. The Huskies reached the round of 16 in '98, the school's first NCAA bid since 1986 and first appearance in the round of 16 since 1984.

Under Bender, the school made the postseason in four consecutive seasons — 1996-99 — which no other Washington coach had done.

But Bender's recent teams struggled, and he was unable to attract marquee-type players until the addition of Doug Wrenn this season. The Huskies have relied mostly on local talent in past seasons, and Bender prided himself on that.

The Huskies placed eighth in the Pac-10 this season to earn the conference's final tournament spot but lost in the first round to Oregon. Washington finished the season 11-18, 5-13 in the Pac-10.

Wrenn originally committed to Washington out of Seattle's O'Dea High School, but backed out of the commitment and went to Connecticut instead. After being dismissed from the UConn team for a variety of incidents, Bender gave him another chance.

Wrenn, a sophomore this past season, had said he would return for his junior season as long as Bender was around to coach him.

The Huskies beat then-No. 19 Oregon at home this season and competed well at times with other ranked teams. But they also suffered embarrassing losses — their 105-60 loss at Stanford was the school's third-worst defeat ever — and failed to live up to the expectations of fans at a school where the football team annually earns a berth to a postseason bowl game.

That reflected on Bender, who stayed positive about his team's chances and ability to improve.

Bender, from Bloomington, Ill., played a season at Indiana University before transferring to Duke, from where he graduated in 1980. He joined coach Mike Krzyzewski's staff as an assistant in 1983, and became a head coach in 1990 at Illinois State.

Bender is the only person in NCAA history to play for two different teams in the national championship game. He played for Indiana's 32-0 national champion in 1976 before going to Duke. He played for the Blue Devils' NCAA runner-up team in 1978.

Bender's overall record as a head coach is 176-199. He spent 1990-93 at Illinois State before coming to Washington.

Love

0

Funny

0

Wow

0

Sad

0

Angry

0

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.