BENDER

ROBERT D. BENDER (age 64). Bob Bender went home to the Lord on Friday July 20th after an extended illness.

Bob was the beloved husband of Terri Ann (nee Cogar) for 39 years. Loving father of Gary (Sarah), Dominic Sisi (Alissa) and Caroline (fiancé Deacon). Treasured grandfather of Juliana, Dominic, Vincent, Deacon, Crew, Chloe, Cayden and Collin. . Dearest son of the late Allen Bender and Caroline Wrentmore (Robert). Dear brother of Cindy Olds (Jim), Allen (Christine), Carol Wiggins (Vernon) and Bruce (Gail). Uncle, cousin and friend of many.

He was a graduate of Valley Forge High School where he was voted best looking and played for the varsity basketball team. He attended Ohio State University and graduated from Capitol University. Bob was a devoted family man who loved Jesus and attending services at Grace Church in Middleburg Heights.

Bob worked for Oatey Co. in Cleveland for 42 years. He started in the Shipping Department and progressed through the company as a direct salesman, territory sales manager, regional sales manager, Vice President Sales and finally Vice President, National Accounts. He formed impenetrable relationships with his customers who all considered him their friend. Bob was primarily responsible for Oatey Co. being named vendor of the year in 2014 and 2016 by Ferguson Enterprises, Inc. and was personally recognized as account manager of the year by WinSupply in 2017. Recently, he was honored by Oatey Co. by being awarded their first Lifetime Achievement Award.

Bob was an avid Cleveland sports fan and lived to witness two Cleveland Championships. He enjoyed golf, hunting, fishing, riding his racing bicycle and Harley. He loved being with his friends, family, and especially playing with his grandchildren. Bob was blessed with a light that shined from within. He had the rare ability of making people feel good about themselves when they were with him. Despite his success and good looks, he was always humble, appreciative and sensitive to others. He was an incredibly likeable man. Everyone who knew Bob considered him a friend. When his illness began to overtake him and his friends were filled with sorrow, they would still smile whenever talking about him. He had a positive frame of mind and could readily see silver linings when others could only see clouds. Bob had an infectious lust for life. He was adventurous and competitive and did well at everything he tried.

Bob was a big supporter of the VeloSano and rode in it while undergoing chemotherapy in 2016. He had planned to attend this year’s event to cheer on the Oatey team, which included three of his family members. In lieu of flowers contributions requested to VoleSano Cure for Cancer, Att: Team Bob Bender.

Funeral services will be held at Grace Church, 7393 Pearl Road, Middleburg Heights, OH Wednesday July 25, 2018 at Noon with a visitation prior from 11:00 AM to time of service. Interment Strongsville Cemetery. Family and friends received Tuesday 2 – 4 & 5 - 8 PM at the A. RIPEPI AND SONS FUNERAL HOME, 18149 BAGLEY ROAD, MIDDLEBURG HEIGHTS, OH (West of I-71).