Many were impressed with the Phoenix Suns' win over the defending champion Denver Nuggets on Tuesday, with ESPN NBA Analyst JJ Redick being no exception.

The former 15-year NBA veteran acknowledged the Suns' struggle to win without one or more stars in the lineup, but sees the Suns as a team that does indeed have enough to make things work on the hardwood when it is time for contention.

"One of the issues when you decide to build a superteam is that you are giving up some roster flexibility and depth," Redick said on ESPN's First Take Wednesday morning. "And so this team was always going to struggle in the Win-Loss column if one of these guys got hurt. Kevin Durant has missed seven games. Booker now has missed 12 games. Bradley Beal has missed 29. They just haven't had the depth. (But) Austin (Rivers) brings up Royce O'Neale. Look -- their top seven -- I'd put their top seven against almost any team in basketball."

Devin Booker was out of Tuesday's game due to his right ankle sprain, but the remaining six of that top seven stepped up against perhaps the league's most daunting contender. Kevin Durant closed both to send the game into overtime, and to lead the 15-5 run that the Suns went on to win the game in overtime. He connected on three-of-eight treys in a 35-point outing where he grabbed eight boards, dished out five assists and swatted two shots.

Role players coming through for the Phoenix Suns on Tuesday

Beal came up clutch in overtime as well, and he nailed two of five threes on the day. He also recorded six rebounds and two steals. He was one of three different Suns to pick up a team-high six assists. One of the other two was O'Neale, who was also two-of-five from downtown.

Jusuf Nurkic was the other, and he brought down a team-high 12 boards. Starting shooting guard Grayson Allen at one point nailed eight straight three-point attempts to start the game, totaling 28 points and swiping a game-high three steals on defense. The only one of the Suns' top seven who was not at his best was Eric Gordon, but he still found a way to rack up a couple of steals and post a +6 plus/minus.

"When we talk about Nurkic, Grayson Allen, Eric Gordon, Royce O'Neale and the big three -- they all complement each other," Redick said. "You can look at lineup data. Of any five-man lineup that has played over 250 minutes together, they have one of five lineups that has outscored opponents by more than 10 points per 100 possessions. They're a good team when healthy. They're an absolutely good team."

Every Sun in the top seven Redick is referring to is scoring in double figures. Figuring out the depth with this squad was always going to be a challenge -- as Redick made clear -- but everyone in the top seven has made significant contributions. Not just the big three.

Nurkic is averaging 10.7 rebounds per game, one steal per game and 1.1 blocks per game. Gordon is also averaging a steal per game, and is shooting 45.1% from the field as well as 38.4% from beyond the arc.

Allen's shooting splits are absurd, as he's shooting 49.5/47.1/89 on the season. O'Neale is shooting a great 40% clip from beyond the three-point line himself, and posting 1.5 steals per game.

How the Phoenix Suns can win in the postseason

"The other thing I like about their team right now -- assuming health in the playoffs: They can play a number of ways," Redick said. "They can play big with Nurkic -- use him as a hub offensively. I think he's had an outstanding season. They can go small with Kevin Durant at the five, and just out-shoot you. Grayson Allen has been a perfect complimentary player. He's having a career year -- leading the NBA in three-point percentage. He had another big night last night."

Like Redick said, the Suns were going to struggle in the Win-Loss column if they had health issues within their big three. Sure enough, they are just the sixth seed in the Western Conference, coming in with a 36-26 record. They're seven games out of first place.

"Assuming health," however, Redick could not have been much more high on the Suns' top seven rotational players. He clearly does not see the Suns as pretenders when it counts.

"This is a really good basketball team," Redick said. "And we spend so much time talking about the Lakers. We spend so much time talking about the four best teams in the Western Conference. We should not be overlooking the Phoenix Suns when it comes to real playoff runs and real playoff contention. They are a damn good basketball team."

After all, regular season struggles do not guarantee postseason struggles. Last season, the Miami Heat were the last seed in the Eastern Conference to make the postseason, yet still won the Eastern Conference. Phoenix has 20 more games to insert Booker back into the lineup and develop a blueprint for how they will look to win in the playoffs.