The Los Angeles Lakers, fresh off a first-round playoff series loss to the Denver Nuggets, are one of two playoff teams looking for a new head coach this offseason. Although the search just recently began, there has been a myriad of names thrown out already. Of the available coaches for hire, Kenny Atkinson, Ty Lue, and a few others have popped up in the Lakers' rumor mill, but one particular name keeps popping up: JJ Redick.

Redick is only three years removed from his playing days in the NBA. Still, his basketball IQ is evident and has been for years. Many have considered Redick a solid coaching candidate since he was in his early 30's back in the mid-2010s. Furthermore, his relationship with Lakers' forward LeBron James makes him an even more obvious coaching candidate for Los Angeles. The pair host the 'Mind the Game' podcast together, where the two talk strategy involved in basketball.

The Lakers' supposed disinterest in former head coach Darvin Ham's basketball strategy was evident, and quickly became a meme of its own.

Moments like the one above were all to common last season. If LeBron James values JJ Redick's knowledge of the game, odds are, the rest of the Lakers team would too -- assuming James returns to the Lakers next year, which is still very likely.

Still, Redick has not been hired as of yet. Although reports seem to indicate that the team is interested in bringing in the former player, everything is just speculation right now. Here is all the latest news and updates regarding the team's search for a new head coach.

Lakers news: All the factors that will determine LeBron James' future in the NBA

Latest Lakers head coaching rumors

Coach K serving as search consultant for Lakers job

Per Shams Charania and Jovan Buha of The Athletic, the Lakers have been using Mike Krzyzewski, the legendary former Duke basketball head coach, as a resource in their search for a new head coach. Charania and Buha write, "Mike Krzyzewski, whose deep knowledge for candidates, such as Redick and others, provides a lens into the culture the organization wants and the characteristics of a potential staff around the next head coach."

The pair allege that multiple sources have confirmed Coach K's involvement in the search. Given the rumors that Redick is becoming the favorite to land the gig, it seems clear that Coach K respects Redick's basketball mind, perhaps even over the likes of Kenny Atkinson, James Borrego, and Ty Lue.

Redick is a "slight favorite" for the job

The Athletic's Jovan Buha referred to Redick as a "slight favorite" for the job on a YouTube video posted to Buha's channel. Buha also noted that the Lakers are looking for a fixture at the head coaching position that can build a long-term, sustainable culture like Erik Spoelstra with the Miami Heat or Steve Kerr with the Golden State Warriors.

With that in mind, Redick would make a lot of sense. Redick is still very young. Given that we are nearing the end of LeBron James' career, Redick's presence could offer a smooth transition from someone who has LeBron's respect early on to a seasoned head coach by the time James retires, one that has more of an idea of the identity the team should have after James is gone.

Redick's relationship with James could serve as a tool to get the entire locker room to buy in next season. Any sort of success would give Redick enough of a reputation to control a locker room afterwards as well. It seems like a perfect fit. Of course, there are other names being thrown around though.

ESPN's Brian Windhorst was on with Pat McAfee and said of Redick that he is "absolutely a legitimate candidate for that job."

What other names are being considered?

Per reports, outside of Redick, the Lakers are considering several assistant coaches -- Minnesota's Micah Nori, Denver's David Adelman, Dallas' Sean Sweeney, Golden State's Kenny Atkinson, and Miami's Chris Quinn to name a few. The report also notes that given Darvin Ham's inability to motivate his locker room, the Lakers could shy away from hiring another first-time head coach like Redick.