After the Denver Nuggets won the 2023 title, teams throughout the league have become extra careful in facing them.

However, only a few teams have found the right answer in stopping the Nuggets, and not all of them were planned. The only reason they are not at the top of the Western Conference standings is that they lost one more game than the Oklahoma City Thunder.

As the Nuggets continue their dominance over their league opponents, a popular analyst made a pretty bold declaration that the team is already in the best condition to make another run for the championship.

JJ Reddick believes the Denver Nuggets are ready to fight for the Larry O’Brien trophy

Popular NBA analyst JJ Reddick talked about the team’s most recent performances during the latest episode of First Take, He claims that the team hasn’t lost that many games after the All-Star break ended, which should be a testament to how good Nikola Jokic and his teammates have been.

Reddick had this to say about the Nuggets, per FirstSportz’ Ubong Archibong:

For me, this was more about the Nuggets. And I’ll say this: as a player for 15 years now, I am a fan who watches basketball every night. How many times have we seen a fully loaded team, a very good team, go against an undermanned team, and that undermanned team outperforms expectations… The Denver Nuggets right now are in championship form.

The Denver Nuggets have only lost three of their last fifteen games, which says a lot about the form they are currently in. While the last two games against the Dallas Mavericks and Minnesota Timberwolves were closely fought, this stretch has been a fantastic display of dominance from the defending champs.

Jokic is putting together another MVP-caliber season with 26.0 PPG, 12.3 RPG, and 1.9 APG on 58%/35%/83% shooting splits. Jamal Murray (20.9 PPG, 4.1 RPG, 6.7 APG) and Michael Porter Jr. (16.9 PPG, 7.0 RPG, 1.5 APG) are doing marvelous jobs as Jokic’s sidekicks. The rest of the role players are also doing their jobs well.

With the Nuggets playing at this level, it’s not hard to see why Reddick thinks it’s only a matter of time until they win another chip.