J. Meric/Getty Images

J.J. Redick is in the midst of the best season of his career.

He's averaging a career-high 15.5 points and 4.5 assists per game. His 45.7 percent shooting from the field is also the best mark in his career. The Orlando Magic also have good reason to begin thinking about shopping him around the league (h/t Josh Robbins of The Orlando Sentinel).

Even though Redick has an expiring contract, he's a great shooter who's turned into more than a one-dimensional player.

This guy can certainly take a playoff team that needs perimeter shooting to another level. Here are the three teams that would make the most sense as candidates to trade for Redick's services.

1. Denver Nuggets

The Nuggets have a lot of depth and talent on their roster, but their biggest weakness is perimeter shooting. The Denver Nuggets are the third-worst team in the NBA in terms of outside scoring, shooting 33.8 percent from three-point land.

Danilo Gallinari is shooting much better after a terrible start to the season, yet the Nuggets could use more guys that can shoot the three. Jordan Hamilton has range and a nice stroke, but he only averages 10.5 minutes and two three-pointers attempted per game.

Redick would be a perfect fit in the Nuggets' second unit with Andre Miller, Corey Brewer and Javale McGee. Here is a trade that could work for both teams: Timofey Mozgov, Anthony Randolph and future Nuggets' draft pick (most likely a first-rounder) for Redick.

The Nuggets get their guy and the Magic get two young big men along with a draft pick for a guy they would have to re-sign at the end of this season. The salaries match-up and the trade would work, according to ESPN's Trade Machine.

2. Chicago Bulls

As soon as the Bulls get Derrick Rose back, they'll have three impact players in their starting lineup with Rose, Luol Deng and Joakim Noah. Carlos Boozer is still an effective power forward on both ends of the floor. All they are really missing is a stud shooting guard.

Their current starter is Richard Hamilton, who is averaging 23 minutes a game at 34 years old. Also, do the Bulls really trust him to play defense against extremely athletic wing players? They also have Marco Belinelli coming off the bench. Even though he's an efficient scorer, he's one-dimensional.

Redick would give the Bulls an outstanding perimeter player and a guy the Bulls can count on to take late threes in crunch time during the playoffs. The Bulls haven't been shooting that well from the outside as a team either. Their 34.8 percent shooting from beyond the arc is the 10th-worst mark in the league.

A trade between these two teams that could work would be Hamilton and Jimmy Butler for Redick and a second-round draft pick. Losing Butler, who has really developed in his second season, would be tough. However, the upgrade from Hamilton to Redick would be tremendous. If they made this deal, the Bulls could arguably have the best starting lineup in the Eastern Conference when the NBA Playoffs commence.

3. Boston Celtics

The Celtics' season came crashing down after it was announced that Rajon Rondo tore his ACL and would be out for the season. They've also lost rotation players Jared Sullinger and Leonardo Barbosa for the season due to injuries.

Instead of rebuilding and trading away Paul Pierce and Kevin Garnett, there's another solution for them.

The Celtics have been looking to acquire a point guard recently. They are also the fourth-worst team in the NBA at three-point shooting. The Celtics are still a playoff team, evidenced by their recent seven-game win streak, they just need to retool the roster a bit.

This trade between the Magic and the Celtics is my favorite trade scenario out of the three. The Celtics would acquire J.J. Redick and Jameer Nelson for Jeff Green, Courtney Lee and Fab Melo.

The Magic would acquire three young players under contract over the next three-and-a-half seasons. They also get rid of an expensive contract by shipping away Nelson. The Celtics get two impact players, including the point guard they desperately need. Redick would also give the Celtics another outside threat.