Company description

Pfizer has a rich heritage of working within the UK since our first facility was opened back in 1952.

Over the past 69 years, we have continued to invest in the UK and are committed to working with the NHS and other healthcare organisations across the industry developing solutions to improve the delivery of care and patient outcomes.

We support the NHS Long Term Plan‘s ambition for prevention, empowering people to control their own health, harnessing new technologies and improving the quality of patient care and health outcomes. We believe these are key to help ensure a sustainable NHS and gives the government, the NHS and the pharmaceutical industry the chance to form a new relationship, truly working together to meet these challenges head-on while putting patients first.

In 2020, we spent over £295 million supporting research and development carried out in the UK and contributed to 126 collaborations with universities, pharmaceutical companies, industries and others. Through collaborations with scientists, academics and clinicians, sharing knowledge, skills and expertise we aim to improve the health and lives of people in the UK and around the world. During 2020, we had 36 clinical trials on-going in the UK, across 69 UK sites, involving over 977 patients since the trials started.

Products and services

The company provides medicines to help treat a variety of serious and life–threatening conditions. With the combined portfolios and resources of Wyeth and Pfizer, Specialty Care has grown substantially. The business unit’s current portfolio includes more than 20 medicines in 12 disease areas, and the pipeline contains more than 25 compounds and indications in Phases II and III. Specialty Care holds leadership positions in vaccines and disease areas such as inflammation, infectious disease, hemophilia and ophthalmology. Neuroscience, Gastroenterology, Women’s Health, Infectious Diseases and Immunology.

Prescription medicines (top 50): Lipitor (1), Lyrica (15), Viagra (26), Xalatan (36).

Contact:

Headquarters: Walton Oaks, Dorking Rd, Tadworth KT20 7NS, Reino Unido