Princess Astrid of Sweden (17 November 1905 – 29 August 1935) was the Queen of the Belgians as the first wife of King Leopold III. Originally a princess of Sweden of the House of Bernadotte, Astrid became the Duchess of Brabant after her marriage to Leopold in November 1926. She became queen of the Belgians on 23 February 1934 until her death. Her charity work revolved around women, children, and disadvantaged people.

Astrid's only daughter, Joséphine-Charlotte, later became Grand Duchess consort of Luxembourg, while both her sons reigned as King of the Belgians. Astrid was also a sister of Crown Princess Märtha of Norway (wife of King Olav V) and a maternal aunt of King Harald V of Norway.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Queen of Belgium Astrid has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Energetic, Intelligent, Intense, Imaginative, Loyal, Caring, and Charming.

Intense and Passionate

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Queen of Belgium Astrid is someone who is an intense, passionate, and intuitive person who is fiercely independent, authentic and direct when engaging with others. A person who is known for being diligent and strong.

Active and Precise

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Queen of Belgium Astrid well know them as someone who can be tough, active, and sharp, like a sword.

Inventive and Clever

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Queen of Belgium Astrid as someone who is flexible, intelligent, and quick-witted.

A person who likes to be creative, and to be recognized for their artistic talents. Who possesses intelligence, mental discipline, and ambition, and who does well in relationships and partnerships.

Influential and Dynamic

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Queen of Belgium Astrid is someone who tends to be focused on spreading ideas, information, and activities.

They are also someone who is curious, dynamic, and positive, and who enjoys inspiring and communicating with other people.

Mysterious and Methodical

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Queen of Belgium Astrid tends to be someone who can come across as mysterious and intense, who can be a complex thinker who is methodical and intuitive, and who can overcome challenges that most others would not be able to.

Some of Queen of Belgium Astrid's challenges

While Queen of Belgium Astrid has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Queen of Belgium Astrid can be Complicated, Brusque, Emotional, Standoffish, Hypocritical, Self-centered, and Unfocused.

Complicated and Brusque

One of Queen of Belgium Astrid's key challenges is that they are someone who can be complicated and gruff with others.

Queen of Belgium Astrid must also exercise caution as they can be excessive and unrealistic, and can have difficulty dealing with responsibility, authority, or criticism.

Unfocused and Indecisive

Queen of Belgium Astrid is someone who can be scattered, restless, and insensitive, be distracted by fluctuating professional interests, be a workaholic, and who can be arrogant and have difficulty accepting advice.

Sensitive and Aggressive

Finally, Queen of Belgium Astrid also can be too "touchy-feely", have a hard time expressing feelings, be too aggressive and headstrong, and be too unforgiving of others' mistakes.