vega-kieling.jpg

Jeffrey Vega (left) will succeed Nancy Kieling (right) as the organization's president and CEO, effective Jan. 5.

LAWRENCE — The Princeton Area Community Foundation announced Thursday its board of trustees has selected a replacement for Nancy Kieling, its current CEO who will retire at the end of this year.

Jeffrey Vega, 47, will succeed Kieling as the organization’s president and CEO, effective Jan. 5. Over the past two decades, Kieling helped grow the organization that manages $105 million in assets and has granted about $55 million to local nonprofit groups.

“I’m elated about joining the Princeton Area Community Foundation and following in the footsteps of Nancy Kieling,” Vega said Thursday. “She leaves a very big legacy, and I’m eager to take all of my learning experiences and continue to build on that legacy of hers.”

Vega, of Monroe, has served for 14 years as president of New Brunswick Tomorrow, a nonprofit organization established in 1975 by the Johnson and Johnson Foundation to revitalize and address social issues in the city, he said.

He joined the organization in 1993 as director of community services and was promoted to vice president in 1997. Throughout his time with NBT, he's partnered with school districts, health care systems and faith-based organizations to develop strategies to address social ills in New Brunswick, he said.

“After a national search process, the board is pleased to have found an outstanding individual to lead this first-rate community foundation,” said David Scott, chairman of the board of trustees, in a news release announcing Vega's appointment. “His deep knowledge of central New Jersey and his commitment to the work of the Community Foundation make him the right person to steward and build upon the organization’s successful legacy.”

Vega is currently a member of the National Advisory Committee for New Jersey Health Initiatives, a statewide granting program of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. He earned a bachelor's degree in urban studies, human ecology and international environmental studies from Rutgers University and also a master's degree in political science and public policy from the university.

Kieling will officially leave her post Dec. 31.

“Jeff is a remarkable person whose work in New Brunswick has been a model to others in New Jersey,” Kieling said in the release. “I’m very happy with the board’s decision and confident that the Community Foundation will continue to lead the way in central NJ’s philanthropic community.”

Though Vega has not set clear-cut goals for the foundation just yet, he said "those goals will become more clear once I join the staff and huddle with the board, donors and other key stakeholder groups."

"Their work resonated very deeply with me," he said. "I'm very excited to get started."