Overview

The Princeton Junction First Aid Squad was formed in the midst of World War II. It all began during a meeting of the First Aid Group of West Windsor Township at Dutch Neck in March, 1942. At the conference, a "Dr. Bangs," chairman of the Medical Corps and First Aid of West Windsor Township Defense Council, asked the three Civil Defense districts - Dutch Neck, Penns Neck, and Princeton Junction - to each establish a first aid station.

Princeton Junction's was placed in the cloak room of the fire house in Berrien City. Permission was obtained from the firemen, and a partition was erected. With aid from members of the community, the room was cleaned, painted, and equipped.

The Ladies Auxiliary of the Princeton Junction Volunteer Fire Company lent the group $10.00 In addition, individual donations of money and equipment flowed in, alongside medical supplies, splints, and a stretcher - all supplied by the township's Defense Council.

The First Aid Squad of Princeton Junction was composed of members of the community who had passed the Red Cross First Aid course. Moreover, two trained nurses joined the group. This contingent's members were: Mrs. Irvine Parrish, R.N., Miss Flo Bathie, R.N., Mrs. R. Bell, Mrs. Frank Cawley, Mrs. Martin Caples, Mrs.W. Duthie, Mrs. C. Hullfish, Mrs. J. Janick, Mrs. W. P. Reynolds, Mrs. H. Schafer, and Ms. Ida Smith.

The station was equipped and organized in time for the first trial blackout in April of 1942. However, because more equipment was routinely needed, on June 27 of that year, the squad sponsored the raffling of a war bond. This money was placed in a bank account for future use.

Subsequently, the following officers were elected: Mrs. Henry Shafer as President, Mrs. Martin Caples as Secretary, and Miss Ida Smith as treasurer.

The squad would continue to serve the community until it was disbanded in 1945. West Windsor wouldn't be home to another EMS organization until 1972, with the formation of the Twin "W" First Aid Squad.

Below are excerpts from the minutes of the Princeton Junction Fist Aid Squad: