Thirty years ago, the Princeton Area Community Foundation was created with the hopes of being a central location for philanthropy in the Mercer County and Central Jersey areas.

As the coronavirus pandemic hit, the foundation became just that and recently created a COVID-19 Relief & Recovery Fund to help low-income children, families and seniors during the crisis.

The fund will provide relief to local Non-Profit organizations and has amassed over a million dollars in less than two weeks.

“We exist to promote philanthropy in order to improve the well-being of our communities,” Jeffrey M. Vega, President & CEO of the Princeton Area Community Foundation, said. “Given that mission, we were compelled to act when this crisis started evolving. Once we knew that our vulnerable families were going to be disproportionately affected, we got into motion and coalesced a group of foundations, companies and others to create this fund knowing that there were going to be immediate needs with schools closing and people out of work.”

LATEST CORONAVIRUS UPDATES FROM NJ.COM

After announcing the fund on March 19, it quickly reached 1-million dollars with The Princeton Area Community Foundation, Betty Wold Johnson, and the George H. and Estelle M. Sands Foundation contributing $250-thousand each. After receiving more donations, the fund currently sits at $1,070,000 and counting.

“It is very inspiring that these wonderful companies, private foundations and donors are willing to stand together,” Vega said. “What a time this was to be ready to stand together. It’s a time of crisis.”

The foundation is accepting online applications from non-profit organizations that are in immediate need to continue serving the community as well as ones in need of help with sustainability. Over 70 applications have already been received and the foundation plans to go over those Tuesday and Wednesday. In anticipation for more Non-Profit applications, the foundation will be meeting twice a week to create a quick turnaround.

“Under ordinary circumstances, Non-Profits are under-resourced. Now you add a significant crisis and the level of anxiety rises up,” Vega said. “Non-Profits are adapting to move to support children that are now learning remotely as well as adults that are now unemployed, all while remaining isolated. To be able to bring together theses donors, foundations and businesses to facilitate this process for our Non-Profits is incredible.”

Another benefit of the program is that Non-Profits that need resources don’t have to go hunting for them. The COVID-19 Relief & Recovery Fund is a one-stop-shop.

As the applications mount, the Princeton Area Community Foundation is asking that anyone with the means or desire donate to the foundation online.

“Companies, private foundations and donors that are still looking at how to get involved and have the ability to give can come to us,” Vega said. “This is the time to step up and stand with us to serve our struggling community and our Non-Profits.”

If you would like updates on New Jersey-specific coronavirus news, subscribe to our Coronavirus in N.J. newsletter.

Tell us your coronavirus stories, whether it’s a news tip, a topic you want us to cover, or a personal story you want to share.