We Provide Foundation & Concrete Repair Services in Princeton, NJ

Your local structural and foundation repair company in Princeton, NJ is Quality 1st Basement Systems

Does your home have foundation or concrete problems? We use quality Supportworks products to effectively repair your foundation or concrete. Whatever type of structural problem you’re dealing with, your local Princeton Supportworks contractor will provide a customized solution to best meet your home’s needs.

Contact us today to request a FREE inspection and estimate from your local Supportworks concrete and foundation repair contractor in Princeton, NJ !

Structural Repair & Concrete Repair Services offered in Princeton:

Foundation Settlement Repair

Foundation Crack Repair

Bowing Wall Repair

Sagging Floor Repair

Uneven Concrete Leveling

Concrete Crack Repair

Home Foundation & Structural Repair in Princeton

Foundation problems can negatively impact the safety, appearance, and value of your home. Issues like foundation settlement, soil changes, and poor construction can cause a variety of symptoms throughout your home. If you think your home might have a structural problem, reach out to your Princeton Supportworks foundation repair professional to have them evaluate your home and recommend the best solution.

Foundation Problem Signs:

Cracked Brick/Stucco - Stair-step cracks in exterior foundation walls.

Bowing Walls - Concrete wall leaning in at the top.

Shearing Walls - Inward movement of the bottom of the block wall.

Ceiling Gaps - Space between the ceiling and the interior wall.

Sagging Floors - Sloping floors or gap between the floor and the interior wall.

Chimney Separation - Chimney separating from the house.

Concrete Leveling & Repair in Princeton

If you’re tired of looking at that ugly, cracked driveway, walkway, or patio, your Supportworks concrete repair contractor in Princeton can help. Cracked and sunken concrete not only looks bad, but it can also be a tripping hazard. Our Concrete Protection System helps homeowners lift, level, repair, and restore the damaged concrete around their home.

Concrete Repair & Protection Solutions:

Lift and level concrete slabs

Seal concrete cracks and joints

Seal concrete surfaces to protect against pitting, flaking, and staining

Resurface concrete to restore its look and function

Why More Princeton Homeowners Choose Us: