Overview

​ For much of the existence of the West Windsor and Princeton Junction volunteer fire companies, they were supported by a diligent staff of women, called the Ladies Auxiliary. Below are the stories of the West Windsor and Princeton Junction Auxiliaries:

Princeton Junction Ladies Auxiliary

On March 9, 1927, the first meeting and election of the Auxiliary took place at the home of Frances Kiernen. 36 people were present. Discussions were held regarding the purpose of the Auxiliary and plans made for the future. The first official meeting with officers presiding took place on April 12, 1927 at the home of William Courtney.

​ The Auxiliary held many fundraisers over the years. The first included chicken dinners, cooked in private homes and served in tents across the street from the Berrien City firehouse. Other fund-raising meals included ham, spaghetti and roast beef dinners. Strawberry festivals, rummage and bake sales, and indoor flea markets also attracted donors from time to time.

Eventually, bingo events started being held at the Berrien City firehouse, where the Ladies Auxiliary sold refreshments. The facilities of the firehouse were subsequently made available for private events and catered dinners.

​ The Ladies Auxiliary played an important role during emergencies. They provided food, hot drinks, and various other kinds of assistance during fires, floods, and other critical events. For example, when the Trenton Filtration plant needed assistance to provide a "Water life line" to the city, the Princeton Junction Ladies Auxiliary, along with the Mercer County Firemen's and the State Fireman's Laxies Auxiliaries, provided 450 roast beef dinners for the firefighters.

When people were stranded due to floods, storms, snow, etc., the Ladies Auxiliary provided shelter, food, and whatever else was needed until the emergency passed.

The organization was disbanded in the 1980s due to a lack of membership. Although it is no longer around, the Princeton Junction Ladies Auxiliary was a much-appreciated organization giving what they could in times of need.

West Windsor Ladies Auxiliary

The West Windsor Ladies Auxiliary was formed to supplement the West Windsor Volunteer Fire Co. No. 1. Its purpose was to assist the firefighters by raising money to help with the mortgage, to decorate the firehouse, to help purchase uniforms and equipment, to provide refreshments and meals during emergencies, and to nurture a sense of community.

The organization's charter was signed in December of 1945. Numbering twenty women strong, it met at the old town hall in Dutch Neck, choosing Myla Tindall (wife of Gordon C. Tindall) as its first president. Other members included: Emily Bartko, Elsie Burd, Florence Chamberlin, Hazel Everett, Ruth Everett, Grace Hand, Nellie Hann, Doris Holman, Tillie Holman, Ethel Little, Marie MacKenzie, Mary Mathes, Mildred Sailey White, Bertha Shielke, Helen Scott, Dorothy Tindall, Evelyn Walton, and Annabelle Weeden. As of 1995, Evelyn Walton and Dorothy Tindall were still active in the Auxiliary.

The Auxiliary participated in a myriad of fund drives for the construction of a new firehouse (in 1952) and paying its mortgage. throughout the years. In addition, money was gathered for various decorations for the firehouse and some uniforms for the firefighters. A kitchen was constructed in the building to assist with dinners and fund-raisers, and to rent for private events (such as wedding receptions). Moreover, the Ladies Auxiliary purchased tables and chairs for the firehouse as well.

​