Rize: A Film Analysis

318 Words | 2 Pages

The film Rize is a dance film and documentary based in Los Angeles California in the early 1990s. This documentary was split into three different sections about the different parts of dance involved. This film has a strong soundtrack and creative ties to African styles of dance and culture. The first part of the film was about a style of dance that I have never seen before. This style of dance is known as “clowning”.

Undefeated By Daniel Lindsay: Film Analysis

736 Words | 3 Pages

In the documentary “Undefeated” by T.J. Martin and Daniel Lindsay, an underprivileged black high school football team tries to break the streak of never having won a playoff game as long as the school has been around. Through all of the struggles that these kids face, they learn to come together with the help of their football coach. While the film was nominated for an Oscar, there are two completely different views on whether the film was about overcoming difficulties, considering the situation or about made up miracles that are only seen in fictional movies. In both reviews of the documentary, the authors talk about both the characters and the directors and how well they delivered their message.

Summary Of Pedro's Death At Blockbuster

322 Words | 2 Pages

When he went to go and pay, Pedro realized that he was all out of money. Pedro walked to the road and tried to hitchhike. After what seemed like forever, Pedro eventually found a ride. The guy that was driving him was very nice and had a Blockbuster’s shirt on.

The culture of food has changed and progressed throughout this time. In the book, Feast for our eyes: Viewing films on food through new lenses; by Laura A. Lindenfeld, we see how in recent times food is growing not only in daily culture but also in entertainment. Television, Internet, and Books have advertised food in so many ways. Media has portrayed food as a desirable and a pleasant façade.

Los Olvidados Film Analysis

405 Words | 2 Pages

In the wildly popular Mexican film, Los olvidados (1950), Spanish director Luis Buñuel exposes the harsh realities of life in Mexico during the 1950’s. Luis Buñuel’s work on Los olvidados portrays a societal loss for all hope due to crime and violence as an infinitely vicious cycle, coupled with addressing the lack of reform for dilapidated living conditions throughout Mexico. In Los olvidados, Buñuel follows Pedro (Alfonso Mejía) a neglected bastard, and El Jaibo (Roberto Cobo) the leader of a gang of homeless children loitering in vacant lots. For Pedro, and the rest of the cast, a series of unfortunate outcomes have been strung together though common ignorance and a lack of self-control. Luis Buñuel’s use of focal length, editing, and dialogue

Walkout Movie Analysis

345 Words | 2 Pages

As a filmmaker myself, I have a some extra insight into the movie. The way the movie is shot is very much like the time period it was supposed to be set in. The director of the film is

Glory Movie Essay

2593 Words | 11 Pages

The director does an outstanding job of not pushing the story. The inspiration is implanted in the characters and the way in which they overcome problems, including, most importantly, their own fears. The historical foundation, for the most part, on which Glory was portrayed, is accurate. The director put a great amount of energy into the historical

Film Analysis: The Midnight Mission

916 Words | 4 Pages

If you look skid row up in the dictionary, the definition is clear: a poor part of town or city where people who are homeless or who drink too much often go. The midnight mission first opens its door in 1914, this area has been plagued with the same issues for far too long. It’s amazing that these types of issues are ignored by the majority of society. The midnight mission has a wonderful program to give people that are on skid row a purpose again.

Bigger, Stronger, Faster By Christopher Bell: Film Analysis

685 Words | 3 Pages

Everyone needs a superhero, someone to be inspired by, or to want to be like that certain individual. Bigger, Stronger, Faster is a documentary directed by Christopher Bell that presents the widespread use of steroids in sports as a sign of winning at whatever cost it takes to be better. The Bell brothers have been drawn into perceiving that performance enhancing drugs is the way to realizing the American Dream. This documentary demonstrates various interviews with coaches, politicians, doctors, and bodybuilders. Bigger, Stronger, Faster informs people the use of steroids and issues of taking steroids.

13th Film Analysis Essay

1335 Words | 6 Pages

The film 13th directed by Ava DuVernay targets an intended audience of the Media and the three branches of the United States government with an emphasis that mass incarceration is an extension of slavery. It is intended to inform viewers about the criminalization of African Americans and the United States prison boom. 13th uses rhetorical devices in its claim to persuade the viewers by using exemplum in the opening seconds of the film. President Barack Obama presents statistics, saying “the United States is home to 5% of the world’s population but is home to 25% of the world’s prisoners.” Also the film uses a hyperbole in talking about the movie Birth of a Nation produced in 1915 which portrays a black man as a violent savage who will kill white women.

Ingrid Goes West Film Analysis

1947 Words | 8 Pages

What genre does the film fall under? Matt Spicer’s first feature-length film, Ingrid Goes West (2017), falls under the genre of satire comedy. Oftentimes social media is put under scrutiny; however, Ingrid Goes West give us a different perspective. The film focuses on exploring human psyche when using social media, instead of the social media app itself.

Brief Summary Of Odysseus Of Homer's Odyssey

1167 Words | 5 Pages

Odysseus and his men sail to the island of Aeolus after escaping the Cyclops. Before they leave, Odysseus receives from Aeolus a wind that will blow him back to Ithaca and a bag that holds the stormy winds. While they sail, the men get curious and open the bag. This releases the stormy winds and they are blown back to Aeolus’s island. Then Odysseus and his men sail to the land of Laestrygones.

Judgement At Nuremberg Movie Analysis

1294 Words | 6 Pages

The pictures shown in this movie are still in black-and-white style as it was released in 1961. Actually the pictures were good, but viewers can not enjoy it fully as the black-and-white pictures will really bother them. It is the only weakness I can found in this movie and it is really unfortunate but it also still can be accepted as it was a 1961 movie. Talking about actors and actresses, they casted excellently in the movie. They did their job very well.

Baz Luhrmann Film Analysis

706 Words | 3 Pages

Baz Luhrmann’s films are known their ability to make a watcher feel as if they are part of the show. Between his use of camera angles, shots and the use of a narrator, it’s no wonder he is able to keep viewers on the edge of their seat. But how does Baz Luhrmann pull off this spectacular feat of his? This is probably explained best by referring to Baz Luhrmann’s films and how he himself has evolved as a director.

Sybil: A Short Film Analysis

1232 Words | 5 Pages

Today there has been an increase in the awareness of mental health. In the sense that society has begun to take notice of how mental health effects each individual differently. The media has begun to incorporate a variety of illnesses to entertain to their audience. However, many have questioned if the media is accurately portraying these mental disorders. I chose to compare two popular movies Frankie & Alice and the 2007 version film Sybil.