January 17, 2018

I've read, extensively this past week, everything I could find about Buzz Aldrin while helping my 10 year old research his Famous American report. And then we got our hands on this beautiful autobiographical book. Written for children, it's simple and straightforward in its delivery, yet it's more thorough in information than all the other articles I read, combined.

The illustrations are captivating and the descriptions awe inspiring.

Buzz's story is "out of this world" (5 stars).

I don't usually add children's picture books to my Goodreads list, but this contains everything you might need to know about Buzz Aldrin in a nutshell. We borrowed a copy from our public library, but I would gladly keep one on my coffee table as a reminder of an incredible moment in science and history and an inspiring reminder that hard work pays off. Also, just a reminder of the amazing wonders out there.

"Having a goal, even one that seems beyond our reach, can inspire us to achieve something magnificent.

Not everyone can explore space. But we all have our own moons to reach for. If you set your sights high, you may accomplish more than you ever dreamed was possible. Just as I did." -Buzz Aldrin

April 27, 2021

Any book with paintings by Wendell Minor is likely to be excellent, if “only” in the illustrations. In this case, Minor is matched by Buzz Aldrin’s exciting text. He tells the story of his youth and effort to become an astronaut simply and well, crediting his friend Ed White with motivating him to try to become an astronaut. When he reaches the story of their flight to the moon, his excitement is palpable! It is so well written! The part that moved me the most was his setting up the flag and his “crisp salute, just as I was taught at West Point”...Still, I remember that brief moment perfectly, so many years later. I remember the pride I felt and how I imagined the pride of every American on Earth.” I also loved his comment that his mother’s maiden name was Moon, so maybe it was just meant to be. Beautiful text matched by beautiful paintings. Superb!

May 9, 2018

A true hero. I never knew much about Buzz Aldrin before this.

July 7, 2019

Wendell Minor deserves more love as an illustrator

July 11, 2021

Buzz Aldrin shares his journey of being the second person to step on the moon and living his dream. (His mother's maiden name was Moon.)

August 13, 2019

This is a little hidden treasure in the library. This is a great book!!!! Illustrations are great. I completely loved it from cover to cover.

February 26, 2019

My 7 year old daughter enjoys reading biographies. This was in a collection I picked up at the library for her. While I rate it a 4, she would not rate it as high. She would probably rate it a 3. She wasn’t nearly as interested in it. I think it was too long but the pictures were amazing.

I personally found his perseverance in attaining his dream inspiring. Additionally this is a great example of preparing for a career that isn’t a career yet. That is something teachers are told all the time.

October 3, 2017

Buzz Aldrin writes from his childhood to his days spent on the Moon. This book gives the readers a chance to know Buzz, his background, and his characteristics. We learn about where he got the name "Buzz," how he ended up in the Air Force, how he got into the space program, and what the moon was like when Apollo 11 accomplished their mission. This book is very inspiring and is good for the dreamers in the classroom. It allows them to dream and allows them to think they have a chance at accomplishing it!

It probably goes without saying, but I LOVED this book! The illustrations were beautiful. I loved the Flight and Space Exploration timeline in the back of the book to learn more about other people in history. This book is super great and I would totally recommend this book.

I would recommend this to probably any age. It is a very exciting book and would be great if students were learning about the late 1960's, influential people in history, or space!

August 1, 2019

Review:

Buzz's story is "out of this world" (5 stars)! I checked this book out from the library in order to celebrate the 50th anniversary of mankind's first trip to the moon. The illustrations are captivating and the descriptions awe inspiring. This short account contains everything you might need to know about Buzz Aldrin in a nutshell. Although it's a children's book, it feels like something that belongs on a coffee table. It's a simple testament of an incredible moment in science and history, and is an inspiring reminder that hard work pays off.

"Having a goal, even one that seems beyond our reach, can inspire us to achieve something magnificent. Not everyone can explore space. But we all have our own moons to reach for. If you set your sights high, you may accomplish more than you ever dreamed was possible. Just as I did." -Buzz Aldrin

P.s. The ideal, autobiographical resource for helping a 10-year-old research his "Famous American" report. It's written for children in straightforward way, yet it contains more thorough in information than all the other articles I read, combined.

April 14, 2022

This is an autobiography of Buzz Aldrin and his life. He writes about his life as a child, his time in the air force, and how he wanted to be an astronaut. I learned a great deal about him through this book. I never really knew much about his story which I thought was funny, because he literally walked on the moon. He's not your everyday rinky-dink type of celebrity.

What I didn't realize was how hard he worked at becoming an astronaut. When he first applied to the academy, they didn't accept him. This book talks about how hard he worked for his dreams, and his message to all of the kids reading it: don't give up on your dreams. I think his story is a powerfully positive and encouraging one.

The illustrations are also great, with how they fill up the entire page. They are so life-like and details, they almost look like pictures.

October 23, 2017

This was pretty good for an autobiography. My only complaint was that each page tended to have a lot more words than most young children are willing to patiently sit through. It had some really great information in it, such as how Buzz Aldrin had never considered becoming an astronaut because for him, astronauts seemed like they were on some sort of superhuman level. If a friend of his hadn't mentioned that he was planning on applying for the program, Dr. Aldrin might have never realized that astronauts were regular people, just like him. I also had no idea that he had a doctorates degree in astronautics from MIT, so he's Dr. Aldrin. I don't think that I've ever heard anyone reference him as such. This is definitely a good book to show you what it takes to become an astronaut.

January 30, 2018

Follow Buzz Aldrin through his childhood and young adult life, find out what he went through before his acceptance into the astronaut program. This picture book gives you real life insight into the hard work and effort Buzz went through in both missions, Gemini 12 and Apollo II. Did Buzz always want to join the space program and journey through space? Read the book to find out!

Honestly, this is the best book I've read for this portfolio. I have always been so into the space travels, but have only ever really heard of Neil Armstrong on the moon; it was very neat to have the first person perspective Aldrin brought to this book.

I would definitely use this book in my class!! I would probably try to tie it into a space lesson; I know my kids would love this one.

November 28, 2021

Middle Grades (4-6)

Autobiography

I read this autobiography with my 4th graders. I loved teaching them about an autobiography and reading about the experience of being on the moon through a firsthand account. In addition to the story going through the sequences that led Buzz to become an astronaut, it also taught the students about the skills required to become the success he was. He talks of independence and determination as traits that he had to get him to reach his goals. I love that these characteristics can be talked about throughout the reading and set an example for the students. I also loved the opportunity to share an entertaining nonfiction text with the students as they can be somewhat reluctant to read that genre.

October 21, 2018

This story was a autobiography written by Buzz Aldrin. The author only did a partial biography. He focused this story on his life from birth, his school years through college and information on how he got involved in the space program. He also shared with reader about being an astronaut, his first mission and landing on the moon. I thought this book gave a good outline of Aldrin's life and his experience being an astronaut. I found the story to be entertaining as well as educational. I enjoyed learning about his journey to becoming an astronaut and what motivated him to follow this path.

February 3, 2020

The book “Reaching for the Moon” by Famous astronaut Buzz Aldrin is a good fun read book that talks about Buzz as a child and his life.In my opinion this book was good. The reason I give this book the rating it did is because i didn't give the information i thought it would.The book was more for a grade below me. Although this book gave decent information and good details it wasn't for me. I would recommend this book for people who want a easy read, who want to learn about this famous astronauts life, and who are in 5th.

February 8, 2018

This is a little mini-memoir for kids about Buzz Aldrin's early life, becoming a pilot and a scientist, and then (after first being rejected) becoming an astronaut. His first space flight was Gemini XII in 1966 and according to Wikipedia, it was the 26th spaceflight of all time. His second spaceflight was the more famous Apollo 11 that made the first moon landing with commander Neil Armstrong in 1969. Pretty exciting!

January 17, 2019

Buzz Aldrin shares what events in his life led him to walk upon the surface of the moon. Giving the bare bones of this momentous occasion, Aldrin's first-hand experience can make anyone wish to journey through space as well.

This is just a short picture book, but I would love to find more information at a children's reading level! No matter how old you get, the famous Apollo 11 will always be enough to bring chills to your skin.

March 20, 2019

This book was very interesting and knowledgeable to read because it talked about Buzz Aldrin's life and the significant events that led to the historic moment of the landing of Apollo 11. The artwork and they way Buzz Aldrin explained his life story is what makes this story so great and wonderful in many ways. Would definitely recommend this book to anyone who wants to learn about Buzz Aldrin's life.

October 24, 2018

This is an interesting biography of Buzz Aldrin's lifetime journey that culminated in walking on the moon. The conversational style makes the reader feel like you are sitting across the table as he speaks directly to them. The story is filled with interesting facts that reveal the commitment and resilience that was nurtured throughout his lifetime.

November 15, 2020

This amazing book, written by Buzz Aldrin himself, chronicles his journey from infancy to astronaut. It is just the right amount of information to keep an elementary aged child interested. I loved hearing about how he gained his name (from his sister) and how his dreams continued to evolve overtime to lead him to be one of the first men on the moon.

October 26, 2018

I was worried this book would feel dated/boring, but I found it super interesting. The pictures were great and really helped illustrate the words. I think it would be nice as a read-aloud video/CD. Maybe a bit lengthy for my students' attention spans, but the read-aloud element might help.

March 18, 2019

This book is a children's autobiography about Buzz Aldrin. He explained that his journey didn't happen when he boarded Apollo 11. The journey started when he was born. This is a great story to share young readers who have an interest in space and want to learn from Buzz how to follow their dreams.

Read

March 2, 2021

This autobiography of Buzz Aldrin tells his story from his childhood to the moon landing.

Tags: Aldrin, Buzz -- Project Apollo (U.S.) -- Astronauts -- United States -- Biography -- Space flight to the moon --

June 22, 2022

3rd - 4th

Research

Genes

Twin

National Space Society

Compare and Contrasts

I like how the author is completing some research on a set of twins. What is different and what is the same? Where are the twin located? Class discussions were great with this story.

November 13, 2023

Wonderful story of how Buzz got his name, worked hard to achieve at school, sports and then as an astronaut. I are. It aloud to a group of seniors at an assisted living facility and they really loved it.

November 24, 2018

Written for elementary school children (interesting and informational enough for adults to enjoy just as well). Paintings by Wendell Minor depict the story. We have a signed copy of the original.