Encounter with Tiber

Buzz Aldrin. Aspect, $21.95 (0pp) ISBN 978-0-446-51854-3

Astronaut Aldrin (Men from Earth, 1989), who was the second man to walk on the moon, and the Hugo- and Nebula-nominated Barnes (Mother of Storms, etc.) join forces in this enjoyable saga which combines two classic SF themes: the future of spaceflight and contact with intelligent alien life. The story oscillates between the careers of two human astronauts, Chris Terence and his son, Jason, on the moon and Mars, and the efforts of the Tiberians (from a planet of Alpha Centauri) to colonize Earth during prehistoric times. Chris meets his destiny while trying to retrieve a Tiberian relic from the moon. Meanwhile, the Tiberians' desperate efforts to colonize a habitable planet before their own is destroyed runs up against a host of well-depicted obstacles. Folly, prejudice, petty rivalries and bureaucratic befuddlement are shown to be common to both races, which are depicted with wit and empathy. Multiple subplots, a huge cast that deserves a glossary but doesn't get one and too many expository lumps impede narrative flow. Even so, the authors' lively storytelling will engage readers as it conveys the wonder and promise of space. Author tour. (July)

close

Details

Reviewed on: 07/01/1996

Genre: Fiction

Leather - 563 pages - 978-0-9747769-6-5

Mass Market Paperbound - 978-0-446-16377-4

Mass Market Paperbound - 656 pages - 978-0-446-60404-8

Amazon

Apple Books

Barnes & Noble

Bookshop

Share

Tweet

Copy Link

Print

More By and About this Authorchevron_right

Buzz Aldrin

Aldrin and illustrator Minor (one of six American artists selected to cover the launch of the space shuttle Discovery in 1988) bring the astronaut's early Continue reading »

Buzz Aldrin

Astronaut Aldrin and Minor (Reaching for the Moon) offer a second collaboration, tracing the history of flight from the Wright brothers through numerous NASA Continue reading »

Buzz Aldrin

Picking up the threads of his acclaimed 1973 autobiography, Return to Earth, Aldrin presents as no-holds-barred account of how his celebrity, career and human weaknesses nearly destroyed his life. On Continue reading »

Buzz Aldrin

Reunited with award-winning SF writer Barnes (Encounter with Tiber), Aldrin, the second man to walk on the Moon, imagines a near future when the space program is in the hands of competing private Continue reading »

Buzz Aldrin, Leonard David

Aldrin makes a daring proposal for further space exploration in this exciting glimpse of the new new frontier. With the passing of Neil Armstrong last year, Aldrin is now the only surviving member of Continue reading »

Buzz Aldrin, Ken Abraham

Famed astronaut Aldrin (coauthor, with Leonard David, of Mission to Mars) combines leadership lessons with behind-the-scenes stories from his Apollo 11 moonwalk (including the speech Continue reading »

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR

THE BEST NEW BOOKS

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR THE BEST NEW BOOKS