A first edition first printing and signed copy of Buzz Aldrin's book "Encounter with Tiber". This edition is hardback and in near mint condition with light wear to the dust jacket.

A hard back copy of Buzz Aldrin's book "Encounter with Tiber". It is signed on the title page by Buzz Aldrin. It is in near pristine condition. Notes CJ-1

First Edition: Aldrin, Buzz; Barnes, John "Encounter with Tiber" (Warner Books: 1996), signed by both authors, fine in wrappers

A Lt edition lithograph done by NASA approx 9x12 signed by the second man on the moon Buzz Aldrin with guaranteed COA

A FDC made by the usps many years ago limited numbered by artist and second man on the moon Buzz Aldrin with COA

A Lt Ed artist signed and numbered FDC done by the usps signed by the second man on the moon Buzz Aldrin with COA

A D’Arrigo signed limited edition lithograph, signature to the lower right corner reads ‘A. D’Arrigo’, title to the lower center border reads ‘The Encounter’, edition to the lower left cor

A FDC signed by artists and numbered as well as bby Buzz Aldrin for the USPS twenty plus years ago nice !

Sgd. L. R. Numbered 398/400. "From the Encounters Giraffe Manor, Kenya. Signed in pencil. Gallery matted and framed. 27"H x 32 3/4" W

Titled "Dawn 'The Awakening.'" Patinated. Signed and numbered 62/65. With custom plexi stand. Comes with original purchase invoice and information from Hansen Gallery, New Orleans, 1996. Original pric

A large Baccarat France crystal glass owl sculpture. Clear glass sculpture depicting an owl perched on a base. Signed Baccarat R Rigot and marked 109/200 1977 Acid Etched Baccarat mark to the undersid

Scarce ''black number'' Apollo 11 photo signed by Buzz Aldrin, printed on ''A Kodak Paper''. Photo is the iconic ''visor'' shot, with Neil Armstrong taking a photo of Aldrin on the moon, an image of A

Apollo 11 photograph signed by both Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin Signed by both in marker COA included

Sonia Delaunay signed limited edition lithograph, signature to the lower right corner reads ‘Sonia Delaunay’, edition to the lower left corner reads ‘30/75’, subject a geometric abstract piece

Title: "La fenetre de l'atelier a la Californie." Signed and numbered in red pen. Signature extensively faded, as in other known examples. Printed by Crommelynck. Numbered 117/300. Dimensions: (Frame)