Praise

“A Quantum Life is not only a story about resilience but also about the power of science as a transcendent force for personal transformation. . . . An important book for anyone who wants to understand how the fire of inquiry, the burning demand to know the world and its beauty intimately, can take root in a heart and lift it up to shine brightly with the stars it most cherishes.”—NPR

“Hakeem Oluseyi’s journey to adulthood is not only lyrical but immensely expansive and powerful. Moving across the American West and South, A Quantum Life encompasses with equal grace matters of particle physics and matters of a fractured family, challenges that are self-wrought and challenges inflicted by racism, and triumphs over an academic landscape engineered against poor African Americans as well as triumphs of the human heart.”—Jeff Hobbs, New York Times bestselling author of The Short and Tragic Life of Robert Peace

“Oluseyi’s book is an epic personal and scientific journey through a system stacked against him. . . . Haunting and heroic.”—Sara Seager, professor of planetary science and physics at MIT, author of The Smallest Lights in the Universe

“A physicist works with the statistical nature of the cosmos to predict the future— possible outcomes and unlikely ones. In A Quantum Life, you’ll encounter one extraordinary turn of events after another, as the extraordinary chess player, puzzle solver, and occasional grifter works his way from grinding poverty and deep despair to worldwide acclaim as a physicist. As you turn each page, you may not believe this outcome is possible. Read on.”—Bill Nye, CEO of The Planetary Society

“A Black astrophysicist delivers a memoir that demonstrates the unstoppable strength of intelligence and the human spirit. . . . A sharp, relatable book about self-reinvention and a loving nod to anyone who has ever believed in the potential of another.”—Kirkus (starred review)

“[A] gripping story of overcoming obstacles and finding purpose . . . A great read for memoir fans, who will be drawn in from the first page.”—Library Journal (starred review)

“Inspiring . . . [Oluseyi’s] story serves as a reminder that barriers can be broken regardless of one’s background and that there is no one way to be a scientist.”—Science