JANET JACKSON ASTROLOGY

For in-depth readings and exclusive predictions, subscribe to the Kyle Thomas Astrology Patreon here.

Janet Jackson’s birth chart shows she has the strength of a lioness

Janet Jackson was born on May 16, 1966. This makes her a strong Taurus Sun with a feisty Aries Moon. Her birth time hasn’t been confirmed online anywhere, so until I connect with her individually (get at me!), let’s instead focus on what we do, in fact, know. When it comes to elemental energy, Jackson is heavily composed of Earth and Water. She has a splash of Fire—but no Air placements in her birth chart. This is very revealing right away. First off, we know that she has tremendous strength, perseverance and stamina. She is able to move mountains with her focus and understands that things don’t always happen overnight. She’s also deeply sensitive and intuitive, in touch with her emotions and those of others, which brings her a true artist’s heart.

When it comes to the key themes I find right away, there are two that repeat consistently. The first is that Jackson was built to work like a machine—and the stars and her family reflect this. She certainly has ambition and a motivation for success, such as can be seen with her Jupiter, the planet of fortune, linking to her Saturn, the planet of longevity. Her Sun is in a distant dance with Pluto, which grants her a desire to be recognized and admired, but to be honest, there are things that are more telling about who she is and why she has become the icon we know her for. When it comes to her success, it’s because of her unbelievable sense of focus and concentration that grants her the determination that she has. Her Sun sings alongside Saturn in perfect alignment, bringing her an immense ability to channel everything she has into her goals—whatever it is that she believes she must do. Her Mercury, the planet of communication, links to Uranus and Pluto, bringing her a sharp mind with great intellect, persuasion and inspiration. Her Sun is also united with Mars, bringing her magnificent self-confidence and energy, able to express herself through vivid physical activity, performance, athletics and hard work. Last, her Mars spins with Uranus and Pluto, too, bringing her the courage to fight back, set herself apart and conquer feelings of insecurity and competition, which have been present in the world—and in her family—her entire life.

The second vast theme is that Jackson truly was gifted the template and artistry of a visionary. Her Saturn kisses Neptune, bringing her the ability to synthesize imagination and the collective unconscious into practical dimensions. This is one of the most telling aspects of an individual who can be highly successful in musical or creative careers. Her Moon is united with Venus, bringing her charm and popularity, as well as further creative success. Last, with her Mars in a very intense swirl with her Neptune, she was granted an overwhelmingly hypnotic power over others, which has made her visually and sonically irresistible.

Were Janet Jackson and Michael Jackson astrologically compatible?

Let’s be real: when you’re born into one of the most famous—and infamous—families in history, you can expect some pretty unique cosmic energy to be affecting you. Let’s pull up Michael Jackson’s birth chart, shall we? Michael Jackson was born on August 29, 1958. This makes him a Virgo Sun with a Pisces Moon. Michael was a deeply sensitive and emotional soul—and when I look at his compatibility with Janet, we can see a relationship that was deeply layered and intense. They certainly had a spiritual bond. While they knew they could move mountains together, they also had a fierce level of competitiveness between them. When things were good, they were great, but their planetary alignments also show high levels of confusion and miscommunication, too. Janet was the more balanced and centered of the two and the way her planets link to his, it can be seen that she tried to always fill his life with compassion.

What are predictions for Janet Jackson?

With a life so vast and unique as it has been for Janet Jackson, what could lie ahead? Many things, in fact. First and foremost, from the end of 2021 until the end of 2023, Jackson is experiencing powerful eclipses in her Sun sign and across the sky. This triggers major turning points around her life, destiny and relationships. However, this is even more telling because a Blood Moon lunar eclipse will take place exactly on May 16, 2022—on her birthday!—and echoing its power over her entire year ahead. This will be one of the most important years in her entire lifetime, as she sheds everything and everyone that is no longer working for her, as well as reaches a whole new level of culmination and personal achievement. This isn’t actually about just professional success; it’s about reveling in everything that she has built toward in recent years and seeing it come into manifestation. Saturn, the planet of life lessons, is squaring her Sun now and in the year ahead—especially because of the imprint the Blood Moon eclipse will leave on her—which does show challenges could pop up, friction being applied and then her having to hold her own. But to be honest, this is something she has dealt with repeatedly in her life, so Jackson can weather a storm. Luckily, the planets from the eclipse are also gifting her blessings and opportunities, so as she asserts herself—which she will absolutely do—she will find that challenges crumble before her will. Moving forward, 2023 and 2024 will be one of the most magical and joyous periods of her life—especially on a personal level—as Jupiter, the planet of miracles, dances over her Venus, Moon, Mercury, Mars, North Node and Sun. To say that she will experience a tremendous rebirth with many happy new beginnings is an understatement. Her heart will feel so at peace. You heard it here first.

To receive an astrological forecast from Kyle Thomas, please contact him at KyleThomasAstrology@gmail.com.