Janet Jackson is an American singer, songwriter, actress, and dancer. “Jackson” is a member of the world’s most talented family. Janet Jackson’s first studio album was self-titled, while her most recent is titled “Unbreakable.”

Janet Jackson: Profile summary

Janet Jackson: Early Life

Janet Damita Jo Jackson was born on May 16, 1966, in Gary city in, Indiana, United States. Her father, Joe Jackson, is a talented manager, and he’s one of the first Jackson family popular people founders, and her mother is Katherine Jackson.

Janet Jackson’s family is popular and has gifted the world with great talents. Her brothers are Michael Jackson, Jermaine Jackson, Randy Jackson, Tito Jackson, Jackie Jackson, Marlon Jackson, and Brandon Jackson, who died after one day after his birth. Janet Jackson has two sisters, La Toya Jackson and Rebbie Jackson. She studied at the Portola Middle School and at the Lanai Road Elementary School.

Janet Jackson: Personal life

Janet Jackson has been married three times and divorced twice. Her first marriage was in 1984 to the singer James DeBarge, and they divorced after one year. Janet Jackson’s second marriage was to the dancer, music video director, and songwriter René Elizondo Jr. from 1991-2000.Advertisement

Janet Jackson had her latest marriage life with the Qatari business magnate Wissam Al Mana. They got married in 2012, welcomed their only child Eissa Al Mana in 2017, separated shortly after their son’s birth, and they are expected to divorce in 2018.

Janet Jackson: Age, Height, and Weight

Being born on 16 May 1966, Janet Jackson is 56 years old as of 2022. Her height is 1.63 m tall, and her weight is 58 kg.

Janet Jackson: Career

Janet Jackson already grew up in a talented family. Her father helped her to get a contract with A&M Records, through which her debut self-titled album was released in 1982. Two years later, Janet Jackson released her second studio album, “Dream Street.” Both the albums ranked on the top charts, but they didn’t debut at 1.

Following the first two albums, Janet Jackson wanted to move out of the family and wanted to work on her own. She collaborated with Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis on her 3rd album, “Control,” which was released in 1986. The album gave Janet her first debut at one on two charts, the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart and the Billboard 200 chart, both in the United States.

Janet Jackson released her latest and 11th studio album in 2015 titled “Unbreakable,” It was successful as it got top-ranked by many magazines and peaked at one on many charts. She also appeared in a few movies and series, and her latest TV appearance was in a drama movie titled “For Colored Girls.”

Janet Jackson: Awards & Achievements

Janet Jackson has been receiving numerous award-winning nominations. She has more than 870 award winnings and nominations. Janet Jackson has won 11 American Music Awards, 12 Billboard Magazine Year-End Number One Awards, 16 Billboard Music Awards, 4 Blockbuster Entertainment Awards, 21 BMI Pop Awards, 5 Bravo Otto Awards, 4 American Black Achievement Awards, 9 Guinness Book of World Records, 5 Grammy Awards, 3 Image Awards, 3 International Dance Music Awards, 9 MTV Video Music Awards, 4 National Association of Recording Merchandisers Awards, 3 Nickelodeon Kids’ Choice Awards, 13 Soul Train Music Awards, and other awards.

Janet Jackson: Net Worth

Janet Jackson’s estimated net worth is $220 million.