North Sardinia is also perfect for water sports enthusiast. You can follow the entire course of the river by canoe or kayak . Also, windsurfing, kite surfing and sup paddle boarding are all possible in this area.

You can also choose to take a light tour on foot or by mountain bike to the forest of Su Filigosu, on the slopes of the Limbara where you can see local wildlife as deer, fallow deer and mouflons.

Tritt's tip: Stay in lively San Teodoro at the Isuledda Resort

4. Sardinia Hidden Gem: Casteldoria baths

An hour's drive away from the Lake Coghinas there are the hot springs of Casteldoria in Santa Maria del Coghinas on the river Coghinas. The thermal baths are named after the old, no longer existing village of Casteldoria, dating from the 12th century. Of the old Doria family’s castle, there is left only the tower. Directly on the bank of the river there is the Spa center and hotel Therme Casteldoria which offers all kinds of treatments in combination with a sauna, steam baths and hydro massage showers. However, you can also enjoy swimming and sunbathing in and near the river. The water of the river is heated and can reach a temperature of up to 70 C. In winter, the combination of warm water and cold air creates large clouds of steam above the river. The water is warmest right below the spa, and the sulphurous mud at the bottom of the river is credited with miraculous properties that would serve to relieve joint pains. You can experience the effect of a natural mud bath yourself, as many of the locals and tourists do. Dive into the river and swim to the hottest point, spread the mud from the bottom (be careful it is hot) in a few layers over your body (or over especially sore spots), let it dry on the side for an hour, then immerse yourself in the river again, rinse off the mud and have a nice swim in the warm water. A wonderful way of relaxing after a day of outdoor activities and sport by the lake!

3. Sardinia Hidden Gem: Limbara Mountains

If the water sports are not for you or you want to explore the hinterland’s nature, you can also opt for an excursion to the Limbara Mountains with different types of routes and nature trails. The highest peak is Punta Balistreri (1359 meters), followed by Punta Sa Berritta, Punta Bandera and Giugantinu. This last mountain gives its name to the Vermentino di Gallura “Giogantinu”, a delicious white wine. The regional forest management (the 'Ente Foreste') of Sardinia marked different hiking routes with signposting, but you can also book quad tours with local agencies.

One of the most fascinating and at the same time easiest routes of the monte Limbara is the one that leads to the caves of Li Conchi, 7 huge granite rocks with large cavities, which were used as homes in ancient times. This route is also accessible by car, from the SS 392.

The top of the Limbara, punta Balistreri with a beautiful panoramic view, can also be reached by car, over a route of about 12 km, but with many curves.

From Li Conchi you can go down again through one of the most beautiful areas of the Limbara, through a landscape full of rocks in strange shapes and granite towers called “Inselberg”, further down you come to the old “Crispoli” fountain.

There are also more intensive and challenging routes through this beautiful landscape that can only be followed on foot or by mountain bike. In any case, the Limbara mountains are one of the Sardinian sights that you cannot miss.

One last tip: do not forget to bring some snacks such as Ozieri bread (thin, soft sheets of bread made from durum wheat, similar to wraps), which you can buy in all supermarkets here and which is typical of the area. Top with the excellent spicy cheese spread and local sausages, roll it up and you'll be prepared to handle the tiredness of the day. Enjoy your tour!

2. Sardinia Hidden Gem: Cala Luna

Located in the mesmerizing Gulf of Orosei, on the East coast of Sardinia, near the picturesque towns of Dorgali and Baunei, Cala Luna is a place you cannot miss when visiting Sardinia. In Cala Luna, you will find a wonderful golden beach hidden in a protected cove surrounded by scenic rock formations carved by the wind and time. Cala Luna has plenty of spacious natural caves where you can find shade, a clear turquoise sea, and unspoiled nature.

Cala Luna is a paradise for different outdoor and water sports enthusiasts. You can practice snorkeling, and if you are up to the challenge, even rock climbing and trekking. In fact, you can reach Cala Luna via the most challenging trekking trail on the island called the "Selvaggio Blu" which takes 6 days and 5 nights to complete. The trail starts from "Sa Pedra Longa" in the middle of the island and ends in Cala Luna. It is strongly advised to take this challenge in autumn or spring and to go only with expert guides. To reach this paradise more comfortably and quickly, you can take a boat from the tourist ports of Arbatax, Cala Gonone or Santa Maria Navarrese.

Tritt's tip: Stay in the nearby touristic village of Arbatax at the Arbatax Residence or at the Residence Il Sogno.

1. Sardinia Hidden Gem: Cala Goloritzè

Close to Cala Luna, you will find Cala Goloritzè, which is easily one of the most memorable places to see in Sardinia. Cala Goloritzè is where the scenic beauty of the Sardinian mountains meets the clear turquoise waters and tropical-style beaches of the Sardinian coast. The beach is made of smooth white sand and pebbles and is protected by scenic rock cliffs. The water is incredibly transparent, so you can clearly see the bottom of the sea without even needing snorkeling gear!

Scenic rock formations surround the cove, including an imponent arc of white rock carved by the waves and the wind and an elongated rock formation of pyramidal shape, very thin and long 143 meters. The air is perfumed by a forest of Mediterranean shrubs, endemic oak, and other Mediterranean trees.

You can reach Cala Goloritzè in different ways. Like the nearby Cala Luna, Cala Goloritzè is part of the "Selvaggio Blu" trekking trail. But worry not: there is an easier way to get to Cala Goloritzè. You can drive to the "Su Porteddu" parking spot near the town of Baunei, and then you will need to hike for 1 hour on the way down to the beach (1.5 hours on the way back, walking uphill).

The entry fee for the beach (in summer) is 6 € per ticket, including the parking lot. You need to book at least 72 hours in advance, and the access to the beach is only open from 7.30 in the morning to 15.00 in the afternoon.

Otherwise, you can reach Cala Goloritzè by boat, departing from Arbatax, Cala Gonone, or Santa Maria Navarrese.

Tritt's tip: Stay in the nearby touristic village of Arbatax at the Arbatax Residence or at the Residence Il Sogno.

You can email us for more information - holiday@tritt-sardinia.com .