860 relations: A Practical Handbook of British Beetles, Adalia bipunctata, Adephaga, Adolf Bernhard Meyer, African civet, Agathidium, Agrypnus, Agustinia, Aleurites moluccanus, Allen's swamp monkey, Almond moth, Alpine chough, Amara (genus), Amazon basin, Amazon insects, Ambrosia beetle, American Beetles, American black duck, American redstart, American robin, American three-toed woodpecker, American white ibis, Amida (beetle), Amphizoa, Andrew Murray (naturalist), Andrey Semyonov-Tyan-Shansky, Anethole, Anilius, Animal communication, Animal worship, Anobiidae, Anomochilus, Antenna (biology), Anthia, Anthicidae, Anthonomus, Aphodiinae, Aphthona, Aphthona flava, Aquatic insect, Araucarioxylon arizonicum, Archostemata, Arnold Förster, Arrhenotoky, Arthropod leg, Ascaris suum, Asclepias, Ashton Court, Asian black bear, Asian long-horned beetle, ... Expand index (810 more) » « Shrink index

A Practical Handbook of British Beetles

A Practical Handbook of British Beetles is a two-volume work on the British beetle fauna, by Norman H. Joy, first published by H. F. & G. Witherby in January 1932.

See Beetle and A Practical Handbook of British Beetles

Adalia bipunctata

Adalia bipunctata, commonly known as the two-spot ladybird, two-spotted ladybug or two-spotted lady beetle, is a carnivorous beetle of the family Coccinellidae that is found throughout the holarctic region.

See Beetle and Adalia bipunctata

Adephaga

The Adephaga (from Greek ἀδηφάγος, adephagos, "gluttonous"), with more than 40,000 recorded species in 10 families, are a suborder of highly specialized beetles and the second-largest suborder of the order Coleoptera.

See Beetle and Adephaga

Adolf Bernhard Meyer

Adolf Bernhard Meyer (11 October 1840, Hamburg – 22 August 1911, Dresden) was a German anthropologist, ornithologist, entomologist, and herpetologist.

See Beetle and Adolf Bernhard Meyer

African civet

The African civet (Civettictis civetta) is the largest representative of the African Viverridae and the sole member of its genus.

See Beetle and African civet

Agathidium

Agathidium is a genus of beetles in the family Leiodidae.

See Beetle and Agathidium

Agrypnus

Agrypnus is a genus of click beetle.

See Beetle and Agrypnus

Agustinia

Agustinia is a genus of sauropod dinosaurs from the Early Cretaceous Period of South America.

See Beetle and Agustinia

Aleurites moluccanus

Aleurites moluccanus (or moluccana), the candlenut, is a flowering tree in the spurge family, Euphorbiaceae, also known as candleberry, Indian walnut, kemiri, varnish tree, nuez de la India, buah keras, or kukui nut tree, and Kekuna tree.

See Beetle and Aleurites moluccanus

Allen's swamp monkey

The Allen's swamp monkey (Allenopithecus nigroviridis) is a primate species categorized in its own genus Allenopithecus in the Old World monkey family.

See Beetle and Allen's swamp monkey

Almond moth

The almond moth or tropical warehouse moth (Cadra cautella) is a small, stored-product pest.

See Beetle and Almond moth

Alpine chough

The Alpine chough, or yellow-billed chough (Pyrrhocorax graculus), is a bird in the crow family, one of only two species in the genus Pyrrhocorax.

See Beetle and Alpine chough

Amara (genus)

Amara is a large genus of carabid beetles, commonly called the sun beetles.

See Beetle and Amara (genus)

Amazon basin

The Amazon basin is the part of South America drained by the Amazon River and its tributaries.

See Beetle and Amazon basin

Amazon insects

The Amazon Rainforest and surrounding region is the most biodiverse on earth and no life form is more diverse than the insects of the Amazon.

See Beetle and Amazon insects

Ambrosia beetle

Ambrosia beetles are beetles of the weevil subfamilies Scolytinae and Platypodinae (Coleoptera, Curculionidae), which live in nutritional symbiosis with ambrosia fungi.

See Beetle and Ambrosia beetle

American Beetles

American Beetles is the single most comprehensive description of the beetles of North America north of the tropical area of Mexico.

See Beetle and American Beetles

American black duck

The American black duck (Anas rubripes) is a large dabbling duck in the family Anatidae.

See Beetle and American black duck

American redstart

The American redstart (Setophaga ruticilla) is a New World warbler.

See Beetle and American redstart

American robin

The American robin (Turdus migratorius) is a migratory songbird of the true thrush genus and Turdidae, the wider thrush family.

See Beetle and American robin

American three-toed woodpecker

The American three-toed woodpecker (Picoides dorsalis) is a medium-sized woodpecker (family Picidae).

See Beetle and American three-toed woodpecker

American white ibis

The American white ibis (Eudocimus albus) is a species of bird in the ibis family, Threskiornithidae.

See Beetle and American white ibis

Amida (beetle)

Amida is a genus of ladybirds primarily found in Asia.

See Beetle and Amida (beetle)

Amphizoa

Amphizoa is a genus of aquatic beetles in the suborder Adephaga, placed in its own monogeneric family, Amphizoidae.

See Beetle and Amphizoa

Andrew Murray (naturalist)

Andrew Dickson Murray FRSE FRPSE FLS (19 February 1812, Edinburgh – 10 January 1878, Kensington) was a Scottish lawyer, botanist, zoologist and entomologist.

See Beetle and Andrew Murray (naturalist)

Andrey Semyonov-Tyan-Shansky

Andrey Petrovich Semyonov-Tyan-Shansky (Андре́й Петро́вич Семёнов-Тянь-Ша́нский) (1866&ndash;1942) was a Russian entomologist specializing in beetles.

See Beetle and Andrey Semyonov-Tyan-Shansky

Anethole

Anethole (anise camphor) is an organic compound that is widely used as a flavoring substance.

See Beetle and Anethole

Anilius

The Aniliidae are a monotypic family created for the monotypic genus Anilius that contains the single species A. scytale.

See Beetle and Anilius

Animal communication

Animal communication is the transfer of information from one or a group of animals (sender or senders) to one or more other animals (receiver or receivers) that affects the current or future behavior of the receivers.

See Beetle and Animal communication

Animal worship

Animal worship (or zoolatry) refers to rituals involving animals, such as the glorification of animal deities or animal sacrifice.

See Beetle and Animal worship

Anobiidae

Anobiidae is a family of beetles.

See Beetle and Anobiidae

Anomochilus

The Anomochilidae, or anomochilids, are a monotypic family of snakes, created for the genus Anomochilus, which currently contains three species.

See Beetle and Anomochilus

Antenna (biology)

Antennae (singular: antenna), sometimes referred to as "feelers," are paired appendages used for sensing in arthropods.

See Beetle and Antenna (biology)

Anthia

Anthia, common name Saber-toothed ground beetle, it's a genus of the ground beetle family, the Carabidae.

See Beetle and Anthia

Anthicidae

The Anthicidae are a family of beetles that resemble ants.

See Beetle and Anthicidae

Anthonomus

Anthonomus is a genus of weevils.

See Beetle and Anthonomus

Aphodiinae

Aphodiinae is a subfamily of the scarab beetle family, Scarabaeidae.

See Beetle and Aphodiinae

Aphthona

Aphthona is a genus of beetle, in the leaf beetle family Chrysomelidae, native to Europe and Asia.

See Beetle and Aphthona

Aphthona flava

Aphthona flava is a beetle of the genus Aphthona.

See Beetle and Aphthona flava

Aquatic insect

Aquatic insects or water insects live some portion of their life cycle in the water.

See Beetle and Aquatic insect

Araucarioxylon arizonicum

Araucarioxylon arizonicum is an extinct species of conifer that is the state fossil of Arizona.

See Beetle and Araucarioxylon arizonicum

Archostemata

The Archostemata are the smallest suborder of beetles, consisting of fewer than 50 known species organised into five families.

See Beetle and Archostemata

Arnold Förster

Arnold Förster (20 January 1810 – 13 August 1884) was a German entomologist, who worked mainly on Coleoptera and Hymenoptera.

See Beetle and Arnold Förster

Arrhenotoky

Arrhenotoky (from Greek -τόκος -tókos "birth of -" + ἄρρην árrhēn "male person"), also known as arrhenotokous parthenogenesis, is a form of parthenogenesis in which unfertilized eggs develop into males.

See Beetle and Arrhenotoky

Arthropod leg

The arthropod leg is a form of jointed appendage of arthropods, usually used for walking.

See Beetle and Arthropod leg

Ascaris suum

Ascaris suum, also known as the large roundworm of pig, is a parasitic nematode that causes ascariasis in pigs.

See Beetle and Ascaris suum

Asclepias

Asclepias L. (1753), the milkweeds, is an American genus of herbaceous perennial, dicotyledonous plants that contains over 140 known species.

See Beetle and Asclepias

Ashton Court

Ashton Court is a mansion house and estate to the west of Bristol in England.

See Beetle and Ashton Court

Asian black bear

The Asian black bear (Ursus thibetanus, previously known as Selenarctos thibetanus), also known as the moon bear and the white-chested bear, is a medium-sized bear species native to Asia and largely adapted to arboreal life.

See Beetle and Asian black bear

Asian long-horned beetle

The Asian long-horned beetle (Anoplophora glabripennis), also known as the starry sky, sky beetle, or ALB, is native to eastern China, Japan, and Korea.

See Beetle and Asian long-horned beetle

Asilidae

The Asilidae are the robber fly family, also called assassin flies.

See Beetle and Asilidae

Asiloidea

The Asiloidea comprise a very large superfamily insects in the order Diptera, the true flies.

See Beetle and Asiloidea

Asimina

Asimina is a genus of small trees or shrubs described as a genus in 1763.

See Beetle and Asimina

Asimina triloba

Asimina triloba, the papaw, pawpaw, paw paw, paw-paw, common pawpaw, Quaker delight, or hillbilly mango is a small deciduous tree native to the eastern United States and Canada, producing a large, yellowish-green to brown fruit.

See Beetle and Asimina triloba

Asparagus beetle

Crioceris or asparagus beetle is a genus of the family Chrysomelidae of beetles.

See Beetle and Asparagus beetle

Atherospermataceae

The Atherospermataceae, commonly known as the southern sassafrases, are a family of broadleaf evergreen trees and shrubs.

See Beetle and Atherospermataceae

Atlases of the flora and fauna of Britain and Ireland

The biodiversity of Great Britain and Ireland is one of the most well-studied geographical areas of its size in the world.

See Beetle and Atlases of the flora and fauna of Britain and Ireland

Auckland Islands

The Auckland Islands (Māori: Motu Maha or Maungahuka) are an archipelago of New Zealand, lying south of the South Island.

See Beetle and Auckland Islands

Australian owlet-nightjar

The Australian owlet-nightjar (Aegotheles cristatus) is a nocturnal bird found in open woodland across Australia and in southern New Guinea.

See Beetle and Australian owlet-nightjar

Édouard Ménétries

Édouard Ménétries (Paris, France, 2 October 1802 – St. Petersburg, Imperial Russia, 10 April 1861) was a French entomologist, zoologist, and herpetologist.

See Beetle and Édouard Ménétries

Étienne Louis Geoffroy

Étienne Louis Geoffroy (October 12, 1725 – August 12, 1810) was a French entomologist and pharmacist.

See Beetle and Étienne Louis Geoffroy

Étienne Mulsant

Martial Étienne Mulsant (2 March 1797, Marnand, Rhône – 4 November 1880) was a French entomologist and ornithologist.

See Beetle and Étienne Mulsant

Ōban Star-Racers

is a French-Japanese anime series created by Savin Yeatman-Eiffel of Sav! The World Productions in association with multiple international companies.

See Beetle and Ōban Star-Racers

Babia Góra National Park

Babia Góra National Park (Babiogórski Park Narodowy) is one of the 23 national parks in Poland, located in the southern part of the country, in Lesser Poland Voivodeship, on the border with Slovakia.

See Beetle and Babia Góra National Park

Bacillus thuringiensis

Bacillus thuringiensis (or Bt) is a Gram-positive, soil-dwelling bacterium, commonly used as a biological pesticide.

See Beetle and Bacillus thuringiensis

Baghdad Battery

The Baghdad Battery or Parthian Battery is a set of three artifacts which were found together: a ceramic pot, a tube of copper, and a rod of iron.

See Beetle and Baghdad Battery

Baissa

Baissa is a lower Cretaceous locality in Siberia, on the left bank of the Vitim River.

See Beetle and Baissa

Banded mongoose

The banded mongoose (Mungos mungo) is a mongoose commonly found in the central and eastern parts of Africa.

See Beetle and Banded mongoose

Banded stilt

The banded stilt (Cladorhynchus leucocephalus) is a nomadic wader of the stilt and avocet family, Recurvirostridae, native to Australia.

See Beetle and Banded stilt

Banksia ilicifolia

Banksia ilicifolia, commonly known as holly-leaved banksia, is a tree in the family Proteaceae.

See Beetle and Banksia ilicifolia

Bantay

, officially the, is a settlement_text in the province of,. According to the, it has a population of people.

See Beetle and Bantay

Bark beetle

A bark beetle is one of about 220 genera with 6,000 species of beetles in the subfamily Scolytinae.

See Beetle and Bark beetle

Baron Cajetan von Felder

Baron Cajetan von Felder (Cajetan Freiherr von Felder; 19 September 1814 &ndash; 30 November 1894) was an Austrian lawyer, entomologist and liberal politician.

See Beetle and Baron Cajetan von Felder

Barred owl

The barred owl (Strix varia), also known as northern barred owl or hoot owl, is a true owl native to eastern North America.

See Beetle and Barred owl

Bat-eared fox

The bat-eared fox (Otocyon megalotis) is a species of fox found on the African savanna, named for its large ears,.

See Beetle and Bat-eared fox

Bayes' theorem

In probability theory and statistics, Bayes’ theorem (alternatively Bayes’ law or Bayes' rule, also written as Bayes’s theorem) describes the probability of an event, based on prior knowledge of conditions that might be related to the event.

See Beetle and Bayes' theorem

Bean weevil

The bean weevils or seed beetles are a subfamily (Bruchinae) of beetles, now placed in the family Chrysomelidae, though they have historically been treated as a separate family.

See Beetle and Bean weevil

Beautiful nuthatch

The beautiful nuthatch (Sitta formosa, sometimes called Callisitta formosa) is a bird species in the Sittidae family, collectively known as nuthatches.

See Beetle and Beautiful nuthatch

Beauveria bassiana

Beauveria bassiana is a fungus that grows naturally in soils throughout the world and acts as a parasite on various arthropod species, causing white muscardine disease; it thus belongs to the entomopathogenic fungi.

See Beetle and Beauveria bassiana

Bee

Bees are flying insects closely related to wasps and ants, known for their role in pollination and, in the case of the best-known bee species, the European honey bee, for producing honey and beeswax.

See Beetle and Bee

Beetle (disambiguation)

A beetle is an insect belonging to the order Coleoptera.

See Beetle and Beetle (disambiguation)

Belidae

Belidae is a family of weevils, called belids or primitive weevils because they have straight antennae, unlike the "true weevils" or Curculionidae which have elbowed antennae.

See Beetle and Belidae

Bermuda rock skink

The Bermuda skink or rock lizard (Plestiodon longirostris, formerly Eumeces longirostrisBrandley M.C., Schmitz A., Reeder T.W. (2005). "Partitioned Bayesian analyses, partition choice, and the phylogenetic relationships of scincid lizards." Systematic Biology 54 (3): 373–390. Smith, H.M. (2005). "Plestiodon: a replacement name for most members of the genus Eumeces in North America." Journal of Kansas Herpetology 14: 15–16.) is a critically endangered species and the only endemic land-living vertebrate of Bermuda.

See Beetle and Bermuda rock skink

Bertie Beetle

A Bertie Beetle is an Australian small chocolate bar manufactured by Nestlé.

See Beetle and Bertie Beetle

Big brown bat

The big brown bat (Eptesicus fuscus) is a widespread species of bat found throughout North America, Central America, the Caribbean, and extreme northern South America.

See Beetle and Big brown bat

Biodiversity of New Zealand

The biodiversity of New Zealand, a large island nation located in the southwestern Pacific Ocean, is varied and distinctive accumulated over many millions of years as lineages evolved in the local circumstances.

See Beetle and Biodiversity of New Zealand

Biological pest control

Biological control or biocontrol is a method of controlling pests such as insects, mites, weeds and plant diseases using other organisms.

See Beetle and Biological pest control

Biomimetics

Biomimetics or biomimicry is the imitation of the models, systems, and elements of nature for the purpose of solving complex human problems.

See Beetle and Biomimetics

Bionics

Bionics or Biologically inspired engineering is the application of biological methods and systems found in nature to the study and design of engineering systems and modern technology.

See Beetle and Bionics

Biopesticide

Biopesticides, a contraction of 'biological pesticides', include several types of pest management intervention: through predatory, parasitic, or chemical relationships.

See Beetle and Biopesticide

Bisaya nossidiiformis

Bisaya nossidiiformis is a beetle that is native to Iran.

See Beetle and Bisaya nossidiiformis

Black slug

The black slug (also known as black arion, European black slug, or large black slug) Arion ater L. is a large terrestrial gastropod mollusk in the family Arionidae—the round back slugs.

See Beetle and Black slug

Black Widow (video game)

Black Widow is a vector arcade game developed by Atari, Inc. released in 1982.

See Beetle and Black Widow (video game)

Black-backed jackal

The black-backed jackal (Canis mesomelas) is a canid native to two areas of Africa, separated by roughly 900 km.

See Beetle and Black-backed jackal

Black-capped vireo

The black-capped vireo (Vireo atricapilla) is a small bird native to the United States and Mexico.

See Beetle and Black-capped vireo

Black-faced grosbeak

The black-faced grosbeak (Caryothraustes poliogaster) is a large seed-eating bird in the cardinal family (Cardinalidae), which is a resident breeding species from south-eastern Mexico to eastern Panama.

See Beetle and Black-faced grosbeak

Black-tailed godwit

The black-tailed godwit (Limosa limosa) is a large, long-legged, long-billed shorebird first described by Carl Linnaeus in 1758.

See Beetle and Black-tailed godwit

Blister beetle

Blister beetles are beetles of the family Meloidae, so called for their defensive secretion of a blistering agent, cantharidin.

See Beetle and Blister beetle

Bloody-nosed beetle

The bloody-nosed beetle (Timarcha tenebricosa), also called blood spewer or blood spewing beetle, is a leaf beetle native to Europe.

See Beetle and Bloody-nosed beetle

Blue ant

The blue ant (Diamma bicolor), also known as the blue-ant or bluebottle is, despite its name and its appearance, not an ant at all, but rather a species of large solitary parasitic wasp sometimes known as a flower wasp.

See Beetle and Blue ant

Blue willow beetle

The blue willow beetle (Phratora vulgatissima), formerly Phyllodecta vulgatissima, is a herbivourous beetle of the family Chrysomelidae.

See Beetle and Blue willow beetle

Blue-faced honeyeater

The blue-faced honeyeater (Entomyzon cyanotis), also colloquially known as the bananabird, is a passerine bird of the honeyeater family, Meliphagidae.

See Beetle and Blue-faced honeyeater

Blue-headed vireo

The blue-headed vireo (Vireo solitarius) is a Neotropical migrating song bird found in North and Central America.

See Beetle and Blue-headed vireo

Bluespring Caverns

Bluespring Caverns is a cave system located in Lawrence County, Indiana, approximately 80 miles (128 km) south of Indianapolis.

See Beetle and Bluespring Caverns

Boll weevil

The boll weevil (Anthonomus grandis) is a beetle which feeds on cotton buds and flowers.

See Beetle and Boll weevil

Boll Weevil Monument

The Boll Weevil Monument in downtown Enterprise, Alabama, United States is a prominent landmark and tribute erected by the citizens of Enterprise in 1919 to show their appreciation to an insect, the boll weevil, for its profound influence on the area's agriculture and economy.

See Beetle and Boll Weevil Monument

Bombardier beetle

Bombardier beetles are ground beetles (Carabidae) in the tribes Brachinini, Paussini, Ozaenini, or Metriini—more than 500 species altogether—which are most notable for the defense mechanism that gives them their name: when disturbed, they eject a hot noxious chemical spray from the tip of the abdomen with a popping sound.

See Beetle and Bombardier beetle

Bombyliidae

The Bombyliidae are a family of flies.

See Beetle and Bombyliidae

Bookham Commons

Bookham Commons are two commons, situated just to the north of the villages of Great Bookham and Little Bookham, in Surrey, England, 1.51 square kilometres in extent; the individual parts are named Great Bookham Common and Little Bookham Common.

See Beetle and Bookham Commons

Bostrichiformia

Bostrichiformia is an infraorder of polyphagan beetles.

See Beetle and Bostrichiformia

Bostrichoidea

Bostrichoidea is a superfamily of beetles.

See Beetle and Bostrichoidea

Braconidae

The Braconidae are a family of parasitoid wasps.

See Beetle and Braconidae

Brocken

The Brocken, also sometimes referred to as the Blocksberg, is the highest peak of the Harz mountain range and also the highest peak of Northern Germany; it is located near Schierke in the German state of Saxony-Anhalt between the rivers Weser and Elbe.

See Beetle and Brocken

Bronze birch borer

The bronze birch borer Agrilus anxius is a wood-boring Buprestid beetle native to North America, more numerous in warmer parts of the continent and rare in the north.

See Beetle and Bronze birch borer

Brook trout

The brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis) is a species of freshwater fish in the salmon family Salmonidae.

See Beetle and Brook trout

Brown bear

The brown bear (Ursus arctos) is a bear that is found across much of northern Eurasia and North America.

See Beetle and Brown bear

Bumblebee

A bumblebee (or bumble bee, bumble-bee or humble-bee) is any of over 250 species in the genus Bombus, part of Apidae, one of the bee families.

See Beetle and Bumblebee

Buprestidae

Buprestidae is a family of beetles known as jewel beetles or metallic wood-boring beetles because of their glossy iridescent colors.

See Beetle and Buprestidae

Buprestoidea

Buprestoidea is a superfamily of beetles.

See Beetle and Buprestoidea

Bura (beetle)

Bura is a genus of ladybirds (family Coccinellidae).

See Beetle and Bura (beetle)

Burying beetle

Burying beetles or sexton beetles (genus Nicrophorus) are the best-known members of the family Silphidae (carrion beetles).

See Beetle and Burying beetle

Buteo

Buteo is a genus of medium to fairly large, wide-ranging raptors with a robust body and broad wings.

See Beetle and Buteo

Byrrhoidea

The superfamily Byrrhoidea includes a number of beetle families, most of which are either aquatic or associated with a semi-aquatic habitat.

See Beetle and Byrrhoidea

Calodactylodes

Calodactylodes is a genus of lizards in the family Gekkonidae (geckos) distributed in peninsular India and Sri Lanka.

See Beetle and Calodactylodes

Camillo Róndani

Camillo Róndani (21 November 1808 &ndash; 17 September 1879) was an Italian entomologist noted for his studies of Diptera.

See Beetle and Camillo Róndani

Campephilus

Campephilus is a genus of large American woodpeckers in the family Picidae.

See Beetle and Campephilus

Cantharis fusca

Cantharis fusca is a species of soldier beetle.

See Beetle and Cantharis fusca

Cardinal beetle

The name cardinal beetle typically refers to three different species of beetles.

See Beetle and Cardinal beetle

Caridae

Caridae is a small Gondwanan family of weevils.

See Beetle and Caridae

Carl August Dohrn

Carl August Dohrn (27 June 1806 – 10 May 1892) was a German entomologist.

See Beetle and Carl August Dohrn

Carl Gustaf Mannerheim (naturalist)

Count Carl Gustaf Mannerheim (August 10, 1797 in Askainen, Finland – October 9, 1854 in Stockholm, Sweden) was a Finnish entomologist and governor of the Viipuri province in the Grand Duchy of Finland.

See Beetle and Carl Gustaf Mannerheim (naturalist)

Carl Gustav Jablonsky

Carl Gustav Jablonsky (1756 &ndash; 25 May 1787) was a Berlin naturalist, entomologist and illustrator.

See Beetle and Carl Gustav Jablonsky

Carl Henrik Boheman

Carl Henrik Boheman (10 July 1796 – 2 November 1868) was a Swedish entomologist.

See Beetle and Carl Henrik Boheman

Carl Johan Schönherr

Carl Johan Schönherr (10 June 1772 – 28 March 1848) was a Swedish entomologist who revised the taxonomy of beetles, including weevils.

See Beetle and Carl Johan Schönherr

Carl Reinhold Sahlberg

Carl Reinhold Sahlberg (January 22, 1779, Eura – October 18, 1860, Yläne) was a Finnish naturalist, primarily an entomologist specializing in beetles.

See Beetle and Carl Reinhold Sahlberg

Carl Stål

Carl Stål (21 March 1833 – 13 June 1878) was a Swedish entomologist specialising in Hemiptera.

See Beetle and Carl Stål

Carlo Alzona

Carlo Alzona was an Italian medical doctor, an entomologist and a malacologist.

See Beetle and Carlo Alzona

Carnewas and Bedruthan Steps

Carnewas & Bedruthan Steps (Karn Havos, meaning rock-pile of summer dwelling and Bos Rudhen, meaning Red-one's dwelling) is a stretch of coastline located on the north Cornish coast between Padstow and Newquay, in Cornwall, England, United Kingdom.

See Beetle and Carnewas and Bedruthan Steps

Carolina wren

The Carolina wren (Thryothorus ludovicianus) is a common species of wren that is a resident in the eastern half of the United States of America, the extreme south of Ontario, Canada, and the extreme northeast of Mexico.

See Beetle and Carolina wren

Carrion flower

Carrion flowers, also known as corpse flowers or stinking flowers, are flowers that emit an odor that smells like rotting flesh.

See Beetle and Carrion flower

Caspar Erasmus Duftschmid

Caspar Erasmus Duftschmid properly Kaspar was an Austrian naturalist and physician who made significant contributions to entomology, especially Coleoptera.

See Beetle and Caspar Erasmus Duftschmid

Caspian plover

The Caspian plover (Charadrius asiaticus) is a wader in the plover family of birds.

See Beetle and Caspian plover

Cassin's sparrow

Cassin's sparrow (Peucaea cassinii) is a medium-sized sparrow.

See Beetle and Cassin's sparrow

Centipede

Centipedes (from Latin prefix centi-, "hundred", and pes, pedis, "foot") are arthropods belonging to the class Chilopoda of the subphylum Myriapoda, an arthropod group which also includes Millipedes and other multi-legged creatures.

See Beetle and Centipede

Cereal leaf beetle

The cereal leaf beetle (Oulema melanopus) is a significant crop pest, described by Carl Linnaeus in 1758.

See Beetle and Cereal leaf beetle

Cerrado

The Cerrado is a vast tropical savanna ecoregion of Brazil, particularly in the states of Goiás, Mato Grosso do Sul, Mato Grosso, Tocantins and Minas Gerais.

See Beetle and Cerrado

Cetonia aurata

Cetonia aurata, called the rose chafer or the green rose chafer, is a beetle, long, that has a metallic structurally coloured green and a distinct V-shaped scutellum.

See Beetle and Cetonia aurata

Chalcid wasp

Chalcid wasps (for their metallic colour) are insects within the superfamily Chalcidoidea, part of the order Hymenoptera.

See Beetle and Chalcid wasp

Charles Darwin's education

Charles Darwin's education gave him a foundation in the doctrine of Creation prevalent throughout the West at the time, as well as knowledge of medicine and theology.

See Beetle and Charles Darwin's education

Charles De Geer

Baron Charles de Geer (the family is usually known as De Geer with a capitalized "De"; Finspång in Risinge 30 January 1720 – Stockholm 7 March 1778) was a Swedish industrialist and entomologist.

See Beetle and Charles De Geer

Charles Joseph Gahan

Charles Joseph Gahan (20 January 1862 – 21 January 1939) was an Irish entomologist.

See Beetle and Charles Joseph Gahan

Charles Nicholas Aubé

Charles Nicholas Aubé (6 May 1802 in Paris &ndash; 15 October 1869), was a French physician and entomologist.

See Beetle and Charles Nicholas Aubé

Cherimoya

The cherimoya (Annona cherimola), also spelled chirimoya and called chirimuya by the Inca people, is an edible fruit-bearing species of the genus Annona from the family Annonaceae.

See Beetle and Cherimoya

Chestnut-backed owlet

The chestnut-backed owlet (Glaucidium castanotum) (often misspelled Glaucidium castanonotum), is an owl which is endemic to Sri Lanka.

See Beetle and Chestnut-backed owlet

Chilean Spanish

Chilean Spanish (español chileno, español de Chile or castellano de Chile) is any of several varieties of Spanish spoken in most of Chile.

See Beetle and Chilean Spanish

Chilocorus stigma

Chilocorus stigma, commonly known as the twice-stabbed ladybug, is a native resident of the United States and Canada but does not live west of the Sierra Nevada.

See Beetle and Chilocorus stigma

Chironomidae

The Chironomidae (informally known as chironomids, nonbiting midges, or lake flies) comprise a families of nematoceran flies with a global distribution.

See Beetle and Chironomidae

Chitin

Chitin (C8H13O5N)n, a long-chain polymer of ''N''-acetylglucosamine, is a derivative of glucose.

See Beetle and Chitin

Chlamydosaurus

The frilled-necked lizard (Chlamydosaurus kingii), also known as the frilled lizard, frilled dragon or frilled agama, is a species of lizard which is found mainly in northern Australia and southern New Guinea.

See Beetle and Chlamydosaurus

Chough

There are two species of passerine birds commonly called chough that constitute the genus Pyrrhocorax of the Corvidae (crow) family of birds.

See Beetle and Chough

Christian Rudolph Wilhelm Wiedemann

Christian Rudolph Wilhelm Wiedemann (December 7, 1770 in Brunswick – December 31, 1840 in Kiel), was a German physician, historian, naturalist and entomologist.

See Beetle and Christian Rudolph Wilhelm Wiedemann

Christmas beetle

Christmas beetle is a name commonly applied to the Australian beetle genus Anoplognathus.

See Beetle and Christmas beetle

Chromoplast

Chromoplasts are plastids, heterogeneous organelles responsible for pigment synthesis and storage in specific photosynthetic eukaryotes.

See Beetle and Chromoplast

Chrysomeloidea

The Chrysomeloidea are an enormous superfamily of beetles, with tens of thousands of species, mostly in the families Cerambycidae (the long-horned beetles) and Chrysomelidae, the leaf beetles.

See Beetle and Chrysomeloidea

Chrząszcz

Chrząszcz (beetle, chafer) by Jan Brzechwa is a poem famous for being one of the hardest-to-pronounce texts in Polish literature, and may cause problems even for adult, native Polish speakers.

See Beetle and Chrząszcz

Chuck-will's-widow

The chuck-will's-widow (Antrostomus carolinensis) is a nocturnal bird of the nightjar family Caprimulgidae.

See Beetle and Chuck-will's-widow

Cicindela sexguttata

The six-spotted tiger beetle, also known as the six-spotted green tiger beetle (Cicindela sexguttata), is a common North American species of ground beetle in the Cicindelinae subfamily.

See Beetle and Cicindela sexguttata

Cicindela trifasciata sigmoidea

Cicindela trifasciata sigmoidea, commonly called the mudflat tiger beetle, is a species of tiger beetle.

See Beetle and Cicindela trifasciata sigmoidea

Citrus long-horned beetle

The citrus long-horned beetle (Anoplophora chinensis) is a long-horned beetle native to Japan, China and Korea, where it is considered a serious pest.

See Beetle and Citrus long-horned beetle

Cladodes

Cladodes is a genus of firefly beetles.

See Beetle and Cladodes

Cleroidea

Cleroidea is a small superfamily of beetles.

See Beetle and Cleroidea

Click beetle

Insects in the family Elateridae are commonly called click beetles (or "typical click beetles" to distinguish them from the related families Cerophytidae, Eucnemidae, and Plastoceridae).

See Beetle and Click beetle

Climate change

Climate change is a change in the statistical distribution of weather patterns when that change lasts for an extended period of time (i.e., decades to millions of years).

See Beetle and Climate change

Clodoveo Carrión Mora

Clodoveo Carrión Mora (1883–1957) was a palaeontologist and naturalist who is regarded as the most prolific and erudite natural scientist of Ecuador of the 20th century.

See Beetle and Clodoveo Carrión Mora

Coarse woody debris

Coarse woody debris (CWD) or coarse woody habitat (CWH) refers to fallen dead trees and the remains of large branches on the ground in forests and in rivers or wetlands.

See Beetle and Coarse woody debris

Coccinella novemnotata

Coccinella novemnotata, the nine-spotted ladybug or nine-spotted lady beetle, is a species of ladybug native to North America.

See Beetle and Coccinella novemnotata

Coccinella septempunctata

Coccinella septempunctata, the seven-spot ladybird (or, in North America, seven-spotted ladybug or "C-7"), is the most common ladybird in Europe.

See Beetle and Coccinella septempunctata

Cock Robin

"Who Killed Cock Robin" is an English nursery rhyme, which has been much used as a murder archetype in world culture.

See Beetle and Cock Robin

Cockchafer

The cockchafer, colloquially called May bug or doodlebug, is a European beetle of the genus Melolontha, in the family Scarabaeidae.

See Beetle and Cockchafer

Codling moth

The codling moth (Cydia pomonella) is a member of the Lepidopteran family Tortricidae.

See Beetle and Codling moth

Coelophysis

Coelophysis is an extinct genus of coelophysid theropod dinosaur that lived approximately 203 to 196 million years ago during the latter part of the Triassic Period in what is now the southwestern United States and also in South Africa and Zimbabwe.

See Beetle and Coelophysis

Coelus

Coelus is a genus of beetles in the family Tenebrionidae.

See Beetle and Coelus

Coevolution

In biology, coevolution occurs when two or more species reciprocally affect each other's evolution.

See Beetle and Coevolution

Coffee

Coffee is a brewed drink prepared from roasted coffee beans, which are the seeds of berries from the Coffea plant.

See Beetle and Coffee

Coleopterology

Coleopterology (from Coleoptera and Greek -λογία, -logia) is a branch of entomology, the scientific study of beetles of the order Coleoptera.

See Beetle and Coleopterology

Colombia

Colombia, officially the Republic of Colombia, is a sovereign state largely situated in the northwest of South America, with territories in Central America.

See Beetle and Colombia

Colorado potato beetle

The Colorado potato beetle (Leptinotarsa decemlineata), also known as the Colorado beetle, the ten-striped spearman, the ten-lined potato beetle or the potato bug, is a major pest of potato crops.

See Beetle and Colorado potato beetle

Columbia spotted frog

The Columbia spotted frog (Rana luteiventris) is a North American species of frog.

See Beetle and Columbia spotted frog

Commensalism

Commensalism is a long term biological interaction (symbiosis) in which members of one species gain benefits while those of the other species are neither benefited nor harmed.

See Beetle and Commensalism

Common asparagus beetle

The common asparagus beetle (Crioceris asparagi) is an important pest of asparagus crops both in Europe and in North America.

See Beetle and Common asparagus beetle

Common furniture beetle

The common furniture beetle or common house borer (Anobium punctatum) is a woodboring beetle.

See Beetle and Common furniture beetle

Common grasshopper warbler

The common grasshopper warbler (Locustella naevia) is a species of Old World warbler in the grass warbler genus Locustella.

See Beetle and Common grasshopper warbler

Common kestrel

The common kestrel (Falco tinnunculus) is a bird of prey species belonging to the kestrel group of the falcon family Falconidae.

See Beetle and Common kestrel

Common planigale

The common planigale (Planigale maculata), also known as the pygmy planigale or the coastal planigale, is one of many small marsupial carnivores known as "marsupial mice" found in Australia.

See Beetle and Common planigale

Common poorwill

The common poorwill (Phalaenoptilus nuttallii) is a nocturnal bird of the family Caprimulgidae, the nightjars.

See Beetle and Common poorwill

Common starling

The common starling (Sturnus vulgaris), also known as the European starling, or in the British Isles just the starling, is a medium-sized passerine bird in the starling family, Sturnidae.

See Beetle and Common starling

Common tern

The common tern (Sterna hirundo) is a seabird in the family Laridae.

See Beetle and Common tern

Common toad

The common toad, European toad, or in Anglophone parts of Europe, simply the toad (Bufo bufo, from Latin bufo "toad"), is an amphibian found throughout most of Europe (with the exception of Ireland, Iceland, and some Mediterranean islands), in the western part of North Asia, and in a small portion of Northwest Africa.

See Beetle and Common toad

Conopophaga

Conopophaga is a genus of birds in the gnateater family.

See Beetle and Conopophaga

Coppicing

Coppicing is a traditional method of woodland management which exploits the capacity of many species of trees to put out new shoots from their stump or roots if cut down.

See Beetle and Coppicing

Coprophilus

Coprophilus (from Greek 'dung-loving') is, with about 30 species, a relatively small genus of staphylinid beetles.

See Beetle and Coprophilus

Cotton

Cotton is a soft, fluffy staple fiber that grows in a boll, or protective case, around the seeds of the cotton plants of the genus Gossypium in the mallow family Malvaceae.

See Beetle and Cotton

Coyote

The coyote (Canis latrans); from Nahuatl) is a canine native to North America. It is smaller than its close relative, the gray wolf, and slightly smaller than the closely related eastern wolf and red wolf. It fills much of the same ecological niche as the golden jackal does in Eurasia, though it is larger and more predatory, and is sometimes called the American jackal by zoologists. The coyote is listed as least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature due to its wide distribution and abundance throughout North America, southwards through Mexico, and into Central America. The species is versatile, able to adapt to and expand into environments modified by humans. It is enlarging its range, with coyotes moving into urban areas in the Eastern U.S., and was sighted in eastern Panama (across the Panama Canal from their home range) for the first time in 2013., 19 coyote subspecies are recognized. The average male weighs and the average female. Their fur color is predominantly light gray and red or fulvous interspersed with black and white, though it varies somewhat with geography. It is highly flexible in social organization, living either in a family unit or in loosely knit packs of unrelated individuals. It has a varied diet consisting primarily of animal meat, including deer, rabbits, hares, rodents, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, and invertebrates, though it may also eat fruits and vegetables on occasion. Its characteristic vocalization is a howl made by solitary individuals. Humans are the coyote's greatest threat, followed by cougars and gray wolves. In spite of this, coyotes sometimes mate with gray, eastern, or red wolves, producing "coywolf" hybrids. In the northeastern United States and eastern Canada, the eastern coyote (a larger subspecies, though still smaller than wolves) is the result of various historical and recent matings with various types of wolves. Genetic studies show that most North American wolves contain some level of coyote DNA. The coyote is a prominent character in Native American folklore, mainly in the Southwestern United States and Mexico, usually depicted as a trickster that alternately assumes the form of an actual coyote or a man. As with other trickster figures, the coyote uses deception and humor to rebel against social conventions. The animal was especially respected in Mesoamerican cosmology as a symbol of military might. After the European colonization of the Americas, it was reviled in Anglo-American culture as a cowardly and untrustworthy animal. Unlike wolves (gray, eastern, or red), which have undergone an improvement of their public image, attitudes towards the coyote remain largely negative.

See Beetle and Coyote

Crepuscular animal

Crepuscular animals are those that are active primarily during twilight (that is, the periods of dawn and dusk).

See Beetle and Crepuscular animal

Crex

Crex is a small genus of birds in the rail family.

See Beetle and Crex

Cryptozoology

Cryptozoology is a pseudoscience that aims to prove the existence of entities from the folklore record, such as Bigfoot or chupacabras, as well as animals otherwise considered extinct, such as non-avian dinosaurs.

See Beetle and Cryptozoology

Cucujidae

The Cucujidae, "flat bark beetles," are a family of distinctively flat beetles found worldwide (except Africa and Antarctica) under the bark of dead trees.

See Beetle and Cucujidae

Cucujiformia

Cucujiformia is an infraorder of polyphagan beetles, representing the vast majority of plant-eating beetles.

See Beetle and Cucujiformia

Cucujoidea

Cucujoidea is a superfamily of beetles.

See Beetle and Cucujoidea

Cupedidae

The Cupedidae are a small family of beetles, notable for the square pattern of "windows" on their elytra (hard forewings), which give the family their common name of reticulated beetles.

See Beetle and Cupedidae

Curculionidae

The Curculionidae are the family of the "true" weevils (or "snout beetles").

See Beetle and Curculionidae

Curculioninae

The beetle subfamily Curculioninae is part of the weevil family Curculionidae.

See Beetle and Curculioninae

Curve-billed thrasher

The curve-billed thrasher (Toxostoma curvirostre) is a medium-sized mimid that is a member of the genus Toxostoma, native to the southwestern United States and much of Mexico.

See Beetle and Curve-billed thrasher

Cutthroat trout

The cutthroat trout is a fish species of the family Salmonidae native to cold-water tributaries of the Pacific Ocean, Rocky Mountains, and Great Basin in North America.

See Beetle and Cutthroat trout

Cycad

Cycads are seed plants with a long fossil history that were formerly more abundant and more diverse than they are today.

See Beetle and Cycad

Cycadales

Cycadales is an order of seed plants that includes all the extant cycads.

See Beetle and Cycadales

Dactyloidae

Dactyloidae are a family of lizards commonly known as anoles and native to warmer parts of the Americas, ranging from southeastern United States to Paraguay.

See Beetle and Dactyloidae

Dalechampia

Dalechampia is a genus of plant of the family Euphorbiaceae and of the monogeneric subtribe Dalechampiinae.

See Beetle and Dalechampia

Dalmatian pelican

The Dalmatian pelican (Pelecanus crispus) is the most massive member of the pelican family, and perhaps the world's largest freshwater bird, although rivaled in weight and length by the largest swans.

See Beetle and Dalmatian pelican

Daniel Ziegler

Rev.

See Beetle and Daniel Ziegler

Darkling beetle

Darkling beetle is the common name of the large family of beetles, Tenebrionidae.

See Beetle and Darkling beetle

Darrell Issa

Darrell Edward Issa (born November 1, 1953) is the Republican U.S. Representative for California's 49th congressional district, serving in Congress since 2001.

See Beetle and Darrell Issa

Dartford warbler

The Dartford warbler (Sylvia undata) is a typical warbler from the warmer parts of western Europe and northwestern Africa.

See Beetle and Dartford warbler

Darwin's fox

Darwin's fox or Darwin's Zorro (Lycalopex fulvipes) is a endangered canine from the genus Lycalopex.

See Beetle and Darwin's fox

Dasygnathoides

Dasygnathoides is an extinct genus of pseudosuchian from the Late Triassic (Carnian) Lossiemouth Sandstone of Scotland.

See Beetle and Dasygnathoides

Dasygnathus

Dasygnathus is a genus of large scarab beetles found in Australia.

See Beetle and Dasygnathus

Daucus

Daucus is a worldwide genus of herbaceous plants of the family Apiaceae of which the best-known species is the cultivated carrot.

See Beetle and Daucus

Deathwatch beetle

The deathwatch beetle, Xestobium rufovillosum, is a woodboring beetle.

See Beetle and Deathwatch beetle

Dermestidae

Dermestidae are a family of Coleoptera that are commonly referred to as skin beetles.

See Beetle and Dermestidae

Derodontidae

Derodontidae is a family of beetles, in its own superfamily, Derodontoidea, sometimes known as the tooth-necked fungus beetles.

See Beetle and Derodontidae

Desert bandicoot

The desert bandicoot (Perameles eremiana) is an extinct bandicoot of the arid country in the centre of Australia.

See Beetle and Desert bandicoot

Desert locust

The desert locust (Schistocerca gregaria) is a species of locust.

See Beetle and Desert locust

Desert wheatear

The desert wheatear (Oenanthe deserti) is a wheatear, a small passerine bird that was formerly classed as a member of the thrush family Turdidae, but is now more generally considered to be an Old World flycatcher (Muscicapidae).

See Beetle and Desert wheatear

Devil's coach horse beetle

The Devil's coach-horse beetle (Ocypus olens) is a species of beetle belonging to the large family of the rove beetles (Staphylinidae).

See Beetle and Devil's coach horse beetle

Dhlinza Forest

The Dlinza Forest is a subtropical forest or Coastal Scarp Forest in Eshowe, Zululand, South Africa, one of five natural forests running in a 100 km line running northwest from the coast.

See Beetle and Dhlinza Forest

Diabrotica

Diabrotica is a widespread genus of beetles, sometimes referred to as cucumber beetles or corn rootworms, in the family Chrysomelidae.

See Beetle and Diabrotica

Diapause

Diapause, when referencing animal dormancy, is the delay in development in response to regularly and recurring periods of adverse environmental conditions.

See Beetle and Diapause

Dinosaur King

is a card-based arcade game from Sega that uses the same gameplay mechanics from Mushiking but uses super-powered dinosaurs instead of beetles.

See Beetle and Dinosaur King

Double-banded plover

The double-banded plover (Charadrius bicinctus), known as the banded dotterel in New Zealand, is a species of bird in the plover family.

See Beetle and Double-banded plover

Driftwood Canyon Provincial Park

Driftwood Canyon Provincial Park is a provincial park in British Columbia, Canada.

See Beetle and Driftwood Canyon Provincial Park

Drosophila

Drosophila is a genus of flies, belonging to the family Drosophilidae, whose members are often called "small fruit flies" or (less frequently) pomace flies, vinegar flies, or wine flies, a reference to the characteristic of many species to linger around overripe or rotting fruit.

See Beetle and Drosophila

Drugstore beetle

The drugstore beetle (Stegobium paniceum), also known as the bread beetle or biscuit beetle, is a tiny, brown beetle that can be found infesting a wide variety of dried plant products, where it is among the most common non-weevils to be found.

See Beetle and Drugstore beetle

Dryocopus

Dryocopus is a genus of large powerful woodpeckers, typically 35–45 cm in length.

See Beetle and Dryocopus

Dryophthorinae

Dryophthorinae is a weevil subfamily within the family Curculionidae.

See Beetle and Dryophthorinae

Dubthach Dóeltenga

In the Ulster Cycle of Irish mythology, Dubthach Dóeltenga ("beetle-tongue", beetles being proverbially black) was a cynical ally of Fergus mac Róich who rarely had a good word to say about anyone.

See Beetle and Dubthach Dóeltenga

Duel Masters Trading Card Game

The Duel Masters Trading Card Game is an out-of-print two-player or two vs.

See Beetle and Duel Masters Trading Card Game

Dull-blue flycatcher

The dull-blue flycatcher (Eumyias sordidus) is a small passerine bird in the flycatcher family, Muscicapidae.

See Beetle and Dull-blue flycatcher

Dung beetle

Dung beetles are beetles that feed partly or exclusively on feces (dung).

See Beetle and Dung beetle

Dunster

Dunster is a village, civil parish and former manor within the English county of Somerset, today just within the north-eastern boundary of the Exmoor National Park.

See Beetle and Dunster

Dusky grouse

The dusky grouse (Dendragapus obscurus) is a species of forest-dwelling grouse native to the Rocky Mountains in North America.

See Beetle and Dusky grouse

Dynastes tityus

Dynastes tityus, the eastern Hercules beetle, is a species of rhinoceros beetle that lives in the Eastern United States.

See Beetle and Dynastes tityus

Dynastinae

Dynastinae or rhinoceros beetles are a subfamily of the scarab beetle family (Scarabaeidae).

See Beetle and Dynastinae

Dysderidae

The family Dysderidae (woodlouse hunters, sowbug-eating spiders or cell spiders) are araneomorph spiders found primarily in Eurasia, although extending into North Africa, with very few species occurring in South America, and one (Dysdera crocata) introduced into many regions of the world.

See Beetle and Dysderidae

Earwig

Earwigs make up the insect order Dermaptera.

See Beetle and Earwig

Eastern box turtle

The eastern box turtle (Terrapene carolina carolina) is a subspecies within a group of hinge-shelled turtles, normally called box turtles.

See Beetle and Eastern box turtle

Eastern screech owl

The eastern screech owl or eastern screech-owl (Megascops asio) is a small owl that is relatively common in Eastern North America, from Mexico to Canada.

See Beetle and Eastern screech owl

Eastern skink

The eastern skink (Scincus mitranus), also commonly known as the Arabian sand skink and the sand fish, is a species of lizard in the skink family (Scincidae).

See Beetle and Eastern skink

Eastern towhee

The eastern towhee (Pipilo erythrophthalmus) is a large New World sparrow.

See Beetle and Eastern towhee

Echis

Echis (common names: saw-scaled vipers, carpet vipersSpawls S, Branch B. 1995. The Dangerous Snakes of Africa. Dubai: Ralph Curtis Books. Oriental Press. 192 pp..) is a genus of venomous vipers found in the dry regions of Africa, the Middle East, Pakistan, India, and Sri Lanka.

See Beetle and Echis

Ecological indicator

Ecological indicators are used to communicate information about ecosystems and the impact human activity has on ecosystems to groups such as the public or government policy makers.

See Beetle and Ecological indicator

Edmund Reitter

Edmund Reitter (22 October 1845 – 15 March 1920) was an Austrian entomologist, writer and a collector.

See Beetle and Edmund Reitter

Elateriformia

Elateriformia is an infraorder of polyphagan beetles.

See Beetle and Elateriformia

Elateroidea

The Elateroidea are a large superfamily of beetles.

See Beetle and Elateroidea

Elm

Elms are deciduous and semi-deciduous trees comprising the flowering plant genus Ulmus in the plant family Ulmaceae.

See Beetle and Elm

Elytron

An elytron (from Greek ἔλυτρον "sheath, cover"; plural: elytra) is a modified, hardened forewing of certain insect orders, notably beetles (Coleoptera) and a few of the true bugs (Hemiptera); in most true bugs, the forewings are instead called hemelytra (sometimes misspelled as "hemielytra"), as only the basal half is thickened while the apex is membranous.

See Beetle and Elytron

Emu

The emu (Dromaius novaehollandiae) is the second-largest living bird by height, after its ratite relative, the ostrich.

See Beetle and Emu

Enantiornithes

Enantiornithes is a group of extinct avialans ("birds" in the broad sense), the most abundant and diverse group known from the Mesozoic era.

See Beetle and Enantiornithes

Endopterygota

Endopterygota, also known as Holometabola, is a superorder of insects within the infraclass Neoptera that go through distinctive larval, pupal, and adult stages.

See Beetle and Endopterygota

Entomology

Entomology is the scientific study of insects, a branch of zoology.

See Beetle and Entomology

Entomophagy

Entomophagy (from Greek ἔντομον éntomon, "insect", and φᾰγεῖν phagein, "to eat") is the human use of insects as food.

See Beetle and Entomophagy

Entomophily

Entomophily or insect pollination is a form of pollination whereby pollen of plants, especially but not only of flowering plants, is distributed by insects.

See Beetle and Entomophily

Environmental stewardship (England)

Environmental Stewardship is an agri-environment scheme run by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs in England which aims to secure widespread environmental benefits.

See Beetle and Environmental stewardship (England)

Ephistemus

Ephistemus is a genus comprising several species of beetles.

See Beetle and Ephistemus

Ernst Friedrich Germar

Ernst Friedrich Germar (3 November 1786 – 8 July 1853) was a German professor and director of the Mineralogical Museum at Halle.

See Beetle and Ernst Friedrich Germar

Ernst Gustav Kraatz

Ernst Gustav Kraatz (13 March 1831 – 2 November 1909) was a German entomologist.

See Beetle and Ernst Gustav Kraatz

Eucharis

Eucharis may refer to.

See Beetle and Eucharis

Eucinetidae

Eucinetidae is a family of beetles, notable for their large coxal plates that cover much of the first ventrite of the abdomen, sometimes called plate-thigh beetles.

See Beetle and Eucinetidae

Eurasian blackcap

The Eurasian blackcap (Sylvia atricapilla) usually known simply as the blackcap, is a common and widespread typical warbler.

See Beetle and Eurasian blackcap

Eurasian crag martin

The Eurasian crag martin or just crag martin (Ptyonoprogne rupestris) is a small passerine bird in the swallow family.

See Beetle and Eurasian crag martin

Eurasian nuthatch

The Eurasian nuthatch or wood nuthatch (Sitta europaea) is a small passerine bird found throughout temperate Asia and in Europe, where its name is the nuthatch.

See Beetle and Eurasian nuthatch

Eurasian rock pipit

The Eurasian rock pipit (Anthus petrosus), or just rock pipit, is a species of small passerine bird that breeds in western Europe on rocky coasts.

See Beetle and Eurasian rock pipit

Eurasian siskin

The Eurasian siskin (Spinus spinus) is a small passerine bird in the finch family Fringillidae.

See Beetle and Eurasian siskin

Eurasian three-toed woodpecker

The three-toed woodpecker (Picoides tridactylus) is a medium-sized woodpecker.

See Beetle and Eurasian three-toed woodpecker

Eurasian wryneck

The Eurasian wryneck (Jynx torquilla) is a species of wryneck in the woodpecker family.

See Beetle and Eurasian wryneck

European badger

The European badger (Meles meles) also known as the Eurasian badger or simply badger, is a species of badger in the family Mustelidae and is native to almost all of Europe and some parts of West Asia.

See Beetle and European badger

European green toad

The European green toad (Bufo viridis) is a species of toad found in mainland Europe.

See Beetle and European green toad

European hedgehog

The European hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus), also known as the West European hedgehog or common hedgehog, is a hedgehog species found in Europe, from Iberia and Italy northwards into Scandinavia.

See Beetle and European hedgehog

European lyctus beetle

European lyctus beetle (Lyctus linearis) is a species of beetle in the family Bostrichidae.

See Beetle and European lyctus beetle

European nightjar

The European nightjar (Caprimulgus europaeus), Eurasian nightjar or just nightjar, is a crepuscular and nocturnal bird in the nightjar family that breeds across most of Europe and temperate Asia.

See Beetle and European nightjar

European pied flycatcher

The European pied flycatcher (Ficedula hypoleuca) is a small passerine bird in the Old World flycatcher family.

See Beetle and European pied flycatcher

Evolution of insects

The most recent understanding of the evolution of insects is based on studies of the following branches of science: molecular biology, insect morphology, paleontology, insect taxonomy, evolution, embryology, bioinformatics and scientific computing.

See Beetle and Evolution of insects

Eype Mouth

Eype Mouth is a natural break in a line of sea cliffs on the Jurassic Coast World Heritage Site in west Dorset on the south coast of England.

See Beetle and Eype Mouth

False potato beetle

The false potato beetle (Leptinotarsa juncta) is a beetle found primarily in the Mid-Atlantic and southeastern regions of the United States.

See Beetle and False potato beetle

False stag beetle

The false stag beetles (Diphyllostoma) are a group of three species of rare beetles known only from California.

See Beetle and False stag beetle

Fat-tailed gerbil

The fat-tailed gerbil ('Pachyuromys duprasi) is a rodent belonging to subfamily Gerbillinae.

See Beetle and Fat-tailed gerbil

Fauna of Australia

The fauna of Australia consists of a huge variety of animals; some 83% of mammals, 89% of reptiles, 24% of fish and insects and 93% of amphibians that inhabit the continent are endemic to Australia.

See Beetle and Fauna of Australia

Fauna of Madagascar

The fauna of Madagascar is a part of the wildlife of Madagascar.

See Beetle and Fauna of Madagascar

Fieldfare

The fieldfare (Turdus pilaris) is a member of the thrush family Turdidae.

See Beetle and Fieldfare

Fipronil

Fipronil is a broad-spectrum insecticide that belongs to the phenylpyrazole chemical family.

See Beetle and Fipronil

Fire-bellied toad

The fire-bellied toads or fire belly toads are a group of eight species of small toads (most species typically no longer than) belonging to the genus Bombina.

See Beetle and Fire-bellied toad

Fire-coloured beetle

Fire-coloured beetles are the beetles of the Pyrochroidae family, which includes the red cardinal beetles.

See Beetle and Fire-coloured beetle

Firefly

The Lampyridae are a family of insects in the beetle order Coleoptera.

See Beetle and Firefly

Flame robin

The flame robin (Petroica phoenicea) is a small passerine bird native to Australia.

See Beetle and Flame robin

Flea beetle

The flea beetle is a small, jumping beetle of the leaf beetle family (Chrysomelidae), that makes up the tribe Alticini which is a part of the subfamily Galerucinae.

See Beetle and Flea beetle

Florida sand skink

The Florida sand skink (Neoseps reynoldsi) is a species of lizard in the family Scincidae, the skinks.

See Beetle and Florida sand skink

Florissant Fossil Beds National Monument

The Florissant Fossil Beds National Monument is a national monument located in Teller County, Colorado.

See Beetle and Florissant Fossil Beds National Monument

Fly fishing

Fly fishing is an angling method in which an artificial "fly" is used to catch fish.

See Beetle and Fly fishing

Folivore

In zoology, a folivore is a herbivore that specializes in eating leaves.

See Beetle and Folivore

Forensic entomology

Forensic entomology is the scientific study of the invasion of the succession pattern of arthropods with their developmental stages of different species found on the decomposed cadavers during legal investigations.

See Beetle and Forensic entomology

Francis Polkinghorne Pascoe

Francis Polkinghorne Pascoe (1 September 1813 – 20 June 1893) was an English entomologist mainly interested in Coleoptera, commonly known as beetles.

See Beetle and Francis Polkinghorne Pascoe

Francis Walker (entomologist)

Francis Walker (31 July 1809 – 5 October 1874) was an English entomologist.

See Beetle and Francis Walker (entomologist)

Franco Andrea Bonelli

Franco Andrea Bonelli (10 November 1784 – 18 November 1830) was an Italian ornithologist, entomologist and collector.

See Beetle and Franco Andrea Bonelli

Frank Macfarlane Burnet

Sir Frank Macfarlane Burnet, (3 September 1899 – 31 August 1985), usually known as Macfarlane or Mac Burnet, was an Australian virologist best known for his contributions to immunology.

See Beetle and Frank Macfarlane Burnet

Fraxinus

Fraxinus, English name ash, is a genus of flowering plants in the olive and lilac family, Oleaceae.

See Beetle and Fraxinus

Fraxinus americana

Fraxinus americana, the white ash or American ash, is a species of ash tree native to eastern and central North America.

See Beetle and Fraxinus americana

Fraxinus pennsylvanica

Fraxinus pennsylvanica, the green ash or red ash, is a species of ash native to eastern and central North America, from Nova Scotia west to southeastern Alberta and eastern Colorado, south to northern Florida, and southwest to Oklahoma and eastern Texas.

See Beetle and Fraxinus pennsylvanica

Frederick William Hope

Frederick William Hope (3 January 1797 – 15 April 1862) was an English entomologist and founder of the Hope Department of Entomology at the University of Oxford.

See Beetle and Frederick William Hope

Fringe-toed lizard

Fringe-toed lizards are lizards of the genus Uma in the subfamily Phrynosomatinae, native to deserts of North America.

See Beetle and Fringe-toed lizard

FSC Żuk

The Żuk (pl. beetle) was a van and light truck produced in Lublin, Poland, between 1958 and 1998 by FSC.

See Beetle and FSC Żuk

Galliformes

Galliformes is an order of heavy-bodied ground-feeding birds that includes turkey, grouse, chicken, New World quail and Old World quail, ptarmigan, partridge, pheasant, junglefowl and the Cracidae.

See Beetle and Galliformes

Gambelia sila

Gambelia sila, commonly known as the blunt-nosed leopard lizard, is a species of lizard in the family Iguanidae.

See Beetle and Gambelia sila

Garden dormouse

The garden dormouse (Eliomys quercinus) is a rodent in the dormouse family.

See Beetle and Garden dormouse

Genetically modified maize

Genetically modified maize (corn) is a genetically modified crop.

See Beetle and Genetically modified maize

Geologic time scale

The geologic time scale (GTS) is a system of chronological dating that relates geological strata (stratigraphy) to time.

See Beetle and Geologic time scale

Georg Hermann Alexander Ochs

Georg Hermann Alexander Ochs (11 July 1887 – 27 September 1971) was a German entomologist, specialising in Coleoptera and in particular the Gyrinidae.

See Beetle and Georg Hermann Alexander Ochs

George Charles Champion

George Charles Champion (29 April 1851, Walworth, South London – 8 August 1927) was an English entomologist specialising in the study of beetles.

See Beetle and George Charles Champion

George Robert Crotch

George Robert Crotch (1842–1874) was a British entomologist.

See Beetle and George Robert Crotch

Geotrupidae

Geotrupidae (from Greek geos, earth, and trypetes, borer) is a family of beetles in the order Coleoptera.

See Beetle and Geotrupidae

Ghana International Airlines

Ghana International Airlines (GIA) was the national airline of the Republic of Ghana.

See Beetle and Ghana International Airlines

Giant anteater

The giant anteater (Myrmecophaga tridactyla), also known as the ant bear, is a large insectivorous mammal native to Central and South America.

See Beetle and Giant anteater

Giant Fijian long-horned beetle

The giant Fijian long-horned beetle (Xixuthrus heros) is native to the island of Viti Levu in Fiji, and is one of the largest living insect species, with specimens around 15 cm long, excluding legs, antennae, or jaws.

See Beetle and Giant Fijian long-horned beetle

Gila trout

The Gila trout (Oncorhynchus gilae) is a species of salmonid, related to the rainbow, native to the Southwest United States.

See Beetle and Gila trout

Gilbert John Arrow

Gilbert John Arrow (20 December 1873 London- 5 October 1948) was an English entomologist.

See Beetle and Gilbert John Arrow

Gill

A gill is a respiratory organ found in many aquatic organisms that extracts dissolved oxygen from water and excretes carbon dioxide.

See Beetle and Gill

Giraffe weevil

The giraffe weevil (Trachelophorus giraffa) is a weevil endemic to Madagascar.

See Beetle and Giraffe weevil

Gladius (video game)

Gladius is a tactical role-playing video game developed and published by LucasArts.

See Beetle and Gladius (video game)

Glaresis

Glaresis is a genus of beetles, sometimes called "enigmatic scarab beetles", in its own family, the Glaresidae.

See Beetle and Glaresis

Glossy ibis

The glossy ibis (Plegadis falcinellus) is a wading bird in the ibis family Threskiornithidae.

See Beetle and Glossy ibis

Glowworm

Glowworm or glow-worm is the common name for various groups of insect larvae and adult larviform females that glow through bioluminescence.

See Beetle and Glowworm

Gnateater

The gnateaters are a bird family, Conopophagidae, consisting of ten small passerine species in two genera, which occur in South and Central America.

See Beetle and Gnateater

Godzilla (animated series)

Godzilla is a 30-minute animated series co-produced and collaborative format between Hanna-Barbera Productions and Toho Co., Ltd. in 1978 and aired on NBC in the United States and TV Tokyo in Japan.

See Beetle and Godzilla (animated series)

Golden samphire

The golden samphire (Limbarda crithmoides) is a perennial coastal species, which may be found growing on salt marsh or sea cliffs across western and southern Europe and the Mediterranean.

See Beetle and Golden samphire

Golden-fronted woodpecker

The golden-fronted woodpecker (Melanerpes aurifrons) is a North American woodpecker.

See Beetle and Golden-fronted woodpecker

Golden-olive woodpecker

The golden-olive woodpecker (Colaptes rubiginosus) is a resident breeding bird from Mexico south and east to Guyana, northwest Argentina, Trinidad and Tobago.

See Beetle and Golden-olive woodpecker

Golden-rumped elephant shrew

The golden-rumped elephant shrew (Rhynchocyon chrysopygus) is a small African mammal.

See Beetle and Golden-rumped elephant shrew

Goleta Slough

The Goleta Slough is an area of estuary, tidal creeks, tidal marsh, and wetlands near Goleta, California, United States.

See Beetle and Goleta Slough

Goliathus

The Goliath beetles (named after the biblical giant Goliath) are any of the five species in the genus Goliathus.

See Beetle and Goliathus

Gonialoe variegata

Gonialoe variegata (syn. Aloe variegata), also known as tiger aloe and partridge-breasted aloe, is a species of flowering plant in the family Asphodelaceae.

See Beetle and Gonialoe variegata

Grand Canyon

The Grand Canyon (Hopi: Ongtupqa; Wi:kaʼi:la, Navajo: Tsékooh Hatsoh, Spanish: Gran Cañón) is a steep-sided canyon carved by the Colorado River in Arizona, United States.

See Beetle and Grand Canyon

Gray bat

The gray bat (Myotis grisescens) once flourished in caves all over the southeastern United States, but due to human disturbance, gray bat populations declined severely during the early and mid portion of the 20th century.

See Beetle and Gray bat

Gray mouse lemur

The gray mouse lemur (Microcebus murinus), grey mouse lemur or lesser mouse lemur, is a small lemur, a type of strepsirrhine primate, found only on the island of Madagascar.

See Beetle and Gray mouse lemur

Great chain of being

The Great Chain of Being is a strict hierarchical structure of all matter and life, thought in medieval Christianity to have been decreed by God.

See Beetle and Great chain of being

Great grey shrike

The great grey shrike, northern grey shrike, or northern shrike (Lanius excubitor) is a large songbird species in the shrike family (Laniidae).

See Beetle and Great grey shrike

Great horned owl

The great horned owl (Bubo virginianus), also known as the tiger owl (originally derived from early naturalists' description as the "winged tiger" or "tiger of the air") or the hoot owl,Austing, G.R. & Holt, Jr., J.B. (1966).

See Beetle and Great horned owl

Great spotted woodpecker

The great spotted woodpecker (Dendrocopos major) is a medium-sized woodpecker with pied black and white plumage and a red patch on the lower belly.

See Beetle and Great spotted woodpecker

Greater bulldog bat

The greater bulldog bat or fisherman bat (Noctilio leporinus) is a type of fishing bat native to Latin America (Spanish: Murciélago pescador).

See Beetle and Greater bulldog bat

Greater horseshoe bat

The greater horseshoe bat (Rhinolophus ferrumequinum) is a European bat of the genus Rhinolophus.

See Beetle and Greater horseshoe bat

Greater kestrel

The greater kestrel or white-eyed kestrel (Falco rupicoloides) is a bird of prey belonging to the falcon family Falconidae.

See Beetle and Greater kestrel

Greater long-nosed armadillo

The greater long-nosed armadillo (Dasypus kappleri) is a South American species of armadillo found in Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, Guyana, Suriname, French Guiana, Peru, Bolivia and Brazil.

See Beetle and Greater long-nosed armadillo

Greater rhea

The greater rhea (Rhea americana) is a species of flightless bird native to eastern South America.

See Beetle and Greater rhea

Greater sage-grouse

The greater sage-grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus) is the largest grouse (a bird species) in North America.

See Beetle and Greater sage-grouse

Greater short-horned lizard

The greater short-horned lizard (Phrynosoma hernandesi), also commonly known as the mountain short-horned lizard, is a species of lizard endemic to western North America.

See Beetle and Greater short-horned lizard

Grey-cheeked thrush

The grey-cheeked thrush (Catharus minimus) is a medium-sized thrush.

See Beetle and Grey-cheeked thrush

Griffith Park

Griffith Park is a large municipal park at the eastern end of the Santa Monica Mountains, in the Los Feliz neighborhood of Los Angeles, California.

See Beetle and Griffith Park

Ground beetle

Ground beetles are a large, cosmopolitan family of beetles, Carabidae, with more than 40,000 species worldwide, around 2,000 of which are found in North America and 2,700 in Europe.

See Beetle and Ground beetle

Grunion

Grunion are two fish species of the genus Leuresthes: the California grunion, L. tenuis, and the Gulf grunion, L. sardinas.

See Beetle and Grunion

Guadalupe-Nipomo Dunes

Guadalupe-Nipomo Dunes is the largest remaining dune system south of San Francisco and the second largest in the U.S. state of California.

See Beetle and Guadalupe-Nipomo Dunes

Gustav Jäger (naturalist)

Gustav Jäger (June 23, 1832 – May 13, 1917) was a German naturalist and hygienist.

See Beetle and Gustav Jäger (naturalist)

Gyascutus

Gyascutus is a genus of beetles in the family Buprestidae, containing the following species.

See Beetle and Gyascutus

H. E. Hinton

Professor Howard Everest Hinton, FRS (24 August 1912 – 2 August 1977) was a British entomologist.

See Beetle and H. E. Hinton

Hairy-tailed mole

The hairy-tailed mole (Parascalops breweri), also known as Brewer's mole, is a medium-sized North American mole.

See Beetle and Hairy-tailed mole

Han (trilobite)

Han is a monotypic genus of agnostid trilobite, whose sole member is Han solo.

See Beetle and Han (trilobite)

Haplodiploidy

Haplodiploidy is a sex-determination system in which males develop from unfertilized eggs and are haploid, and females develop from fertilized eggs and are diploid.

See Beetle and Haplodiploidy

Harmonia (beetle)

Harmonia is a genus of lady beetles belonging to the subfamily Coccinellinae.

See Beetle and Harmonia (beetle)

Harmonia axyridis

Harmonia axyridis, most commonly known as the harlequin, multicolored Asian, or simply Asian ladybeetle, is a large coccinellid beetle.

See Beetle and Harmonia axyridis

Harpalinae

Harpalinae is a huge subfamily of ground beetles that contains 20,000 species.

See Beetle and Harpalinae

Harris's sparrow

The Harris's sparrow (Zonotrichia querula) is a large sparrow.

See Beetle and Harris's sparrow

Heliciculture

Heliciculture, also known as heliculture, commonly known as snail farming, is the process of raising land snails specifically for human use, either to use their flesh as edible escargot, or more recently, to obtain snail slime for use in cosmetics, or snail eggs for human consumption as a type of caviar.

See Beetle and Heliciculture

Hell Creek Formation

The Hell Creek Formation is an intensively-studied division of mostly Upper Cretaceous and some lower Paleocene rocks in North America, named for exposures studied along Hell Creek, near Jordan, Montana.

See Beetle and Hell Creek Formation

Hemiptera

The Hemiptera or true bugs are an order of insects comprising some 50,000 to 80,000 species of groups such as the cicadas, aphids, planthoppers, leafhoppers, and shield bugs.

See Beetle and Hemiptera

Hemolymph

Hemolymph, or haemolymph, is a fluid, analogous to the blood in vertebrates, that circulates in the interior of the arthropod body remaining in direct contact with the animal's tissues.

See Beetle and Hemolymph

Hepatica

Hepatica (hepatica, liverleaf, or liverwort) is a genus of herbaceous perennials in the buttercup family, native to central and northern Europe, Asia and eastern North America.

See Beetle and Hepatica

Hercules beetle

The Hercules beetle (Dynastes hercules, Dynastinae) is a species of rhinoceros beetle native to the rainforests of Central America, South America, and the Lesser Antilles, and is the longest extant species of beetle in the world, and is also one of the largest flying insects in the world.

See Beetle and Hercules beetle

Hermann Loew

Friedrich Hermann Loew (19 July 1807 – 21 April 1879) was a German entomologist who specialised in the study of Diptera, an order of insects including flies, mosquitoes, gnats and midges.

See Beetle and Hermann Loew

Heteroceridae

The Heteroceridae, or variegated mud-loving beetles, are a widespread and relatively common family of beetles.

See Beetle and Heteroceridae

Himalayan black bear

The Himalayan black bear (Ursus thibetanus laniger) is a subspecies of the Asian black bear found in the Himalayas of India, Tibet, Nepal, China and Pakistan.

See Beetle and Himalayan black bear

Hippodamia convergens

Hippodamia convergens, commonly known as the convergent lady beetle, is one of the most common lady beetles in North America and is found throughout the continent.

See Beetle and Hippodamia convergens

Hippodamia tredecimpunctata

Hippodamia tredecimpunctata, commonly known as the thirteen-spot ladybeetle, is a species of lady beetle.

See Beetle and Hippodamia tredecimpunctata

Histeridae

Histeridae is a family of beetles commonly known as Clown beetles or Hister beetles.

See Beetle and Histeridae

Hog-nosed skunk

The hog-nosed skunks belong to the genus Conepatus and are members of the family Mephitidae (skunks).

See Beetle and Hog-nosed skunk

Holometabolism

Holometabolism, also called complete metamorphosis, is a form of insect development which includes four life stages: egg, larva, pupa and imago or adult.

See Beetle and Holometabolism

Homology (biology)

In biology, homology is the existence of shared ancestry between a pair of structures, or genes, in different taxa.

See Beetle and Homology (biology)

Hooded pitohui

The hooded pitohui (Pitohui dichrous) is a species of bird in the genus Pitohui found in New Guinea.

See Beetle and Hooded pitohui

Horace Donisthorpe

Horace St.

See Beetle and Horace Donisthorpe

Horsfield's tarsier

Horsfield's tarsier (Cephalopachus bancanus), also known as the western tarsier, is the only species of tarsier in the genus Cephalopachus.

See Beetle and Horsfield's tarsier

House sparrow

The house sparrow (Passer domesticus) is a bird of the sparrow family Passeridae, found in most parts of the world.

See Beetle and House sparrow

Houston toad

The Houston toad (Anaxyrus houstonensis, formerly Bufo houstonensis) is an endangered species of amphibian that is endemic to Texas in the United States.

See Beetle and Houston toad

Huhu beetle

The huhu beetle (Prionoplus reticularis), is a longhorn beetle endemic to New Zealand.

See Beetle and Huhu beetle

Hybosoridae

Hybosoridae, sometimes known as the scavenger scarab beetles, is a family of scarabaeiform beetles.

See Beetle and Hybosoridae

Hydrophilidae

Hydrophilidae, also called water scavenger beetles, is a family of chiefly aquatic beetles.

See Beetle and Hydrophilidae

Hydroscaphidae

The Hydroscaphidae are a small family of water beetles known commonly as skiff beetles.

See Beetle and Hydroscaphidae

Hypanthium

In angiosperms, a hypanthium or floral cup is a structure where basal portions of the calyx, the corolla, and the stamens form a cup-shaped tube.

See Beetle and Hypanthium

Hypericum

Hypericum is a genus of flowering plants in the family Hypericaceae (formerly considered a subfamily of Clusiaceae).

See Beetle and Hypericum

Hypermetamorphosis

Hypermetamorphosis is a term used in entomology that refers to a class of variants of holometabolism, that is to say, complete insect metamorphosis, but where some larval instars are distinct from each other.

See Beetle and Hypermetamorphosis

Hyperparasite

A hyperparasite is a parasite whose host, often an insect, is also a parasite, often specifically a parasitoid.

See Beetle and Hyperparasite

Ichneumonidae

The Ichneumonidae are a parasitoid wasp family within the order Hymenoptera.

See Beetle and Ichneumonidae

Idiospermum

Idiospermum is a genus containing a single species of tree, Idiospermum australiense, found in Australian tropical rainforests.

See Beetle and Idiospermum

Imre Frivaldszky

Dr Emerich Frivaldszky von Frivald (6 February 1799 in Bacskó, Hungary, now Slovakia – 19 October 1870 in Jobbágyi, Hungary), known as Imre Frivaldszky, was a Hungarian botanist and entomologist.

See Beetle and Imre Frivaldszky

Indiana bat

The Indiana bat (Myotis sodalis) is a medium-sized mouse-eared bat native to North America.

See Beetle and Indiana bat

Indigo bunting

The indigo bunting (Passerina cyanea) is a small seed-eating bird in the cardinal family, Cardinalidae.

See Beetle and Indigo bunting

Industrial melanism

Industrial melanism is an evolutionary effect prominent in several arthropods, where dark pigmentation (melanism) has evolved in an environment affected by industrial pollution, including sulphur dioxide gas and dark soot deposits.

See Beetle and Industrial melanism

Infant formula

Infant formula, or baby formula, is a manufactured food designed and marketed for feeding to babies and infants under 12 months of age, usually prepared for bottle-feeding or cup-feeding from powder (mixed with water) or liquid (with or without additional water).

See Beetle and Infant formula

Insect collecting

Insect collecting refers to the collection of insects and other arthropods for scientific study or as a hobby.

See Beetle and Insect collecting

Insect diuretic hormones

Insect diuretic hormones are hormones that regulate water balance through diuretic action.

See Beetle and Insect diuretic hormones

Insect flight

Insects are the only group of invertebrates that have evolved wings and flight.

See Beetle and Insect flight

Insect wing

Insect wings are adult outgrowths of the insect exoskeleton that enable insects to fly.

See Beetle and Insect wing

Insektors

Insektors is a 1994 French animated TV series about a conflict between two tribes of anthropomorphic insects: the Joyces (an airborne, brightly coloured race) and the Yuks (a dank, dark race fixated on keeping their furnaces burning in order to survive).

See Beetle and Insektors

Invasive species of Australian origin

There are a number of Australian species that have become invasive when introduced into outside Australia or outside Oceania.

See Beetle and Invasive species of Australian origin

Irvingia gabonensis

Irvingia gabonensis is a species of African trees in the genus Irvingia, sometimes known by the common names wild mango, African mango, bush mango, dika or ogbono.

See Beetle and Irvingia gabonensis

Island thrush

The island thrush (Turdus poliocephalus) is a common forest bird in the thrush family.

See Beetle and Island thrush

J. B. S. Haldane

John Burdon Sanderson Haldane (5 November 18921 December 1964) was an English scientist known for his work in the study of physiology, genetics, evolutionary biology, and in mathematics, where he made innovative contributions to the fields of statistics and biostatistics.

See Beetle and J. B. S. Haldane

Jacques-Marie-Frangile Bigot

Jacques Marie Frangile Bigot Jacques Marie Frangile Bigot (1818–1893) was a French naturalist and entomologist most noted for his studies of Diptera.

See Beetle and Jacques-Marie-Frangile Bigot

James Charles Dale

James Charles Dale (13 December 1791 – 6 February 1872) was an English naturalist who devoted almost all of his adult life to entomology.

See Beetle and James Charles Dale

James Nathaniel Halbert

James Nathaniel Halbert was an Irish entomologist.

See Beetle and James Nathaniel Halbert

Japanese beetle

The Japanese beetle (Popillia japonica) is a common species of beetle.

See Beetle and Japanese beetle

Japanese grosbeak

The Japanese grosbeak (Eophona personata) or Ikaruga is a finch native to East Asia.

See Beetle and Japanese grosbeak

Japanese rhinoceros beetle

The Japanese rhinoceros beetle, Japanese horned beetle, or, Allomyrina dichotoma, is a species of rhinoceros beetle.

See Beetle and Japanese rhinoceros beetle

Jean Baptiste Boisduval

Jean Baptiste Alphonse Déchauffour de Boisduval (24 June 1799 – 30 December 1879) was a French lepidopterist, botanist, and physician.

See Beetle and Jean Baptiste Boisduval

Jean-Baptiste Robineau-Desvoidy

André Jean Baptiste Robineau-Desvoidy (1 January 1799 in Saint-Sauveur-en-Puisaye – 25 June 1857 in Paris) was a French physician and entomologist specialising in the study of Diptera (flies) and to some extent of the Coleoptera (beetles).

See Beetle and Jean-Baptiste Robineau-Desvoidy

Johan August Wahlberg

Johan August Wahlberg (9 October 1810 Lagklarebäck, Sweden – 6 March 1856 Lake Ngami, Bechuanaland) was a Swedish naturalist and explorer.

See Beetle and Johan August Wahlberg

Johan Christian Fabricius

Johan Christian Fabricius (7 January 1745 – 3 March 1808) was a Danish zoologist, specialising in "Insecta", which at that time included all arthropods: insects, arachnids, crustaceans and others.

See Beetle and Johan Christian Fabricius

Johann Christoph Friedrich Klug

Johann Christoph Friedrich Klug (5 May 1775, in Berlin – 3 February 1856, in Berlin), was a German entomologist.

See Beetle and Johann Christoph Friedrich Klug

Johann Friedrich von Brandt

Johann Friedrich von Brandt (25 May 1802 – 15 July 1879) was a German naturalist, who worked mostly in Russia.

See Beetle and Johann Friedrich von Brandt

Johann Friedrich Wilhelm Herbst

Johann Friedrich Wilhelm Herbst (1 November 1743 – 5 November 1807) was a German naturalist and entomologist from Petershagen, Minden-Ravensberg.

See Beetle and Johann Friedrich Wilhelm Herbst

Johann Gottlieb Kugelann

Johann Gottlieb Kugelann (2 January 1753 – 8 September 1815) was a German entomologist.

See Beetle and Johann Gottlieb Kugelann

Johann Nepomuk von Laicharting

Johann Nepomuk von Laicharting was an Austrian entomologist.

See Beetle and Johann Nepomuk von Laicharting

Johann Rudolph Schellenberg

Johann Rudolph Schellenberg (4 January 1740, Basel &ndash; 8 June 1806, Töss, a district in the city of Winterthur) was a Swiss artist, writer and entomologist best known for his illustrations of insects.

See Beetle and Johann Rudolph Schellenberg

John Bowring

Sir John Bowring, KCB (Chinese translated name: 寶寧, 寶靈 (for Putonghua speakers) or 包令 (for Cantonese)) (Thai: พระยาสยามมานุกูลกิจ สยามมิตรมหายศ) (17 October 1792 – 23 November 1872) was an English political economist, traveller, writer, literary translator, polyglot, and the fourth Governor of Hong Kong.

See Beetle and John Bowring

John Lawrence LeConte

John Lawrence LeConte (May 13, 1825 – November 15, 1883) was an American entomologist of the 19th century, responsible for naming and describing approximately half of the insect taxa known in the United States during his lifetime, - URL retrieved September 14, 2006 including some 5,000 species of beetles.

See Beetle and John Lawrence LeConte

Joseph Philippe de Clairville

Joseph Philippe de Clairville (1742 – 31 July 1830) was a notable French botanist and entomologist, who was mainly active in Switzerland.

See Beetle and Joseph Philippe de Clairville

Joseph Sugar Baly

Joseph Sugar Baly (1816 – 25 March 1890) was an English doctor and entomologist.

See Beetle and Joseph Sugar Baly

Joseph Waltl

Dr.

See Beetle and Joseph Waltl

Kakamega Forest

Kakamega Forest is a tropical rainforest situated in the Kakamega and Kisumu Counties of Kenya, northwest of the capital Nairobi, and near to the border with Uganda.

See Beetle and Kakamega Forest

Karl Jordan

Heinrich Ernst Karl Jordan (7 December 1861 – 12 January 1959) was a German entomologist.

See Beetle and Karl Jordan

Katipo

The katipo (Latrodectus katipo) is an endangered species of spider native to New Zealand.

See Beetle and Katipo

Kheper

Kheper is a genus of Scarabaeidae or scarab beetles in the subfamily Scarabaeinae.

See Beetle and Kheper

Khepri

Khepri (Egyptian: ḫprj, also transliterated Khepera, Kheper, Khepra, Chepri) is a god in the ancient Egyptian religion.

See Beetle and Khepri

Kittlitz's plover

Kittlitz’s plover (Charadrius pecuarius) is a small shorebird (35-40 g) in the family Charadriidae that breeds near coastal and inland saltmarshes, sandy or muddy riverbanks or alkaline grasslands with short vegetation.

See Beetle and Kittlitz's plover

Kosmos 1887

Bion 8 or Kosmos 1887 (in Russian: Бион 8, Космос 1887) was a Bion satellite.

See Beetle and Kosmos 1887

Kotoka International Airport

Kotoka International Airport in Accra, the capital of Ghana, is an international airport, and has the capacity for large aircraft such as the Boeing 747-8.

See Beetle and Kotoka International Airport

Krubera Cave

Krubera Cave (კრუბერის გამოქვაბული or კრუბერის ღრმული; Also known as Voronya Cave, sometimes spelled Voronja Cave) is the second deepest known cave on Earth after the Veryovkina Cave.

See Beetle and Krubera Cave

Kultarr

The kultarr (Antechinomys laniger) (also called the "jerboa-marsupial") is a small insectivorous nocturnal marsupial inhabiting the arid interior of Australia.

See Beetle and Kultarr

Kurunegala

Kurunegala (කුරුණෑගල, குருணாகல்) is a major city in Sri Lanka.

See Beetle and Kurunegala

Kusel

Kusel, until 1865 written Cusel, is a town in the Kusel district in Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany.

See Beetle and Kusel

Kyzylkum Desert

The Kyzylkum Desert (Qizilqum/Қизилқум, قىزىلقۇم; Qyzylqum, قىزىلقۇم, Кызылкум) is the 16th largest desert in the world.

See Beetle and Kyzylkum Desert

La Specola

The Museum of Zoology and Natural History, best known as La Specola, is an eclectic natural history museum in Florence, central Italy, located next to the Pitti Palace.

See Beetle and La Specola

Lampyris

Lampyris is a genus of beetles in the firefly family (Lampyridae).

See Beetle and Lampyris

Larrea tridentata

Larrea tridentata is known as creosote bush and greasewood as a plant, chaparral as a medicinal herb, and as gobernadora in Mexico, Spanish for "governess", due to its ability to secure more water by inhibiting the growth of nearby plants.

See Beetle and Larrea tridentata

Larva

A larva (plural: larvae) is a distinct juvenile form many animals undergo before metamorphosis into adults.

See Beetle and Larva

Larviform female

Larviform female is biological phenomenon occurring in some species, where the females in the adult stage of metamorphosis resemble the larvae to various degrees.

See Beetle and Larviform female

Laziness

Laziness (also known as indolence) is disinclination to activity or exertion despite having the ability to act or exert oneself.

See Beetle and Laziness

Léon Fairmaire

Léon Marc Herminie Fairmaire (29 June 1820 – 1 April 1906) was a French entomologist.

See Beetle and Léon Fairmaire

Lee Brown Coye

Lee Brown Coye (July 24, 1907 – September 5, 1981) was an American artist.

See Beetle and Lee Brown Coye

Leopard cat

The leopard cat (Prionailurus bengalensis) is a small wild cat native to continental South, Southeast and East Asia.

See Beetle and Leopard cat

Lepidoptera

Lepidoptera is an order of insects that includes butterflies and moths (both are called lepidopterans).

See Beetle and Lepidoptera

Leptacinus intermedius

Leptacinus intermedius is a European rove beetle, described in 1935 by Horace Donisthorpe.

See Beetle and Leptacinus intermedius

Leptinotarsa

Leptinotarsa is a genus of leaf beetles.

See Beetle and Leptinotarsa

Lesser grey shrike

The lesser grey shrike (Lanius minor) is a member of the shrike family Laniidae.

See Beetle and Lesser grey shrike

Lesser silver water beetle

The lesser silver water beetle (Hydrochara caraboides) is a species of water scavenger beetle (family Hydrophilidae).

See Beetle and Lesser silver water beetle

Life in the Undergrowth

Life in the Undergrowth is a BBC nature documentary series written and presented by David Attenborough, first transmitted in the UK from 23 November 2005.

See Beetle and Life in the Undergrowth

Light pollution

Light pollution, also known as photopollution, is the presence of anthropogenic light in the night environment.

See Beetle and Light pollution

Liliaceae

The lily family, Liliaceae, consists of fifteen genera and about 705 known species (Christenhusz & Byng 2016) of flowering plants within the order Liliales.

See Beetle and Liliaceae

Lineated woodpecker

The lineated woodpecker (Dryocopus lineatus) is a very large woodpecker which is a resident breeding bird from Mexico south to northern Argentina and on Trinidad.

See Beetle and Lineated woodpecker

"Links 2-3-4" (German for Left 2-3-4) is a song by Neue Deutsche Härte band Rammstein, released on their third studio album, Mutter (Mother).

See Beetle and Links 2-3-4

List of beetle species of Great Britain

This is a list of beetle species in Britain.

See Beetle and List of beetle species of Great Britain

List of coleopterists

Notable students of coleopterology (beetles) include the following.

See Beetle and List of coleopterists

List of common household pests

This is a list of common household pests, animal species or genera that have a history of living in, or invading, human habitation and causing damage to structures, eating human foods, acting as disease vectors, or causing other harms.

See Beetle and List of common household pests

List of entomologists

The following is a list of entomologists, people who have studied insects.

See Beetle and List of entomologists

List of ladybirds and related beetle species recorded in Britain

The following is a list of beetles in the family Coccinellidae recorded in Great Britain.

See Beetle and List of ladybirds and related beetle species recorded in Britain

List of Latin and Greek words commonly used in systematic names

This list of Latin and Greek words commonly used in systematic names is intended to help those unfamiliar with classical languages to understand and remember the scientific names of organisms.

See Beetle and List of Latin and Greek words commonly used in systematic names

List of recurring Mario franchise enemies

This is a list of common, recurring enemies in the ''Mario'' franchise.

See Beetle and List of recurring Mario franchise enemies

List of Russian people

This is a list of people associated with the modern Russian Federation, the Soviet Union, Imperial Russia, Russian Tsardom, the Grand Duchy of Moscow, and other predecessor states of Russia.

See Beetle and List of Russian people

List of Spanish words of Nahuatl origin

Documented Nahuatl words in the Spanish language (mostly as spoken in Mexico and Mesoamerica) include an extensive list of words that represent (i) animals, (ii) plants, fruit and vegetables, (iii) foods and beverages, and (iv) domestic appliances.

See Beetle and List of Spanish words of Nahuatl origin

List of Star Wars creatures

This is a list of creatures in the fictional Star Wars universe.

See Beetle and List of Star Wars creatures

List of subgroups of the order Coleoptera

This article classifies the subgroups of the order Coleoptera (beetles) down to the level of families, following the system in Volume 2 of American Beetles (2002) for all North American families (there were changes in the system between Vols. 1 & 2), and following Lawrence & Newton (1995) for extralimital taxa.

See Beetle and List of subgroups of the order Coleoptera

Little owl

The little owl (Athene noctua) is a bird that inhabits much of the temperate and warmer parts of Europe, Asia east to Korea, and north Africa.

See Beetle and Little owl

Living fossil

A living fossil is an extant taxon that closely resembles organisms otherwise known only from the fossil record.

See Beetle and Living fossil

Lizard

Lizards are a widespread group of squamate reptiles, with over 6,000 species, ranging across all continents except Antarctica, as well as most oceanic island chains.

See Beetle and Lizard

Long-tailed dunnart

The long-tailed dunnart (Sminthopsis longicaudata) is an Australian dunnart that, like the little long-tailed dunnart, has a tail longer than its body.

See Beetle and Long-tailed dunnart

Longhorn beetle

The longhorn beetles (Cerambycidae; also known as long-horned or longhorn beetles or longicorns) are a cosmopolitan family of beetles, typically characterized by extremely long antennae, which are often as long as or longer than the beetle's body.

See Beetle and Longhorn beetle

Lotis (beetle)

Lotis is a genus of lady beetles.

See Beetle and Lotis (beetle)

Louis Alexandre Auguste Chevrolat

Louis Alexandre Auguste Chevrolat was a French entomologist, born 29 March 1799 at Paris and died 16 December 1884 in the same city.

See Beetle and Louis Alexandre Auguste Chevrolat

Louis Jurine

Louis Jurine (6 February 1751 – 20 October 1819) was a Swiss physician, surgeon and naturalist mainly interested in entomology.

See Beetle and Louis Jurine

Louisiana waterthrush

The Louisiana waterthrush (Parkesia motacilla) is a New World warbler, that breeds in eastern North America and winters in the West Indies and Central America.

See Beetle and Louisiana waterthrush

Louse

Louse (plural: lice) is the common name for members of the order Phthiraptera, which contains nearly 5,000 species of wingless insect.

See Beetle and Louse

Lucy's warbler

Lucy's warbler (Oreothlypis luciae) is a small New World warbler found in North America.

See Beetle and Lucy's warbler

Ludwig Redtenbacher

Ludwig Redtenbacher (June 10, 1814 in Kirchdorf an der Krems, Austria – February 8, 1876 in Vienna) was an Austrian doctor and entomologist mainly interested in beetles.

See Beetle and Ludwig Redtenbacher

Lutrochidae

Lutrochidae is a family of water beetles sometimes known as "travertine beetles", since in North America they are common in springs and streams depositing travertine.

See Beetle and Lutrochidae

Lymexylidae

The Lymexylidae (historically often spelled Lymexylonidae), also known as ship-timber beetles, are a family of wood-boring beetles.

See Beetle and Lymexylidae

Lyrebird

A lyrebird is either of two species of ground-dwelling Australian birds that compose the genus Menura, and the family Menuridae.

See Beetle and Lyrebird

Lythrum salicaria

Lythrum salicaria (purple loosestrifeFlora of NW Europe) is a flowering plant belonging to the family Lythraceae.

See Beetle and Lythrum salicaria

Macrodontia cervicornis

Male, disarticulated how to Beauchene MHNT Macrodontia cervicornis (Linnaeus, 1758) is one of the largest beetles, with known specimens exceeding 17 cm in length.

See Beetle and Macrodontia cervicornis

Magnolia

Magnolia is a large genus of about 210The number of species in the genus Magnolia depends on the taxonomic view that one takes up.

See Beetle and Magnolia

Magnolia warbler

The magnolia warbler (Setophaga magnolia) is a member of the wood warbler family Parulidae.

See Beetle and Magnolia warbler

Magnoliaceae

The Magnoliaceae are a flowering plant family, the magnolia family, in the order Magnoliales.

See Beetle and Magnoliaceae

Magor, Monmouthshire

Magor (Magwyr) - meaning 'a wall' - is a large village in Monmouthshire, south east Wales, between Chepstow and the city of Newport, and adjoining the Caldicot Levels beside the Severn Estuary.

See Beetle and Magor, Monmouthshire

Malaise trap

A malaise trap is a large, tent-like structure used for trapping flying insects, particularly Hymenoptera and Diptera.

See Beetle and Malaise trap

Maleo

The maleo (Macrocephalon maleo) is a large megapode and the only member of the monotypic genus Macrocephalon.

See Beetle and Maleo

Malpighian tubule system

The Malpighian tubule system is a type of excretory and osmoregulatory system found in some insects, myriapods, arachnids, and tardigrades.

See Beetle and Malpighian tubule system

Manchester Museum

Manchester Museum is a museum displaying works of archaeology, anthropology and natural history and is owned by the University of Manchester, in England.

See Beetle and Manchester Museum

Mandrill

The mandrill (Mandrillus sphinx) is a primate of the Old World monkey (Cercopithecidae) family.

See Beetle and Mandrill

Maned sloth

The maned sloth (Bradypus torquatus), also known as the ai, is a three-toed sloth that lives only in Brazil.

See Beetle and Maned sloth

Mangrove monitor

The mangrove monitor, mangrove goanna, or Western Pacific monitor lizard (Varanus indicus) is a member of the monitor lizard family with a large distribution from northern Australia and New Guinea to the Moluccas, Solomon Islands, Marshall Islands, Caroline Islands, and Mariana Islands.

See Beetle and Mangrove monitor

Marbled polecat

The marbled polecat (Vormela peregusna) is a small mammal belonging to the monotypic genus Vormela within the Mustelinae subfamily.

See Beetle and Marbled polecat

Marvel Adventures Spider-Man

Marvel Adventures Spider-Man (preceded by Marvel Age Spider-Man) is a Marvel Comics comic book series intended for all ages, especially children, that ran for 61 issues from May 2005 through May 2010.

See Beetle and Marvel Adventures Spider-Man

Maximilian Spinola

Maximilian Spinola (Massimiliano Spinola; July 10, 1780 &ndash; November 12, 1857) was an Italian entomologist.

See Beetle and Maximilian Spinola

Mazon Creek fossil beds

The Mazon Creek fossil beds are a conservation lagerstätte found near Morris, in Grundy County, Illinois.

See Beetle and Mazon Creek fossil beds

Meconium

Meconium is the earliest stool of a mammalian infant.

See Beetle and Meconium

Medabots

Medabots, known in Japan as, is a role-playing video game franchise developed by Natsume and published by Imagineer in Japan in 1997.

See Beetle and Medabots

Megalon

is a kaiju who first appeared in Toho's 1973 film Godzilla vs. Megalon.

See Beetle and Megalon

Megaloptera

Megaloptera is an order of insects.

See Beetle and Megaloptera

Meganeura

Meganeura is a genus of extinct insects from the Carboniferous period (approximately 300 million years ago), which resembled and are related to the present-day dragonflies.

See Beetle and Meganeura

Meilland International SA

Meilland International SA is a family-owned rose growing business founded circa 1850.

See Beetle and Meilland International SA

Melaleuca

Melaleuca is a genus of nearly 300 species of plants in the myrtle family, Myrtaceae, commonly known as paperbarks,