With a Secret Service boat, left, keeping a watchful eye, President Bush casts his line in the Kennebunk River near his Kennebunkport home recently. The state's beauty and charm has made it one of Bush's favorite retreats. TRAVEL EDITOR'S NOTE: Ron Johnson is a Minneapolis travel writer.

``Take a trip to Maine, and you'll soon find out why President Bush frequently flees to Kennebunkport.''

By RON D. JOHNSON

Why does President George Bush maintain his summer White House at Kennebunkport and flee up to Maine whenever he can get away from Washington?

There are many reasons President Bush fell in love with Kennebunkport, and it happened long before he was elected president. It happened when he was a young boy growing up in New England.

President Bush loves Kennebunkport for the same reasons Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, who was born in Portland, Maine, did. And Longfellow continued his love affair with Maine after he moved to Cambridge, Mass., to teach at Harvard.

And Bush loves Kennebunkport and Maine for the same reasons best-selling novelist Stephen King does. King lives near Bangor on the northern coastline of Maine.

Maine is a wonderfully relaxed, scenic, laid-back place. It has some of the the most fantastic ocean, coastline and beach scenery found anywhere on earth. Its small towns have a quaint, endearing charm. And its largest cities are not large. Portland, the state's largest and its capital, has only a shade over 60,000 people, excluding suburbs.

And like the scenery, the people who live in Maine also are remarkable. They are far friendlier than friendly. They take their time when they talk to you and will explain how to get where you're going or which is the best cafe in town.

They truly seem to want all visitors to enjoy themselves. And Maine, of course, is uncrowded. It's a big state, yet barely 1 million people live there.

Kennebunkport has been a tourist mecca since the Victorian era in the early 1800s. People started flocking to this scenic town in southern Maine by ship and by train long before automobile travel was possible.

European fisherman discovered Kennebunkport in the early 1600s, and when it was first settled it was called Cape Porpus and later Cape Porpoise. Later, the inland town of Kennebunk was founded, then soon after, Kennebunkport on the coast.

Kennebunkport started out as a shipbuilding and fishing center, and later because of its scenic beauty on the coastline, its wonderful beaches and the large hotels which sprang up, it became a favorite oceanside paradise for vacationers. Mostly, they came from Boston and New York. Now, they come from every state, Europe and South America.

We headquartered in Portland, and took the hour's drive through interesting small towns to Kennebunkport for a looksee at President Bush's adopted summer escape.

We found Kennebunkport to be all we had hoped it would be, plus much more.

It's a combination of picturesque, breathtaking harbors and inlets, wonderful sandy beaches, three fine golf courses, stately old homes once owned by shipping barons, newer and just as large and impressive dwellings along the ocean, fantastic shops and boutiques selling everything imaginable, fine hotels and many motels and restaurants right on the ocean, where you can dine outside and look at the sea. We found a great place called the Shawmut Inn, which has great food and service and a spectacular view of the scenic harbor. George Bush's summer White House is a short walk away.

We became so entranced with Kennebunkport we didn't want to leave, but finally we were forced to because we had to drive up to Freeport to see L.L. Bean and the other bargain shops.

We saw Kennebunkport on our last day in Maine, and it proved to be a fitting climax and farewell to a busy, but wonderful five days in mystical Maine.

It's only a 20-minute drive by freeway north from Portland to Freeport. Another name for Freeport, Maine, might be Bargain City, U.S.A.

A visit to the L.L. Bean headquarters alone might be worth the trip.

One of the largest mail order stores in the nation, L.L. Bean is an outdoor sporting goods specialty haven, but it also has a wide array of outdoor clothing for men and women, plus T-shirts, sweat shirts and other apparel. Bean is open 365 days a year, 24 hours a day. A shopper could spend many hours at L.L. Bean and never tire of shopping there.

In addition to L.L. Bean, there are huge Calvin Klein, Dansk, Ralph Lauren, Class Perfume, Gant, Reebok and Rawlings sporting goods stores. There is a total of 91 shops and stores boasting wholesale prices in Freeport, plus 10 hotels and bed and breakfasts, motels and several good restaurants.

Freeport, Maine, is a veritable shopper's paradise, so if that is your bent, don't miss it.

Our group of travel writers took a bus north from Portland to the Rangeley mountain and lakes region on the edge of the northern Maine wilderness.

The town of Rangeley, with a population of 2,000 is in the midst of Maine's mountain region, which is part of the larger New Hampshire Blue Mountain chain.

It also lies in an area of clear, pristine lakes which are laden with land-locked salmon. We were told the fishing is always good because there isn't much fishing pressure in this part of Maine.p