Prescott Sheldon Bush Jr. of Hingham, a retired insurance executive who was the brother of former President George H.W. Bush and uncle to former President George W. Bush, died Wednesday at his home. He was 87.

Born in Portland, Maine, Mr. Bush was raised in Greenwich, Conn. He later lived in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, for four years before moving back to Greenwich in 1949. He and his wife, Elizabeth, moved to Hingham three years ago.

Mr. Bush attended Greenwich Country Day School and Phillips Academy in Andover, and graduated from Yale University in 1944. At Yale he was a member of the Whiffenpoofs, with whom he shared a love of close harmony, opera and choir music.

After Yale, Mr. Bush went to Brazil to help Pan American Airways build and operate airfields. Mr. Bush later took a job in New York City with Pan Am in 1949. In 1955, after the birth of his second son, Jamie, Mr. Bush took a job as an account executive with insurance brokers Johnson & Higgins. He became a partner in the firm. Upon his retirement from Johnson & Higgins, Mr. Bush became a consultant, introducing many American businesses to China. He was a founder of the United States-China Chamber of Commerce.

“Dad’s mark was made in Connecticut politics, the golf world and in the insurance world. One of the things that is true in all three of those areas is that Dad was a constant source of warmth and live counsel to so many people,” said son Jamie Bush yesterday. “He spent thousands of hours with people at every level of politics in Connecticut and, like all of his siblings and his parents, he had a great belief in our democratic process. Believing in the process as he did, he was thrilled for an opportunity to be involved in it and support people who ran for office, which he did for 50 years in Connecticut at all levels.”

Mr. Bush was deeply involved in Connecticut politics behind the scenes as an advisor, fundraiser and manager for multiple campaigns for the state legislature, Congress and the presidency, his family said. He also served for many years as one of Greenwich’s representatives to the Republican Party’s State Central Committee. In 1982 he was a candidate for the U.S. Senate seat his father had held for two terms, before withdrawing for the sake of party unity.

Mr. Bush, who his family noted was born while his father was on a golf course in Kennebunkport, was also a lifelong lover of the sport. As a member of the United States Golf Association’s executive committee, he championed the USGA’s Public Links efforts and bringing women into the ranks of professional golf. He was an architect and developer of the Griffith Harris Golf Course in Greenwich and a member of numerous courses around the country. In 1990, he helped develop the first premier golf club in China, the Shanghai Country Club.

Mr. Bush was an engaged resident of Greenwich, serving as a member of the Representative Town Meeting, chairman of the Republican Town Committee, and multiple nonprofit boards. He was a prodigious fundraiser for the American Red Cross, Greenwich Hospital and the YMCA. He also was active in Family Reentry, a prison ministry based in Norwalk, Conn.

“The interesting thing about our family,” said Jamie Bush, “is that there is on the one hand a template that they all come out of – it’s sort of a genetic love of God, country and Yale – and they are all just enormously fun, they love people and really just every level of society. They are all wonderful that way, my dad’s generation.”

Mr. Bush is survived by his wife of 66 years, Elizabeth (Kauffman); his daughter, Kelsey Bush-Nadeau of Williston, Vt.; his son, James L. of Hingham; three brothers, President George H.W. of Houston, William “Bucky” of St. Louis, and Jonathan of New Haven, Conn.; a sister, Nancy Ellis of Boston; six grandchildren and many nieces and nephews.

“Above all else, he was a devoted family man whose philanthropy started at home,” his family said in a statement.

A memorial service will be held at noon on Wednesday at Christ Church Greenwich, Greenwich, Conn.

Burial will be private.

Arrangements by Keohane Funeral Home, Quincy.