Former first lady Barbara Bush's connection to Maine began when she married, as she is quoted as saying, "the first man I ever kissed" - George Herbert Walker Bush.

She was just 19 years old, and it was 1945. That's when she and the former president began spending their summers at the family home on Walker's Point in Kennebunkport.

The tradition has continued for decades.

"For instance, some of us who have 13 grandchildren who come for the summer," Mrs. Bush said.

WGME-TV in Portland spoke with Mrs. Bush in 1995, shortly after she had learned that Maine Medical Center wanted to name its new children's hospital after her.

"I said to George, 'Isn't that the funniest thing? They came to me to urge me to do it.' I mean, something so exciting and so flattering as though I'd say, 'Oh no. No thank you.' They've stretched my life," she said.

is a lasting legacy to a woman who knew the pain of losing a child. She and her husband lost their daughter Robin to leukemia at a time when family visiting hours were restricted.

"It makes an enormous difference. You know, George and I had a child who was sick and we had definite visiting hours. It wasn't until the very end that we were allowed to be with her all the time. First of all, it helps the child. They're frightened in a hospital and today, we now know that to have parents there makes an enormous difference," Mrs. Bush said.

Mrs. Bush stayed connected to the hospital, combining her love of children with another of her great passions -- literacy.

Mrs. Bush read to children at the hospital every summer, and she supported literacy efforts through the in Maine.

The foundation has donated hundreds of thousands of dollars to literacy programs all over the state.

"If we don't teach our children to read and to write and to understand, and we don't teach mothers and fathers how important parenting is, our country's going to be in terrible shape," Mrs. Bush said.

Over the past few years, Mrs. Bush kept a lower profile, though she and her husband continue to be active members of the Kennebunkport community. She was often seen wearing her signature pearls, even donating a strand to the George and Barbara Bush Center at the University of New England.

"And Mrs. Bush gave us her pearls and her gardening hat that she uses to garden at Kennebunkport at the house. So, they were really nice, I think, things that meaning to them personally and tied to their life here in Maine," former university President Danielle Ripich said.

A lifelong love of Maine that began when she found the love of a lifetime.

"That's what George Bush has done for me. He's allowed me to have hospitals named after me and introduced me to all the world leaders," said Mrs. Bush. "Pretty exciting,"