MOTHER MOTHER ANNOUNCE CROSS CANADA TOUR

SPECIAL GUESTS CAVETOWN AND CANNONS SUPPORT

Canada’s biggest alt-rock export Mother Mother announced they will be hitting the road again in 2025 with new Canadian tour stops in support of their latest album, Grief Chapter. Produced by Live Nation, the newly announced 11-date Canadian run kicks off on February 18 in Victoria, BC at Save On Foods Memorial Centre, with stops in Calgary, Regina, Winnipeg and more, before the band heads West for shows in Ontario and Quebec, wrapping up a massive year of touring. Multi-Platinum singer/songwriter and producer Cavetown and indie-pop trio Cannons will join as support on all dates. The launch of these dates follows nearly sold-out shows with Cavetown at Budweiser Stage in Toronto and Rogers Arena in Vancouver this summer, when the two bands join forces for a total of 34 shows across North America.

Grief Chapter marks a new era in Mother Mother’s constantly evolving story, kickstarted by an organic groundswell of young, passionate fans who have all found community in the band’s songs. Sonically, Grief Chapter’s twelve songs are some of the band’s most dynamic. Listen HERE.

About Mother Mother

Comprised of Ryan Guldemond (vocals, guitar), Molly Guldemond (vocals, keys), Jasmin Parkin (vocals, keys), Ali Siadat (drums) and Mike Young (bass), Mother Mother has seen truly remarkable growth over the past three years. 2022 catapulted the band into a new stratosphere of universal success following the release of their 8th studio album Inside, with platinum certified single “Hayloft II” connecting with audiences around the globe.

In the pounding, profound new Mother Mother album, Grief Chapter – their ninth – the beloved Canadian group push the page, the pen, and their sound further than they ever have before. A dialed-up collection of songs that takes chances, swings big, goes as grandiose with the songwriting as it does granular, Grief Chapter dives lyrically deep on Big Picture concepts like life, death, mourning, and the freedom that comes with accepting the inevitable. And sonically, Grief Chapter’s twelve songs are some of Mother Mother’s most muscular offerings of all time, buoyed by legions of new fans and the bigger rooms and venues that have followed their recent years of continued, evolved success. “Our instinct was to make things hit hard and feel powerful,” says lead singer and Mother Mother lyricist Ryan Guldemond. “We don’t take this moment for granted — or this life. A life in music, doing what we love with whom we love.”

About Cavetown

With DIY ethos and a spiraling imagination, 25-year-old singer-songwriter and producer Cavetown makes songs that excavate the deepest, unspoken parts of his heart. Since releasing his first self-produced tracks at age 14, the Cambridge-based musician also known as Robin Skinner has become one of the leaders of his generation’s bedroom pop scene, amassing a global audience of fellow outsiders who connect to his lyrics of identity and belonging. After reaching new heights with 2022’s Worm Food, he now preps his new EP, little vice, out February 23 on Sire Records. A sense of childlike wonder has been a guiding force for Cavetown ever since he taught himself how to produce and began uploading work on Bandcamp and YouTube as a young teenager. Inspired by his love of fantasy, his songs slowly brought in a devoted online audience, leading to sold-out shows across the U.S. and U.K. behind his 2018 album Lemon Boy. Shortly after releasing the LP, he signed to Sire Records and played festivals around the world like Reading and Leeds, Lollapalooza, and Primavera Sound. Even with all his success, Cavetown remains committed to ensuring a tight-knit connection with his listeners. In 2022, he created the This Is Home Project, which provides funds to foundations dedicated to LGBTQ+ youth in need. Now, he remains motivated to keep sharing his honest feelings through his songs. “From what I’ve been told, something about me and my music helps them to feel understood and that they’re not alone in who they are,” he says.

About Cannons

CANNONS alternate between flashes of gauzy introspection, glitter-drenched dancefloor ecstasy, and gritty sensuality. The Los Angeles trio—Michelle Joy [vocals], Ryan Clapham [lead guitar], and Paul Davis [drums keys]—elevate alternative / electro-pop to a neon stratosphere with nocturnal production and a visual sensibility equally suited to Studio 54 or summer festival season. Thus far, the band has honed this signature style over the course of three albums, namely Night Drive [2017], Shadows [2019], and Fever Dream [2022]. Along the way, “Fire For You” reached RIAA gold status, generated nearly a quarter-of-a-billion streams, topped Alternative Radio, and landed massive syncs on the likes of NETFLIX’s Never Have I Ever, American Horror Story, and more. CANNONS earned critical acclaim from The Hollywood Reporter, Billboard, FLAUNT, and Consequence of Sound while YouTube touted them among 2021’s “Artists on the Rise.” Emerging as a live force, they’ve headlined countless packed shows in addition to lighting up festivals such as Coachella, Lollapalooza, Life Is Beautiful, Outside Lands, and Electric Forest, to name a few. Evolving yet again, CANNONS kickstart another era with the sunny, sassy, and sexy funkified strut of their 2023 single “Loving You” and album “Hearbeat Highway” with much more to come.