By fostering deep bonds and crafting delicious food and drink, these Canadian mother-daughter-run businesses are keeping family traditions alive.

Whether it's a prized cookbook, a baking tip you cherish from your oma or a set of silverware passed down through the generations, food and all the traditions that surround it are likely a big part of your family life. These Canadian women understand the importance of breaking bread, and they've found a way to share their own family recipes, cultures and passions for everything from Riesling wine to tadka masala spice mix to Imperial cookies with the masses. Here are their stories.

SPERLING VINEYARDS

WHO: Sisters Ann Sperling and Susan Sperling Richardson, and Susan's daughter Jill Richardson Branby

WHERE: Kelowna, B.C

Sperling Vineyards | Image: Jill Richardson Branby

ON A FAVOURITE WINE: "Our flagship wine, a Reisling, is made from vines my dad planted back in 1978—among the earliest planted in Canada," says Ann. "Our dad was a visionary."

ON OVERCOMING OBSTACLES: "In 2013, we all decided to have a camping weekend," says Susan. "While we were away, a hailstorm absolutely pummelled our vineyard, damaging much of our wine grape crop and eliminating the table grapes we sell to supermarkets. We said, 'OK, what can we do with what we've got?' And we created a few wines that were totally new to us, including our beautiful Pinot Noir rosé."

ON THE BEST PART OF THE JOB: "It's about giving roots to the next generations, the same roots I was given," says Susan. "I've always been so proud of my home. I lived on the land, and my family's footprint is still there."

LEFT: Jill’s son, Magnus Branby, walks with his cousins from the winery to Great-grandma Velma’s house. RIGHT: Grape picking is a family affair. Here, Jill’s kids help Dad harvest Pearl of Csaba and Bacchus grapes. | Image: Jill Richardson Branby

JASWANT'S KITCHEN

WHO: Mom Jaswant and daughters Nimi, Roupi and Simi Kular

WHERE: Toronto

Nimi, Simi, Jaswant and Roupi Kular on a recent vacation to the Mayan Riviera.

THEIR STORY: It all started with curry powder. "As my children grew up and moved away, I felt they needed help making homemade Indian food," says Jaswant. She knew that Indian dishes were notoriously complex and time-intensive, so she blended a curry powder to help her daughter Simi cook on her own. It went so well that she developed more foolproof dry spice blends and standardized her recipes. "I wanted my kids to keep on cooking and feed the next generation," she says. "I didn't want to lose our Indian culture." In 2010, Nimi and Roupi suggested that Jaswant sell the blends and the three of them started Jaswant's Kitchen. In Canada, the blends are sold at food shows, in independent retailers and online through sites such as Amazon and Etsy.

Though the traditional way to store Indian spices—in a masala box—is indeed enticing, the exposure to air makes them lose flavour faster. Jaswant’s jarred all-natural spice blends offer an attractive alternative. | Image: Instagram.com/JaswantsKitchen

ON MAKING EVERYTHING BY HAND: "Whenever we had a food show, the whole family had to pitch in and spend the weekends preparing and packaging," says Simi. "We have staff help with that now, but my mom still roasts the spices, grinds them and blends them herself." ON

A FAVOURITE BLEND: "I haven't seen anything like our tadka masala," says Jaswant. "Typically, in Indian cooking, people chop onions, garlic and ginger, then fry them, along with the spices, to start the dish. This takes about 45 minutes and smells up the whole house. I made it into a dry blend that you just add water to. It reminds me of my grandmother's cooking."

ON FAMILY HOLIDAYS: "For the past few years, we've had themes," says Simi. "We'll pick a type of cuisine and try to make a full menu; we did Moroccan last Thanksgiving. My mom brings back spices from her travels and tries to recreate the flavours from those countries."

CAFE MOSAICS AND THE MOTH CAFE

WHO: Mom Thanh Lu and daughters Jillian and Khuyen Khuong

WHERE: Edmonton

HIGH TEA BAKERY

WHO: Mom Carol and daughter Belinda Bigold

WHERE: Winnipeg

The business brains and the baking talent: Belinda Bigold and her mom, Carol, serve up cookies that look almost too pretty to eat.

THEIR STORY: Though baking has been a part of the Bigold family's DNA for decades, it wasn't until Carol decided to sell intricately iced cookies for a fundraiser that Belinda saw their popularity. "Mom was selling them for $3 a dozen because that was the cost of a bag of Oreos—she didn't see that people would pay more for quality," says Belinda with a laugh. They were so popular that people began to order them year after year. Belinda knew that her mom had always wanted to own her own business, and decided to give her a chance to further use her talents by opening High Tea Bakery in 2003 to sell the goodies—many from recipes handed down through the family. "The carrot cake recipe is from my husband's great-auntie Virginia McPhee, and the lamington cake is from my aunt Eileen Hayward," says Carol. Now, High Tea Bakery crafts some of the most beautiful sweet treats in Winnipeg.

The sweets that started it all: Carol’s famous decorated cookies, gussied up for Mother’s Day.