Dallon James Weekes, an American musician, singer, and songwriter, was born on 4 May 1981 in a small town in Verona, Missouri near a large Amish community. He is the second of four children and was raised in a Mormon family in Clearfield, Utah, where his parents moved shortly after he was born. He attended Clearfield High School, and after graduating with honors in 1999, he served a full-time two-year mission for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Oklahoma. After returning home from his mission, he attended Weber State University for a brief period of time before dropping out to pursue music full time. His genres include Pop Rock, Alternative Rock, Indie Rock, Synthpop, and Pop Punk. He is also proficient at playing bass guitar, keyboards, synthesizer, guitar, ukulele, and baritone guitar.

Dallon is best known for his roles as bass guitarist, backing vocalist, and as a songwriter/lyricist for the rock band Panic! At the Disco. Alongside him in Panic! at the Disco are drummer, Spencer Smith, and lead singer, Brendon Urie. He was originally hired by Panic! At the Disco to play bass and synthesizer for one of their tours, and around the same time the band was going through some changes, with their leader guitarist, Ryan Ross, leaving, he was invited to become a permanent member of the band. He is also the lead vocalist, bass guitarist, and songwriter for his independent band, the Brobecks, and met most of his former bandmates while attending Clearfield High School.

Music Career – The Brobecks

The band began as a weekend hobby for Dallon shortly after he returned to Utah after serving his mission. The name of the band was inspired by a person from his school days, and the original line-up was comprised of Dallon, photographer/producer Matt Glass and another friend from high school. After a few years of recording basement demos, touring and line-up changes, the band was offered a contract from an imprint of Drive-Thru Records. Dallon was offered solo record contracts by Sony BMG, Interscope Records, and a smaller indie label if he would drop his band mates, but he declined.

In May 2009, the album Violent Things was released. A limited quantity of the CD was availbale for purchase, but it was made available on iTunes. The album was produced by Casey Crescenzo of the band, The Dear Hunter, and features Darren Robinson of the band, Phantom Planet, on guitar. Frequent Brobecks drummer, Drew Davidson, played the drums on the album.

Prior to the album’s release, the songs “Love at First Sight” and “Second Boys Will Be First Choice” appeared on X96’s Top Ten daily songs list, with “Second Boys” reaching number one on the station and remaining there for several weeks. “Love at First Sight,” one of the most popular songs on the album, was placed in the rotation on Delta Airlines radio. The band has opened for bands such as Fall Out Boy, Phantom Planet, Ben Kweller, and The Bravery, however, despite all the label interest and album success for an indie band, the band still remains independent and unsigned.

In late 2012, Dallon released the Quiet Title EP for download on his Bandcamp page for The Brobecks, with an option to purchase a physical copy of the Violent Things ReIssue Cd. The Quiet Title EP consists of two songs “Anyone I Know” and “Cluster Hug”, featuring Ian Crawford on guitar, with help from former Brobecks drummer, Matt Glass, on recording and editing.

Music Career – Panic! at the Disco

In 2009, Dallon was hired to provide bass, synthesizer and back-up vocals for Panic! at the Disco on a temporary basis during one of their tours. While on tour with the band in China in mid-2010, he was asked by Brendon Urie and Spencer Smith to become a permanent member of the band. His status as a permanent member remained unknown publicly until mid-2012 when he confirmed via Twitter his full-time involvement with the band.

During his tenure as an official member of Panic! at the Disco, he was responsible for the conceptualization of the cover art for the band’s third studio album, Vices & Virtues (2011). He was also credited with writing all but two of the songs for the band’s fourth studio album, Too Weird to Live, Too Rare to Die (2013).

At the 2015 Alternative Press Music Awards, Dallon was nominated for Best Bassist. In October 2015, he announced his departure from the official line-up of Panic! At the Disco via twitter stating that he was “not contributing creatively anymore.”

Personal Life

On March 18, 2006, Dallon Weekes married his girlfriend of over a year, Breezy Douglas, an actress and model from the Los Angeles area. They have two children. Their daughter, Amelie Olivia Weekes was born on 1 June 2008. She is named after the 2001 French film Amélie. Their son, Knox Oliver Weekes, was born on 23 June 2010. He is named after ‘Knox Overstreet’, a character from the 1989 film Dead Poets Society. The family currently resides in Southern California.