Birth Name: Dallon James Weekes

Place of Birth: Verona, Missouri, U.S.

Date of Birth: May 4, 1981

Ethnicity: English (mostly), Scottish, German, Swiss-German, more distant Welsh, Scots-Irish/Northern Irish, and French

Dallon Weekes is an American singer, songwriter, musician, and record producer. He is the frontman for musical duo I Dont Know How But They Found Me, which also includes Ryan Seaman. He was previously a member of pop rock band Panic! at the Disco, along with Brendon Urie.

He is married to Breezy Douglas, with whom he has two children.

Dallon’s paternal grandfather was Lee Charles Weekes (the son of Charles Weekes and Rose Lena Dietrich). Lee was born in Rexburg, Idaho. Charles was the son of George Sidney Weekes, whose parents were English, and of Mary Ann Briggs, who was an English emigrant, from Tupton, Derbyshire. Rose was the daughter of Swiss-German emigrants, Gottfried Fred Dietrich, from Hettiswil, and Rosa Lena Bauer, from Schwarzenegg.

Dallon’s paternal grandmother is Delsa Green (the daughter of Harold Mander Green and Rosa Heinz). Harold was the son of Henry Thomas Broomhead Green and Sarah Ann Mander, who were born in the U.S., both of them to English immigrants. Rosa was the daughter of German emigrants, from Baden-Württemberg, Jacob Heinz, from Glashofen, and Caroline Catherine Friedrike Haefele, from Gailsbach.

Dallon’s maternal grandfather was David James Hooper (the son of John Albert Hooper and Ruby Estella Murdoch). David was born in Richfield, Utah. John was the son of Samuel Hooper, an English emigrant, from Birmingham, and of Elsie Leavitt, who had deep roots in the U.S. Ruby was the daughter of James “D” Murdoch, Sr., a Scottish emigrant, from Cronberry, Ayrshire, and of Elizabeth Lindsay, who was born in Illinois, also to Scottish parents.

Dallon’s maternal grandmother was Juanita Patterson (the daughter of Walter Edward Tracy Patterson and Emma Leona Stogner). Juanita was born in Tylertown, Mississippi, and had deep roots in the U.S. Walter was the son of Daniel Byrd Patterson and Susie Ann Courtney. Emma was the daughter of William Ezell Jefferson Stogner and Julia Josephine Stogner.