Bilawal Bhutto Zardari is set to launch his much-awaited campaign in Punjab, from the southern belt, which once used to be the stronghold of Pakistan People’s Party, with the first public meeting in Rahim Yar Khan on Saturday (today) “to regain its lost image and support.”

Can the grandson of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and son of the late Benazir Bhutto be able to do it in a difficult situation?

Various senior analysts and columnists rule out the chances of revival of the PPP in near future, in the presence of the Pakistan Muslim League-N (PML-N), and a strong opposition, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI).

It’s a new beginning for Bilawal, as southern Punjab has once remained the PPP stronghold and Makhdoom Ahmad Mehmood, president of the PPP southern chapter, has revived the party in this particular area. It can prove a ray of hope for the party in a no-win situation.

Bilawal has recently become the full-time chairman of the PPP, while Asif Ali Zardari has been relieved of the responsibility as the co-chairman. He is now the president of PPP Parliamentarians. May be for the same reason his name and contribution was missing from the speech of Bilawal in Umarkot.

Bilawal on Thursday made a fiery speech and announced his plan for Punjab, and that too from Rahim Yar Khan. It would be interesting to see the response from the PPP workers and supporters, who have been waiting for party's political activities for very long.

PPP, which was a leading party in Punjab during the Bhutto period, has to struggle in 2008 elections, months after assassination of Benazir Bhutto, and managed to secure good number of seats in the Punjab and National assemblies. But, in 2013 general elections, the party was completely wiped out and replaced by Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf.

The PPP leadership, particularly the PPP Punjab leadership, took refuge behind an excuse that their leaders were under threat from Taliban. No doubt, the excuse had some weightage, but that was not the only factor behind the defeat as most of their leaders were found campaigning for their sons, brothers and relatives. Neither the central leadership chalked out any plan nor its provincial body for the 2013 election campaign.

The party did not hold major public meetings during the campaign but leaders were found campaigning for their beloved-one individually.

Bilawal has a huge challenge ahead as unlike his grandfather, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, neither his mother, Benazir Bhutto, nor his father Asif Ali Zardari, made Punjab their base. BB had the best chance after her return from self-exile, but the then provincial leadership kept her out. Zardari also made Bilawal House in Lahore, but did not launch any campaign from there.

Another challenge for Bilawal would be to counter the PTI, which has snatched the PPP vote-bank. So, it’s Imran Khan and not Nawaz Sharif, who is the key rival for the PPP. The only solace available to the PPP is of peasants, women, minorities and secular/ liberal vote bank.

Even Imran Khan and the PTI, after back-to-back defeats in the by-elections and local bodies’ elections, are passing through a difficult phase. Its candidates in the last few elections lost by considerable margin. Yet, the PTI is far ahead of the PPP, which is on the third position. Thus, the PPP vote-bank has shrunk.

The dilemma of the PPP and Bilawal is that they are not even utilising party's powerful faces like Qamarzaman Kaira, Nadeem Afzal Chan or Aitzaz Ahsan. With all due respect to PPP Punjab President Manzoor Ahmad Wattoo and two ex-premiers, Yusuf Raza Gilani and Raja Pervez Ashraf, they have failed to revive the party in the post-2013 scenario.

The PPP, perhaps, had missed the chance during its five years tenure, 2008-2013, to give good governance.

What the PPP needs today is a "new political order”, revival of its political philosophy and programme and show good governance in Sindh, where its bureaucrats, officials are facing corruption charges.

Bilawal and other PPP leaders could not hold on the issues till the last two and a half years period of the incumbent government. The only issue on which they looked active lately is that of former president, retired General Pervez Musharraf, who was allowed by the federal government to go abroad for treatment. The PPP held a few demonstrations but since it has a weak case, the party could not get much support from masses.

Now, Bilawal is making some bold statements in support of minorities and women to revive party's secular and liberal image. But, that alone may not help unless he makes some drastic changes in PPP’s political philosophy.

His statement in Umarkot in support of the minorities, which supported making a minority member president of Pakistan, is far from ground realities, as it required a constitutional amendment. Therefore, if this is something which his party is working on, he should also be ready for a strong rebuttal from the right wing.

Secondly, the PPP could have initiated an amendment at the time of the 18th Amendment. If they are looking for consensus, they may never get it on such issues.

If Bilawal, despite his directives to Sindh and AJK, could not revive student unions, on which there is a consensus, how come he will succeed on such controversial issues. His speech of "Two Pakistan, one for the rich and the other for the poor; one for Musharraf the other for Benazir”, is a courageous speech.

Bilawal should first go for major overhauling in the PPP Punjab and bring forward strong faces, who also enjoy credibility. Secondly, his speech in Rahim Yar Khan would be important and could be the launching pad for the revival of his party in Punjab. How frequently will he visit Punjab and make Lahore his headquarters would determined how serious the party is about its revival and for winning the lost glory.

The writer is the senior columnist and analyst of GEO, The News and Jang