Staff Reporter

The Central Vice President Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) and Leader of the Opposition in Sindh Assembly, Haleem Adil Sheikh has said that the life and teachings of Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (PBUH) are exemplary guiding principles for success in life here and hereafter.

In a statement issued here on Sunday, he said that Rabi-ul-Awal is the month of advent of Prophet of Islam Hazrat Muhammad (PBUH) who is mercy and blessing for the all the creations of Almighty Allah and Pakistani nation was celebrating “Ashra e Rahmatul-lil- Alameen” to pay reverence to the greatest leader of all times.

Haleem Adil said that Prime Minister Imran Khan has announced to establish Rehmatul-lil-Alameen Authority while the decade will be observed with religious reverence and sanctity throughout the country in befitting manner.

He announced that following major event of celebrations of 12th Rabiul Awal in Islamabad that would be addressed by PM Imran Khan, a conference of Ullema Karam, Sajjadah Nasheens of venerated shrines and custodians of different theological orders titled “Jashan Aamad e Rasool and Riyasat e Madina Conference” will be held on October 22, 2021 at Sindh Governor House.

The Prime Minster of Pakistan will address the conference that will be presided by Governor Sindh Imran Ismael.

Foreign Minister Makhdoom Shah Mehmood Qureshi, Federal Minister for Religious Affairs be special guests among others, he added.

Referring to PPP’s public gathering in Karachi on the day, the Opposition Leader in Sindh Assembly suggested that Bilawal Zardari should let the people of Sindh know where in 13 years budget accumulating to Rs 8900 billion was utilized and how a massive corruption of Rs 1400 billion was allowed.

Masses want to know, why 85% percent of the population living in Sindh were left to drink contaminated water and water channels, reservoirs and aquifers were being constantly degraded. Wheat of Rs 14 billion spoiled by ‘rats’ and people have to buy flour at exorbitant rates, he noted.

The economic hub of the country Karachi speaks aloud of performance of PPP, lack of sanitation, drainage and green cover coupled with messy traffic system with poor public transport took the metropolitan to higher ranks among the filthiest cities of the world, Haleem Adil Sheikh remarked.

Including arrival of 84 buses progress on federal government sponsored Green Line of BRT project was in front of every citizen and they were eager to see Red and Orange Lines of Sindh government, and what happened Sindh Government’s colorful Transport projects?

Haleem Adil Sheikh said that corruption of Rs 3 billion was committed on the purchase of school desks, Bilawal, masses want to know why the 5,000 desk was bought in rupees 29,000.