Pierce Brosnan has commanded respect as one of the film world's most varied, adventurous and skilled dramatic actors. The consummate leading man, Pierce was a strong and focused young man. He studied acting for three years in London followed by several years performing around the UK. Early roles included The Long Good Friday and The Mirror Crack'd (both 1980), before his foray into the world of television, in the 1981 ABC TV Mini-Series The Manions of America. Announced to America, Pierce secured the title role in the popular and hugely successful long-running detective series, Remington Steele in 1982. Roles in The Lawnmower Man (1992) and Mrs. Doubtfire (1993) established his big screen credibility and soon his charisma, good looks and intelligence in these roles made him a prime candidate to step into the shoes of one of the cinema's most iconic characters, becoming the 5th James Bond in 1994. His role as James Bond made him a household name all over the world, reinvigorating the popularity of the Bond legacy by putting his own stamp on the coolly debonair 007 in the box-office blockbusters Goldeneye, Tomorrow Never Dies, The World is Not Enough and Die Another Day. Die Another Day, which marked the 40th anniversary of Bond, was at the time the most successful Bond film ever, garnering almost half a billion dollars worldwide.

Established as one of the world's most bankable stars, Pierce could have been forgiven for resting on his laurels. As he continued his leading roles in films such as Dante's Peak and The Tailor of Panama, his drive and desire would not allow for complacency though, as he expanded his career to include film production, and specifically production in Ireland. The work of his production company, Irish DreamTime, has been of major significance to Ireland's film industry. To date, Irish DreamTime has produced over a dozen films including The Nephew, The Thomas Crown Affair, Evelyn, Laws of Attraction, The Matador, The Greatest and November Man. The company's first studio project, The Thomas Crown Affair, starring Brosnan, Rene Russo and Denis Leary became both a critical and box office hit.