In the 1992 movie "Lawnmower Man," Pierce Brosnan plays a scientist obsessed with the notion that virtual reality is "the next level" in human evolution. "Lawnmower Man" could easily be passed off as another bad movie based loosely on a Steven King story, except that it reflects the way society perceived virtual reality at the time it was made.

VictorMax, Forte and Virtual IO manufactured $600 to $1,000 HMDs that had severe resolution limitations. They were fine for playing games such as "Doom" or "Magic Carpet," but their resolution was so low that they could not display text legibly. HMDs that had high-resolution displays cost thousands of dollars.

Another problem was the HMD itself. Most HMDs were built into clunky helmets that weighed a couple of pounds and were uncomfortable. (Virtual IO tried to get around this problem by building its displays into goggles called i-glasses that were much lighter than their competitors' helmets.)

"One of the limiting factors of the current technology is the component elements - the inability for the existing technology to achieve the brightness and contrast-ratio levels and the color fidelity requirements," says Matt Nichols, vice president of marketing at Microvision. "Just the sheer form factor - the size, the weight, the mass - of the component technologies was very large."

"People were supposed to wear these enormously heavy, power-consuming gorillas and accept it as part of their life."

Tom Furness, one of the pioneers who helped generate interest in virtual reality, has played an important role in developing what may become the next evolution in virtual displays.

"Furness started working on virtual reality in 1968 and kept working on it through the '70s," says Moody. "The display he built was for flight simulators. You sat in the simulator, and this thing was suspended over your head. He called it the Visually Coupled System." (NOTE: There is some debate over who created the first virtual reality display. David Evans and Ivan Sutherland built a virtual reality display at the University of Utah in 1968.)

Furness's work strayed from monitors and screens when he discovered that he could transmit images directly on to the human retina using lasers.

"He left the Air Force in 1990 and decided it was time to bring this out into the real world, and that was how he ended up at the University of Washington. They have a lab there called the human interface technology lab (HIT Lab). They do really amazing work," says Moody.

Furness's new work has many powerful applications and implications. Using lasers instead of LCDs has enabled him to achieve very high-resolution images. Instead of the blurry 170x100 resolution offered by early commercial HMDs, the HIT Lab's virtual retinal displays (VRD) can achieve 800x600 resolution.

You could not read text through the monitors of early HMDs. One of the HIT Lab's demonstrations includes a legibly scanned image of the stock market page of the Wall Street Journal.

Microvision, a Seattle-based firm, has licensed the HIT Lab's technology and is developing it for practical applications.

"We were at VGA and SVGA right out of the gates," says Nichols. "We're now under a government program to deliver high-definition television-quality (32-bit color with 800x600 resolution) by early 1999."

Using lasers has enabled Microvision to develop lightweight HMDs. Instead of using LCD screens, the Microvision design has fiber-optic cables to feed the laser signal into scanners that project it into the user's eyes.

"The breakthrough that enabled us to do this is the development of a mechanical resonant scanner (a metallic mirror) that moves fast enough to allow the beam of light to be scanned across the retina in a horizontal direction," says Homer Pryor, a doctoral student working at the HIT Lab.

One possible application of this technology is restoring eyesight. Preliminary studies at the HIT Lab have shown that people suffering from the latter stages of macular degeneration, a disease that destroys the retina, can see laser images if they are projected into healthy parts of their retinas.

"Tom [Furness] has an enormous passion for a subject called 'low vision,' helping individuals in an advanced stage of macular degeneration, whose only alternative is to use a magnifying glass to see things," says Nichols. "It appears that by using a pinpoint beam of light directed to the living area of the retina, as opposed to the damaged areas, the human brain will perceive the information."

Nichols insists, however that Microvision is not involved in these experiments and wants to see solid findings before speculating about their success. "The exact results are in such a preliminary stage that it would be irresponsible for Microvision to make any kind of claim about what this technology can accomplish," says Nichols.

"We do see medical applications. We're exploring technology to do advanced diagnosis of eye-related diseases."

A fairly new company, Microvision is still developing its technology and is not yet manufacturing finished products. It does, however, have several prototypes, including monochrome and full-color displays.

These displays are used by looking at a small dot of light coming out of a lens. Looking into this dot is similar to staring into a peephole. You can only see parts of the image until you get close enough; then the entire picture appears.

While the mainstream market may not be ready for VRD technology, there are specific industries that are. "The early ventures that crossed the chasm directly into the consumer market found a market that was not ready and did not have any relevant applications," Nichols says. "We're quite happy to build our business within markets that are not only asking for our technology but have a very significant use for it."

According to Nichols, one of the most promising applications for this technology will be creating virtual displays for pilots on fighter jets. He admits, however, that the final design could be pricey.

"When you add the integration and the electronics, you're anywhere from $200,000 to $250,000. That's for a full visual system that's tied into the nose and wings of the plane, night vision, systems integration, land terrain... a lot of sensors all built into what ultimately becomes the helmet."

"When you are talking about the survivability of an $80 million aircraft, adding a head-mounted display for a pilot is a fairly insignificant investment."

The evolution of synthetic reality

As far as the commercial use of virtual reality is concerned, people involved in the industry claim that virtual reality is alive and well in forms that do not involve head mounted displays.

"I see VR as the seamless integration of technology into our lives," says Joanna Alexander, who founded the Sarnoff Institute's synthetic realities group. "We saw virtual reality as the suspension of disbelief. Mentally, we view it as standing in a 3-D room in which you can interact with objects; but that is a very specific and narrow application of virtual reality."

Alexander left Sarnoff in 1995 to form Zombie VR Studios, a company that designs content for PC game publishers and location-based entertainment companies.

"Virtual reality is not dead," insists Mark Long, Alexander's partner at Zombie and another former member of the Sarnoff synthetic realities group. "Is a head-mounted display required for what we call virtual reality? What about force feedback and 3-D audio?"

Moody agrees. "The lab researchers kept working after all of the publicity went away. More and more elements of their work are now making their way into the mainstream. If you go to Sega GameWorks, you see things like a fishing game in which you hold a pole and the line reacts [to the fish on the screen]."

According to Moody, head-mounted displays are making a comeback in Japan in the home entertainment market. "Sony and Olympus and a couple of other companies are making some really amazing HMDs that have not been sent to the American market," he says. "Sony has one called the Glasstron (retails for 88,000 yen, or approximately U.S. $800) and Olympus has one called the Eye-Trek.

"Sony's comes bundled with a portable DVD player. They have one now with head tracking, but I don't think it is on the market yet. Eye-Trek doesn't have head tracking, but it only weighs four ounces."