A 13-year-old Jacksonville boy gunned down in a drive-by shooting a week ago was laid to rest amid an outpouring of grief from family, friends, neighbors and classmates as well as strangers Saturday.

Prince Holland was killed while being driven home with three other youths after football tryouts Dec. 3. The shooting at the intersection of New Kings and Moncrief roads also sent an 11-year-old boy and the 21-year-old driver to the hospital with gunshot wounds.

Two other teenage passengers – ages 14 and 15 – were not injured in the barrage of gunfire.

The Jacksonville Sheriff’s Office has said a car drove up then someone opened fire on the five victims who were inside a sport utility vehicle stopped at the Northside intersection.

Affectionately known as “Day Day” to family and friends, Prince is the 11th homicide victim age 17 or younger slain in the city so far this year.

Prince Holland:'We will not tire': Jacksonville sheriff, mayor pledge resources to find shooter in boy's death

Nate Monroe:Nate Monroe: Gun violence, politics, and Jacksonville's terrible truth

The Ribault Middle School student known for being at church every Sunday and for his love of football — especially the Kansas City Chiefs — is among a total of at least 153 homicides in the city since Jan. 1.

Jacksonville had 124 homicides at this time last year, unofficial Times-Union records show.

No arrests had been reported in the Dec. 3 drive-by shooting by the time the funeral for Prince began Saturday afternoon at Zion Hope Missionary Baptist Church.

The slaying has drawn nationwide attention as well as condemnation and calls for unity to stop the violence from Sheriff T.K Waters, other elected officials, and church and community leaders.

Waters and Mayor Lenny Curry along with multiple government and nonprofit officials also have pledged more resources toward solving the drive-by shooting.

Amid an outpouring of grief, Prince was remembered Saturday as a “protector and mentor” to his friends who he brought to church with him as well as inspired to get into sports instead of drugs and gangs.

Prince also was remembered for his kindness as demonstrated by cutting the lawns of his neighbors. And even at his young age, he worked hard toward making his dream of becoming a wide receiver for the Kansas City Chiefs a reality.

'A good kid'

“It’s awful. It’s just awful. Just to know this happened out of the blue, random,” his aunt Sandra Cheeseborough told the Times-Union following the funeral.

“He was a good kid. … He got his peers, even his football peers, going to church with him. He’d say you all want to be my friend, you have to go to church with me. You’ve got to walk my walk. You've got to know God’,” she said.

Prince’s death has devastated their entire family, she said.

“We’re just trying to heal,” Cheeseborough said.

Prince was part of an extended family that included 11 siblings according to his obituary.

At least 150 people including Prince’s friends, fellow football players, classmates and neighbors attended the funeral. Many wore red and gold at the family's request because those were the Kansas City Chiefs colors. Prince's own football jersey was displayed in a place of honor beside his Kansas City Chiefs-themed casket.

His mother, Chantel Brown, was overcome and began to weep and struggled to sing the gospel song “I Just Can’t Give Up Now” and then was helped back to her seat by her children.

Brown wrote a loving poem in tribute to her son describing him as "my wide receiver in the sky." The poem was printed in the order of services program given to mourners at the funeral.

"You gave us 13 years and we wish it were more. But God needed you at His side. Teach those who don't know the same way you showed me. Fly High Baby Boy … Because you said, "Don't cry for me" and in your words "Day Day don't play." Watch over us always as we live for you each day … Love, Ma"

Prince’s older brothers Chrishon Sykes and Walter Johnson each choked back tears as they spoke of their little brother — saying he was taken too soon.

“He did everything he was supposed to do ...He never was a bad child. He never was a street child. He was the most humble person … I just want justice for my brother and my family,” Sykes said.

Johnson apologized.

“I’m sorry I wasn’t a better big brother … I just want him to know that I loved him dearly,” said Johnson also weeping.

Church Pastor Glenn Foreman called on the crowd to follow Prince’s example. People need to learn to love themselves, love others and love Jesus just as God loves his children, he said.

Prince’s family has established a GoFundMe account seeking donations to help pay for the expenses resulting from his death.

Anyone with information about the killing or other crime can call the Sheriff’s Office at (904) 630-0500.

Any anonymous tips made to First Coast Crime Stoppers at (866) 845-8477 (845-TIPS) leading to an arrest could result in a reward up to $9,000. Or email JSOCrimeTips@jaxsheriff.org or rewards@fccrimestoppers.com.