I Think I Love My Wife Chris Rock (U.S.)

In "I Think I Love My Wife," Chris Rock, who also directed and wrote the script (along with his frequent collaborator Louis C.K.), plays Richard Cooper, an investment banker whose life is as bland as his name. Richard, in his voice-over narration, is the first to admit that his situation is enviable in many ways: he has a lovely wife named Brenda (Gina Torres), two cute, small children, a spiffy house in the suburbs and a flourishing career at a reputable Manhattan firm.

The problem, as you may be able to intuit from this checklist of bourgeois amenities, is that he's bored. He has reached a point at which existence settles into a series of pleasant routines and minor frustrations. In Richard's case, one of these frustrations — the sexual cooling of his marriage to Brenda — becomes the source of some potentially major trouble.

"My marriage is frozen solid," he declares. He means to say that it's strong, but the metaphor sneaks up and traps him in an uncomfortable admission.

To make matters worse, he delivers this diagnosis to Nikki Tru (Kerry Washington), a human blowtorch — even without the cigarettes she'd still be smoking — aimed at the facade of Richard's comfortable, complacent life.

Nikki, the ex-girlfriend of an old friend, shows up at Richard's office one afternoon, supposedly seeking a letter of recommendation. By caprice or design, she ensnares him in a long, volatile flirtation, a relationship that, while not technically adulterous, is nonetheless tinged with furtiveness and guilty exhilaration.

If the premise sounds familiar, that is in part because "I Think I Love My Wife" is a remake, at once free-handed and faithful, of "L'Amour l'après- midi" (Chloe in the Afternoon), the sixth and last of Eric Rohmer's "Moral Tales."

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.