I Think I Love My Wife

Directed by Chris Rock

Written by Chris Rock and Louis C.K.

Starring Chris Rock, Kerry Washington, Steve Buscemi

Classification: 14A

Rating: **

I Think I Love My Wife begins where your typical romance comedy ends - in happily-ever-after land, where the guy gets the girl and the two kids and the picket-fenced house and can say without equivocation seven years into his state of bliss: "I'm bored out of my mind." Actually, since this is Chris Rock talking, what he really says is, "I'm bored out of my fucking mind," that all-purpose adjective doing its usual job of pretending to up the comic ante. Rock has also said his movie is "based" on Eric Rohmer's 1972 morality tale, Chloe in the Afternoon, the kind of classically intelligent talkfest that gets along with (so far as I recall) hardly any help from the all-purpose adjective. Of course, there's no reason to dispute Rock's claim, much as there's no reason to doubt that Roll Over Beethoven is based on the Fifth Symphony.

Tripling as director, co-writer and star, Rock turns up as Richard Cooper, a black investment banker in an otherwise lily-white firm and a sexually neglected husband in an otherwise solid marriage. Why so neglected? No explanation, except that, like everything else here, it suits a male humourist's chauvinistic needs. Anyway, Richard wears conservative suits, wire-framed glasses and a choirboy expression, but, when the siren call of comedy arises, he has a convenient habit of sliding right out of character to sound pretty much like a certain Chris Rock. Like when, complaining about his wife's taste in oversized undies, he laments in a pained half-shout: "The biggest thing on a pair of panties should be the tag." (Insert rim shot here.)

Enter the sexy devil with the red dress on. One fine day, who should wiggle into his office but the single and single-minded Nikki (Kerry Washington), a curvaceous friend from his bachelor period. She flirts shamelessly and he half-resists, although not nearly enough to discourage subsequent lunch-hour visits. Quickly, then, the script baits the hook, leaving a lusting-in-his-heart Richard to agonize over whether to push his emotional adultery ("I feel all the guilt but none of the pleasure") into the real hot deal. There's the moral conundrum, and the entire remainder of the movie is devoted to it.

So how do you fill the next two acts? Well, Rohmer, being a serious homme, used plenty of soul-searching voiceover, lots of subtle dialogue and a camera eager to scan the characters' faces for tell-tale signs of hypocrisy or self-deception. Rock, charged with turning serious into seriously funny, takes a more expedient approach - he steals from himself, inserting set-piece scenes that are essentially just dramatized riffs from the cleaner parts of his stand-up act. Since the fouler parts are his forte, we're left only with some mildly amusing moments in search of a movie. Rohmer gave us a cinematic essay; Rock settles for a tepid concert flick tarted up with a mini-plot.

Those recycled riffs aren't hard to spot. They stick out like weather-and-traffic on the news wheel, and you can easily tick them off as they pass by: two tediously married couples share a dull dinner date; a dutiful hubby checks out the auto show with his ultra-practical spouse ("Going to the car show and looking at the minivans is like going to a strip show and looking at the deejay"); a mistimed dose of Viagra leaves the same hubby all dressed up with no place to poke; and, that old favourite, a timid lothario tries to discreetly buy a packet of condoms from a voluble drug store clerk.

The supporting characters are on hand to flesh out the set-pieces and fill whatever gaps remain. In a delicious bit of miscasting, Steve Buscemi appears as a guiltlessly philandering colleague in Richard's investment firm - yeah, Buscemi is just the guy you want handling your mutual funds. And playing the corporate bigwig is the redoubtable Edward Herrmann who, oddly enough, gets not only the film's best (and most politically incorrect) line but one worthy of Rohmer himself: "You can lose a lot of money chasing women but you'll never lose women chasing money."

In an even better surprise, Washington's take on the seductress is so saucy, so unapologetic, such a brash blend of insouciant charm and raw sex appeal, that she swipes the picture from right under its nominal star. The only problem is that her theft inadvertently tips the balance of the moral dilemma, shifting it seismically all the way from "He'd be a fool to succumb" to "He'd be a coward not to."

A smarter, wittier Rock - that is, the Rock of his stand-up routine - would have picked up on that shift and made us squirm a little. But not here. The only ambiguity in I Think I Love My Wife lies in the title, where it stays, never venturing a frame further. Too bad. In braver hands, I think I could have loved this movie. In fact, once upon a golden time, I believe I did.