Chris Rock has previously written and directed two narrative feature films (Head of State and I Think I Love My Wife), but it’s only with Top Five that I feel we can safely describe him as an “auteur.” His new film, which has premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival, is a charmingly tough-knuckled expression of an artist’s vision in a pure and classic mode. With Top Five, Chris Rock has made his Annie Hall.

Rock plays Andre Allen, a character with many similarities to himself. He began as a stand-up comedian, then segued into a series of extremely popular, stupid movies. (Allen’s Whammy the Bear trilogy features a cop in a bear suit that shoots machine guns, and it made a zillion dollars.) When we meet Andre he is four years sober, readying to marry to a Kardashian-esque reality star (Gabrielle Union) and is about to release his first “serious” effort, an historical epic on the Haitian slave revolution. Despite Top Five happening over the course of one day, the splendid stream-of-consciousness editing means it takes a moment to put it all together. Indeed, at first you may think that Andre's verbal sparring partner Chelsea (Rosario Dawson, in a plum role) is his significant other. They’ve got the walk-and-talk patter down and seem comfortable zinging one another. This is, however, not the case.

Chelsea is a New York Times reporter shadowing Andre for the day as he preps for his bachelor party and does a junket for his earnest drama. (Side note: I was not expecting to see some of my New York–area film-coverage colleagues on the screen at this year's Toronto International Film Festival. I missed one of the jokes, as I was too busy shouting “whaaaaaaa?!?!”) The “plot” of Top Five, such as it is, is simple. Chris Rock and Rosario Dawson walk around New York. It’s the jazzy way in which they do it that make this so memorable.

Early yuks are earned with some flashback stories to Andre Allen’s younger years (and a Cedric the Entertainer cameo that is a gift to the GIF-makers), but it’s when Andre brings Chelsea to his childhood home in the projects when the movie really hums. To welcoming cheers of “Hollywood!,” Andre is immediately put in his place by the people who knew him when. Disses are hurled in all directions between Rock, Tracy Morgan, Sherri Shepherd, and, upstaging them all, Leslie Jones. If there's justice in this world, Top Five will do for Leslie Jones what Bridesmaids did for Melissa McCarthy.

What’s so remarkable about this and a few other sequences in Top Five is that it deviates from the current and ubiquitous S.N.L./Apatow style. It isn’t shock humor, or catchphrase humor. I get the impression that Rock let his actors improvise for quite a long time, giving the best scenes an almost Cassavetes-like observational feel. They aren’t mugging for the camera, they are riffing within their roles. The film’s title comes from an oft-repeated time waster, where people list their favorite all-time rappers. Any sane screenwriting professor would look at that and say “cut this”—but these tangents are what elevates this from a simple comedy to something resembling greatness.

That’s not to say there aren’t gross-out bits. There’s something in this movie that involves habanero sauce and the human body that’ll be discussed for quite a long time. The ending is also telegraphed from miles away. But the warmth of the moment is completely earned, because the journey took the roundabout route. The splintered editing allows for a crammed-in image of Rosario Dawson playing skip-rope with a bunch of kids. It isn’t really set up properly, and I’m willing to bet that there was a whole scene surrounding it that was tossed out. But Rock recognized that the spirit of this movie, like the spirit of a great stand-up comedian, is in association and riffing. So the stray blink stays, and it ends up being one of the finest moments we’ve yet seen from Dawson.

Not every bit in Top Five landed for me. An Angry Birds joke is already dated. And the jokes about hip-hop stars aren’t meant for squares like myself. But what’s impressive is the total package. Rock clearly opened a vein and poured all he had into this one. It’s possible that he’s drained and has not much else to say. Hopefully that’s not the case and this is merely “first” film from a major director—a bold voice that we’ve already known and loved for years.

Style

Justin Timberlake Loses New York Driving Privileges in DUI Hearing

The judge also scolded the singer's defense attorney for making “irresponsible” comments about Timberlake's level of intoxication.

Television

Brian Jordan Alvarez’s English Teacher Has an Angle but Doesn’t Feel Like Homework

Its creators hope this sharp, silly FX series can be “a microcosm of all the stupid arguments that everyone’s having with each other all the time.”

Politics

RFK Jr. Ruled Ineligible for New York Ballot After Judge Calls BS on Him Living in a One-Room Rental for $500 a Month

He only started paying rent after a report questioned if he really lived there.

News

What Kamala Harris's New Campaign Sounds Like

A complete transcript of the vice president's speech on July 30, 2024 in Atlanta

Hollywood

47 New Movies This Fall to Watch Out For

Fall 2024’s most intriguing movie releases include everything from Wicked and Joker: Folie á Deux to Saturday Night and Nosferatu.

Movies

Why Was Jessica Chastain and Anne Hathaway’s New Movie Buried?

Mothers’ Instinct is a perfectly solid domestic thriller with two Oscar-winning movie stars that barely got a North American release.

Television

Who Are the Three New Dragon Riders on House of the Dragon?

On the penultimate episode of House of the Dragon season two, Rhaenyra has enlisted the help of three new dragon riders: Addam of Hull, Hugh Hammer, and Ulf the White. Here's what you need to know about all three.

Style

Singer-Songwriter Orenda Fink Breaks Her Mother’s Spell in Haunting New Memoir

In The Witch’s Daughter: My Mother, Her Magic, and the Madness That Bound Us, Fink reckons with her mother’s mental illness and addiction, conjuring her own healing.

Royals

Kate Middleton and a Scruffy Prince William Enlist an Unexpected New Spokesperson

Snoop Dogg had a celebratory message for the Paris 2024 Olympians on behalf of “the Prince and his lovely wife.”

Politics

New Polls Show Walz’s Approval Rating Surging While Vance’s Circles the Drain

A real tale of two running mates.