We rely on our home appliances to keep our lives running smoothly. When they break, it can feel difficult to keep up between trips to the laundromat and hand-scrubbing all those pots after family dinners.

Our home appliance repair services are available for 24/7 scheduling so you can get a service professional in your home to fix your appliance as soon as possible. With The Neighborly Done Right Promise™, your residential appliance repairs are covered by a one-year parts and labor warranty, so you can trust we’ll get your repairs done right.

How Home Appliance Repairs Work With Mr. Appliance

From leaky dishwashers to microwaves and ovens that won’t heat, we’ve seen it all. Our customer service teams are waiting to pair you with a local service professional who will provide a pleasant, hassle-free repair experience. Schedule your in-home service appointment to get all your appliances back in working order on your schedule.

Here are some of the reasons why thousands of homeowners call on us daily to complete their in-home appliance repairs:

Friendly, respectful professionals who arrive on time.

Experienced appliance repair professionals who get the job done right the first time.

Honest, upfront pricing (flat rate, never hourly).

Flexible appointment times that fit a busy schedule.

Regular special offers for additional savings.

Parts and workmanship that come with the Neighborly Done Right Promise™.

Repair clean-up services included.

When it comes to finding a trustworthy, experienced residential appliance repair service, your local Mr. Appliance checks all the boxes. You can count on our skilled professionals to get your appliances back up and running quickly.

Home Appliance Repair Services You Can Rely On

Home appliances always seem to break at the worst times. At Mr. Appliance, we know how important it is to get your kitchen and laundry appliances fixed quickly and properly.

Call us for all your home appliance repair needs, including:

Kitchen Appliance Repair and Maintenance

Is your once-convenient kitchen appliance now a hassle to operate? When your beloved wine cooler is acting up or the dishwasher stops mid-cycle, we provide reliable residential appliance repair and maintenance services that will keep your household running smoothly. We can help with maintenance and repairs for the following kitchen appliances:

Dishwashers

Freezers

Garbage disposals

Gas or electric ovens, stoves, and ranges

Ice makers

Microwaves

Refrigerators

Wine coolers

Laundry Machine Repair and Maintenance

There’s nothing like a fresh set of clean sheets. However, when you have laundry piling up because your washer and/or dryer isn’t working properly, it can throw your whole household in chaos. We’ll get your laundry routine back on schedule and restore order with appliance maintenance and repair services that include the following:

Dryer vent cleaning service

Electric dryer repair and maintenance

Gas dryer repair and maintenance

Washing machine repair and maintenance

Looking for Home Appliance Repair Near Me? Here’s What Our Customers Have to Say

Your local Mr. Appliance offers reliable appliance repairs and maintenance service you can trust, but don’t take our word for it. Check out these testimonials from Mr. Appliance's customers.

Home Appliance Brands We Maintain and Repair

From dryers that don’t dry to warm refrigerators, we take care of it all. Most importantly, we understand there is no convenient time for your appliances to break down. That is why our teams of local home appliance repair professionals are ready to provide the exceptional, reliable repair services you need, when you need it.

We repair and maintain all major brands of kitchen and laundry appliances, from the latest smart fridges to older model stoves. Don’t see your appliance brand listed below? Call your local Mr. Appliance today to see if we can repair it.

Home Appliance Repair FAQ

Have more questions about appliance repairs? No problem. Our team of experienced appliance experts have answers to some of the most commonly asked questions about home appliance repair.

Is It Better To Repair or Replace an Appliance?

First, call a professional for help determining whether it’s worth fixing an older appliance. The decision to repair or replace an appliance will vary based on how well the appliance was maintained, what the issue is, and how old the appliance is. An experienced appliance service professional will weigh all those factors to help you determine if repairing or replacing your appliance is the best option.

Is It Worth Fixing Old Appliances?

Determining if it’s worth fixing an old appliance is not always an easy decision because every repair case is different. While you don’t want to waste time and money repairing an old appliance that could potentially break down again quickly, extending its life until you can afford a newer model may be worth it (depending on the cost and nature of the repair). Before initiating any repairs, a professional should provide you with upfront pricing related to the repair, which will help you make an informed decision. Your local Mr. Appliance provides upfront pricing and the Neighborly Done Right Promise™, which ensures your satisfaction.

What Is the Life Expectancy of a Home Appliance?

Life expectancy for a home appliance varies depending on usage, maintenance, and more. Refer to the chart below for average home appliance life expectancies.

Reliable Home Appliance Repair Services From the Experts

Keeping your household running smoothly means keeping your kitchen and laundry room appliances in top shape. It’s hard to make dinner when the stove doesn’t turn on, and it’s disturbing how fast laundry piles up when the washing machine or dryer is on the fritz.