By Meryl Gottlieb| mg986611@ohiou.edu| @buzzlightmeryl

How I Met Your Mother airs Mondays at 8 p.m. on CBS

Rating: 4.5/5

After tonight’s episode, there are only two more episodes before How I Met Your Mother’s season eight finale. I know, I’m devastated too folks. However, we got a great episode tonight, and I cannot wait to see the finale because I know it is going to be amazing, and I may cry. Scratch that; I will cry.

I already whimpered when Bob Saget began the episode narrating that it would be the story of the night Barney’s (Neil Patrick Harris) life fell apart. My baby! Except, his worst night is one of the show’s best nights.

Six hours earlier, he and Robin (Cobie Smulders) prepare to go to dinner with his mother (Frances Conroy). Robin is very nervous about going, especially because she has to be alone with her until Barney returns from dropping off the $5,000 catering deposit.

He tells her not to worry because what could possibly happen? Kidnapping, that’s what. Marshall (Jason Segel) and Ted (Josh Radnor) kidnap him for his bachelor’s party.

It’s his “bro-mitzvah” — his right of passage as a bro. As a person of the Jewish faith, I have to say that these references were hilarious! I laughed so hard that I cried a little. Puns included a bro-maka (yamaka), a bro-del (dreidel) and a Bro-rah (Torah) that is written in He-bro (Hebrew). Perfection. I definitely approve.

However, Robin is less than excited because now she has to spend the evening alone with his mother. Isn’t it everyone’s dream to spend the night with their mother-in-law?

Barney has said several times that he knows Marshall and Ted will fail planning his bachelor’s party because they won’t be able to make it awesome enough, and they didn’t. They are staying at a run-down hotel that is ten miles outside of Atlantic City, and they have a clown for entertainment. I can’t even describe how much I love Ted and Marshall; they are such adorable dorks.

Barney apparently told his mother that Robin is a virgin, prompting a ton of virgin jokes that were top-notch. Frances Conroy, you rule on American Horror Story and you’re hilarious on HIMYM. Is there anything you can’t do?

As Barney requested in the bro-rah, the Karate Kid has to appear. So, Lily (Alyson Hannigan) brings Ralph Macchio to the party. Except, Barney prefers William Zabka, who played the bully in the movie, saying he is the true Karate Kid. Of course he thinks that. I love him.

Let’s all just take a moment to appreciate Macchio’s cameo. He was so hilarious, and Barney’s hatred of him was excellent. Everyone continually compared Barney and Macchio, to which Barney always replied, “I am nothing like Ralph Macchio,” in a way only Barney could. Except lines like “Self-shake” and “Incredi-wait for it-ble” make it pretty obvious they are similar.

Also, let’s not forgot the wonderful Hannigan. Continuing a long tradition, Lily is all over Macchio, and, as always, it’s hilarious. Hannigan has that craziness down pat.

Ted and Marshall did hire a stripper, and it’s Quinn (Becki Newton). Oh snap. Of course, it’s incredibly awkward because she showed up to Barney’s bachelor party not even a full year after they broke up. Just to annoy him, she does a strip show for everyone but Barney, even the clown.

Barney is having such a terrible time that he calls the party off. As they drive back home, Macchio makes remarks about how much of a loser Barney is for not even gambling when he was ten miles from Atlantic City. That crazy twitch of his begins, and he whips the car around as he clenches the catering deposit money in his hand. Oh no. That is not going to go over well with Robin.

Another great nod to HIMYM history: Barney goes to play Xing Hai Shi Bu Xing. Except, this time, he does not do well. He loses all of the catering money and then tries to win it back by taking out a loan with a Chinese man who wants Marshall as collateral.

Ted yells at Barney for not caring about his friends. When Barney tries to go after him, he runs into Robin who is then incredibly upset when Quinn gets out of the car. She throws her ring at him and tells him it’s over. NNNNOOOOOOOOO. Oh my goodness. I had to pause the show so that I could probably yell and cry over this.

However, things are not what they seem. Everything was Robin’s plan! WHAT! So that heart attack I had thinking they broke up was for nothing. No show, well besides American Horror Story, has ever thrown me the way HIMYM does.

No one could figure out how to give Barney the best night of his life since he makes every night awesome, so Robin suggested giving him the worst night. That’s terrible but seeing them plan this was hilarious. Everyone was in on it: Quinn, the Chinese men at the casino, Barney’s mom and Macchio. Just like one of Barney’s plays, Robin planned “The Barney.” That flashback of the gang planning the whole thing was hilarious. Watch it and see why you love the cast and the show.

Barney actually loved the whole thing. Though, he points out that they still did not get the Karate Kid right. Or did they? The clown reveals himself to be William Zabka. That was just the cherry on top of a phenomenal night.

Tonight’s episode reminded me of why I loved the show: it’s hilarious; the cast is amazing; and it played on the time card again. HIMYM is great because it is a show about time. They can present something as if it’s real and then rewind and show what really happened. For the millionth time, I would like to highlight how amazing the cast’s chemistry is with one another. They are all respectively hilarious, but put them together and they are unstoppable.