The IBM Q Network is looking to foster joint research opportunities with universities in an effort to expand the field of knowledge around quantum computing.

A number of universities are looking to collaborate on quantum computing research through joining the IBM Q Network, a consortium of large companies, startups, academic institutions and research labs working together to advance quantum computing and explore practical applications. Florida State University, Stony Brook University, the University of Notre Dame, Virginia Tech and the University of Tokyo will all gain access to IBM's most advanced quantum computing systems for teaching as well as faculty and student research projects.

These collaborations include:

Stony Brook University working with Oak Ridge National Lab for joint research and to prepare a new workforce that is skilled in quantum technologies;

University of Notre Dame working with students to develop novel quantum computing applications in chemistry, physics and engineering and the creation of tools to increase the efficiency of quantum computers; and

Virginia Tech working with Oak Ridge National Lab, the U.S. Department of Energy and IBM Almaden Research Center to develop new quantum algorithms in the field of quantum chemistry.

"Developing practical quantum applications that drive business and scientific breakthroughs requires a diverse ecosystem," said Anthony Annunziata, IBM Q Network global lead. "Partnering with these world-leading academic and research institutions is key as we work to educate, empower and get the next generation of students 'quantum ready' to advance the field."

IBM is also working with several institutions that already have initiatives focused around quantum computing. These university research collaborations include Duke University, Harvard University, Northwestern University, the University of Colorado Boulder and the University of Waterloo. The IBM Q Network will also connect with the Chicago Quantum Exchange hub, which combines work being done at the University of Chicago, Argonne National Laboratory, Fermilab and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

Duke University has established The Brown Lab, which will work with IBM in the area of quantum error correction. The Harvard Quantum Initiative is working to develop an educational platform for quantum engineering and science for the long term. The University of Colorado Boulder has a CUBit Initaitive, which brings university, industry and government scientists together to conduct joint research and development, train students to contribute to the expanding quantum workforce and engage with industry partners.

More information on the IBM Q Network can be found here.