OXFORD – Bryan Michael Hamel, 35, of Turk Hollow Road, passed away Wednesday, February 21, 2018. He is survived by his wife of 9 years, Jenna L. (Price) Hamel of Oxford; his son, Lucca Wolfgang Hamel of Oxford, and a daughter due in June. He also leaves his father, Gregory C. Hamel and his wife Stacey of Oxford; his mother, Sandra M. (Mysliwicz) Genduso and her husband Steve of Worcester; his sister, Jessica L. Hamel of Clarksville, TN; his paternal grandfather, Dr. Rene J. Hamel of Oxford, Stacey’s mother, Judith Moulton; and a large extended family. He was predeceased by his paternal grandmother, Veronica M. Hamel; and his maternal grandparents, Chester and Grace Mysliwicz. He was born in Worcester, and lived in Chicago IL, Norfolk VA, Bahrain, Augusta, GA, Mayport FL, St. Augustine FL, Rota Spain, Hampton VA and Pensacola FL.

Bryan graduated Oxford high school in 2000 and while he did well overall, he excelled in all parts of the Naval Junior ROTC program, especially the drill team and in marksmanship, winning many awards and trophies.

Bryan was in his 16th year proudly serving with the U.S. Navy. His current rank was Chief Petty Officer and he was voted president of the Chief’s Mess at Corry Station in Pensacola, FL. He was a member of the American Legion and was an avid fisherman equally at home in a canoe on Sacarrappa Pond, in a kayak on the Atlantic or surfcasting in the Gulf of Mexico. He loved his New England roots and was a fan of the Boston Red Sox.

A talented photographer, gifted writer and world traveler he was also a mentor, leader and friend to many. The stories of his adventures exemplified the how fully he lived each day, seeking purpose, comradery and most importantly great tales to share on the fishing pier, in his garage, hiking the Appalachian Trail or sharing a drink at the Chief’s Mess. The people lucky enough to be his family, chosen friend, military family member will never fill the hole that his loss has left. He was the greatest father to his son Lucca, he was teaching him to live life honorably and with exuberance. He had the kind of life and marriage that people envied and yet loved to watch.

A funeral Mass will be held at 12 noon on Saturday, March 24, 2018, at St. Roch’s Church, 332 Main St., Oxford. A celebration of life will follow the Mass. Burial will be private at a later date at North Cemetery in Oxford. In lieu of flowers, memorial contributions for Bryan’s wife and children may be made at https://www.gofundme.com/bryan-hamel-memorial

Paradis-Givner Funeral Home in Oxford is directing the arrangements.

SERVICES