Last modified: 2016-04-23 by ivan sache

Keywords: la matanza de acentejo |

Links: FOTW homepage | search | disclaimer and copyright | write us | mirrors

Flag of La Matanza de Acentejo, as seen on 15 February 2010 in front of the Town Hall and at the Matanza exit of the North Tenerife highway, respectively - Images by Klaus-Michael Schneider, 7 May 2010

Symbols of La Matanza de Acentejo Flag of La Matanza de Acentejo shown in the Santa Cruz de Tenerife Military Museum

See also:

Spain Canary Islands (Autonomous Community, Spain) Santa Cruz de Tenerife Province (Canary Islands, Spain) Tenerife Island (Canary Islands, Spain)

Symbols of La Matanza de Acentejo

The flag and arms of La Matanza de Acentejo are prescribed by a Decree adopted on 30 November 1987 by the Government of the Canary Islands and published on 14 December 1987 in the official gazette of the Canary Islands, No. 158, p. 3,555 (text).

The symbols is described as follows:

Flag: Bicoloured, 2/3 of the total length, charged with the prescribed coat of arms.

Coat of arms: [Per pale,] 1. Gules two sticks crossed [per saltire] over a crossbow all proper, 2. Vert three bunches of grapes or two and one. The shield surmounted by a Royal crown closed.

According to Jos&eacute Manuel Erbez (Banderas y escudos de Canarias, 2007; website), red symbolizes the battle fought in 1494 by the Castilians and the Guanche, while green symbolizes agricutlure.

The coat of arms features the weapons used by the fighters: armed with sticks, the Guanche defeated and slaughtered (matanza, "a massacre") the Castilians armed with crossbows. The grapes recall wine production.

The Royal Academy of History recommended to remove the crossbow from the 1st field of the proposed coat of arms. The Academy approved the proposed flag.

[Boletín de la Real Academia de la Historia, 1987, 184, 3: 563]

Several versions of the flag have been reported, most probably due to the lack of precision of the official description, with no drawing attached. When used on those flags, the coat of arms (image) has a white scroll beneath the shield, inscribed with "VILLA HISTORICA" in black letters.

Flags seen in 2010 were vertically divided red-gren (1:2), without or with the coat of arms placed over the border between the two fields.

Flag of La Matanza de Acentejo, as seen on 3 February 2007 at the Matanza exit of the North Tenerife highway - Image by Klaus-Michael Schneider, 14 March 2010

The flag hoisted in 2007 at the Matanza exit of the North Tenerife was vertically divided green-red (1:2) with the coat of arms is in the middle of the flag.

Klaus-Michael Schneider & Ivan Sache, 7 March 2010

Flag of La Matanza de Acentejo shown in the Santa Cruz de Tenerife Military Museum

Flag of La Matanza de Acentejo, as seen on 30 January 2007 in the Santa Cruz de Tenerife Military Museum - Image by Klaus-Michael Schneider, 14 March 2010

The flag of La Matanza de Acentejo shown in the Santa Cruz de Tenerife Military Museum is vertically divided green-red (1:2) with the coat of arms is in the middle of the flag.

According to Elena Felipe, form the municipal administration of La Matanza de Acentejo, this must be the originally prescribed flag.