Last modified: 2018-10-09 by ivan sache

Keywords: santa cruz de tenerife |

Links: FOTW homepage | search | disclaimer and copyright | write us | mirrors

Flag of Santa Cruz de Tenerife, as seen on 16 February 2010 at the Market Hall of Our Lady of Africa - Image by Klaus-Michael Schneider, 9 March 2010

Symbols of Santa Cruz de Tenerife Ceremonial flag of Santa Cruz de Tenerife Other reported flag of Santa Cruz de Tenerife Santa Cruz de Tenerife Port Authority (Autoridad Portuaria de Santa Cruz de Tenerife) Sports clubs in Santa Cruz de Tenerife

Real Club Náutico de Tenerife Club Deportivvo de Tenerife

See also:

Spain Canary Islands (Autonomous Community, Spain) Santa Cruz de Tenerife Province (Canary Islands, Spain) Tenerife (Canary Islands, Spain)

Symbols of Santa Cruz de Tenerife

The symbols of Santa Cruz de Tenerife were granted by Royal Letters signed on 28 August 1803 by Charles IV.

The flag is white with the municipal coat of arms in the centre. According to Jos&eacute Manuel Erbez (Banderas y escudos de Canarias, 2007; website), white, the colour of the Bourbon dynasty, is a tribute to the loyalty of Santa Cruz to the Spanish Royal House.

The coat of arms (image) is "Or a Cross of St. James gules superimposed with a Latin cross vert in base three lion's heads sable two and one the central pierced by the base of the Cross of St. James. A bordure azure wavy argent charged in chief with an island elsewhere of four castles and four anchors in turn all argent. The shield surmounted by a Royal crown closed. In base the 1st Class Cross of the Order of Charity.

According to Jos&eacute Manuel Erbez (Banderas y escudos de Canarias, 2007; website), the Cross of St. James recalls the victory over Admiral Nelson (25 June 1797). The green cross (cruz) recalls the town's name, coined on 3 May 1494, the Day of the True Cross, by the conquerors who had landed on the coast. The lion's heads represent the three victories over English assaulters led by Blake (30 April 1657), Jenning (6 November 1706), and Nelson. The bordure represents the sea, Tenerife, the fortresses that once defended the island, and the port. The Cross of the Order of Charity was granted in 1893 to reward the exemplary behaviour of the population during the cholera epidemic, together with the title of "Muy Benéfica".

A leaflet released by the municipality gives some alternative and additional explanations.

The field or represents the loyalty of the inhabitants of the town to the motherland. The Cross of St. James recalls the town's patron saint and namesake, and recalls the landing of Alonso Fernández de Lugo on 1 May 1494. The green cross represents the town's never fading devotion and never decreasing hope to gain greater triumphs. The sword beneath [the base of the cross] is red as a tribute to blood shed. The three lion's heads, alternatively, stand for Captains General Dávila, Robles and Guti&eacuterrez, defenders of the island. The triangle-shaped island represents Tenerife with famous Mt. Teide. Argent represents the snow on the peak and the loyalty of the inhabitants. The castles are argent because they always defended the island. Argent represents incorruptibility and the importance of saving the riches of the island from enemies' greed.

Santiago Dotor, Klaus-Michael Schneider & Ivan Sache, 26 April 2007

Ceremonial flag of Santa Cruz de Tenerife

Ceremonial flag of Santa Cruz de Tenerife - Image by Klaus-Michael Schneider, 28 March 2010

Calvo and Grávalos [g2c83] show the flag granted in 1897 to Santa Cruz de Tenerife as in proportions 14:15, white with the coat of arms in the centre, with brownish lion's heads. The shield is surrounded by branches of oak (dexter side) and laurel (sinister side). A red, a yellow and a white outlined in black cravates are attached at top hoist. The flag was reportedly introduced on 25 May 1897, but the actual date must be 25 July, celebrating the centenary of the victory over Admiral Nelson.

The flag is presented every year on that very day and on 3 May, the day of the foundation of Santa Cruz, connected with the privilege of trooping the colour and playing the national anthem.

Klaus-Michael Schneider, 28 March 2010

Other reported flag of Santa Cruz de Tenerife

Reported flag of Santa Cruz de Tenerife - Image by Klaus-Michael Schneider, 28 March 2010

A card presented in the exhibition "Extraordinary Objects of Tinerfenian History" (Casa Lercaro, La Laguna, 12 December 2008 - 12 February 2009), without further explanation, features a squarish white flag with the coat of arms in its centre, slightly shifted to the top. The oval of the coat of arms has a yellow fimbriation. The flag cannot be dated exactly, but it must predate 23 April 1894, when the town was granted the Cross of the Order of Charity, which is not shown on the flag.

Klaus-Michael Schneider, 28 March 2010

Santa Cruz de Tenerife Port Authority

Flag of Santa Cruz de Tenerife Port Authority, as seen on 22 April 2008 in Santa Cruz de Tenerife and on 11 February 2010 in Los Christianos and San Sebastián de la Gomera - Image by Klaus-Michael Schneider, 13 March 2010

The Santa Cruz de Tenerife Port Authority (website) is in charge of the ports of Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Santa Cruz de la Palma, Los Cristianos, San Sebastián de la Gomera and La Estaca.

The flag of Santa Cruz de Tenerife Port Authority is white with the bow of a steamship in blue and red, shifted towards the top of the flag. The funnel is puffing out five blue clouds, ascending in a row to the hoist. Beneath the ship is a blueish green wave. At the flag's bottom is the blue inscription "PUERTOS DE TENERIFE" (Tenerife Ports).

Klaus-Michael Schneider, 13 March 2010

Sports clubs in Santa Cruz de Tenerife

Real Club Náutico de Tenerife

Burgee of Real Club Náutico de Tenerife, as seen on 18 February 2010 at the club house - Image by Klaus-Michael Schneider, 18 March 2010

Real Club Náutico de Tenerife (Royal Nautical Club of Tenerife; website) was established in 1902. The club's burgee is horizontally divided white-blue with the club's badge in the middle.

The badge, surrounded by a golden circle, is quartered blue and white, the quarters being fimbriated golden. Within the circle is a shield divided per bend sinister red-yellow-red, superimposed to a white and gold anchor and a pair of golden oars. In the burgee's canton is a red Cross of St. James superimposed with a green Latin cross, taken from the coat of arms of Santa Cruz de Tenerife.

Klaus-Michael Schneider, 18 March 2010

Club Deportivo de Tenerife

Flag of Club Deportivo de Tenerife - Image from the Spanish Vexillological Society website, 4 March 2007

The flag of Club Deportivo de Tenerife is based on the islands' flag, blue with a white saltire. In the centre of the flag is the club's bagdge, a blue shield with a white saltire and the letters "C" (left), "D" (base" and "T" (eight). In the the centre of the shield is a simplified version of the coat of arms of the town of Santa Cruz de Tenerife, garland and cross omitted.