UK fans of Love Is Blind have had to make do with the US version of the series for years now, but finally they're getting their own UK-based spin-off.

Advertisement

It's one of a number of major series coming to Netflix this month, a list which also including the fourth and final season of The Umbrella Academy, Emily in Paris season 4 part 1 and Kaos, the new fantasy series starring Jeff Goldblum.

On the film side of things, fans of Rebel Moon can look forward to Zack Snyder's director's cuts for both part 1 and part 2, while Mark Wahlberg and Halle Berry co-star in new action comedy The Union.

There's also The Deliverance, a new supernatural horror film from director Lee Daniels which stars Andra Day, Aunjanue Ellis-Taylor and Glenn Close.

With other new additions, including plenty of film favourites and fresh originals, scroll on to find out more about what's coming to Netflix in August 2024.

More like this

New on Netflix this week (29th July - 4th August)

The biggest new releases arriving on Netflix this week include new series and movies such as Unsolved Mysteries volume 4, the Rebel Moon director's cuts and Saving Bikini Bottom: The Sandy Cheeks Movie.

Here's a list of some of the best titles releasing this week. You can find a full list of everything releasing in August 2024 below.

Unsolved Mysteries volume 4 – A new set of mysteries are explored in this fourth volume of the reboot series.

Godzilla Minus One/Minus Color (2024) – Black and white version of the recent acclaimed Godzilla movie.

Joyride (2022) – Coming of age drama set in County Kerry, Ireland, and starring Olivia Colman.

Rebel Moon Part One: Director’s Cut (2024) – R Rated director's cuts of the sci-fi films from Zack Snyder.

Rebel Moon Part Two: Director’s Cut (2024) – R Rated director's cuts of the sci-fi films from Zack Snyder.

Saving Bikini Bottom: The Sandy Cheeks Movie (2024) – New SpongeBob SquarePants movie focusing on Sandy Cheeks.

New on Netflix UK in August

Thursday 1st August

Borderless Fog (2024) – Indonesian crime thriller about a detective investigating a series of gruesome murders.

Children Ruin Everything season 3 - Third season of the Canadian sitcom

Godzilla Minus One/Minus Color (2024) – Black and white version of the recent acclaimed Godzilla movie.

Joyride (2022) – Coming of age drama set in County Kerry, Ireland, and starring Olivia Colman.

Kimi ni Todoke: From Me to You season 3 - Third season of the Japanese anime series.

Love Is Blind: Mexico season 1 – New Mexican spin-off from the hit reality dating show.

Mon Laferte, te amo (2024) – Music documentary film following Mon Laferte.

Suspect season 1 – First season of the Channel 4 thriller, starring James Nesbitt, Joely Richardson and more.

The Keepers of the Pigs (2023) – Documentary about the history of guinea-pigs.

The Rising of The Shield Hero season 2 – Second season of the Japanese anime series.

Unstable season 2 – Second season of the comedy starring Rob Lowe and his son John Owen Lowe.

Stop scrolling, start watching. Get exclusive newsletters from our award-winning editorial team.

Sign up to receive the freshest reviews and recommendations for Streaming and On Demand

Email address

By entering your details, you are agreeing to our terms and conditions and privacy policy. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Friday 2nd August

Modern Masters: SS Rajamouli (2024) – Documentary about filmmaker SS Rajamouli.

Rebel Moon Part One: Director’s Cut (2024) – R Rated director's cuts of the sci-fi films from Zack Snyder.

Rebel Moon Part Two: Director’s Cut (2024) – R Rated director's cuts of the sci-fi films from Zack Snyder.

Saving Bikini Bottom: The Sandy Cheeks Movie (2024) – New SpongeBob SquarePants movie focusing on Sandy Cheeks.

Saturday 3rd August

Joe Rogan: Burn the Boats (2024) – Stand-up comedy special from Joe Rogan.

Final Destination (2000) – The first film in the supernatural horror franchise about premonition.

Final Destination 2 (2003) – The second film in the supernatural horror franchise about premonition.

Final Destination 3 (2006) – The third film in the supernatural horror franchise about premonition.

Sunday 4th August

Bad Hombres (2023) – Thriller film about two undocumented immigrants trying to stay alive when their employers turn out to be psychopaths.

Monday 5th August

Gabby’s Dollhouse season 10 – 10th season of the animated children's series.

Tuesday 6th August

Rising Impact season 2 – Second season of the Japanese anime series.

The Influencer season 1 – Korean reality series in which elite influencers flaunt their skills in a social survival show.

Wednesday 7th August

A History of Violence (2005) – 2005 action thriller film directed by David Cronenberg, starring Viggo Mortensen.

Lolo and the Kid (2024) – Filipino drama film.

Love Is Blind: UK season 1 – Emma and Matt Willis host this UK spin-off of the hit reality dating series.

Thursday 8th August

Fuchsia Libre (2024) – Filipino wrestling film.

Shahmaran season 2 – Second season of the Turkish fantasy-drama series.

The Umbrella Academy season 4 – Fourth and final season of the superhero series starring Elliot Page and Tom Hopper.

Ties of Shooting Stars (2008) – Japanese drama series.

Friday 9th August

Blue Ribbon Baking Championship season 1 – Reality series in which blue ribbon-winning bakers from state fairs across the US face off in a baking showdown.

Deep Blue Sea (1999) – Sci-fi horror shark film starring Saffron Burrows.

Inside the Mind of a Dog (2024) – documentary with scientific and emotional insights into the world of dogs.

Mission: Cross (2024) – Korean action comedy film.

Phir Aayi Hasseen Dillruba (2024) – Hindi-language Indian thriller film.

Vengeance (2022) – BJ Novak directs and stars in this dark comedy/mystery film about a journalist and podcaster.

Saturday 10th August

Romance in the House season 1 – Korean drama series.

Sunday 11th August

Horizon Line (2021) – Adventure thriller film set on a plane, starring Alexander Dreymon and Allison Williams.

Monday 12th August

Baby Ruby (2022) – Horror/thriller starring Noémie Merlant and Kit Harington, about a vlogger and influencer whose life unravels after she becomes a mother.

Tuesday 13th August

Matt Rife: Lucid – A Crowd Work Special (2024) – Stand-up special from Matt Rife, made up entirely of crowd work.

Wednesday 14th August

All Creatures Great & Small season 1 – First season of the Channel 5 adaptation of the James Herriot books.

Daughters (2024) – Documentary film about four girls preparing to reunite with their fathers through a dance at a jail.

Worst Ex Ever season 1 – True crime docuseries dissecting the dark side of love through eyewitness testimonies.

Thursday 15th August

Confess, Fletch (2022) – Crime comedy film starring Jon Hamm and Lorenza Izzo.

Emily in Paris season 4 part 1 – First part in the fourth season of the romantic drama starring Lily Collins.

Kengan Ashura season 2 part 2 - New episodes from the Japanese anime series.

US Marshals (1998) – Action crime thriller film and spin-off from The Fugitive, starring Tommy Lee Jones.

Friday 16th August

Halloween Ends (2022) – Most recent film in the Halloween franchise, starring Jamie Lee Curtis.

I can’t live without you (2024) – Spanish-language romantic comedy film, about a workaholic who must choose between his phone and his marriage.

The Union (2024) – Action comedy film starring Mark Wahlberg and Halle Berry, about a construction worker who is roped into the espionage world by his high school girlfriend.

Saturday 17th August

Love Next Door season 1 – Romantic Korean drama series.

Monday 19th August

CoComelon Lane: The Nursery Rhyme Musical season 3 – Third season of the animates children's show.

Tuesday 20th August

Langston Kerman: Bad Poetry (2024) – Stand-up comedy special from Langston Kerman.

Terror Tuesday: Extreme season 1 – Thai horror series telling eight stories inspired by call-ins to the Angkhan Khlumpong radio show.

Untold: The Murder of Air McNair (2024) – Documentary tracking the rise of NFL quarterback Steve McNair and the details surrounding his murder in 2009.

Wednesday 21st August

The Accident season 1 – Mexican thriller series about a birthday party that takes a tragic turn.

Back to 15 season 3: Back to 18 – Third season of the Brazilian teen comedy.

Nice Girls (2024) – French action comedy film about a maverick cop and a meticulous detective who join forces with a charming ex-hacker.

Pop Star Academy: KATSEYE season 1 – Docuseries about 20 aspiring pop stars in a K-pop training program.

Wyatt Earp and The Cowboy War – Docudrama about the feud between Wyatt Earp and Ike Clanton.

Thursday 22nd August

Baby Fever season 2 – Medical comedy series about a fertility doctor who drunkenly inseminates herself with her ex-boyfriend's sperm.

GG Precinct season 1 – Taiwanese comedy series.

Mermaid Magic season 1 - Animated children's series.

Pretty Guardian Sailor Moon Cosmos: The Movie Part 1 (2024) – Two-part Japanese anime fantasy film.

Pretty Guardian Sailor Moon Cosmos: The Movie Part 2 (2024) – Two-part Japanese anime fantasy film.

Orphan: First Kill (2022) – Psychological horror and prequel to Orphan, starring Isabelle Fuhrman.

Secret Lives of Orangutans (2024) – Documentary film, narrated by David Attenborough, about orangutans.

The Ice Cream Wars season 1 – BBC documentary about one of Scotland’s longest trials.

The Present (2024) – Family film starring Isla Fisher and Greg Kinnear about a boy who can manipulate time using a family heirloom.

Friday 23rd August

Incoming (2024) – Comedy film about four teenage boys attending the biggest party of the year during their first week of high school.

Tòkunbọ̀ (2024) – Nollywood crime drama film.

Tuesday 27th August

Untold: Sign Stealer (2024) – Sports documentary about Connor Stalions and the allegations surrounding the Michigan football sign-stealing scandal.

Wednesday 28th August

Untamed Royals (2024) – Mexican crime film about a group of wealthy teenagers who commit escalating crimes.

Thursday 29th August

Chastity High season 1 – Japanese romantic drama about an elite school with a "no romance" rule.

Kaos season 1 – Jeff Goldblum stars as Zeus in this mythological dark-comedy about the Greek gods.

Represent season 2 – Second season of the political French comedy series.

Terminator Zero season 2 – Second season of the animated Terminator series.

Wednesday 31st August

Breathless season 1 – Spanish romantic medical drama.

The Deliverance (2024) – Supernatural horror film from director Lee Daniels and starring Andra Day, Aunjanue Ellis-Taylor and Glenn Close.

Best Netflix releases from July 2024

Last month on Netflix also saw a host of big new releases, with series and films such as Vikings: Valhalla season 3, Cobra Kai season 6 part 1, Too Hot to Handle season 6, The Decameron and Elite season 8 being added to the service.

Here's a list of some of the best new releases on Netflix in July 2024:

Star Trek: Prodigy season 2 – Second season of the animated Star Trek series skewed to younger audiences.

Beverly Hills Cop: Axel F (2024) – Long-awaited fourth film in the action comedy franchise starring Eddie Murphy.

The Man With 1000 Kids – Docuseries about a group of families who learned that the man they had trusted as a sperm donor also fathered hundreds or thousands of other children across the world.

Vikings: Valhalla season 3 – Third season of the Vikings sequel series, which is set more than 100 years after the events of the original show.

Exploding Kittens season 1 – Animated adaptation of the card game of the same name, which follows God and the antichrist as they are sent to Earth to live as talking cats.

LALIGA: All Access season 1 – All-access sports documentary going behind-the-scenes of Spanish football.

Cobra Kai season 6 part 1 – First batch of episodes from the Karate Kid follow-up show's final season.

Skywalkers: A Love Story (2024) – Documentary film about a daredevil couple preparing for their most challenging climb yet.

Too Hot to Handle season 6 – New season of the reality dating series in which all sexual contact is off-limits.

The Decameron season 1 – Medieval black comedy series starring Zosia Mamet and Saoirse-Monica Jackson as a group of nobles and their servants trying to survive the Black Death at their countryside villa.

Elite season 8 – Eighth and final season of the Spanish teen drama series set in an elite high school.

Unsolved Mysteries volume 4 – A new set of mysteries are explored in this fourth volume of the reboot series.

Read more:

What to watch on TV this week

Best films to watch on TV today, tonight and this week

New on Disney Plus UK August 2024 – every new film and show this month

Best movies to watch on Netflix right now

Sign up for Netflix from £4.99 a month. Netflix is also available on Sky Glass and Virgin Media Stream.

Advertisement

Check out our Streaming Guide for more recommendations on what to watch, or visit our TV Guide to see what's on tonight. For more from the biggest stars in TV, listen to The Radio Times Podcast.