Anya Taylor-Joy has several notable entries on her acting resume. Still, none of them are quite like the stunt-heavy dystopian sci-fi epic “Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga.”

Here’s what we know about the secretly married Taylor-Joy and the latest entry in the "Mad Max" franchise as it comes to theaters for Memorial Day weekend.

How old is Anya Taylor-Joy? When was she born?

Taylor-Joy was born in Miami on April 16, 1996, according to IMDb, meaning she turned 28 just before "Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga" premiered.

She is the youngest of six children born to a Scottish father born in South America and a Spanish-English mother born in Zambia, Africa, per IMDb. Taylor-Joy attended schools in Buenos Aires and London before moving to New York City as a teenager to pursue an acting career.

What are Anya Taylor-Joy’s most famous roles?

Many actors have to pay their dues with small roles in little-seen projects before catching their big breaks.

Not Anya Taylor-Joy.

After an uncredited role in the movie “Vampire Academy” and a one-off role on the British TV show “Endeavour” in 2014, Taylor-Joy landed the starring role in Robert Eggers’ period horror movie “The Witch” in 2015.

A year later, she had a leading role in M. Night Shyamalan’s “Split.” She reprised that role in Shyamalan’s “Glass” in 2019, starred in the award-winning Netflix miniseries “The Queen’s Gambit,” the 2022 comedy horror hit "The Menu" and worked with Eggers again in 2022’s “The Northman.”

Yet Taylor-Joy’s most famous role might be one in which viewers never see her – as the voice of Princess Peach in “The Super Mario Bros. Movie,” which grossed $1.3 billion at the worldwide box office according to Box Office Mojo.

Who are Taylor-Joy’s notable co-stars

“Furiosa” is hardly the first time Taylor-Joy has shared the screen with a notable co-star like Chris Hemsworth.

Her small, uncredited role in this year’s “Dune: Part Two” put her alongside Timothée Chalamet, Zendaya, Javier Bardem, Austin Butler, Josh Brolin, Christopher Walken, Florence Pugh and Stellan Skarsgard.

Speaking of the Skarsgard clan, Taylor-Joy acted alongside Alexander Skarsgard in “The Northman.”

Oscar winners Christian Bale (“Amsterdam”) and Cillian Murphy (“Peaky Blinders"), BAFTA winner James McAvoy (“Split” and “Glass”), Ralph Fiennes (“The Menu”) and Daniel Radcliffe (“Playmobil: The Movie”) are just a few of Taylor-Joy’s other notable co-stars.

Food for thought: Anya Taylor-Joy talks foodie thriller ‘The Menu,' fangirling over Voldemort

Does Anya Taylor-Joy have an Oscar?

She does not have an Academy Award or any nominations, but Taylor-Joy’s award cabinet is hardly empty.

She won a Golden Globe, a Screen Actors Guild Award and a Critics Choice Award for her performance in “The Queen’s Gambit.”

Taylor-Joy won the Chopard Trophy as a Female Revelation at the 2017 Cannes Film Festival, the same year she earned a BAFTA nomination as a rising star.

What we know about Anya Taylor-Joy’s role in ‘Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga’

Nearly a decade after “Mad Max: Fury Road” hit theaters, director George Miller returns to his post-apocalyptic wasteland with “Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga.”

Taylor-Joy stars as Furiosa. The movie tells the origin story of Furiosa, who was played by Charlize Theron in “Fury Road.” Taylor-Joy plays a younger version of the character in “Furiosa” as she fights to find her way home after being kidnapped by a roving biker gang led by the Warlord Dementus (Chris Hemsworth).

Where was the movie filmed?

Miller filmed “Furiosa” in several locations in New South Wales, Australia, according to IMDb.

What is ‘Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga’ rated?

The Motion Picture Association of America rated the movie R due to scenes of violence, intense scenes, gore and mild profanity.

How long is ‘Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga’?

“Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga” has a runtime of 2 hours and 28 minutes.

It is the longest of Miller’s “Mad Max” movies.