Calling something a “catch-22” is, in short, common parlance for when someone is trapped in an inescapable dilemma. But where does the phrase come from?

Read more:

Everything you need to know about George Clooney’s Catch-22

Fans of Joseph Heller’s satirical novel, Catch-22, will recognise the origins of the term instantly. Now a modern classic, the text was written in 1961, but it has recently been turned into a TV series directed by and starring George Clooney.

Here’s where exactly the phrase comes from, and what it means for the characters in the book:

What is a catch-22?

The Collins English Dictionary defines a catch-22 as follows: “If you describe a situation as a catch-22, you mean it is an impossible situation because you cannot do one thing until you do another thing, but you cannot do the second thing until you do the first thing.”

It is a dilemma or difficult circumstance from which there is no escape due to mutually conflicting or dependent conditions. It’s also come to stand for frustrating bureaucratic logic or rules.

What is the etymology of the phrase?

Heller coined the term in his book, which describes absurd bureaucratic constraints on soldiers in World War II.

The book is set on an American airbase in Italy and tells the story of Captain Yossarian, a bombardier in the Army Air Corps who wants to be discharged.

The only way he can be discharged is by claiming that the war has made him insane. However, the camp’s doctor points out that Yossarian’s desire to be discharged (and thus safe) proves his sanity. Yossarian is caught in a paradoxical situation.

The term is first introduced by the character Doc Daneeka, an army psychiatrist who invokes “Catch-22” to explain why any pilot requesting mental evaluation for insanity demonstrates his own sanity in creating the request and thus cannot be declared insane.

How does it first appear in the book?

Yossarian: “You mean there’s a catch?”

“Sure there’s a catch,” Doc Daneeka replied. “Catch-22. Anyone who wants to get out of combat duty isn’t really crazy.”

There was only one catch and that was Catch-22, which specified that a concern for one’s own safety in the face of dangers that were real and immediate was the process of a rational mind. Orr was crazy and could be grounded. All he had to do was ask; and as soon as he did, he would no longer be crazy and would have to fly more missions. Orr would be crazy to fly more missions and sane if he didn’t, but if he was sane, he had to fly them. If he flew them, he was crazy and didn’t have to; but if he didn’t want to, he was sane and had to. Yossarian was moved very deeply by the absolute simplicity of this clause of Catch-22 and let out a respectful whistle.

“That’s some catch, that Catch-22,” he observed.

“It’s the best there is,” Doc Daneeka agreed.”

Where else does it appear in the novel?

Different formulations of “Catch-22” appear throughout the novel, to highlight the absurdity of war itself.

The term is applied to various loopholes and quirks of the military system, always with the implication that rules are created and used against those lower in the hierarchy, who find themselves in paradoxical situations.

In chapter six, Yossarian is told that Catch-22 requires him to do anything his commanding officer tells him to do, regardless of whether these orders contradict orders from the officer’s superiors.

Later on in the story, Catch-22 is described to Yossarian by an old woman recounting an act of violence by soldiers:

“Catch-22 says they have a right to do anything we can’t stop them from doing.”

“What the hell are you talking about?” Yossarian shouted at her in bewildered, furious protest. “How did you know it was Catch-22? Who the hell told you it was Catch-22?”

“The soldiers with the hard white hats and clubs. The girls were crying. ‘Did we do anything wrong?’ they said. The men said no and pushed them away out the door with the ends of their clubs. ‘Then why are you chasing us out?’ the girls said. ‘Catch-22,’ the men said. All they kept saying was ‘Catch-22, Catch-22.’ What does it mean, Catch-22? What is Catch-22?”

“Didn’t they show it to you?” Yossarian demanded, stamping about in anger and distress. “Didn’t you even make them read it?”

“They don’t have to show us Catch-22,” the old woman answered. “The law says they don’t have to.”

“What law says they don’t have to?”

“Catch-22.”

When is Catch-22 on TV?

The show started on 20 June, and continues on Channel 4 every Thursday at 9pm.