John Anderson enters his first season as the Red Flash head coach of cheer and dance in 2021-22.

Anderson comes to the Red Flash after running his own company called Stunt Doctor, for aerial athletes (Gymnastics, Cheer, Dance, Baton, and Ninja), since 2000. It is here where he developed a system to diagnose inefficient movement patterns then introduce motor learning techniques that improve body control through mindset, coordination and fitness. Anderson is an ACE Certified Health Coach, former Certified Strength and Conditioning Specialist, and former Level 1 Club Coach for USA Weightlifting. He has concurrently been working as a Certified Orthotic Fitter since 2014.

Between 2009-2013, Anderson ran a wellness consultation and personal training business called Real Recess out of his own franchised cheerleading gym, Cheer Tyme Altoona. Real Recess is a concept in which he coached clients to take short breaks in their day to improve wellness. The cheerleading gym, in addition to being a home to competitive teams, was also where Anderson ran his Stunt Doctor business.

On the college side of coaching, Anderson spent the 2007-08 season as the head cheer and dance coach at Appalachian State, where the programs cheered on the Mountaineers to a third-consecutive FCS national championship and historic upset of No. 5 Michigan. His coed cheer squad competed and won the Spirit Sports National Championship in Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, that year.

Previously, Anderson served as the director of cheer at Woodward Camp in Pennsylvania from 2005-07, with staff members that included Olympic Athletes, Cirque du Soleil performers, and X Games athletes. Under Anderson’s lead, the camp expanded enrollment of cheer athletes to a level that a new gym was built to accommodate growth.

Adding to his college coaching profile, Anderson was the head cheer and dance coach at Penn State Altoona from 2003-05. His cheer squad won consecutive Reach the Beach National Championship titles in the coed division.

Professionally, Anderson worked for the Universal Cheerleaders Association traveling the Western Hemisphere from 2000-2004. UCA, instructs crowd leading techniques as well as stunting skills to athletes and coaches from Pop Warner to collegiate levels. Anderson also worked special events for UCA, staffing yearly National and World Championships in Orlando.

Immediately following his own graduation, Anderson was employed by Ursinus College as their head cheer and dance coach, assistant gymnastics Coach and assistant strength and conditioning coach for the 2002-03 season. That year, Ursinus Gymnastics finished as the runner-up at NCAA Division III Nationals in Eau Claire, Wisconsin.

As an athlete, Anderson has ranked seventh at the 2010 Cheerleading Worlds in Orlando, Florida, with the Pittsburgh Superstars; national champion at 2006 USA Nationals in Las Vegas with Arizona State as a graduate student; national champion at 2001 CheerTech Nationals in Philadelphia with West Chester University; and State Champion at 1997 Pennsylvania States in Johnstown with Hollidaysburg Area High School.

Anderson is a 2002 graduate of West Chester University with a Bachelor of Science degree in Kinesiology and a Minor in Coaching. He started to pursue a Graduate Degree in Hospitality Management at Arizona State in 2005-2006. Outside of cheer and dance, Anderson enjoys hiking, biking, skiing and kayaking while exploring various parts of the world. He resides in Hollidaysburg with his wife, Melinda and their children Meaghan and RJ.