As we continue our work through the COVID – 19 pandemic, I am encouraged by our accomplishments. Our teachers have been persistent and working diligently to prepare our students for higher levels of academic achievement. This is evidenced by the Class of 2022 earning an unofficial graduation rate of 91%! This graduation rate surpasses the Buffalo Public Schools average graduation rate and likely the average graduation rate for New York State. Our Class of 2022 accumulated 1.6 million dollars in scholarship monies and students will be attending 23 colleges and universities across the country.

Our PTECH program successfully completed year one of the seven-year grant. The group of 48 students enrolled last Fall will begin experiencing collegelevel work this year, while a new group of 48 students will be enrolled this Fall. We are excited about the collaboration and support provided by Erie Community College and IBM.

We will be welcoming 120 new freshmen to our school during our Freshman Orientation in August. In addition, we will also be hosting a Summer Bridge Academy for our PTECH students after Freshman Orientation, leading up to the beginning of the school year.

We are excited to share that we are in the process of creating a Tiger Technology Lab that gives students access to build, program, and practice operating robots and drones. We are working to gather equipment to make this a state-of-the-art lab, which will build upon our focus on innovative technology.

Our school continues to grow and is becoming a school of destination in the City of Buffalo. We will resume our pursuit of having 700 – 800 students enrolled as we regain classrooms within our school building. This Fall, we will recover classrooms on the fourth floor of the school building. This is the first step in recapturing the entire school building for the Fall of 2023. On behalf of our faculty, staff, and students, I would like to thank the Bennett Alumni Association for their continued support!

On behalf of our faculty, staff, and students, I would like to thank the Bennett Alumni Association for their continued support!

Optima Futura! The Best is Yet to Be

Article Headlines