Life Time offers various subscriptions, including, but not limited to memberships that afford access to our premises and services and memberships that provide access to our digital or online resources, including the Life Time app. Our subscriptions, memberships, amenities, center or premise access (in whole or part), benefits, programs, services, classes, and events and their respective Dues and/or Fees, if applicable, whether current or designated in the future, are subject to change or termination at any time and may be subject to separate Dues and/or Fees for usage, availability or access. Life Time retains complete control over all matters affecting or relating to its members or memberships, including but not limited to any separate Dues and/or Fees charged for center or premise access (in whole or part) or online resource access, promotions, or documentation or information that may be required of members or guests such as proof of co-habitation, familial/guardianship status, caregiver or PCA status, nanny or au pair status, age, or residency.

Members:

Primary Member. The designated Primary Member is typically the person purchasing the membership. The Primary Member may exercise the following rights: cancel the entire membership, change the Monthly Payment Method, add or subtract Additional Members, authorize Club Tab users, correct or update membership information, transfer a Founders or Legacy membership, obtain his or her own membership information, and make payments on the membership.

Additional Member. All other members other than the Primary Member are considered Additional Members. The classification of an Additional Member may require proof of cohabitation, familial guardianship status, caregiver status, nanny or au pair status, age or residency. Memberships are only permitted to have 1 Additional Member aged 26 years or older.*

Partner Member: The Partner Member is a single person added to the membership that is over the age of 14.

Secondary Member(s): a person added to the membership that is not the Partner Member, that is at least 14 years of age and less than 26 years of age and that is the Primary or Partner Member’s child, or child that the Primary or Partner Member is the legal guardian of, in such that the Primary or Partner Member has the right and authority to make decisions concerning the care, custody, and control of, including entering a Membership on their behalf. Memberships may be permitted to have more than 1 Secondary Member.

Minor Member(s): The Primary or Partner Member’s children or children that the Primary or Partner Member are the legal guardian or authorized adult of, in such that the Primary Member has the right and authority to make decisions concerning the care, custody, and control of, including entering a Membership on their behalf, are considered Minor Members. Minor Members over the age of 3 months, but under the age of 14 are referred to as Junior Members. Junior Members aged 11 are permitted to use the fitness floor and free weight area under the direct supervision of a parent, legal guardian or authorized adult. Junior Members aged 12-13 are permitted to use the fitness floor and free weight area. Direct supervision of Junior Members aged 12-13 by their parent, legal guardian or authorized adult while using the fitness floor and free weight area is recommended but not required. Once a Junior Member reaches the age of 14, they are no longer considered a Junior Member.

Caregiver: A Caregiver, who is over the age of 18, may be added to a Membership as long as the Membership has at least one Junior Member who is eligible for Life Time Kids Academy or Life Time’s child center. Caregivers must sign a “Caregiver Agreement” in addition to any membership agreements to access Life Time premises.

*Memberships with Caregivers and adult children with whom the Primary or Partner Member is their legal guardian or otherwise legally dependent on, at Life Time’s sole discretion, may be allowed more than one Additional Member over the age of 26. ↩ Go back to asterisk

Grandparents. Subject to applicable laws, we allow a grandparent, as an authorized adult, to add to their own membership a current member's child or a non-member’s child for whom the grandparent is responsible. Only one membership will be charged for the child's junior or adult membership dues if both the child’s parent or legal guardian and the grandparent have a Life Time membership. If the child’s parent(s) or legal guardian(s) are not Life Time Members the Grandparent’s membership will be charged. We require that both the parent or guardian and the non-parent caretaker sign an agreement related to care of the child in our center and may be required to submit proof of the parties' familial relationship (e.g., a birth certificate) or caregiver status. For more information, visit Account Services at your club.

Nannies, Caregivers and Au Pairs. Subject to applicable laws, we allow a certified nanny, caregiver, or au pair who is at least 18 years old, to add to their own membership a current member's child for whom the nanny or au pair is responsible. We will charge only one membership for the child's junior or adult membership dues. We require that both the parent or guardian and the non-parent caretaker sign an agreement related to care of the child in our center and submit proof of the parties' employment relationship (e.g., a cancelled check, nanny certification, etc.). For more information, visit Account Services at your club.

Disabled Members. We welcome disabled members to use our centers. If a disabled member must be accompanied by a non-member assistant or caretaker to reasonably accommodate the member's use of the center, we require both parties to sign an agreement related to such use of the center. For members needing an interpreter or additional information regarding an accommodation, please visit Account Services at your club.

Membership Access:

Center Closure or Access Restrictions. We reserve the right to close or restrict access, without advance notice, to any area of or the entire center or premises for any reason, including, but not limited to, closures or restrictions related to construction, remodeling, repair, or maintenance (whether planned or unplanned), for health or safety reasons, including but not limited to weather, natural disasters, power outages or other failure of electrical or water service; infectious disease presence, outbreak, pandemic or epidemic; medical issues; terroristic activity; active assailant; riots or unrest; a labor dispute, strike or shortage; in compliance with state and local laws or any order, directive or guidance issued or action taken by any regulatory, governmental or law enforcement agency or authority; and/ or other event outside of Life Time’s reasonable control. Updates on such closures may be found on your club's home page on lifetime.life or in the Life Time member mobile app. Your obligation to pay membership Dues and/or Fees is not dependent upon usage, availability, or access to the center or premise and is further subject to your General Terms Agreement.

Certain Spaces or Additional Services. We may restrict access, and/or charge separate Dues and/or Fees for access, to certain areas, programs, services, and activities, in or around a center or premise (such as the pool or aquatic area, whether indoor or outdoor; basketball, tennis, pickleball, racquetball or other courts, exercise studios, lounge areas, or any other space in or around a center or premise).

Multi Center Access Memberships, afford Members general access to Centers based on the prevailing monthly membership dues rates required to gain general access to a given Center through a Standard, Signature, or Premier Multi-Center Access Membership

Standard Multi-Center Access Memberships. Standard Life Time 1, Life Time 2, Life Time 3 or Life Time 4+ memberships afford general access to Centers.

Signature Multi-Center Access Memberships. Signature Life Time 1, Life Time 2, Life Time 3 or Life Time 4+ memberships afford general access to Centers plus certain additional products, services, or spaces that would otherwise be accessible only upon payment of additional Dues or Fees (“Signature Benefits”). The currently-available Signature Benefits included are Life Time branded small group training such as GTX, Alpha and UltraFit, complimentary indoor tennis court time, complimentary pickleball court time (excluding the Life Time Sky Club Pickleball Courts), Life Time Greenway Lounge and 1-day early reservations for general classes and childcare, as available per Center. Signature Benefits may not be available at all Centers. See Center for more details. Services such as personal training, Pilates or any other trainer-created or custom service or program are excluded. Life Time may change or adjust Signature Benefits associated with the Signature Membership, in its sole discretion, from time to time and without notice. Signature Benefits may not be available at all Centers, may vary by Center and may be restricted.

Premier Multi-Center Access Memberships. Premier Life Time 1, Life Time 2, Life Time 3 or Life Time 4+ memberships afford general access to Centers, Signature Benefits, and certain additional products, services or spaces accessible by payment of additional Dues or Fees that are not Signature Benefits within a Signature Membership (“Premier Benefits”). The currently-available Premier Benefits include access to Life Time Sky – New York City pickleball courts (such pickleball court access may require additional Dues and/or Fees). See Center for more details. Services such as personal training, Pilates or any other trainer-created or custom service or program are excluded. Life Time may change or adjust the Premier Benefits associated with the Premier Membership, in its sole discretion, from time to time and without notice. Premier Memberships are not available in all Centers. In addition, Premier Benefits vary by Center and may be restricted.

Standard, Signature and Premier Multi-Center Access Memberships reflect the number of Members age 14 or older who are included on the Membership (e.g., Standard Life Time 2 or Signature Life Time 2 are memberships with 2 individuals age 14 or older). The total Membership amount paid as Base Dues before tax and excluding Junior Member Dues afford the Members access to the “Primary Center” and other centers that charge the same or lower prevailing Base Dues rate. Centers that charge a higher Base Dues rate are only accessible if the Primary or Partner Member increase the Base Dues to match the Base Dues charged by such center. The centers to which a Member has general access are located on my.lifetime.life under “Account > View All My Clubs.” Center access is at all times subject to the terms of these and our policies, your General Terms Agreement and your Member Usage Agreement.

Junior Member Access:

Junior Members are members ages 3 months through 13 years. Junior members ages 3 months through 11 years are afforded access to the Child Center/Kids Academy at the club(s) that charge the same or lower prevailing Base Dues rate as your Membership.

Junior Member Dues vary by club location and are based on the club you have access to with the highest Base Dues rate. If you upgrade your membership in order to access club(s) with a higher Base Dues rate, your Junior Member Dues may be subject to increase.

Other Memberships The following memberships afford Members general access to one (1) or more centers or to one or more specific Life Time locations, services or programs, often on a limited basis, with such access at all times subject to the terms of these policies, your General Terms Agreement, Member Usage Agreement and Digital Membership Terms (if applicable) and may require proof of age or other requirement, if applicable. In addition, Life Time may change or adjust Other Membership access, amenities, services and/or benefits in its sole discretion, from time to time and without notice. Other Membership amenities, services and/or benefits may vary by Club/Center and may be restricted or accessible only upon payment of additional Dues or Fees. Other Memberships are not available at all Life Time Clubs/Centers. See your Club/Center for additional details.

26 and Under Club Only provides general access for an individual of at least 12 but less than 27 years of age to a single center. When the member reaches the age of 27, this membership will be automatically converted to the then-available corresponding single member Multi-Center Access Membership (as may be designated by Life Time from time to time) based on the membership type afforded at the applicable Center at the then-prevailing Dues and/or Fees for new individual members at the applicable center. For example, a 26 and Under Club Only membership will currently automatically convert to a Standard Life Time One or, if the applicable club doesn’t offer a Standard Life Time One the 26 and Under Club Only membership will automatically convert to a Signature Life Time One membership.

65 and Over Club Only provides general access for an individual at least 65 years of age to a single Center. All Additional Members added to a 65 and Over Club Only membership will be afforded general access to the same single Center. A 65 and Over Club Only membership will convert to a Multi-Center Access membership if the 65+ Primary Member is inactivated on the membership and there isn’t an Additional Member at least 65 years of age on the membership and will be subject to all other membership requirements.

Club Only provides general access only for an individual to a single center. This membership may be offered in limited markets.

One-Day Membership provides Signature Membership access only to a single center for one calendar day during business hours for that center. One-Day Memberships may be purchased for a single day or for multiple days. And, subject to certain terms and conditions, Life Time in its discretion may permit members who purchase a One-Day Membership to upgrade to a monthly recurring general access membership. Neither the Experience Life magazine subscription nor the option to purchase an Experience Life subscription at a reduced rate are included in a One-Day Membership.

Digital Membership Plus Limited Access provides members with access to Life Time Digital Membership benefits, access to my.lifetime.life and limited general access to various Life Time amenities as may be offered by Life Time from time to time in its sole discretion. In no circumstance does this membership afford access beyond the limited scope of the applicable programs, services or amenities afforded by Life Time in connection with this membership. A fifteen dollar ($15) recurring monthly charge will be assessed to maintain a Digital Membership Plus Limited Access. Digital Membership Plus Limited Access content and services may be changed, modified or altered at any time and without notice. Additional terms and conditions apply.

Limited Access provides our basic access through limited access to a single Life Time Center or multiple Life Time Centers and/or provides limited access to certain areas, spaces, premises, services, limited hours of access, amenities or programs to the extent the terms of the membership explicitly so provide. Life Time, in our sole discretion, may change Limited Access Membership access.

Medicare Advantage & Supplement Fitness Plan Limited Memberships provide limited access to certain Life Time centers/clubs. Current access hours for Medicare Advantage & Supplemental Fitness Plan Limited Memberships are:

Monday through Friday: 9:30 A.M. – 3:00 P.M.

Saturday: 2:00 P.M. – Close

Sunday: all open hours

Holiday Hours: See center/club for holiday hours.

Additional information regarding Medicare Advantage & Supplement Fitness Plan Limited Memberships may be found by clicking on the following link: https://www.lifetime.life/medicare.html. Medicare Advantage & Supplement Fitness Plan Limited Membership members may elect to purchase additional Signature membership access. Please see your center/club for additional details and pricing. Monthly recurring Dues and/or Fees and cancellation policies apply to Signature membership upgrades.

Limited Access Standard Membership provides limited access to certain Life Time centers/clubs. Current access hours for Limited Standard Memberships are:

Monday through Friday: 9:30 A.M. – 3:00 P.M.

Saturday: 2:00 P.M. – Close;

Sunday: all open hours.

Holiday Hours: See center/club for holiday hours.

18+ Clubs. The following clubs are reserved for Life Time members 18 years of age and above:

Austin Downtown, 907 W. 5th Street, #201, Austin, TX 78703

Austin Arboretum, 4210 W. Baker Lane, Austin, TX 787759

Digital Memberships. Life Time or a subsidiary or affiliate of Life Time may offer or make available to members a digital membership that provides health and fitness content and services through digital methods. The digital memberships are subject to the digital membership terms (view digital membership terms), as such terms may be changed, modified or otherwise altered by Life Time or such subsidiary or affiliate of Life Time from time to time, including with respect to any subscription dues or fees for the digital membership. The digital membership terms include a binding arbitration agreement with class action waiver. A fifteen dollar ($15) recurring monthly charge will be assessed to maintain a Digital Membership. Digital Membership content and services may be changed, modified or altered at any time and without notice. Additional terms and conditions apply.

GENERAL ACCESS & LIMITED ACCESS MEMBERSHIP PRICING:*

Standard Multi-Center Access, Signature Multi-Center Access, 26 & Under Club Only, 65 and Over Club Only and Limited Access, Adult and Junior Membership Pricing:*

Please click the following link to view Life Time Membership Pricing for Standard Multi-Center Access, Signature Multi-Center Access, 26 & Under Club Only, 65 and Over Club Only and Limited Access Memberships for Adults & Juniors. Prices vary by location and are subject to change. Please visit or contact the club for additional terms and conditions:

https://locationaccess.lifetime.life

Additional Other Memberships:*

One-Day Membership:* One-Day Membership general access dues prices vary by location and range from $30-$100. Please visit or contact the club for additional terms and conditions.

*MEMBERSHIP PRICING IS SUBJECT TO CHANGE AND CERTAIN SERVICES, PROGRAMS, AMENITIES, OR AREAS WITHIN A CLUB MAY BE RESTRICTED, CONDITIONED, OR OTHERWISE LIMITED BY SPECIFIC TERMS AND CONDITIONS AND/OR SUBJECT TO A SEPARATE OR SUPPLEMENTAL FEE FOR ACCESS OR USE, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PERSONAL TRAINING, SWIMMING LESSONS, RACQUET SPORTS AND OUTDOOR POOLS. SEE CLUB FOR ADDITIONAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS.↩ Go back to GENERAL ACCESS & Limited Access MEMBERSHIP PRICING ↩ Go back to Standard Multi-Center Access, Signature Multi-Center Access, 26 & Under Club Only, 65 and Over Club Only and Limited Access, Adult and Junior Membership Pricing ↩ Go back to Additional Other Memberships ↩ Go back to One-Day Membership

Payments and Fees:

Dues Payments. We collect monthly membership dues, including junior dues, and certain other payments (such as recurring payments for services or products) within the first five (5) days of each month (typically on the first business day of each month) or at an additional date designated by you for certain products or services by electronic fund transfer from the designated bank account or credit or debit card on file for your Monthly Payment Method ("Monthly Payment Method"). If we are unable to successfully draft payments from your Monthly Payment Method when due, we will continue to attempt collection thereafter, typically each Monday, Wednesday, and Friday of the subsequent week(s). Life Time may use services made available by card issuers which automatically update your card information and prevent disruptions due to account changes, such as an expired or reissued card. You may opt-out of this service at any time by contacting your center. We are not responsible for overdraft fees. We do not issue regular monthly invoices. Your transaction history (including, but not limited to, recurring and non-recurring charges) may be found on my.lifetime.life under “View Transaction History.” To establish your membership, you must provide a Monthly Payment Method. In special circumstances, however, you may avoid a forthcoming monthly dues electronic funds transfer by providing an alternate method of payment to the center at least three (3) business days prior to the last day of the month. To change your designated dues-paying account, please see the Front Desk or visit my.lifetime.life. Dues, fees, costs and other charges are subject to change by Life Time at any time without notice, unless otherwise required by law. In the event of a change in any amount charged, Life Time may provide any notice required by law by regular mail or by email to the address(es) associated with the membership.

Fees. Subject to the provisions below and any variation required or permitted by state law, we may charge certain fees to members, including without limitation as set forth in the below Fee Schedule or in each Department Policy section of the Guest and Club Policies, which may be periodically updated in our sole discretion. Fees may vary by season, calendar date, state, service, demand, product, program, benefit, class, event, amenity, center, premise, center or premise area (such as the pool or aquatic area, whether indoor or outdoor; basketball, tennis, racquetball or other courts; exercise studios; or any other space in or around a center or premise) or payment frequency, whether recurring or non-recurring.

Life Time Fee Schedule

Life Time’s fees are charged to the financial account associated with the Monthly Payment Method on file for dues payments within four (4) business days of a membership change.

Member Add-On

Add an Additional Member: Add-On Fee* and $10 Service Fee

Add a Junior Member: $10 Service Fee

*Fee varies by center location

Member Downgrade

Downgrade a Member: $10 Service Fee

Access Change

Adding access to a club or clubs: $10 Service Fee

Downgrading access from a club or clubs: $10 Service Fee

Other Fees

Late Payment: $10; Except $0 in AZ & $5 in MD

Invalid Payment - Dishonored Check: $20

Membership Card Replacement: $5

Lost Locker Key: $40

Credit Card Surcharge: Unless otherwise prohibited by law, a credit card surcharge of 2.5% is imposed on all recurring credit card transactions to your monthly payment method on file, which is not greater than our cost of acceptance for all states except Colorado. In Colorado a credit card surcharge of 2.0% is imposed on all recurring credit card transactions to your monthly payment method on file, which is not greater than our cost of acceptance. We do not currently surcharge transactions using a ClubTab Account or at various points of sale within a club or online. We do not surcharge debit cards.

Beach Club Access Fee: A per new general access Member or reactivated on-hold general access Member (established on or after the effective date of Outdoor Pool Access for each pool season, as applicable) one-time seasonal fee or Guest daily fee for Beach Club Access to participating Life Time Center’s outdoor pool or aquatic areas. Beach Club Access Fees range between $35 and $250 for adult Members (“Beach Club Access Adult” age 13+), $25 and $150 for Junior Members (“Beach Club Access Junior(s)” ages 1-13) and adult Guest’s (“Beach Club Access Adult Guest (s)” age 13+) and Junior Guest’s (“Beach Club Access Junior Guest(s)” ages 1-13) Beach Club Access Fees range between zero dollars and $100 from the start of the season (Additional details found within the “Beach Club Access Fee” section below. May be subject to separate terms and conditions with Life Time. Beach Club Access Fees may vary by Center/club and Life Time reserves the right to update Beach Club Access Fees at any time and without notice. Beach Club Access may be restricted and/or additional fees may be charged for certain outdoor pool or aquatic area amenities, products, services, or spaces (such as the cabanas))

Racquet Sport Court Reservation & Other Fees: Life Time may charge fees to reserve racquet courts, late cancellation fees and/or other fees, including but not limited to, racquet sport programming fees (“Racquet Fees”). Racquet Fees, programming, and court access vary by club/Center, may be restricted and may be subject to separate terms and conditions with Life Time. See your club/center for additional details.

Experience Life Magazine Subscription: Life Time members may receive a print and/or digital subscription to Experience Life. Visit the Recurring Services section of your my.lifetime.life account for pricing and cancellation information, as applicable.

Public Improvement Fees. Life Time may assess additional Fees on services (including memberships or other subscriptions), amenities, products, and other sales and service transactions pursuant to applicable law related to certain government and/or municipal obligations, including for certain public improvements, based on the geographic area of a Life Time Center for (“Public Improvement Fees”). The current Public Improvement Fees will be posted pursuant to the applicable law governing such Public Improvement Fees.

Your continued membership with Life Time constitutes your agreement to pay Life Time's fees, including specifically its fees for late and or invalid payments.

Late or Non-Payment(s) - You may be charged fees related to late or non-payment(s) if for any reason we do not receive payment for our goods or services by the due date or you pay less than the full amount owed for our goods and services.

Late Fee. YOU WILL BE CHARGED A $10 LATE FEE ($5 IN MARYLAND) ON ANY PAYMENT AMOUNT (E.G., MONTHLY DUES, FEES OR OTHER CHARGES) ASSESSED IN ANY SINGLE MONTH THAT HAVE NOT BEEN PAID IN FULL WITH RESPECT TO YOUR MONTHLY DUES PAYMENT DUE ON THE 1st OF EACH MONTH (WHICH WE COLLECT BY EFT WITHIN THE FIRST FIVE DAYS OF THE MONTH), WE WILL CHARGE A $10 LATE FEE ($5 IN MD) ON THE 20TH OF EACH MONTH IF WE DO NOT RECEIVE THAT MONTH'S DUES FROM YOUR MONTHLY PAYMENT METHOD ACCOUNT BEFORE THE 20TH OF THE MONTH. WE CHARGE SUCH MONTHLY LATE FEES FOR UP TO TWO (2) MONTHS WHILE YOUR MEMBERSHIP REMAINS IN EFFECT, AFTER WHICH YOUR MEMBERSHIP WILL BE TERMINATED FOR NON-PAYMENT.

Late Fees Are Not Considered Interest or Penalties. We do not anticipate that you will fail to pay your monthly dues, fees and other charges on a timely basis, and we do not extend credit to members or other customers. We sell goods and services, and expect payment for those goods and services before or when we deliver or perform them, including payment on the first day of any monthly service period or on any other date on which payments are due. Any fees or other charges due to late payment or non-payment are liquidated damages intended to be a reasonable advance estimate of our costs resulting from late payments and non-payments. These costs are difficult to calculate or to predict when we set such fees or other charges, including our current $10 late fee ($5 in Maryland), because we cannot know in advance (1) whether you will pay for our goods or services on a timely basis, if ever; (2) when you will actually pay if you do pay late; and (3) what costs we will incur because of your late payment or non-payment.

Invalid Payments. We accept various means of payment for our goods and services, including payment by check for certain goods and services. WITH RESPECT TO PAYMENT BY CHECK, IF A CHECK IS DISHONORED FOR INSUFFICIENT FUNDS OR ANY OTHER REASON, YOU WILL BE CHARGED A $20 FEE FOR SUBMISSION OF AN INVALID PAYMENT INSTRUMENT as provided in the Fee Schedule. IF YOU ARE A MEMBER, WE WILL ADD THE AMOUNT OF THE DISHONORED CHECK PLUS THE $20 FEE TO YOUR MEMBERSHIP ACCOUNT BALANCE, WHICH AMOUNT WE WILL COLLECT FROM YOUR MONTHLY PAYMENT METHOD ACCOUNT.

Beach Club Access Fee. Certain Centers may charge a fee, whether as part of Base Dues, Service-Related Fees or separate fees, for a Member or Guest access to the outdoor pool or aquatic area (“Beach Club Access”). Such Beach Club Access Fee may be listed in our Fee Schedule or in separate agreements for the purchase of such Beach Club Access and will be required at participating Centers for all general access memberships created as of April 12, 2023, for all on-hold memberships reactivated to general access memberships on or after May 9, 2023, and for all Guests in order for Members and/or Guests to access each participating Center’s Beach Club. Such Beach Club Access may be subject to separate agreements with Life Time. The services, products, amenities and spaces (such as the cabanas) of each participating Center’s Beach Club may vary, may be restricted and may be subject to additional fees. Life Time reserves the right to limit Guest Beach Club Access to non-peak, family or open hours, or restrict Guest Beach Club Access entirely, in their sole discretion.

Promotion-Related Fees. Life Time may offer promotions or discounts related to Life Time memberships from time to time. Promotion terms will be provided in the promotion materials or at registration. Promotion terms may be updated by Life Time to the extent permitted by law. Promotions are limited to one (1) per membership and cannot be combined with any other offers, promotions or discounts or applied in conjunction with any other membership type with reduced, promotional, or other non-standard dues rates (ex. 26 and Under Club Only and 65 and Over Club Only). Life Time may void a member’s promotion terms, including but not limited to, if membership is involuntarily termed, not maintained in good standing, if the membership does not retain its club access status or if there is a change to the membership. A promotional joining fee deposit is non-refundable to the fullest extent permitted by law.

Right to Implement or Change Fees. We reserve the right to implement or change fees or other charges at any time, unless otherwise required by law. We may provide any notice required by law by regular mail or by email to the address(es) associated with the membership.

ClubTab. We offer a service called ClubTab in which authorized adult and youth members on a membership may purchase products and services using a credit card account placed on file with Life Time. Once an adult member designates a credit card account ("ClubTab Account") any adult and additional member(s) (12 years of age or older) authorized to use that account for purchases may purchase items by presenting their membership card or telephone number at any Life Time point of sale. Individual purchases are posted to the ClubTab Account as they occur, separate from monthly membership dues. To start or stop ClubTab, or change your ClubTab Account or authorized members, please visit the Front Desk or my.lifetime.life.

Membership Changes and Information. Subject to applicable restrictions, the Primary Member and other authorized Additional Members may make changes to or obtain information about the membership after you have joined Life Time, such as changing your Monthly Payment Method or ClubTab Account, adding or removing members, or upgrading or downgrading club access. We may charge a membership change fee to make changes to your membership as disclosed in our Fee Schedule - including changes such as access upgrades and member add-ons or downgrades. We may collect service or separate fees on or about the date you make the membership change, or on the next scheduled draft from the designated bank account or credit or debit card on file for your membership. Fees are subject to change by Life Time at any time. To make a change to or obtain information about your membership, please visit the Front Desk at your club. Without valid legal process, members or guests may not obtain other private, confidential, privileged and/or proprietary internal business information, including but not limited to incident reports, video surveillance footage, or membership-related photographs. Please direct any subpoena or other legal process requesting such information to the Life Time legal department. We reserve the right to disclose such information in our sole discretion to aid the law enforcement process or as otherwise required or permitted by law.

Option to Change, Convert or Resume a Membership. Without any obligation, and in its sole discretion, Life Time may afford you the option to change, convert, or resume any membership relationship you have, or may have had, with Life Time, subject to your continued acceptance of the terms and conditions in this Agreement or to the acceptance of new terms and conditions presented to you in a subsequent agreement or agreements, in addition to your agreement to the then-applicable Club Policies.

Use of Third Party Products. To the extent that I utilize any third-party products and services in connection with the purchase of, including but not limited to, a membership, services and/or products, I agree to comply with all applicable terms or conditions of any agreement for such third party products and services. I understand and agree Life Time is not responsible for my use of or access to any third-party products or services.

Membership Suspension or Termination. We permit you to hold, suspend or terminate your membership under certain circumstances, upon advanced notice or as allowed by each state’s health club laws, as applicable.

Placing Your Access Membership On-Hold with Life Time Digital.* Members may put their club access membership on hold once per calendar year for up to 4 months by converting their club access membership (which includes a Digital Membership) to exclusively a Digital Membership. In addition, members must also maintain a club-access membership for at least 6 consecutive months to be eligible to put their membership on hold. A Digital Membership allows a member to retain access to my.lifetime.life and all Digital Membership benefits while club access is paused. A $15 recurring monthly charge (plus applicable taxes and surcharge fees) will be assessed to maintain a member’s Digital Membership during the period the member put their club access on hold. Please contact your club for further details.

*Life Time reserves the right to charge a one-time service fee when making the change to a membership status or club access. Upon activation of center access, payment of the membership’s dues rate (at the time of access deactivation) for the remainder of the month in which club access is activated, plus any increases in dues, fees or costs associated with the membership that occurred during the access hold period will be due. To deactivate club access and downgrade to the Digital Membership, 30-day advanced notice is required.

Membership Freeze. Life Time will freeze the portion of your membership affected by a medical or military situation for up to 90 days. After the freeze period, your membership or the portion of your membership that has been affected will automatically reactivate. A statement from the treating physician or orders from a military service branch may be required.

Membership Termination: Because we do not use long-term membership contracts, you may terminate your membership for any reason upon giving advanced notice to Life Time as provided in your General Terms Agreement or, if exclusively a digital member, as provided in your Digital Membership Terms.

Termination for Death or Disability. You may terminate your membership if you become totally or permanently disabled or you may suspend your membership if you become partially disabled by giving notice to Life Time as described in your General Terms Agreement or Digital Membership Terms, as applicable. If you die, your estate may terminate the contract by giving notice as described in the General Terms Agreement or Digital Membership Terms, as applicable.

FOR CONNECTICUT MEMBERS ONLY:

Buyer's Right to Cancel

If you wish to cancel this contract, you may cancel by sending a written notice stating that you do not wish to be bound by this contract. The notice must be delivered or mailed before midnight of the third business day after you sign this contract. The notice must be delivered or mailed to:

Life Time, 130 Tresser Blvd., Stamford, CT 06901

AccountServices@lifetime.life

You may also cancel this contract if:

(1) You relocate your residence further than twenty-five miles from any health club operated by the seller or from any other substantially similar health club which would accept the obligation of the seller;

(2) You die; or

(3) The health club ceases operation at the location where you entered into this contract or the location closest to your primary residence.

If you become disabled, you shall have the option of:

(1) Being relieved of liability for payment on that portion of the contract term for which you are disabled; or

(2) Extending the duration of the original contract at no cost to you for a period equal to the duration of the disability.

You must send a written notice of disability, which may be sent to the health club in an electronic form. You may be required to prove such disability by submitting documentation from a licensed physician, a licensed advanced practice registered nurse or another credentialed medical provider. If you cancel, the health club may keep or collect an amount equal to the fair market value of the services or use of facilities you have already received.

Membership Change Requests. Changes to your membership are accepted as shown below with advanced notice per your General Terms Agreement or Digital Membership Terms, as applicable. To make an email request, please contact Account Services at AccountServices@lifetime.life. We will respond to your inquiry with the required next steps to finalize your request.

Membership Change In-Club By Email Online

(my.lifetime.life or the Life Time member app) Membership Change

Place my Club Access On Hold In-Club

Make Change In-Club By Email

Make Change By Email Online

(my.lifetime.life or the Life Time member app)

Make change online or in app Membership Change

Reactivate Club Access (from On-Hold) In-Club

Make Change In-Club By Email

Make Change By Email Online

(my.lifetime.life or the Life Time member app)

Make change online or in app Membership Change

Upgrade to a Signature Membership In-Club

Make Change In-Club By Email

Make Change By Email Online

(my.lifetime.life or the Life Time member app)

Make change online or in app Membership Change

Dues Payment Method Update* In-Club

Make Change In-Club By Email

Cannot Make Change By Email Online

(my.lifetime.life or the Life Time member app)

Make change online or in app Membership Change

Medical/Military Freeze** In-Club

Make Change In-Club By Email

Make Change By Email Online

(my.lifetime.life or the Life Time member app)

Cannot Make change online or in app Membership Change

Cancellation In-Club

Make Change In-Club By Email

Make Change By Email Online

(my.lifetime.life or the Life Time member app)

Make change online or in app Membership Change

Add Member(s) In-Club

Make Change In-Club By Email

Make Change By Email Online

(my.lifetime.life or the Life Time member app)

Make change online or in app Membership Change

Inactivate Member(s) In-Club

Make Change In-Club By Email

Make Change By Email Online

(my.lifetime.life or the Life Time member app)

Cannot Make change online or in app Membership Change

Add or Remove Club Access In-Club

Make Change In-Club By Email

Make Change By Email Online

(my.lifetime.life or the Life Time member app)

Cannot Make change online or in app

*You may update your Dues Payment Method through the Life Time Digital app. To do so, please visit the My Profile section of the app, select My Account and select Payment Options in the Billing and Purchase History section.

**Physician’s note or military orders required

Membership Suspension or Termination by Life Time. We reserve the right to suspend or terminate your membership, or any member on your membership, at any time, for any reason and without notice for a failure to comply with these or any of our other rules, regulations, procedures or policies, including those applying to guest passes and the use of secondary access entry points to any Center (which may be amended as necessary), Team Member directions, or for conduct we determine to be improper, inappropriate or contrary to our best interests or the best interest of our members, as determined by us in our sole discretion.

my.lifetime.life. We welcome members (including non-access members, such as on hold members) to use our online resources, including but not limited to my.lifetime.life. Use of my.lifetime.life is subject to the my.lifetime.life use agreement and our online community standards or guidelines. If you violate such agreements, standards or guidelines, your membership and/or my.lifetime.life access may be suspended or terminated. Establishment of a my.lifetime.life account in order to access Account, Reservation and other member-specific information requires an active membership and is available for members age 13 and older.