Life can be crazy, wild, difficult, beautiful, and everything else. As people try their best to navigate life, it sometimes takes the right music to motivate them to make the most of it. Here are 20 tunes to inspire you to live life to the fullest.

1 of 20

“Time Of Our Lives” by Pitbull featuring Ne-Yo

Ronald Martinez/Getty Images

When Pitbull and Ne-Yo collaborate, it’s always a party track. “Time Of Our Lives” stands out because it tells the story of a person who works hard and still finds it difficult to survive daily. However, they still believe in living life to the fullest with their last dollars. In other words, live life like there is no tomorrow.

2 of 20

“Live Your Life” by T.I. featuring Rihanna

Kevin Winter/Getty Images

T.I. and Rihanna gave fans a confidence booster with their hit single “Live Your Life.” The two reflected on how people should work smart, stack their money, and live on their terms. The song reached No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100.

3 of 20

“Beautiful Day” by U2

Jed Jacobsohn/Getty Images

One thing that’s evident is that life is hard and challenging, and people are forced to push through everyday. U2’s “Beautiful Day” encourages listeners to find joy and happiness despite life’s most challenging moments.

4 of 20

“Where’s the Fun in Forever” by Miguel

Paras Griffin/Getty Images

In 2012, Miguel released his sophomore album Kaleidoscope Dream to rave reviews. Although “Where’s the Fun in Forever” wasn't released as a single, it became a fan favorite as Miguel encourages listeners to be in the moment and celebrate the present day.

5 of 20

“Unwritten” by Natasha Bedingfield

Daniel Knighton/Getty Images

Natasha Bedingfield’s hit song “Unwritten” describes life as a book and reminds listeners that they are the authors of it. She sings about how people are conditioned to go through life in certain ways but encourages people to live the life they want. “Drench yourself in words unspoken," she sings. "Live your life with arms wide open / Today is where your book begins / The rest is still unwritten.”

6 of 20

“Alright” by Ledisi

Denise Truscello/Getty Images for The Recording Academy

Sometimes people need to be encouraged that life isn’t all that bad. Ledisi’s “Alright" details her daily trials and difficulties, but she knows that brighter days are ahead. She sings, “Life can bring us through many changes, it’s alright / Just don’t give up, know that it’s gonna be alright.”

7 of 20

“Good Life” by Kanye West featuring T-Pain

John Shearer/WireImage

Kanye West has never had a problem being a little braggadocious in his music, which fuels “Good Life.” West raps about living a lavish lifestyle while telling his enemies to continue hating on his success. Regardless of the hate from other people, he knows he's still going to shine.

8 of 20

“Living in the Moment” by Jason Mraz

John Lamparski/Getty Images

On Jason Mraz’s “Living in the Moment,” he’s aware that life will always throw curveballs, and people must learn from past mistakes. He doesn’t want to waste his days dwelling on the past but rather have fun and live every day like tomorrow isn't promised.

9 of 20

“The Motto” by Drake

Timothy Hiatt/Getty Images

Fans can always count on Drake to give them catchy lyrics that can serve as social media captions and life encouragements. On his hit song “The Motto,” he turned “YOLO,” which stands for "you only live once," into a pop culture staple.

10 of 20

“Sunshine” by OneRepublic

Roy Rochlin/Getty Images

OneRepublic’s “Sunshine” is a feel-good track sure to get listeners moving. The song details how people will always deal with life’s challenges, but they still need to find positivity and goodness (sunshine) amidst it all.

11 of 20

“Closer” by Goapele

Tim Mosenfelder/Getty Images

On Goapele’s smooth and breezy classic “Closer,” the singer realizes her dreams are within her reach. She’s reached a point where she will push any fears aside and manifest what she truly wants to achieve.

12 of 20

“Keep Your Head Up” by Andy Grammar

Terry Wyatt/Getty Images

Life is too short for one to feel down about it. Andy Grammar reiterates this sentiment in “Keep Your Head Up.” He details struggles such as paying bills while feeling skeptical and confused about his future. He encourages his listeners to realize how the sun always shines after the rain.

13 of 20

“Good Life” by G-Eazy featuring Kehlani

Gilbert Carrasquillo/FilmMagic

Bay Area natives G-Eazy and Kehlani joined forces on their motivational track “Good Life.” The song is all about one gaining success and staying down with people who were always there for them. Life can be a little sweeter when one has the right crew around them.

14 of 20

“Moment 4 Life” by Nicki Minaj featuring Drake

Frazer Harrison/Getty Images

On Nicki Minaj’s “Moment 4 Life,” the rapper is on top of the world with all her success, but she’s reminded not to take life and her accomplishments for granted. The opener says it all: “I fly with the stars in the skies / I am no longer trying to survive / I believe that life is a prize / But to live doesn’t mean you’re alive.”

15 of 20

“The Nights” by Avicii

Xavi Torrent/WireImage

There are times when parents give good advice. However, whether the child takes it to heart is a personal decision. On Avicii’s song “The Nights,” he stresses how his father told him to enjoy life because one may always desire better days. “He said, ‘One day you’ll leave this world behind / So live a life you will remember,'" he sings. "My father told me when I was just a child / These are the nights that never die.”

16 of 20

“Golden” by Jill Scott

Leon Bennett/Getty Images for BET

The color gold is a symbol of different things — prosperity, wealth, success, and triumph. Jill Scott’s hit single “Golden” uses the titular color to symbolize how she’s winning in life and wants to live to her full potential. “Living my life like it’s golden” should be a universal mantra.

17 of 20

“Adventure of a Lifetime” by Coldplay

Kevin Mazur/AMA2015/WireImage

Sometimes people need a little encouragement to go after what they want. Coldplay’s “Adventure of a Lifetime” reiterates to listeners that they only have one life to follow their dreams. Lead singer Chris Martin sings about how he met someone that made him feel “alive again.”

18 of 20

“Just Fine” by Mary J. Blige

Michael Loccisano/FilmMagic

Throughout Mary J. Blige’s catalog, there have always been common themes of love, heartbreak, and drama. She flipped the switch when she released “Just Fine,” an upbeat track that highlights being positive and happy in one’s life. In the first verse, she says, “No time for moping around, are you kidding? / And no time for negative vibes, ‘cause I’m winning / It’s been a long week / I put in my hardest / Gonna live my life, feels so good to get it right.”

19 of 20

“The Other Side” by SZA and Justin Timberlake

Tim Mosenfelder/Getty Images

As people grow older, it’s second nature to compare themselves to someone else, especially when that other person seems to be living a much sweeter life. SZA and Justin Timberlake teamed up on the motivational track “The Other Side,” which encourages listeners to continue running their own race because “the grass ain’t always greener on the other side.”

20 of 20

“Sunday Best" by Surfaces

Josh Brasted/FilmMagic

Nobody is a master of life, and everyone is trying to figure it out. On “Sunday Best,” Surfaces stresses how life can be difficult, but people can still feel good about themselves. On the pre-hook, they sing, “Everyone falls down sometimes / But you just got to know it’ll all be fine.”

Mya Singleton is a freelance music journalist and social strategist based in the Bay Area, with experience covering R&B and hip-hop. Her reporting has appeared in several publications including Yardbarker, The Sports Fan Journal, AXS, and Hollywood Unlocked. With a career spanning over ten years, she’s covered concerts across the West Coast and interviewed some of the entertainment industry’s leading figures including Anderson .Paak, Nonstop Da Hitman, Laurieann Gibson, and Floyd Mayweather. You can find her talking about all things music and sports on Twitter at @MyaMelody7.