Hal Roach, the writer, producer and director who was a leading pioneer in shaping American film comedy, died yesterday at the UCLA Medical Center in Los Angeles. He was 100 years old and lived in Bel-Air, Calif.

He died of pneumonia, said a friend, Richard Bann.

Mr. Roach helped make stars of Harold Lloyd, Will Rogers, Harry Langdon and Charley Chase. He introduced film audiences to the renowned team of Laurel and Hardy and created and shaped the inventive "Our Gang" comedies, the most popular juvenile series ever filmed.

The movie maker won three Academy Awards, including an honorary one in 1984 for career achievement, and was given a special tribute at this year's Oscar ceremony. The other two were for shorts, "The Music Box," a 1931 Laurel and Hardy comedy about lugging a piano up a staircase, and "Bored of Education," 15 minutes of 1936 mischief and mayhem by the "Our Gang" chums.

As chief of Hal Roach Studios for nearly 40 years, Mr. Roach was the executive producer of nearly 1,000 movies. He occasionally directed, and he took part in the scripting and gag-writing for many films. His 18-acre comedy factory in Culver City, Calif., was a legendary prep school for performers, including Janet Gaynor, Jean Harlow and Mickey Rooney, and directors like Frank Capra, Leo McCarey and George Stevens.

Movies that Mr. Roach directed included "One Million B.C.," an innovative 1940 special-effects film. B. R. Crisler of The New York Times hailed it as "a masterpiece of imaginative fiction."

Mr. Roach co-wrote many of Harold Lloyd's thrilling stunt comedies, including the classic "Safety Last"; directed "Turnabout," a farce about a marital role-reversal, and produced two hit fantasies, "Topper" and "Topper Returns," as well as "Of Mice and Men," a poignant drama from the John Steinbeck novel. In the mid-1960's, he compiled and produced "The Crazy World of Laurel and Hardy."

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.