Toth, Karen, KT,60, Vintondale, passed away April 13, 2018 at Memorial Medical Center. She was born Oct. 19, 1957, in Johnstown. Daughter of the late Albert and Martha (Baligush) Toth. Preceded in death by sisters Karla Kippy and Kimberly Toth. Karen is survived by Sisters and brother Jane (Jim) Burley, Coupon; Jim (Peggy) Toth, CA; Kathy (Raymond) Bleday, Panama City Beach, FL. Aunt KK to her nieces and nephews Pam (Tom) Bearer, Todd (Caron) Wentz, Allison (Ryan) Bem, Matthew (Ali) Boast. Jennifer, Adam, JJ, and Amy Bleday. Audrey, Greg, and Joel (Rudy) Toth. Several great nieces and nephews. Very special friend Bev Zamboni. Former member of Immaculate Conception Church, Vintondale and member of St. Marys Church, Nanty Glo. KT was a 1975 graduate of Bishop Carroll High School. She was an avid sports fan and was loved and cherished by all her family and friends. Family and friends will be received at Bowser Ondriezek Funeral Home, Nanty Glo, Monday from 6-8 P.M., where a Liturgical Wake Service will be held. Funeral Mass will be Tuesday at 10 A.M. at St. Marys Church, Nanty Glo. Interment to be held at the convenience of the family.

Published on April 15, 2018

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of KarenHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Karen

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree