BOOK-STEVE JOBS

AUTHOR- WALTER ISAACSON

GENRE- BIOGRAPHY

Story of a man who was determined to leave his mark.

In 8th grade while reading the morning newspaper, a blooming mind discovered about this tech revolutionist, the business magnate and the most amazing personality in the tech field, Steve Jobs. I was so inspired by that single article that the very next minute I hopped on my computer to look for this man. After reading the whole Steve Jobs Wikipedia and many more articles I found out about this biography by Walter Isaacson.

The next day in the school during lunch break my eyes fell on this new book in the library, there it was the book that topped my wish list. I couldn’t wait for our next library period to grab the book and dig into Jobs’ life. Days passed the single copy in the library were never available for me. Hustling all around the library I would ask the librarian to find it or save it for me. It was only on my first teen birthday I received this book as a present. How exciting can being a teenager be? The more I read the book, the more in fell in love with Jobs’ great personality, his passion for work and the most important his determination.

Even before Isaacson had published his most phenomenal works, Steve Jobs had approached him to curate his Biography. Isaacson never believed that Jobs would fit his kind of work, but the man knew where he ought to be in the world.

Steve Jobs early inspiration was his adopted father Mr. Paul Jobs. As Jobs quoted “He even cared for the look of parts you couldn’t see” about his father, a trait that he bought in Apple and everywhere he worked. Another interesting aspect is how Isaacson goes into intricacies of why Steve probably behaved the way he did. The harsh truth of Steve’s abandonment way early in life and how it influenced every facet of his life is intriguing. The book does not try to hide and glorify Steve for what he is not. It is in many ways a candid account, with not only the author’s or Steve’s perspective of who Steve Jobs was, but of all the people that influenced him, worked and lived with him.

When Steve Jobs was in high school he met Steve Wozniak who was a student at University of California at Berkeley. Along with the name they shared similar interest in technology and electronics. Working out of a family garage, he and Jobs attempted to produce a user-friendly alternative to the computers that were being introduced by International Business Machines at that time. Wozniak worked on the invention of products, and Jobs was responsible for sales. Not long after Apple was founded, Wozniak created the Apple I, a design built largely in Jobs' bedroom and garage. With Wozniak's knowledge of electronics and Jobs' marketing skills, the two were well-suited to do business together.

Jobs was a perfectionist. He always believed in creating flawless products. This is fairly evident in the Apple products. Whatever he created he wanted to be the best in it. He is a greater example of learning from mistakes, his life was full of mistakes but he never let them pull him back rather he moved ahead with learning. The author has interestingly captured the agony, frustration and the taste of sweet success throughout.

Once Bill Gates, co-founder of Microsoft had stated that he was envious of Steve Jobs charisma. “I was a minor wizard so I couldn’t fall under his spells, but I could see him casting the spells, and then I would look at people and see them mesmerized,” Gates said. This proves what an inspiring and charismatic soul Steve Jobs was.

The book serves as learning for many young entrepreneurs. I would highly recommend this book for everyone whether from tech background or not as it teaches about many life lessons and motivates one to never give up on their dreams.

Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication.

-Steve Jobs