Kid Rock, born Robert James Richie, has enjoyed a 30-year career entertaining people. He is outspoken and has caused controversy for his use of Confederate flags, before officially distancing himself from that in 2011. Kid said, “[I] never flew the flag with hate in my heart.”

Pamela Anderson was discovered at a BC Lions Football game, and moved on to become a model, actress, writer, and animal rights activist. Best known for her racy modeling pics and her appearances on shows like Baywatch, Home Improvement and V.I.P., Pam is also a household name who is not without personal drama, which is often shared by tabloids.

In 2001, Kid Rock met (and began dating) the Canadian-born, bleach blonde beauty. The pair dated, were engaged in 2002, broke up, got back together and wed in 2006...before splitting up for good in a divorce that was made official in February 2007.

Despite the relatively short time they were together (especially considering how famous the pair is), people still talk about (and marvel at) their relationship. It seems the two are asked about their time together often, despite their marriage ending nearly 11 years ago.

Here are 20 Little Known Facts about Kid Rock’s Relationship With Pamela Anderson.

20 They Haven't Spoken Since The Divorce

When Pam and Kid called it quits the second time, there was no chance of remaining friends. Pam recently admitted that they haven’t spoken since the divorce, which was more than a decade ago. When Kid reflected on regrets over the relationship, particularly getting back together and then marrying, he told Howard Stern, “I knew the stove was hot, and I wanted to put my hand on it.”

19 They Called Off Their Engagement Before Tying The Knot

This marriage nearly didn’t happen at all. Kid has said one of the reasons for the initial breakup was because Pam didn’t want to sign a prenuptial agreement. Another reason was that he didn’t want to make the move (with his son) from Michigan to California. After they got back together, Kid agreed to wed without a prenup and went to the West coast. Following the divorce, Kid and his son returned to Michigan.

18 He Didn't Hunt When He Was With Pam

Since Pam is a very vocal advocate for PETA and veganism, she has strong views on animals and their rights. Pam said she first became a vegetarian as a teen, when she saw an animal her dad had hunted.

When talking about her marriage to Kid Rock, and his penchant for posting hunting photos on social media, she said, “When he was with me, he didn’t hunt. I don’t think he was very Republican, but now he is. Oh well.”

17 Borat Played A Role In Their Demise

Today, Kid says that this is a lie, which Pam made up to get attention, but Sacha Baron Cohen backs up the Baywatch star’s story about the end of their marriage. Pam Anderson was in the film, which features a scene where Borat kidnaps her.

Baron Cohen said, “Kid Rock saw the movie, and I texted Pamela Anderson and asked, ‘How did it go? What did he think?’ And she texted back, ‘He’s getting divorced.’”

16 He Was Husband Number 2

Pam Anderson has a thing for musicians. Before Kid Rock, she got married to Mötley Crüe drummer, Tommy Lee, after knowing him for less than 96 hours - a marriage that lasted for just over three years. The pair have two sons together.

Today, Kid Rock is engaged to long-time girlfriend, Audrey Berry, and Pam most recently split up with footballer boyfriend, Adil Rami.

15 Pam Spent, Kid Saved

It turns out that fiscal responsibility is important to Kid Rock. When they were married, Kid claims that Pam started spending all his money. Kid said, "The worst thing in life is to be famous without money."

He said that when she moved into his 12 million-dollar Malibu beach house, she insisted on fixing the house to her liking, immediately. Today, it’s been reported that Kid Rock is worth 80 million and Pam Anderson is worth 12 million.

14 Wedding On A Boat

Nothing says Rock Star meets Baywatch Babe like a wedding on a boat. The two were wed in their beach attire (yep, swimsuits) on a yacht in Saint-Tropez, in July 2006. At least they had minimal tan lines to worry about when they entered divorce proceedings the following year.

13 Pam Didn't Get Along With His Mom

It turns out that Kid Rock is a mama’s boy and doesn’t like anyone talking smack about his mom. He claims that Pam routinely had something bad to say about Kid’s mom.

He also said that Pam had strange rules for her boys, like, even though all three of their kids got along quite well (and they even purchased them a triple bunk bed), she would never let the three boys sleep in the room. Kid says she was paranoid about his son hurting her sons.

12 The Relationship Made Ex Tommy Lee Angry

Kid Rock said that, at one time, he and Tommy Lee were friends. Like any friend, he decided to call up Tommy about Pam, most likely so he wouldn’t hear it through a tabloid.

Kid said, “He was pretty (angry) when I started seeing Pamela [Anderson]. When we started hanging out, I called him on the phone to say that I’d started seeing her, and he had a fit. They weren’t even going out. I was just trying to be cool, like a friend.”

11 She Didn't Want A Prenup

A lot of people think that a prenup is unromantic. When you’re a celebrity dealing with millions of dollars and children are involved, it’s probably a smart business move.

Just the same, the engagement was called off until the pair could get over this hurdle, and, in the end, Pam got her wedding, without the prenup attached. Here is how Pam described the wedding at the time: “The best most romantic wedding of all time.”

10 That Time He Smacked Tommy Lee Wasn't About Pam?

The public fight happened during Alicia Keys’ performance at the MTV Music Video Awards and it was petty and immature at best. Lee apologized to Keys, but managed to get in post-fight jabs, by calling Kid Rock “Kid Pebble” and saying it wasn’t a punch, but more of a slap.

Although Kid has said, “It had absolutely zero to do with her.” he’s also said, “I had to do what I had to do because this was a long time coming. You know, I came back from the bathroom and he was sitting right there. It was even more disrespectful after everything he’s said, I was like that’s enough, that’s it.”

9 Kid's Sister Didn't Like Pam

In addition to not playing nice with Pam, Kid Rock says that Pam was very disrespectful, because she said awful things about his sister, Jill Richie. Kid and his sister remain close, attending events together, and he even sang at her wedding: Lynyrd Skynyrd’s Sweet Home Alabama and Bob Seger’s Night Moves, naturally.

8 Their Agreement Re: Hep C

Although they had a big discussion about Pam Anderson’s Hepatitis C diagnosis, she and Rock agreed to keep it on the down low. Pam did not tell her husband that she was sending out a press release about the illness, and Kid felt foolish when he denied any knowledge, like they’d agreed upon, because it looked like he knew nothing about Pam and her life.

7 He Thinks Her Life Is A Circus

The amount of venom that Kid Rock spits about ex, Pam, makes us think that he might not be over her, or is just sick of being asked about it. Kid told Howard Stern, “I knew it was a bad career move to get involved with her because your life becomes a circus – because that’s what she wants is media attention.”

6 They Weren't The Brady Bunch

Even though the short-lived, blended "family" got along well (particularly the boys), they were never a family. It must have been hard for Kid’s son to be uprooted from Michigan and start a new life in California. Kid and his son remain close, and, since Robert James had his son in his early twenties, Kid Rock became a grandad when he was just 43.

5 The Pregnancy Rumor

Pam Anderson said that she suffered a miscarriage while she was pregnant; Kid Rock says this was a lie. The two were fighting, and Kid says that she told him the bad news as she hung up the phone. Kid later said that, when he arrived in Vancouver to see Anderson, “She’s partying at this restaurant, drinking champagne, jumping on the tables. I’m thinking, ‘That’s a quick recovery from a miscarriage.’ ”

4 Pam On His Political Beliefs

While Kid Rock was famously photographed visiting the current president, Pam admits that she also met him, but not when he was in office, and does not support him. She said she met him during her centerfold days with Playboy. Pam said, “I think it was his birthday. I was hired to be there. We all were paid like $500 a day. He was with a wife — I don’t know which one — but he was nothing special.”

3 It Takes Three Men To Keep Pam Happy

Pam has had her fair share of romances, flings, husbands, and fiancés. Perhaps her view on finding a relationship comes from something an aunt said to her. Pam recalled, "My aunt used to say, 'One man can't do it all. One for sex, one for conversation, one for entertainment.'" So, she married Tommy Lee for the conversation, right?

2 They Were Only Married For Four Months

For all the news coverage they received, you’d think it was the wedding of the century, but the marriage itself lasted less than four months, before the pair filed for divorce, due to “irreconcilable differences”. During the proceedings, Pam prepared a short statement for her website that read, “Yes, it’s true. Unfortunately, impossible.”

1 She's Four Years Older Than Kid

While many celebrities remain ageless, Pam Anderson is four years senior to Kid Rock. Today, as Pam is in her early 50s and Kid is approaching his 50th birthday, maybe they’ll manage to bring a little bit of kindness to each other, for the mistakes that they made when they were young and foolish. We’re not holding our breath.

Sources: E Online, Denver Post, Nicki Swift, Fox News, Huffington Post, Louder Sound, Today, AV Club, US Magazine, Rolling Stone

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tbTErZ%2Bippeoe6S7zGhpaWWcnsG1uMRmoqenp6N6p63CrapmmZKkwrV5yqKbZqqfmLi0edGeo5qsmaS7tLTIqWSwoaSderGtzJ6jmmWRo7GmvtKopWg%3D