Written and directed by Carlos Atanes.

Cast: Oriol Aubets, Anthony Blake, Manuel Masera, Abel Folk, Manuel Solàs, Karen Owens, Joan Frank Caransonnet, Arantxa Peña, Hans Richter.

Music by Xavier Tort and Thee Maldoror Kollective.

A renowned SF writer is at a local convention to talk about his work. As he takes the podium he renounces his work as utter fictional rubbish and declares that he has found a portal to another world, orbiting the star Proxima Centauri. "Simply listen to my new book-on-CD and be delivered", he proclaims. Unsurprisingly, this bizarre announcement is not well received by his fans. But Tony, the owner of a specialist DVD and video store is attending the conference, and being an open-minded dreamer buys the disc to try it out. Are the strange visions he starts to experience real? Have a selected group of humans really found a shortcut to Proxima Centauri system? Could there really exist a conspiracy on Earth to aid an invasion by an alien fleet? And is the super-strong armour he's made to wear really "invisible" or is he simply an emperor parading round in new underpants?

A visionary movie. A "dickian" science fiction trip to the stars.

Nominated for Ignotus Award to the 2007 Best Spanish Film (Spanish Science Fiction Association, AEFCFT). Nominated for Icon Award to the Best Feature Film at Tel Aviv International Fantasy Film Festival (Israel, 2007).

"A film this intelligent is rare, and sadlysuch intelligence is even more rare in modern sci-fi films" (Film Fanaddict). "In the vein of Solaris, K-PAX and The Man Who Fell to Earth, PROXIMA is a refreshing film full of wonder" (London Sci Fi Festival). "In the age of loud and bombastic, it is a tremendous breath of fresh air to find an SF movie that dares to be quirky, intelligent and defiantly its own beast. Perhaps the best Phillip K. Dick movie that has nothing to do with PKD, you might get a hint of what it's like if you think Primer by way of Alejandro Jodorowski, with bursts of Repo Man absurdity, a hint of Tarkovsky's Stalker, and a truckload of cheap sci fi tropes. If a foreign language art film with secret powers, black clad commandos, weird cults, deprogrammers, tons of nerdy SF geek references and, yes, even spaceships, sounds like your thing, then give PROXIMA a try" (M.T.C.).