The Great Train Robbery – 60 years on. Is there anything fresh to be said? writes retired policeman and now author Graham Satchwell.

Some of you will be aware that a few years ago, I wrote a book called, ‘Great Train Robbery Confidential’. But what few know is when I started it with Tom Wisbey (one of the Great Train Robbers) , it was intended as a work of fiction in which new facts about the robbery and the people involved, would be revealed.

But it seemed too much of a fresh concept for publishers. So instead, a factual account was published (‘Great Train Robbery Confidential’).

But over the years since, my drive to see the original idea come to fruition didn’t fade, and this summer the novel, ‘The Great Train Robbery and The South Coast Raiders’ will be published.

For anyone with an interest in crime, I can say with absolute belief, after a good deal of research, that no other book on the subject has given a better description of the characters involved, their working culture or the true nature of the crime.

The book is unusual in several ways. Firstly, authenticity. How many crime novels are written by former gangsters and senior detectives? Secondly, forget the train robbers being ‘Robin Hood heroes’. This story, truly reflects the degradation of being drawn into serious organised crime – ruthless, threatening and violent.

For busy security professionals who rarely, if ever, refuse to find time to read a novel, I would say the book provides the prefect holiday read, it will not only entertain but provide a valuable reminder that no crime is too audacious to be contemplated

‘A fascinating and inventive fictional take on an almost legendary crime. It is a real page-turner with a gripping narrative’.

Stewart Tendler, former chief crime correspondent of The Times.

‘A rollicking crime novel with all the benefits of an ex-detective’s insider know-how.‘

Duncan Campbell, Journalist and author.

‘A very well-informed and interesting story told with authenticity and pace.’

Jackie Malton, former Flying Squad officer, writer and broadcaster.

‘The Great Train Robbery and The South Coast Raiders’ by Graham Satchwell in hardback, paperback and Kindle editions will be available in August.