At first, Romain Gauthier struck me to be a very serious man during our appointment. I had to be black-gloved and excessively careful. He tracked my hands’ every motion, and instilled in me his sense of gravity over the haute horlogerie that I was handling. It wasn’t until later in the interview, when we coincidentally sidetracked to the topic of cars, that smiles cracked and laughter alleviated the tension. And that’s when it dawned on me that Romain Gauthier was one guy, with whom only a handful of others created very superior and very exclusive watches in very limited quantity. The model that I was handling embodied months of someone toiling away to create something novel and pristine – and that indeed deserved my caution in addition to deserving my respect.

The piece at hand is the Logical One by Romain Gauthier. HODINKEE introduced it in 2013 (the year that the Logical One claimed the Men’s Complication Watch prize at the Grand Prix d’Horlogerie de Geneve). Rest assured, it’s every bit as serious a watch in the metal as it is in press release photos.

While we’ve covered other haute models that contain this mechanism here and here, Gauthier is in a league of his own. He has replaced the fusée with a snail cam. Why? Two reasons. In the diagram above, notice how the chain wraps around the fusée in successive layers. To accommodate this geometry, the chain links have to be small and often weak. More importantly, the top layers of chain are on a higher plane than the barrel, and they transmit energy at a downward angle – which is inefficient and stressful to the mechanism. Gauthier solved this problem with his snail cam. The cam and barrel are on the same plane, and the chain is shorter, stronger and with larger, more durable links. Secondly, all of the rollers within the chain are actually synthetic rubies. In fact, he’s even placed two ruby-sheets inside the barrel to prevent friction, which is fanatical attentiveness to friction problems.

In addition to all of its aforementioned mechanical prowess, the Logical One is wound via a pusher at 9 o'clock (also to reduce wear by transmitting force to the barrel on the same plane, instead of at 90° like with a traditional crown). The pusher is both sleek and unobtrusive. And that brings us to the finesse of the watch itself. At 43 mm, it's not a small piece. It's lighter than one might imagine, and one that hugs the wrist rather supplely.

As far as depth and chic-ness are concerned, it's fair to say that the dial of the Logical One has a considerable amount of both. The exposed balance at 6 o'clock, the embossed timekeeping sub-dials above it and the chain mechanism to their left all ensure that the complexity and depth of this piece are prominent. The visible plates are red gold, blasted to perfection and yet unassuming (a good thing, given that it enhances legibility).