A Hard Day’s Night was released at the height of Beatlemania in 1964 and fans flocked to theaters to see John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison, and Ringo Starr in their first film. Directed by Richard Lester, who would also do their 1965 follow-up Help!, the comedy would go on to influence British television and cinema. Now it’s available in 4K as one of this month’s The Criterion Collection offerings.

If you’re a diehard fan of the Beatles then this set is a no-brainer purchase. The 4K digital restoration looks great and the classic tunes that play throughout sound great in the 5.1 surround mix. The film was shot in black and white, which gives it an interesting documentary feel, but it’s incredible seeing the fresh-faced “Fab Four” in high definition. It’s a wonderful time capsule of British culture that winds up being entertaining no matter if you adore the band or not.

RELATED: The Red Shoes Criterion 4K Review: Dance for Us Again

A Hard Day’s Night lampoons the strange position of fame that the group was put in. There are several frantic chase scenes of the group running from adoring fans that seem ridiculous today but were the reality for them. The script’s wit and the band’s natural delivery give the film a lot of its hilarious moments, such as Paul McCartney answering, “No, actually, we’re just good friends,” after being asked if he sees his father often. There are plenty of physical gags too, and a lot of the film’s funniest sequences are seen in the small details, as Lester doesn’t throw everything in your face, which lends the film well to rewatches.

While all four Beatles equip themselves well to the big screen, it is Ringo that winds up being the star. From being the butt of jokes at the expense of Paul McCartney’s mischievous grandfather (played wonderfully by Wilfrid Brambell) to going on an entertaining rebellious streak after feeling overlooked by the rest of his bandmates, Starr winds up having the most meaningful arc. Actors Norman Rossington and John Junkin also have tremendous chemistry as the band’s managers, who wind up bickering throughout due to seeds planted by Brambell’s character.

The Criterion set for A Hard Day’s Night is packed to the brim with special features. There’s the usual commentary track that offers plenty of insight from a group of cast and crew members, a 1964 program that features interviews with the band, an interview with Beatles biographer Mark Lewisohn, and two documentaries on the making of the film (1994’s “You Can’t Do That“ and 2002’s Things They Said Today). Additionally, Lester’s career is celebrated with his Oscar-nominated short The Running Jumping & Standing Still Film, and several programs on his career and style.

Unlike the 4K releases of The Red Shoes and The Piano, which featured plain plastic packaging, A Hard Day’s Night is a premium box similar to Citizen Kane, Menace II Society, Mulholland Dr., and Uncut Gems. The booklet that comes with the film is wonderful and comes in at 80 pages, featuring plenty of photos of the band, an essay by Howard Hampton on the film, and selected quotes from a 1970 interview with Lester.

The Criterion set for A Hard Day’s Night is as nice as it gets. Nothing beats when Criterion goes all out and thankfully this classic jukebox musical comedy received the proper fanfare. The comedy still holds up, and it remains a fascinating look at Beatlemania and how the band viewed their unprecedented fame.

SCORE: 9/10

As ComingSoon’s review policy explains, a score of 9 equates to “Excellent.” Entertainment that reaches this level is at the top of its type. The gold standard that every creator aims to reach.