The Beatles' 'A Hard Day's Night' is still fresh at 50

It's been a long and winding road in the half-century since the jaunty joyousness of A Hard Day's Night hit screens.

As the fourth iteration of Transformers rakes in millions for its insipid retooling, it's worth reflecting on a 50-year-old film that was truly transformative.

Hard Day's Night is that rare film that brilliantly captures a specific phenomenon and is also timeless.

John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Starr were much more than mods, rockers or mockers. Audiences first met the film-star Beatles in A Hard Day's Night in 1964 as they mischievously navigated the insanity of screaming fans, neurotic producers and voracious press. From the first frame, who didn't yearn to be immersed in their madcap world eight days a week?

"You don't just want to watch it; you want to be in it," says director Steven Soderbergh, who co-wrote Getting Away With It with Hard Day's Night director Richard Lester. "You want to be one of them. You want to climb inside of it and be surrounded by that kind of energy."

From all accounts, the filmed ebullience of the four lads from Liverpool captured their real-life charisma.

"That specific kind of exuberance is very difficult, if not impossible, to fake," Soderbergh says. He ought to know: He says his 1998 fast-paced Out of Sight was inspired by it.

The film's blend of indelibly engaging Beatles music, wacky shenanigans and anarchic humor made it thoroughly infectious.

Nothing like the films of Elvis Presley, Cliff Richard or other music stars before The Beatles, A Hard Day's Night was so witty, stylish and joyously unrestrained that it influenced a spate of later comedies and created a template for contemporary music videos. Its style of rapid pacing, zig-zag cutting and playful one-liners remains inventive today.

"It's still fresh because it was done with so much energy," says Giles Martin, who produced Paul McCartney's 2013 album New and collaborated with his father, longtime Beatles producer George Martin, on the soundscape of Love, the Cirque du Soleil show that incorporates Beatles music. "They were parodying themselves in a tongue-in-cheek way. They had a huge ability to be irreverent and flippant, but with meaning."

Lester conveyed the magic and mystery of a rare phenomenon when he re-created what it was like to be one of the Fab Four at that seminal moment.

"It was sort of happenstance, the planets lining up with the perfect filmmaker to capture it," Soderbergh says. "That's really what's happening: He's capturing something as opposed to staging it."

As the black-and-white film celebrates its 50th anniversary with Criterion Collection's release of the Blu-Ray and DVD versions, and opens for a special summer engagement starting Friday at more than 100 theaters nationwide, it's an optimum time to examine the massive cinematic contribution of The Beatles and the filmmakers involved in A Hard Day's Night.

The quartet began working on the film just a month after their legendary appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show in February 1964. The movie opened on July 6, 1964.

Lester let The Beatles' youthful irreverence shine through and raucously communicated the whirlwind of being the world's biggest musical stars.

Not only was it massively entertaining and brilliantly directed, the movie hugely expanded The Beatles' fan base in the United States and spread across the universe in a big way.

"At the time the film was contracted, The Beatles had not yet broken America," says biographer Mark Lewisohn, who wrote Tune In: The Beatles: All these Years. "It was made with the hope that it might help their popularity in America, but it was made pretty much on their strength in Britain. ... It was made to amuse but was also made as a vehicle for a pop group.

"Those kinds of films hadn't always been comedies. They'd been light with maybe funny moments, or attempts to be funny. It was a complete send-up of all the pop musicals before. The jukebox musical was the genre they were mining. And they just completely revolutionized it."

Lester intrinsically understood what an extraordinary phenomenon he was depicting.

"The Beatles knew Lester and he knew them," Soderbergh says. "They roped in (screenwriter) Alun Owen, who had an incredible ear for the kind of one-liners they were pretty good at coming up with on their own. Lester has such a great visual sense of humor and was able to put visual jokes on top of the verbal jokes."

Lester has said there was never any discussion about an alternative way of approaching the film.

"They were almost entirely asked to do what they normally did: to go to a club, to go to a rehearsal room," Lester, 82, said in a previously published interview included in a booklet that accompanies the anniversary collection DVD. He was not available to be interviewed for this story.

Lester cleverly incorporated improvisation. The memorable scene in which the four moptops attend a news conference and give hilariously goofy responses to journalists was unscripted, developed as they filmed.

"They couldn't shoot on the street anymore," Soderbergh says. "They were creating so much chaos because crowds were showing up. So Lester said, 'Get me a room and get me a bunch of journalists and they started writing up these questions.' "

Each of The Beatles provided impromptu answers. When a reporter asked John Lennon "How do you find America?" the famously irreverent Lennon popped back with: "Turn left at Greenland."

The film is worth rewatching for those who haven't seen it in a while, to catch those improvised moments. Plus, new observations jump out. George Harrison emerges as the best actor of the quartet, with a natural gift for underplaying scenes.

Viewers gets a mounting sense of four musician pals held captive — or at least hemmed in — by their escalating fame. When they run onto an empty field (and sing Can't Buy Me Love), their sense of release is palpable.

Deftly conveying the surrealistic adventure of the Liverpool lads (without ever mentioning the name The Beatles in the film), Lester juxtaposed their impudence with the taciturn weirdness of veteran British actor Wilfrid Brambell, who played Paul's oh-so-clean grandfather. Lester has said he capitalized on the four pals' "private idiom" along with a faux sense of cinema verité, heightened in black and white. Flourishes of the Marx Brothers, Buster Keaton, Jacques Tati and Britain's The Goon Show infuse the film.

The blend of fast-paced visual antics and witty wordplay in A Hard Day's Night left a legacy evident in the Monty Python movies and mockumentaries like This is Spinal Tap, and it still resonates in comedies today.

As Soderbergh puts it: "Even for all its frantic feeling, it's still a beautifully crafted movie. Prior to that, films with music in them tended to be more staged and much more formal in their cinematic approach. This thing looks like it was shot tomorrow."