Welcome to the official Film/Art Gallery collection of original A Hard Day's Night vintage movie posters. Film/Art Gallery offers a wide range of movie posters and artwork for the cinema's ultimate musical comedy film.

A 1964 musical comedy film, A Hard Day's Night stars John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison, and Ringo Starr known as the English rock band, The Beatles. Directed by Richard Lester and written by Alun Owen, the rock and roll film was released by United Artists using a cinéma vérité style in black-and-white which portrays 36 hours in the lives of the group. The film’s ultimate aim was to present the Beatles as a social phenomenon band in this country.

With an original tentative title "Beatlemania" John Lennon write a new title song completed eight days before filming was finished and won a Grammy for Best Performance by a Vocal Group. A Hard Day's Night set records at the London Pavilion by grossing over $20,000 in the first week. Film critic Roger Ebert added it to his list for The Great Movies and Leslie Halliwell gave the film his highest rating, four stars, the only British film of 1964 to achieve.

The film was nominated for two Academy Awards: for Best Screenplay (Alun Owen), and Best Score (Adaptation) (George Martin). By 1971, A Hard Day's Night was estimated to have earned $11 million worldwide and ranked 88th greatest British film of the 20th century. In celebration for its 40th anniversary of the film's world premiere, a reunion in 2004 was hosted in London by DVD producer Martin Lewis and was attended by McCartney and crew members.

Film/Art Gallery’s collection of original A Hard Day's Night movie posters includes artwork by Waldemar Swierzy for the Polish A1 (23x33). Our A Hard Day's Night poster collection also includes Belgian (14x22) and Czech (23x33) versions.

Film/Art Gallery movie posters are original prints and film poster collectibles. These are original movie posters. We do not carry any movie poster reproductions or reprints of any kind.