Russia Wharf

Description

Located at the heart of the Waterfront District in Downtown Boston, Russia Wharf, better known by the official name The Lofts at Atlantic Wharf, offers residents a luxurious place to call home right in the middle of the city. Listed on the National Register of Historic Places since 1980, the wharf building that houses the lofts features 88 units to accommodate a number of different space needs.

Prospective renters can choose from several different two- and one-bedroom floorplans in this Russia Wharf condo development. Each floorplan features two bathrooms, which makes it easy to host guests and still maintain privacy, for one bathroom can be dedicated entirely to visitors. Many of the units feature waterfront views, which make these Boston condos a delight to come home to every evening.

The architecture of the building is classic in style, but the condos are thoroughly modern and include a number of superb amenities designed particularly for the discerning resident. Large windows and ceilings that are more than ten feet high create a wide-open atmosphere that brings in a ton of natural light and makes the entire home feel quite spacious. Premium design features make these condos elegant and inviting. Units feature ash hardwood flooring throughout the living areas and quartz stone countertops in the kitchen. Under cabinet lighting and white tile backsplashes in the kitchens make them delightful places to prepare food for residents and guests, and the ENERGY STAR rated appliances ensure that everything is done in the most energy efficient manner possible.

Speaking of energy efficiency, the units have been designed to use less electricity and reduce the carbon footprint of residents. Each condo at Russia Wharf also includes dimmable lighting and ENERGY STAR rated washers and dryers that make it convenient and easy on the environment when it is time to do laundry. Moreover, all units also include marble vanity tops and oversized, Pantelleria-style tile in the bathrooms. Condos are pre-wired for telephone and data usage, and blocking is already installed for the placement of a flat screen television.

In addition to these standard features in every condo unit, residents can take advantage of many different community amenities. Stay in shape while living in The Lofts at Atlantic Wharf by visiting the exercise and fitness facility. There is an onsite parking garage to accommodate residents, as well as a bicycle room. Onsite boat slips are also available on nearby Fort Point Channel. The community is also a great place to enjoy the outdoors due to the waterfront park that is fully integrated into the development. Finally, the 24-hour concierge service provides residents with all they need to get their errands done.

The Boston Russia Wharf condos are snapped up quickly every time one becomes available for lease, so prospective residents will want to know right away when there is a vacancy. Fill out the form on this page to get Today's Availability List for The Lofts at Atlantic Wharf and to learn more about the development's floorplans. Photos, a virtual tour, and other information will also be included.

Fill in the information above to view up-to-the-minute availability, including photos, floorplans, virtual tour, and more!

Our website provides FREE access to the largest real estate database in the Boston area! This database includes not only our listings, but literally ALL of the largest real estate brokerages in the Boston area post listings to the system as well!

Click Here

to Search

sales