Our first glimpse of Anthony Asquith’s 1928 thriller Shooting Stars might confuse viewers who have read a brief plot summary. We appear to be watching a romantic western in which a cowboy on horseback is kissing his sweetheart, who sits perched in a tree. She takes a dove from out of a cage and holds it against her face. Then she kisses the dove, and suddenly the illusion disperses.

The dove bites the woman and she flings the dove from her and begins shouting. As the scene cuts to another camera angle, it becomes clear that this is not a western. It is a film studio that is making a western. The dove flies up to the roof. The director orders the camera crew to stop filming. The cowboy was riding a wooden horse, and the heroine was standing on a box in the middle of a fake tree.

While the argument with the lead actress Mae Feather (Annette Benson) continues, the director complains to her husband Julian Gordon (Brian Aherne) that his wife is “a bit trying”. Mae tells them, “I’ll kiss a dove, but a vulture – not me”. In the first of a number of visual jokes designed to undermine our opinion of Mae, we see a music score entitled, “Ain’t She Sweet?”

This was the film debut of director Anthony Asquith, though it is attributed to A. V Bramble. Asquith soon settled down into a more conservative style of film-making, but he did work with the closet homosexual dramatist Terrence Rattigan on a number of movies, even though Asquith’s father was the prime minister who signed the arrest warrant of another gay playwright, Oscar Wilde.

He may not have been the most adventurous film-maker, but Asquith did direct many memorable British films, including Pygmalion, The Winslow Boy, The Browning Version and The Importance of Being Earnest. I have a soft-spot for Cottage to Let, a wartime comedy thriller that starred Leslie Banks, Alastair Sim, John Mills, Michael Wilding and a young George Cole.

If Asquith’s style in making those films was solid but traditional, his style during the silent era was bolder. His early films seem slightly Hitchcockian in their ingenious positioning of the camera, technical bravura and mischievous humour.

Like Hitchcock, Asquith used props that seem insignificant when first introduced into the story, but which feature prominently later. An example would be the mistaken substitution of Mae’s lipstick holder for a bullet (the association of lipstick and a bullet offers a metaphor for the ruthless nature of Mae). Not to mention the sight of Julian polishing a gun, which gives us our first hint that the title of the film might have an additional meaning.

Another Hitchcockian similarity is that Asquith visualises elements that the viewer could not hear in a silent film, but which seemed more real when superimposed on the screen, such as the brass instruments that briefly appear when Mae turns on a radio.

The most notable divergence from the Hitchcock manner of film-making is the mocking eye that Asquith turns towards the world of cinema. Hitchcock never ridiculed his own profession on screen. At best we might see Vertigo as a metaphor for Hitchcock’s own craft – his ability to transform an actress into his own perfect image of womanhood, and then destroy her again.

Asquith on the other hand goes in for direct satire. As the opening scene makes clear, Asquith is showing us the reality behind the starry images that we see on screen. Viewed on set, the artifice behind the movies is not nearly as exciting as it appears to the audience. It is wood and plastic, and arguing prima donnas, and a struggling film crew.

Asquith includes two films-within-the-film. These provide a sarcastic commentary on the movie industry, and an ironic comparison and contrast to the lives of Mae and Julian. In one scene, Julian is sat in a film theatre watching one of his own shows. The lurid sensationalism of the film represents cinema at its worst, and is therefore very funny.

The story of the film-within-film is a melodrama in which the heroine begs a wolfish man for the return of her sister’s indiscreet letters. He locks her in the room and tries to force his attentions on her, but the hero (seemingly by a psychic impulse) rushes to the rescue and break into the room to save her.

The film is accompanied by lurid intertitles which are very much the opposite of Asquith’s own. Asquith’s intertitles are merely the words with no adornment. The film’s intertitles are put on the background of pictures of knights and dragons, and look particularly foolish.

Asquith also manages to sneakily mock audience reactions, as people in the cinema (a couple of young boys in particular) get carried away with their enthusiasm as they watch the fight scenes.

The chaste heroine resisting an evil seducer provides a sharp contrast to the reality of the marriage between Julian and Mae. The same is true of the other film-within-film which stars Andy Wilkes (Donald Calthrop), the man who will become Mae’s lover. Here the film is not presented to us in an auditorium. We only glimpse scenes of its rehearsal.

Here Asquith makes fun of the more uninspired and lowbrow slapstick comedies that were once popular. Wilkes is no Chaplin, that’s for sure. His pratfalls are crude and vulgar. Wilkes is appearing in a farce about marital infidelity (appropriately enough). The story even imitates the real-life events of Mae and Wilkes in that a married woman gives Wilkes the key to her apartment.

In the character of Mae Feather, Asquith had an ample opportunity to avenge himself on any divas that he had ever had to work with. Mae is a popular actress of the age. She is known as “Sunshine Girl”, an amusingly inappropriate name for her. Fans wait outside the studio for her autograph. A reporter is on hand to ask for an interview.

Mae’s answers to the reporter offer a typical model of showbiz mendacity. She puts on fake airs of niceness for the reporter, and is extra loving to Julian. The reporter scribbles, “Has found ideal mate” in her notes.

In relation to the other crew members, Mae is sufficiently effusive for the reporter to write down, “Loves all her fellow workers”. Meanwhile outside Mae’s room, the crew have captured the dove that bit her, and awarded it a paper cross for Valour.

I am not entirely sure why Mae would wish to have an affair with Andy Wilkes. Julian is regularly handsome, whereas Andy looks like a creep. Perhaps that is the attraction. Julian is blindly trusting towards his wife. He tries to defend her bad behaviour on set by saying she is tired.

The affair starts when Julian asks Andy to escort Mae home, but Andy asks if he can take her to the Pavilion instead. Julian jokingly calls Mae a faithless wife who is deserting her husband, but he little realises how true this will prove.

Mae instead goes back to Andy’s house. This is supposedly for a drink before the show starts, but it ends in her tearing up the tickets. The film cuts to a shot of their empty seats in the theatre, and then superimposes an image of the two of them lying on a sofa together.

In characteristic fashion, Asquith provides a pointed visual joke. As Mae looks out of Andy’s window, her name is in neon lights on the front of a cinema showing her latest film. That film is called “My Man”, though at this stage we may be wondering to which man it is referring.

Their affair is soon discovered in a suitably farcical manner. Mae provides Andy with a key to her apartment, but her husband returns home early due to a change in schedule. A news broadcast on the radio announces that Andy has been injured while performing a stunt. Mae is prostrate with anxiety, and Julian phones the film studio to find out more.

However it is a false alarm – it is Andy’s double that has been injured. While Mae’s guard is down and she is no longer watching out for her lover, Andy lets himself into the apartment in full view of Julian. Julian can see that Andy has Mae’s key, and that he is expected by her.

When Julian decides to divorce Mae, her career faces ruin since her contract specifies that she must not be involved in any scandal – and this at a time when the married couple have an American trip planned. We now see the depths to which an ambitious film star is prepared to plunge in order to keep herself famous. Mae decides to substitute a real bullet for a blank cartridge in a gun that will be used to shoot her husband in the next scene of the movie.

Perhaps I had better be vague about how Mae’s plan works out. Let us just say there are plenty more ironic touches before the film is finished. Mae will provide her best acting ever – for reasons that only we will understand. When a character remarks, “Only one more shot and you’re finished,” this proves to be truer than he knows.

Asquith makes good use of shadows, a spotlight, and a POV shot from a swinging chandelier. Mae’s final scene in her movie has her waving and kissing goodbye to her lover. Meanwhile we see the silhouettes of a number of men carrying a body. They approach, and then walk over the camera, which is placed at ground level.

The film’s epilogue offers one more glimpse at the reality of working in cinema. Like Mae, the film industry is a hard-nosed and ruthless mistress. Watching the end of Shooting Stars, I was reminded of the climax of Josef von Sternberg’s silent movie, The Last Command.

Some years later the positions of two of the characters in this triangle have changed. One of them has literally and metaphorically been raised above the level of the other actors. Another one has fallen into obscurity, and is inconspicuous enough to be chosen as a mere extra. For those stars who are lucky or canny enough to survive, there is still the spotlight. For those who fail, there is nothing left but to dwindle into the darkness and pass through the Exit.