This translation contains Chapter One of the Brihat Samhita, a famous East Indian astrology text by Varahamihira (circa 6th century). This chapter deals with introductory matters such as establishing the competence and experience of the author and the reason for writing this text. The other chapters will be added as I complete them. My translation includes an outline of the major concepts for each chapter, a word for word translation from Sanskrit to English with parts of speech annotations. I welcome any feedback. Thank you for your attention and support.

Acharya Varahamihira was one of the greatest astrologers of ancient India. Belonging to the 6th century CE of the Gupta Age, he composed numerous texts on astrology and allied subjects. Among his notable works is the Brihat Samhita, which is an extraordinary treatise on not just astrology but a host of other subjects – from architecture to agriculture, from meteorology to physiognomy, from economics to dental hygiene! This paper presents a short background and review of the text with brief analyses of the major subject categories.

This translation contains chapters eight to seventeen of the Brihat Jataka, a famous East Indian astrology text by Varahamihira (circa 6th century). There are a total of 28 chapters. My translation includes an outline of the major concepts for each chapter with spreadsheets, a word for word translation from Sanskrit to English with parts of speech annotations. The chapter topics for this part are as follows: Chapter Eight: Dashas and Antardashas. Chapter Nine: Ashtakavaraga. Chapter Ten: Vocation. Chapter Eleven: Raja Yogas. Chapter Twelve: Nabhasa Yogas. Chapter Thirteen: Moon Yogas Chapter Fourteen: Two Planet Yogas Chapter Fifteen: Mendicant Yogas. Chapter Sixteen: Results of the Nakshatras Chapter Seventeen: Results of the Moon in the Zodiac Signs This is my first draft at this translation. I plan on doing a final version with more commentary. I welcome any feedback. Thank you for your attention and support.

One of the earliest preserved Sanskrit works on Perso-Arabic (Tājika) astrology, the thirteenth-century Karmaprakāśa of Samarasiṃha (also known as the Manuṣya jātaka, Tājikatantrasāra or Gaṇakabhūṣaṇa), is examined with particular attention to subgenre, distinctive content and likely Arabic-language sources. On the basis of a comparison of the extant text of the Karmaprakāśa with excerpts attributed to Samarasiṃha by later Tājika writers, conclusions are drawn with regard to other works, now lost or misattributed, by the same author.

This translation contains chapters eighteen to twenty of the Brihat Jataka, a famous East Indian astrology text by Varahamihira (circa 6th century). There are a total of 28 chapters. My translation includes an outline of the major concepts for each chapter with spreadsheets, a word for word translation from Sanskrit to English with parts of speech annotations. The chapter topics for this part are as follows: Chapter Eighteen: Results of the Aspects Chapter Nineteen: Ashtakavaraga Chapter Twenty: Houses Chapter Twenty-one: Support Yogas Chapter Twenty-two: Miscellaneous Yogas Chapter Twenty-three: Undesirable Yogas Chapter Twenty-four: Horoscope of the Female Chapter Twenty-five: Death Chapter Twenty-six: Lost Horoscopes Chapter Twenty-seven: The Character of the Drekkana Chapter Twenty-eight: Conclusion This is my first draft at this translation. I plan on doing a final version with more commentary. I welcome any feedback. Thank you for your attention and support.

This translation contains Chapter Ninty-Eight of the Brihat Samhita, a famous East Indian astrology text by Varahamihira (circa 6th century). This chapter deals with the qualities of the actions of the nakṣatras. The other chapters will be added as I complete them. My translation includes an outline of the major concepts for each chapter, a word for word translation from Sanskrit to English with parts of speech annotations. I welcome any feedback. Thank you for your attention and support.

This essay refers to the concise history of Hindu astrology, highlighting its symbolism present in its spirituality which is transversal to all cultures. In a summarized way, it also mentions the foundations and main conceptions of Hindu astrology, namely Rasi, Nakshastra, Navagrahas, Bhava, Dashas.

This study surveys the presence of astrological determinism (i.e., the belief that celestial bodies influence or signal fated developments) within Indian Buddhism, from early literature until late-Tantra, in which passive belief in astrology is more often expected than rejected. It is argued that a tradition of ‘Buddhist astrology’ did, in fact, exist with a clear evolution over time. This demonstrates that many Buddhists were comfortable with astrology alongside a belief in karma. The increasing incorporation of astrological elements into Buddhist texts also reflects the growing appreciation of astrology in Indian culture over the course of the first millennium CE.