Day 3 of olive harvesting was all about the clock ticking. Trees still had to be picked, the truck loaded and a long drive to the press by 4 p.m. If you’re late, you lose your spot.

A caravan of Domenico’s truck filled with olive crates, David and Dax in the 4×4, and Jenny and I in the Panda, racing through the Umbrian countryside. It’s dusk, we are late, hold on, hurry, hurry!

At Frantoio Monte Accuto, they take the pressing seriously. A few years prior, this was a press that hadn’t become acquainted with current technology. Now, as an example, there are cameras for every part of the processing…the vacuuming, the washing, the pitting (which end up as fuel tablets for wood-burning stoves) and the grinding.

When one gets to the Oliomatic as pictured above, most of the processes have happened. This machine was behind a glass wall, and was awesome. The entire start to finish was much faster than we expected, so Dax and I were going back and forth, filming one machine to another.

Here’s the finished product:

Which we had on bruschetta, when we got back to Ca’ di Gosto. The oil was so green and spicy, too. Super delicious! But, before that happened:

David, Jenny and Domenico, after it’s all done:

The Umbria Project will continue to film in 2013, so we will keep you posted!

Working on The Umbria Project has been an education for both Dax and myself, for both filmmaking and storytelling. We are in the midst of restructuring the story we want to tell about Ca’ di Gosto, and David & Jenny Nichols, and still trying to make the quick trips count for as much good footage as possible. Case in point was this past Halloween. Flew that night to Italy, made it the house late the following morning, and started filming immediately.

It’s olive harvesting time, and based on the Nichols’ oil achievements last year, the window for picking and pressing was tight. Amidst Jenny, Domenico, Dax, myself and the other pickers, there was no time to dawdle. There is your appointment at the mill, and you need to be on time…all hands on deck…well, in the trees.

Brian, one of the olive pickers, suggested I go about it like taking thyme leaves off of a spring of thyme. The trick is to keep as many leaves and branches out of your picked olives. Also, there will be green and black olives, but the prized ones were blush, a combo of colors:

I had such a great time on Day 2 of the harvest. It became such a zen thing of stripping the branch, and search of the olives I missed.

The weather was gorgeous, and we were able to capture the work and the workers with both the Canon and the Sony. Then it was time for dinner:

Above is another version of a salad with carciofi, vegetables and squashes, with an anchovy and mustard dressing.

Fennel sakad wuth pomegranate seeds, fennel fronds and olive oil.

In the midst of all of this, Jenny was also making red tomato chutney and green tomato chutney, which are both delicious. She never, ever stops!

Next post, the pressing….

Today began with a visit to Brent Zimmerman of ABCheese in Anghiari (http://www.valledimezzo.com/farm).

Brent is from Michigan, and has a herd of Oberhasli goats. He makes some amazing cheese with the goats’ milk, hard, soft, a Brie, a Feta-style. We were fortunate enough to sample a few, and all were delicious.

This makes me tired:

One:

And, two:

The farm was pure heaven:

We all headed home, and then started the cooking and decorating for the al fresco dinner shoot.

So, there was setting up the outdoor dining area:

And now, what you’ve all been waiting for:

And now, dessert:

Dining

And, the aftermath:

Tomorrow, we say ciao to Ca’ di Gosto for the second time. Stay tuned for our next trip!

Before we get to the tomato planting, here are photos from last night’s dinner:

Plus:

Now, for today. The weather was perfect to go into the garden, and the dogs agreed:

And, of course

But,

Jenny and Denise were great today. Lots of knowledge about planting, composting, and slugs were documented:

We shot a segment about summer pudding.

And, a little North Carolina here in Umbria:

Tomorrow is our last shooting day. A visit to Brent the goat man to see goats (!) and how he makes goat cheese, then an al fresco lunch under the oak tree with pasta, sea bass, antipasti, summer pudding, and wine. Not a bad way to end a documentary shoot, right?

Sunday was rainy, so what’s a film crew to do? Film food stuff:

A brief segueway on what’s we’ve had for the past 3 days:

Friday – lasagne, with meringues, sorbet, chocolate sauce dessert extravaganza.

Saturday – turkey milanese, zucchini with tomato sauce and garlic breadcrumbs, green beans with guanciale, red lentils, and dessert was Eton mess.

Sunday – lunch was nettle ravioli with a lemon sauce, red lentil salad (unbelievably yummy), dinner was Zuni chicken with bread salad (everyone’s favorite), and various bruschettas. Did I mention wine? Well, yes, there’s been wine…

The larder is one of my favorite rooms in the house. There’s something very comforting about it, and I like to think of this as Jenny’s laboratory.

Today is more rain, so there will be more cooking and filming. By the way, the finished nettle ravioli:

After hour delays on everyone’s flight(s), we made it to Rome, trained it to Terentola and drove to Umbria.

This time we came more prepared with more lighting and hard drives, less non-essential equipment (we’ll see how that goes) and peanut butter pretzels and gourmet chocolate bars for our hosts/subjects.

The addition of a production designer to our group has already been a big improvement. We are doing our biggest shoot on Tuesday, and Denise will definitely be hard at work for our al fresco lunch shoot.

And,

Lots of work with chickens, flora and fauna…

and

We’ve been having good weather, but a little cooler than expected. Rain is due on Monday, so we are planning around it.

Going to try and get some food segments shot tomorrow. Stay tuned.