EX-NBA star Kendrick Perkins has spoken out on his apparent Boston Celtics parade ban.

The former NBA champion was reportedly excluded from the Celtics celebrations as they toasted a record 18th title.

Perkins spent the first eight seasons of his NBA career with the Celtics and was the starting center as they won the championship in 2008.

Boston announcer and Perkins' former teammate Brian Scalabrine revealed the ESPN analyst would not be at the team's parade following this season's triumph.

"It’s not really an open-arms thing with Kendrick Perkins," he told SiriusXM Radio show The Starting Lineup over the weekend.

"I heard Scalabrine the other day, and I love Scal, but he pissed me off,” Perkins said to The Mark Jackson Show on Tuesday.

"I never said I wanted to come! It wasn’t my moment, or 2008’s moments. It was 2024’s moment. Let them have their moment."

On Monday, Perkins had labeled Scalabrine a "coward" following his comments over the celebrations.

"Right now I feel like Scal is a coward,” Perkins told 98.5 The Sports Hub’s Felger & Mazz.

"Was I the only 2008 member missing from the duck boat? No, I wasn’t. [Eddie] House, my guy, he was there. Leon Powe, great friend of mine as well, he was there.

"Scal was there and Paul [Pierce] was there. There was still 11 other guys missing."

Since moving into the sports broadcasting arena, Perkins has not been scared to speak his mind.

He was highly critical of the Celtics during the 2022 NBA Finals, which they lost to the Golden State Warriors.

“I’ve been one that’s been one of the biggest advocates for Jayson Tatum and Jaylen Brown since they put the world on notice back when Tatum was a rookie," Big Perk continued.

"And my thing is over the past couple years, they’ve had their letdowns.

"So the criticism, it was warranted. It wasn’t like I was just making it up.

"As far as [coach] Joe Mazzulla, I didn’t believe that his system could get it done."

"Now I have nothing to say, I mean congratulations to them,” Perkins added.

"But the thing is, Boston fans, they expect you to be married to them for life. Like a sense of entitlement, like you owe them your life.

"And that’s just not the case."

Perkins is a regular on ESPN's First Take and Get Up on weekday mornings.

He also teams up with Pat McAfee for a special NBA-related segment every Thursday.

The former center hasn't been back to Boston by personal choice since the team traded him away in 2011, per Awful Announcing.

Now 39, he enjoyed spells with the Oklahoma City Thunder, Cleveland Cavaliers, and the New Orleans Pelicans after leaving Massachusetts.

Perkins retired in 2018 after 16 seasons in the NBA.