Kendrick Perkins names 1 trade target who can help revive Warriors

The Golden State Warriors have entered a re-tooling era. It’s not a rebuild, they still have Stephen Curry and Draymond Green with Steve Kerr at the helm.

Kendrick Perkins Takes Jab at Sixers Star Joel Embiid for Team USA Play

This offseason, Philadelphia 76ers star Joel Embiid is doing something he's never done before. Despite having multiple suitors, he chose to suit up for Team USA in the 2024 Summer Olympics.

Kendrick Perkins says Knicks' championship window is open for 3-4 years

With a young core on affordable deals, the Knicks should be in contention for years to come, said Kendrick Perkins.

Los Angeles Clippers: Kendrick Perkins Advocating Shocking Kawhi Leonard Move

Paul George’s free-agency departure marked a new era for the Los Angeles Clippers. At this point, this team will need to contend for a championship sans arguably their second-best player over the past five years.

Los Angeles Lakers: Kendrick Perkins Makes Strong Anthony Davis Team USA Demand to Steve Kerr

Los Angeles Lakers news: There has been a lot of talk surrounding Team USA’s starting lineup heading into the upcoming Olympic Games. There have recently been some calls for head coach Steve Kerr to drop Philadelphia 76ers superstar Joel Embiid from the starting five in favor of Anthony Davis.

Former NBA Champ Gives Honest Review of Team USA’s Bench Unit

Having a starting lineup of LeBron James, Kevin Durant, and Stephen Curry is more than enough to dominate most teams in the world. For former NBA champion Kendrick Perkins, though, Team USA’s bench unit is equally problematic for opposing squads facing them in the 2024 Olympics.

LeBron James Bricks Wide-Open Shot In Team USA Practice

LeBron James is gearing up for his fourth Olympic appearance as part of Team USA, aiming to secure another gold medal for his collection. However, during a recent Team USA practice session, LeBron experienced a rare, surprising, and embarrassing moment.

How Kendrick Perkins earned Paul Pierce’s respect as Celtics rookie

Kendrick Perkins has taken a lot of criticism since transitioning away from the basketball court to his new career in sports media. However, during his playing days, Perkins served as a pivotal role player on the Boston Celtics, the team that drafted him in 2003 and with which he spent the first eight years of his career.

Kendrick Perkins Explains Why LeBron James And Rob Pelinka Aren’t On The Same Page

Kendrick Perkins gave his thoughts on LeBron James and Rob Pelinka's relationship and their perspective on the Lakers. He said LeBron James wants to win championships, whereas Rob Pelinka is concerned with protecting the Lakers' future.

Kendrick Perkins wins ‘left big toe’ bet after LeBron James signs max $104 million contract

LeBron James is entering his 22nd season in the NBA, the oldest player in the league. Hence, the star has little time to win another championship, so James has done everything he can to improve the Lakers’ roster.

Kendrick Perkins tabs Timberwolves as NBA Draft biggest winner with Rob Dillingham

Former Kentucky star Rob Dillingham heard his name called early on in the 2024 NBA Draft. Dillingham was selected with the No. 8 overall pick by the Spurs and was traded to the Minnesota Timberwolves.

Boston Celtics’ Legendary 1-Time NBA Champion Reveals the Truth Behind His Beef With Kendrick Perkins

Brian Scalabrine and Kendrick Perkins were teammates for the Boston Celtics in five years, including winning the 2007-08 championship. But fast forward to 2024, and these two icons are embroiled in an ugly feud.

Kendrick Perkins Gets Mad After Brian Scalabrine Says He Wasn't Invited To 2024 Celtics Parade

Brian Scalabrine has earned the wrath of former teammate Kendrick Perkins after he claimed that the big man was not invited to the Boston Celtics' title parade last week.

Kendrick Perkins Calls For Knicks to Chase Lakers Star

If Anthony Davis isn't willing to play (blue) devil's advocate with the Los Angeles Lakers, the New York Knicks could be an option. So claims ESPN analyst and former NBA veteran Kendrick Perkins, who theorized such a union on the Scoop B Radio Podcast.

Kendrick Perkins issues mea culpa after Celtics’ title

On Monday evening, Jayson Tatum and the Boston Celtics broke through and won their first NBA championship in 16 years with a blowout game 5 victory over Luka Doncic and the Dallas Mavericks in the NBA Finals.