Kendrick Perkins wants to play in the NBA again. Correction: Kendrick Perkins wants to return to the NBA in some capacity. It's not entirely certain that much playing time will be on the cards. It’s not entirely out of the question that Perkins could return to the Boston Celtics – he has publicly expressed a desire to do so – but it would only be to provide his own unique brand of Veteran Presence. Don’t expect to see it happen anytime soon, however.

Perkins, who made a cameo appearance with the Cleveland Cavaliers last year, is eager to return to the NBA for one last go around and has asked GM Danny Ainge about the possibility of ending things in Boston. Ainge was quick to throw cold water on the likelihood of Perkins returning to the team in the very near future, telling the local radio program Toucher & Rich, “I don’t think it’s a good fit for our team right now” while adding that the team is already struggling to find room to play all of their big men.

Ainge’s comments aren’t untrue, they currently are struggling to find enough time for Aron Baynes, Daniel Theis and Robert Williams while trying to keep Al Horford in the lineup. That’s indeed a lot of bigs to juggle and the Celtics' roster is currently full until the NBA finishes up investigating the domestic violence charges against Jabari Bird.

Perkins was a key starter for the Celtics, bringing his trademark defensive toughness to the team during the New Big Three era. His offensive production, however, began to decline after Boston traded him to the Oklahoma City Thunder for Jeff Green, one of those trades that ended up having no winners, only participants. His reputation as a teammate, however, was enough to keep him in the league even as his points per game average began wavering below the 3.0 mark.

Is there an argument for Perkins ending his career where it began? The Boston Globe’s Chad Finn thinks so, making the case that Perkins would satisfy the Celtics’ current needs considering head coach Brad Stevens’s questions about the team's toughness and Kyrie Irving's call for a 14-year-old veteran. Finn points out that Perkins remains “one of the most respected players among his peers… he’d be a great influence on Terry Rozier, Jaylen Brown, Jayson Tatum, and Robert Williams, among others? Having Perk around is good for a team’s soul.” Plus, he notes that the team wouldn’t have to worry about finding Perkins minutes because, ideally, you wouldn’t play him any.

That particular argument brings us back to the central problem here: considering the team's goals and their struggles, right now they can’t really afford to bring Perkins in just to be an extra coach. Even Finn concedes that a signing wouldn’t make much sense until later in the season. The Celtics are still trying to win the East, or at the very least re-establish themselves as one of the conference’s toughest teams, and currently are struggling mightily to put things together. A ceremonial reunion with Kendrick Perkins, a popular player and a key figure in the 2008 championship team, would be quite a poetic end to his career, but it can’t be on Boston's list of priorities right now.