Former Boston Celtics big man Kendrick Perkins announced his official retirement from the NBA on Adrian Wojnarowski’s podcast on Monday in a conversation that spanned his college career through his time with the Boston Celtics and the Oklahoma City Thunder.

Perkins was not on an NBA roster this season, and even at his peak, his skill set would not have been well-suited to the modern game in which bigs are expected to switch and help contain the pick-and-roll. But he was a highly useful starter for Boston during the last Big Three era, and even when teams started going small, Perkins was coveted as a strong locker room presence.

The interview with Wojnarowski covered a lot of amusing topics, including Kevin Garnett’s rules for the buffet line postgame during the Big Three era. According to Perkins, Garnett held team staffers tightly to a players-eat-first rule. At one point, a team doctor -- who didn’t know the rule -- made himself a plate after a game. Perkins said Garnett emerged from the shower and got in the team doctor’s face.

“Players eat first. Matter of fact, give me this s---,” Garnett said, according to Perkins. He grabbed the plate and threw it in the trash.

A team video coordinator also once suffered Garnett’s wrath, to the point that Perkins felt the need to step in.

“'Perk, what you want with me today?'” Perkins recalled Garnett saying. “Now me and him getting into an argument over (the coach) not abiding by KG’s rules. So man, s---. That was the rule. Do not eat before the players. After that, you can eat whatever you want to eat.”

Perkins also remembered the day he was traded to the Oklahoma City Thunder. The team was in Denver at the time, and according to Perkins, the vibe around shoot around felt off -- Perkins said Doc Rivers wasn’t looking at his center in the eye.

When Perkins returned to his hotel from shoot around, he saw the news: He was headed to Oklahoma in exchange for Jeff Green. A friend tried to console Perkins by saying OKC was a young squad on the rise.

“I’m like, ‘I ain’t trying to hear that s---, man,’” Perkins told Wojnarowski. “This is my family right here.'"

Perkins said he went to Rivers, Kevin Garnett and Paul Pierce in tears, before talking to his best friend on team, Rajon Rondo (Rondo told Perkins he was retiring when he heard the news).

Once Perkins got to Oklahoma City, however, his take on the situation improved after GM Sam Presti committed to a four-year, $36 million contract.

“Right then, everything in Boston went out the window,” Perkins told Wojnarowski, laughing.

That’s probably fair. Danny Ainge recently told 98.5′s Toucher and Rich he didn’t regret the decision to trade his big man.

“Perkins was hurt," Ainge said. “People keep forgetting that. He wasn’t healthy, he had a torn ACL. He wanted a contract extension. We were not gonna pay him the money, just because of the payroll that we had. And he ended up, after we traded him, he ended up getting surgery again. So he wasn’t going to help us then. Nenad Krstic was actually better than Perkins at that moment in time because of his health and then he got hurt.”

The Celtics, of course, later dealt Green to Memphis for a pick that will almost certainly land in the lottery. Perkins got paid, and the Celtics got the Memphis pick. All things considered, the situation worked itself out.