Multimillionaire Deborah Meaden has baffled social media users after declaring she won't be buying any new clothing, shoes or handbags in the next 12 months.

The Dragons' Den star, 60, from Taunton, who has a net worth of £40million, made the announcement to her 346,000 followers on Twitter yesterday.

She said: 'I am not going to be buying any brand new clothes, shoes, handbags for this year. I can replace where worn out if needed and I can recycle.'

While many praised Deborah for the move, other social media users were critical of the multimillionaire for the announcement.

'The amount of privilege required to tweet this out as if it is a big deal and not the reality for the vast majority of people is quite something,' one said.

Deborah, who sold her family business for a reported £33million in 2005, lives with her husband in their home in Somerset and also owns a home in the fashionable Primrose Hill area of North London.

In an interview in 2015, Deborah told the Daily Express that in the first year she started working in television she spent £10,000 on a new 'base wardrobe.'

While she said she doesn't like shopping, she also revealed she could go a few years without spending much before indulging in a 'big splurge.'

She also revealed she has two wardrobes, moving items from one to another if she doesn't get much wear from them, before donating them to charity.

The multimillionaire also revealed her most expensive purchase was a designer dress costing £6,000.

The TV personality shared her tweet about the 'No-spend year' yesterday afternoon, after revealing she'd been considering the challenge 'for some time.'

However, in a follow-up tweet, she conceded that there might be new additions to her wardrobe, as long as they're not brand news.

'I already have a group of friends I swap with just to freshen up the wardrobe, but I guess if I needed a New handbag for damage reasons then I would look for second hand/vintage.

Her tweet went on to be liked over 23,000 times, but some Twitter users were baffled by the millionaire business woman's announcement.

One said: 'The fact you even need to worry about being seen in the same things says it all.

Another commented: 'There are people who buy clothes who their clothes aren't worn out?'

One added: 'Loads of us have no choice but to do this. What would be great is if you could donate the money you save doing this to food banks, homeless shelters and disabled charities to help those of us who struggle to find money to eat, let alone buy a new frock.'