Think of A-list celebrities and you will ­probably imagine fashionable villas on Primrose Hill or arty canalside pads in hipster-central Hackney Wick. But seriously, places like that are so last year.

Instead the new must-have for many famous faces is a West Country home – and I don’t mean the farmer’s markets of Chipping Norton in the Cotswolds, just 90 minutes from London, but a ­property in a genuine far west location. Many have already made the move.

In Dorset you’ll find ­Martin Clunes, Harry Redknapp, Julian Fellowes and Jonathan Ross; Somerset has Sean Bean, Deborah Meaden of Dragons’ Den, television presenters Mariella ­Frostrup and Kevin McCloud, and Peter Andre has a base at Taunton.

Not enough? Head further west and in Devon you’ll find Jennifer Saunders and Ade ­Edmondson, Damien Hirst, Kirstie Allsopp, veteran Stones rocker Charlie Watts and Wetherspoon boss Tim Martin. Cross the Tamar to Cornwall and look out for Richard and Judy, Gordon Ramsay, Dawn French and Andrew Ridgeley from Wham! And talking of names from the past, there’s David Cameron’s second home in Rock, too.

You get the picture: more than a little stardust has been sprinkled on the West Country in recent years.

“Each of these airports has seen a significant increase in private aircraft usage in the past few years as the region has become more popular with high net worth purchasers,” says Andrew Adams, a buying agent specialising in Somerset, Bristol and Bath.

There are also growing numbers of designated landing areas for heli­copters, making it possible to have homes in tradit­ionally harder-to-reach rural parts of the region. The landing pads are usually found at high-end hotels,­ ­including the Horn of Plenty and Lympstone Manor in Devon and the Tregenna Castle and Nare hotels in Cornwall.

With such improved accessibility come London-style facilities which, for good or bad, many high fliers want when in the West Country.

The highest-profile examples are Babington House and Hauser & Wirth, located close to each other in Somerset. The former is a private members’ club with a spa, while the latter is a stunning art gallery with sister premises in the distinctly more glitzy locations of Los Angeles, Zurich, London and New York.

“Babington has turned what wasn’t a very fashionable area into a real destination,” says George Wade of buying agency Property Vision. “There’s also a new boutique hotel to open at Hadspen House near Castle Cary. If what’s ­happened since Hauser & Wirth is ­replicated by Hadspen, it’ll be a big boost to this part of the world.”

Then there’s the West Country’s long-standing foodie reputation. This is a virtuous circle, as top-quality nosh ­attracts celebrity chefs, who in turn pull in celebrity residents keen to visit the famous eateries. The area has more restaurants owned and run by TV chefs than you can shake a gently sautéed scallop at – Rick Stein, Nathan Outlaw and Jamie Oliver, among many others.

It is with property as it is with food: celebrity buyers, typically with deep pockets, tend to want only the best. “Everyone wants privacy, but celebs coming here are obsessed with it,” says Clare Coode, a buying agent with Stacks Property Search in Cornwall, who has helped many of the county’s best-known residents and second-homeowners find houses.

“One famous buyer insisted that the agents walk up every hill for miles around to ensure the house he wanted couldn’t be snapped by the paparazzi. He rejected the house in the end for that reason, even though it was perfect in every other way,” she says.

Buying agents say the spots desired by the rich and famous are areas like St Mawes in the Roseland Peninsula in south Cornwall and villages close to Padstow and Rock on the north coast. Also ­favoured are the less-populated parts of rural North Devon, country areas in central Somerset and sections of the Dorset coast – quiet spots such as West Lulworth, as well as the more blingy Sandbanks.

Few celebrities buy in towns, with one exception: Bruton in Somerset. “Lots of celebrities live around there, particularly from the arty world. There’s a place called At The Chapel, a restaurant with rooms and its own bakery set in a listed 17th-century former chapel, and it’s popular with media types,” says Robin Gould of Prime Purchase, Savills’ buying agent arm.

Wherever you look in the West Country these days there is no shortage of celeb-friendly homes on sale. There are currently around 1,000 properties priced from £1 ­million to £10 million on the open market, but it’s often those not in the public domain that ­appeal the most.

“We have four incredible ‘prime’ houses privately available, but which we aren’t able to market publicly,” explains Josephine Ashby of John Bray and Partners, which sells homes in exclusive areas of Cornwall’s north coast. The fact that the press or public can’t see floor plans or prices online is helpful in attracting famous buyers. They often make it clear to selling agents that they don’t want any “digital footprint” on Rightmove or other websites revealing the layout or decor of a home they have bought.

Meanwhile, the West Country’s ­burgeoning celebrity reputation ­continues this summer with an onslaught of more famous names, this time visiting the ­region for work.

A new season of ITV’s Doc Martin is being shot in the Cornish village of Port Isaac, which is also the setting for this year’s film Fisherman’s Friends; on Dorset’s Jurassic coast, the hills of Lyme Regis are being used for the making of Ammonite, a new movie with Kate Winslet and Saoirse Ronan; and at Somerset’s Clevedon Pier crews have been filming Sanditon, an eight-part ITV adaptation of the Jane Austen novel left incomplete at her death.

More than one estate agency has ­offered to show the stars of these shows the local area during their downtime, in the hope that some might snap up a second home or relocate altogether. Such a thought used to be fanciful, but such is the appeal of the South West that now there’s a good chance any celebrity buyer might find their co-star is also their next-door neighbour.