Towson, MD (WorkersCompensation.com) - Carmine D'Alessandro was recently promoted to Chief Legal Officer. In this position, Mr. D’Alessandro oversees the Legal, Subrogation, Special Investigations, Premium Audit and Compliance functions. Prior to this promotion, Mr. D’Alessandro was the Vice President of Legal for Chesapeake Employers Insurance.

Mr. D’Alessandro joined the company in July 1994 and has served as an attorney with the Legal department; Director of the Legal department; and Assistant Vice President of Claims, where his responsibilities included the management of the company’s private claims; and Assistant Vice President of Legal Services. He received his bachelor’s degree from George Washington University in 1990 and his J.D. degree from the University of Baltimore School of Law in 1993. Mr. D’Alessandro is a member of the Maryland Bar, the District of Columbia Bar, Maryland Defense Counsel and the Baltimore County Bar Association.

Sharon Rowell was recently promoted to Chief Administrative Officer (CAO). In this position, Ms. Rowell oversees Human Resources, Marketing and Business Development, the Customer Contact Center, and the Distribution department for Chesapeake Employers. Prior to her promotion, Ms. Rowell was Vice President of Marketing and Business Development for the company.

Ms. Rowell’s previous positions with Chesapeake Employers include Assistant Vice President of Marketing and Business Development, Director of the Strategic Business Unit (SBU), and Director of Premium Audit. Her professional career with Chesapeake Employers also includes positions held in the Claims Management, Internal Audit, and Finance departments.

Prior to joining the Chesapeake Employers’ team, Ms. Rowell worked with Maryland’s Office of Legislative Audits. Ms. Rowell earned a bachelor’s degree in accounting from Bowie State University in Maryland and a Master’s of Business Administration from the University of Central Michigan.

The title for Paige Beck, CPA, recently changed to Chief Innovation Officer at Chesapeake Employers Insurance. As CIO, Ms. Beck oversees the Information Systems and Underwriting departments as well as the implementation of the company's new core system. Previously, Ms. Beck was Chief Administrative Officer for Chesapeake Employers.

During her 20-plus-year tenure with the Towson-based insurer, Ms. Beck has served as CFO/CAO, head of the Internal Audit department and as Assistant Vice President of Finance. Prior to joining the company, she was employed with the Office of Legislative Audits. She is a member of the Maryland Association of Certified Public Accountants and a graduate of Towson University where she earned a bachelor’s degree in accounting.

About Chesapeake Employers

Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company is Maryland’s largest writer of workers’ compensation insurance. It is a nonprofit, non-stock, private corporation. Chesapeake Employers has served as a continuous, guaranteed source for fairly priced workers’ compensation insurance since 1914.