Maria D’Alessandro wants to be remembered as a caring person who did her best for all she met along life’s journey. Considering how dedicated she is to her family and her community, we’re sure that is exactly how she will be remembered.

D’Alessandro was born in Brooklyn, and attended local schools — PS 207, IS 278, John Dewey High School, and Kingsborough Community College. She has truly embraced all that Brooklyn has to offer and has dedicated her life to giving back to her beloved borough and its residents.

Both D’Alessandro’s parents were volunteers in her Marine Park neighborhood, and she has continued their legacy. In 1986, she joined the Marine Park Civic board of directors, serving as a board member and chairwoman of the board.

“I remained there until 2012 when I and several others in the community decided that an organization was needed directly for the park itself,” says D’Alessandro. “We established the Marine Park Alliance Corp in 2013 of which I am the executive vice president.” She also serves as the volunteer coordinator and event planner for the Alliance.

During the years she has also donated her time and energy to the Hendrick I. Lott House, Cub Scout Pack 353, and the 63rd Precinct Community Council.

D’Alessandro’s friends and family have long admired her selfless dedication to helping others; one of her biggest admirers is her husband of 33 years, Charles D’Alessandro.

“I admire everything about her. The fact that she is amazing and she doesn’t even know it,” he says. “She is a selfless person who treats everyone the way she would like to be treated. She cares with her whole heart, pays attention to every detail, and it shows.”

He added that his wife truly adores Marine Park, the “small community in a big city,” where she was raised, and also has a special place in her heart for her home borough, saying that Brooklyn “has so much to offer, and still has that small-town feeling.”

Family friend Kristy DiCarlo had more words of praise for this Woman of Distinction.

“She does so much for the community. Maria is very humble, very humble — she does not look for recognition. She’s civic-minded, puts herself out there, spends a lot of time volunteering, doing park clean-ups, serving as president of the association dedicated to the park — it’s truly amazing what she’s gotten done. She’s just an all-around good person, a very deserving person.”

If she were able to trade places with anyone and hold any position anywhere in the world, say, president or queen, D’Alessandro says she wouldn’t, insisting her favorite position is the one she currently holds.

“I hold that position right here, every day as a loving partner to my life partner, mother to my two sons Charles and Carmine, daughter to my parents, and a caregiver to the people that touch my life each day,” says D’Alessandro.

NEIGHBORHOOD: Marine Park.

OCCUPATION: Title closer.

COMPANY: Self-employed.

CLAIM TO FAME: Second-generation community volunteer and steward of Marine Park for future generations.

FAVORITE BROOKLYN PLACE: Marine Park.

WOMAN I ADMIRE: My mother RoseMarie Carro. She was and is a wonderful wife, mother, and volunteer.

MOTTO: “You must be the change you wish to see in the world.” – Mahatma Gandhi