BISHOP GRIMES MISSION STATEMENT

Bishop Grimes shares in the evangelizing mission of the Roman Catholic Church, a mission that has been handed on by Christ and his apostles and received by generations of believers. Therefore, we seek to help students take part, with the current generation of believers, in receiving and handing on their Catholic faith by coming to know it, live it, and share it. We accomplish this mission by providing a high quality and rigorous Catholic education that prepares students in mind, body, and spirit to encounter Christ, live their faith in the context of His Church, and serve others in His name, particularly the poor and those who are in need.

BISHOP GRIMES PHILOSOPHY

Bishop Grimes is a Roman Catholic school that prepares students for college, career and life. At Bishop Grimes we recognize our responsibility as ministers of the church of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Syracuse to share in the mission of Jesus. We treasure the unique potential of each individual and strive to create a rigorous, engaging, supportive, and spiritual environment. The educational experience at Bishop Grimes challenges each of our students to “grow in the maturity of Christ, ” to become responsible citizens, and to be active in their parish faith communities.

BISHOP GRIMES BELIEF STATEMENTS

At Bishop Grimes we believe:

Christ is our Purpose. Christ is our Focus. Christ is our Model.

It is these foundational beliefs from which all of our other beliefs at Bishop Grimes are derived, including our belief that we are called to:

Integrate the Gospel message of Jesus Christ within our daily lives as promoters of justice, seekers of peace, and evangelizers of the work of God to all those in need;

Foster responsible decision-making based on Gospel-values in our current circumstances and future challenges;

Ensure that all of our students are college and career ready and prepared for a lifetime of growth centered on the teachings of Jesus Christ;

Promote academic excellence and to foster the unique potential of each student.

PROFILE OF THE BISHOP GRIMES JR. / SR. HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATE

Graduates of Bishop Grimes and the Catholic Schools of the Diocese of Syracuse will: Live their faith by:

Knowing, understanding, and promoting the principles of the Catholic faith

Protecting and nurturing human life at all stages

Exhibiting behavior and making decisions that reflect high moral character and values of our faith: integrity, honesty, self-control, and concern for others

Serving God through service to others in society and the Church

Respecting the dignity of others, including people of other cultures and traditions, as modeled by Jesus by extending acceptance, empathy, compassion, and love towards all

Being responsible stewards of all of God’s gifts

Continuing to devote attention to their own ongoing faith formation and evangelization

Providing leadership enhanced by moral considerations to the Church, local communities, their families, and future generations

Demonstrating the acquisition of life skills that promote cooperation, creativity, critical thinking, self-reflection, and problem solving in a variety of settings

Taking active roles as responsible community leaders in order to make significant positive contributions

Demonstrating an understanding and appreciation for the development of the whole person – spiritually, academically, physically, emotionally, and socially

Code of Conduct & Discipline

At Bishop Grimes, we seek to create a healthy moral environment and to build a school community reflecting gospel values and the spirit of Jesus' love. We wish to develop an atmosphere that is conducive to learning, protect members of our school family from injury or malicious harm, and safeguard both private and school property. Our goal is to aid our students in growing into mature responsible Christian