BANGALORE, India--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Wipro Technologies, the Global Information Technology, Consulting and Outsourcing business of Wipro Limited (NYSE: WIT) today announced that it has been recognized by the Ethisphere Institute, the leading business ethics think-tank, as one of the 2012 World’s Most Ethical (WME) Companies. This recognition is for a select number of companies from around the world who demonstrate consistently high levels of transparency, ethics and corporate responsibility. Wipro's recognition is a reflection of its long standing legacy of conducting business on a strong foundation of values where integrity and transparency have been top priorities.

Speaking about this unique achievement, Anurag Behar, Chief Sustainability Officer, Wipro said, “We are honored and delighted at being named in the Ethisphere’s 2012 World’s Most Ethical Companies list. It reaffirms our belief that responsible citizenship, integrity and ethics are essential conditions for doing well in business.”

"A strong ethical foundation is a competitive advantage, and Wipro recognizes the important role corporate responsibility plays in improving its bottom line,” said Alex Brigham, Executive Director of the Ethisphere Institute. “As more and more organizations strive for this honor each year, Wipro’s inclusion as a World’s Most Ethical Company for 2012 demonstrates its industry-leading commitment to ethics and dedication to integrity.”

This is the sixth year Ethisphere has published the World’s most Ethical (WME) company rankings. Ethisphere reviews hundreds of companies and evaluates applications utilizing its proprietary methodology through in-depth research and multi-step analysis, naming the companies that surpassed their industry peers to this year's World's Most Ethical Companies list. The 2012 list features companies in more than three dozen industries, including 40 companies headquartered outside the United States.

The methodology for the WME ranking includes reviewing codes of ethics, litigation and regulatory infraction histories; evaluating the investment in innovation and sustainable business practices; looking at activities designed to improve corporate citizenship; and studying nominations from senior executives, industry peers, suppliers and customers.

The Ethisphere recognition follows a long list of recognitions for Wipro in the last 12 months, including the inclusion in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index for the second time in succession, a listing in Newsweek's Top 50 Green Companies and inclusion in the NASDAQ Global Sustainability 100.

Read about the methodology and view the complete list of the 2012 World’s Most Ethical Companies at http://www.ethisphere.com/wme.

About Wipro Technologies

Wipro Technologies, the global IT business of Wipro Limited (NYSE:WIT) is a leading Information Technology, Consulting and Outsourcing company, that delivers solutions to enable its clients do business better. Wipro Technologies delivers winning business outcomes through its deep industry experience and a 360 degree view of "Business through Technology" – helping clients create successful and adaptive businesses. A company recognized globally for its comprehensive portfolio of services, a practitioner’s approach to delivering innovation and an organization wide commitment to sustainability, Wipro Technologies has 131,000 employees and clients across 54 countries. For more information, please visit www.wipro.com.

About Ethisphere Institute:

The research-based Ethisphere® Institute is a leading international think-tank dedicated to the creation, advancement and sharing of best practices in business ethics, corporate social responsibility, anti-corruption and sustainability. Ethisphere Magazine, which publishes the globally recognized World’s Most Ethical Companies Ranking™, is the quarterly publication of the Institute. Ethisphere provides the only third-party verifications of compliance programs and ethical cultures that include: Ethics Inside® Certification, Compliance Leader Verification™ and Anti-Corruption Program Verification™. The Institute’s premier membership group, the Business Ethics Leadership Alliance™, is a business ethics forum that includes more than 100 leading corporations, universities and institutions that collectively leverage their experience, expertise and innovative ways to address emerging compliance challenges. More information on the Ethisphere Institute, including ranking projects and membership, can be found at http://www.ethisphere.com.

Forward-looking and Cautionary Statements