Bangalore, India – April 1, 2020:

Wipro Ltd, Wipro Enterprises Ltd and Azim Premji Foundation, have together committed Rs 1125 crore towards tackling the unprecedented health and humanitarian crisis arising from the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak. These resources will help enable the dedicated medical and service fraternity in the frontline of the battle against the pandemic and in mitigating its wide-ranging human impact, particularly on the most disadvantaged of our society.

Integrated action will be taken for a comprehensive on-the-ground response in specific geographies, focused on immediate humanitarian aid, and augmentation of healthcare capacity, including containing the COVID-19 outbreak and treating those affected by it. These responses will be carefully coordinated with relevant government institutions and would be executed by the Azim Premji Foundation’s 1600-person team, in collaboration with many of its over 350 strong civil society partners, who have a deep presence across the country. These efforts will fully leverage the technology expertise, sourcing systems, infrastructure, and distribution reach of Wipro.

Of the Rs 1125 crore, Wipro Ltd’s commitment is Rs 100 crore, Wipro Enterprises Ltd’s is Rs 25 crore, and that of the Azim Premji Foundation is Rs 1000 crore. These sums are in addition to the annual CSR activities of Wipro, and the usual philanthropic spends of the Azim Premji Foundation.

Modern global society has not confronted a crisis of this magnitude and type. The Azim Premji Foundation and Wipro believe that we must all work together to not only deal with this crisis and minimize its human impact, particularly on the disadvantaged, but also learn from these extraordinary times, to develop a more resilient global community, based on justice, equity, humaneness, and ecological sustainability.

We are completely committed to this quest and wish everyone all safety.

Wipro Ltd, Wipro Enterprises Ltd, and Azim Premji Foundation

PS: Over the past few days, with the help of many of our partners, we have developed a ‘District Response Plan to COVID-19’, which is guiding many of our efforts. This plan is available at https://azimpremjiuniversity.edu.in/SitePages/covid-19.aspx, both for feedback and improvement, and for other organizations to use where they find it useful.

Wipro Media Contact:

Vipin Nair

Wipro Limited

vipin.nair1@wipro.com

About Azim Premji Foundation

Azim Premji Foundation is a philanthropic organization established by Azim Premji, with a vision of contributing towards developing a just, equitable, humane and sustainable society. It has three key dimensions of work, all focused in India: Field work in school education to support the public education system, support to not-for-profit organizations in various domains of work through multi-year financial grants and running the not-for-profit Azim Premji University.

About Wipro Limited

Wipro Limited (NYSE: WIT, BSE: 507685, NSE: WIPRO) is a leading global information technology, consulting and business process services company. We harness the power of cognitive computing, hyper-automation, robotics, cloud, analytics and emerging technologies to help our clients adapt to the digital world and make them successful. A company recognized globally for its comprehensive portfolio of services, strong commitment to sustainability and good corporate citizenship, we have over 175,000 dedicated employees serving clients across six continents. Together, we discover ideas and connect the dots to build a better and a bold new future.

About WEL

Wipro Enterprises has Wipro Consumer Care and Lighting and Wipro Infrastructure Engineering under its umbrella. Wipro Consumer Care & Lighting is a leading FMCG business in Personal Care, Home Care, Lighting & Switches and Office Furniture. Wipro Infrastructure Engineering is a diversified engineering business in the fields of Hydraulics, Water Treatment, Additive Manufacturing, Aerospace and Automation Solutions. In addition, Wipro Enterprises has two joint ventures, Wipro GE Healthcare Private Limited and Wipro Kawasaki Precision Machinery Private Limited.

Forward-looking and Cautionary Statements