Wipro Limited is among the leading global information technology, consulting, and business process service companies. This company harnesses the power of hyper-automation and cognitive computing to aid clients in finding success in the digital world. Wipro utilizes robotics, cloud, analytics, and other emerging technologies to make this goal a reality.

Wipro has been globally recognized for its comprehensive service portfolio. They also are renowned for their commitment to sustainability and good corporate censorship. With more than 220,000 dedicated employees, Wipro serves clients across six continents.

Founded in 1945, Wipro recently delivered its “best ever” quarter with a 35% jump in profits. This highly successful company is renowned for its growth and excellent services, listed as the 32nd largest Indian company in the Fortune India 500.

Wipro is originally based in Bengaluru, India, and now services much of the world. Wipro’s services reach the Americas, Europe, the Pacific, the Middle East, and Africa. Their many industries include insurance, education, aerospace and defense, and much more.

Wipro is a reliable company with hands in countless industries across much of the world. The company has earned a reputation for efficient and effective work in its many fields. While often referred to as an IT services company, Wipro offers many services.

Wipro’s services are widespread, but there are six major services they offer. These services are as follows:

Data, Analytics, and AI

Consulting

Applications

Digital Operations and Platform

Infrastructure Services

Cloud Services

Wipro’s pricing

Wipro’s pricing is dependent on the needs of the client and the services they are purchasing. The company is well-known for having fair and affordable prices for the services provided. Contact Wipro to receive an estimate for services.

Wipro is known for its competitive pricing and the large variety of services offered. This helps put them above their competitors that fail to offer the same service.

Additionally, Wipro’s commitment to sustainability has made them a popular choice in today’s economic climate. Focuses on Operational Risk Management, decarbonization, and energy management help to give them a trustworthy and responsible reputation.

Thierry Delaporte (Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director)

Delaporte serves as the CEO and MD of Wipro Limited as a whole. Working with 27 years of experience, Thierry previously led Capgemini as their COO and a member of the Group Executive Board. Delaporte is the President of the Life Project 4 Youth and is known for his passion for meaningful change.

Rishad Premji (Executive Chairman)

Rishad Premji was recently the Chief Strategy Officer for Wipro. In this role, Premji led the M&A strategy and conceptualized the $250 million start-up investment fund, Wipro Ventures. Premji also serves on the Board of the Azim Premji Foundation, one of India’s largest non-profits.