EAST BRUNSWICK, N.J. & BANGALORE, India--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Wipro Limited (NYSE: WIT, BSE: 507685, NSE: WIPRO), a leading global information technology, consulting and business process services company today announced that it has joined The Linux Foundation as a Silver Member. The Linux Foundation is a nonprofit organization enabling mass innovation through open source technologies.

In addition to supporting Linux, the Foundation also supports associated open source projects such as Open Network Automation Platform (ONAP), Hyperledger, Cloud Native Computing Foundation, Cloud Foundry Foundation and Automotive Grade Linux, among others.

Wipro has identified open source technologies as one of the strategic client themes to drive transformation across the enterprise. Open source is empowering enterprises to foray into new areas such as cognitive computing, blockchain, hyper automation, cloud and analytics. Wipro’s dedicated Open Source Practice and Center of Excellence, coupled with global advisory and consulting capabilities provide end-to end open source solutions and services to enterprises.

Mike Woster, Chief Operations Officer, The Linux Foundation, said, “We are proud to welcome Wipro to The Linux Foundation. Wipro has demonstrated its support to open source through its ongoing contributions to a wide range of open source projects. This membership further reinforces that commitment. We look forward to a strong and continued collaboration for the benefit of the entire open source community.”

Andrew Aitken, General Manager and Global Open Source Practice Leader, Wipro Limited said, "Wipro’s entry to The Linux Foundation, the leading industry trade association in open source, reaffirms our commitment to using, promoting and contributing to open source technologies. Our participation in multiple Linux Foundation supported projects enables us to be a part of the cutting-edge technology transformation occurring because of open source. Further, it demonstrates our expertise in these key technologies to our clients.”

Wipro is enabling internal teams to crowdsource and tap the power of the Topcoder community and leverage a wide set of skills to provide new value services, faster delivery and a global scale. Furthermore, Wipro’s open source solutions helps customers realize their enterprise goals by providing one-of-a-kind industry-specific legacy migration frameworks and methodologies using Wipro IP accelerators and ready-to-use pre-built, integrated, open source stacks and solutions.

About Wipro Limited

Wipro Limited (NYSE: WIT, BSE: 507685, NSE: WIPRO) is a leading global information technology, consulting and business process services company. We harness the power of cognitive computing, hyper-automation, robotics, cloud, analytics and emerging technologies to help our clients adapt to the digital world and make them successful. A company recognized globally for its comprehensive portfolio of services, strong commitment to sustainability and good corporate citizenship, we have over 160,000 dedicated employees serving clients across six continents. Together, we discover ideas and connect the dots to build a better and a bold new future.

Forward-looking and Cautionary Statements