ABC News political anchor George Stephanopoulos is married to actress, producer, and philanthropist Ali Wentworth.

The two met on a blind date and have been married for two decades, sharing two daughters.

Who is Stephanopoulos' wife, Ali Wentworth?

Alexandra "Ali" Wentworth is an American actress, comedian, author, and producer.

Wentworth is most notable for her work in the Fox sketch comedy series In Living Color from 1992 to 1994, where she was known for impressions of famous celebrities.

Her film credits include Jerry Maguire, The Real Blonde, Office Space, The Love Bug and It’s Complicated, and she once worked as a correspondent for The Oprah Winfrey Show.

She formerly hosted The Daily Shot with Ali Wentworth on Yahoo and starred in the TV series Nightcap, which she created and wrote.

She is also a philanthropist and supports the Child Mind Institue, a nonprofit dedicated to transforming the lives of children & families struggling with mental health & learning disorders.

When did Wentworth co-host Live with Kelly and Ryan?

On August 24, 2022, Wentworth co-hosted Live with Kelly and Ryan while Kelly Ripa is still on vacation.

Although the show started off as innocent, it took an awkward turn when the 57-year-old joked about Ryan's IQ level.

During the segment, Ryan, 47, explained how he thought he had spotted a stingray in the bay, but it turned out to be a very large crab.

Still stunned, Ali made an exasperated “wow” sound, before throwing extra shade and joking to Ryan: “I guess there’s no IQ test to be a host of morning television.”

When did Stephanopoulos and Wentworth get married?

Wentworth married George Stephanopoulos in 2001.

The couple shares two children together: Elliott Anastasia Stephanopoulos and Harper Andrea Stephanopoulos.

Wentworth and her husband and children all live in New York City.

Who is George Stephanopoulos and what does he do?

Stephanopoulos is an American television host, political commentator, and former Democratic advisor.

He is the chief anchor and political correspondent for ABC News.

He was one of President Bill Clinton's most trusted aides during his first term. Stephanopoulos' initiatives most notably focused on crime legislation, affirmative action, and a healthcare plan that was spearheaded by Hillary Clinton.

Stephanopoulos grew up in Fall River, Massachusetts, and began his political career in Ohio before he moved to Washington DC.

He is the son of first-generation Greek-American parents.