The Nordic countries are known around the world for their unique history and culture. From a shared Viking past through to their ‘Nordic model’ approach to society, the Nordic region of northern Europe attracts many curious travelers from all over the world.

Despite their similarities, each of the five main Nordic countries—Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden—offers something different to travelers.

Here’s what to expect in each country along with a highlight or two to help you decide on your next Nordic travel destination.

Denmark: Explore Copenhagen by bike

While much of the Nordic region is defined by mountains, glaciers and other natural features, the highest point in Denmark is just 566 feet above sea level. This relatively flat landscape has plenty of other benefits though, most notably turning Denmark into a top cycling destination.

In 2022, the Tour de France comes to Denmark, further highlighting the country’s benefits for cycling. Rush hour in Copenhagen is a sight to behold, with the capital’s cycle lanes busier than the roads.

Touring Copenhagen by bike is a must, but the keen cyclist can explore Denmark’s network of seven national cycling routes. The 510-mile Baltic Sea Route is the pick of the bunch.

Finland: The home of happiness

Beautiful landscapes, easy-to-access nature and a chilled-out way of life are among the reasons Finland consistently ranks first in the World Happiness Report.

Start in the relatively modern capital city Helsinki where Scandinavian and Russian influences mix. It’s a city for architecture and design lovers, with popular stops including the hidden church carved out of the bedrock and the Helsinki design museum.

Of course, no trip to Finland would be complete without a sauna experience. While saunas are popular throughout the region, Finland is the undisputed home. There’s believed to be as many as one sauna for every two of Finland’s 5.5 million residents.

Iceland: Incredible natural landscapes

From active volcanos reshaping the country to epic glaciers, Iceland truly is the home of fire and ice. After 6,000 years of silence, the Geldingadalir volcano burst into life in March 2021 in an eruption that would ultimately last for six months.

ForbesIceland Expects One Million Tourists In 2022

The natural attractions of Iceland—lava fields, hot springs, geysers and blue ice glacier caves—are seemingly endless, yet there’s a new destination that everyone’s talking about in 2022. Lonely Planet named the Westfjords on its ‘best in travel’ list due to recent investment that has made the region more accessible to tourists than ever before.

U.S. travelers now have an easier time of visiting Iceland thanks to the launch of several new routes to/from Reykjavik operated by PLAY, a low-cost airline launched last year that is quickly expanding.

Norway: Fjords and mountains

The Norwegian fjords have previously been named as the world’s best tourist destination, but they are just one of the natural attractions Norway has to offer active travelers.

Home to many protected species of plants, birds and animals, Norway’s 40 mainland national parks are the best place to start. From the blue ice caves of Jostedalsbreen to the wild reindeer and musk ox of Dovrefjell, there’s something for every nature lover.

Historic Bergen is a fantastic choice as a base. Norway’s second biggest city has a fascinating history to uncover, before road, rail and passenger ferry links take you into the heart of the country.

Sweden: Best for city breaks

With a population of more than 10 million, Sweden has the biggest population in the region. You certainly notice that in the capital city Stockholm where there's plenty of things to do to suit all tastes.

High speed rail connects Stockholm with the other big cities Gothenburg and Malmö, enabling tourists to explore them with relative ease.

Of course, there’s far more to Sweden than just its bustling cities. There’s plenty of isolated coastline, lakes and islands throughout the country if you need a break.

Much of this is located close to the cities. For example, Stockholm locals often head out to the much quieter islands of the Stockholm archipelago when they need some downtime.

Other Nordic territories

Also considered part of the Nordic region and worth considering are two constituent countries within the Kingdom of Denmark, the Faroe Islands and Greenland. A trip to either place makes most sense to combine with a visit to Denmark itself given the direct flights from Copenhagen.