Norway, Sweden and Denmark are the only three Scandinavian countries. However, when people think about Scandinavia, they usually assume that other countries, such as Finland or Iceland, are also in that region. All these countries together are referred to as the Nordic countries.

Leaving geographical accuracies behind, e-commerce in the Nordic region is dominated by Norway, Sweden and Denmark (the three Scandinavian countries!) and Finland. Nordic online shoppers are digitally mature, and around 9 in 10 Nordic consumers regularly shop online.

In this guide, we will look at the characteristics of online shoppers in Norway, Sweden, Denmark and Finland to help you make your international expansion successful.

E-commerce revenue in the Nordic countries

The Nordic countries are among the richest countries in the world measured by GDP per capita. In 2021, e-commerce revenue amounted to over 22 billion euros in Sweden. Second in the ranking were Norwegians with a total revenue of about 17 billion euros, followed by the Danish with a total revenue of 14.48 billion euros and the Finnish with a total revenue of about 13 billion euros.

Swedish online shoppers have traditionally been the biggest spenders in the Nordic region and they were the Nordic citizens who spent most on e-commerce purchases in 2021.

Statista Market Outlook forecasts that the total e-commerce revenue in the region will continue to grow thanks to an increasing number of people embracing online shopping and the bigger interest in the traditionally small segments of groceries, home furnishings, dietary supplements, medication and pharmaceuticals.

Top product categories for online purchases

Clothing and footwear is the biggest product category in the Nordic e-commerce market, followed by home electronics and cosmetics.

Food is still a relatively small segment but considering the general change in consumer shopping behaviour during the coronavirus pandemic, which saw an increasing number of people shopping for groceries online, this segment is expected to grow in the future.

Top product categories online in the Nordics in 2021

Image source

Mobile methods of payment and contactless technology are also growing fast. The use of smartphones is widespread, and two in ten Danes used mobile payments for their online shopping in 2021 according to Statista Market Outlook.

Delivery and returns

Free delivery as well as free returns are considered essential by many online shoppers in the Nordic countries.

The vast majority of Nordic consumers prefer to have their goods delivered to their homes, with the exception of Finland, where most consumers are happy to collect their purchases from a parcel locker or a distribution hub.

It is also worth mentioning that returns are quite common in the Nordic region, so it is important to describe your products accurately to minimize returns.

Expected trust signals

Entering the e-commerce market in the Nordic region can be challenging. Not trusting foreign websites and customer service not being offered in their native language are two big reasons for Nordic consumers not to shop at foreign web shops. Fortunately, e-commerce retailers can overcome these barriers by meeting the expectations of online shoppers.

Communication in their native language

Even though Scandinavian consumers are able to understand and navigate a website in English-language, they prefer to make purchases in their own language. If a website is in the language of the consumer, it will look and feel more familiar, increasing the trust in the e-retailer.

It is therefore extremely important to translate e-commerce websites and marketplaces into the native language of each country you are selling to, taking into account elements such as currencies and sizing that also may require localisation.

Simply put, consumers are less likely to shop on an e-commerce site that is available only in English. They will choose their native language over English on a website if given the choice.

Paola Manca, Founder & Senior Consultant at Ampere Nordic

Reviews

Online shoppers in the Nordic region love scrolling through product reviews before making a final decision. Customer reviews have become central to the online shopping experience because they help to build trust and drive sales.

According to Trustpilot, over 70% of shoppers say they trust online reviews as much as personal recommendations. This is why product reviews together with other elements such as FAQs and product descriptions are among the key aspects you need to localise on an e-commerce site.