Watch the trailer

Pick of Flicks reviews Wild Target

If you're an actor hired to play an assassin, there's one prop you really ought to know how to handle. "It turned out that I'm not one of God's natural gunmen," says Bill Nighy, the venerable scene-stealer of Love Actually, Shaun of the Dead and other modern British comedy classics, of his unlikely role in Wild Target.

"I think I wobbled the gun about too much in the beginning."

The actor took solace from a story he heard about his "great hero", as Nighy describes Christopher Walken. "Somebody told me that he invented – or, at least, he made popular and famous – the 'holding the gun sideways at arm's length' method," Nighy says.

"Apparently he was quoted as saying the reason that he holds it so far away is because he doesn't like guns."

Despite his own issues, Nighy acquits himself well in Jonathan Lynn's remake of the 1993 French film Cible Emouvante, which was also known as Wild Target. He plays Victor, a middle-aged assassin who takes the term "lone gunman" to every extreme.

When a rare attraction blossoms between Victor and a beautiful woman, Rose (Emily Blunt), he is somewhat conflicted as Rose is a thief who has conned a very bad man out of thousands of pounds and this bad man has hired Victor to kill her.

As a good old-fashioned caper flick develops, a colourful supporting cast comes together around the pair, from the young stoner in whom Victor sees hitman potential and who unwittingly joins them (played by Rupert Grint of the Harry Potter films), to the series of eccentric replacement assassins in their pursuit.

The "hitman comedy" is tricky territory, given people who kill for a living have some seriously dark issues, but that didn't deter Nighy.

"I thought the script explained itself pretty clearly," he says. "It was daft enough, you know? I'm not high on anybody's list for playing assassins, I don't think, but to play a kind of hopefully amusing one didn't daunt me too much.

"What did daunt me was Jean Rochefort. I've never seen the original French film [in which Rochefort played the role of Victor] but in terms of comedy, there is no deader pan than Jean Rochefort's deadpan."

Despite its Gallic origins, the Wild Target remake has a very English feel, similar to – if not quite in the same league as – A Fish Called Wanda. It's the kind of film that could play pretty much anywhere and provide something for everybody, be that some good laughs, a sweet love story or a bunch of assassins trying to kill each other.

"I like things that have a broad appeal, I really do," Nighy says. "I never got over the idea that, you know, you play in Australia or in France or in America or wherever. Particularly if you're getting laughs.

"I remember the first time I was in a movie and a producer phoned up and said, 'It played really well in France . . . they laughed in France.' I had this sort of stupidly primitive thrill that I'd probably not known when they were laughing. You know, I was probably doing the shopping."

At 60, Nighy is as much enamoured with his craft as ever, whether it's for the big screen, TV or stage. Ever since the 1998 film about a rock band trying to make a comeback, Still Crazy, tapped his previously little-known aptitude for comedy, he has become a bona fide star.

"Because I have, generally, a negative turn of mind, I always used to think that I couldn't do [comedy] because I have a sort of f---ed-up way of thinking about it.

"And then to do jokes live, it's endlessly fascinating. It never gets old. People say, 'Don't you get bored doing the show every night?' No, I don't. I can't get enough of it. It's addictive: you know, you pull the trigger and they laugh."

Now he has (finally) become accustomed to pulling other kinds of triggers, will we see another side to Bill Nighy? Have the action-hero roles been flooding in?

"Yeah, quite," he says with a dignified chuckle. "Yes, thank you, George, it's kind of you to speculate in that way but I doubt it, somehow. But you never know."