Oliver Hermanus’ new film Living, scripted by Nobel Prize-winning author Kazuo Ishiguro, presents a different type of screen hero—a dying civil servant, exquisitely played by Bill Nighy, searching for meaning in what remains of his life. Despite its potentially grim subject matter, Living is one of the year’s major films, generating awards buzz since warm receptions at Sundance (where Isaac Feldberg declared it one of the best of the fest in Letterboxd’s round-up) and at the London Film Festival. Nighy recently tied with Cate Blanchett for her work in TÁR as the Los Angeles Film Critics Association’s picks for the best leading performance of the year.

Living follows Nighy’s Mr. Williams as he is diagnosed with a terminal illness, consequently spiraling into existential despair. After unsuccessful attempts to be a hedonist and connect with his family, he eventually finds fulfillment by building a children’s playground in a deprived East London neighborhood.

The film is closely based on Akira Kurosawa’s 1952 classic Ikiru (translated as “To Live”). Beloved by cineastes worldwide, Ikiru tied for 72nd place on Sight & Sound’s 2022 directors’ list of the greatest films of all time—not too shabby, and a potentially intimidating landmark of cinema to make your own version.

Kurosawa’s film was also a favorite of the young Kazuo Ishiguro. “As a Japanese kid growing up in England in the 1950s, it was unusual to see a Japanese movie, so Ikiru was very important to me,” he says. “When I became a novelist, the vision of the film became fundamental to my writing. It says you can remain who you are, and do something with the hand that life has dealt you, and make it something wonderful.”

Determined to bring Ikiru to the Instagram generation, Ishiguro pitched the idea for a remake to producers Stephen Woolley and Elizabeth Karlsen. Collectively, they set their sights on Nighy for Mr. Williams, his first film role since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Four years later, Nighy is sitting in a hotel suite, impeccably dressed in a blue Savile Row suit, promoting Living ahead of its US release. “I’m beyond fortunate,” he purrs. “This is the precise film we need right now. You know you’re in a hit when you get messages from people you haven’t heard from for 25 years, or people in the street, or cab drivers, who’ve all seen it in a cinema. It’s wonderful.”

Enter Oliver Hermanus, the 39-year-old South African director of Moffie and Beauty, two harrowing portraits of closeted gay men struggling to survive in violently homophobic cultures. Living is Hermanos’ first project made outside South Africa, and while the subject matter feels worlds away from his previous work, they all deal with men in states of profound isolation.

“If I have a primary character I’m focused on, it’s easier for me,” he says. “I have a photographic background so I think in terms of portraiture. It’s an interesting throughline. I’m developing a very strange collection of leading men.”

Ishiguro put Hermanus on a diet of mid-century British films, including The Lady Vanishes, Kind Hearts and Coronets, and Powell and Pressburger’s A Canterbury Tale. As the director puts it, “He wanted me to get a sense of the way people spoke and moved in the 1950s, which was very helpful. There was a lot to learn about class and accents. The gender and class politics of the film are very interesting to me, especially how the [working-class] women from East London are treated.”

Hermanus and his team pull off a tricky balancing act, immersing audiences in a very familiar cinematic Britishness, while never wallowing in nostalgia. “I said to everyone at the beginning: ‘It can’t be a Hallmark card.’ Bill and I were very much on the same page. Everything had to have an emotional restraint. Even in the final scene, Bill had just a hint of a smile, not gushing satisfaction. We didn’t go too full-throttle with the sentiment.”

A graduate of the London Film School, the director also brought his own cinematic obsessions to the project. “I have the color control of my favorite Hitchcocks—North by Northwest, Rear Window, Vertigo, Rope—the framing aspirations of Metropolis, the music references of Douglas Sirk’s melodramas, and the fantasy opening title sequences of East of Eden.”

Much of the pleasure in watching Living comes from its unfashionably stately pace. Hermanus, Ramsay, and editor Chris Wyatt keep things slow and focused, with extensive use of long close-ups, giving the actors time to react naturally on screen. The effect is perversely energizing, sensitizing audiences to every nuance of Mr. Williams’ awakening.

Hermanus’ trust in his actors pays off. Nighy offers a masterclass in old-school stagecraft, dialing down his natural charisma to play a man asleep in his life, his spine hunched into a bass clef and a faltering voice croaking like a rusty squeeze-box. “Beautiful and poignant. A career-best,” writes Letterboxd member Alex Koutavas. Audrello echoes the sentiment, calling it “a wonderful, reserved and powerful performance”. JoJo must be quite pleased with the LAFCA, as their review makes a plea to the Academy: “Bill Bill Bill Bill Bill Nighy for Best Actor.”

Nighy purses his lips politely at suggestions he’s “transformed” into the role. “It’s nothing fancy. It’s the result of a lot of thinking, and going over and over the lines. Mr. Williams is locked up. He’s institutionalized in grief, given that he’s lost his wife at an early stage. His personality and his voice have formed around that loss. He’s reluctant to engage with the world because it’s disappointed him profoundly. He’s also a procrastinator, which is very corrosive, so I figured his voice would struggle to get out.”

The actor admits there’s something appealing about the English stiff upper lip. “I was interested in that style of conduct—that bizarre degree of restraint that people required of themselves in those days. Even though it’s deeply unhealthy and repressed and suppressed, somehow there’s an element of heroism.”

Though Living is undoubtedly a showcase for its leading man, Ishiguro’s screenplay makes room for some vivid supporting roles. Tom Burke is delicious as a scoundrel who introduces Mr. Williams to pinball machines, strip clubs, and alcohol poisoning, and Patsy Ferran has some wonderful moments as Williams’ grasping daughter-in-law. Enricioni was quite taken with Ferran, noting in their Letterboxd review, “never have I seen someone slice and serve a shepherd’s pie with such pure passive aggression.”

The film’s breakout star is Aimee Lou Wood, the BAFTA-winning actress from Netflix series Sex Education. She plays Margaret, an office worker who dazzles Mr. Williams with her appetite for life. Ishiguro’s screenplay neatly side-steps cinematic clichés about young women, giving Margaret agency and a complex inner life.

“The part was such a gift,” Wood enthuses. “Margaret is so self-assured and knows what she wants. When I read the script, I was waiting nervously for the reveal that Mr. Williams was in love with her. Instead, it was a genuine platonic connection. Platonic relationships are just as important as romantic ones, and aren’t celebrated enough.”

Despite acting opposite a titan of the screen, Wood holds her own effortlessly against Nighy. Working together was, she says, “everything you would want it to be and more. He surpasses all expectations, which is amazing, given that my expectations were pretty bloody high. To see all his sparkle and calm and magic just shrink—it was really heartbreaking.”

Audience sympathy for Living will rise and fall on the film’s final act, where Mr. Williams shifts into action, doggedly pursuing the construction of his playground. Though the scenes are undeniably melodramatic, the filmmakers worked hard to stop things from slipping into Forrest Gump bathos.

“We coined it as being ‘the right size’,” Hermanus explains. “Mr. Williams finds a sweet spot between anxiety and self-confidence, where he’s able to cut through things and be present and live. Just knowing that he’s arrived at that spot provides a real sense of satisfaction.”

Mr. Williams’ story is, Ishiguro says, “subtly and importantly different” to similarly-themed films about moral redemption. “In A Christmas Carol and It’s a Wonderful Life, the protagonists completely change. That’s okay in a fantasy setting, but it isn’t really a choice for most people. We can’t just flip overnight and turn into someone else. You are who you are by a certain age, and life isn’t going to open doors for you if you suddenly want to change.”

“You’ve also got to be lucky,” he continues. “Mr. Williams is part of a generation that transformed Britain and created a welfare state, so he’s contributing to the greater good. He’s in the right place at the right time. By comparison, Stevens [the butler in The Remains of the Day] works for a Nazi sympathizer, so his little achievement isn’t as fulfilling.”

Wood agrees, citing Living along with It’s a Wonderful Life and Everything Everywhere All at Once as her favorite types of stories. “There are infinite possibilities for who you could be, but who you are is perfect and who you should be. I love any film that conveys that message.”

“Be yourself,” Oscar Wilde once quipped, “everyone else is taken.” A line of sparkling artifice that paradoxically turns out to be true. The same is true of Living, a gift for audiences who relish a quiet thoughtful film about the importance of being your own remarkable self.