832 relations: *Lisp, A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, Accent kernel, ACiD Productions, ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest, ACT-R, Adelaide, Advanced Academy of Georgia, Agent-based model, AIBO, Alan Budd, Alan Kay, Alan Perlis, Alan Turing, Albert Brooks, Albert Goldman, Aleph kernel, Alexander Downer, Alfred Schild, ALGOL 68, Alicia de Larrocha, Allegheny College, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, Allen Newell, Alpha Kappa Delta Phi, Alpha Rho Chi, AMA Computer University, American Conservatory Theater, American Institute of Architecture Students, American Mathematics Competitions, American Sociological Association, Ames Research Center, Amortized analysis, AMosaic, André Heinz, Andrew Appel, Andrew B. Whinston, Andrew Carnegie, Andrew File System, Andrew Mellon, Andrew Plotkin, Andrew Project, Andy Bechtolsheim, Andy Warhol, Anita Borg, Anna Deavere Smith, Anna University, Annette Baier, Anthony Daniels, Anti-phishing software, ..., Apollo Education Group, Architecture description language, Architecture tradeoff analysis method, Aron Ralston, Art museum, ArtGardens of Pittsburgh, Arthur Kennedy, Artificial intelligence, ASIMO, Aspinwall, Pennsylvania, Association for Computing Machinery, Asteroid impact avoidance, Audacity (audio editor), Autonomous car, Avie Tevanian, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Barbara Ehrenreich, Barbara Feldon, Barbara Schwartz (artist), Beam search, Beaux-Arts architecture, Ben Iden Payne, Benjamin C. Pierce, Benny Benack, Berkeley DB, Bernard Chazelle, Bernard Cohen (physicist), Bertil Näslund, Beta Theta Pi, Big Trak, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Bill Cosby, Bill Mitchell (automobile designer), Billy Price (singer), Binary decision diagram, BitTorrent, Blackgate Penitentiary, BLISS, Bob Barr, Bob Braden, Bob Sproull, Bodoni, Boltzmann machine, Booz Allen Hamilton, Bowdoin College, Branch and bound, Bruce Jay Nelson, Bud Yorkin, Business action on climate change, Business school, C. Daniel Mote Jr., C.mmp, Campus network, Capability Maturity Model, Capability Maturity Model Integration, Capability-based security, Cardinal (color), Carl Betz, Carnegie, Carnegie Institute, Carnegie Mellon College of Engineering, Carnegie Mellon College of Fine Arts, Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon School of Drama, Carnegie Mellon Silicon Valley, Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar, Carnegie Science Center, Carrier current, Case Western Reserve University, Cèilidh, Centenarian, Centennial Challenges, Charles E. Leiserson, Charles Erwin Wilson, Charles Forgy, Charles Geschke, Charles Ludlam, Charles W. Upton, Charlie White (artist), Cherry Jones, Chip Ganassi, ChipTest, Christopher Reeve, Church of Scientology, Churchill Scholarship, CIT, Clarence Zener, Claude Shannon, Claytronics, Clifford Shull, Clinton Davisson, CMU, CMU Common Lisp, Coda (file system), Cognitive architecture, Cognitive tutor, College humor magazines, College of Engineering, Guindy, Columbia Graduate School of Architecture, Planning and Preservation, Columbia, Maryland, Common Lisp, Commons club, Communication during the September 11 attacks, Computer chess, Computer emergency response team, Computer poker player, Computerworld Smithsonian Award, Concealed carry in the United States, Continuous track, Convocation, Cooperative education, Cordelia Scaife May, Costas Azariadis, Creepshow, CyberCash, Cyrus IMAP server, Dagmara Domińczyk, Dale T. Mortensen, Dan Heisman, Dana Scott, Daniel Sleator, DARPA Grand Challenge, Daryl Bem, Data (Star Trek), Data compression, Dave Haynie, David J. Farber, David Lander, David Larsen, David Parnas, David Patterson (computer scientist), David S. Touretzky, Davis Grubb, Dawn of the Dead (1978 film), Decision support system, DECstation, Deep Blue (chess computer), Deep Thought (chess computer), Deliberative opinion poll, Demand response, Demoscene, Dieselboy, Dietrich, Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences, Digital Games Research Association, Distributed Computing Environment, Doctorate, Doom (1993 video game), Douglas Lenat, Dragon Runner, Draize test, DSSC, Dylan (programming language), E. L. Konigsburg, Earl Wild, Edgar Mitchell, Edward C. Prescott, Edward Feigenbaum, Edward Fredkin, Edward J. Green, Edward Jenner, Edwin H. Land, Eindhoven University of Technology, Elaine de Kooning, Elizabeth Hartman, Ellen Steiber, Emoticon, Empathy gap, Energy storage, Eric Schmidt, Eric von Hippel, ESPCI Paris, Esteban (musician), Eta Kappa Nu, Ethan Hawke, Ethics, Eunice Norton, Eurisko, EZ Word, Façade (video game), Feed forward (control), Feng-hsiung Hsu, Festival Speech Synthesis System, Fight song, Final (Java), Fine art, Finn E. Kydland, Flash memory, Flashdance, Flying Dog Brewery, Food miles, Fort Pitt Tunnel, Fox Sports Radio, Francesca James, Franco Modigliani, Frank Cunimondo, Frank Gorshin, Fred Cohen, Frederic Goudy, Frederick Seitz, Freeform (radio format), Friendship (Pittsburgh), FurryMUCK, Future Combat Systems, Gabriel Hawawini, Gabriel Macht, Galaxy, Garamond, Garth Gibson, Gaussian (software), Geoffrey Hinton, George A. Romero, George Armitage Miller, George Fix, George Maciunas, George Pake, George Peppard, George Sotter, George Trumbull Ladd, Glenn Reynolds, GNU Hurd, GNU Mach, Godspell, Gold standard, Google, Google Earth, Gordon Bell, Gotham City, Graduate school, Guatemala City, Guy L. Steele Jr., Guyford Stever, H. T. Kung, Hacker culture, Haitian Creole, Hajime Sorayama, HAL 9000, Halil Mete Soner, Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, Han van Meegeren, Hans Berliner, Hans Moravec, Haptic technology, Hard disk drive, Harry Kendall Thaw, Heinz College, Henk Barendregt, Henry Giroux, Herb Gardner, Herb Sendek, Herbert A. Simon, Hierarchy, High-bandwidth Digital Content Protection, Hill District (Pittsburgh), Hill Street Blues, His Girl Friday, History of artificial intelligence, History of Pennsylvania, History of Pittsburgh, HiTech, Honus Wagner, Howard Da Silva, Hub (bassist), Hypertext, Ico, Identity theft, IDL specification language, Idlewild and Soak Zone, Igor Ansoff, Immaculate Reception, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Industrial and organizational psychology, Industrial design, Information management, Information privacy, Information Processing Language, Information security, Informedia Digital Library, Institute of technology, Instituto Superior Técnico, Instructional design, Intel, Interaction design, Interactive kiosk, Interactive storytelling, InterMezzo (file system), Internet chess server, Internist-I, IPOPT, Ivan Sutherland, IWarp, Jack Goldman, Jack Klugman, Jairam Ramesh, James Cromwell, James G. March, James Gosling, James McClelland (psychologist), James Warhola, Jamie Zawinski, Jan Mossin, Jared Cohon, Jaron Lanier, Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber, Jeannine Savard, Jeff Bezos, Jefferson Hills, Pennsylvania, Jeffrey Mylett, Jerome Apt, Jeromy Carriere, Jill Farren Phelps, Joe Manganiello, Johannes Kepler, John Brashear, John C. Reynolds, John Clive Ward, John Currin, John Forbes Nash Jr., John H. Johnson, John Harbison, John Heinz, John L. Hall, John Lasseter, John Lighton Synge, John Mark Ockerbloom, John Muth, John Ousterhout, John Pasquin, John Patrick Crecine, John Pople, John Tarnoff, John Wells (filmmaker), John White Alexander, John-Michael Tebelak, Johnny Costa, Jon Strauss, Jonathan Borofsky, Jonathan Borwein, Jonathan I. Schwartz, Jonathan Shewchuk, Jonathan Zittrain, José Leite Lopes, Josh Groban, Joshua Schachter, Judith Light, Judith Resnik, Julius Baker, July 1981, K&L Gates, Kai-Fu Lee, KAIST, Kalman J. Cohen, Kappa Alpha Theta, Karen Lynn Gorney, Katie Finneran, Keith Uncapher, Ken Goldberg, Kenneth Johnson (producer), Kevin Warwick, Keystroke-level model, Kigali, Kim Polese, King Mongkut's Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, Kirkendall effect, Klaatu barada nikto, Kurt Vonnegut, Larry Giammo, Laura Scales, Lauren Lane, Lauri Vaska, Laverne & Shirley, League of American Bicyclists, Legion (software), Lenna, Lenore Blum, Leo Robin, Leonardo Balada, Leroy Jenkins (jazz musician), LisaGay Hamilton, List of acronyms: C, List of Apollo astronauts, List of artificial intelligence projects, List of Brown University people, List of business schools in the United States, List of campus radio stations, List of Carnegie Mellon University people, List of college mascots in the United States, List of college team nicknames in the United States, List of colleges and universities in Pennsylvania, List of colleges and universities in the United States by endowment, List of colleges and universities named after people, List of Cornell University alumni, List of digital library projects, List of educational programming languages, List of engineering schools, List of file systems, List of free and open-source software packages, List of Guggenheim Fellowships awarded in 1970, List of Guggenheim Fellowships awarded in 1978, List of Indian Americans, List of Iranian Americans, List of leaders of universities and colleges in the United States, List of mottos, List of Nobel laureates by university affiliation, List of office suites, List of operating systems, List of people from Chennai, List of people from Pittsburgh, List of philanthropists, List of political scientists, List of Princeton University people, List of public lecture series, List of Serbs, List of speeches, List of Stanford University people, List of Swarthmore College people, List of Tamil people, List of Tau Beta Pi chapters, List of United States defense contractors, List of University of California, Berkeley alumni, List of University of California, Berkeley faculty, List of University of California, Santa Barbara alumni, List of University of Georgia people, List of University of Minnesota people, List of University of Pennsylvania people, List of University of Toronto people, Local food, Loggia, Logical framework, Lou Scheimer, Louis Monier, Ludics, Lustre (file system), Lycos, Mach (kernel), Mach-O, MacMach, MacOS, Mahadev Satyanarayanan, Maksimilijan Vanka, Manil Suri, Manuel Blum, Marc Acito, Marc Ewing, Marcel Boyer, Mariette Hartley, Marion Bauer, Mark Canepa, Mark Roosevelt, Marko Petkovšek, Markup language, Martin O'Malley, Mary Elizabeth Price, Marymount Manhattan College, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Mathematical Olympiad Program, Matriculation, Matt Bomer, Matthias de l'Obel, Megan Hilty, Mellon, Mellon College of Science, Mellon Institute of Industrial Research, Memtest86, Mental Models, Mentat (computing), Merton Miller, Michael Chabon, Michael Keaton, Michael McKean, Michael McMillian, Michael O. Rabin, Michael Tucker (actor), Michael Witbrock, Michel Adanson, Michigan Terminal System, Micropayment, Microsoft Research, Microsoft SideWinder, Mid-Atlantic accent, Mike Rann, Military robot, Million Book Project, Ming-Na Wen, MkLinux, Modigliani–Miller theorem, Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education, Montgomery Blair High School, Morris worm, Motorola 88000, Moza bint Nasser, Mr. Belvedere, Mr. Yuk, Mushroom Kingdom, Nancy Marchand, Nanyang Technological University, Nathaniel Borenstein, National Association of Schools of Art and Design, National LambdaRail, National Pacemaker Awards, National Science Foundation Network, NCAA Men's Tennis Championship, Neats and scruffies, NESL, Net neutrality, Netrek, New University of Lisbon, Newman Centers, NeXT, Nicole DeHuff, Night of the Living Dead, Nomad rover, Northeastern United States, Northwestern University, Norwegian School of Economics, Novice, Oakland (Pittsburgh), Oaklisp, Object Management Group, Okey L. Patteson, Oliver E. Williamson, Omicron Delta Epsilon, Online community, Open Software Foundation, Open Student Television Network, OpenAFS, OPS5, Oratory of Saint Philip Neri, Otto Stern, Out of This Furnace, P3P, Pancake sorting, Parallel algorithm, Parallel computing, Password cracking, Patricia Tallman, Patrick Wilson (American actor), Paul Flory, Paul H. O'Neill, Paul Lauterbur, Paul Mellon, Paul Reubens, PDP-10, PDP-11, PDP-9, Pedestrian scramble, Penn Township, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, Per Brinch Hansen, Perpendicular recording, PERQ, Personal software process, Peter Chen, Peter Corroon, Phi Eta Sigma, Phil Karn, Philip Morrison, Philip Wadler, Philosophy, Politics and Economics, Pippin (musical), Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh International Airport, Pittsburgh Panthers, Pittsburgh Theological Seminary, Pixar, Polish Academy of Sciences, Political correctness, Pomona College, Port Authority of Allegheny County, PPG Place, Pratt Institute, Premier Election Solutions, Presidents' Athletic Conference, Privacy policy, Project Athena, Project Gutenberg, Project management software, Psychological Review, Public university, Purity test, Puzzlehunt, R. A. McConnell, Raj Reddy, Raoul Bott, Rapid serial visual presentation, Ratan Tata, Ravi Jagannathan, Ray Kurzweil, Raymond Kaskey, Red Hat, Regional accents of English, René Auberjonois, Renée Elise Goldsberry, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Research I university, Rete algorithm, Richard B. Mellon, Richard Florida, Richard Forno, Richard Mellon Scaife, Richard Rashid, Richard Sanders (actor), Richard Turner (software), Richard Wallace (scientist), Rick Levin, Rishi Valley School, RIT (disambiguation), Rita Dove, Rob Marshall, Robber baron (industrialist), Robert Cummings, Robert E. Forsythe, Robert Foxworth, Robert H. Dennard, Robert Harper (computer scientist), Robert Lucas Jr., Robert Middleton, Robert Parr, Robert S. Harris, Robert W. Floyd, Robert Watson (computer scientist), Robin Thomas, Robocrane, Robot Hall of Fame, Robotics Institute, Rodney Brooks, Roger Schank, Rolf Pfeifer, Romare Bearden, Rootkit, Royal Radar Establishment, Rudolf Carnap, Rules of Go, Saint Ignatius High School (Cleveland), Sally Jessy Raphael, Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of Management, Sandstorm (vehicle), Sasin Graduate Institute of Business Administration of Chulalongkorn University, Saxonburg, Pennsylvania, Süleyman Başak, Schenley Park, Scientific Data Systems, Scion xB, Scotia, New York, Scott Draves, Scott Fahlman, Scottish Terrier, Script kiddie, Self-surgery, Semiconductor Research Corporation, September 19, Serial Experiments Lain, Service design, Service provider interface, Shafi Goldwasser, Shakey the robot, Shari Belafonte, Siemens Competition, Sigma Alpha Iota, Simple Authentication and Security Layer, Singapore Management University, Single transferable vote, Small-world experiment, Smiley, Snakebot, Soar (cognitive architecture), Social and Decision Sciences (Carnegie Mellon University), Software architecture, Software Engineering Institute, Software house, Solar Decathlon, Sonia Manzano, South Side (Pittsburgh), Spaced repetition, Species Plantarum, Speech recognition, Springbrook High School, Sprouts (game), Squirrel Hill (Pittsburgh), Sri Lanka, Stan Franklin, Stan Zin, Stephanie Kwolek, Stephen Fienberg, Stephen Schwartz (composer), Steven Bochco, Steven Rudich, Stevens Institute of Technology, Stuart Card, Student Environmental Action Coalition, Sugar Bowl, Sun Yat-sen University, Sutton Foster, Sverre Fehn, Swisshelm Park (Pittsburgh), Synchrocyclotron, System programming language, Tamara Tunie, Tartan, Tata Consultancy Services, Tcsh, Technology, Ted Danson, Ted Selker, Temple Grandin, TeraGrid, Teresa Heinz, Texas hold 'em, The Colophon, A Book Collectors' Quarterly, The Day the Earth Stood Still, The Hobbit, The Tartan, Theta Tau, Thistle, Thomas Delahanty, Tianjin University, Timeline of programming languages, Tom Keene (actor), Tom Savini, Tonya Pinkins, Total Information Awareness, TR35, Tru64 UNIX, Turing Award, Twelf, U.S. Steel Tower, Uber, Underwood Dudley, Unibus, University Athletic Association, University of Madeira, University of Pittsburgh, University of Zambia, Unreal Tournament, USS Pennsylvania (ACR-4), Val Logsdon Fitch, Van Dyke Parks, Vartan Gregorian, Vasili Kuznetsov (politician), Vaughn Monroe, VAX, Vertical integration, Victorville, California, Vinod Khosla, Vivisimo, Vocational school, VU University Amsterdam, Wahhabism, Walter F. Tichy, Walter Kohn, Wassily Leontief, Watts Humphrey, Wearable computer, Western Pennsylvania, Why the lucky stiff, Wi-Fi, Will Bailey, Willard Harrison Bennett, William Atherton, William Eythe, William Frederick Meggers, William J. G. Turner, William Lowell Putnam Mathematical Competition, William Sleator, William Winkenwerder Jr., William Wulf, Women in computing, Workplace OS, Worse is better, WRCT, X Window System, Xerox Alto, XNU, Yankee Stadium (1923), Yinz, Yippy, Yun Wang, Zephyr (protocol), Zoë (robot), ZOG (hypertext), 1939 in sports, 3D printing. Expand index (782 more) » « Shrink index

*Lisp

The *Lisp (aka StarLisp) programming language was conceived of in 1985 by Cliff Lasser and Steve Omohundro (employees of the Thinking Machines Corporation) as a way of providing an efficient yet high-level language for programming the nascent Connection Machine.

See Carnegie Mellon University and *Lisp

A. P. J. Abdul Kalam

Avul Pakir Jainulabdeen Abdul Kalam (15 October 1931 – 27 July 2015) was an Indian scientist who served as the 11th President of India from 2002 to 2007. He was born and raised in Rameswaram, Tamil Nadu and studied physics and aerospace engineering. He spent the next four decades as a scientist and science administrator, mainly at the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) and Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and was intimately involved in India's civilian space programme and military missile development efforts. He thus came to be known as the Missile Man of India for his work on the development of ballistic missile and launch vehicle technology. He also played a pivotal organisational, technical, and political role in India's Pokhran-II nuclear tests in 1998, the first since the original nuclear test by India in 1974. Kalam was elected as the 11th President of India in 2002 with the support of both the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party and the then-opposition Indian National Congress. Widely referred to as the "People's President," he returned to his civilian life of education, writing and public service after a single term. He was a recipient of several prestigious awards, including the Bharat Ratna, India's highest civilian honour. While delivering a lecture at the Indian Institute of Management Shillong, Kalam collapsed and died from an apparent cardiac arrest on 27 July 2015, aged 83. Thousands including national-level dignitaries attended the funeral ceremony held in his hometown of Rameshwaram, where he was buried with full state honours.

See Carnegie Mellon University and A. P. J. Abdul Kalam

Accent kernel

Accent was an operating system kernel developed at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU).

See Carnegie Mellon University and Accent kernel

ACiD Productions

ACiD Productions (ACiD) is a digital art group.

See Carnegie Mellon University and ACiD Productions

ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest

ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest (abbreviated as ICPC or acmICPC) is an annual multi-tiered competitive programming competition among the universities of world.

See Carnegie Mellon University and ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest

ACT-R

ACT-R (pronounced /ˌækt ˈɑr/; short for "Adaptive Control of Thought—Rational") is a cognitive architecture mainly developed by John Robert Anderson at Carnegie Mellon University.

See Carnegie Mellon University and ACT-R

Adelaide

Adelaide is the capital city of the state of South Australia, and the fifth-most populous city of Australia.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Adelaide

Advanced Academy of Georgia

The Advanced Academy of Georgia was an early college entrance program at the University of West Georgia in Carrollton, Georgia.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Advanced Academy of Georgia

Agent-based model

An agent-based model (ABM) is a class of computational models for simulating the actions and interactions of autonomous agents (both individual or collective entities such as organizations or groups) with a view to assessing their effects on the system as a whole.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Agent-based model

AIBO

AIBO (stylized aibo, Artificial Intelligence Robot, homonymous with, "pal" or "partner" in Japanese) is a series of robotic pets designed and manufactured by Sony.

See Carnegie Mellon University and AIBO

Alan Budd

Sir Alan Peter Budd (born 16 November 1937) is a prominent British economist, who was a founding member of the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) in 1997.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Alan Budd

Alan Kay

Alan Curtis Kay (born May 17, 1940 published by the Association for Computing Machinery 2012) is an American computer scientist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Alan Kay

Alan Perlis

Alan Jay Perlis (April 1, 1922 – February 7, 1990) was an American computer scientist and professor at Purdue University, Carnegie Mellon University and Yale University.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Alan Perlis

Alan Turing

Alan Mathison Turing (23 June 1912 – 7 June 1954) was an English computer scientist, mathematician, logician, cryptanalyst, philosopher, and theoretical biologist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Alan Turing

Albert Brooks

Albert Lawrence Brooks (born Einstein; July 22, 1947) is an American actor, comedian, writer, and director.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Albert Brooks

Albert Goldman

Albert Harry Goldman (April 15, 1927 – March 28, 1994) was an American academic and author.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Albert Goldman

Aleph kernel

Aleph is a discontinued operating system kernel developed at the University of Rochester as part of their RIG project in 1975.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Aleph kernel

Alexander Downer

Alexander John Gosse Downer AC (born 9 September 1951) is a former Australian politician and diplomat who was leader of the Liberal Party from 1994 to 1995, Minister for Foreign Affairs from 1996 to 2007, and High Commissioner to the United Kingdom from 2014 to 2018.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Alexander Downer

Alfred Schild

Alfred Schild (September 7, 1921 &ndash; May 24, 1977) was a leading German-American physicist, well known for his contributions to the Golden age of general relativity (1960–1975).

See Carnegie Mellon University and Alfred Schild

ALGOL 68

ALGOL 68 (short for Algorithmic Language 1968) is an imperative computer programming language that was conceived as a successor to the ALGOL 60 programming language, designed with the goal of a much wider scope of application and more rigorously defined syntax and semantics.

See Carnegie Mellon University and ALGOL 68

Alicia de Larrocha

Alicia de Larrocha y de la Calle (23 May 192325 September 2009) was a Spanish pianist and composer.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Alicia de Larrocha

Allegheny College

Allegheny College is a private, coeducational liberal arts college in northwestern Pennsylvania in the town of Meadville, approximately 35 miles (56 km) south of Erie.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Allegheny College

Allegheny County, Pennsylvania

Allegheny County is a county in the southwest of the U.S. state of Pennsylvania.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Allegheny County, Pennsylvania

Allen Newell

Allen Newell (March 19, 1927 &ndash; July 19, 1992) was a researcher in computer science and cognitive psychology at the RAND Corporation and at Carnegie Mellon University’s School of Computer Science, Tepper School of Business, and Department of Psychology.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Allen Newell

Alpha Kappa Delta Phi

alpha Kappa Delta Phi (αΚΔΦ) (also known as aKDPhi) is an Asian-interest sorority founded at the University of California, Berkeley.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Alpha Kappa Delta Phi

Alpha Rho Chi

Alpha Rho Chi (ΑΡΧ) is a professional co-educational college fraternity for students studying architecture and related professions.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Alpha Rho Chi

AMA Computer University

AMA Computer University (Filipino: Pamantasang Pangkompyuter ng AMA), using the trade name AMA University (Filipino: Pamantasan ng AMA), is the first ICT university in the Philippines and in Asia.

See Carnegie Mellon University and AMA Computer University

American Conservatory Theater

The American Conservatory Theater (A.C.T.) is a large non-profit theater company in San Francisco, California, that offers both classical and contemporary theater productions, as well as being an acting school.

See Carnegie Mellon University and American Conservatory Theater

American Institute of Architecture Students

The American Institute of Architecture Students (AIAS) is an independent, nonprofit, student-run organization dedicated to providing unmatched progressive programs, information, and resources on issues critical to architecture and the experience of education.

See Carnegie Mellon University and American Institute of Architecture Students

American Mathematics Competitions

The American Mathematics Competitions (AMC) are the first of a series of competitions in secondary school mathematics that determine the United States team for the International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO).

See Carnegie Mellon University and American Mathematics Competitions

American Sociological Association

The American Sociological Association (ASA), founded in 1905 as the American Sociological Society, is a non-profit organization dedicated to advancing the discipline and profession of sociology.

See Carnegie Mellon University and American Sociological Association

Ames Research Center

Ames Research Center (ARC), also known as NASA Ames, is a major NASA research center at Moffett Federal Airfield in California's Silicon Valley.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Ames Research Center

Amortized analysis

In computer science, amortized analysis is a method for analyzing a given algorithm's complexity, or how much of a resource, especially time or memory, it takes to execute.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Amortized analysis

AMosaic

AMosaic is a discontinued Amiga port of the Mosaic web browser, developed beginning in 1993, and was the first graphical web browser for the Amiga.

See Carnegie Mellon University and AMosaic

André Heinz

André Thierstein Heinz (born December 9, 1969) is an American environmentalist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and André Heinz

Andrew Appel

Andrew Wilson Appel (born 1960) is the Eugene Higgins Professor of computer science at Princeton University, New Jersey.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Andrew Appel

Andrew B. Whinston

Andrew B. Whinston (born June 3, 1936) is an American economist and computer scientist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Andrew B. Whinston

Andrew Carnegie

Andrew Carnegie (but commonly or;MacKay, p. 29. November 25, 1835August 11, 1919) was a Scottish-American industrialist, business magnate, and philanthropist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Andrew Carnegie

Andrew File System

The Andrew File System (AFS) is a distributed file system which uses a set of trusted servers to present a homogeneous, location-transparent file name space to all the client workstations.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Andrew File System

Andrew Mellon

Andrew William Mellon (March 24, 1855 – August 26, 1937), sometimes A.W., was an American banker, businessman, industrialist, philanthropist, art collector, and politician.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Andrew Mellon

Andrew Plotkin

Andrew Plotkin (born May 15, 1970), also known as Zarf, is a central figure in the modern interactive fiction (IF) community.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Andrew Plotkin

Andrew Project

The Andrew Project was a distributed computing environment developed at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) beginning in 1982.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Andrew Project

Andy Bechtolsheim

Andreas Maria Maximilian Freiherr von Mauchenheim genannt Bechtolsheim (born 30 September 1955), known as Andy Bechtolsheim, is a German electrical engineer, entrepreneur, investor, and self-made billionaire.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Andy Bechtolsheim

Andy Warhol

Andy Warhol (born Andrew Warhola; August 6, 1928 – February 22, 1987) was an American artist, director and producer who was a leading figure in the visual art movement known as pop art.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Andy Warhol

Anita Borg

Anita Borg (January 17, 1949 – April 6, 2003) was an American computer scientist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Anita Borg

Anna Deavere Smith

Anna Deavere Smith (born September 18, 1950) is an American actress, playwright, and professor.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Anna Deavere Smith

Anna University

Anna University is a state technical university in Tamil Nadu, India.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Anna University

Annette Baier

Annette Claire Baier (née Stoop; 11 October 1929 – 2 November 2012) was a New Zealand philosopher and Hume scholar, focused in particular on Hume's moral psychology.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Annette Baier

Anthony Daniels

Anthony Daniels (born 21 February 1946) is an English actor and mime artist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Anthony Daniels

Anti-phishing software

Anti-phishing software consists of computer programs that attempt to identify phishing content contained in websites, e-mail, or other forms used to accessing data (usually from the internet) and block the content, usually with a warning to the user (and often an option to view the content regardless).

See Carnegie Mellon University and Anti-phishing software

Apollo Education Group

Apollo Education Group, Inc. is an American corporation based in the South Phoenix area of Phoenix, Arizona.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Apollo Education Group

Architecture description language

Architecture description languages (ADLs) are used in several disciplines: system engineering, software engineering, and enterprise modelling and engineering.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Architecture description language

Architecture tradeoff analysis method

In software engineering, architecture tradeoff analysis method (ATAM) is a risk-mitigation process used early in the software development life cycle.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Architecture tradeoff analysis method

Aron Ralston

Aron Lee Ralston (born October 27, 1975) is an American outdoorsman, mechanical engineer and motivational speaker known for having survived a canyoneering accident in southeastern Utah in 2003 during which he amputated his own right forearm with a dull pocketknife in order to free himself from a dislodged boulder which had him trapped in Blue John Canyon for six days.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Aron Ralston

Art museum

An art museum or art gallery is a building or space for the exhibition of art, usually visual art.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Art museum

ArtGardens of Pittsburgh

The ArtGardens of Pittsburgh in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania is an outdoor gallery of installation art where the medium of the art is growing plants.

See Carnegie Mellon University and ArtGardens of Pittsburgh

Arthur Kennedy

John Arthur Kennedy (February 17, 1914January 5, 1990) was an American stage and film actor known for his versatility in supporting film roles and his ability to create "an exceptional honesty and naturalness on stage", especially in the original casts of Arthur Miller plays on Broadway.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Arthur Kennedy

Artificial intelligence

Artificial intelligence (AI, also machine intelligence, MI) is intelligence demonstrated by machines, in contrast to the natural intelligence (NI) displayed by humans and other animals.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Artificial intelligence

ASIMO

ASIMO (whose name comes from English initials or words Advanced Step in Innovative Mobility) is a humanoid robot created by Honda in 2000.

See Carnegie Mellon University and ASIMO

Aspinwall, Pennsylvania

Aspinwall is a borough on the Allegheny River in Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, United States, and is part of the Pittsburgh Metro Area.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Aspinwall, Pennsylvania

Association for Computing Machinery

The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) is an international learned society for computing.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Association for Computing Machinery

Asteroid impact avoidance

Asteroid impact avoidance comprises a number of methods by which near-Earth objects (NEO) could be diverted, preventing destructive impact events.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Asteroid impact avoidance

Audacity (audio editor)

Audacity is a free and open-source digital audio editor and recording application software, available for Windows, macOS/OS X and Unix-like operating systems.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Audacity (audio editor)

Autonomous car

An autonomous car (also known as a driverless car, self-driving car, and robotic car) is a vehicle that is capable of sensing its environment and navigating without human input.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Autonomous car

Avie Tevanian

Avadis "Avie" Tevanian is an American computer scientist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Avie Tevanian

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne

The École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) is a research institute and university in Lausanne, Switzerland, that specializes in natural sciences and engineering.

See Carnegie Mellon University and École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne

Barbara Ehrenreich

Barbara Ehrenreich (born August 26, 1941) is an American author and political activist who describes herself as "a myth buster by trade" and has been called "a veteran muckraker" by The New Yorker.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Barbara Ehrenreich

Barbara Feldon

Barbara Feldon (born March 12, 1933) is an American character actress who works mostly in the theatre, but is primarily known for her roles on television.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Barbara Feldon

Barbara Schwartz (artist)

Barbara Schwartz (1949 &ndash; May 8, 2006, New York) was an American abstract artist, painter, sculptor and art teacher.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Barbara Schwartz (artist)

Beam search

In computer science, beam search is a heuristic search algorithm that explores a graph by expanding the most promising node in a limited set.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Beam search

Beaux-Arts architecture

Beaux-Arts architecture was the academic architectural style taught at the École des Beaux-Arts in Paris, particularly from the 1830s to the end of the 19th century.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Beaux-Arts architecture

Ben Iden Payne

Ben Iden Payne (September 5, 1881 – April 6, 1976), also known as B. Iden Payne, was an English actor, director and teacher.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Ben Iden Payne

Benjamin C. Pierce

Benjamin Crawford Pierce is an American professor of computer science at the University of Pennsylvania.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Benjamin C. Pierce

Benny Benack

Benidict E. "Benny" Benack (August 31, 1921 &ndash; July 23, 1986) was at the forefront of the Pittsburgh jazz scene in the 1960s and '70s.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Benny Benack

Berkeley DB

Berkeley DB (BDB) is a software library intended to provide a high-performance embedded database for key/value data.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Berkeley DB

Bernard Chazelle

Bernard Chazelle (born November 5, 1955) is a French-American computer scientist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Bernard Chazelle

Bernard Cohen (physicist)

Bernard Leonard Cohen (June 14, 1924 – March 17, 2012) was born in Pittsburgh,CV composed and posted currently, http://www.phyast.pitt.edu/~blc/Vita-Pub.htm Retrieved 23 March 2011 and was Professor Emeritus of Physics at the University of Pittsburgh.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Bernard Cohen (physicist)

Bertil Näslund

Bertil Näslund (4 April 1933 –15 February 2016) was a Swedish economist and emeritus professor at Handelshögskolan i Stockholm (Stockholm School of Economics).

See Carnegie Mellon University and Bertil Näslund

Beta Theta Pi

Beta Theta Pi (ΒΘΠ), commonly known as Beta, is a North American social fraternity that was founded in 1839 at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Beta Theta Pi

Big Trak

BIG TRAK / bigtrak is a programmable electric vehicle created by Milton Bradley in 1979, resembling a futuristic Sci-Fi tank / utility vehicle, possibly for use on the Moon or a Planetoid style environment.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Big Trak

Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation

Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF), also known as the Gates Foundation, is a private foundation founded by Bill and Melinda Gates.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation

Bill Cosby

William Henry Cosby Jr. (born July 12, 1937) is an American stand-up comedian, actor, musician, author, and convicted sex offender.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Bill Cosby

Bill Mitchell (automobile designer)

William L. "Bill" Mitchell (July 2, 1912 Cleveland, Ohio – September 12, 1988 Royal Oak, Michigan) was an American automobile designer.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Bill Mitchell (automobile designer)

Billy Price (singer)

Billy Price is the stage name of the American soul singer.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Billy Price (singer)

Binary decision diagram

In computer science, a binary decision diagram (BDD) or branching program is a data structure that is used to represent a Boolean function.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Binary decision diagram

BitTorrent

BitTorrent (abbreviated to BT) is a communication protocol for peer-to-peer file sharing (P2P) which is used to distribute data and electronic files over the Internet.

See Carnegie Mellon University and BitTorrent

Blackgate Penitentiary

Blackgate Penitentiary is a fictional prison appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics, commonly in stories featuring the superhero Batman.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Blackgate Penitentiary

BLISS

BLISS is a system programming language developed at Carnegie Mellon University by W. A. Wulf, D. B. Russell, and A. N. Habermann around 1970.

See Carnegie Mellon University and BLISS

Bob Barr

Robert Laurence Barr Jr. (born November 5, 1948) is an American attorney and politician.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Bob Barr

Bob Braden

Robert Braden (28 January 1934 – 15 April 2018) was an American computer scientist who played a role in the development of the Internet.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Bob Braden

Bob Sproull

Robert Fletcher "Bob" Sproull (born c. 1945) is an American computer scientist, who worked for Oracle Corporation where he was director of Oracle Labs in Burlington, Massachusetts.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Bob Sproull

Bodoni

Bodoni is the name given to the serif typefaces first designed by Giambattista Bodoni (1740–1813) in the late eighteenth century and frequently revived since.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Bodoni

Boltzmann machine

A Boltzmann machine (also called stochastic Hopfield network with hidden units) is a type of stochastic recurrent neural network (and Markov random field).

See Carnegie Mellon University and Boltzmann machine

Booz Allen Hamilton

Booz Allen Hamilton Inc. (informally: Booz Allen) is an American management and information technology consulting firm, sometimes referred to as a government-services company, headquartered in McLean, Virginia, in Greater Washington, D.C., with 80 other offices around the globe.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Booz Allen Hamilton

Bowdoin College

Bowdoin College is a private liberal arts college located in Brunswick, Maine.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Bowdoin College

Branch and bound

Branch and bound (BB, B&B, or BnB) is an algorithm design paradigm for discrete and combinatorial optimization problems, as well as mathematical optimization.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Branch and bound

Bruce Jay Nelson

Bruce Jay Nelson (January 19, 1952 – September 19, 1999) was an American computer scientist best known as the inventor of the remote procedure call concept for computer network communications.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Bruce Jay Nelson

Bud Yorkin

Alan David "Bud" Yorkin (February 22, 1926 – August 18, 2015) was an American film and television producer, director, writer, and actor.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Bud Yorkin

Business action on climate change

Business action on climate change includes a range of activities relating to global warming, and to influencing political decisions on global-warming-related regulation, such as the Kyoto Protocol.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Business action on climate change

Business school

A business school is a university-level institution that confers degrees in business administration or management.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Business school

C. Daniel Mote Jr.

Clayton Daniel Mote Jr. (born February 5, 1937) is the current President of the National Academy of Engineering.

See Carnegie Mellon University and C. Daniel Mote Jr.

C.mmp

The C.mmp was an early MIMD multiprocessor system developed at Carnegie Mellon University by William Wulf (1971).

See Carnegie Mellon University and C.mmp

Campus network

A campus network, campus area network, corporate area network or CAN is a computer network made up of an interconnection of local area networks (LANs) within a limited geographical area.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Campus network

Capability Maturity Model

The Capability Maturity Model (CMM) is a development model created after a study of data collected from organizations that contracted with the U.S. Department of Defense, who funded the research.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Capability Maturity Model

Capability Maturity Model Integration

Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) is a process level improvement training and appraisal program.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Capability Maturity Model Integration

Capability-based security

Capability-based security is a concept in the design of secure computing systems, one of the existing security models.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Capability-based security

Cardinal (color)

Cardinal is a vivid red, which may get its name from the cassocks worn by Catholic cardinals (although the color worn by cardinals is scarlet).

See Carnegie Mellon University and Cardinal (color)

Carl Betz

Carl Lawrence Betz (March 9, 1921 &ndash; January 18, 1978) was an American stage, film, and television actor.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Carl Betz

Carnegie

Carnegie may refer to.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Carnegie

Carnegie Institute

Carnegie Institute may refer to.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Carnegie Institute

Carnegie Mellon College of Engineering

The Carnegie Mellon University College of Engineering is the academic unit that manages engineering research and education at Carnegie Mellon.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Carnegie Mellon College of Engineering

Carnegie Mellon College of Fine Arts

The College of Fine Arts at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania oversees the Schools of Architecture, Art, Design, Drama, and Music; along with its associated centers, studios, and galleries.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Carnegie Mellon College of Fine Arts

Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science

The School of Computer Science (SCS) at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, US is a leading private school for computer science established in 1988.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science

Carnegie Mellon School of Drama

The Carnegie Mellon School of Drama is the oldest degree-granting drama program in the United States, founded in 1914 as a division of the College of Fine Arts at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Carnegie Mellon School of Drama

Carnegie Mellon Silicon Valley

Carnegie Mellon Silicon Valley is a branch campus of Carnegie Mellon University located in the heart of Silicon Valley in Mountain View, California.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Carnegie Mellon Silicon Valley

Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar

Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar (Arabic: جامعة كارنيجي ميلون في قطر), is one of the branch campuses of Carnegie Mellon University, located in Doha, Qatar.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar

Carnegie Science Center

The Carnegie Science Center is one of the four Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Carnegie Science Center

Carrier current

Carrier current transmission (originally called wired wireless) employs guided low-power radio signals, which are transmitted along electrical conductors.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Carrier current

Case Western Reserve University

Case Western Reserve University (also known as Case Western Reserve, Case Western, Case, and CWRU) is a private doctorate-granting university in Cleveland, Ohio.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Case Western Reserve University

Cèilidh

A cèilidh or céilí is a traditional Scottish or Irish social gathering.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Cèilidh

Centenarian

A centenarian is a person who lives to or beyond the age of 100 years.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Centenarian

Centennial Challenges

The Centennial Challenges are NASA space competition inducement prize contests for non-government-funded technological achievements by American teams.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Centennial Challenges

Charles E. Leiserson

Charles Eric Leiserson is a computer scientist, specializing in the theory of parallel computing and distributed computing, and particularly practical applications thereof.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Charles E. Leiserson

Charles Erwin Wilson

Charles Erwin Wilson (July 18, 1890 – September 26, 1961) was an American engineer and businessman who served as United States Secretary of Defense from 1953 to 1957 under President Dwight D. Eisenhower.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Charles Erwin Wilson

Charles Forgy

Dr Charles L. Forgy (born December 12, 1949 in Texas) is a computer scientist, known for developing the Rete algorithm used in his OPS5 and other production system languages used to build expert systems.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Charles Forgy

Charles Geschke

Charles M. "Chuck" Geschke (born September 11, 1939) is an American businessman.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Charles Geschke

Charles Ludlam

Charles Braun Ludlam (April 12, 1943 – May 28, 1987) was an American actor, director, and playwright.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Charles Ludlam

Charles W. Upton

Charles W. Upton (born c. 1943) is an American economist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Charles W. Upton

Charlie White (artist)

Charlie White (born 1972, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania) is an American artist and academic White received his BFA in 1994 from the School of Visual Arts, New York, and received his MFA from Art Center College of Design, Pasadena, California, in 1998.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Charlie White (artist)

Cherry Jones

Cherry Jones (born November 21, 1956) is an American actress.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Cherry Jones

Chip Ganassi

Floyd "Chip" Ganassi Jr. (born May 24, 1958) is an American businessman, former racing driver, current team owner and member of the Motorsports Hall of Fame of America.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Chip Ganassi

ChipTest

ChipTest was a 1985 chess playing computer built by Feng-hsiung Hsu, Thomas Anantharaman and Murray Campbell at Carnegie Mellon University.

See Carnegie Mellon University and ChipTest

Christopher Reeve

Christopher D'Olier Reeve (September 25, 1952 – October 10, 2004) was an American actor.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Christopher Reeve

Church of Scientology

The Church of Scientology is a multinational network and hierarchy of numerous ostensibly independent but interconnected corporate entities and other organizations devoted to the practice, administration and dissemination of Scientology, a new religious movement.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Church of Scientology

Churchill Scholarship

The Churchill Scholarship is awarded by the Winston Churchill Foundation of the United States to graduates of the more than one hundred colleges and universities invited to participate in the Churchill Scholarship Program, for the pursuit of research and study in the physical and natural sciences, mathematics, engineering, for one year at Churchill College at the University of Cambridge.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Churchill Scholarship

CIT

CIT or cit may refer to.

See Carnegie Mellon University and CIT

Clarence Zener

Clarence Melvin Zener (December 1, 1905 – July 2, 1993) was the American physicist who first (1934) described the property concerning the breakdown of electrical insulators.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Clarence Zener

Claude Shannon

Claude Elwood Shannon (April 30, 1916 – February 24, 2001) was an American mathematician, electrical engineer, and cryptographer known as "the father of information theory".

See Carnegie Mellon University and Claude Shannon

Claytronics

Claytronics is an abstract future concept that combines nanoscale robotics and computer science to create individual nanometer-scale computers called claytronic atoms, or catoms, which can interact with each other to form tangible 3D objects that a user can interact with.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Claytronics

Clifford Shull

Clifford Glenwood Shull (September 23, 1915 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania – March 31, 2001) was a Nobel Prize-winning American physicist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Clifford Shull

Clinton Davisson

Clinton Joseph Davisson (October 22, 1881 – February 1, 1958), was an American physicist who won the 1937 Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery of electron diffraction in the famous Davisson-Germer experiment.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Clinton Davisson

CMU

CMU may refer to.

See Carnegie Mellon University and CMU

CMU Common Lisp

CMUCL is a free Common Lisp implementation, originally developed at Carnegie Mellon University.

See Carnegie Mellon University and CMU Common Lisp

Coda (file system)

Coda is a distributed file system developed as a research project at Carnegie Mellon University since 1987 under the direction of Mahadev Satyanarayanan.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Coda (file system)

Cognitive architecture

A cognitive architecture can refer to a theory about the structure of the human mind.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Cognitive architecture

Cognitive tutor

A cognitive tutor is a particular kind of intelligent tutoring system that utilizes a cognitive model to provide feedback to students as they are working through problems.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Cognitive tutor

College humor magazines

Many colleges and universities publish satirical journals conventionally referred to as "humor magazines." Among the most famous: the Harvard Lampoon, which gave rise to the National Lampoon in 1970, The Yale Record, the nation's oldest college humor magazine (founded in 1872), Princeton Tiger Magazine, the University of Pennsylvania Punch Bowl, which was founded in 1899, the Dartmouth Jack-O-Lantern, founded in 1908, and The Brown Jug, founded in 1920.

See Carnegie Mellon University and College humor magazines

College of Engineering, Guindy

The College of Engineering, Guindy (CEG) is a public engineering college in Chennai, India and is India's oldest technical institution, founded in 1794.

See Carnegie Mellon University and College of Engineering, Guindy

Columbia Graduate School of Architecture, Planning and Preservation

The Graduate School of Architecture, Planning and Preservation at Columbia University in New York City, also known simply as GSAPP, is regarded as one of the most important and prestigious architecture schools in the world.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Columbia Graduate School of Architecture, Planning and Preservation

Columbia, Maryland

Columbia is a census-designated place in Howard County, Maryland, United States, and is one of the principal cities of the Baltimore metropolitan area.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Columbia, Maryland

Common Lisp

Common Lisp (CL) is a dialect of the Lisp programming language, published in ANSI standard document ANSI INCITS 226-1994 (R2004) (formerly X3.226-1994 (R1999)).

See Carnegie Mellon University and Common Lisp

Commons club

A Commons Club is a type of social organization whose membership is "open" rather than selective based on personal introduction and invitation.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Commons club

Communication during the September 11 attacks

Communication problems and successes played an important role in the September 11, 2001 attacks and their aftermath.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Communication during the September 11 attacks

Computer chess

Computer chess is a game of computer architecture encompassing hardware and software capable of playing chess autonomously without human guidance.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Computer chess

Computer emergency response team

A computer emergency response team (CERT) is an expert group that handles computer security incidents.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Computer emergency response team

Computer poker player

A computer poker player is a computer program designed to play the game of poker against human opponents or other computer opponents.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Computer poker player

Computerworld Smithsonian Award

The Computerworld Smithsonian Award is given out annually to individuals who have used technology to produce beneficial changes for society.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Computerworld Smithsonian Award

Concealed carry in the United States

Concealed carry or carrying a concealed weapon (CCW), is the practice of carrying a weapon (such as a handgun) in public in a concealed manner, either on one's person or in close proximity.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Concealed carry in the United States

Continuous track

Continuous track, also called tank tread or caterpillar track, is a system of vehicle propulsion in which a continuous band of treads or track plates is driven by two or more wheels.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Continuous track

Convocation

A convocation (from the Latin convocare meaning "to call/come together", a translation of the Greek ἐκκλησία ekklēsia) is a group of people formally assembled for a special purpose, mostly ecclesiastical or academic.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Convocation

Cooperative education

Cooperative education (or co-operative education) is a structured method of combining classroom-based education with practical work experience.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Cooperative education

Cordelia Scaife May

Cordelia Scaife May (September 24, 1928–January 26, 2005) — known as "Cordy" to family and friends — was a Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania-area political donor and philanthropist and one of the wealthiest women in the United States.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Cordelia Scaife May

Costas Azariadis

Constantine Christos "Costas" Azariadis (Κώστας Αζαριάδης; born February 17, 1943) is a macroeconomist born in Athens, Greece.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Costas Azariadis

Creepshow

Creepshow is a 1982 American dark comedy horror anthology film directed by George A. Romero and written by Stephen King, making this film his screenwriting debut.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Creepshow

CyberCash

CyberCash, Inc. was an internet payment service for electronic commerce, headquartered in Reston, Virginia.

See Carnegie Mellon University and CyberCash

Cyrus IMAP server

The Cyrus IMAP server is electronic mail server software developed by Carnegie Mellon University.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Cyrus IMAP server

Dagmara Domińczyk

Dagmara Domińczyk (born July 17, 1976) is a Polish-American actress and author.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Dagmara Domińczyk

Dale T. Mortensen

Dale Thomas Mortensen (February 2, 1939 – January 9, 2014) was an American economist and Nobel laureate.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Dale T. Mortensen

Dan Heisman

Dan Heisman (born July 8, 1950) is a United States Chess Federation National Master, author and instructor.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Dan Heisman

Dana Scott

Dana Stewart Scott (born October 11, 1932) is the emeritus Hillman University Professor of Computer Science, Philosophy, and Mathematical Logic at Carnegie Mellon University; he is now retired and lives in Berkeley, California.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Dana Scott

Daniel Sleator

Daniel Dominic Kaplan Sleator (born 10 December 1953 in St. Louis) is a Professor of Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, United States.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Daniel Sleator

DARPA Grand Challenge

The DARPA Grand Challenge is a prize competition for American autonomous vehicles, funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, the most prominent research organization of the United States Department of Defense.

See Carnegie Mellon University and DARPA Grand Challenge

Daryl Bem

Daryl J. Bem (born June 10, 1938) is a social psychologist and professor emeritus at Cornell University.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Daryl Bem

Data (Star Trek)

Data is a character in the fictional Star Trek franchise.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Data (Star Trek)

Data compression

In signal processing, data compression, source coding, or bit-rate reduction involves encoding information using fewer bits than the original representation.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Data compression

Dave Haynie

Dave Haynie is an American electrical engineer.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Dave Haynie

David J. Farber

David J. "Dave" Farber (born April 17, 1934) is a professor of computer science, noted for his major contributions to programming languages and computer networking.

See Carnegie Mellon University and David J. Farber

David Lander

David Leonard Lander (born June 22, 1947) is an American actor, voice actor, comedian, composer, musician, and baseball scout.

See Carnegie Mellon University and David Lander

David Larsen

David Larsen (born April 23, 1980) is an American stage actor from Portland, Oregon.

See Carnegie Mellon University and David Larsen

David Parnas

David Lorge Parnas (born February 10, 1941) is a Canadian early pioneer of software engineering, who developed the concept of information hiding in modular programming, which is an important element of object-oriented programming today.

See Carnegie Mellon University and David Parnas

David Patterson (computer scientist)

David Andrew Patterson (born November 16, 1947) is an American computer pioneer and academic who has held the position of Professor of Computer Science at the University of California, Berkeley since 1976.

See Carnegie Mellon University and David Patterson (computer scientist)

David S. Touretzky

David S. Touretzky is a research professor in the Computer Science Department and the Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition at Carnegie Mellon University.

See Carnegie Mellon University and David S. Touretzky

Davis Grubb

Davis Grubb (July 23, 1919 – July 24, 1980) was an American novelist and short story writer.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Davis Grubb

Dawn of the Dead (1978 film)

Dawn of the Dead (also known internationally as Zombi or Zombie) is a 1978 American independent zombie horror film directed by George A. Romero.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Dawn of the Dead (1978 film)

Decision support system

A decision support system (DSS) is an information system that supports business or organizational decision-making activities.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Decision support system

DECstation

The DECstation was a brand of computers used by DEC, and refers to three distinct lines of computer systems&mdash;the first released in 1978 as a word processing system, and the latter (more widely known) two both released in 1989.

See Carnegie Mellon University and DECstation

Deep Blue (chess computer)

Deep Blue was a chess-playing computer developed by IBM.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Deep Blue (chess computer)

Deep Thought (chess computer)

Deep Thought was a computer designed to play chess.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Deep Thought (chess computer)

Deliberative opinion poll

The Deliberative Opinion Poll, sometimes called a Deliberative Poll, is a form of opinion poll that incorporates the principles of deliberative democracy.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Deliberative opinion poll

Demand response

Demand response is a change in the power consumption of an electric utility customer to better match the demand for power with the supply.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Demand response

Demoscene

The demoscene is an international computer art subculture focused on producing demos: self-contained, sometimes extremely small, computer programs that produce audio-visual presentations.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Demoscene

Dieselboy

Damian Higgins, better known by his stage name Dieselboy, is an American drum and bass DJ, producer,from Brooklyn.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Dieselboy

Dietrich

Dietrich (German pronunciation) is the German equivalent of the English name Derek.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Dietrich

Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences

The Marianna Brown Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences (Dietrich College or DC) is the liberal and professional studies college and the second largest academic unit by enrollment (after the Mellon College of Science) at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences

Digital Games Research Association

Digital Games Research Association (DiGRA) is a nonprofit international learned society whose work focuses on game studies and associated activities.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Digital Games Research Association

Distributed Computing Environment

In computing, the Distributed Computing Environment (DCE) software system was developed in the early 1990s from the work of the Open Software Foundation (OSF), a consortium (founded in 1988) that included Apollo Computer (part of Hewlett-Packard from 1989), IBM, Digital Equipment Corporation, and others.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Distributed Computing Environment

Doctorate

A doctorate (from Latin docere, "to teach") or doctor's degree (from Latin doctor, "teacher") or doctoral degree (from the ancient formalism licentia docendi) is an academic degree awarded by universities that is, in most countries, a research degree that qualifies the holder to teach at the university level in the degree's field, or to work in a specific profession.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Doctorate

Doom (1993 video game)

Doom (typeset as DOOM in official documents and stylized as DooM in other media) is a 1993 first-person shooter (FPS) video game by id Software.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Doom (1993 video game)

Douglas Lenat

Douglas Bruce Lenat (born 1950) is the CEO of Cycorp, Inc. of Austin, Texas, and has been a prominent researcher in artificial intelligence; he was awarded the biannual IJCAI Computers and Thought Award in 1976 for creating the landmark machine learning program, AM.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Douglas Lenat

Dragon Runner

Dragon Runner is a military robot built for urban combat.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Dragon Runner

Draize test

The Draize Test is an acute toxicity test devised in 1944 by Food and Drug Administration (FDA) toxicologists John H. Draize and Jacob M. Spines.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Draize test

DSSC

DSSC may mean.

See Carnegie Mellon University and DSSC

Dylan (programming language)

Dylan is a multi-paradigm programming language that includes support for functional and object-oriented programming, and is dynamic and reflective while providing a programming model designed to support efficient machine code generation, including fine-grained control over dynamic and static behaviors.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Dylan (programming language)

E. L. Konigsburg

Elaine Lobl Konigsburg (February 10, 1930 – April 19, 2013) was an American writer and illustrator of children's books and young adult fiction.

See Carnegie Mellon University and E. L. Konigsburg

Earl Wild

Earl Wild (November 26, 1915January 23, 2010) was an American pianist known for his transcriptions of jazz and classical music.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Earl Wild

Edgar Mitchell

Edgar Dean "Ed" Mitchell (September 17, 1930 – February 4, 2016) was a United States Navy officer and aviator, test pilot, aeronautical engineer, ufologist and NASA astronaut.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Edgar Mitchell

Edward C. Prescott

Edward Christian Prescott (born December 26, 1940) is an American economist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Edward C. Prescott

Edward Feigenbaum

Edward Albert "Ed" Feigenbaum (born January 20, 1936) is a computer scientist working in the field of artificial intelligence, and joint winner of the 1994 ACM Turing Award.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Edward Feigenbaum

Edward Fredkin

Edward Fredkin (born 1934) is a distinguished career professor at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU), Pennsylvania, and an early pioneer of Digital physics.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Edward Fredkin

Edward J. Green

Edward James Green (born 1947) is an American economist best known for his contributions to the theory of dynamic contracts.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Edward J. Green

Edward Jenner

Edward Jenner, FRS FRCPE (17 May 1749 – 26 January 1823) was an English physician and scientist who was the pioneer of smallpox vaccine, the world's first vaccine.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Edward Jenner

Edwin H. Land

Edwin Herbert Land, ForMemRS, FRPS, Hon.MRI (May 7, 1909 – March 1, 1991) was an American scientist and inventor, best known as the co-founder of the Polaroid Corporation.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Edwin H. Land

Eindhoven University of Technology

The Eindhoven University of Technology (Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, abbr. TU/e) is a university of technology in Eindhoven, Netherlands.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Eindhoven University of Technology

Elaine de Kooning

Elaine de Kooning (March 12, 1918 – February 1, 1989) was an Abstract Expressionist and Figurative Expressionist painter in the post-World War II era.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Elaine de Kooning

Elizabeth Hartman

Mary Elizabeth Hartman (December 23, 1943 – June 10, 1987) was an American actress, best known for her performance in the 1965 film A Patch of Blue, playing a blind girl named Selina D'Arcy, opposite Sidney Poitier, a role for which she was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress and the Golden Globe Award.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Elizabeth Hartman

Ellen Steiber

Ellen Steiber is an American novelist and author of books for young readers, including some based on single episodes of The X-Files and Full House series.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Ellen Steiber

Emoticon

An emoticon (rarely pronounced) is a pictorial representation of a facial expression using characters—usually punctuation marks, numbers, and letters—to express a person's feelings or mood, or as a time-saving method.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Emoticon

Empathy gap

A hot-cold empathy gap is a cognitive bias in which people underestimate the influences of visceral drives on their own attitudes, preferences, and behaviors.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Empathy gap

Energy storage

Energy storage is the capture of energy produced at one time for use at a later time.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Energy storage

Eric Schmidt

Eric Emerson Schmidt (born April 27, 1955) is an American businessman and software engineer.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Eric Schmidt

Eric von Hippel

Eric von Hippel (born August 27, 1941) is an American economist and a professor at the MIT Sloan School of Management, specializing in the nature and economics of distributed and open innovation.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Eric von Hippel

ESPCI Paris

ESPCI Paris (officially the École supérieure de physique et de chimie industrielles de la Ville de Paris; The City of Paris Industrial Physics and Chemistry Higher Educational Institution) is an engineering school founded in 1882 by The City of Paris, France.

See Carnegie Mellon University and ESPCI Paris

Esteban (musician)

Esteban is the stage name of Stephen Paul (born 1948).

See Carnegie Mellon University and Esteban (musician)

Eta Kappa Nu

Eta Kappa Nu (ΗΚΝ) is the international electrical and computer engineering honor society of the IEEE, founded in October 1904 by Maurice L. Carr at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Eta Kappa Nu

Ethan Hawke

Ethan Green Hawke (born November 6, 1970) is an American actor, writer, and director.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Ethan Hawke

Ethics

Ethics or moral philosophy is a branch of philosophy that involves systematizing, defending, and recommending concepts of right and wrong conduct.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Ethics

Eunice Norton

Eunice Norton (June 30, 1908 &ndash; December 9, 2005) was an American pianist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Eunice Norton

Eurisko

Eurisko (Gr., I discover) is a program written by Douglas Lenat in RLL-1, a representation language itself written in the Lisp programming language.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Eurisko

EZ Word

EZ Word was a word processor developed as part of the Andrew User Interface System, a user-interface research project jointly done by both IBM and the Carnegie Mellon University.

See Carnegie Mellon University and EZ Word

Façade (video game)

Façade is an artificial-intelligence-based interactive story created by Michael Mateas and Andrew Stern.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Façade (video game)

Feed forward (control)

Feed-forward, sometimes written feedforward, is a term describing an element or pathway within a control system that passes a controlling signal from a source in its external environment, often a command signal from an external operator, to a load elsewhere in its external environment.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Feed forward (control)

Feng-hsiung Hsu

Feng-hsiung Hsu (nicknamed Crazy Bird) is a computer scientist and the author of the book Behind Deep Blue: Building the Computer that Defeated the World Chess Champion.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Feng-hsiung Hsu

Festival Speech Synthesis System

The Festival Speech Synthesis System is a general multi-lingual speech synthesis system originally developed by Alan W. Black at Centre for Speech Technology Research (CSTR) at the University of Edinburgh.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Festival Speech Synthesis System

Fight song

In American and Canadian sports, a fight song is a song associated with a team.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Fight song

Final (Java)

In the Java programming language, the final keyword is used in several contexts to define an entity that can only be assigned once.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Final (Java)

Fine art

In European academic traditions, fine art is art developed primarily for aesthetics or beauty, distinguishing it from applied art, which also has to serve some practical function, such as pottery or most metalwork.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Fine art

Finn E. Kydland

Finn Erling Kydland (born 1 December 1943) is a Norwegian economist known for his contributions to business cycle theory.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Finn E. Kydland

Flash memory

Flash memory is an electronic (solid-state) non-volatile computer storage medium that can be electrically erased and reprogrammed.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Flash memory

Flashdance

Flashdance is a 1983 American romantic drama film directed by Adrian Lyne.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Flashdance

Flying Dog Brewery

Flying Dog Brewery is a craft brewery located in Frederick, Maryland.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Flying Dog Brewery

Food miles

Food miles is a term which refers to the distance food is transported from the time of its production until it reaches the consumer.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Food miles

Fort Pitt Tunnel

The Fort Pitt Tunnel carries traffic on Interstate 376 (I-376),Interstate 279 prior to June 10, 2009 U.S. Route 22 (US 22), US 30, and US 19 Truck between Downtown Pittsburgh and the West End neighborhood in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Fort Pitt Tunnel

Fox Sports Radio

The FOX Sports Radio Network, based in Los Angeles, California, is a division of Premiere Networks in partnership with FOX Sports.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Fox Sports Radio

Francesca James

Francesca James (born January 23, 1949) is an American actress, writer, singer, composer, director and producer.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Francesca James

Franco Modigliani

Franco Modigliani (June 18, 1918 – September 25, 2003) was an Italian-American economist and the recipient of the 1985 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Franco Modigliani

Frank Cunimondo

Frank Cunimondo (born 1934) is an American jazz pianist and educator based in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Frank Cunimondo

Frank Gorshin

Frank John Gorshin Jr. (April 5, 1933 – May 17, 2005) was an American character actor, impressionist, and comedian.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Frank Gorshin

Fred Cohen

Frederick B. Cohen (born 1956) is an American computer scientist and best known as the inventor of computer virus defense techniques.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Fred Cohen

Frederic Goudy

Frederic W. Goudy (March 8, 1865 in Bloomington, Illinois – May 11, 1947 in Marlborough-on-Hudson) was an American printer, artist and type designer whose typefaces include Copperplate Gothic, Goudy Old Style and Kennerley.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Frederic Goudy

Frederick Seitz

Frederick Seitz (July 4, 1911 – March 2, 2008) was an American physicist and a pioneer of solid state physics.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Frederick Seitz

Freeform (radio format)

Freeform, or freeform radio, is a radio station programming format in which the disc jockey is given total control over what music to play, regardless of music genre or commercial interests.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Freeform (radio format)

Friendship (Pittsburgh)

Friendship is a neighborhood of large Victorian houses in the East End of the City of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States, about four miles (6 km) east of Pittsburgh's Golden Triangle.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Friendship (Pittsburgh)

FurryMUCK

FurryMUCK is one of the oldest and largest non-combat MUD-style games in existence.

See Carnegie Mellon University and FurryMUCK

Future Combat Systems

Future Combat Systems (FCS) was the United States Army's principal modernization program from 2003 to early 2009.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Future Combat Systems

Gabriel Hawawini

Gabriel Hawawini (born August 29, 1947) is a Professor of Finance at INSEAD business school where he held the Henry Grunfeld Chair in Investment Banking from 1996 to 2013 and served as dean from 2000 to 2006, spearheading the institution’s global expansion from its original campus in France into Asia (Singapore) and the Middle East (Abu Dhabi).

See Carnegie Mellon University and Gabriel Hawawini

Gabriel Macht

Gabriel Macht (born January 22, 1972) is an American actor and film producer.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Gabriel Macht

Galaxy

A galaxy is a gravitationally bound system of stars, stellar remnants, interstellar gas, dust, and dark matter.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Galaxy

Garamond

Garamond is a group of many old-style serif typefaces, named for sixteenth-century Parisian engraver Claude Garamond (generally spelled as Garamont in his lifetime).

See Carnegie Mellon University and Garamond

Garth Gibson

Garth Alan Gibson is a Computer Scientist from Carnegie Mellon University.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Garth Gibson

Gaussian (software)

Gaussian is a general purpose computational chemistry software package initially released in 1970 by John Pople and his research group at Carnegie Mellon University as Gaussian 70.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Gaussian (software)

Geoffrey Hinton

Geoffrey Everest Hinton One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from the royalsociety.org website where: (born 6 December 1947) is a British cognitive psychologist and computer scientist, most noted for his work on artificial neural networks.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Geoffrey Hinton

George A. Romero

George Andrew Romero (February 4, 1940 – July 16, 2017) was an American-Canadian filmmaker, writer and editor, best known for his series of gruesome and satirical horror films about an imagined zombie apocalypse, beginning with Night of the Living Dead (1968), which is often considered a progenitor of the fictional zombie of modern culture.

See Carnegie Mellon University and George A. Romero

George Armitage Miller

George Armitage Miller (February 3, 1920 – July 22, 2012) was an American psychologist who was one of the founders of the cognitive psychology field.

See Carnegie Mellon University and George Armitage Miller

George Fix

George J. Fix (10 May 1939 – 10 March 2002) was an American mathematician who collaborated on several seminal papers and books in the field of finite element method.

See Carnegie Mellon University and George Fix

George Maciunas

George Maciunas (Jurgis Mačiūnas; November 8, 1931 – May 9, 1978) was a Lithuanian American artist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and George Maciunas

George Pake

George Pake (April 1, 1924 &ndash; March 4, 2004) was a physicist and research executive primarily known for helping found Xerox PARC.

See Carnegie Mellon University and George Pake

George Peppard

George Peppard Jr. (October 1, 1928 – May 8, 1994) was an American film and television actor.

See Carnegie Mellon University and George Peppard

George Sotter

George W. Sotter (1879 &ndash; 1953) was an American painter best known for Impressionist-style works.

See Carnegie Mellon University and George Sotter

George Trumbull Ladd

George Trumbull Ladd (January 19, 1842 – August 8, 1921) was an American philosopher, educator and psychologist.

See Carnegie Mellon University and George Trumbull Ladd

Glenn Reynolds

Glenn Harlan Reynolds (born August 27, 1960) is Beauchamp Brogan Distinguished Professor of Law at the University of Tennessee College of Law, and is known for his weblog, Instapundit, an American political weblog.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Glenn Reynolds

GNU Hurd

GNU Hurd is the multiserver microkernel written as part of GNU.

See Carnegie Mellon University and GNU Hurd

GNU Mach

GNU Mach is an implementation of the Mach microkernel.

See Carnegie Mellon University and GNU Mach

Godspell

Godspell is a musical, composed by Stephen Schwartz with the spoken parts by John-Michael Tebelak.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Godspell

Gold standard

A gold standard is a monetary system in which the standard economic unit of account is based on a fixed quantity of gold.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Gold standard

Google

Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Google

Google Earth

Google Earth is a computer program that renders a 3D representation of Earth based on satellite imagery.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Google Earth

Gordon Bell

C.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Gordon Bell

Gotham City

Gotham City, or simply Gotham, is a fictional American city appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics, best known as the home of Batman.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Gotham City

Graduate school

A graduate school (sometimes shortened as grad school) is a school that awards advanced academic degrees (i.e. master's and doctoral degrees) with the general requirement that students must have earned a previous undergraduate (bachelor's) degree with a high grade point average.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Graduate school

Guatemala City

Guatemala City (Ciudad de Guatemala), locally known as Guatemala or Guate, officially Nueva Guatemala de la Asunción (New Guatemala of the Assumption), is the capital and largest city of the Republic of Guatemala, and the most populous in Central America.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Guatemala City

Guy L. Steele Jr.

Guy Lewis Steele Jr. (born October 2, 1954) is an American computer scientist who has played an important role in designing and documenting several computer programming languages.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Guy L. Steele Jr.

Guyford Stever

Horton Guyford Stever (October 24, 1916 – April 9, 2010) was an American administrator, physicist, educator, and engineer.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Guyford Stever

H. T. Kung

H.

See Carnegie Mellon University and H. T. Kung

Hacker culture

The hacker culture is a subculture of individuals who enjoy the intellectual challenge of creatively overcoming limitations of software systems to achieve novel and clever outcomes.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Hacker culture

Haitian Creole

Haitian Creole (kreyòl ayisyen,; créole haïtien) is a French-based creole language spoken by 9.6–12million people worldwide, and the only language of most Haitians.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Haitian Creole

Hajime Sorayama

is a Japanese illustrator known for his precisely detailed, erotic portrayals of feminized, biomechanoid robots, and his design work on the original Sony AIBO robotic "pet".

See Carnegie Mellon University and Hajime Sorayama

HAL 9000

HAL 9000 is a fictional character and the main antagonist in Arthur C. Clarke's Space Odyssey series.

See Carnegie Mellon University and HAL 9000

Halil Mete Soner

Halil Mete Soner is a Turkish mathematician born in Ankara.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Halil Mete Soner

Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani

Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa bin Hamad bin Abdullah bin Jassim bin Mohammed Al Thani (الشيخ حمد بن خليفة آل ثاني; born 1 January 1952) is a member of the ruling Al Thani Qatari royal family.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani

Han van Meegeren

Henricus Antonius "Han" van Meegeren (10 October 1889 – 30 December 1947) was a Dutch painter and portraitist and is considered to be one of the most ingenious art forgers of the 20th century.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Han van Meegeren

Hans Berliner

Hans Jack Berliner (January 27, 1929 &ndash; January 13, 2017) was a Professor of Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon University, and was the World Correspondence Chess Champion, from 1965–1968.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Hans Berliner

Hans Moravec

Hans Peter Moravec (born November 30, 1948, Kautzen, Austria) is an adjunct faculty member at the Robotics Institute of Carnegie Mellon University.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Hans Moravec

Haptic technology

Haptic or kinesthetic communication recreates the sense of touch by applying forces, vibrations, or motions to the user.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Haptic technology

Hard disk drive

A hard disk drive (HDD), hard disk, hard drive or fixed disk is an electromechanical data storage device that uses magnetic storage to store and retrieve digital information using one or more rigid rapidly rotating disks (platters) coated with magnetic material.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Hard disk drive

Harry Kendall Thaw

Harry Kendall Thaw (February 12, 1871 – February 22, 1947) was the son of Pittsburgh coal and railroad baron William Thaw, Sr. Heir to a multimillion-dollar mine and railroad fortune, Thaw had a history of severe mental instability and led a profligate life.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Harry Kendall Thaw

Heinz College

The H. John Heinz III College of Information Systems and Public Policy (Heinz College or HC) at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States is a private graduate college that consists of one of the nation's top-ranked public policy schools—the Network of Schools of Public Policy, Affairs, and Administration-accredited School of Public Policy & Management—and information schools—the School of Information Systems & Management.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Heinz College

Henk Barendregt

Hendrik Pieter (Henk) Barendregt (born 18 December 1947, Amsterdam) is a Dutch logician, known for his work in lambda calculus and type theory.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Henk Barendregt

Henry Giroux

Henry Giroux (born September 18, 1943) is an American and Canadian scholar and cultural critic.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Henry Giroux

Herb Gardner

Herbert George Gardner (December 28, 1934 – September 25, 2003), better known as Herb Gardner, was an American commercial artist, cartoonist, playwright and screenwriter.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Herb Gardner

Herb Sendek

Herbert Joseph Sendek Jr. (born February 22, 1963) is an American college basketball coach who is the current men's basketball head coach at Santa Clara.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Herb Sendek

Herbert A. Simon

Herbert Alexander Simon (June 15, 1916 – February 9, 2001) was an American economist and political scientist whose primary interest was decision-making within organizations and is best known for the theories of "bounded rationality" and "satisficing".

See Carnegie Mellon University and Herbert A. Simon

Hierarchy

A hierarchy (from the Greek hierarchia, "rule of a high priest", from hierarkhes, "leader of sacred rites") is an arrangement of items (objects, names, values, categories, etc.) in which the items are represented as being "above", "below", or "at the same level as" one another A hierarchy can link entities either directly or indirectly, and either vertically or diagonally.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Hierarchy

High-bandwidth Digital Content Protection

High-bandwidth Digital Content Protection (HDCP) is a form of digital copy protection developed by Intel Corporation to prevent copying of digital audio & video content as it travels across connections.

See Carnegie Mellon University and High-bandwidth Digital Content Protection

Hill District (Pittsburgh)

The Hill District is a historic black collection of neighborhoods in the City of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Hill District (Pittsburgh)

Hill Street Blues

Hill Street Blues is an American serial police drama that aired on NBC in primetime from 1981 to 1987 for 146 episodes.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Hill Street Blues

His Girl Friday

His Girl Friday is a 1940 American screwball comedy film directed by Howard Hawks, from an adaptation by Charles Lederer, Ben Hecht and Charles MacArthur of the play The Front Page by Hecht and MacArthur.

See Carnegie Mellon University and His Girl Friday

History of artificial intelligence

The history of Artificial Intelligence (AI) began in antiquity, with myths, stories and rumors of artificial beings endowed with intelligence or consciousness by master craftsmen; as Pamela McCorduck writes, AI began with "an ancient wish to forge the gods." The seeds of modern AI were planted by classical philosophers who attempted to describe the process of human thinking as the mechanical manipulation of symbols.

See Carnegie Mellon University and History of artificial intelligence

History of Pennsylvania

The History of Pennsylvania begins in 1681 when William Penn received a royal charter from King Charles II of England, although human activity in the region precedes that date.

See Carnegie Mellon University and History of Pennsylvania

History of Pittsburgh

The history of Pittsburgh began with centuries of Native American civilization in the modern Pittsburgh region, known as "Dionde:gâ'" in the Seneca language.' Eventually French and British explorers encountered the strategic confluence where the Allegheny and Monongahela Rivers meet to form the Ohio, which leads to the Mississippi River.

See Carnegie Mellon University and History of Pittsburgh

HiTech

HiTech was a chess machine built at Carnegie Mellon University under the direction of World Correspondence Chess Champion Dr.

See Carnegie Mellon University and HiTech

Honus Wagner

Johannes Peter "Honus" Wagner (February 24, 1874 – December 6, 1955), sometimes referred to as "Hans" Wagner, was an American baseball shortstop who played 21 seasons in Major League Baseball from 1897 to 1917, almost entirely for the Pittsburgh Pirates.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Honus Wagner

Howard Da Silva

Howard Da Silva (born Howard Silverblatt, May 4, 1909 – February 16, 1986) was an American actor, director and musical performer on stage, film, television and radio.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Howard Da Silva

Hub (bassist)

Leonard "Hub" Hubbard is a former band member of The Roots and played bass for the Philadelphia outfit from 1992 to 2007.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Hub (bassist)

Hypertext

Hypertext is text displayed on a computer display or other electronic devices with references (hyperlinks) to other text that the reader can immediately access, or where text can be revealed progressively at multiple levels of detail (also called StretchText).

See Carnegie Mellon University and Hypertext

Ico

is an action-adventure game developed by SCE Japan Studio and Team Ico, and published by Sony Computer Entertainment, released for the PlayStation 2 video game console in 2001 and 2002 in various regions.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Ico

Identity theft

Identity theft is the deliberate use of someone else's identity, usually as a method to gain a financial advantage or obtain credit and other benefits in the other person's name, and perhaps to the other person's disadvantage or loss.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Identity theft

IDL specification language

IDL (Interface Description Language) is a software interface description language (also referred to as Interface Descriptor Language) created by William Wulf and John Nestor of Carnegie Mellon University and David Lamb of Queen's University, Canada.

See Carnegie Mellon University and IDL specification language

Idlewild and Soak Zone

Idlewild and Soak Zone, commonly known as Idlewild Park or simply Idlewild, is a children's amusement park situated in the Laurel Highlands near Ligonier, Pennsylvania, United States, about east of Pittsburgh, along US Route 30.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Idlewild and Soak Zone

Igor Ansoff

Harry Igor Ansoff (рус. Игорь Ансов; original surname is Ansov) (December 12, 1918 – July 14, 2002) was a Russian American applied mathematician and business manager.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Igor Ansoff

Immaculate Reception

The Immaculate Reception is one of the most famous plays in the history of American football.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Immaculate Reception

Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur

Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur (also known as IIT Kanpur or IITK) is a public engineering institution located in Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur

Industrial and organizational psychology

Industrial and organizational psychology (I/O psychology), which is also known as occupational psychology, organizational psychology, and work and organizational psychology, is an applied discipline within psychology.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Industrial and organizational psychology

Industrial design

Industrial design is a process of design applied to products that are to be manufactured through techniques of mass production.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Industrial design

Information management

Information management (IM) concerns a cycle of organizational activity: the acquisition of information from one or more sources, the custodianship and the distribution of that information to those who need it, and its ultimate disposition through archiving or deletion.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Information management

Information privacy

Information privacy, or data privacy (or data protection), is the relationship between the collection and dissemination of data, technology, the public expectation of privacy, and the legal and political issues surrounding them.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Information privacy

Information Processing Language

Information Processing Language (IPL) is a programming language created by Allen Newell, Cliff Shaw, and Herbert A. Simon at RAND Corporation and the Carnegie Institute of Technology at about 1956.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Information Processing Language

Information security

Information security, sometimes shortened to InfoSec, is the practice of preventing unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, inspection, recording or destruction of information.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Information security

Informedia Digital Library

The Informedia Digital Library is an ongoing research program at Carnegie Mellon University to build search engines and information visualization technology for many types of media.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Informedia Digital Library

Institute of technology

An institute of technology (also: university of technology, polytechnic university, technikon, and technical university) is a type of university which specializes in engineering, technology, applied science, and sometimes natural sciences.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Institute of technology

Instituto Superior Técnico

Instituto Superior Técnico (IST) is a school of engineering, part of the Universidade de Lisboa (University of Lisbon).

See Carnegie Mellon University and Instituto Superior Técnico

Instructional design

Instructional design (ID), or instructional systems design (ISD), is the practice of creating "instructional experiences which make the acquisition of knowledge and skill more efficient, effective, and appealing".

See Carnegie Mellon University and Instructional design

Intel

Intel Corporation (stylized as intel) is an American multinational corporation and technology company headquartered in Santa Clara, California, in the Silicon Valley.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Intel

Interaction design

Interaction design, often abbreviated as IxD, is "the practice of designing interactive digital products, environments, systems, and services." Beyond the digital aspect, interaction design is also useful when creating physical (non-digital) products, exploring how a user might interact with it.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Interaction design

Interactive kiosk

An interactive kiosk is a computer terminal featuring specialized hardware and software that provides access to information and applications for communication, commerce, entertainment, or education.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Interactive kiosk

Interactive storytelling

Interactive storytelling (also known as interactive drama) is a form of digital entertainment in which the storyline is not predetermined.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Interactive storytelling

InterMezzo (file system)

InterMezzo was a distributed file system written for the Linux kernel, distributed under the GNU General Public License.

See Carnegie Mellon University and InterMezzo (file system)

Internet chess server

An Internet chess server (ICS) is an external server that provides the facility to play, discuss, and view the board game of chess over the Internet.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Internet chess server

Internist-I

INTERNIST-I was a broad-based computer-assisted diagnostic tool developed in the early 1970s at the University of Pittsburgh as an educational experiment.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Internist-I

IPOPT

IPOPT, short for "Interior Point OPTimizer, pronounced I-P-Opt", is a software library for large scale nonlinear optimization of continuous systems.

See Carnegie Mellon University and IPOPT

Ivan Sutherland

Ivan Edward Sutherland (born May 16, 1938) is an American computer scientist and Internet pioneer, widely regarded as the "father of computer graphics." His early work in computer graphics as well as his teaching with David C. Evans in that subject at the University of Utah in the 1970s was pioneering in the field.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Ivan Sutherland

IWarp

iWarp was an experimental parallel supercomputer architecture developed as a joint project by Intel and Carnegie Mellon University.

See Carnegie Mellon University and IWarp

Jack Goldman

Jacob "Jack" Goldman (Brooklyn, New York, July 18, 1921 &ndash; Westport, Connecticut, December 20, 2011) was an American physicist and former chief scientist of Xerox Corporation.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Jack Goldman

Jack Klugman

Jack Klugman (April 27, 1922 – December 24, 2012) was an American stage, film, and television actor.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Jack Klugman

Jairam Ramesh

Jairam Ramesh (born 9 April 1954) is an Indian economist and politician belonging to Indian National Congress.

See Carnegie Mellon University and Jairam Ramesh

James Cromwell

James Oliver Cromwell (born January 27, 1940) is an American actor.

See Carnegie Mellon University and James Cromwell

James G. March

James Gardner March (born 1928 in Cleveland, Ohio) is Jack Steele Parker professor emeritus at Stanford University and the Stanford Graduate School of Education, best known for his research on organizations, his (jointly with Richard Cyert) ''A behavioral theory of the firm'' and organizational decision making.

See Carnegie Mellon University and James G. March

James Gosling

James Arthur Gosling, OC (born May 19, 1955) is a Canadian computer scientist, best known as the founder and lead designer behind the Java programming language.

See Carnegie Mellon University and James Gosling

James McClelland (psychologist)

James Lloyd "Jay" McClelland, FBA (born December 1, 1948) is the Lucie Stern Professor at Stanford University, where he was formerly the chair of the Psychology Department.

See Carnegie Mellon University and James McClelland (psychologist)

James Warhola

James Warhola (born March 16, 1955) is an American artist who has illustrated more than two dozen children's picture books since 1987.

See Carnegie Mellon University and James Warhola

Jamie Zawinski

James Werner Zawinski (born November 3, 1968), commonly known as jwz, is an American computer programmer with contributions to t