THE Gambino mob family was founded in the 1900s and was known as one of the "Five Families" that dominate organized crime activities in New York City.

Over the years, multiple family members have passed away but their story will live on in a new ABC documentary.

Who are the Gambino mob family and where are they now?

The family was first formed under the leadership of Salvatore D’Aquila in the 1900s but following his murder in 1928, control was left and taken by multiple people.

The Gambino mob family includes:

Albert Anastasia

Italian-American mobster Umberto "Albert" Anastasia, famously took control of the Gambino family in 1951.

He was also known as the co-founder of Murder, Inc., an organization that was known for mob-related assassinations.

Albert was considered extremely dangerous and some even went as far as to call him insane, according to the Crime Museum.

He was ultimately assassinated in 1957 after members of his crew had plotted against him.

Carlo Gambino

Carlo Gambino is known today as one of the most successful crime bosses of all time.

He was known for strengthing the family and increasing their profit levels all while staying out of the public eye after taking over control following Albert's death.

Carlo was able to avoid being linked to any criminal activity from 1957 to 1976 and never spent a day in jail.

He ultimately passed away on October 15, 1976, after suffering a heart attack.

Aniello Dellacroce

American mobster Aniello John "Neil" Dellacroce was known as the Gambino family's underboss.

He was appointed to the position by Carlo and took over for Joseph Biondo.

Aniello was known as John Gotti's mentor but was ultimately sent to jail in 1973 after being convicted of tax evasion.

He was sentenced to five years in prison and fined $15,000.

Aniello ultimately passed away on December 2, 1985.

Paul Castellano

Paul Castellano took control of the family business in 1976 following the death of Carlo Gambino.

Despite being Carlo's brother-in-law, many were not happy with the way he ran the family.

He was ultimately assassinated on December 16, 1985, after a hit was was ordered on him by John Gotti.

John Gotti

John Gotti notoriously took over control of the Gambino family in 1985 following the murder of Paul Castellano, with Salvatore “Sammy the Bull” Gravano as his second-in-command.

Over the years, John was able to avoid criminal charges and was found not guilty at three different trials, which led to his nickname, “The Teflon Don."

Despite his success, his Underbook later turned on him which led to him being sentenced to life in prison in 1992.

John later died on June 10, 2002.

John Angelo Gotti Jr.

Following John Gotti's death, his son, John Gotti Jr., 57, took over in 1992.

The law eventually caught up with John Jr. as well and in 1999, he pled guilty to four acts of racketeering including bribery, extortion, and the threat of violence.

He was later sentenced to six years and five months in prison.

After his sentence, he reportedly left the criminal life behind and has become an entrepreneur and writer.

Despite serving his time, John Jr. revealed that he sometimes feels guilty because of his freedom.

"I’m home with my family and friends, and I run numerous businesses, while some of my former peers are serving life sentences, many for crimes they did not commit, often because rats lied about them," he wrote in an essay for Men's Journal.

"I often feel guilty I’m free and they’re not."

Sammy "The Bull" Gravano

Born March 12, 1945, Salvatore "Sammy the Bull" Gravano, 76, is known as a former mobster who served as the underboss of the Gambino crime family.

Sammy is responsible for helping the FBI bring down powerful Gambino boss John Gotti for good after he turned against the family.

"Being a gangster, actually in my life, was a curse," Gravano told ABC News, "and it did affect my family."

After confessing to 19 murders, including the killings of his best friend, Louis Milito, and his brother-in-law, Sammy spent five years in prison.

He was then arrested again in 2000 for his ecstasy drug ring which ran drugs from Arizona to New York in the 1990s. He was sentenced to 20 years in prison and was released in September 2017.

After getting out, he continued to tell his story and even hosts a podcast.

Karen Gravano

Born May 8, 1972, Karen Gravano, 49, is known as Sammy's daughter.

She is known today as a television personality and became a household name after debuting on the VH1 series, Mob Wives. Over the years, she has also appeared on MTV's Families of the Mafia.

Karen has also had some run-ins with the law throughout the course of her life and was even arrested in February 2000 for her involvement in Sammy's ecstasy drug ring.

She ultimately pleaded guilty to the use of wire communications and other drug-related transactions, according to ABC News, and was sentenced to three years of probation.

Karen is also known as a published author and famously wrote the 2012 book, Mob Daughter: The Mafia, Sammy "The Bull" Gravano, and Me!

Gerard Gravano

Gerard Gravano is known as Sammy's son and has also famously appeared on MTV's Families of the Mafia.

Like his sister, he was also arrested in 2000 due to his involvement in Sammy's ecstasy ring and later pleaded guilty to “illegally conducting an enterprise and offering to sell and transport dangerous drug," according to ABC News.

Gerard was sentenced to nine years in prison and later moved to Arizona after he was released and settled down with Amy Lynn Price Gravano, whom he married in 2018.

The couple started a business together in 2016 called Impact Payment Options, LLC, which is known for serving the Credit Card Service industry.

Outside of the company, Amy is known as a hairstylist and a health coach.

They have also welcomed four children together.

What is The Last Gangster?

Truth and Lies: The Last Gangster is an ABC News special that tells the story of Sammy Gravano.

The two-hour special, which is set to premiere on January 27, 2022, at 8:00pm EST, will feature an interview with Sammy as well as other former members of the Gambino family including John Jr, Gerard, and Karen.

There will also be interviews with former FBI and NYPD officers who led the Gambino investigation.