Synopsis

Following Jill Scott's appearance on "I'm a Celeb 2022," there has been an increase in curiosity about the English football player's personal life. Many people are curious about Shelly Unitt, her partner, and how the engaged couple met.

There's been a recent interest and curiosity among netizens on who is Shelly Unitt, fiancée of Jill Scott Jill. Well, Shelly Unitt is Rachel Unitt's younger sister and a former England football star. Despite not being a professional player herself, the 37-year-old nevertheless has a lot in common with her athletic lover.

#Budget' 2024 with ET

Union Budget 2024 Live Updates

In Manchester, Jill and Rachel started a coffee shop named "Boxx2Boxx Coffee" in April 2021. Their patrons range from renowned athletes to devoted locals.

During her free time, Shelly works as a community health officer in Walsall. She also enjoys traveling, frequently updating her social media accounts with news of her most recent international trips.

In the spring of 2020, Jill Scott and Shelly Unitt are engaged but have yet to get married. On March 17, the football player shared the wonderful news on Instagram with a picture of a gorgeous diamond ring with a beautiful band. The photo, which also showed a steaming cup of coffee, was titled "The finest coffee so far," and Shelly was mentioned in the message. Numerous admirers congratulated the pair on the significant step in the hundreds of kind remarks that followed the delighted announcement.

Talking about Jill Scott, She is a former professional football player who was a member of the legendary women's Euro 2022 team that won the competition following a series of wins this August. She began her career in 2004 at Sunderland before moving to Everton in 2006.

The retired football player's 2022 has been a significant year since she brought home the UEFA Women's Euro 2022 title. She gained recognition by appearing in I’m a celebrity 2022 , a former England football player and member of the England Lionesses, is also in the running to be named Queen of the Jungle in I'm a Celebrity 2022.

About six years had passed since Jill and Shelly started dating, and the football player said in 2020 that she was "extremely glad for their fourth Christmas together." She said that she can concentrate on getting married to her longtime partner, Shelly Unitt, now that her sporting career is on hold.

Faqs

Do Jill Scott and Shelly Unitt have any children?

No, Jill Scott and Shelly Unitt have no children yet.

How Long Have Jill Scott and Shelly Unitt Been Together?

According to reports, they have been dating for the last six years.

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

Disclaimer Statement: This content is authored by an external agency. The views expressed here are that of the respective authors/ entities and do not represent the views of Economic Times (ET). ET does not guarantee, vouch for or endorse any of its contents nor is responsible for them in any manner whatsoever. Please take all steps necessary to ascertain that any information and content provided is correct, updated, and verified. ET hereby disclaims any and all warranties, express or implied, relating to the report and any content therein.

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

It took 42 years of grit and finesse to turn a 2-minute promise into an INR9,000 crore brand whose taste unites India

What this Sebi proposal for discerning investors means for MFs and PMS

Economic Survey’s plan to drop food from inflation targeting is a bad idea

Dollar bear cycle may fuel emerging markets rally till 2029: Rohit Srivastava of Indiacharts

Lessons for Indian cybersecurity from Google’s biggest acquisition ever

RBI sets stage for the first shift in monetary policy stance since April 2022

1

2

3