Synopsis

The tour was supposed to take place in 2020, but because of the pandemic, it was postponed.

To commemorate the 20th anniversary of her album ‘Who Is Jill Scott?: Words and Sounds’, Vol. 1, Jill Scott went on tour in the early months of 2020. But because of the Covid pandemic, it was cancelled. Currently, Scott has released the tour's new dates. Beginning on February 28 in Augusta, Georgia, the 23rd-anniversary tour for her 2000 debut studio album will go to Philadelphia, Nashville, Atlanta, Brooklyn, Memphis, and more before coming to an end in June.

#Budget' 2024 with ET

Budget Highlights: Your 2-minute guide

FM 's plan for Viksit Bharat: A look at key numbers

What's in Sitharaman's Budget for you?

Scott will play the entire record from beginning to end while on tour. Three years ago, Scott said in a news release that she and her band were so excited, then that blasted COVID shut us down. She said they are now ready and asked her fans to visit her soon. She said that there is a lot of affection around.

The main public sale at MissJillScott.com begins on Friday, December 9, at 10 AM local time, with pre-sales beginning on 6 December, Tuesday.

Fans may anticipate the Grammy-winning musician performing her cherished debut in its entirety. She said that she is going to stick to the set list from the record. She will perform each song in the album's order. She said that they should bring their CD covers to her audience. Jill also mentioned that some people might be able to recite the list off-hand.

Two of the album's singles—"A Long Walk" and "The Way"—made an appearance on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. The songs peaked at No. 60. Scott also received three nominations for the 43rd Grammy Awards, including Best New Artist, Best Female R&B Vocal Performance, and Best R&B Album.

She also received nominations for "A Long Walk" and "He Loves Me" at the 44th and 45th Grammy Awards, respectively. Best Female R&B Vocal Performance was the category for both nominations.

FAQs:

What song by Jill Scott is the most well-known?

Jill Scott's most well-known song is probably "A Long Walk," which epitomizes 2000s neo-soul.

What was Jill Scott's first single?

Jill Scott's first single was ‘Gettin in the Way’.

#Budget' 2024 with ET

What's cheaper and what's costlier? Here's the list

New slabs announced in new income tax regime

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

Disclaimer Statement: This content is authored by an external agency. The views expressed here are that of the respective authors/ entities and do not represent the views of Economic Times (ET). ET does not guarantee, vouch for or endorse any of its contents nor is responsible for them in any manner whatsoever. Please take all steps necessary to ascertain that any information and content provided is correct, updated, and verified. ET hereby disclaims any and all warranties, express or implied, relating to the report and any content therein.

(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

...moreless

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

...moreless