For nearly 20 years, visitors who showed up early to the Florida Strawberry Festival or stayed late were greeted and sent off by Randy Scott.

Each morning during the signature Plant City event, Scott opened the festival by signing “The Star-Spangled Banner” and closed each evening singing “Happy Trails.” Scott and his wife, Jill, also helped organize and produce local acts in the festival’s entertainment tent.

Now, festival organizers and the community are grappling with the reality that this year’s event was the couple’s last.

The Scotts, both 71, were killed Monday along with Jill Scott’s sister, Judy Cook, in a head-on crash in Manatee County, festival officials confirmed Tuesday.

Cook, 80, lived in Plant City and also volunteered at the festival.

The festival announced the loss in a post on its Facebook page.

“Everyone’s admiration for Mr. Randy started with just him — his sweet demeanor, steadfast spirit, quiet confidence, and genuine concern for others,” the post said. “Mrs. Jill was the jewel of Mr. Randy’s eye. If you could catch a glimpse of her, she would often be seen working fervently behind the scenes to help support her family. Her willingness to serve others and desire to show appreciation for others set her apart from the rest.”

In an interview, festival president Kyle Robinson called the loss devastating for the festival “family” and the tight-knit Plant City-area community.

“They were just a sweet couple and a giving family, and certainly they gave a lot to our Strawberry Festival,” Robinson said.

The Florida Highway Patrol has not released the names of the people involved in the crash. According to a news release from the agency, a 59-year-old Palmetto man was driving a dump truck west on County Road 674 near 161st Avenue E in Parrish about 1:50 p.m. when he drifted onto the shoulder at a curve in the road.

The truck driver overcorrected, crossed the road in front of the Scotts’ SUV and drove onto the southern shoulder, troopers said. The driver of the SUV — Randy Scott — swerved right to avoid a collision and also drove onto the southern shoulder, where the truck and SUV collided head-on.

The Scotts and Cook died at the scene. The driver of the dump truck was taken to Manatee Memorial Hospital to be treated for minor injuries, troopers said.

In a 2019 Tampa Bay Times story, Randy Scott said he “was in the baby parade at the Strawberry Festival and I grew up singing ‘Davy Crockett’ on my stick horse.”

In a 2020 feature story by Fox 13, Randy Scott said he and the woman he would eventually marry were both delivered by the same doctor about a month and a half apart. Randy Scott grew up singing in church and called his festival duties “a fulfilling thing.”

“It just makes you feel good to see the folks coming out, enjoying the shows and just having a good time here at the Strawberry Festival,” he told the station.

Among the Scotts’ survivors are three daughters, Aimee, Angel and April, and a grandson who also helped at the festival.

Robinson said the Scott family dedicated much of their time to making sure the entertainment tent featured talented local acts.

“Whether it’s a church choir or a school chorus or a local dance group from the community that wanted to come and showcase their talent, they’re the ones that put all that together,” Robinson said. “It gave them an opportunity to get up there and perform in front of all their friends and family and it was just a special thing, and it was certainly a passion and labor of love for that entire family.”

Robinson said Randy and Jill Scott attended a retirement celebration on the festival grounds Friday for festival vice president and office manager Ellany Johnson and president Paul Davis.

“A lot of us had the opportunity to speak to them and hug them,” Robinson said, “and little did we know they’d be taken from us so abruptly in just a couple of days.”