Changzhou Kemao Drying Equipment Co., Ltd. design, manufacture drying equipment, granulating equipment, mixing equipment, crushing equipment, dust removal equipment, stove and so on. To provide users with equipment selection, design, manufacture, installation and commissioning services. Comer company has strong technical force, advanced processing equipment, strict quality management to improve product application capabilities, develop new products. Company brings together a group of highly qualified professionals, with many years of experience in various departments of the young by the act. Companies adhere to the "people-oriented" principle, continue to attract the best talent, and pharmaceutical, chemical and food manufacturers, research institutes together to study new techniques, application of new technologies, develop new products.

Comer made progress every point, every success is inseparable from the community's concern and support. Comer people know to meet user demand, production-use devices allow users peace of mind, rest assured, there is a sense of accomplishment that we should do. Comer upholds the scientific, standardized design ideas, making customer satisfaction, humane equipment; emphasis on equipment efficiency and energy saving, environmental protection both, all for the sake of users, advocates quality equipment and service user feedback, to win more care and support to achieve sustainable development. Comer vigorously promote honesty, pragmatism, innovation, development of corporate culture. Advocate doing socially responsible businesses, socially responsible Comer people.

Comer Changzhou Drying Equipment Co., Ltd. located in the scenic Yangtze River Delta, Yangtze River Delta manufacturing industry developed industrial city - Changzhou, located in Shanghai, Nanjing economic zone hinterland, a pleasant climate and convenient transportation, warmly welcome new and old customers, domestic foreign friends to visit, together with the progress, create brilliant!

New General Manager Gu wholeheartedly welcome new and old friends to visit and cooperation

Operating rules: quality reputation first customer requirements for the quality control objectives

Quality policy: market-oriented, customer satisfaction for the purpose of continuous improvement, to achieve international quality, industry-leading level

Warranty: One year warranty equipment; provide lifelong maintenance services

Installation and commissioning and training services: Delegating engineering and technical personnel to help guide the installation and commissioning of equipment, training of operators

Accessories Services: full accessories provide long-term service

Factory Service: Equipment manufactured after passing inspection, sent in advance to notify the user acceptance, arrange transportation