Committed to transform scientific innovation into outstanding products

ProcessGene management team is composed of world-class Business Process Management experts, that have succeeded to establish the company as leader of a new and thrilling global industry. Our executive team is committed to continuing the translation of ProcessGene’s scientific innovation into outstanding product and business achievements.

Avi Wasser, Ph.D, Executive Director

Dr. Avi Wasser is an information systems expert, in the fields of BPM and GRC financial software. He is the co-inventor of Multi-Org GRC/BPM technology, and of the ProcessWeb extraction and search algorithms. Related to his research work, Dr. Wasser has been serving as a Business Process Management / GRC advisor for some of the world’s largest enterprises. Dr. Wasser has been a research fellow at the Center for Dynamic Enterprise Modeling at the Technion, Israel’s institute of technology, where he also graduated his post doctoral studies. Wasser brings to ProcessGene an extensive understanding of BPM- with unique expertise in finance and regulatory compliance. He published several academic papers and has participated as speaker in the most important BPM and GRC scientific conferences. His professional experience includes heading a unit of Cyclone Ltd – a subsidiary of the Elbit Group (NASDAQ: ESLTF), being a founding team member of Niragongo Inc. (purchased by Unipier) and service as a commissioned officer at the Israeli Navy.

Current quote: “Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace” Proverbs, 3:17.

Maya Lincoln, Ph.D, VP of R&D

Head of ProcessGene Innovation Center

Dr. Lincoln is an Information Systems expert, with extensive research and development background. Lincoln has vast field experience in practical software design and development and she has led large-scale software development projects. Her professional experience includes positions such as chief software architect at the LSRT consortium where she was in charge of realizing a high-performance distributed computing system, and being in charge of core R&D at Dealigence Technologies Ltd – a subsidiary of the Elbit Group (NASDAQ: ESLTF). Dr. Lincoln’s academic background includes research fellowship at the Technion’s Center for Dynamic Enterprise Modeling. She earned her Ph.D from the Technion, Israel’s Institute of Technology. Dr. Lincoln holds a CRISC certification.

Current quote: “Will we someday understand time and space and existence itself – as a self-synthesized information system?”, John Archibald Wheeler, 1989.

Tal Aharon, LL.b, Director of Operations

Mr. Aharon brings to ProcessGene a wealth of experience in the enterprise software industry, as well as an extensive background in project management and GRC consulting (mainly Risk Management) to global organizations. Mr. Aharon was in charge of international sales and account management at Niragongo technologies Inc. (acquired by Unipier) where he led the delivery of complex software products to some of Europe’s largest mobile carriers and solution integrators. Prior to that he was in charge of account and project management at Commtouch (NASDAQ: CTCH)- pioneers of Web communications and messaging. Mr. Aharon received his LL.B degree from the University of Haifa in Israel. In his background Mr. Aharon is also a certified business coach, with vast expertise in improving personal effectiveness in organizations.

Current quote: “Easy is right. Begin right and you are easy” Chuang-Tzu (Zhuangzi), ca. 300 CE.

Alon Bianco, CPA, Director of Finance