Alon Leibovich is the CEO and co-founder of BrandTotal. Leibovich is a pioneer in the brandtech space, empowering Fortune 500 companies to break through in the social landscape by leveraging social competitive analytics. A marketing and advertising veteran, Alon spent years at leading agencies including McCann. He successfully raised $20M in total funding for BrandTotal and launched the company internationally.

Alon is a member of Forbes Business Council, and holds a BA in Business Administration and Psychology from Ben-Gurion University, and a MS.c from the Technion in Behavioral and Business Administration sciences.

Daniel’s expertise and proven accomplishments are in bringing new technologies and new products from idea to commercialization across global markets.

Haier, a Chinese company, is the global leader in the production and distribution of home appliances, with brands such as GE Appliances in North America, MABE in South America, Candy & Hoover in Europe, AQUA in Japan, and many others. In 2017, Daniel established Haier's first innovation center out of China in order to introduce innovations and technologies from Israel to Haier's Global R&D Centers. The Israeli center has since expanded its territory into Europe and is a key component of Haier's global innovation ecosystem.

Daniel held several C-level executive positions with technology companies and accumulated vast international business development and sales experience. His previous positions include: Co-Founder & CEO of Explay Ltd. (an early developer of pico-projectors), General Manager (Voice Business Unit) and Corporate VP at Terayon Communications Inc., and Co-Founder and President at QualiTau Inc. Daniel has spearheaded business development and market penetration activities in the Asia region, in particular in China, Japan, and Taiwan. Daniel holds an MBA from the Coller School of Management at Tel-Aviv University, and holds a B.Sc. in Industrial Engineering from the Technion Institute of Technology in Haifa.

David started his career at the House of Commons working for a member of the UK Parliament. He swapped politics for the cut and thrust of advertising.

Joining Bates Dorland, he became main Board Director for strategy and Managing Director of the consulting and digital divisions and CEO of the worldwide retail and technology centre of excellence. David joined Kingfisher’s B&Q plc, one of Europe’s largest retailers sitting on the main board of directors as UK and International Marketing Director. David was on the management team that led B&Q’s international expansion to Eastern Europe and Asia including China where he lived in Shanghai for a while.

David is now at WPP as the CEO of The Store, the WPP Global Retail Practice and Chairman, BAV Group. David is an acknowledged expert in Branding and Consumer change in China. He is a leading authority on digital, Artificial Intelligence and Voice in retail.

David has authored a number of books and studies, including “A History of Retail in 100 Objects”; “The Third Era of Digital Retailing”; “Smart Shopping – How Artificial Intelligence is transforming the retail conversation”; “Retailing to the customer of one. How mass customisation and IoT makes the personal possible and profitable”; “The Thoughts of Chairmen Now: Wisdom and Insights from China’s Business Leaders and Entrepreneurs”; “The China Dream”; “Brand Stories” celebrating the enduring power of iconic brands, "Do you hear what I hear- our voice activated digital future", "Dates with Destiny- Understanding China's Shopping Festivals" and his latest book "LOOK - A Book of Changes" a pictorial reflection of China over the past 10 years. David is the creator and narrator of a documentary film on Alibaba

“Open Sesame - the Birth and Rise of Alibaba” He broadcasts and lectures around the world including BBC, CCTV China, CNBC, Davos The World Economic Forum, Yale, CKGSB and Cambridge Universities. David is a former non-executive director of the NGO, “TFT”, an organisation dedicated to sustainable production. He is Chairman of the Centre for International Business and Management (CIBAM) where Academics, Business and Policy Makers meet with activities taking place at Queens’ College, University of Cambridge. He is a board member of China-Britain Business Council.

david.roth@wpp.com, www.wpp.com Twitter: davidrothlondon

Dor Isseroff is the Director of Partnerships and Growth at ironSource Aura. Dor joined ironSource in 2015, and since 2017 has been based out of Berlin leading Aura's new business and growth activity in Europe. Dor works closely with hundreds of app developers, brands, and agencies, as well as leading European telcos such as Orange, Vodafone, Hutch (ThreeUK), and Samsung - helping each one scale their businesses with Aura.

ironSource is a leading business platform that enables mobile content creators to prosper within the app economy. App developers use ironSource's platform to turn their apps into successful, scalable businesses, leveraging a comprehensive set of software solutions which help them grow and engage users, monetize content, and analyze and optimize business performance to drive more overall growth. The ironSource platform also empowers telecom operators to create a richer device experience, incorporating relevant app and service recommendations to engage users throughout the lifecycle of the device. By providing a comprehensive business platform for the core constituents of the app economy, ironSource allows customers to focus on what they do best, creating great apps and user experiences, while we enable their business expansion in the app economy. For more information please visit www.is.com

Dov Moran is one of the most prominent Israeli hi-tech leaders in the world, and the Managing Partner of Grove Ventures.

He is an investor, inventor and entrepreneur, who is best known as the inventor of the USB flash drive.

Moran founded M-Systems, acquired by SanDisk for $US 1.6 billion in 2006.

He also served as the chairman of Tower Semiconductors, a developer and manufacturer of semiconductors and integrated circuits, in which he led a massive overhaul. Under Moran’s guidance, the company achieved a notable turnaround and became an enormous success.

Mr. Moran was awarded with multiple prizes, including Ernst & Young’s “Entrepreneur of the Year” award, the prestigious Edward Rheine award, the Johnson Information Storage Systems Award and the Netexplo Talent of the Year award. He holds Honorary Doctorates from Israel's Academic Center of Law & Science, the Moscow State Technical University and the Technion - the Israeli Institute of Technology.

He lectures extensively in universities and schools, and servs as a mentor to many Israeli entrepreneurs, to which he assists in converting research and innovation into viable businesses. His book 100 Doors - An Introduction to Entrepreneurship was published in 2016 and included insights from his untraditional path.

Moran also established few other companies and invested in many others prior to establishing Grove Ventures.