In French, you use specific subject pronouns for it/he/she/they depending on what they refer to.

The subject pronouns "it/he/she/they" in French

Il means he or it (for a masculine noun)

Jean travaille dans le club. - Il travaille dans le club.Jean works in the club. - He works in the club.

Le stylo est sur la table. - Il est sur la table.The pen is on the table. - It is on the table.

Elle means she or it (for a feminine noun)

La fleur est jolie. - Elle est jolie.The flower is pretty. - It is pretty.

Ils means they (for masculine or mixed plural nouns)

Jean et Paul vont au cinéma. - Ils vont au cinéma.Jean and Paul are going to the cinema. - They are going to the cinema.

Elles means they or them (when every one of the group are female or feminine nouns)

Les fleurs sont jolies. - Elles sont jolies.The flowers are pretty. - They are pretty.

See also "C'est" vs "Il/Elle est" to say it is/she is/he is in French

Grammar note: Pronouns are general words that replace specific nouns in sentences. A verb has a subject (the person or thing doing the verb), and may have an object (the thing being done to). Subject pronouns are usually different to object pronouns, so you cannot use one to replace the other (in English it can be either, but French uses distinct words) .

Subject - Verb - Object

(sub) Jean (verb) kicks (obj) the ball > (subj pron) He (verb) kicks (obj pron) it

Want to make sure your French sounds confident? We’ll map your knowledge and give you free lessons to focus on your gaps and mistakes. Start your Brainmap today »

Find your French level for FREE

Test your French to the CEFR standard

Learn more about these related French grammar topics

Examples and resources

Jean travaille dans le club. - Il travaille dans le club.Jean works in the club. - He works in the club.

Jean et Paul vont au cinéma. - Ils vont au cinéma.Jean and Paul are going to the cinema. - They are going to the cinema.

Les fleurs sont jolies. - Elles sont jolies.The flowers are pretty. - They are pretty.

Le stylo est sur la table. - Il est sur la table.The pen is on the table. - It is on the table.

La fleur est jolie. - Elle est jolie.The flower is pretty. - It is pretty.