Grant Aleksander BIO

The bulk of Aleksander's TV work has been in daytime dramas (soap operas).

Aleksander is perhaps best known for his portrayal of Phillip Spaulding on the daytime drama Guiding Light. Aleksander played Phillip in several stints over a span of almost 30 years. His initial run was from 1982 to 1984. When Aleksander left the role, it was recast with actor John Bolger. Aleksander returned to Guiding Light in late 1986, leaving again in 1991, citing exhaustion from being front-burner five days a week for five years, as well as the loss of both of his parents in the early 1990s. Aleksander again returned to the show in April 1996, and Phillip was once again involved in front-burner story with ex-wife Beth, as well as new love interests Harley Cooper and Olivia Spencer.

The announcement in 2004 that Aleksander was let go by the show came as a shock; media reports speculated on a number of possible reasons, including Aleksander's high salary, and allegations that Aleksander was temperamental or had been feuding with the actress who portrayed his love interest.

In terms of story, the character of Phillip appeared to be murdered on-screen, but a subsequent story the next year revealed that the character was alive.

In late 2008, it was announced by the official Guiding Light website that he would be reprising his role as Phillip Spaulding. Aleksander resumed the role on February 9, 2009, and played Phillip until the show ended in September 2009.

Aleksander also had a brief stint on Capitol for the 1986 season as dastardly DJ Phillips, and played Alec McIntyre on All My Children from 1993 to 1996.

Aleksander played the bartender at "Mickey's Bar" in the 1986 movie Tough Guys, starring Burt Lancaster and Kirk Douglas. In 2006, he appeared in two motion pictures, The Big Bad Swim and the American Civil War film Fields of Freedom.

He was also featured on several episodic television series, mostly in the 1980s and 1990s. His first appearance was in the ABC Afterschool Special, "A Very Delicate Matter". His guest starring roles include Who's the Boss? and The Fall Guy. Aleksander also played Nicholas Drake in the 1986 made-for-TV movie Dark Mansions.

Aleksander returned to Washington and Lee as a Guest Artist in the first "Dick Sessoms Honorary Production" of Shaw's "Mrs. Warren's Profession." He played Sir George Crofts, with Rob Mish directing.

Grant Aleksander News

GUIDING LIGHT Stars Join Cast Of PERFECT CRIME To Celebrate Its 33rd Year

Executive-Producer Armand Hyatt today announced that two Emmy-nominated and beloved soap stars are joining the cast of Off-Broadway's longest running play, PERFECT CRIME this month, celebrating the record-breaking murder mystery as it enters its historic 33rd year of performances. Both Robert Newman and Grant Aleksander of GUIDING LIGHT fame will be taking on the role of Detective James Ascher in the classic whodunit that continues its run in the Anne L. Bernstein Theater at The Theater Center. Mr. Newman will perform in the role now through May 8th and May 24th - June 16th and Mr. Aleksander will perform in the role May 10th - May 22nd and June 17th - June 30th. For tickets: https://www.ticketmaster.com/Perfect-Crime-tickets/artist/935439or you can call The Theater Center box office at 212-921-7862.

Emmy Nominated Grant Aleksander Joins PERFECT CRIME Off-Broadway

Emmy Nominated actor Grant Aleksander, best known for his role as Philip Spaulding on Guiding Light is replacing two other daytime drama legends Robert Newman (Guiding Light) and Richard Shoberg (All My Children), in Off Broadway's longest running play, Perfect Crime. Mr. Aleksander is returning to the role of Detective Asher (a role he took on this past Summer) and begins performances tonight, January 14, 2019, for two weeks only - through January 28.

Emmy-Nominated Star Grant Aleksander To Perform Off-Broadway In PERFECT CRIME

Emmy Nominated actor Grant Aleksander, best known for his role as Philip Spaulding on Guilding Light is replacing two other daytime drama legends Robert Newman (Guiding Light) and Richard Shoberg (All My Children), in Off Broadway's longest running play, Perfect Crime. Mr. Aleksander is returning to the role of Detective Asher (a role he took on this Spring) and begins performances tonight.

PERFECT CRIME Celebrates Its 31st Anniversary Today

The Off-Broadway 'whodunit' PERFECT CRIME will celebrate its 31st Anniversary today - continuing on as the longest-running play in the city's history. The smart, funny and fast-paced thriller plays in the Anne L. Bernstein Theater at The Theater Center in Times Square (1627 Broadway).

PERFECT CRIME Will Celebrate Its 31st Anniversary On April 18

The Off-Broadway 'whodunit' PERFECT CRIME will celebrate its 31st Anniversary on Wednesday, April 18th - continuing on as the longest-running play in the city's history. The smart, funny and fast-paced thriller plays in the Anne L. Bernstein Theater at The Theater Center in Times Square (1627 Broadway).

New Soap Opera Series TAINTED DREAMS to Premiere on Amazon Prime 12/26

TAINTED DREAMS, the Emmy nominated web-series about the 'behind the scenes' drama of the fictitious soap Painted Dreams is slated to start streaming on Amazon on December 26, 2016.

New Soap Opera Series TAINTED DREAMS to Premiere on Amazon Prime 12/26

TAINTED DREAMS, the Emmy nominated web-series about the 'behind the scenes' drama of the fictitious soap Painted Dreams is slated to start streaming on Amazon on December 26, 2016.

TAINTED DREAMS Scores Two Independent Series Award Nominations

NYC Brand Production's first scripted series, Tainted Dreams garners two Independent Series Award nominations for: 'Best Ensemble Cast' and 'Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama' for Alicia Minshew best known for her role as 'Erica Kane's' daughter, 'Kendall Hart' on All My Children. Tainted Dreams' ensemble cast boasts eight of Off-Broadway's funniest folks. Stars of the Off-Broadway comedy hits, 'My Big Gay Italian Wedding,' now celebrating its 10thAnniversary Off-Broadway, and its sequel 'My Big Gay Italian Funeral' including Anthony Wilkinson (creator and executive producer of 'Wedding' and 'Funeral', Debra Toscano, Paul Moon, Brian Patrick Murphy, Brett Douglas, Erik Ransom, Meagan Robar and Marissa Perry, all moonlight as part of the Independent Series Award-nominated 'Best Ensemble Cast' from Tainted Dreams.

'Real Housewives' Star Dina Manzo Begins Filming TAINTED DREAMS

“Real Housewives of New Jersey,” star Dina Manzo will film her first scenes August 8 as a member of the cast of NYC Brand Production's first, scripted dramedy, 'Tainted Dreams.”

Photo Coverage: CAT ON A HOT TIN ROOF's Opening Night Theatre Arrivals

Tennessee Williams' Cat on a Hot Tin Roof, starring Scarlett Johansson as Maggie, Ciarán Hinds as Big Daddy, Benjamin Walker as Brick and Debra Monk as Big Mama, directed by Rob Ashford, opened last night January 17, and BroadwayWorld.com was there to capture all of the excitement and glamour of the evening. Check out photos from the opening theatre arrivals below!

BWW's Top New Jersey Theatre Stories of 2012

BroadwayWorld brings you the Best of New Jersey in the year 2012. Check out the Top Theatre Stories from each month during in the year 2012. We look forward to another exciting year of theatre in 2013!

Grant Aleksander to Star in Shakespeare Theatre of New Jersey's 2012 Play Reading Series

The Shakespeare Theatre of New Jersey will launch its third annual Lend Us Your Ears play reading series on Monday, March 12 at 7 p.m. with Eve of Ides, a new play by author David Blixt. The series also includes readings of William Shakespeare's Henry IV, Part Two on July 16 and the comedy Wittenberg by David Davalos on September 24. All readings will be held at 7:00 pm at the Shakespeare Theatre's Main Stage, the F.M. Kirby Shakespeare Theatre, 36 Madison Ave. (at Lancaster Road) in Madison. The Lend Us Your Ears discount subscription series, featuring tickets to all three readings, is $36 for adults and $24 for students. Individual tickets are $15 each for adults and $10 for students. For tickets or more information, call the box office at 973-408-5600 or visit www.ShakespeareNJ.org.

Grant Aleksander to Star in Shakespeare Theatre of New Jersey's 2012 Play Reading Series

The Shakespeare Theatre of New Jersey will launch its third annual Lend Us Your Ears play reading series on Monday, March 12 at 7 p.m. with Eve of Ides, a new play by author David Blixt. The series also includes readings of William Shakespeare's Henry IV, Part Two on July 16 and the comedy Wittenberg by David Davalos on September 24. All readings will be held at 7:00 pm at the Shakespeare Theatre's Main Stage, the F.M. Kirby Shakespeare Theatre, 36 Madison Ave. (at Lancaster Road) in Madison. The Lend Us Your Ears discount subscription series, featuring tickets to all three readings, is $36 for adults and $24 for students. Individual tickets are $15 each for adults and $10 for students. For tickets or more information, call the box office at 973-408-5600 or visit www.ShakespeareNJ.org.

THE REAL LOVE Debuts at Pasadena Civic, Broadcasts Live

Over 3,000 people gave a rousing standing ovation for the world premiere of 'The Real Love,' a new musical which brought together some of the biggest names of Hollywood and Broadway onstage at the Pasadena Civic. In what may be the first time in musical theater history, the opening of 'The Real Love' was also experienced by worldwide television viewers watching the live broadcast on Supreme Master Television. This unique occasion was to celebrate the channel's fifth anniversary of constructive programming.

Animal Haven Shelter to Honor Bebe Neuwirth Oct. 28

Animal Haven Shelter announced today that the Florence Brenner Award will be presented their 41st Going Home Luncheon, which will take place on Sunday, October 28th at Dante Caterers in Queens, NYC.

Gerson's Play 'Night' Begins at FringeNYC August 10

The Occasional Theatre will present the world premiere of Night by Philip Gerson, as part of the 11th annual New York International Fringe Festival - FringeNYC at the Connelly Theatre

Philip Gerson's Play 'Night' to Play FringeNYC in Aug.

The Occasional Theatre will present the world premiere of Night by Philip Gerson, as part of the 11th annual New York International Fringe Festival - FringeNYC at the Connelly Theatre