“What they need is a union.”

Human trafficking has emerged as an enormous crime in the last couple of decades, and has been used as a plot device for umpteen films. Liam Neeson’s Taken film series comes to mind.

Hot Shots, the third episode of The Wire’s second season, also explains the plight of young women from less-developed countries who are tricked and then sold like meat. The sheer scale at which it is done and the way the whole system is gamed is mindboggling in itself. When a DoJ official explains to Bunk and his two colleagues, Lester and Beatrice “Beadie” Russell, that 50,000 such women are working across the United States, Russell makes the remark, “What they need is a union.”

Unions, the working class’ way of fighting with the capitalist class for its rights and demands, are having a tough time. At least the stevedores union is. Work has dried up, and there’s no surety when or if the new canal would be built. That’s pushed Frank Sobotka to people like Senator Clay Davis, in an attempt to get funding for projects so that good times return to the docks.

Speaking of returns, Omar Little is back in Baltimore. He has resumed his stick-ups and has found a new lover and a couple of allies. Only a matter of time before he and McNulty meet, you’d suppose. McNulty is continuing his own investigation into the 14 murders, and takes his ideas to Bunk and co, thinking he’ll shock them. But woodman Lester and cigarboi Bunk, along with Officer Russell, have already done that digging, turning the tables on him.

Someone else who does that is Elena, Jimmy’s estranged wife. She serves him a separation agreement. He wants to get back with her, but things don’t look rosy there. While Jimmy’s sadness is genuine, I struggle to think how Elena could realistically take him back, knowing he’s still seeing Rhonda Pearlman.

I’m perplexed about Stringer Bell’s gameplan. He’s loyal to Avon, which is fine. But with Avon in the can for a fair few years, why won’t he try to become the no. 1 himself? He’s quite content to be the brains and enforcer behind the Barksdale operation, spiking Tilghman’s dope, although he sees nothing wrong in sleeping with Dee’s girl. I’m intrigued to see where this goes.

Sobotka’s nephew, Nick, and his son Ziggy, steal a container with 400 Japanese digital cameras. Their going to business with the Greeks behind his back won’t please Frank, I think. The thing is, Nick is in a desperate place, with barely 6 days of work in a month. No wonder he’s looking for alternate sources of income.

The real antagonist this season has to be the Greek crew. That the Greek isn’t concerned about the loss of millions of dollars with the girls’ death talks a lot about his deep pockets, and also brings the question – Which public figures and departments does he have in those pockets?

I like how Valchek is unwittingly helping us get a reunion of the old crew. Some credit has to go to Prez too, you’d think. The previous week, Valchek was happy to join hands with acting commissioner Burrell. And now, having seen the useless turds Burrell’s handed him, he’s not shy about going to the latter and scare him about rattling his bid to get the big seat permanently. The same deputizing of useless men happened last season too, but Daniels got lucky. That might happen again as Valchek got Burrell to depute him to this new task force. Daniels will try to refuse this offer, but he’ll surely stay on. And that is good both for him and for us viewers. It also means my prediction of him coming up against the likes of Burrell in the future could only come to fruition from inside the department, not from the bar.

Hot Shots focusses on people ready to do anything to get what they want. Sobotka grease the dock worker. Avon gets the drugs spiked. Elena serves the separation agreement. Nick ventures into the world of crime on his own. Heck, even Valchek rocks the boat. These people are fighting against the circumstances that pushed them into these situations, a pushback to regain a semblance of foothold, to do what they want to do.

Who knows who’ll OD on this?

If you liked this post, do share your thoughts in the comments section.

Featured image courtesy.

Thanks for reading.