Ava Kofman (“Measure for Measure,” p. 28), a reporter for ProPublica, has written for the Times Magazine and New York, among other publications. This article is a collaboration between The New Yorker and ProPublica. Mary Beard (“Divine Comedy,” p. 18) is a former professor of classics at the University of Cambridge. She will publish “Emperor of Rome” in October. Nikhil Krishnan (Books, p. 58) is a fellow in philosophy at Robinson College, Cambridge. Inkoo Kang (On Television, p. 74), a staff writer, became a television critic for the magazine last October. Christian Wiman (Poem, p. 34) published, most recently, the poetry collection “Survival Is a Style.” His next book, “Zero at the Bone,” is forthcoming in December. Rebecca Mead (The Talk of the Town, p. 14), a staff writer, published “Home/Land” in 2022. Peter Hessler (“A…

BEHIND THE SCENES Michael Schulman’s otherwise insightful piece about the Marvel Cinematic Universe left out the single most important “origin story” behind this cultural phenomenon (“Comic Effect,” June 12th). The animation executive Margaret Loesch was the person who made Marvel storytelling work in Hollywood. Between 1966 and 1992, there were no truly successful Marvel-superhero adaptations in film or television. In the nineteen-eighties, Loesch and Stan Lee pitched Marvel properties to NBC, ABC, and CBS, only to be told they’d never work onscreen. When Loesch became president of the fledgling Fox Children’s Network, she insisted on airing an X-Men animated series (for which I served as showrunner). It became a worldwide sensation, quickly taking what had been a small, fourth-place network to a dominant first-place position in Saturday-morning TV ratings. Its success…

The Jamaican-born artist Ebony G. Patterson’s installation “… things come to thrive… in the shedding … in the molting…,” at the New York Botanical Garden, in the Bronx (through Oct. 22), is the result of a four-year residency. Dotting the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory and its lawn are glittering black-foam vultures and glass sculptures of feet and plants, just some of the pieces with which Patterson probes the garden’s surface. “How do I get people to look beneath the landscape?” she asks. “There’s a secret that’s being concealed.” As ever, it’s advisable to check in advance to confirm engagements. MUSIC “Carmen” OPERA Tucked behind the wrought-iron gate of the West Side Community Garden, on West Eighty-ninth Street, On Site Opera presents an hour’s worth of excerpts from “Carmen.” The concert winnows down Bizet’s sultry…

At Mariscos El Submarino, which opened in 2020, on the border of Jackson Heights and Elmhurst, in Queens, there’s no ambiguity about what you’re in for. On a chaotic block of Roosevelt Avenue, the restaurant is beachy and brightly lit, mariachi blaring, plastic cutlery and several hot-sauce bottles on every table. The menu is dense with affordably priced seafood dishes from the northwest coast of Mexico, including multiple varieties of aguachile, for which raw shrimp (or an assortment of shrimp, fish, and octopus) is quick-cured in a brothy mix of lime juice, salt, and chili. Mitica—the second restaurant from El Submarino’s owners, Alonso Guzman and Amy Hernandez—which opened in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, in May, is altogether more mysterious. “You’ve heard a lot of stories but never anything like this,” Mitica’s Instagram bio…

The masks came out again this month—only, contrary to the covid years, New Yorkers donned them outdoors and slid them off when they stepped inside. As smoke from hundreds of Canadian wildfires drifted across the northern U.S. border, engulfing much of the eastern seaboard in an orange miasma, it sent New York’s air quality to the worst levels on record, and, at one point, the worst in the world. Planes were grounded, outdoor activities were cancelled, and patients with asthma and other respiratory conditions filled emergency rooms. Senator Chuck Schumer called on the Biden Administration to send more American firefighters up North to stave off a “summer of smoke.” There is nothing more fundamental to life than respiration, and an awareness that the air around you isn’t fit to breathe can…

Two decades ago, when Nicholas Cullinan worked part time as a visitor-services assistant at London’s National Portrait Gallery, one of his least favorite parts of the job was the uniform. “It was polyester,” he explained the other day. “You would put the shirt on, and it was itchy, and it just didn’t feel good.” In 2015, after stints at the Tate Modern and at New York’s Metropolitan Museum, Cullinan was appointed director of the gallery, with a brief to undertake a major renovation of the institution, which reopens this month, after a three-year closure. Among the changes: a new range of gender-neutral, natural-fibre, part-recycled workwear options for the front-of-house staff, emblazoned with the gallery’s logo. “It suits all types of bodies, skin tones, and age groups, so I am kind…