TinyHousebeiDresden 1 - direkt am Naturteich - Nähe Sächsische Schweiz, Dresden, a property with a garden, is located in Großharthau, 26 km from Pillnitz Castle and Park, 27 km from Saxon Switzerland National Park, as well as 29 km from Panometer Dresden. This property offers access to a balcony, free private parking and free WiFi. On clear days, guests can head outside to enjoy the holiday home's outdoor fireplace or simply kick back and relax. Providing a terrace with lake views, this holiday home also offers a flat-screen TV, a well-equipped kitchenette with a dishwasher, an oven and a microwave, as well as 1 bathroom with a shower and a hair dryer. For added privacy, the accommodation features a private entrance. Guests at the holiday home will be able to enjoy activities in and around Großharthau, like cycling, fishing and hiking. The holiday home has a picnic area where you can spend a day out in the open. Brühl's Terrace is 30 km from TinyHousebeiDresden 1 - direkt am Naturteich - Nähe Sächsische Schweiz, Dresden, while Frauenkirche Dresden is 31 km away. The nearest airport is Dresden Airport, 34 km from the accommodation.

This property will not accommodate hen, stag or similar parties. Guests are required to show a photo identification and credit card upon check-in. Please note that all Special Requests are subject to availability and additional charges may apply. Guests under the age of 18 can only check in with a parent or official guardian. If you cause damage to the property during your stay, you could be asked to pay up to EUR 300 after check-out, according to this property's <a target="_blank" href="https://www.booking.com/content/terms.html#sep2023_terms_accommodations_know_subheading_6">Damage Policy</a>. Please note that bed linen and towels are not provided. Guests can bring their own or rent them at the property for the following extra charges: Bed linen: 10 € per person, per stay Towels: 5 € per person, per stay. Please contact the property before arrival for rental. When travelling with pets, please note that an extra charge of 15€ per pet, per night applies. Please note that a maximum of 2 pets is allowed. Washing machine and/or dryer for 5€ each per use. Please note that since check-in is contactless via a key safe, guests are required to send photo of their ID card (front and back) and the completed registration form after booking. Managed by a private host