Großharthau. For Thomas Schmidt, Monday was actually a mountain festival. Saxony's Environment and Agriculture Minister is currently touring the so-called Leader regions of the Free State, which use European funds to promote projects in rural areas. "I have already visited half of them," he explained at the Werab family in Schmiedefeld. The minister started his visit to the Leader region of Westlausitz on their four-sided farm.

He could well have celebrated Bergfest in Janine and Mario Werab's vaulted cellar. It is ideally suited for parties. The 70th birthday of Mario Werab's father-in-law was just celebrated there. Although "there is still a lot to be done," as the house builders explain. Nevertheless, the minister and his entourage are delighted. The room, with its unplastered, historic brick vault, is already a real eye-catcher. Part of the ceiling already shines in the most beautiful rust red. The rest still needs work. "That will be brushed. By hand. Overhead," the builder describes the task. That's arduous, she says. Almost as arduous as applying for Leader funding. Nevertheless Werabs would do it again in such a way. Because the 100,000 euros, which the EU added to their conversion, "already help to manage. The people who moved in from Dresden received the maximum subsidy because they were given a vacant building in the countryside to live in.

Shock at the first viewing

The Schmiedefeld four-sided farm was uninhabited for seven years before the Dresden family bought it. The decay and the need for investment were correspondingly high. The 40-year-old family man recalls that he was shocked when he first saw the property. But he immediately recognized the potential of the buildings. Three years later, the renovated courtyard is a gem. And a benefit for all residents. The generations have moved closer together. Three families on one farm. The builders now have their parents on site and can support each other. For example, someone is also at home when the children come home from school, say Janine and Mario Werab, who commute to Dresden every day to work.

The preservation of rural building culture is, however, only one goal of the 30 Leader areas in Saxony. The EU supports a wide variety of projects that promote rural areas. Thomas Schmidt took a look at a few of them in Großharthau. One of them was the former secondary school. The educational institution, which closed in 2004, has been transformed into a comfortable home for 42 senior citizens. Managing director and owner Andreas Richter and home manager Roman Wobst led the visit through the home, which is "small but nice," as Andreas Richter emphasizes.

He is particularly pleased that a good solution was found together with the municipal administration when it came to heating. The space in the basement where the heating oil was stored was needed for housekeeping. Therefore, a wood pellet heating system was installed in the basement of the elementary school. Since then, it has been supplying the school, gymnasium and senior citizens' home with heat. "This is also much more effective than having a boiler in every house," praises the minister. It is not without reason that Großharthau was awarded the European Energy Award and can now boast the title of energy-saving community.

New classrooms

After all, the elementary school was just across the street. Under the roof, which used to be used as a storage area, new classrooms were built. One is now the new classroom for the fourth grade, the other is used by all the children. It was set up as an art and craft room. Thanks to the skylights, the rooms are flooded with light. The rescue staircase was also extended. The municipality received a total of around 190,000 euros from the Leader funding program.

During his tour, the minister listened very attentively, often nodded affirmatively, sometimes asked questions - and ventured a look into the future during a concluding round of talks in the Kulturscheune. "Due to Brexit, it is foreseeable that there will be less money for the regions after 2020," said Thomas Schmidt. Despite everything: Saxony wants to maintain this type of support and, if possible, reduce errors and problems and also launch further support programs for rural areas.

Mayor Jens Krauße gave the minister, among other things, on the way, he may advocate that the bureaucratic hurdles in the application for Leader funding, be reduced. Because at the moment even small carelessness can be the end for the best idea.

With this, he fell on open ears with Thomas Schmidt. "The whole procedure is far too complicated for us," he said. That is why they are already intervening in Brussels. Because if the application procedure is too tricky, mistakes cannot be ruled out. At the moment, a wrongly placed cross or the filling out of a wrong form is regarded as funding fraud, just as if someone manages his own pocket. That can't be, he said. "We need to move toward more goal orientation." Because he knows from many conversations he had on his Leader tour that it took a while in the beginning for the funding program to become known as such. Now one should be able to use it also as uncomplicatedly as possible. Thomas Schmidt hopes that this will be possible in the next funding period.

By Manuela Paul

Image source: Rocci Klein