TinyHousebeiDresden 2 im Teich - Nähe Sächsische Schweiz, Dresden, mit Badeteich, a property with barbecue facilities, is situated in Großharthau, 25 km from Saxon Switzerland National Park, 26 km from Pillnitz Castle and Park, as well as 29 km from Panometer Dresden. Boasting luggage storage space, this property also provides guests with a picnic area. There is an outdoor fireplace and guests can make use of free WiFi, free private parking and an electric vehicle charging station. Offering direct access to a balcony, the air-conditioned holiday home consists of 1 bedroom. Featuring a terrace with lake views, this holiday home also includes a flat-screen TV, a well-equipped kitchenette with a dishwasher, an oven and a microwave, as well as 1 bathroom with a shower and a hair dryer. There is also a seating area and a fireplace. Guests at the holiday home will be able to enjoy activities in and around Großharthau, like walking tours. Guests can swim in the pool with a view, go cycling or hiking. Brühl's Terrace is 30 km from TinyHousebeiDresden 2 im Teich - Nähe Sächsische Schweiz, Dresden, mit Badeteich, while Frauenkirche Dresden is 31 km from the property. The nearest airport is Dresden Airport, 34 km from the accommodation.

This property will not accommodate hen, stag or similar parties. Guests are required to show a photo identification and credit card upon check-in. Please note that all Special Requests are subject to availability and additional charges may apply. Guests under the age of 18 can only check in with a parent or official guardian. Please note that bed linen and towels are not provided. Guests can bring their own or rent them at the property for the following extra charges: Bed linen: 10 € per person, per stay Towels: 5 € per person, per stay. Please contact the property before arrival for rental. Pets are not allowed in this TinyHouse. Washing machine and/or dryer for 5€ each per use. Please note that since check-in is contactless via a key safe, guests are required to send photo of their ID card (front and back) and the completed registration form after booking. Please contact the property before arrival for rental. Managed by a private host