An American woman living in London has revealed all the things others should know about the big city before making it their home.

Dys, who hails from Atlanta, has revealed the pros and cons to living in the capital.

From the close proximity to European countries to drinking culture and surprisingly nice weather, the content creator shared the reality of living in London.

Listing off all the positives about London, Dys revealed that the city is more affordable in comparison to some US cities.

Perhaps in the US many would assume London is far more expensive to live than New York, however according to Dys this is not the case.

Besides the cost of food, Dys revealed living in the Big Apple was more costly.

But saving some money on her weekly grocery shop wasn't London's only advantage, according to the content creator.

Acknowledging London's close proximity and cheap flights to other countries in Europe, the Middle East and more, Dys also added: 'Sometimes the best thing to do is leave.'

Another upside to UK life for Dys was also being able to 'feel safe in large crowds and gatherings'.

And although many would believe the dreary British weather would be a dealbreaker, Dys noted that it wasn't as bad as many were led to believe.

She added: 'People are just dramatic and chronic complainers.'

Even though the American had pointed out some positives bout the UK, her view of the country wasn't entirely upbeat.

Dys shared that she was left feeling unimpressed by British drinking culture.

'Drinking is such a core part of culture here,' she wrote.

'You have to drink to make friends, progress at work, socialise, etc everything here involves drinking.'

Also slamming London as 'fake 24 hour city', the American claimed it is difficult to purchase food after 9pm at night.

Dys also found the capital city to be a very lonely place, quipping how hard it was to foster a 'warm, friendly or kind' community in the busy city.

She added: 'The people, infrastructure and social fabric of London don't foster much spontaneity one of the many things I miss about the US.'

Also disappointed by the UK's sweet treat selection, Dys encouraged Americans to appreciate how 'spoilt for choice' they are.

Many Brits came to the city's defence in the comments, vehemently disagreeing with the American's claims.

'How is it raining almost everyday and you’re saying it’s not that bad,' one asked.

Defending London's food availability, a user exclaimed: 'You can literally buy food at 4am'

Whilst another chimed in: 'It is definitely not hard to find food after 9pm.'

A fifth penned: 'As for spontaneity, it's one of the best places in the world. You can get up any day of the week at anytime and find something to do'

However, both Londoners and Americans came to Dys defence after some social media users were disgruntled by her opinions.

'I lived in London for 5 years and I could not agree more especially how difficult it is finding friends, though when you do, they last longer & stronger.' one wrote.

'As a Londoner I 100% agree on the spontaneity thing for nights out,' a viewer said.

'We just don’t have bar culture like in the US or other UK cities where you can just go on a night out and see where it takes you.'