The Southern California Mountains Foundation is a non-profit that is passionate about our mission and community. We strive to:

Support youth development through conservation initiatives integrating environmental education, training, and hands-on service projects;

Protect our natural resources through adult and family-led programming; and

Provide interpretive services that focus on outdoor recreation, responsible use, and stewardship of our natural environment.

We achieve our mission by raising money, organizing critical volunteer resources, and creating and managing programs focused on health, stewardship, and sustainability of our Southern California mountains and urban “forests”.

Over the past 30 years, the use of national forests has increased while funding has dramatically declined. The Mountains Foundation works to bridge that gap and add value to our local mountains through the visitor experience. It takes the efforts of our staff and more than 700 trained volunteers to support that work.

For the past 20 years, the organization has made a critical difference, executing volunteer programs that donated 1.5 million hours of service valued at $32,685,000.00.

Looking back at the last 25 years . . . The organization, founded and incorporated in 1993, was the idea of a group of stakeholders associated with the San Bernardino National Forest. With millions of recreational visitors per year and a year-round population of hundreds of thousands, the Southern California Mountains represented one of the U.S. Forest Service’s greatest challenges. At that time, meeting these recreational demands with quality services seemed beyond Forest Service resources.

The solution the stakeholders generated was to create a non-profit to support the work of the San Bernardino National Forest, assisting with the mandate for responsible recreation, undertaking conservation to safeguard the Forest’s future, and providing education that promotes stewardship. The San Bernardino National Forest Association was born.

The organization started out by interpreting the forest to visitors along off-highway vehicle trails and in historic fire lookout towers through their Off Highway Vehicle Safety and Education and Fire Lookout programs, respectively. At the same time, the National Children’s Forest was developed to engage young people.

The San Bernardino National Forest was threatened and under attack by an 8-year drought, massive infestation of the bark beetle and what began with the wildfires of 2003 followed by the devastating fires of 2006. This extreme call-to-action created a fundamental shift in their priorities from a focus on interpretive programming and natural resource protection to an on-the ground restoration team that was shovel-ready with the organizational capacity and reputation to get the job done; primarily led by youth.

Hence, the Forest Care and the Urban Conservation Corps of the Inland Empire (UCC) were launched in 2006 in response to assisting homeowners create more fire safe mountain communities and to expand their commitment to youth development. They accomplished this charter through the Urban Conservation Corps by engaging inner city and at-risk youth from both San Bernardino and Riverside Counties in conservation projects by integrating education, hands-on work and job readiness training. In the process, the organization has helped young people succeed while creating healthier and sustainable urban public lands and mountains loved by so many Southern Californians. In addition, our restoration efforts expanded the role and voice of youth at Children’s Forest in public lands management.

In 1998 the Big Bear Discovery Center was opened and co-managed with the U.S. Forest Service as a gateway to the forest through visitor services, family-oriented programming and interpretative tours and services designed to teach responsible recreation and foster a respect and appreciation for our public lands through stewardship education. In 2017 the mountains partnered with the Big Bear Valley Trails Foundation and is currently undergoing a merger to add the seventh program to our portfolio that will support trail stewardship throughout the Big Bear Valley.

Over 750 volunteers support the Mountains Foundation on a year-round basis. The Foundation supports public lands and our partners through grants, corporate sponsorships, memberships, private donations and fundraisers.

Mike Mutschler | Vice President

Mike Mutschler started his professional life as a computer programmer and non-destructive testing engineer in the 80’s while in college at Cal Poly Pomona. By 1991, his entrepreneurial tendencies took over and he started a technology support company aimed at helping clients get the most out of their IT budgets. His company, Resource Computer Solutions has been doing just that ever since mostly in Southern California but all over the country as well. He knows and understands what it takes to make a small business successful.

He first got involved as a Board member for the Mountains Foundation in 2015. He was asked to serve because of his passion for the environment and for the preservation of the Big Bear Valley. He has spent a lot of his vacation time in Moonridge since he was 5 years old and continues to make Big Bear his second home. “There is nothing better than making the short drive up the hill and feeling the stress of life slowly dissolve as the sky turns more blue and the air changes to something pure.” He attributes much of his success to the ability for him and his family to get away from it all in just an hour. He believes we have to do everything within our limited power to keep the forest a place where everyone can experience the power and beauty of nature.

Stacy Gorin | Executive Director

Stacy Gorin, a 10 year veteran of the Southern California Mountains Foundation has been leading the organization since October 2015. Stacy has been energized by nature since childhood and believes that everyone deserves the opportunity to enjoy the beauty, solitude and joy that connecting to nature provides.

Through her leadership, the nonprofit continues to win large-scale grants since her employment in 2006; and, created collaborative partnerships successfully advancing our environmental conservation, education and responsible recreation initiatives. Stacy previously served as Deputy Director for the Southern California Mountains Foundation from December 2012 until April 2015. Stacy joined the nonprofit in 2006, then named the San Bernardino National Forest Association, as Lead Naturalist at the Big Bear Discovery Center performing student and visitor education program, training volunteers and leading interpretive programs; moving to Discovery Center Director position in 2010 overseeing all operations and staff at the Center. The nonprofit was formed in 1992 and renamed the Southern California Mountains Foundation in concert with its 20th milestone year and celebration. It is comprised of 6 key programs and supported by 1,000 plus volunteers.

Stacy Gorin holds a Bachelor’s degree in Environmental Analysis and Design from the University California Irvine. Stacy connects to nature through her hobbies of hiking, biking, snowboarding, and rock climbing.

Duvonne Easley | Urban Conservation Corps Fleet, and Warehouse Manager

Duvonne Easley was born and raised in Los Angeles, California. He started conservation work at the age of 15 with the Los Angeles Conservation Corps (LACC) Clean & Green Program. He continued his work in the conservation field by becoming an adult corpsmember and advanced his career where he was promoted to Assistant crew lead and supervisor in a short period of time. During his time at LACC, he was involved in various beautification projects around the greater Los Angeles Area and for his time he was awarded the Russell Kantor Education Scholarship as well as an AmeriCorps award to further his education. He went on to the College of Southern Nevada and transferred to Victor Valley College where he became a certified Automotive Mechanic, licensed Smog Tech, and studied in the Criminal Justice field. After college, he worked as an armed security guard in the Las Vegas area where he responded to alarm responses, and emergency situations when dispatched. He advanced to the rank of Lieutenant and loved to help and resolve issues within his community. While there he realized that he has a profound passion and commitment to helping the challenged youth within urban areas and went back to working in the conservation field with Kern Service And Conservation Corps (KSACC) where he was the lead supervisor. With his time there he became a California State Parks Certified Trails Maintenance Expert. All of his experiences led up to him accepting a position within the Southern California Mountains Foundation, Urban Conservation Corps where he is currently working for the last 8 years. In his leisure time, he enjoys the outdoors, restoring classic cars, and spending time with family and friends.

Lisa Underwood | Restoration Manager

Lisa really enjoys working with people in the outdoors, doing the hard work, enjoying the science of habitat restoration, and seeing people from all walks of life enjoying nature together. She worked at various camps in Forest Falls, Barton Flats, and Mammoth Lakes which sparked her love for the mountains and her enthusiasm for sharing outdoor experiences with others.

She has had an array of jobs leading up to Project Coordinator such as Forest Service wildlife tech, backpacking instructor, bat lady, and spelunking guide. She graduated from California State University, San Bernardino, with a BA in Environmental Studies, and attended Humboldt State for a year where she learned to key plants and about humidity. She and her husband love to hike, backpack, drywall and are in search of the perfect paella.

Melinda Herrera | Restoration Project Coordinator

Melinda Herrera was born and raised in Los Angeles, California. She has always had a love and passion for nature since she was a child. She was given the chance to work for the Urban Conservation Corps in 2018 and was able to grow out of her shell as well as gain tons of knowledge by gettings hands-on experience with fencing, slashing, seed collecting, and much more and variety of places she’s never been before such as Baldy Mesa, Lytle Creek, Deep Creek, etc. She was fortunate enough to be a part of the first bilingual naturalist class at the UCC and receive a certification. Melinda was later on promoted at the Urban Conservation Corps as crew lead and shortly after supervisor. As Supervisor she was able to share her love and knowledge of the outdoors with newly hired corpsmembers and become a role model as well as someone they could confide in. She is now working with the SCMF monitoring all front country areas and leading conservation crews in many projects to help protect the beautiful national forest in hopes to teach others about the importance of conserving our land. Melinda loves to spend time with friends and family, enjoys walking her dogs, helping others, and watching scary movies.

Andrea Mendoza | HR & Payroll Coordinator

Andrea Mendoza is from Colton,CA. She studied at Cal State San Bernardino where she earned a Bachelor’s degree in Human Resource Management. During her studies, she enjoyed volunteering locally at places such as the Humane Society of San Bernardino and Feeding America Riverside|San Bernardino. She also spent some time working for the California Department of Food and Agriculture as a Pest Prevention Assistant. Andrea was able to join her career, love of nature, and devotion to helping the community when she started working with SCMF. She started out as a corpsmember in 2018 and after being given the opportunity to work as a junior admin assistant, she worked her way up to her current position as the HR & Payroll coordinator. She loves the mission of this organization and its positive impact on the local community.

Lizzet Pineda

Lizzet is passionate about the outdoors and connecting her community with nature. She attended CSU San Bernardino where she graduated with a dual degree in Environmental Studies and Geography with a concentration in Global Studies and certification in GIS. She has interned with the National Park Service creating story maps and doing community outreach. She has also worked in the private sector as a program assistant doing community outreach for easier access to public transportation. Soon after she decided to return to San Bernardino and help her own community and began working with the Urban Conservation Corps. While at the UCC she helps train our corpsmembers to become educators in their own communities and teach the community how to be more environmentally friendly by recycling and doing guided tours in the mountains. During Lizzet’s free time she likes to visit botanical gardens, bake, travel, and look at sloth memes.