OR such smart guys, Joel and Ethan Coen sure know idiots. The brotherly team – which writes, directs, produces, edits and does everything short of catering their movies – has made a string of films, going back to 1984’s “Blood Simple,” that usually feature people so dim, they would have lost on the rigged quiz shows of the 1950s.

Remember Nicolas Cage’s H.I. McDunnogh in “Raising Arizona” who held up a liquor store for diapers? Or Jeff Bridges’ pot-addled Dude (see related story) in “The Big Lebowski”? Or the world’s worst kidnappers in “Fargo”?

These are not guys who would ever be recruited for sperm bank donations.

Last year’s Oscar-winning epic “No Country for Old Men,” as brilliant as it was, felt like a bit of a departure for the Coens. Its dusty cinematography and brutal violence didn’t quite feel at home tone-wise in the brothers’ catalog.

About the only idiotic thing in the whole movie was Javier Bardem’s pageboy haircut – or maybe Josh Brolin’s decision to return to the drug-deal massacre site. But with “Burn After Reading,” opening Friday, the brothers get back to doing what they do best – absurdist comedy featuring a bunch of rubes.

This time the brothers are taking on Washington, DC, idiots, a topic more fertile than the Mesopotamian crescent. If you can’t find absurdity inside the Beltway, you should just give up and become a priest or an accountant. Or run for Congress.

“Burn After Reading,” as Coen movies so often do, revolves around an inept attempt at crime. Two air-headed personal trainers (Brad Pitt and Frances McDormand) find a CD they think contains CIA secrets, so they set out to blackmail the disc’s owner (John Malkovich) in order to pay for McDormand’s much-desired plastic surgery.

It will shock no one to learn that nothing goes quite according to plan.

What is unusual, however, is the particular idiots the Coens have recruited. For years, they’ve relied on their own repertory company of sorts, a group of talented if somewhat oddball, comedic actors. Steve Buscemi, Peter Stormare, John Turturro, John Goodman, Jon Polito and, of course, McDormand (Joel’s wife) have all been part of multiple Coen outings.

Now oddball has been traded for pretty boy, as Pitt makes his Coen brothers debut playing Chad Feldheimer, a gym rat the actor described as “a dumbbell. A gum-chewing, Gatorade-swilling, iPod-addicted bubble brain.” The Coens wrote the part explicitly for Pitt.

“When they called, I was happy to be there,” Pitt said at the Venice Film Festival last week. “After reading the part, I wasn’t sure whether to be flattered or insulted. I’m still a bit unsure.”

It’s not that hard to believe that someone so pretty could be so stupid (just look at Jessica Simpson), but Pitt, who made his career playing smoldering leading men, seems to be trying hard to play against type. He’s taken whacks at comedy before in the “Ocean’s 11” trilogy and “Snatch,” but no attempt has been as big or as eager as the dip he plays here.

Pitt sees the role as “a career buster,” which is a bit of a stretch. If “Meet Joe Black” doesn’t kill a career, nothing will.

Also game to embrace his inner knucklehead is George Clooney, another leading man who enjoys blowing up his handsome-guy image by goofing off with the Coens. He plays Harry Pfarrer, a womanizing federal marshal who likes to brag about how he’s never discharged his gun. Clooney is making his third Coens appearance, after 2000’s “O Brother, Where Art Thou?” and 2003’s “Intolerable Cruelty.” He calls it his “trilogy of idiots.”

“George loves to play idiots for us,” Joel said earlier this year.

“The day we wrapped, he said, ‘All right, I’ve played my last idiot,’ ” Ethan said. “So we told him it was sad that he wouldn’t be working with us anymore.”

The question is whether audiences accept will seeing such gigantic movie stars in unconventionally goofy roles, or will they prefer that the Coens stick with lower-profile character actors?

Perhaps coincidentally, the brothers’ previous films featuring above-the-title names – Tom Hanks in “The Ladykillers” and Clooney in “Intolerable Cruelty” – have been either box-office or critical misfires. For their next outing, the Coens are back to lesser-knowns, tapping Richard Kind (“Curb Your Enthusiasm,” “Spin City”) and stage actor Michael Stuhlbarg for the black comedy “A Serious Man.”

But J.K. Simmons, who has a hilarious, movie-stealing turn as a CIA boss in “Burn After Reading,” says an actor should be allowed to be many things.

“Clooney and Brad Pitt are the two handsomest leading men of their generation, but they’re character actors too. You don’t do a Coen brothers movie without being a character actor,” Simmons told The Post. “One of the things that drew them to the project was the opportunity to do something different and wacky. They both want to expand their careers beyond what you might expect of them. They’re obviously not doing it because they need a job.”

Clooney agrees. “As soon as they called me up, I knew I’d do it,” he said. “It’s the Coen brothers. They make roles available to you that people don’t know you’re capable of doing as an actor.”

“Then they told me they wrote the part for me,” he added. “Which worried me.”

And although the humor and tone of “Burn After Reading” is similar to previous films, it marks a move into a new genre for the writer-directors.

“We thought, let’s do a spy movie, mostly because we hadn’t done one before,” Joel said at Venice. “It could have been a dog movie or an outer space movie. We just landed on a spy movie. I can’t say there was a particular reason.”

Ethan chimed in: ” ‘Burn After Reading’ is our version of a Tony Scott-Jason Bourne kind of movie – without the explosions.”

But this is not actually the pair’s first attempt at a political thriller. Back when they were teenagers growing up in St. Louis Park, Minn., the Coens decided to start making their own movies, mainly as a way to escape boredom. They began mowing lawns and eventually earned enough money to buy a Vivitar Super 8 camera.

They gathered friends and shot a few uninspired films, mostly remakes. Among their first efforts was “Ed . . . Dog,” a remake of a Lassie flick and something called “My Pits Smell Sublime.” But the Coens also decided to take a stab at “Advise and Consent,” the 1962 Otto Preminger film based on the Pulitzer-winning novel by Allen Drury. Neither brother had seen the film, but their friend and lead actor had read the book.

“That’s the last time we tried taking on ‘inside the Beltway’ subject matter,” Joel said.

“Like ‘Advise and Consent,’ this new picture is about the personal meeting the political, with melodrama,” Ethan said.

And comedy, of course. The Coens even managed to wring a few laughs out of a story as bleak as “No Country for Old Men.”

“They’re just really low-key, bone dry, funny guys,” Simmons said. “They’re the guys that would have been cracking you up in the back row of the classroom in the seventh grade and getting you in trouble because you would have been blowing snot out of your nose from laughing.”

The only drawback to working with such funny writer-directors is that the cast isn’t left with much room for interpretation. The Coens know exactly what they want, down to every detail. (Simmons nearly didn’t get the part because he was younger than the brothers had pictured his character.)

“They are so specific that there really no need to interpret. With their stuff, you either get it or you don’t, and that’s pretty much it,” Simmons said. “Every once in a while, I would think there’s this one little thing I would like to change. I’d throw it out there and they’d go, ‘Yeaaaaah, no!’ “

But the actor didn’t mind. “I totally get it,” he said. “With little films, you end up bringing a lot of your own stuff and improvising and paraphrasing. With them, it’s like doing Shakespeare. They so specifically know what they want, and it’s them doing everything from the first word on the page to the last cut in the editing room, you just have to believe they know what they’re doing. And obviously they do.”

Anyone who thinks otherwise would have to be an idiot.