The Coastwatching Organisation originated at the commencement of World War II, in September 1939, when Commander Norman Long of Australian Naval Intelligence commissioned Naval Commander Eric Feldt to establish it.

Commander Feldt flew to Port Moresby and was responsible for recruiting expatriate Administrators, District Officers, Plantation owners, Managers and Miners as Coastwatchers, supplying them with Teleradio equipment, and training them in Morse Code.

The Coastwatching Organisation was administered entirely by the Royal Australian Navy through the Naval Intelligence Division, Melbourne, whilst being formally established in July 1942 as the Intelligence arm operating technically as ‘M’ Special Unit of the Allied Intelligence Bureau (AIB), with its other arm – Sabotage – operating as ‘Z’ Special Unit.

The Coastwatching Organisation comprised the following personnel: Royal Australian Navy (RAN) 178, Australian Imperial Force (AIF) 174, Royal Australian Air force (RAAF) 10, Solomon Islands Defence Force 8, United States Army 28, Civilians 13 and Native trained troops (estimated at) 150, for a total of 561 personnel.

Commander Feldt’s role was to form a cohesive body that was organised to alert Australia of any military threat from the north. This required having a presence in the territories that were subsequently invaded and occupied to report any movements of the enemy. Its strict mandate was to not confront the enemy, and to avoid capture in order to carry out its objectives.

While the organisation lay dormant for just over two years until the war came to the Pacific in December 1941 following the surprise attack by the Japanese at Pearl Harbor, the team was then ready and able to carry out vital intelligence and other roles under the guidance of Commander Feldt.

The Coastwatchers then played a significant and often underestimated part in the outcome of the War in the Pacific.

A typical party of Coastwatchers comprised four components.

It had a leader (a jungle-experienced expatriate), a radio signaler (trained in coding and decoding), and a number of trained Native Troops (who fulfilled various roles including as sentries and guides while maintaining essential living conditions): without any one of these components, there would have been no Coastwatchers.

The fourth component (included in the AIF count above) was the military support of the 136 AIF survivors of the original contingent of 273 1st Independent Company men. The soldiers, not including their five officers who were captured and transported to Japan or their 132 comrades who were captured and drowned on the POW ship Montevideo Maru, were originally part of the disbanded Lark Force but, having escaped capture, had then been inducted into ‘M’ Special Unit to become Coastwatchers.

Sea power

The Coastwatchers were entirely dependent on their strategic deployment by naval shipping with their gallant crews. Specifically, ten US Submarines – Gato, Guardfish, Dace, Nautilus, Greenling, Grampus, Grouper, Peto, Scamp and S42 – were used to infiltrate the Coastwatchers by inflated rubber boats into enemy-held territory periodically throughout the years of the war and to evacuate them along with many hundreds of downed US airmen.

Herewith is the only available photo of the interior of a submarine, the USS Dace. The Dace disembarked the ill-fated Harris party into the Hollandia area, which included the radio operator Jack Bunning who had taken my place at the last moment. Tragically, Bunning was among those killed when the party was ambushed by the Japanese.

In addition to the submarines, the flotilla of US Patrol Torpedo Boats (‘PT’ boats) were occasionally used for the same purpose (although, notably, PT109, captained by Lt. John F. Kennedy, was bisected by a Japanese Cruiser, with Kennedy and his crew subsequently saved by Coastwatcher Reg Evans).

In addition, the Australian vessels HDML (Harbour Defence Motor Launch) 1321 and the HMAS Paluma played a material role in Coastwatching duties, whilst the commandeered vessels, Lakatoi, Laurabada and the Macdui were instrumental in rescuing over 400 escapees from the war-torn New Britain debacle.

Air power

The contribution of the aircraft and their crews by dropping essential supplies of food, equipment and ammunition (with sometimes the odd bottle of whiskey chucked in!) to the isolated parties was essential, be they a Liberator, PBY Catalina, Piper Cub or whatever.

As an aside, at least 321 allied airmen and 280 US sailors were rescued by Coastwatchers behind enemy lines during the Solomon Islands Campaign (see Feldt The Coastwatchers, p.153), and there were many others saved and evacuated from New Britain.

Winning the War

Following that background to the organisation, as it transpired the Coastwatchers played a vital role in winning the war against the Japanese Navy during World War II. As I have noted elsewhere:

Australian Coastwatchers brought the tide of Japanese invasive successes to a shuddering halt when two coastwatchers spotted and reported an invasion fleet of 5,500 Japanese troops sailing south. The Coastwatchers’ observation was pivotal as it precipitated the Battle of the Coral Sea in May 1942 and thwarted the Japanese invasion of Port Moresby.

In later noting the vital role played by the Coastwatchers with their timely warnings of enemy bombers headed towards Guadalcanal, the United States Admiral William F. (Bull) Halsey declared that ‘The Coastwatchers saved Guadalcanal, and Guadalcanal saved the South Pacific’ and Australia’s own ‘Weary’ Dunlop stated: ‘It could equally be said that the Coast Watchers saved Port Moresby and Port Moresby saved Australia.’

Medals of Honour

The Coastwatchers were recognized for their achievements with no less than 92 formal awards (including native troops Yauwika and Simogun) – representing an incredible 17% of its force of 561 – by the Australian, British and US Governments. (See Feldt The Coast Watchers.) This would appear to be a relatively high number and percentage rate for military awards and would presumably compare favourably with many units in military history.

However, performance does not come without a cost!

Unfortunately, whilst the Coastwatchers played such a critical role, it was incurred at a cost of 36 men, being 6.4% of its force, who were captured and killed. This included the beheading on the beach at Aitape of Coastwatcher Len Siffleet.

Several of the Native troops were also killed, as commemorated on the Memorial at Tidal River in Victoria, which displays the names of the 36 men, including Natives, who lost their lives.

Finale

In 1959, a memorial lighthouse was erected at Madang, on the north coast of Papua New Guinea, to honour the Coastwatchers. The memorial also bears the names of those 36 Coastwatchers killed behind enemy lines while risking their lives in the execution of their duties.