Pearson's Prize:

Canada and the Suez Crisis

By John Melady

Dundurn, 207 pages, $30

Canada's reputation as a peacekeeper began with Lester Pearson's firm resolve after the 1956 invasion of Egypt, when the world faced a possible nuclear war. John Melady, author of a number of history books, including Korea: Canada's Forgotten War, has written a thorough account of the events leading up to, and including, the formation of the peacekeeping United Nations Emergency Force, as well as the major players involved.

The Suez Canal was proposed by Ferdinand de Lesseps, a 17th-century French diplomat, who convinced Muhammad Said Pasha, son of the Egyptian ruler, to build the waterway with French financial backing. The die had been cast. The canal was opened in 1869, when an Anglo-French company took possession while the Egyptians, who built the canal using hard labour, were treated as ciphers. The next Egyptian ruler, the spendthrift Ismail, asked for further funding from Britain, which sent over a regiment to protect its investment.

That Egyptians were mere spectators in their own history was duly noted by Gamal Abdel Nasser, who took over as dictator in 1954, when the wastrel King Farouk was sent into exile. Nasser was a man with an agenda after Egypt lost to David Ben-Gurion's forces in the Arab-Israel war of 1948. Nasser needed arms, as well as backing for the giant Aswan dam. He was turned down by Western countries before turning to the Soviet Union for help. Encouraged by his new superpower alliance, he nationalized the Suez Canal on July 26, 1956.

This sudden turn of events shocked British prime minister Sir Anthony Eden, who declared a state of emergency. An old boy's last hurrah was to become more like a death rattle for both Eden and his Conservative government.

The buildup to the invasion of Egypt involved stealth and duplicity when Britain entered into an alliance with France and Israel. Eden, who had once met Nasser, held an intense hatred of the man. He couldn't wait to invade Egypt, regardless of any contrary advice from the Foreign Office.

Melady describes the horrendous carnage at the height of the invasion in emphatic detail. Both Britain and France entered the fray under false pretenses, by stating they were only there as intervenors between Egypt and Israel.

Canadian prime minister Louis St. Laurent and external affairs minister Lester Pearson were astonished when they read Eden's patronizing dispatch to Ottawa, stating he expected Canada's full support for the invasion.

Instead, Pearson sent a reply that criticized the war and stated that Eden was at fault in not first informing the United Nations. Of course, Eden also avoided telling the Commonwealth countries, including Canada, or even the United States. This outraged U.S. president Dwight Eisenhower, who, as commanding general in the Second World War, could see all too clearly the global danger of such military tactics in Suez.

Meanwhile, the crisis ignited a debate in Canada. Feeling for the mother country became as hot as high tea for some, while others were starting to see Canada as a separate entity, free from the necessity for any overseas commitment. Polls reported that 43 per cent of Canadians supported the invasion, 40 per cent were opposed.

There was clearly a reflective political climate in this country. Pearson was akin to those eminent philosophers and scientists who regularly spent time at a thinkers' summer retreat in Pugwash, N.S., founded by industrialist Cyrus Eaton at the height of the Cold War. The Eaton guests were concerned about the likelihood of nuclear warfare, and so was Pearson.

An urgent meeting of the UN General Assembly was convened in November. The sword of Damocles came closer to dropping as debate intensified. The Soviets declared they were ready for nuclear war, if necessary. U.S. secretary of state John Foster Dulles, an imposing man, put forward a proposal to the General Assembly, meeting in emergency session to avoid French and British veto power, to end the crisis. It was passed because of his bullying tactics, but it lacked any real authority, since it only called for a ceasefire. Pearson abstained from the vote, instead proposing a peace plan that involved policing the war zone with peacekeepers. History underwrote a momentous event -- but not without a few glitches.

Canada was one of the countries chosen to send troops to Egypt, but the Egyptian ambassador voiced concern over the Queen's Own Rifles' name, uniforms and flags, arguing that the general Egyptian populace would not distinguish between Canadian troops and British invaders. Pearson realized sensibilities would be offended and that the Egyptians did not need any reminder of a British connection. He sent other Canadian regiments instead, mostly in logistical and support roles, while Canadian general Tommy Burns was put in charge of the UN Emergency Force.

Pearson's involvement receives considerable acclaim in this book. It is evident Melady has genuine affection for the intrepid peacemaker, who was a genuine hero of the time. Still, Eden's decline and fall that at times dominates the narrative, compelling in its description of the British prime minister's character and personal behaviour. Eden was obsessed with beating Nasser, as well as besting Churchill for posterity. As we see Eden trying imperiously to impose his country's authority, he comes across as a man a century behind, cocooned in a time warp.

Eden became a pariah after he went on holiday for health reasons. His very absence became an indictment, since he had left the helm to his many opponents. He was forced to resign, with his bad health a liability even he couldn't ignore.

Instead, it was Pearson who received the laurel wreath, without being a glory hunter. Pearson, representing a much younger country, conveyed a wisdom honed by his wits and mastery of statecraft, unexpected from a former colony's emissary. The Nobel Prize for Peace, awarded to Pearson, provided Canada well-deserved recognition, without the necessity of gunboat diplomacy.

This book is also a timely reminder that cogent compromise resulting in peace is an affirmation of sanity.

Alfred Rushton's play The Baron and the Scotsman is about Sir John A. Macdonald and the ill-fated American invasion at Windmill Point, Upper Canada, in 1838.