>>Weather by month // weather averages Leipzig

>>Climate graph // Weather by Month Leipzig

>>average temperature by month Leipzig

>>Weather Leipzig

Leipzig's climate is classified as warm and temperate. The precipitation levels in Leipzig are noteworthy, as there is rainfall even during the most arid month. According to Köppen and Geiger, this climate is classified as Cfb. The temperature in this location is approximately 10.2 °C | 50.3 °F, as determined by statistical analysis. The rainfall here is around 723 mm | 28.5 inch per year.

The specified area is located in the northern hemisphere of our planet. The onset of summer commences towards the conclusion of June and culminates by September. The season is characterized by a sequence of months, namely: June, July, August, September.

Climate graph // Weather by Month Leipzig

The least amount of rainfall occurs in February. The average in this month is 44 mm | 1.7 inch. The month of July experiences the highest amount of precipitation, with an average value of 80 mm | 3.1 inch.

average temperature by month Leipzig

The temperatures are highest on average in July, at around 19.7 °C | 67.5 °F. The month of January is characterized by the lowest temperatures, which have an average reading of 0.9 °C | 33.7 °F.

Weather by month // weather averages Leipzig

<>

Avg. Temperature °C (°F) Min. Temperature °C (°F) Max. Temperature °C (°F) Precipitation / Rainfall mm (in) Humidity (%) Rainy days (d) avg. Sun hours (hours)

January February March April May June July August September October November December

Data: 1991 - 2021 Min. Temperature °C (°F), Max. Temperature °C (°F), Precipitation / Rainfall mm (in), Humidity, Rainy days. Data: 1999 - 2019: avg. Sun hours

The variation in the precipitation between the driest and wettest months is 36 mm | 1 inch. The fluctuation of temperatures over the course of a year is referred to as temperature variation.

It has been observed that November exhibits the highest relative humidity, with a percentage of 84.03. On the other hand, July experiences the lowest relative humidity at an approximate rate of 65.68. According to the data, December is observed as the month with maximum rainy days (13.43) while September has recorded minimum rainfall during its tenure (10.23).

Leipzig weather and climate for every month

Airport close to Leipzig

The closest Airports of Leipzig are: Leipzig/Halle Airport (LEJ) 14.30km,Dresden Airport (DRS) 99.35km,Erfurt-Weimar Airport (ERF) 106.98km

You can reach Leipzig from this Cities by Plane: London (LCY), Paris (CDG), Cologne (CGN), Bremen (BRE), Funchal (FNC), Hurghada (HRG), Basel (BSL), Frankfurt am Main (FRA), Agadir (AGA), Santa Cruz de Tenerife (TFS), Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (LPA), Heraklion (HER), Barcelona (BCN), Zurich (ZRH), Düsseldorf (DUS), Amsterdam (AMS), Palma de Mallorca (PMI), Antalya (AYT), Stuttgart (STR), Moscow (DME)