The graphs below provide an overview of the climate in Leipzig (Saxony), Germany. They present long-term patterns and averages of weather conditions over a 30-year period.

Average day and night temperature

The mean minimum and maximum temperatures over the year.

Monthly hours of sunshine

The average monthly total hours of sunshine over the year

Monthly precipitation

The mean monthly precipitation over the year, including rain, snow, hail etc.

Monthly rainy days

The average number of days each month with rain, snow, hail etc.

Average humidity

The mean monthly relative humidity over the year

Forecast for Leipzig

almost clear and no rain

partly cloudy and no rain

broken clouds and no rain

The best time of year to visit Leipzig in Germany

Leipzig has an oceanic climate. This is characterized by small temperature differences between summer and winter. The winter months are mild, with some days below freezing, but with average pleasant temperatures. Most rain falls in summer. The best time of year to visit Leipzig is the end of spring (May - June) or the beginning of Autumn (September).

During the months of June, July, August and September you are most likely to experience good weather with pleasant average temperatures that fall between 20째C and 26째C.

Other facts from our historical weather data:

Which is the warmest month in Leipzig?

July has an average maximum temperature of 26째C and is the warmest month of the year.

Which is the coldest month in Leipzig?

The coldest month is January with an average maximum temperature of 5째C.

Which is the wettest month in Leipzig?

July tops the wettest month list with 79 mm of rainfall.

Which is the driest month in Leipzig?

April is the driest month with 44 mm of precipitation.

Which is the sunniest month in Leipzig?

July is the sunniest month with an average of 231 hours of sunshine.

No idea where to travel to this year? We have a tool that recommends destinations based on your ideal conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.