FLINTSTONE — Edward “Bud” Lester Kolb, 83, of Flintstone, passed away Friday, May 21, 2010, at the Western Maryland Regional Medical Center. Born Aug. 16, 1926, in Cumberland, Mr. Kolb was the son of the late Eugene Lester Kolb and Dora Esther (Wagner) Kolb. He was also preceded in death by six brothers, Charles Eugene, Jack Merlin, William Andrew, John Phillip, Lewis Earl and James Arthur Kolb; and a sister, Anna Katherine Wright. Bud was an avid fisherman who took pleasure and pride in building his airboats. He was a carpenter and master plumber by trade and many considered him a master wood craftsman as evidenced by the many homes that display his talents. Bud was a United States Naval veteran from World War II and was a lifetime member of the Flintstone Volunteer Fire Company. Bud is survived by his wife of 63 years, Peggy Ann (Frey) Kolb; his sons, Larry Kolb and his wife Liz, Haymarket, Va., and Michael Kolb and Geri Rowe, Clearville, Pa.; his daughters, Barbara Kolb, Leonardtown, Nancy Smith and her husband Steven, Hagerstown, and Fran Mullenax and her husband Ric, Cumberland; his sisters, Do-rothy Esther Price and her husband Lee and Helen Margaret Adams and her husband Royce; and his sisters-in-law, Doris Kolb and Louise Kolb. Bud is also survived by his grandchildren, Eddie Kolb, Laura Forester, David Compton, Juan Lopez, Pablo Lopez, Alexis Lopez, Matthew Smith, Joshua Smith, Chrissy Condry, Trudy Bridges, Tracy Self and Richard Mullenax; as well as his great-grandchildren, Tori, Aubrey, Skylar, Nikolai, Alec, Mila, Arianna, Loki, Strummer, Cordel, Crendy, Coy, Haley, Carl, Paige, Jake, Lacy, Rachel and Becky; and three generations of many nieces and nephews. It is a pleasure and privilege to be his family. The family will receive friends at the Flintstone United Methodist Church on Wednesday, May 26, 2010, at noon. A memorial service will be held at 1 p.m. with the Rev. Fred Iser officiating. Military honors will be accorded at the cemetery by the Post 13 Veterans Honor Guard. Interment will be in the Maryland Veterans Cemetery at Rocky Gap. The family requests that memorials be made to the Flintstone Volunteer Fire Company, PO Box 105, Flintstone, MD 21530. The Adams Family Funeral Home, P.A., 404 Decatur St., Cumberland, (www.AdamsFamilyFuneralHome.com) is in charge of the arrangements.