Gary Edward Kolb, Jr. passed away peacefully on April 17, 2023 at the young age of 46. He was born to Kathleen and Dr. Gary Kolb, Sr. on September 9, 1976 in Indianapolis, Indiana. At the young age of two, his family moved to the greatest state in America – Alabama! They chose not just any city in the state, but the bustling town of Bay Minette, which is where Gary and his siblings would be raised and call home.

Gary graduated from Baldwin County High School and because he aspired for greatness, was led to the only university in Alabama that offered it - Auburn University - graduating with a Bachelor of Science degree in Forestry. Anyone who knew Gary knew how much he LOVED learning, so he continued his education at Troy University earning an additional Bachelor of Science degree in Geomatics. He spent the past 8 years of his career proudly serving the Alabama Forestry Commission, most recently holding the position of Forestry Management Specialist.

Gary was an enthusiastic, some would say obsessive Auburn football fan and could be found most fall Saturdays in his man cave (Chuggers) sharing his adoration with equally passionate Auburn friends and family. During the winter months, he would retreat to the woods of Wilcox County with the intent to “provide” food for his family. While the food provisions often were minimal, the good times around the campfire were not, and made up for the lack of meat on the table. Occasionally he could be found on the Tensaw River intending to once again provide additional meat for his family, but with little luck because, as he would often say, “Duck Dynasty killed duck hunting for those that truly loved it.” His love of the outdoors continued with summers spent camping, fishing, and relaxing on Dauphin Island.

Above all, Gary valued his family. He was a dedicated husband and father always teaching his children how to do the things he loved – like how to shoot a rifle and shotgun, or throw a cast net, or bait a hook, and how to safely remove a saltwater catfish from a hook (if you know, you know). And of course, instilling in them the most important values - his faithfulness and passion for Auburn football. War Eagle!

Gary is survived by his wife of 18 years, Reagan Norris Kolb, and children Kennedy Frances Kolb and Gary Edward Kolb III of Spanish Fort; his loving and devoted parents, Kathleen and Dr. Gary Edward Kolb Sr. of Bay Minette; three siblings, Kirsten Kolb Pate (Steve) of Bay Minette, Jeremiah James Kolb (Sarah) of Daphne, and Kiley Kolb Walp (Erik) of Doylestown, PA; godparents, Karen Green and David Kolb; godson Carson Kolb; and an extremely close circle of aunts, uncles, nieces, nephews, cousins, and friends.

Funeral services for Gary Edward Kolb, Jr. will be held Thursday, April 20, 2023 at St. Patrick Parish in Robertsdale, AL. Visitation will be at 11:00 with service following at 12:00. Pallbearers will include George Blais, Andrew Bryars, Dylan Cowart, James Cowart, Ben Green, Jackson Kolb, Jeremiah Kolb, and Thomas Norris.

The family has requested that black not be worn at the funeral as we want this to be a time of celebration. In Lieu of flowers, please consider donating to https://www.pilotsforchrist.net/ or plant a tree in Gary’s honor. His favorite tree is Swamp Chestnut Oak.