US actress Halle Berry and French-Canadian model Gabriel Aubry have reportedly broken up.

The pair - who have a daughter Nahla Ariela Aubry, 2, but are not married - have ended their romance and are working out financial and custody arrangements, RadarOnline.com reports.

It was Aubry, 34, who allegedly decided to call time on his five-year relationship with Berry, 43. Their nine-year age gap is believed to have been a factor in his decision.

A source said: "Gabriel just felt it wasn't working any more. When they were first together, the nine-year age difference between them didn't faze him, she was the most beautiful woman he had ever dated and he was totally in love. But as time went on, he started feeling it more and more. He felt he needed to break it off with Halle."

However, Aubry denies the age gap was a factor, telling Access Hollywood: “While I will not comment on all of the wild inaccuracies being speculated about in the media, I am sad to say that Halle and I have decided together to separate at this time.

“She is, and will forever be, one of the most special and beautiful people that I have ever known, and I am certain that we will continue to have only love and respect for one another.”

The relationship ended a couple of months ago and Berry has been using the services of Judy Bogen, a family law attorney from Beverly Hills law firm Hersch Mannis and Bogen, to sort out custody conditions for Nahla and various financial matters.

The source added: "Gabriel's main concern was custody of Nahla. He loves that little girl more than anything, and wanted 50/50 joint physical custody of her, which Halle agreed to.

"Financially, Gabriel earns a decent amount from his modelling career, in the region of $US700,000 per year, so he's comfortable and he didn't want a dime from Halle.

"All Gabriel has asked for is the house they own together in Canada. Halle put the full deposit down on the house but Gabriel has made every one of the payments since. Halle agreed right away.

"As much as it can be it's been an amicable split."

Unlucky-in-love Berry is no stranger to break-ups.

The Oscar winner's first marriage to David Justice, a former baseball player, ended after four years in 1997.

Her second union to musician Eric Benet imploded after four years when the Monster's Ball star discovered he had cheated on her.