Halle Berry and Olivier Martinez might have just announced they were divorcing after two years of marriage, but it’s Berry’s first ex husband that has decided to denounce the “Extant” star on Twitter.

HALLE BERRY’S EX DISSES HER ON TWITTER

Former MLB player David Justice and Halle Berry divorced in 1997 following a 4 year marriage. Yet it seems Justice still has some strong feelings about his ex-wife. When hearing about Berry and her current husbands divorce Justice took to Twitter to post this:

“Me, (second husband) Eric (Benet), (boyfriend) Gabriel (Aubry) and Olivier were all her ‘Knight in Shining Armor’ until it ends. Then we all become the worst guys in history.”

But it also seems that Berry’s other ex, second husband Eric Benet, whom she divorced in 2005, has some strong feelings as well. This is how he responded to Justice’s tweet:

“My man at @23davidjustice is tweeting some truth dis’ mornin’!”

Justice then went on to tweet some advice for Berry’s soon-to-be ex, Olivier:

“Just wait,Olivier..It’s coming! She insinuated that her daughter wasn’t safe around Gabriel..look it up and see the reason!” he wrote, referring to Berry’s custody battle with ex-boyfriend Gabriel Aubry over their 7-year-old daughter, Nahla.

TAKING TO SOCIAL MEDIA TO DISCREDIT SPOUSE

It’s not an uncommon practice for exes to take to social media to lash out against their ex-spouses. The practice can feel liberating and freeing, but there care be serious consequences for doing so – and not just emotional, but also legal. As the saying goes: If you can’t say anything nice, don’t say anything at all. This should perhaps be your mantra when it comes to deciding whether or not to diss your ex on social media. Letting it all out on social media can actually lead you right to court for not only libel, but also a heavier judgement in divorce court. “You give up so much privacy, and if you don’t understand the consequences of it, you can really have problems,” says divorce attorney Adam Swickle. “The Internet is a dangerous place to comment on your divorce.” According to a 2010 survey done by the American Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers, 81% of their members agreed that they had seen an increase in the number of cases that involved evidence found on social networks.

CONSIDERATIONS

If you’re a huge social networking fan, and also a fan of airing your dirty laundry on the sites, and you’re also in the midst of a divorce, there are some things you’ll want to consider: , it’s important to realize the wider reaching aspect of social media. Sure, posts can be deleted, but they can still live on in people’s memories. Would you want your child to read something damning about you? Most likely not, so why damage their relationship with your ex by posting something that is, or maybe isn’t even true?

BERRY AND MARTINEZ ANNOUNCE DIVORCE

Last week Berry and Martinez, both 49, issued a joint statement announcing their decision to end their relationship. The two met on the set of Dark Tide in 2010, were secretly engaged one year later, and wed in 2013. “We move forward with love and respect for one another and the shared focus for what is best for our son,” they said in the joint statement. “We wish each other nothing but happiness in life, and we hope that you respect our, and most importantly, our children’s privacy, as we go through this difficult period.” The details of their divorce is not yet known, but what’s known is the two cited “irreconcilable differences” in official court documents. It’s unclear what they will do regarding the son they share.

IRRECONCILABLE DIFFERENCES AND GROUNDS FOR DIVORCE

To start the divorce process, also known as the dissolution of marriage process, you will need to determine the grounds for divorce, or reasons you are filing for divorce. In California, there are two grounds for divorce:

Irreconcilable differences. This means you and your spouse are unable to agree and will never be able to agree on basic, fundamental issues involving the marriage or your family.

Incurable insanity. This is almost never used as it requires medical proof that one spouse was insane when the marriage petition was filed and is still incurably insane.

Additionally, you will need to meet residency requirements to file for divorce: you or your spouse must have lived in California for six months and in the county in which you are seeking your divorce for at least three months before filing the dissolution of marriage petition. Most commonly, irreconcilable differences is the reason cited for divorce. Additionally, California is a no fault state which means that blame cannot be assigned to a spouse, even if the divorce is happening because of infidelity.

JOINT CUSTODY

Family law courts favor awarding joint child custody to both parents, due to the fact that typically, it’s been shown that child’s respond best to both parents being in their lives.

JOINT CHILD CUSTODY

Joint custody is when two parents share decision making responsibilities and / or physical control of the child or children they share. Joint custody is able to be awarded to parents that are divorced, separated, no longer living together, or even if they never lived together.

FORMS OF JOINT CHILD CUSTODY

There are different forms of joint custody that can be awarded, including:

joint legal custody. This means both parents are able to make decisions regarding the child, including religion, education, medical, and any legal matters.

joint physical custody. This means a child spends equal time with each parent.

joint legal and physical custody.

While it’s a common practice for parents to share physical custody and legal custody, it’s not always the case that parents that share legal custody also share physical custody.

WORKING WITH A FAMILY LAW ATTORNEY

There are various things to be taken into consideration during divorce and spousal support decision. A skilled and qualified family law attorney can assist you to make sure you receive a fair case. For advice on divorce and spousal support issues you need an expert law firm such as (619) DIVORCE.

For advice on divorce, you need the expert law firm of 619 DIVORCE. Schedule a consultation today.